<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
These images produced good text files. There is only minimal misrecognition, and even less garbling.
<pb n="1"/>
A TRUE WOMAN
CHAPTER I
WixIo TILLA 01   VERY OOMMONPLAE INOIDENT
1O tI o l   l she was not going to gush I-Not even
I  thiogh there was nothing in the room at this
moment to stand up afterwards before her as dumb
witness to a moment's possible weakness. Less than
nothing, in fact: space might have spoken and
recalled that moment . . infinite nothingness might
at some future time have brought back the memory of
it ... but these dumb, impassive objects! . . . the
fountain pen between her fingers l the dull, unin-
teresting hotel furniture covered in red velvet-an
uninviting red that repelled dreaminess and peace !-
the ormolu clock which had ceased long ago to mark
the passage of time, wearied-as it no doubt was, poor
thing-by the monotonous burden of a bronze Psyche
gazing on her shiny brown charms, in an utterly blank
and unreflective bronze mirror, while obviously be-
moaning the fracture of one of her smooth bronze
thighs I Indeed, Louisa might well have given way to
that overmastering feeling of excitement before all
B 



<pb n="2"/>
S             A TRUE WOMAN 
these things. They weuld neither see nor hear.
would never deride, for they could never remember. ,
But a wood fire crackled in the small hearth . .
and ... and those citron-coloured carnations we
favourite flowers of his ... and his picture did stand
on the top of that ugly little Louis Philippe bureau;
... No! no    it would never do to gush-for these
things would see... and though they might notl
remember they would remind.
And Louisa counted herself one of the strong ones
of this earth. Just think of her namel Have you-
ever known a Louisa who gushed, who called herself
the happiest woman on earth, who thought of a man- .i
just an ordinary man, mind you-as the best, the 
handsomest, the truest, the most perfect hero of
romance that ever threw a radiance over the entire:
prosy world of the twentieth century ? 
Louisas, believe me, do no such thing. The Mays
and the Floras, the Lady Barbaras and Lady Edithas 
look beatific and charming when-clasping their lily- 
white hands together and raising violet eyes to the
patterned ceiling paper above them-they e;olaim:
"Oh I my hero and my king "
But Louisas would only look ridiculous if they be-
haved like that . . , Louisa Harris, too  . . . Louisa,
the eldest of three sisters... the daughter of a
wealthy English gentleman with a fine estate in Kent,
an assured position, no troubles, no cares, nothing in
her life to make it sad, or sordid, or interesting  ...
Louisa Harris and romance ! . . . Why, she was not
even pretty. She had neither violet eyes nor hair of



<pb n="3"/>
A VERY COMMONPLACE INCIDENT                 s
~   taiddy gold. The latter was brown and the former
we   grey. ... How could romance come in the way
of grey eyes, and of a girl named Louisa ?
Can you conceive, for instance, one of those adorable
detrimentals of low degree and empty pockets, who
ave a way of arousing love in the hearts of the beauti-
fl daughters of irascible millionaires, can you conceive
suoh an interesting personage, I say, falling in love
with Louisa Harris 
I confes that I cannot. To begin with dear, kind,
Squire Harris was not altogether a millionaire, and not
a tl:  itia oible, and penniless owners of romantic
piaaliMais were not on his visiting list.
Therre Louisa, living a prosy life of luxury, got
upevery morning, ate a copious breakfast, walked out
with the dogs, hunted in the autumn, skated in the
winter, did the London season and played tennis in
the summer, just like hundreds and hundreds of other
well-born, well-bred English girls of average means,
average positions, average education, hunt, dance,
and play tennis throughout the length and breadth
of this country.
There was no room for romance in such a life, no
time for it . .. the life itself was so full already-so
fall of the humdrum of daily rounds, of common tasks,
that the heart which beat with such ordinary regularity
in the seemingly ordinary breast of a very ordinary
girl, did so all unconscious of the intense pathos which
underlay this very ordinary existence.
Vaguely Louisa knew that somewhere beyond even
the land of dreams, there lay all unknown, all mysteri-



<pb n="4"/>
~4        A TRUE WOMAN
ous, a glorious world of romance: a universe peo
by girlish imaginin, and the sensitive, creat
thoughts of poets, by the galloping phantasies of sup
excited brains, and the vague longings of ambitio
souls, a universe wherein dwelt alike the memo
of those who have loved and the hopes of those wh
suffer. But when she thought of it all she did so 
one who from the arid plain gazes on the cool streams
and golden minarets which the fairy Fata Morgana?
conjures on the horizon far away. She looked on it
as all ureal and altogether beyond her ken. She
shut her eyes to the beautiful mirage, her heart against 
its childish yearnings.
Such things did not exist. They were not for her- 
Louisa Harris. The little kitchenmaid at the Court,
who on Sunday evenings went off giggling, her chubby 
face glowing with pride and the result of recent
ablutions, on the arm of Jim the third gardener, knew,
more about that world of romance than well-bred,
well-born young ladies ever dreamed of in their 
commonplace philosophy.
And Louisa Harris had always shut down the book
which spoke of such impossible things, and counted '
herself one of the strong ones of the earth.
Therefore now with Luke's letter in her hand, in
which he tells her in a very few words that he loves her
beyond anything on earth and that he only waits the
day when he can call her his own, his very own dearly
loved wife, why should Louisa-prosy, healthy-minded,
healthy-bodied Louisa-suddenly imagine that the
whole world is transfigured-that the hotel room 



<pb n="5"/>
'OXMMONPLACE INCIDENT            5
td ane-hamber to heaven-that the red
omXpromising chairs are clouds of a roseate
d that the bronze Psyche with the broken thigh
ei die fairy who with Morgana-like wand hath
up this mirage of glorious visions which
'  s wotid vanish again before long ?
-~ *J 'weat up to the window and rested her forehead
E'  uu the oool pane. She might be ever so strong, she
i        t halnot Lp her forehead feelinghot and her eyes being
[!' . -iSlofs= m... tears that did not hurt as they fell.
i';   · Outb e the weather was indeed prosy and common-
^, (^llr ^  tloon coming down in torrents and beating
.i  newspaper kiosqae over the way, on the
o'. "ib rammways and taxi-autos, making the electric
U    peep dimly through the veil of wet, drowning by
t ineesant patter, to which the gusts of a November
gal made fitful if loud accompaniment, the shouts
of the oochers on their boxes, the rattle of wheels
n the stone pavement, even at times the shrill whistle
for abs emanating from the porch of the brilliantly
lighted Palace Hotel.
It was oe on half-past six by the clook of the Gard
' d  Nord opposite.  The express from Ostend had
just come in-very late, of course, owing to the gale
which had delayed the mail boat. Louisa, straining her
eyes, watched the excited crowd pouring out of the
station in the wake of porters and of piles of luggage
jabbering, shouting and fussing like an army of irre
sponsible pigmies: men in blouses and men in im-
maculate bowler hats, women wrapped in furs, clinging
to gigantic headgear that threatened to leave the safe



<pb n="6"/>
6             A TRUE WOMAN 
refuge of an elaborate coiffure or of well-fixed
gantuan hatpins, midineUes in fashionable skirts
high-heeled shoes, countrywomen in wool shawls t]
lapped round their bulky forms like the wings of 
overfed bat . . . all hurrying and jostling one anot
in a mad endeavour to avoid the onrush of the 
numerable taxi-autos, which in uncountable numbe
wound in and out of the slower-moving traffic like 
erratic thread of some living tangled skein.
Just the everyday prosy life of a small but ambitio
capital, struggling in the midst of an almost over
powering sense of responsibility towards the whole
Europe in view of its recent great Colonial expansi
Louisa gave an impatient sigh.
Even the strong ones of the earth get wearied of
daily round, the common task at times. She andaunm
were due to dine at the British Embassy at eigh   H
o'olook; it was only half-past six now, and obviously
impossible to sit another hour in this unresponsive
hotel room in the company of red velvet chairs and
the bronze Psyche.
Aunt, in conjunction with her maid, Annette, wasi
busy laying the foundations of an elaborate toilette.,/
Louisa was free to do as she pleased. She got ai
serviceable ulster and a diminutive hat and sallied '
forth into the streets. She did not want to think or to  _.
dream, nor perhaps did she altogether wish to work 
off that unusual feeling of excitement which had so
unaccountably transformed her ever since Luke's letter 
had come.
An she wanted was to be alone, and to come out of 



<pb n="7"/>
COMMiONPLACE INCIDENT            7
lt i  while. She had been alone all the after-
am foe that brief half-hour when aunt discussed
over a badly brewed cup of tea; it was
-indl of "alone "-ness which Louisa wanted
but rather the solitude which a crowded street
Z: LA~~mS    aR the power to give.
. '   I e.m-si.  a kind of sociability in any room, be it ever
i|s" m mltaoonHlmisin gin  the matter of discomfort, but a
ao   ded street can be unutterably lonely, either
Mdily so or kindly, as the case may be.
I :-  o Louis Harris, the commonplace society girl,
" esi«ma »d to tea-fights, to dances and to dinner
p      i p H .loieliness of this crowded little city was
! eminetly welcome. With her dark ulster closely
buttoned to the throat, the small hat tied under her
chin, with everything on her weatherproof and un-
fashionable, she attracted no notice from the passer-by.
Not one head was turned as, with a long breath of
delight, she sallied forth from under the portico of the
hotel out into'the muddy, busy street; not one glance
of curiosity or interest so freely bestowed in the streets
of foreign capitals on a solitary female figure if it be
young and comely, followed this very ordinary-
looking English miss.
To the crowd she was indifferent. These men and
women hurrying along, pushing, jostling and scurrying,
knew nothing of Luke, nor that she, Louisa Harris,
was the happiest woman on earth.
She turned back towards the Boulevards, meaning to
take a brisk walk all along the avenue of trees which
makes acircuit round the inner part of the town and



<pb n="8"/>
8             A TRUE WOMAN
which ultimately would lead her back to the Gard
Nord and the Palace Hotel. It was a walk she 
often done before: save for one or two busy cor
on the way, it would be fairly solitary and peaceful.
Louisa stepped out with an honest British 
hands buried in the pockets of her serviceable u
head bent against the sudden gusts of wind. 8S
did not mind the darkness of the ill-lighted, wi
Boulevard, and had every intention of covering t
two miles in a little more than half an hour. 
How the time sped I It seemed as if she had only jusf
left the hotel, and already surely not a quarter of ^
mile away she could see glimmering the lights of th:i
Place Namur, the half-way point of her walk.
She was in the Boulevard Waterloo, there where.
private houses with closed porte-ocw re8 add nothing 
to the municipal lighting of the thoroughfare.
Trams had been rushing past her in endless sucoes-
sion; but now there was a lull. Close by her a taxi-
auto whizzed quickly past and came to a standstill
some hundred yards away, near to the pavement,;
and not far from an electrio light standard. 
Louisa, with vacant eyes attached on that cab,
but with her mind fixed on a particular room in a
particular house in Grosvenor Square, where lived a 
man of the name of Luke de Mountford, continued her 
walk. Those same vacant eyes of hers presently 
saw the chauffeur of the taxi-auto get down from his 
box and open the door of the cab, and then her absent 
mind was suddenly brought back from Grosvenor i
Square, London, to the Boulevard Waterloo in Brussels,  1



<pb n="9"/>
A VERY COMMONPLACE INCIDENT             9
i terrible cry of horror which had broken from that
hauffeur's lips. Instinctively Louisa hurried on,
even as she did so a small crowd, which indeed
siB med to have sprung from nowhere, had already
Kthnrfed round the vehicle.
' :Murmurs of " What is it ? what is it ?" mingled with
' Amothered groans of terror, as curiosity caused one or
-two of the more bold to peer into the gloomy depths
, d the cab. Shrill calls brought a couple of gardiens
to the spot. In a moment Louisa found herself a
; unit i an eager, anxious crowd asking questions,
onjecturing, wondering, horror-struck as soon as a
plausible and graphic explanation came from those
who were in the forefront and were privileged to see,
"A man . . . murdered ..."
I  "But how  "
"The chauffeur got down from his box, .. and
looked in ... ah, mon Die / "
"What did he see "
"   man ... he is quite young  ... only about
twenty years of age ..."
"Stabbed through the neck...."
"Stabbed ? ... Bah . . ."
" Right through the neck, I tell you . . just below
the ear.... I can see the wound, quite small, as if
done with a skewer...."
"'Alon /... .  yonel...  oyotn/" came in gruff
aeeents from the two portly gardiens who worked
vigorously with elbows and even feet to keep the
crowd somewhat at bay.
Louisa was on the fringe of the crowd. She could



<pb n="10"/>
10             A TRUE WOMAN
see nothing, of course . . . she did not wish to see
which the chauffeur saw when first he opened the 
of his cab ... but she stood rooted to the 
feeling that strange, unexplainable fascination 
one always feels, when one of those great life
of which one reads so often and so indiffee
happens to be enacted within the close range of
own perception.
She gleaned-a phrase here and there .. . saw
horror-stricken faces of those who had seen, the pl
bovine expression of the two gardiens, more im
to suoh sights, and calmly taking notes by the 
of the electric standard.
" But to think that I drove that rascally murd
in my cab, and put him down safe and sound not
minutes ago .. ." came with the adjunct of a I
oath from the irate chauffeur.
"How did it all occur" ?
The gardiens tried to stem the flow of the d
eloquence; such details should first be given to
police-eyons / ... But what were two fat 
against twenty stalwart idlers all determined to hear
. . and then there were the women . . . they 
determined to know more.
Louisa bent her ear to listen. She was just ou
the crowd-not a part of it-and there was really
morbid curiosity in her. It was only the oall of
imagination which is irresistible on those occasions-
a prosy, matter-of-fact, high-bred girl could not, jui
then, tear herself away from that cab and the trag
which had been enacted therein in the mysteri



<pb n="11"/>
*IRY COMMONPLACE INCIDENT            11
whilst the unconscious driver sped along,
Ef the gruesome burden which he was dragging
iA dictination.
.M.Voim I" he was saying with many ejaculations
expltives, and a volley of excited gestures. "Out-
'!ib the Paro, near the theatre, two bourgeois hailed
a  , and one of them told me to draw up on the top of
te Galerie St. Hubert, which I did. The same one-
the one who had told me where to go, got out, clapped
ea door to and spoke a few words to his friend who
had remained inside."
"What did he say ?"
"Oh   I couldn't hear, and I didn't listen . . . but
after that he told me to drive on to Boulevard Water-
loo, No. 34, and here I am."
" You suspected nothing ? "
"Nothing, how should I    Two bourgeois get
into my cab. I see nothing ... I hear nothing ...
one of them gets out and tells me to drive on further.
. . How should I think there's anything wrong "
"What was the other man like . . . the one who
spoke to you . .  "
" Ma oi / I don't know.... It was raining so fast
and pitch dark just outside the Pare lights . . . and
he did seem to keep in the shadow . . . now I come
to think of it ... and his cap-he wore a cap-was
pulled well over his face . . . and the collar of his
coat was up to his nose. It was raining so, I didn't
really see him properly... I saw the other one
better ... the one who has been murdered ...."
But the rotund gardies had had enough of this.



<pb n="12"/>
12            A TRUE WOMAN
Moreover, they would hear all about it at full
presently; as for the crowd ... it had no bus
know too much.
They hustled the excited driver back on to 
box, and themselves got into the cab beside It .;
the dead man, stabbed in the neck from ear to ear .
the wound quite small as if it had been done wit
skewer.
The gardiena ordered the chauffeur to drive to
Commissariat, and Louisa turned away with a 
shiver down her spine and her throat choked with
horror of what she had only guessed.



<pb n="13"/>
5?'  .
CHAPTER II
'  ONOE MORE THE OBVIOUS
dom   t suppose for a moment, I hope, that a girl
_ UB Louisa would allow her mind to dwell on
s. hoer.. Mysterious crimes in strange cities,
Idon too for the matter of that-are alas I
frequent occurrence to be quite as startling as
be.
day or two later Louisa Harris and her aunt,
m    yder, crossed over to England. They had spent
Week in Italy and one in Brussels, not with a view
daeming over the beauties of the Italian Lakes, or
th    art treasures collected in the museums of
but because Lady Ryder had had a bronchial
h which she could not shake off, and so her
had ordered her a thorough change. Bellaggio
seteted, and Louisa accompanied her. They
yed at the best hotels both in Bellaggio and in
.se, where Lady Ryder had several friends
Wbom .she wished to visit before she went home.
i. Nothing whatever happened that should not have
I happened; everything was orderly and well managed;
he couorier and the maid saw to tickets and to luggage,
t to hotel rooms and sleeping compartments. It was
obvioufy their mission in life to see that nothing
|.'- :13



<pb n="14"/>
14            A TRUE WOMAN
untoward or unexpected happened-but on
obvious.
It was clearly not their fault that Miss Harris
seen a cab in which an unknown man happen
have been murdered.
Louisa, with a view to preventing her aunt
going to sleep after dinner and thereby spoiling,
night's rest, had told her of the incident which she
witnessed in the Boulevard Waterloo, and Lady
was genuinely shocked. She vaguely felt that
niece had done something unladylike and odd,
was so unlike Louisa.
The latter had amused herself by scanning a n
of English papers in order to find out what was
London about that strange crime, which she
almost witnessed-the man stabbed through the
from ear to ear, and the wound so small it might
been done with a skewer. But with charac
indifference London paid but little heed to the m
ous dramas of a sister city. A brief account of
gruesome discovery... a figurative shrug of
shoulders as to the incompetence of the Be
police, who held neither a clue to the perpe
of the crime nor to the identity of the victim...
Just a stranger-an idler.  Brussels was full
strangers just now. His nationality  Who know)
His individuality ? ... there seemed no one to
The police were active, no doubt, but so far they
discovered nothing.
Two men    The murderer and the murdered
gulfed in that great whirlpool known as hu



<pb n="15"/>
ONCE MORE THE OBVIOUS              15
units of no importance, since no one seemed to
*. Interesting to the detective whose duty it was
track the crime to its perpetrator. Interesting to
reporter who could fill a column with accounts of
potions, of questionings, of examinations. In-
eeting to the after-dinner talker who could ex-
tie over the moral lessons to be drawn from the
ption of such a crime.
But the murdered man goes to his grave unknown;
id- the murderer wandBrs Cain-like on the face of the
? earth ... as mysterious, as unknown, as silent as his
I victim.
i/'
h,-  



<pb n="16"/>
CHAPTER mI
AND NOW ALMOST LIKE A DBEAM
E   ZVEIRYTHNG   went on just as oonven
E   whose mouthpiece for the moment hap
to be Lady Ryder-desired, just as Louisa
that everything would: the letters of congrtu
the stately visits from and to Lord Radelyffe-L
uncle-the magnificent diamond tiara from the 
the rope of pearls from Luke, the silver salvers
inkstands, and enamel parasol handles from e
body who was anybody in London society.
Louisa's portrait and that of Luke hastily
cheaply reproduced in the halfpenny dailies, so
she looked like a white negress with a cast in
eye, and he like the mutilated hero of " L'homme
rit," the more elegant half-tone blocks in the
penny weeklies under the popular, if somewhat
neyed heading of "The Earl of Radclyffe's heir 
his future bride, Miss Louisa Harris," it was all th
just as it had been for hundreds of other girls
hundreds of other young men before Louisa had
covered that there was only one man in the w
wide world, and that beyond the land of diam
tiaras and of society weddings, there was a
universe, immense and illimitable, whereon the 
16



<pb n="17"/>
'NIOW  ALMOST LIKE A DREAM         17
never set, and whither no one dared
lone, only hand in hand with that other
, the future mate, the pupil and teacher of love,
one that mattered.
the wedding was to be in four weeks from this
- The invitations were not out yet, for Louisa-
pressed by Luke-had only just made up her
*  half an hour ago about the date. Strangely
hshe had been in no hurry for the wedding day
e ome. Luke had been so anxious, so crestfallen
she put him off with vague promises, that she
oould not account for this strange reticence
i  her ... so unworthy a level-headed, conventional
of the world.
Uut the outer lobby of the fairy universe was sur-
y beautiful, and though the golden gates to
i nner halls beyond were ajar, and would yield
the slightest pressure of Louisa's slender fingers,
she was glad to tarry awhile longer. Were they
hand in hand? What mattered waiting, since
Mniy called beyond those golden gates ?
T*his morning, however, convention-still voiced by
yyder-was more vigorous than was oonsistent
outward peace. Louisa, worried by aunt, and
the memory of Luke's expression of misery and
ppomtment when last night she had again refused
.l0    the wedding day, chided herself for her silly
. .is', and at eleven o'clock set out for a stroll in
ttesemea Park, her mind made up, her unwonted fit of
! mnimtentality smothered by the louder voice of
- .aemMn mese,



<pb n="18"/>
18            A TRUE WOMAN
She and Luke always took their walks ab
Battersea Park. In the morning hours they'
free there from perpetual meetings with 
company-all outside company being undesir
the lobby of the fairy universe. Louisa had pr
to meet Luke in the tropical garden at ha
eleven. She was always punctual and he always 
his time; she smart and business-like in her
tailor-made gown and close hat which defied win
rain, he always a little shamefaced when he 
neatly gloved hand in his, as most English young
are apt to be when sentiment for the first- time ha
to overmaster them.
To-day she saw him coming towards her j
same as on other days. He walked just as brisl
held himself as erect as he always did, but the m
that he was near enough for her to see his faoeI
knew that there was something very wrong in
world and with him. Some one from the w
eternity beyond had seen fit to push the golden
closer together, so that now they would not
quite so easily to the soft pressure of a woman's
"What is it, Luke ? " she asked very quietly,
soon as her fingers rested safely between his.
"What is what ? " he rejoined foolishly and
ing like a child would, and with a forced,
inane-looking smile on his lips.
"What has happened " she reiterated mom.
patiently.
"Nothing," he replied, "that need worry you, I
Shallwesit down here? You won't catch cold?"



<pb n="19"/>
_  NOW ALMOST LIKE A DREAM 19
a seat well sheltered against the cold
and the impertinent gaze of the passers-by.
nver catch cold," said Louisa, smiling in spite of
f at Luke's funny, awkward ways. "But we
?* sit down. Let us stroll up and down, shall we ?
a o  talk better then, and tell me all about it."
.Thre's not much to tell at present. And no
to worry."
There's nothing that worries me so much as your
-slalying, Luke, or the thought that you are
g futile endeavours to keep something from me,"
retorted almost irritably this time, for straingely
g  her nerves-she never knew before this that
i had any-were slightly on the jar this morning.
' I don't want to shilly-shally, little girl," he replied
y, "nor to keep anything from you. There, will
put your hand on my arm. 'Arry and 'Arriet, eh ?
.. Well never mind ... There's no one to see."
HBe took her hand-that neatly-gloved small hand of
, and put it under his arm. For one moment it
as if he would kiss that tiny and tantalizing
just below the thumb where the pink palm shows
the opening of the glove. Luke was not a demonstri
lover, he was shy and English and abrupt, but
s morning-was it the breath of spring in the air, the
of the Roman hyacinths in that bed over there,
merely the shadow of a tiny cloud on the uniform
Ibe of his life's horizon that gave a certain rugged
:tuess to his touch, as his hand lingered over that
st glove which nestled securely in among the folds
his coat sleeve t
. .^^Sz
I5.



<pb n="20"/>
20            A TRUE WOMAN
"Now," she said simply.
"Have you," he asked with abrupt irrelevance
"read your paper all through this morning ? "
"Not all through. Only the important headlines.'
"And you saw nothing about a claim to a peerage ? 
"Nothing."
"Well I that's all about it. A man has sprung up
from nowhere in particular, who claims to be my uncle
Arthur's son, and therefore heir-presumptive to the
title and all."
Luke heaved a deep sigh, as if with this brief if
ungrammatical statement his own heart had been un-
burdened of a tiresome load.
"Your uncle Arthur ?" she repeated, somewhat'
bewildered.
" Yes. You never knew him, did you ?"
" No," she said, " I never knew him, though as a
baby I must have seen him. I was only three, I
think, when he died. But I never heard that he had
been married. I am sure father never knew."
"Nor did I, nor did Uncle Rad, nor any of us. The
whole thing is either a thunderbolt or a . . an
imposture."
"Tell me," she said, "a little more clearly, Luke
dear, will you ? I am feeling quite muddled." And 
now it was she who led the way to the isolated seat
beneath that group of silver birch, whose baby leaves
trembled beneath the rough kiss of the cool April
breeze.
They sat down together, and on the gravelled path
in front of them a robin hopped half shyly, half im-



<pb n="21"/>
S  AND NOW ALMOST LIKE A DREAM 21
: pertinently about and gazed with tiny inquisitive
eyes on the doings of these big folk. All round them
the twitter of bird throats filled the air with its magic,
its hymn to the reawakened earth, and drowned in
this pleasing solitude the distant sounds of the busy
city that seemed so far away from this secluded nook
inhabited by birds and flowers, and by two dwellers
in Fata Morgana's land.
"Tell me firstly," said Louisa, in her most prosy,
most matter-of-fact tone of voice, " all that is known
about your unele Arthur."
"Well! up to now, I individually knew very little
about him. He was the next eldest brother to Uncle
Rad, and my father was the youngest of all. When
Uncle Rad succeeded to the title, Arthur was heir-
presumptive, of course. But, as you know, he died-
as was supposed unmarried-nineteen years ago, and
my poor dear father was killed in the hunting field
the following year. I was a mere kid then and the
others were babies-orphans the lot of us. My mother
died when Edith was borm  Uncle Rad was said to be
a confirmed bachelor. He took us all to live with him.
. . And was father, mother, elder brother, elder
sister to us all. Bless him  .. ."
Luke paused abruptly, and Louisa too was silent.
Only the song of a thrush soaring upwards to the skies
called for that blessing which neither of them at the
moment could adequately evoke.
" Yes ! " said Louisa at last, "I knew all that."
Lord Radelyffe and his people were all of the same
world as herself. She knew all about the present man's



<pb n="22"/>
£3            A TRUE WOMAN
touching affection for the children of his you
brother, but more especially for Luke, on whom
bestowed an amount of love and tender care whi
would have shamed many a father by its unsel
intensity. That affection was a beautiful trait in
otherwise not very lovable character.
"I dare say," resumed Luke after a little while, "th
I have been badly brought up. I mean in this wa
that if . . .if the whole story is true ... if Uno
Arthur did marry and did have a son, then I sho
have to go and shift for myself and for Jim and Fra
and Edith.... Of course, Uncle Rad would d
what he could for us, but I should no longer be 
heir . . . and we couldn't go on living at Grosven
Square and ..." 
"Aren't you rambling on a little too fast, dear ?
mid Louisa gently, whilst she beamed with an a
motherly smile-the smile that a woman wears whe
she means to pacify and to comfort-on the trouble
face of the young man.
" Of course I am," he replied more calmly, " but I
can't help it.... For some days now I've had a so
of feeling that something was going to happen . ..
that . . .well! that things weren't going to go right.
And this morning when I got up, I made up my mind
that I would tell you."
"When did you hear first, and from whom ? "
"The first thing we heard was last autumn. There '
came a letter from abroad for Uncle Rad. It hadn't
the private mark on it, so Mr. Warren opened it along
with the rest of the correspondence. He showed it to



<pb n="23"/>
AND NOW ALMOST IKE A DREAM 2S
The.letter was signed Philip de Mountford,
began 'My dear uncle.' I couldn't make head or
i ia[ of it; I thought it all twaddle.... You've no
ide what sort of letters Uncle Rad gets sometimes
from every kind of lunatic or scoundrel you can think
- , who wants to get something out of him. Well !-
thi letter at first looked to me the same sort of thing.
, . I had never heard of any one who had the right
to say.' dear uncle' to Uncle Rad . . . but it had a
lot in it about blood being thicker than water and all
the rest of it, with a kind of request for justice and talk
about the cruelty of Fate.... The writer, however,
asserted positively that he was the only and legitimate
on of Mr. Arthur de Mountford, who-this he pro-
fessed to have only heard recently-was own brother
to the Earl of Radclyffe. The story which he went on
to relate at full length was queer enough in all con-
science. I remember every word of it, for it seemed
to get right away into my brain, then and there, as if
something was being hammered or screwed straight
into one of the cells of my memory never really to
come out again."
" And yet when . . . when we were first engaged,"
rejoined Louisa quietly, "you never told me anything
about it."
" I'll tell you directly how that was. I remembered
and then forgot-if you know what I mean-and now
it has all come back. At the time I thought the letter
of this man who called himself Philip de Mountford
nothing but humbug-so did Mr. Warren, and yet he
and I talked it over and discussed it between us for



<pb n="24"/>
*4            A TRUE WOMAN
evereso long. It all sounded so strange. Uncle Arth
-o this man said who called himself Philip de  oun
ford-had married in Martinique a half-caste
named Adeline Petit, who was this same Philip'
mother. He declares that he has all the paper
marriage certificates or whatever they are called-
prove every word he says. He did not want to troub
his unle much, only now that his mother was dea
he felt all alone in the world and longed for the oo
panionship and affection of his own kith and kin. 
he wanted, he said, was friendship. Then he went 
to say that, of course, he did not expect his lordship
take his word for all this, he only asked for an opp
tanity to show his dear uncle all the papers and oth
proofs which he held that he was in real and sobe
truth the only and legitimate son of Mr. Arthur d
Mountford, own brother to his lordship."
"How old is this man-this Philip de Mountford-.
supposed to be ? "
"Well, he said in that first letter that the marriage
took place in the parish church of St. Pierre in Martin-1
ique on the 28th of August, 1881. That he himselfI
was born the following year, and christened in the same.
churoh under the name of Philip Arthur, and registered
as the son of Mr. Arthur Collingwood de Mountford
of Ford's Mount, in the county of Northampton,
England, and of Adeline de Mountford, ne Petit, his
wife."
" Twenty-four years ago," said Louisa thoughtfully, 
"and he only claims kinship with Lord Radclyffe
now ...."



<pb n="25"/>
IND NOW ALMOST LIKE A DREAM 25
ihat's just," rejoined Luke, "where the curious
of the story comes in. This Philip de Mountford-
't mknow how else to call him-said in his first letter
it his mother never knew that Mr. Arthur de Mount-
fl(Id was anything more than a private English gentle-
mra  traveling either for profit or pleasure, but in any
ass not possessed of either wealth or social position.
Between you and me, dear, I suppose that this Adeline
Petit was just a half-caste girl, without much know-
bdge of what goes on in the world, and why she should
-   ave married Uncle Arthur I can't think .. ."
" If she did marry him, you mean...."
t "If she did marry him, as you say," said Luke with a
singular want of conviction, which Louisa was not
dsow to remark.
"You think that this young man's story is true,
then ?"
"I don't know what to think, and that's the truth."
" Tell me more," added Louisa simply.
" Well, this Philip's story goes on to say that his
father-Uncle Arthur-apparently soon tired of his
exotic wife, for it seems that two years after the
marriage he left Martinique and never returned to it
to the day of his death."
" Pardon," said Louisa in her prim little way, " my
interrupting you; but have any of you-Lord Rad-
clyffe, I mean, or any of your friends-any recollection
of your uncle Arthur living at Martinique for a while ?
Two years seems a long time. .. ."
"As a matter of fact, Uncle Arthur was a bit of a
wastrel, you know. He never would study for any-



<pb n="26"/>
26            A TRUE WOMAN
thing. He passed into the navy-very well, too,
believe-but he threw it all up almost as soon as 
got his commission, and started roaming about t
world. I do know for a fact that once his peop
had no news of him for about three or four ye
and then he turned up one fine day as if he had onl
been absent for a week's shooting."
"When was that "
"I can't tell you exactly. I was only a tiny kid a
the time, not more than three years old I should say
Yes, I do remember, now I come to think of it, tha
Uncle Arthur was home the Christmas after my third
birthday. I have a distinct recollection of my 
telling me that Uncle Arthur was one of my presen
from Father Christmas, and of my thinking what 
rotten present it was. Later on in the nursery all of us'
ohildren were rather frightened of him, and we used
to have great disussions as to where this uncle came
from. The Christmas present theory was soon exploded, 
because of some difficulty about Uncle Arthur not
having been actually found in a stocking, and his being 
too big anyway to be hidden in one, so we fell back on 
Jim's suggestion that he was the man in the moon come 
down for a holiday."
" You," she said, " had your third birthday in 1883."
" Yes."
"That was the year, then, that your uncle Arthur 
came home from his wanderings about the world,
during which he had never given any news of himself
or his doings to any member of his family."
"By Jove     Loo, what a splendid examining



<pb n="27"/>
AND NOW        ALMOST LIKE A DREAM          27
t maistate you'd make! " was Luke's unsophisticated
ommuent on Louisa's last remark.
But she frowned a little at this show of levity, and
-  continued quietly:
"And your uncle, according to this so-called Philip
de Mountford, was married in 1881 in Martinique, his
son was born in 1882, and he left Martinique in 1883
never to return."
"Hang it all, Loo!" exclaimed the young man
almost roughly, " that is all surmise."
" I know it is, dear, I was only thinking."
" Thinking what "
" That it all tallies so very exactly, and that this ...
this Philip de Mountford seems in any case to know a
great deal about your uncle Arthur, and his move-
ments in the past."
" There's no doubt of that; and ..."
Luke. paused a moment, and a curious blush spread
over his face. The Englishman's inborn dislike to
talk of certain subjects to his women-folk had got hold
of him, and he did not know how to proceed.
As usual in such cases, the woman-unmoved and
business-like-put an end to his access of shyness.
"The matter is-or may be-too serious, dear, for
you to keep any of your thoughts back from me at this
juncture."
"What I meant was," he said abruptly, " that this
Philip might quite well be Uncle Arthur's son, you
know, but it doesn't follow that he has any right to
call himself Philip de Mountford, or to think that he
is Uncle Rad's presumptive heir."



<pb n="28"/>
28            A TRUE WOMAN
"That will, of course, depend on his proofs--
papers and so on . . ." she assented calmly. " 
any one seen them ? "
"At the time-it was some time last Novembe
that he first wrote to Uncle Rad, he had all his pa
by him. He wrote from St. Vincent-have I told yo
that ?"
" No."
"Well I it was from St. Vincent that he wrote. 
had left Martinique, I understand, in 1902, when S
Pierre, if you remember, was totally destroyed b
volcanic eruption. It seems that when Uncle Arthb
left the French colony for good, he lodged quite
comfortable sum in the local bank at St. Pierre in th
name of Mrs. de Mountford. Of course, he had n
intention of ever going back there, and anyhow 
never did, for he died about three years later. The
lady went on living her own life quite happily. Ap-
parently she did not hanker much after her faithless
husband. I suppose that she never imagined for a
moment that he meant to stick to her, and she cer-
tainly never bothered her head as to what his con-
neotions or friends over in England might be. Amongst
her own kith and kin, the half-caste population of a
French settlement, she was considered very well off,
almost rich. After a very few years of grass-widow-
hood, she married again, without much scruple or
compunction, which proves that she never thought
that her English husband would come back to her.
And then came the catastrophe."
" What catastrophe ? "



<pb n="29"/>
AND NOW      ALMOST LIKE A DREAM         29
The destruction of St. Pierre, You remember the
acounts of it, The whole town was destroyed.
Xvery building in the place-the local bank, the
ahurch, the presbytery, the post-office-were burnt
to the ground; everything was devastated for miles
around. And thousands perished, of course."
"I remember."
"Mrs. de Mountford and her son Philip were amongst
the very few who escaped. Their cottage was burned
; to the ground, but she, with all a Frenchwoman's
ese of respect for papers and marks of identification,
fought her way back into the house, even when it was
tottering above her head, jn order to rescue those
things which she valued more than her life, the proofs
that she was a respectable married woman and that
Philip was her lawfully begotten son. Her second
husband-I think from reading between the lines
that he was a native or at best a half-caste-was one
of the many who perished. But Mrs. de Mountford
and Philip managed to reach the coast unhurt and to
put out to sea in an open boat. They were picked up
by a fishing smack from Marie Galante and landed
there    It is a small island-French settlement, of
ourse-off Guadeloupe. They had little or no money,
and how they lived I don't know, but they stayed in
Marie Galante for some time. Then the mother died,
and Philip made his way somehow or other to Roseau
in Dominica, and thence to St. Vincent."
"When was that ?"
" Last year, I suppose."
"And," she said, meditating on all that she had



<pb n="30"/>
80            A TRUE WOMAN
heard, "it was in St. Vincent that he first
who he was ... or might be."
" Well! in a British colony it was bound to happ
Whether somebody put him up to it out there, 
whether he merely sucked the information in fro
nowhere in particular, I can't say; certain it
that he did soon discover that the name he bore w
one of the best-known in England, and that his fath
must, as a matter of fact, have been own brother to t
Earl of Radlyffe. So he wrote to Uncle Rad."
Louisa was silent. She was absorbed in though
and for the moment Luke had come to the end of wh
he had to say-or rather of what he meant to say j
now. That there was more to come, Louisa wel kne
Commonplace women have a way of intuitively getti
at the bottom of the thoughts of people for whom th
care. Louisa guessed that beneath Luke's levity an
his sohoolboyish slang-which grew more apparen
as the young man drew to the end of his narrative
that beneath his outward flippancy there lay a dee
substratum of puzzlement and anxiety.
The story as told by Luke sounded crude enough
almost melodramatio-right out of the oommonpl
range of Louisa's usual everyday life. Whilst she 
listening to this exotic tale of secret and incongruo
marriage and of those earthquakes and volcani
eruptions which had seemed so remote when she ha
read about them nine years ago in the newspapers, she
almost thought that she must be dreaming, that she
would wake up presently in her bed at the Langham
Hotel where she was staying with aunt, and that she



<pb n="31"/>
AND NOW ALMOST LKE A DREAM 81
r  ould then dress and have her breakfast and go out
fto meet Luke, and tell him all about the idiotic dream
s she had had about an unknown heir to the Earldom of
Badclyffe, who was a nigger-or almost so-and was 
born in a country where there were volcanoes and
earthquakes.
How far removed from her at this moment did aunt
seem, and father, and the twins. Surely they could
not be of the same-world as this exotic pretender
to Uncle Radclyffe's affection, and to Luke's hitherto
undisputed rights. And as father and aunt, and Mabel
and Chris were very much alive and very real, then
this so-called Philip de Mountford must be a creature
of dreams.
" Or else an impostor."
She had said this aloud, thus breaking in on her own
thoughts and his. A feeling of restlessness seized her
now. She was cold too, for the April breeze was biting
and had searched out the back of her neck underneath
the sable stole and caused her to shiver in the spring
sunshine.
"Let us walk," she said, " a little . . . shall we "



<pb n="32"/>
CHAPTER IV
NOTHING REALLY TANGIBLE
TMHY walked up the gravel walk under the che
nut trees, whereon the leafbuds, lusoious-loo
with their young green surface delicately tinged 
pink, looked over-ready to burst into fan-shaped f
ness of glory. The well-kept paths, the orderly fio
beds and smoothly trimmed lawns looked all so sim
so obvious beside the strange problem which fate
propounded to these two young people walking
and down side by side ... and with just a cer
distance between them as if that problem was kee
them apart.
And that intangible reality stood between t
causing in Luke a vague sense of shame-faoedness, 
if he were guilty towards Louisa . ., and in her
feeling of irritation against the whole world aro
her, for having allowed this monstrous thing to hap
-this vague shadow on life's pathway, on the life
the only man who mattered.
People passed them as they walked-the curio
the indifferent; men with bowler hats pulled 
frowning brows, boys with caps carelessly worn at
back of their heads, girls with numbed fingers th
in worn gloves, tip-tilted noses blue with cold, 
32



<pb n="33"/>
NOTHING REALLY TANGIBLE             58 
-ifitting clothes scarce shielding attenuated shoulders
f  against the keen spring blast.
Just the humdrum, everyday crowd of London: the
fighters, the workers, toiling against heavy odds of
feeble health, insufficient food, scanty clothing, the
poor that no one bothers about, less interesting than the
unemployed labourers, less picturesque, less noisy ...
they passed and had no time to heed the elegantly
clad figure wrapped in costly furs, or the young man
in perfectly tailored coat, who was even now preparing
himself for a fight with destiny, beside which the daily
struggle for halfpence would be but a mere skirmish.
Instinctively they knew-these two-the society girl
and the easy-going, wealthy man-that it was reality
with which they would have to deal. That instinct
comes with the breath of Fate: a warning that hot
decrees are serious, not to be lightly set aside but
pondered over, that her materialized breath would
not be a phantom or a thing to be derided.
Truth or imposture ? Which ?
Neither the man nor the girl knew as yet, but
Reality-whatever else it was.
They walked on for a while in silence. Another
instinct-the conventional one-had warned them
that their stay in the Park had been unduly prolonged;
there were social duties to attend to, calls to make,
luncheon with Lord Radclyffe at Grosvenor Square.
So they both by tacit consent turned their steps
back towards the town.
A man passed them from behind, walking quicker
than they did. As he passed, he looked at them both
D



<pb n="34"/>
A TRUE WOMAN
intently, as if desirous of arresting their attenti
Of course, he succeeded, for his look was alm
oompelling. Louisa was the first to turn towards 
then Luke did likewise; and the passer-by raised
hat respectfully with a slight inclination of head 
shoulders that suggested foreign upbringing.
Once more convention stepped in, and Luke mech
cally returned the salute.
"Who was that ? " asked Louisa, when the pa
by was out of earshot.
"I don't know," replied Luke. " I thought it
some one you knew. He bowed to you."
"No!" she said, "to you, I think. Funny y
should not know him."
But silence once broken, constraint fled with it. 
drew nearer to Luke and once more her hand so
his coat sleeve, with a light pressure quickly wi
drawn.
"Now, Luke," she said abruptly, reverting to 
subject, " how do you stand in all this "
"I ?"
"Yes. What does Lord Radolyffe say ? "
" He laughs the whole thing to scorn, and dec
that the man is an impudent liar."
"He saw," she asked, "the first letter ? The
that came from St. Vincent "
"Yes. Mr. Warren and I did not think we ou
to keep it from him."
"Of course not," she assented. "Then he 
that the letter was a tissue of lies "
"From beginning to end."



<pb n="35"/>
H       NOTHING REALLY TANGIBLE             85
"He refused," she insisted, "to believe in the
aruriage of your uncle Arthur out there in Martin-
" He didn't go into details. He just said that the
whole letter was an impudent attempt at blackmail."
And since then  "
L   He has never spoken about it."
"Until to-day ? " she asked.
"He hasn't spoken," he replied, insisting on the
word, "even to-day. Two or three times I think
letters came for him in the same handwriting. Mr.
Warren did not open them, of course, and took them
straight to Uncle Rad. They always bore foreign
postmarks, some from one place, some from another,
.but Uncle Rad never referred to them after he had
read them, nor did he instruct Mr. Warren to reply.
Then the letters ceased, and I began to forget the
whole business. I didn't tell you, because Uncle Rad
.told me not to talk about the whole thing. It was
beneath contempt, he said, and he didn't want the
tittle-tattle to get about."
"Then," she asked, " what happened "
" A week ago a letter came with a London postmark
-on it. The address and letter were both typewritten,
and the latter covered four sheets of paper, and was
signed Philip de Mountford. Bar the actual story of
the marriage and all that, the letter was almost
identical to the first one which came from St. Vincent.
Mr. Warren had opened it, for it looked like a business
one, and he waited for me in his office to ask my
opinion about it. Of course, we had to give it to Uncle
>~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="36"/>
56            A TRUE WOMAN
Rad. It had all the old phrases in it about
being thicker than water, and about longing 
friendship and companionship and all that. 
was no hint of threats or demand for money or 
thing like that." 
" Of course not," she said, "whilst Lord Radely
is alive, the young man has no claim."
Only," he rejoined, "that of kinship."
" Lord Radlyffe need not do anything for him."'
Already there was a note of hostility in Louisa's 
voie. The commonplace woman was donning arm
against the man who talked of usurping the loved o
privileges.
"I wish," he insisted, "that I could have got 
letter from Uncle Rad to show you. It was so sim
and so sensible. All he asks is just to see Uncle 
personally, to feel that he has kindred in the wo
He knows-he says-that beyond goodwill, he has
claim now. As a matter of fact he has something m
substantial than that, for Uncle Arthur had a 
personal property about £15,000 which he left.
us four. hildren-Jim  and Frank and Edie 
me-and which I for one wouldn't touch if I knew
certain that this Philip was his son."
"But," she argued, " you say that the man does x
speak of money."
She hated the talk about money, for she had all tt
contempt for it which women have who have ne
felt the want of it. It would have been so simple ,
the intruder had only wanted money. She would 
have cared a little bit if Luke had none, or was 



<pb n="37"/>
NOTHING REALLY TANGIBLE             87
to have any. It was his right which she would
hear of being questioned. His right in Lord
adolyffe's affections, in his household, and also his
rights in the future when Lord Radelyffe would be
gone.
"You are sure," she insisted, "that he does not
want money ?"
"I don't think," he replied, "that he does, just
now. He seems to have a little; he must have had a
little since he came over from St. Vincent and is
staying at a moderately good hotel in London. No.
He wants to see Uncle Rad, because he thinks that if
Uncle Rad saw him, blood would cry out in response.
It appears that now he has lodged all his papers of
identification with a London lawyer-a very good firm,
mind you-and he wants Uncle Rad's solicitor to see
all the papers and to examine them. That seems fair
to me. Doesn't it to you ? "
" Very' fair indeed," she mused.
"What I mean," he added with great conviction,
"is that if those papers weren't all right and that, he
wouldn't be so anxious for Uncle Rad's solicitors to
have a look at them, would he "
" No."
And after a while she reiterated more emphatically--
" Certainly not."
"I must say," he concluded, "that the whole thing
simply beats me."
" But what does Lord Radolyffe say now ? "
"Nothing."
"How do you mean, nothing ?"



<pb n="38"/>
88       A TRUE WOMAN
"Just what I say. He won't talk about the ti
He won't discuss it. He won't answer any ques
which I put to him. 'My dear boy, the man is
palpable impudent impostor, a blackmailer.' 
that's all I can get out of him."
" He won't see the man ? "
"Won't hear of it."
" And won't he let his solicitor-Mr. Dobson, i
it ?-meet the other lawyer "
" He says he wouldn't dream of wasting old Dobso
time."
"Then what's going to happen ? "
"I don't see," he said, " what is going to happe
"Won't you have a talk about it with old
Dobson, and see what he says ?" 
" I can't very well do that. Strictly speaking, i
none of my business . . . as yet. I couldn't cons
Uncle Rad's lawyers, without Uncle Rad's consent."
"Another one, then."
He shrugged his shoulders, obviously undeci
what to do. He had thought very little about h
or his future in all this; his thoughts had dw
mostly on Lord Radclyffe-father, mother, broth
sister to them all. Bless him! . . . and then he 
thought of her. He looked round him with eyes t
scarcely saw, for they really were turned inwards
his own simple soul, and to his loving heart. Right 
against that very simplicity of soul, a duty stood cle
and uncompromising, a duty yet to he perform
the real aim and end of all that he had said so f
But he did not know how best to perform such a du



<pb n="39"/>
NOTHING REALLY TANGIBLE             39
Simple souls-unlike the complex physiological
pheomena of modem times-are apt to be selfless,
o think more of the feelings of others than of analysing
their own various sensations, and Luke knew that
what he considered his duty would not be quite so
obvious to Louisa, and that by fulfilling it he would
give her pain.



<pb n="40"/>
CHAPTER V
JUST AN OBVIOUS DUTY
UT it was she who gave him an opening.
" Luke," she said, " it's all very well, but t
matter does concern you in a way, far more so, in fa
than it does Lord Radclyffe. Nothing can make 
difference to Lord Radelyffe, but if what this you
man asserts is all true, then it will make a world
difference to you."
"I know that-that's just the trouble."
"You were thinking of yourself ?"
"No. I was thinking of you  "
"      Of me "
"Yes," he said now very abruptly, quite roughly 
crudely, not choosing his words lest they helped 
betray what he felt, and all that he felt. " If wh
this man says is true, then I am a penniless nonentit
whom you are not going to marry."
"You are talking nonsense, Luke, and you kno
it," was all that she said. And she said it very quietly
very decisively. He was talking nonsense, of course,
for whatever happened or didn't happen, there was
one thing in the world that was absolutely, undeniably.
impossible, and that was that she should not marry
Luke.
to~~~~~~~~~~'



<pb n="41"/>
JUST AN OBVIOUS DUTY              41
-Whit she, Louisa Harris, plain, uninteresting,
place Louisa Harris was of this world, her
with Luke must be. People-in this present-
ymatter-of-fact world-didn't have their hearts
EwrAc1hed out of them, they were not made to suffer
.impossible and unendurable tortures; then why should
she--Louisa Harris-be threatened with such a
cataclysm ?
"I am  not," he was saying rather tonelessly,
talking nonsense, Loo. I have thought all that
j over. It's over eight days since that letter came;
eight times twenty-four hours since I seemed in a way
to see all my future through a thick black cloud, and
I I've had time to think. I saw you too through that
l thick black cloud... I saw you just as you are,
· exquisite, beautiful, like a jewel that should for ever
remain in a perfect setting. I ..."
He broke off abruptly, and-mechanically-his
hand went up to his forehead and eyes. Where was
he ? He gave a sudden, quaint laugh.
"What a drivelling fool you must think me, Loo."
She looked straight at him: pure of soul, simple of
heart, with a passion of tenderness and self-abnegation
as yet dormant beneath the outer crust of a convene
tional education, and of commonplace surroundings,
but with the passion there, nevertheless. And it was
expressed in the sudden, strange luminosity of her
eyes-I would not have you think that they were
tears-as they met and held his own.
They didn't say anything more just then. People
of their type and class in England do not say much,



<pb n="42"/>
42            A TRUE WOMAN
you know, under such circumstances. They hae b
drilled not to. Drilled and drilled from childh
upwards, from the time when, after a fall and a 
lip or broken tooth, the tears have to be held b
lest the words " snivel " or " cry-baby " be mention
But quietude does not necessarily mean freedom 
pain. A out lip hurts worse when it is not wett
with tears.
It was only the shadow that was hovering over th
two as yet: nothing really tangible. And the shad
was not between them. She would not let it co
between them. If it covered him, it should wrap h
too. The commonplace woman had no fear of i
descent, only as far as it affected him.
"Nothing," she said after a while, "could make
difference to our marriage, Luke. Except, of co
if you ceased to care."
"Or you, Loo," he suggested meekly.
"Do you think," she retorted, "that I should
Just because you had no money ? "
" Not," he owned, " because of that. But I sho
be such a nonentity. I have no real profession,
there are the others . . . Jim in the Blues costs a f
ful lot a year, and Frank in the diplomatic service m
have his promised allowance . . . I have read for
Bar, but beyond that what am I  . .."
" Your unle's right hand," she retorted firml
"his agent, his secretary, his factotum all rolled in
one. You manage his estates, his charities, his co
spondence.... You write his sppeehes and con
his household  ... Lord Radelyffe-every one sa



<pb n="43"/>
JUST AN OBVIOUS DUTY              46
in London-would not be himself at all without
Luke de Mountford behind him. .. ."
[  "That's not what I mean, Loo."
" What do you mean  "
m  "I mean that . . ."
He paused a moment, then added with seeming
irrelevance-
"We all know that Uncle Rad is a curious kind of
man. .. .If this story turns out to be true, he would
still say nothing . . . but he would fret and fret . ..
and worry himself into his grave. ..."
" The story," she argued obstinately, " will nottrrn
out to be true ... It's not like you, Luke, to jumpt
conclusions, or to be afraid of a nightmare."  :9
"I am not afraid," he rejoined simply. * But I
must look at possibilities. Yes, dear," he continued
E   more forcibly, :it is possible that this story is true....
' No good saying fAt it is            impossible . . . improbable,
if you like, but not impossible. Look at it how you
like, you must admit that it is not impossible. Uncle
Arthur may have married in Martinique ... he
was out there in 1881 . . he may have had a son.
. . . His telling no one about his marriage is not to be
wondered at.. . . He was always reticent and queer
about his own affairs... This Philip may possibly
be Uncle Rad's sole and rightful heir . . . and I may
possibly be a beggar."
She uttered an exclamation of incredulity. Luke!
. .  a beggar! . . . Luke! the one man in all the
world, different to every other man ! . .. Luke ousted
by that stranger upstart . . .



<pb n="44"/>
44         .A TRUE WOMAN
.God had too much sense of humour to allow
ridiouloua a Fate to work her silly caprice.
"And," she said with soorn, "because of all th
absurd possibilities you talk of breaking off y
engagement to me.... Do you oare so little as
that, Luke?"
He did not reply, but continued to walk beside
just a yard or so apart from her, turning his steps in
dieotion of the gates, towards the Albert Bridge, t
nearest way home. She-meekly now, for already
was sorry-turned to look at him. Something in
attitude, the stoop of the shoulders, usully so sq
and ereot, the hands curiously clasped behind his 
told her that her shaft-very thoughtlessly aimed-
struck even deeper than it should.
"I am so sorry, dear," she said gently.
His look forgave her, even before the words 
fllyout of her mouth, but with oharacteristic retie
he made no reply to her taunt. Strangely enough, 
was satisd that he should say nothing. The l
which did not reproaoh even whilst it tried to con
the iinfinite depth of the wound so lightly dealt, 
told her more than any words could do. Whate
Luke decided to do, it would be from a sense of m
obligation, that desire for doing the right thing-in
worldly sense of the term-which is inherent in
men of a certain class. No sentiment save that of
conventional one of honour would be allowed to 
her destiny and his. 
Conventionality-that same strained sense of ho
and duty-decreed that under certain mund
!                                                   'w&
t~~~~~~~~~o



<pb n="45"/>
JUST AN OBVIOUS DUTY              46
ircumstances a man and woman should not mate.
Differences of ancestry, of parentage, of birth and of
country, divergence of taste, of faith, of belief ... a.
these matter not one jot. But let the man be beggared
and the woman rich, and convention steps in and says,
"'It shall not be ! "
These two bowed to that decree: unconventional
m in so far as that they both made the sacrifice out of the
intense purity of their sentiment to one another. They
made an absolutely worldly sacrifice for a wholly un-
worldly motive. Luke would as soon have thought of
seeing Louisa in a badly fitting serge frock, and paying
twopence for a two-mile ride in an omnibus, as he
would expect to see a diamond tiara packed in a
cardboard box: it would be unfair on the jeweller
who had made the tiara thus to subject it to rough
treatment; and it would be equally unfair on the
Creator of Louisa to-let her be buffeted about by the
cruder atoms of this world.
Louisa only thought of Luke, and that perhaps he
would feel happier in his mind if she allowed him to
make this temporary sacrifice.
There is such wonderful balm in self-imposed sacri-
fice I
"What," she asked simply, "do you want me to
say, Luke ? "
"Only that ... that you won't give me up alto-
gether unless . . ."
Here he checked himself abruptly. Was there ever
an Englishman born who could talk sentiment at
moments such as this ? Luke was no exception to



<pb n="46"/>
46            A TRUE WOMAN 
that rule. There was so much that he wanted
to Louisa, and yet the very words literally o!i
him before he could contrive to utter them.  i
"Don't," she said quietly, "let us even r  _
such things, Luke. I do not believe in this sh
. . and I cannot even understand why you 
worry about it ... but whatever happens, I
never give you up. Never. We will put off fix
day of our wedding-since we have made no anno
ment this won't matter at all; but I only agree 
because I think that it is what you would like..
fancy that it would ease your mind .. ..
breaking our engagement in the future-in case
worst happens-well, it shall not be with my co
Luke, unless you really ceased to care."
They had reached the gate close to the bridge.
pulsated all round them, the life of the big
callous, noisy, and cruel. Omnibuses, cabs, heavy
rattled incessantly past them. People jostled
another, hurrying and scurrying, pigmies and
adding their tiny load of work, of care, of sorrow
titanic edifice of this living world.
Louisa's last words remained unanswered.
had-by silence-said everything that there w
say. They stood on the pavement for a moment,
Luke hailed a passing taxi-cab.
At the corner opposite, an omnibus pulled up ota
way westwards. A man stepped off the kerb re
enter it. Louisa caught his eye, and he raised his h
the man who had passed them in the Park just no



<pb n="47"/>
CHAPTER VI
JUST A DISAGREEABLE OLD MAN
luncheons at Grosvenor Square were always
rather dull and formal. But Louisa did not mind
verymuch. She was used to dull and formal affairs:
y were part and parcel of her daily life. London
iet is full of it. The dull and formal dominate,
others-vulgar if more lively-were not worth
'ltivating.
! Then, she almost liked Lord Radclyffe, because he
so fond of Luke. And even then " alost" was a
g. word. No one-except Luke-could really like
e old man. He was very bad-tempered, very diota-
, a perfect tyrant in his own household. His
Oinions no one dared contradict, no one cared to
f.gue with him, and his advanced Tory views were so
bid that he almost made perverts from the cause, of
AD those whom he desired to convince.
And even these were few, for Lord Radclyffe had no
fiends and very few acquaintances. He had a strange
-ad absolute dislike for his fellow-men. He did not like
i Besing people, he hated to exchange greetings, to talk
or to mingle with any crowd that was purely on pleasure
bent. He went up to the House and made speeches
political, philanthropic, economic speeches which Luke
47



<pb n="48"/>
48            A TRUE WOMAN
prepared for him and which he spoke without ent
siam or any desire to please. This he did not bec
he liked it or took any interest in things polit
philanthropic, or economic, but only because he
sidered that a man in his position owed certain du
to the State-duties which it would be cowardly 
shirk.
But he really cared nothing for the thoughts
others, for their opinions, their joys or their sorro
He had schooled himself not to care, to call philanthro
empty sentiment, politics senseless ambition, econo
grasping avarice.
His was a life entirely wrapped up in itself. In you
he had been very shy: a shyness caused at first by'
serious defect of speech which, though cured in la
years, always left an unconquerable diffidence,
almost morbid fear of ridicule in its train.
Because of this, I think, he had never been a spo
man-or rather never been an athlete, for he 
splendid with a gun and the finest revolver shot
England, so I've been told, and an acknowle
master of fence-but with bat, ball or racquet he I
invariably clumsy.
He had always hated to be laughed at, and theref
had never gone through the rough mill of a tyro
athletics or in games. Arthur, one of his brothers, h
been a blue at Oxford, the other one, James-y
remember James de Mountford ?-was the celebra
cricketer; but he, the eldest, always seemed to rem
outside that magic circle of sport, the great ring of mae
links which unites Englishmen one to another in a w



<pb n="49"/>
JUST A DISAGREEABLE OLD MAN               49
itbat no other conformity of tastes, of breeding, or of
. religion can ever do.
Because of this diffidence too, no doubt, he had never
married. I was told once by an intimate friend of his,
that old Rad-as he was universally called-had
never mustered up sufficient courage to propose to any
woman. And as he saw one by one the coveted matri-
monial prizes-the pretty girls whom at different
times he had admired sufficiently to desire for wife-
snapped up by more enterprising wooers, his dour
moroseness grew into positive chronic ill-humour.
He liked no one and no one liked him; and during
sixty years of life he had succeeded in eliminating from
his entire being every feeling of sentiment-save one.
He had to all appearances an absolutely callous heart;
he cared neither for dog nor horse-he ordered a
splendid mare to be shot without the slightest oom-
punction, after she had carried him in the hunting field
and in the Park faithfully and beautifully for over
eight years, just because she had shied at a motor-car
and nearly thrown him. He was not cruel, you know,
just callous in all respects save one: void of all
sentiment-he called it sentimentality-save in his
affection for Luke.
Luke had been-ever since he was a growing lad-
the buffer in the establishment, between the irascible
master and the many subordinates. From Mr. Warren
-the highly paid and greatly snubbed secretary-
down to the maids below stairs, one and all brought
troubles, complaints, worries to Mr. Luke. No one
dared approach his lordship. A word out of season
E



<pb n="50"/>
50            A TRUE WOMAN
brought instant dismissal; and no one thought
leaving a place where, besides excellent wages, t
was the pleasure of waiting on Mr. Luke.-Never
de Mountford, you notice . . . always Mr. Luke.
had grown up amongst the household; Winston,
old oachman, had taught him to ride-Mary,
housekeeper, then a nurse, had bathed him in a 
hand basin when he was less than eighteen inches l
Therefore the atmosphere of the gloomy old h
pleased Louisa Harris. With the perfect and un
scious selfishness of a woman in love, she ga
everything in life just as it affected Luke. She e
contrived to like Lord Radolyffe. He trod on ev
one of her moral and spiritual corns, it is true;
had that lofty contempt for the entire feminine
which pertains to the Oriental more than to the m
civilized Western -raes; he combated her opini
both religious and political, without any pretence.
deference; he smoked very strong cigars in every 
in the house, without the slightest regard for
feelings of his lady visitors; he did or left undo
great many other things which would tend to irri
and even to offend a woman accustomed to
conventional courtesies of daily social life; but w
Luke entered a room where but a moment ago 
Radelyffe had been venting his chronic ill-hu
on an offending or innocent subordinate, the
man's dour face would become tranfigured,.!
radiated with a look of pride and of joy at sight of 
man on whom he had lavished all the affection of w
his strong nature was capable.



<pb n="51"/>
JUST A DISAGREEABLE OLD MAN            51
:  Luke could do no wrong. Luke was always right
He could argue with his lordship, contradict him, obtain
anything he liked from him. Eternal contradictions
of human nature: the childless man in perfect adora-
tion before a brother's son, the callous, hard-hearted
misanthrope soft as wax in the hands of one man.
!.



<pb n="52"/>
CHAPTER VII
THE PABT PLAYED BY A FIVE-POUND NOTE i
AND it was into this atmosphere of gloom and
1A    purposeless misanthropy that Louisa H
brought this morning the cheering sunshine of her o
indomitable optimism.
She knew, of course, from the first that the subj
which interested every one in the house more than
other subject could ever do was not to be mentioned
Lord Radclyfie's presence. But she was quite shr
enough to see that dear old Luke-unsophistiot
and none too acute an observer-had overestim
his uncle's indifferenoe to the all-absorbing matter.
The old man's face-usually a mirror of contemp
ous cynicism-looked, to the woman's keener i
distinotly troubled, and his surly silence was e
more profound than hitherto.
He hardly did more than bid Louisa a curt "Ho
de do ?" when she entered, and then relapsed in
moroseness wholly unbroken before luncheon w
announced.
Jim-" in the Blues "-was there when she arriv
and Edie came in a few moments later, breathl
and with hat awry and tawny hair flying in all dire
62



<pb n="53"/>
PART PLAYED BY A FIVE-POUND NOTE           58
,straight from a tussle with the dogs and the
Isharp east wind in the Park.
vidently no secret had been made before these two
of the strange events which had culminated this very
morning in their brother's avowal to Louisa, and the
postponement 8ine die of the wedding. But equally
evidently these young creatures, absorbed in their own
life, their own pursuits and amusements, were not in-
lined to look on the matter seriously.
Their sky had been so absolutely cloudless throughout
their lives that it was impossible for them at the
moment to realize that the dark shadow on the distant
horizon might possibly conceal thunder in its filmy
bosom.
Edie-just over twenty years of age and already
satiated with the excitement of three London seasons,
her mind saturated with novel-reading and on the
look-out for some new sensations-was inclined to look
on the affair as an exhilarating interlude between the
Shrove Tuesday dance at Wessex House and the first
Drawing-room in May. Jim-" in the Blues "-very
eligible as a possible husband for the daughters of
ambitious mammas, a trifle spoilt, a little slow of wit,
and not a little self-satisfied-dismissed the whole
incident as " tommy-rot."
When Louisa first greeted them, Edie had whispered
excitedly-
" Has he told you ?"
And without waiting for a direct reply had continued
with unabated eagerness-
"Awfully exciting, don't you think ?"



<pb n="54"/>
54            A TRUE WOMAN 
But Jim, with the elegant drawl peculiar to his k
had suppressed further confidences by an author
"Awful rot, I call it, don't you? Luke is soft
worry about it." 
Strangely enough, at luncheon it was Lord
olyffe who brought up the subject-matter. 
with the tactlessness of youth, had asked a poin
blank question- 
" Well! " she said, " when is that wedding to
and what are we bridesmaids going to wear ? I w
you I won't have white-I hate a white wedding."
Then, as no answer came, she said impatiently-
"I wish you'd name the day, you two stupi
Awfully soft, I call it, hanging about like this."
Luke would have said something then, but Lo
inteRed.
" It is all my fault, Edie," she said. " You know
want to take the twins out myself this season. I mu
give them a real good time before I marry."
"Bosh! remarked Edith unremen emoniously.  Ma
and Chris will have a far better time when you 
married and can present them yourself. Tell the
from me that it's no fun being 'out,' and the long
they put it off the better they'll enjoy themselv
later on. Besides, Colonel Harris will take them
about."
"Father hates sitting up late ... ." hazarded
Louisa, somewhat lamely.
"The truth of the matter is," here broke in Lord;
Radolyffe dryly, "that Luke has persuaded you to



<pb n="55"/>
PART PLAYED BY A FIVE-POUND NOTE           56
t off the wedding because of this d-d impostor
who seems to have set you all off by the ears."
Edie laughed and said "Bosh!" Jim growled and
murmured " Rot! "
.Luke and Louisa were silent, the while Lord Rad-
clyffe's closely-set dark, piercing eyes wandered from
one young face to the other. Louisa, feeling uncom*
fortable beneath that none too amiable scrutiny, did
not know what to say, but Luke quietly remarked after
a while--
"You're right, uncle. It is my doing, but Loo
agrees with me, and we are going to wait until this
cloud is properly cleared up."
If any one else had spoken so clearly and decisively
in direct contradiction to the old man's obvious wishes
in the matter, the result would have been an outburst
of ill-humour and probably a volley of invectives, not
unmixed with more forcible language. But since it was
Luke who had spoken-and Luke could do no wrong-
Lord Radclyffe responded quite gently-
"My dear boy," he said, and it was really touching
to hear the hard voice soften and linger on the endear-
ing words, " I have told you once and for all that the
story of this so-called Philip de Mountford is a fabrica-
tion from beginning to end. There is absolutely no
reason for you to fret one single instant because of the
lies a blackmailer chooses to trump up. As for your
putting off your wedding one single hour because of
this folly, why, it is positive nonsense. I should have
thought you had more common sense . .. and Miss
Harris too, for the matter of that."



<pb n="56"/>
b6            A TRtJ    WOMAN
Luke was silent for a moment or two, while
tossed her irresponsible head with the gesture 
absolute "I told you so." Jim muttered some
behind his heavy cavalry moustache. Louisa, w
head bent and fingers somewhat restless and fid
waited to hear what Luke would say.
"If only," he said, "you would consent, Uncle 
to let Mr. Dobson go through this man's papers."
"What were the good of wasting Mr. Dobson's time
retorted Lord Radolyffe, with surprising good humo
"I know that the man is an impostor. I don't th
it," he reiterated emphatioally, " I know it."
" How ?"
Before the old man had time to reply, the butle
sober, solemn Parker-came in with a card on
salver, which he presented to his master. L
Radolyffe took up the card, and grunted as he glano
at it. He always grunted when he was threatened wi
visitors.
"Why," he said gruffly, and he threw the c
back on to the salver, "haven't you told Mr
Warren ? "
"Mr. Warren," said solemn Parker, "is out, m
lord."
"Then ask Mr. Dobson to call another time."
" It's not Mr. Dobson hisself, my lord. But a young:
gentleman from his offioe."
"Then tell the young gentleman from the office that
I haven't time to bother about him."
" Shall I see him, sir ? " asked Luke, ready to go.
"Certainly not," retorted the irasoible old man. 



<pb n="57"/>
PLAYED BY A FIVE-POUND NOTE          57
where you are. You have got Miss Harris to
The young gentleman," resumed Parker with
l insistence, "said he wouldn't keep your
hip five minutes. He said he'd brought some
for your lordship's signature."
"The Tower Farm lease, Uncle Rad," remarked
/ke.
"I think, Mr. Luke," assented the butler, "that the
ung gentleman did mention the word lease."
* "Why has that confounded Warren taken himself
just when I want him ? " was Lord Radolyffe's
gumff comment as he rose from the table.
"Let me go, sir," insisted Luke.
I "No, hang it, boy, you can't sign my name-not yet,
anyway .    .. I am not yet a helpless imbecile. ...
Show the young man into the library, Parker ....
I can't think why Dobson is always in such a con-
founded hurry about leases . . .sending a fool of a
I clerk up at most inconvenient hours. .. ."
Still muttering half audibly, he walked to the
library door, which Parker held open for him, and
even this he did not do without surreptitiously taking
hold of Luke's hand and giving it a friendly squeeze.
For a moment it seemed as if Luke would follow
him, despite contrary orders. He paused, undecided,
· standing in the middle of the room. Louisa's kind
grey eyes following his slightest movement.
Jim stolidly pulled the cigar-box towards him, and
Edie with chin resting in both hands looked sulky and
generally out of sorts.
i



<pb n="58"/>
58            A TRUE WOMAN              '
Parker-silent and correct of mien-had ol
library door behind his master, and now with n
tread he crossed the dining-room and opened the B
door-the one that gave on the hall. Louisa i
tively turned her eyes from Luke and saw
in the middle of the hall-a young man in jack e
and overcoat, who had looked up, with palpi
eagerness expressed in his face, the moment he
sight of Parker.
It was the same man who had lifted his hat to 
and to herself in Battersea Park this very mo
Luke saw him too, and apparently also rec
him.
"That's why he bowed to us, Luke . . . i
Park .. you remember ? " she said as soon as
door had once more closed on Parker and       .
visitor.
" Funny that you didn't know him..." 
continued, since Luke had made no comment.
"I didn't," he remarked curtly.  ,
"Didn't what?"                       . 
" I did not, and do not know this man."  -
I' Not Mr. Dobson's clerk?"    .        .
Luke did not answer, but went out into the 
Parker was standing beside the library door, which
had just closed, having introduced the visitor into
lordship's presence.
"Parker," said Luke abruptly, "what made
tell his lordship that that young gentleman 
from Mr. Dobson ?"
'The question had come so suddenly that Par



<pb n="59"/>
PLAYED BY A FIVE-POUND NOTE         59
l    suB, dignified Parker-was thrown off his balance,
the reply, which took some time in coming,
unconvincing.
I The young gentleman," he said slowly, "told me,
i Luke, that he came from Mr. Dobson."
!No, Parker," asserted Luke unhesitatingly, "he
nothing of the sort. He wanted to see his lordship
dgot you to help him concoct some lie whereby he
get what he wanted."
aA greyish hue spread over Parker's pink and flabby
utenanoe.
" Lord help me, Mr. Luke," he murmured tonelessly,
hw did you know ?"
i "I didn't," replied Luke curtly. " I guessed. Now
know."
i. "I didn't think I was doing no harm."
! "No harm   by introducing into his lordship's
,presence strangers who might be malefactors ? "
., Already Luke, at Parker's first admission, had gone
quickly to the library door. Here he paused, with his
hand on the latch, uncertain if he should enter. The
:house was an old one, well-built and stout; from
within came the even sound of a voice speaking quite
; quietly, but no isolated word could be distinguished.
Parker was floundering in a quagmire of confused
explanations.
"Malefactor, Mr. Luke  he argued; " that young
man was no malefactor. He spoke so nicely. And he
had plenty of money about him. I didn't see I was
doing no harm. He wanted to see his lordship, and
asked me to help him to it .. ."



<pb n="60"/>
60            A TRUE WOMAN
"And," queried Luke impatiently, "paid
help him, eh ?"                             _
"I thought," replied the man, loftily igno
suggestion, " that taking in one of Mr. Dobson's
that was lying in the tray could do no harm. I t
it couldn't do no harm. The young gentleman
lordship would be very grateful to me when he
out what I'd done."
" And how grateful was the young gentleman to
Parker ? "
"To the tune of a five-pound note, Mr. Luke.",
"Then, as you have plenty of money in hand,4
can pack up your things and get out of this 
before I've time to tell his lordship."
"Mr. Luke . .. ."
"Don't argue. Do as I tell you."
"I must take my notice from his lordship,"
Parker, vainly trying to recover his dignity.
"Very well. You can wait until his lordship
been told."
"Mr. Luke . . ."
"Best not wait to see his lordship, Parker. Take
word for it."
"Very well, Mr. Luke."
There was a tone of finality in Luke's voice w
apparently Parker did not dare to combat. The 
looked confused and troubled. What had seemed
him merely a venial sin-the taking of a bribe for
trivial service-now suddenly assumed giant
portions ... a crime almost, punished by a st
dismissal from Mr. Luke.



<pb n="61"/>
SART PLAYED BY A FIVE-POUND NOTE           61
He went without venturing on further protest, and
e,left standing alone in the hall, once more put his
d on the knob of the library door. This time he
ed o turn it. But the door had been locked from the
k eide.
iI~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="62"/>
CHAPTER VIII
AND THUS THI SHADOW DESOBINDED
FROM within, the hum of a man's voie--s
low and insistently-still came softly 
Luke, with the prodigality of youth, would have
ten years of his life for the gift of second sight, to
what went on between those four walls beyond thl
where he himself stood expectant, undecided,
more than vaguely anxious.
"Luke !"
It was quite natural that Louisa should stand
beside him, having come to him softly, noise
like the embodiment of moral strength, and a co
sense which was almost a virtue.
"Uncle Rad," he said quietly, "has locked
in with this man."
"Who is it, Luke" "
"The man who calls himself Philip de Mountf
" How do you know ? "
"How does one," he retorted, " know such 
"And Parker let him in ? "
"He gave Parker a five-pound note. Parker is
a grasping fool. He concocted the story of Mr. DoI
and the lease. He is always listening at keyholes,
he knows that Mr. Dobson often sends up a clerk
62



<pb n="63"/>
*   p AND THUS THE SHADOW DESCENDED           68
papers for Uncle Rad's signature. Those things are
not very difficult to manage. If one man is deter-
f mined and the other corruptible, it's done sooner or
? later."
"Is Lord Radclyffe safe with that man, do you
think?"
"God grant it," he replied fervently.
Jim and Edie made a noisy irruption into the hall,
and Luke and Louisa talked ostentatiously of in-
different things .. the weather, Lent, and the newest
play, until the young people had gathered up coats
and hats and banged the street door to behind them,
taking their breeziness, their optimism away with
them out into the spring air, and leaving the shadows
of the on-coming tragedy to forgather in every angle
of the luxurious house in Grosvenor Square.
And there were Luke de Mountford and Louisa
Harris left standing alone in the hall; just two very
ordinary, very simple-souled young people, face to
face for the first time in their uneventful life with the
dark problem of a grim " might be." A looked door
between them and the decisions of Fate, a world of
possibilities in the silence which now reigned beyond
that closed door.
They were, remember, wholly unprepared for it,
untrained for any such eventuality. Well-bred and
well brought up, yet were they totally uneducated in
the great lessons of life. It was as if a man absolutely
untutored in science were suddenly to be confronted
with a mathematical problem, the solution or non-
solution of which would mean life or death to him.



<pb n="64"/>
64            A TRUE WOMAN               A
The problem lay in silence beyond the 1oo
silence broken now and again by the pe
gentle hum of the man's voice-the strang
never by a word from Lord Radolyffe.    ,
"Uncle Bad," said Luke at last, in deep
"has never raised his voice once. I thou
there would be a row . . . that he would turn
out of the house.... Dear old chap! he
much patience as a rule."
" What shall we do, Luke ? " she asked.
"How do you mean "
" You can't go on standing like that in the
if you were eavesdropping. The servants will be o
through presently."
"You are right, Loo," he said, "as usual. I
into the dining-room. I could hear there if an y
suspicious was happening in the library." 
" You are not afraid, Luke ?"             _
"For Uncle Rad, you mean ?"             I
Of Oourse."
"I hardly know whether I am or not. No,'!
added decisively, after a moment's hesitation, " I
not afraid of violence . . . the fellow whom we 
in the Park did not look that sort."
He led Louisa back into the dining-room, 
couple of footmen were clearing away the luno
things. The melancholy Parker placed cigar-box 
matches on a side table, and then retired silent and
a wealth of reproach expressed in his round, 
eyes.
Soon Luke and Louisa were alone. He smo



<pb n="65"/>
AND THUS THE SHADOW DESCENDED            65
she sat in a deep arm-chair close to him saying
ing, for both knew what went on in the other's
ind.
Close on an hour went by, and then the tinkle of a
distant bell broke the silence. Voices were heard some-
what louder of tone in the library, and Lord Radelyffe's
sounded quite distinct and firm,
"I'll see you again to-morrow," he said, " at Mr.
,., tell me the name and address again, please,"
The door leading from library to hall was opened,
A footman helped the stranger on with coat and hat.
Then the street door banged to again, and once more
the house lapsed into silence and gloom.
"I think I had better go now."
Louisa rose, and Luke said in matter-of-fact
tones-
" I'll put you into a cab."
"No," she said, "I prefer to walk. I am going
straight back to the Langham. Will you go to the
Ducies' At Home to-morrow ? "
"Yes," he said, " just to see you."
"You'll know more by then."
"I shall know all there is to know."
"Luke," she said, " you are not afraid "
It was the second time she had put the question to
him, but this time its purport was a very different
one. He understood it nevertheless, for he replied
simply-
" Only for you."
"Why for me ? "
"Because, Loo, you are just all the world to me  . .
F



<pb n="66"/>
66            A TRUE WOMAN
and a man must feel a little afraid when he
may lose the world." 
"Not me, Luke," she said, "you would not
me ... whatever happened."
"Let me get you a cab."
He was English, you see, and could not man
say anything just then. The flood-gates of sent
might burst asunder now with the slightest
*   uttered that was not strictly commonplace. L
understood, else she had not loved him as she
It never occurred to her to think that he was
different. Nay, more  his sudden transition 
sentiment to the calling of a cab-from sentim
the trivialities of life, pleased her in its very esse
incongruity.
"I said I would walk," she reminded
smiling.
Then she gave him her hand. It was gloveless,s
he took it in his, turning the palm upwards so t
might bury his lips in its delicately perfumed d
His kiss almost scalded her flesh, his lips were b
hot. Passion held in check will consume with i
fire, whilst its expression often cools like the N
embrace.                                .
He went to the door with her, and watched.
slender, trim figure walking rapidly away un
disappeared round the corner of the Square. 
When he turned back into the hall, he found 
face to face with Lord Radclyffe. Not Uncle 
but an altogether different man, an old man now
the cynical lines round the mouth accentuated



<pb n="67"/>
AND THUS THE SHADOW DESCENDED            67
deepened into furrows, the eyes hollow and colourless,
t he shoulders bent as if under an unbearable load.
F    "Uncle Rad," said Luke, speaking very gently,
forcing his voice to betray nothing of anxiety or
surprise, "can I do anything for you "
But even at sight of his nephew, of the man who had
hitherto always succeeded in dissipating, by his very
presence, every cloud on the misanthrope's brow, even
at sight of him Lord Radclyffe seemed to shrink within
himself, his face became almost ashen in its pallor,
and lines of cruel hardness quite disfigured his
mouth.
"I want to be alone to-day," he said dryly; "tell
them to send me up some tea in the afternoon. I'll
go to my room    now.... I shan't want any
dinner."
" But, sir, won't you . . . "
" I want to be alone to-day," the old man reiterated
tonelessly, "and to be left alone."
" Very well, sir."
Lord Radclyffe walked slowly towards the staircase.
Luke-his heart torn with anxiety and sorrow-
saw how heavy was the old man's step, how listless
his movements. The younger man's instinct drew him
instantly to the side of the elder. He placed an affec-
tionate hand on his uncle's shoulder.
"Uncle Rad," he said appealingly, "can't I do
anything for you ? "
Lord Radclyffe turned, and for a moment his eyes
softened as they rested on the face he loved so well.
His wrinkled hand sought the firm, young one which



<pb n="68"/>
68             A TRUE WOMAN
lingered on his shoulder. But he did not
only put it gently aside, then said quietly--
" No, my boy, there's nothing you can do, exc
leave me alone."
Then he went upstairs and shut himself up in his
room, and Luke saw him no more that day.
,                                        .~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~?
* A
.                             ,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~/l



<pb n="69"/>
CHAPTER IX
WHICH TELLS OF THE INEVITABLE BESULT
AND now a month and more had gone by, and the
J  whole aspect of the world and of life was changed
for Luke. Not for Louisa, because she, womanlike, had
her life in love and love alone. Love was unchanged,
or if changed at all it was ennobled, revivified, purified
by the halo of sorrow and of abnegation which glorified
it with its radiance.
For Luke the world had indeed changed. With the
advent of Philip de Mountford that spring afternoon
into the old house in Grosvenor Square, life for the other
nephew-for Luke, once the dearly loved-became
altogether different.
That one moment of softness, when Lord Rad-
clyffe-a bent and broken old man-went from the
library up the stairs to his own room, determined to be
alone, and gently removed Luke's affectionate hand
from his own bowed shoulders, that one moment of
softness was the last that passed between uncle-almost
father-and nephew. After that, coldness and cyni-
cism: the same as the old man had meted out to
every one around him-save Luke-for years past.
Now there was no exception. Coldness and cynicism
to all, and to the intruder, the new-comer, to Philip de
69



<pb n="70"/>
70            A TRUE WOMAN 
Mountford, an unvarying courtesy, constant def
that at times verged on impassive submission.
And the change, I must own, did not come grad
Have I not said that only a month had gone by ? 
Arthur's son, from the land of volcanoes and 
quakes, had already conquered all that he had cot
seek. He who had been labelled an impostor 
blackmailer took-after that one interview-his
in the old man's mind ... if not in his heart. 
only knows-for no one else was present at that
interview-what arguments he held, what a
he made. He came like a thief, bribing his way
his uncle's presence, and stayed like a dearly
son, a master in the house.
And Luke was shut out once and for all from
Radclyffe's mind and heart. Can you conceive that
selfless affection as the older man bore to the yo
an live for a quarter of a century and die in one h
Yet so it seemed. Luke was shut out from that i
most recess in Uncle Rad's heart which he had
pied, undisputed, from childhood upwards. Now
only took his place amongst the others: with Jim
Edie and Frank, children of the younger brothe
no consequence in the house of the reigning peer.
Luke with characteristic pride-characteristic i
lence, mayhap, where his own interests were at s
would not fight for his rightful position-his by
of ages, twenty years of affection, of fidelity and
radeship.
The day following the first momentous inte
Lord Radclyffe spent in lawyers' company.



<pb n="71"/>
TELIS OF THE INEVITABLE RESULT            71
Davies in Finsbury Court, then Mr. Dobson in Bedford
low. The latter argued and counselled. Though
papers might be to all appearances correct and
quite in order, there was no hurry to come to a
decision.  But Lord Radclyffe-with that same
dictatorial obstinacy with which he had originally
branded the claimant as an impostor and a black-
mailer, now clung to his reversed opinion. Convinced
-beyond doubt apparently-that Philip de Mountford
was his brother Arthur's son, he insisted on acknow-
ledging him openly as his heir, and on showering on him
all those luxuries and privileges which Luke had en-
joyed for so many years.
Indignant and mentally sore, Jim and Edie pro-
tested with all the violence of youth, violence which
proved as useless as it was ill-considered. Luke said
nothing, for he foresaw that the end was inevitable. He
set about making a home for his younger brothers and
sister to be ready for them as soon as the cataclysm
came, when Philip de Mountford, usurping every right,
would turn his cousins out of the old home.
Frank, absent at Santiago-a young attache out at
his first post-had been told very little as yet. Luke
had tried to break the news to him in a guarded letter,
which received but the following brief and optimistic
answer-
"Why, old man! what's the matter with you ?
Worrying over such rubbish ? Take my advice and go
to Carlsbad. Your liver must be out of order."
But the catastrophe came nevertheless; sooner even
than was expected. Edie's language grew very un-



<pb n="72"/>
72            A TRUE WOMAN 
guarded in Philip's presence, and Jim " in the 
did not watch over his own manners when the
cousin was in the house.
One evening when Luke was absent-as was-
often the case now-and the family gathering
sisted of Lord Radclyffe-sullen and morose-P
pleasantly condeseending-and Jim and Edie-sn
and wrathful-a difference in political opinion be
the young people set a spark to the smouldering
Philip-still pleasantly condescending-did not
much that evening, though he had been called f
and an upstart, and told to go back to his 
relations; but the next morning Jim and Edie recei
a curt admonition from Lord Radolyffe, during w
they were told that if such a disgraceful exhibition
impertinence occurred again, they would have to 
and pitch their tent elsewhere. 
They brought their grievance to Luke: told him
that they had treasured up in their rebellious yo
hearts against the usurper, and much that they  h
hitherto kept from the elder brother, who l
God knows had a sufficient load of disappointment
bear.
What could Luke do but promise that Jim and
should in future have a house of their own, whe
neither usurper nor upstart would have access,
where they could nurse their wrath in peace and
snubbed ?
For the first time since many, many days Luke w
alone with his uncle in the library. Philip was out _
and Lord Radelyffe was taken unawares. 



<pb n="73"/>
F  TELLS OF THE INEVITABLE RESULT          78
What Luke never would have dreamed of doing for
himself, he did for his brothers and sister: he made
* appeal to his uncle's sense of right, of justice, and of
mercy.
!i    "Uncle Rad," he said, "you have told us all so
often that this should be a home for us all. It doesn't
matter about me, but the others-Jim and Edie-they
haven't offended you, have they ?"
Lord Radclyffe was fretful and irritable. When
Luke first came in it had almost seemed as if he would
order him to go. Such an old man he looked-sour and
morose: his clothes hung more loosely than before
on an obviously attenuated frame. He seemed care-
worn and worried, and Luke's heart, which could not
tear itself away from the memories of past kindness,
ached to see the change.
"Would you," he asked insistently, "would you
rather we went away, Uncle Rad "
The old man shifted about uneasily in his chair.
He would not meet Luke's eyes any more than he
would take his hand just now.
"Jim and Edie," he said curtly, "are very ill-
mannered, and Philip feels ..."
He passed his tongue over his lips, which were
parched and dry. A look-it was a mere flash-almost
of appeal passed from his eyes to Luke.
"Then," said Luke simply, "it is this... this
Philip whom Jim and Edie have offended ? . . . Not
you, Uncle Rad ? "
" Philip is your uncle Arthur's son," rejoined Lord
Radclyffe, speaking like a fretful child in a thin voice



<pb n="74"/>
74            A TRUE WOMAN
that cracked now and again; "he will be the hl
the family presently . . .
"Not," interposed Luke earnestly, "before
years are past, I trust and pray for all our
Uncle Rad . . ." 
"The sooner," continued the old man, not he
the interruption, "those young jackanapes la
respect him, the better it will be for them."
"Jim and Edie have been a little spoilt by
kindness, sir. They are finding the lesson a little
to learn. Perhaps they had better go and
elsewhere."
Lord Radolyffe made no reply. Silence was
potent meaning: of submission to another's
dominant personality, of indifference to eve
save to peace and quiet.
Suppressing a sigh of bitter disappointment,
rose to go.
Then," he said, "the sooner I make all
ments the better. There's only the agreement
the flat to sign, and we can move in next week."
"Where's the flat?" queried the old man
tatingly.
"In Exhibition Road, Kensington; close to
Park. Edie loves the Park, and it won't be far
barracks for Jim."
"But you've no furniture.... How     will
furnish a flat ? . . . Don't go yet," continued
Radclyffe, seeing that Luke was preparing to take
leave. " Philip won't be here till tea-time." 
"I am afraid, sir, that I don't care to steal a



<pb n="75"/>
TELLS OF THE INEVITABLE RESULT          75
minutes of your company, just when Philip is absent.
. . I would rather not see you at all than see you on
ufferance."
·    "You are very obstinate and tiresome . . . and you
make it so difficult for me.... I want to hear about
the furniture . . . and how you are going to manage."
=  "Loo is helping Edie to get what is wanted," replied
Luke, smiling despite the heavy weight of disappoint-
ment in his heart. It was pitiable to see the old man's
obvious feeling of relief in the absence of the man who
was exercising such boundless influence over him.
" But have you money, Luke ? " he asked.
" Not overmuch, sir, but enough."
" The £15,000 your father left you ? "
"Yes. And that's about all."
" And the £15,000 from your uncle Arthur ? "
" I don't know about that, sir. I think that should
go back to Uncle Arthur's son."
"Nonsense I nonsense " retorted Lord Radclyfle
querulously. "I've talked to Dobson about that.
Your uncle Arthur left that money to you . . . and
not to his son.... He had his own reasons for doing
this.... Dobson thinks so too."
"It is very kind of Mr. Dobson to trouble about
my affairs, but . . ."
"The money was left to you," persisted the old
man, " and to Jim and Edie and Frank."
"They will do whatever they like with their share,
but I could not touch a penny of Uncle Arthur's
money."
"What will you do ?"



<pb n="76"/>
76            A TRUE WOMAN
" I don't know yet, uncle. I have only had a 
in which to think of so much . . . and there 
new flat to see to."
Lord Radclyffe rose and shuffled towards Luke.,
dropped his voice, lest the library walls had ears.
"I'll not forget you, Luke . . . presently . . .
I am gone ... and that won't be long.. ..
provide for you ... my will...."
"Don't, Uncle Rad, for God's sake I" and the
was wrung from a heart overburdened with pity
with shame.
And without waiting to take more affectionate
Luke hurried from the room.
')



<pb n="77"/>
CHAPTER X
*           E MLIFE MUST GO ON JUST THE SAME
|  T- HEY met at dances and at musical At Homes, for
1the world wagged just as it had always done, and
here-don't you think ?-lies the tragedy of the com-
monplace. Luke and Louisa, with the whole aspect of
life changed for them, with a problem to face of which
hitherto they had no conception, and the solution of
which meant a probing of soul and heart and mind,
Luke and Louisa had to see the world pass them by,
the same as heretofore, with laughter and with tears,
with the weariness of pleasure, and the burdens of
disappointment.
The world stared at them-curious and almost
interested-searching wounds that had only just
begun to ache, since indifferent hands had dared to
touch them. And convention said: "Thou shalt not
seem to suffer, thou shalt pass by serene and unmoved,
thou shalt dance and sing and parade in Park or ball-
room; thou art my puppet and I have nought to do
with thy soul."
So Luke and Louisa did as convention bade them,
and people stared at them and asked them inane
questions that were meant to be delicate, but were
supremely tactless. People, too, wondered what they
77



<pb n="78"/>
78            A TRUE WOMAN
meant to do, when the engagement would be.
broken off or what Colonel Harris's--
father's-attitude would be in all this.
how after the first excitement, consequent on
Radclyffe's open acknowledgment of the cl
things had tamed off somewhat: Luke de Mo
looked just the same as before, although a while 
had been-heir to one of the first peerages in En
and now was a penniless son of a younger son. I
know whether people thought that he ought to
entirely different now, or whether he should hene
wear shabby dress clothes and gloves that betray
dry cleaner: certain it is that when Luke ente
reception room, a dozen lips were ready-had
dared or good breeding allowed-to frame the
tions-
" Well I and what are you going to do now ?" 
Or-                                      '
"Do tell us how it feels to find oneself a beggar 
a sudden." 
Enterprising hostesses made great attempts.
gather all parties in their drawing-rooms.
strategy worthy of a better cause they manceuvre
invite Philip de Mountford and Lord Radelyffe,
Luke and Louisa-all to the same dinner-party, pr
ing themselves and their other guests a subtle e
ment at sight of these puppets dancing to 
tunes, beside which the. most moving problem
would seem but tame entertainment.
But Philip de Mountford-though as much so
after now as Luke had been in the past-declined



<pb n="79"/>
LIFE MUST GO ON JUST THE SAME 79
e a show of for the delectation of bored society
women: he declined all invitations on his own and
Lord Radclyffe's behalf.
So people had to be content to watch Luke and
Louisa.
They were together at the Ducies' At Home. There
was a crush, a Hungarian band from Germany, a
Russian singer from Bayswater, a great many diamonds,
and incessant gossip.
"Luke de Mountford is here ... and Miss Harris.
Have you seen them ? "
"Oh yes! we met on the stairs, and had a long
chat."
"How do they seem ?"
"Oh! quite happy."
"They don't care."
" Do they mean to break off the engagement ?"
" I have heard nothing. Have you ? "
" Louisa Harris has a nice fortune of her own."
"And Lord Radclyffe will provide for Luke."
" I don't think so. He practically turned him out
of the house, you know."
"Not really ?"
"I know it for a positive fact. My sister has just
got a new butler, who left Lord Radclyffe's service the
very day Philip de Mountford first walked into the
house."
" Old Parker; I remember him."
"He says Lord Radclyffe turned all the family out,
bag and baggage. They were so insolent to Philip."
"Then it's quite true ? "



<pb n="80"/>
80            A TRUE WOMAN              |
" That this Philip is the late Arthur de 
son t?"
" Quite true, I believe. Lord Radolyffe o
knowledges it. He is satisfied, apparently."
" So are the lawyers, I understand."
" Oh I how do you do, Miss Harris  So glad
you looking so wel."
This very pointedly, as Louisa, perfectly 
smiling serenely, ascended the broad staircase.
" I have not been ill, Lady Keogh."
" Oh no I of course not. And how is Mr. de
ford ?"
" You can ask him yourself."
And Louisa passed on to make way for Luke. 
the same remarks, the same questions repeated 
Initum, until, a popular waltz, played by the
garian gentlemen from Germany, drew the fashi
crowd round the musicians' platform.
Then Luke and Louisa contrived to make good'i
escape, and to reach the half-landing above the
of numerous young couples that adorned the
The hum of voices, the noise of shrill laughter,'
swish of skirts and fans masked their own whisp
The couples on the stairs were absorbed in their
little affairs-they were sitting out here so that
might pursue their own flirtations.
Luke and Louisa could talk undisturbed.
They spoke of the flat in Exhibition Road 
the furniture that Louisa had helped Edie to sel
"There are only a few odds and ends to get 
Louisa was saying, "coal-scuttles and wast



<pb n="81"/>
LIFE MUST GO ON JUST THE SAME          81
8 mkets: that sort of thing. I hope you don't think
Htalt we have been extravagant. Edie, I am afraid,
had rather luxurious notions.. .."
" Poor Edie "
" Oh  I don't think she minds very much. Life
at Grosvenor Square in the past month has not been
over-cheerful."
Then, as Luke made no comment, she continued, in
B her own straightforward, matter-of-fact way-the
commonplace woman facing the ordinary duties of
life-
"Now that the flat is all in order you can all move.
in whenever you like . . . and then, Luke, you must
begin to think of yourself."
" Of you, Loo," he said simply.
" Oh ! there's nothing," she said, " to think about
me."
"There you are wrong, Loo, and you must not talk
like that. Our engagement must be officially broken
off. ... Colonel Harris has been too patient as it is."
"Father," she rejoined, " does not wish the engage-
ment broken off."
" All these people," he said, nodding in the direc-
tion of the crowd below, "will expect some sort of
announcement."
"Let them."
"Loo, you must take back your word."
"How does one take back one's word, Luke ? Have
you ever done it ? I shouldn't know how to."
She looked at him straight, her eyes brilliant in the
glare of the electric lamps, not a tear in them or in
G



<pb n="82"/>
82            A TRUE WOMAN             '
his, her face immovable, lest indifferent ey
pened to be turned up to where these two in
people sat. Only a quiver round the lips, a si ^
passion palpitated deep down within her heart,
the Bond Street gown and the diamond col
soul within the puppet, i
She held his glance, forcing him into mute ao
ledgment that his philosophy, his worldliness.
only veneer, and that he had not really enis
hard possibility of actually losing her.
Oh! these men of this awful conventional
how cruel they can be in that proud desire to do
is right . . . what their code tells them is right t!
law of God or nature that I-only convention-
dictates of other men! Hard on themselves,
in abnegation, but not understanding that the 
gift they can bestow on a woman is the right f
to efface herself, the right for. her to be the 
love, of consolation, of sacrifice.         .
Commonplace, plain, sensible Louisa unde
everything that Luke felt; those great luminous
of hers, tearless yet brillant, read every line on
face drilled into impassiveness.
No one else could have guessed the precise m
at which softness crept into the hard detemi
of jaw and lips; no ear but hers could ever have
ceived the subtle change in the quivering breath,
hard obstinacy that drew the nostrils together, 
set every line of the face, to that indrawing of
heavy air around caused by passionate longing
hammered at the super-excited brain, and mader



<pb n="83"/>
LIFE MUST GO ON JUST THE SAME           88
KDews crack in the mighty physical effort at self-
ression.
But, to all outward appearance, perfect calm, oor-
-ect demeanour:-the attitude and tone of voice pre-
scribed by the usages of this so-called society.
-   "Loo," he said, "it is not fair to tempt me. I
f should be a miserable our if I held you to your word.
I am a penniless beggar-a wastrel now, without a
profession, without prospects, soon to be without
friends."
He seemed to take pleasure in recalling his defects,
and she let him ramble on. Women who are neither
psychological puzzles nor interesting personalities
have a way of listening patiently whilst a tortured soul
eases its burden by contemplating its own martyrdom.
"I am a penniless beggar," he reiterated. " I have
no right to ask any woman to share my future dull
and humdrum existence. A few thousands is all I
have. I think that Edie will marry soon, and then I
can go abroad. ... I must go abroad. .... I must
do something...."
"We'll do it together, Luke."
"I feel," he continued, rebellious now and wrathful,
all the primary instincts alive in him of self-preserva-
tion and the desire to destroy an enemy, " I feel that
if I stayed in England I should contrive to be even
with that blackguard. ... His rights ? By God! I
would never question those . . . the moment I knew
that he was Uncle Arthur's son I should have been
ready to shake him by the hand, to respect him, to
stand aside, as was his due.... But his attitude I



<pb n="84"/>
84            A TRUE WOMAN 
. . the influence he exercises over Uncle Rad
His rancour against us all! Jim and Edie! w l
they done ? . . . to be all turned out of the ho
a pack of poor relations . . . and poor Unole-
He checked himself, for she had put a hand 
coat-leeve. 
"Luke, it is no use," she said.
"You are right, Loo I and I am a miserable
. . .If you only knew how I hate that man ! . 
"Don't," she said, " let us think of him."
"How can I help it ? He robs me of you."
"No," she rejoined, "not that."
Her hand still rested on his arm, and he
between both his. The couples in front of the
down the length of stairs, paid no heed to them~
through the hum of voices from a distant room b
came softly wafted on the hot, still air the str
the exquisite Brcarolle from the "Contes d'Hom
Louisa smiled confidently, proudly. He held
hand, and she felt that his-hot and dry-quii
in every muscle at her touch. The commonl
woman had opened the magic book of Love. She
turned its first pages, the opening chapters had
simple, unruffled, uncrumpled by the hand of me
Fate. But now at last she read the chapter whih
along she knew was bound to reach her ken.
leaves of the book were crumpled, Fate with
hand had tried to blur the writing; the psycho
problem of to-day-the one that goes by the n
"moder woman "-would no doubt ponder ere



<pb n="85"/>
LIFE MUST GO ON JUST THE SAME           85
ied to read further; she would analyse her feelings,
her thoughts, her sensations, she would revel over her
own heartache and delight in her own soul-agony.
But simple-minded, conventional Louisa did none of
these things. She neither ruffled her hair nor dressed
in ill-made serge clothes; her dress was perfect and her
hand exquisitely gloved. She did nothing out of the
way, she only loved one man altogether beyond herself,
and she understood his passionate love for her, and all
that troubled him in this world in which they both
lived.
" I love that Barcarolle, don't you ? " she said after
a while.
"I did not hear it," he replied.
"Luke "
"It's no use, Loo," he said under his breath, "you
must despise me for being a drivelling fool; but I have
neither eyes nor ears now. I would give all I have in
the world to lie down there on the floor now before
you and to kiss the soles of your feet."
"How could I despise you, Luke, for that "
"Put your hand on my knee, just for a moment,
Loo; I think I shaA go mad if I don't feel your touch."
She did as he asked her, and he was silent until the
last note of the Barcarolle died away in a soft murmured
breath.
"What a cowardly wretch I am," he said, under
cover of the wave of enthusiastic applause which
effectually covered the sound of his voice to all save
hers. " I think I would sell my soul for a touch of
your hand, and all the while I know that with every



<pb n="86"/>
86            A TRUE WOMAN
word'I am playing the part of a coward. If
Harris heard me he would give me a sound th
A dog-whip is what I deserve." 
"I have told you," she rejoined simply, '
father does not wish our engagement to be brok
He sticks to your cause, and will do so through
and thin. He still believes that this Philip 
impostor, and thinks that Lord Radclyffe has
leave of his senses."
She spoke quite quietly, matter-of-factedly
pulling by her serene calm Luke's soul back fro
realms of turbulent sensations to the prosy f
to-day. And he-in answer to her mute ditate
with a movement-wholly instinctive and mech
-drew himself upright, and passed his hand ov
ruffled hair, and the jeopardized immaculten
shirt front and cuffs.
"Philip de Mountford," he said simply, "is no,
postor, Loo. He has been perfectly straightforw
and Mr. Dobson for one, who has seen all his p
thinks that there is no doubt whatever that
Uncle Arthur's son. His clerk-Mr. Downing
out to Martinique, you know, and his first le
came a day or two ago. All inquiries give the
result, and Downing says that it is quite easy to
the man's life-step by step-from his birth in
Pierre, past the dark days of the earthquake and
lonely life at Marie Galante. Mrs. de Mountford
a half-caste native, as we all suspected, but the 
riage was unquestionably legal. Downing has spa
to people in Martinique and also in Marie Gal



<pb n="87"/>
LIFE MUST GO ON JUST THE SAME           87
ho knew her and her son, or at any rate of them.
I cannot tell you everything clearly, but there are a
great many links in a long chain of evidence, and so
far Mr. Dobson and his-clerk have not come across a
broken one. That the Mrs. de Mountford who died at
Marie Galante was Uncle Arthur's wife, and that
Philip is his son, I am afraid no one can question. He
has quite a number of letters in his possession, which
Uncle Arthur wrote after he had practically abandoned
wife and child. I think it was the letters that con-
vinced Uncle Rad."
" Lord Radclyffe," she remarked dryly, " has taken
everything far too much for granted."
I     "He is convinced, Loo . . . and that's all about
it."
"He is," she retorted more hotly than was her
wont, " acting in a cruel and heartless manner. Even
if this Philip is your uncle Arthur's son, even if he is
heir to the peerage and the future head of the family,
there was no reason for installing him in your home,
Luke, and turning you and the others out of it."
"I suppose," rejoined Luke philosophically, "the
house was never really our home. What Uncle Rad
gave freely, he has taken away again from us. I don't
suppose that we have the right to complain."
"But what will become of you all "
"We must scrape along. Frank must have his
promised allowance or he'll never get along in the
service, and five hundred pounds a year is a big slice
.out of a thousand. Jim, too, spends a great deal:
Uncle Rad never stinted him with money, for it was he



<pb n="88"/>
88            A TRUE WOMAN 
who wanted Jim to be in the Blues. Now he 
to exchange into a less expensive regiment. I ;
Edie will marry soon.... Reggie Duggan hal
in love with her for the past two years . .. 
make up her mind now." 
" But you, Luke "
He did not know if he ought to tell her of his p
the ostrich farm  out in Africa-the par
offered to him by a cousin of his mother's whQ
doing remarkably well, but who was getting old
wanted the companionship of one of his kind.. *
was a living anyway ... but a giving up of 
thing that had constituted life in the past ...
the giving up of his exquisite Loo.... How 
he ask her to share that life with him? .
primitive conditions . . . the total absence of lu!
. . the rough, everyday existence ?
And Loo so perfectly dressed, so absolutely mod
and dainty ... waited on hand and foot ... .
But she insisted, seeing that he was hesitating
was trying to keep something from her.
" What about you, Luke ? " 
He had not time to reply, for from the hall bo
shrill voice called to them both by name.
" Mr. de Mountford, Miss Harris, the young
want to dance . . . you'll join in, won't you ? "
Already he was on his feet, every trace of emot
swept away from his face, together with every cr
from his immaculate dress clothes, and every s
wisp of hair from his well-groomed head. Not a 
torn with passion, fighting the battle of life agi
..



<pb n="89"/>
LIFE MUST GO ON JUST THE SAME          89
overwhelming odds, casting away from him the hand
which he would have given his last drop of blood to
possess-only the man of the world, smiling while his
very soul was being wrung-only the puppet dancing
to the conventional world's tune.
"Dancing?" he said lightly. "Rather . . Lady
Ducie, may I have this first waltz ? No ? ... oh,
I say, that's too bad. ... The first Lancers, then ?
. Good I Loo, may I have this dance "
And the world went on just the same.
i'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="90"/>
CHAPTER XI
AND THEIR  ARE SOCIAL DUTIES TO PE
THE first November fog.
T1     The world had wagged on in its mat
way for more than six months now, since that.
April when Philip de Mountford-under cover
told by Parker-had made his way into Lo
clyffe's presence-more than five months si
favoured nephew had been so unceremoniously'
out of his home. 
Spring had yielded to summer, summer giv
to autumn: and already winter was treading
on autumn's heels. The autumn session had,
London with noise and bustle, with political 
parties and monster receptions, with new plays
the best theatres, and volumes of ephemeral lite
And all that was-to-night-wrapped in a de
the first of the season, quite a stranger too in I
for scientists had asserted positively that the 
the traditional "pea-souper" was over: the
polis would know it no more.
Colonel Harris was in town with his da
Louisa, and swearing at London weather in
country fashion. He declared that fogs p
90



<pb n="91"/>
SOCIAL DUTIES TO PERFORM             91
intellect, that he became positively imbecile, not
Lmowing how to fight his way in the folds of such a
black pall. Taxi-cab drivers he mistrusted: in fact he
had all an old sportsman's hatred of mechanically
propelled vehicles, whilst he flatly refused to bring
valuable horses up to. town to catch their death of
cold whilst waiting about in the fog.
So Luke had promised to pilot the party as far as
the Danish Legation, where they were to dine to-night
-this was the only condition under which Colonel
Harris would consent to enter one of those confounded
motors.
Colonel Harris had remained loyal to the core to
Luke and to his fortunes. It is a way old sportsmen
have; and he had never interfered by word or in-
nuendo in Louisa's actions with regard to her engage-
ment. His daughter was old enough, he said, to know
her own mind. She liked Luke, and it would be shabby
to leave him in the lurch, now that the last of the society
rats were scurrying to leave the sinking ship. They
were doing it too in a mighty hurry. The invitations,
which the penniless younger son received towards the
end of the London season, were considerably fewer than
those which were showered on him at its beginning,
before the world had realized that Philip de Mountford
had come to stay, and would one day be Earl of Rad-
clyffe with a rent roll of £80,000 a year, and the sore
need of a wife.
It had begun with the bridge parties. Luke would no
longer play-since he could no longer afford to lose a
quarter's income at one sitting. Uncle Rad used to



<pb n="92"/>
92            A TRUE WOMAN 
shrug indifferent shoulders at such losses,
blank cheques at the dear boy's disposal.
then how welcome Luke was at bridge parties,
very undesirable now.
Then he could no longer make return for h
entertainments. He had no home to which 
smart friends: Lord Radclyffe, though a m
ill-humour, gave splendid dinner-parties at.
Luke was quasi host. Now it was all give and n
and the givers retired one by one, quite 
by Luke, who thus was spared the initiative of
his back on his friends. They did the turng,
politely but very effectually. Luke scarcely
how he was dropping out of his former circle.
over-absorbed and really did not care. Mo
dress clothes were getting shabby.
To-night at the Langham, when he arrived at
seven o'clock so as to have an undisturbed
with Loo, Colonel Harris greeted him with outs
hand and cordial welcome-
"Hello I Luke my boy I how goes it with you
Louisa said nothing, but her eyes welcomed.
and she drew him near to her, on to the sofa in
of the fire, and allowed her hand to rest in his, f
knew how he loved the touch of it. People 
beginning to say that Louisa Harris was getting
she never had been good-looking, poor thing t>l
always smart, very smart ... now she was 
her smartness, and what remained ?
She had come up to town this autumn inli
autumn's frocks I and the twins were after all I
:_.



<pb n="93"/>
SOCIAL DUTIES TO PERFORM            -9
eroned by their aunt. Would that absurd engage-
nt never be broken off ? Fancy Louisa Harris
ed to a poor man ! Why ! she did not know how
do her hair, and dresses were still worn fastened at
back, and would be for years to come! Louisa
is and no French maid, cheap corsets and cleaned
oves it was unthinkable.
Perhaps the engagement was virtually broken
.f  . .  anyhow the wedding could never take
: Unless Philip de Mountford happened to die.
But it did not look as if the engagement was broken
off. Not at any rate on this raw November evening,
when there was a dense fog outside, but a bright, cheery
ire and plenty of light in the little sitting-room at the
Langham, and Luke sat on the sofa beside Louisa, and
plain Louisa-in last autumn's gown-looking at
him with her candid, luminous eyes.
"How is Lord Radclyffe ? " asked Colonel Harris.
"Badly," replied Luke, "I am afraid. He looks
very feeble, and his asthma, I know, must bother him.
He was always worse in foggy weather."
"He ought to go to Algeciras. He always used
to."
"I know," assented Luke dejectedly.
"Can't something be done ? Surely, Luke, you
haven't lost all your influence with him."
"Every bit, sir. Why, I hardly ever see him."
"Hardly ever see him ? " ejaculated Colonel Harris,
and I am afraid that he swore.
"I haven't been to Grosvenor Square for over six



<pb n="94"/>
94            A TRUE WOMAN
weeks. I am only allowed to see him when
out, or by special permission from Philip. I
under such conditions."
"How that house must have altered! "
"You wouldn't know it, sir. All the serva
gone, one after the other; they had rows with
and left at a month's notice. I suppose he has 
how to set about getting new ones.... I
shouldn't I . .. There's only a man and his
sort of charwoman who cleans and cooks, and t
is supposed to look after Uncle Rad, but he
do it, for he is half seas over most of the time."
"Good God! " murmured Colonel Harris.
"They have shut up all the rooms, except the 
where Uncle Rad and Philip have their mealsI
they are at home. But they lunch and dine at
club mostly ...."
"What club do they go to ? I called in
Athenaum last night,l thinking to find Radclyffe
but the hall-porter told me that he never went
now."
"No. He and Philip have joined some new
Shaftesbury Avenue-The Veterans', I thi
called."
"Some low, mixed-up kind of place! Old
olyffe must be out of his senses! "
"He likes it, so he tells me, because people
come and bother him there."
"I should think not, indeed! I wouldn't se
in such a place."
"He goes there most evenings, and so does



<pb n="95"/>
SOCIAL DUTIES TO PERFORM               95
and it's so bad for Uncle Rad to be out late these
nights."
'ou ought to make an effort and stop it, Luke."
"I have made many efforts, sir. But, as a matter
fact, I had made up my mind to make a final one
t-night. Uncle Rad ought to go abroad, and I
thought I would try to impress this on Philip. He
t be a bad man. . . ."
"Oh   can't he ?" was Colonel Harris's muttered'
comment,
" At any rate, if I have no influence, he has, and he
must exert it and get Uncle Rad down to Algeciras
or anywhere else he likes, so long as it is well
south."
Luke paused awhile, his face fushed with this ex-
pression of determination, which must have caused
his pride many a bitter pang. Then he resumed, more
quietly-
"It's rather humiliating, isn't it, to go to that man
as a suppliant ? "
"Don't go as a suppliant, my boy. You must in-
sist on your uncle being properly looked after."
Colonel Harris thought all that sort of thing so easy.
One always does before one has had a genuine tussle
with the unpleasant realities of life; to the good
country squire with an assured position, an assured
income, assured influence, it seemed very easy indeed
to insist. He himself never had to insist: things oc-
curred round him and at his word, as it were, of them-
selves.
But Louisa, knowing how matters stood, made no



<pb n="96"/>
96            A TRUE WOMAN             '
suggestion. She knew that Luke would do
but that that best was but of little avail 
Philip de Mountford arranged, so it would 
about.
Friends and well-wishers could but pray
intruder was not a bad man, and that he 
uncle's health at heart. 
She gave the signal to go, saying simply- 
"We mustn't be late for dinner, father, mus
And she rose to go, held back by the h
Luke's fervent insistence.
He could not accustom himself to part from.
he often had to do. It seemed absurd, but und
He was supremely happy in her company, and 
as much of it as ever he could; but the 
always awful, and Louisa-subtly compreh
was conscious of the terrible pain which she 
at every parting. She felt the repercussion of i
her nerves, although her sound common s
demned the sensation as unreal.
To-night the feeling was even stronger than
ever been before. At her first suggestion that
time to go, an elusive current passed from him
He had been holding her hand, and his had
and only slightly on the quiver from time to
when her own fingers pressed more markedly
his. Butnow, all at once, it seemed as if a
current of lava had penetrated his veins; hise 
almost scorched her own, and though visibly
not move, yet she felt the pulses throbbing and
bling beneath the flesh. The look of misery in
!;



<pb n="97"/>
SOCIAL DUTIES TO PERFORM             97
e her own heart ache, though she tried to smile
wth easy gaiety.
" To-morrow we go to the Temple Show together,
don't forget, Luke."
Her words seemed to recall him from another world,
and he quickly enough pulled himself together and
helped her on with her cloak. Colonel Harris, with
the gentle tactfulness peculiar to kind hearts, had
loudly announced that he would be waiting in the hall.
"Anything the matter, Luke ? " she asked as soon
as her father had gone from the room.
He contrived to smile and to look unconcerned.
"Not particularly," he replied.
"You seem different to-night, somehow."
" How different "
"I can't explain. But you are not yourself."
"Myself more than ever. My adoration for you is
more uncontrolled-that is all."
She wrapped herself up in her furs; for it was
silence that gave the best response. And then he said,
quite calmly-
"Will you go first ? I'll switch off the light."
"Father will be waiting downstairs," she rejoined.
Then she went past him and out through the door,
and he had to go back to the mantelpiece where one
of the electric light switches was, He turned off the
light; the room remained in darkness, save where the
dying embers of the fire threw a red glow on the sofa
where she had sat with him, and the footstool on
which her evening shoe had rested.
And the conventional man of the world, schooled
H



<pb n="98"/>
98            A TRUE WOMAN 
from childhood onwards to discipline and "elf
fell on both knees against that mute footsto
leaning forward, he pressed his burning lips 
the silk cushions of the sofa, which still bore
press and the fragrance of her exquisite shoul
Then he too went out of the room.



<pb n="99"/>
CHAPTER XII
SHALL A MAN ESCAPE HIS FATE ?
i   N the way to the Danish Legation Colonel Harris
I     x  asked  Luke what his plans were for the
evening.
" I shall," replied Luke, " call at Grosvenor Square.
I may find Uncle Rad, or Philip, or both at home. I
mean to have a good tussle about this wintering
abroad. ... It's really most important."
"I call it criminal," retorted Colonel Harris, " keep-
ing a man in London who has been used to go
south in the winter for the past twenty years at
least."
"Uncle Rad is still fairly well now, though I do
think he looks more feeble than usual. He ought to
go at once."
"But," suggested Louisa, "he oughtn't to go
alone."
"No. He certainly ought not."
"Would Mr. de Mountford go with him  "
"I don't think so."
"This new man of his, then  "
"That," said Luke hotly, "would be madness.
The man is really a drunkard."
99



<pb n="100"/>
100           A TRUE WOMAN
"But somebody ought to go."
"Edie would be only too willing... if
allowed."
"Edie ? " exclaimed Louisa.
And she added, with a smile-
"What will Reggie Duggan have to
that ? "
"Nothing," he replied quietly. "Reggie
has cried off."
" You don't mean that."
" He has given up Edie, who has little or no
year, and become engaged to Marian Mont
has eight thousand pounds a year of her own." 
"Poor Edie !" murmured Louisa; whilst
Harris's exclamation was equally to the point
more forcible, and more particularly concee
Honourable Reginald Duggan.
" Yes!" rejoined Luke, "it has hit her 
coming on the top of other things. There's no
saying the fact, is there, Colonel Harris, that we
brothers and sister owe something to Uncle 
son "
"The handle of a riding whip," came from o
depths of Colonel Harris's fur coat. "Stupid 
parsons have of saying that to wish a man d
tantamount to murder. I am committing murder
for the matter of that, for I wish that blackguard
buried in one of his native earthquakes."
"Would to God," added Luke, " that wishing
would do it."
There was so much wrath, such hatred and



<pb n="101"/>
SHIALL A MAN ESCAPE HIS FATE ?       101
tempt, contained in those words that Louisa instinc-
tively whispered-
" Hush, Luke ! don't talk like that."
And Colonel Harris somewhat ostentatiously cleared
his throat and said-
"Don't let us think of that confounded Philip."
Luke took leave of Colonel Harris and of Louisa at
the door of the Danish Legation, He waited on the
carpeted kerb beneath the awning until he saw her
white evening cloak disappear in the doorway.
The fog had become very dense. Just here, where
a number of carriage lamps threw light around, one
could distinguish faces and forms immediately close
to one; but as Luke turned away from the brilliant
lights he realized how thick was the pall which en-
veloped London to-night. He looked at his watch;
it was close upon eight. The next few minutes brought
him to the door of Lord Radclyffe's house.
He rang, but obtained no answer; he rang again
and again, and finally came to the conclusion that his
uncle and cousin were, as usual, dining out, and that
the elderly couple who did perfunctory service in the
house were either asleep or out of earshot, or had taken
the opportunity of seeking amusement in a neighbour-
ing public-house.
But Luke was worried about Lord Radclyffe; more-
over, he had made up his mind that he would speak
to him and to Philip to-night with regard to the im-
perative wintering abroad for the old man.
The Veterans' Club was unknown to Luke, but
Shaftesbury Avenue was not. He turned into Oxford



<pb n="102"/>
102           A TRUE WOMAN               '
Street, and as taxi-cabs were now a forbidden 1
he hailed a passing omnibus and jumped into it;
thus was rapidly conveyed into the very heart ot
fog, which had found its haven around Pic
Circus.
I!



<pb n="103"/>
CHAPTER XIII
THEY HAVE NO HEARBT
AS to what occurred in the heart of the fog on that
A     night in November, four years ago, most of you,
no doubt, will remember. Those who do not I must
refer to the morning papers of the following day.
A perfect harvest for journalists. Gossip and detail
sufficient to fill column upon column of newspaper:
- gossip that grew as the hours sped on, and the second
day of fog pursued its monotonous course.
A man had been found murdered in a taxi-cab, his
throat stabbed through from ear to ear, the jugular
pierced, life absolutely extinct-the murderer vanished.
Drama in the midst of reality.
Such things are, you know. No amount of so-called
realistic literature, no amount of sneers at what is
dubbed melodrama, will prevent this fact occurring-
and occurring very frequently in the streets of a
mighty city.
Just a man murdered, and the murderer disappeared.
A very real thing that, and London has had to face
such facts often enough, more often than has an
audience at Drury Lane or the Adelphi. The superior-
minded critic who spells British Drama with a capital
B and D, and pronounces it Pritish Trama, sat in the
108



<pb n="104"/>
104           A TRUE WOMAN
stalls of a London theatre on this very 
evening in November, four years ago. The 
one that did not appeal to the superior-minded
it was just a simple tale of jealousy which led
breaking of that great commandment: "Tholt
do no murder I "
And the superior-minded critic yawned
well-gloved hand and dubbed the play melod
unreal, and stagey, quite foreign to the life of
But just at that hour-between nine and ten o'
a man was murdered in a taxi-cab, and his m
vanished in the fog.
London doesn't dub such events melodr
does not sneer at them or call them unreal. She
that they are real: there is nothing stagey or 
about them: they have even become commonp
They occur so often; and most often whilst 
dines or dances, and the elect applaud with 
grace the newest play by Mr. Bernard Shaw.
Only in this case the event gained addit
terest. The murdered man was a personality.
one whom everybody that was anybody had
about, gossiped, and discussed for the past six m
Some one whom few had seen, but many had h
about-Philip de Mountford, the son of the
Arthur de Mountford-Radclyffe's newly found
you know.
The news spread as only such news can spread,
when society poured out from theatres, from ho
in Grosvenor Square, or from the dining-room of
Carlton, every one had heard the news.



<pb n="105"/>
THEY HAVE NO HEART               105
It was as if the sprite of gossip had been busy whis-
pering in over-willing ears.
"Philip de Mountford has been murdered."
"He was found in a taxi-cab; his throat was cut
from ear to ear."
"No, no I not cut, I understand. Pierced through
with a sharp instrument-a stiletto, I presume."
"How horrible "
!   ( " Poor Lord Radolyffe . . . such a tragedy! . . ."
"He'll never live through it."
" He has looked very feeble lately."
"The scandal round the late Arthur's name broke
him up, I think."
"It seems Arthur de Mountford had married a
negress."
"No, no ! Philip did not look like a half-caste. I
saw him once or twice. He was dark, but nice-looking."
" Still! there was some scandal about the mar-
riage."
"Nothing to what this scandal will be !"
" What scandal? "
"Seek whom the crime benefits, you know."
" Then you think ... .  You really think Luke de
Mountford did it ?"
" I thought so the moment I heard the story."
"I've always thought that Luke de Mountford a
queer sort of fellow."
"And he took his cousin's advent very badly."
"Well, one can't wonder at that exactly ... to
lose a future peerage all of a sudden . . . and he has
no private fortune either . . ."



<pb n="106"/>
106           A TRUE WOMAN
" Poor beggar."                         G
" I heard there were awful rows between the i
until Lord Radolyffe himself turned Luke and t
out of the house,"                       I
" And now Philip de Mountford has been mur
"And the police will seek him whom the.
benefits."
"It certainly looks very suspicious."
"       A   drea   . c .. Won't it be exci
"Something to read about in one's morning p
"I shall try and get reserved seats for the trial
I hate a crush, don't you ? "                     I
" Will they hang him, do you think  " ? 
"If he is found guilty.., English justice
respecter of persons."
" How awful."
And tittle-tattle, senseless talk, inane remark
wafted on the grimy wings of the fog. They pen
everywhere, in the lobbies of the theatres, the 
of madame, and the smoking-room of my lord.
penetrated to the magnificent reception rooms
Danish Legation, and Louisa heard the remarks
before she knew the full details of the story.
had a well-trained contralto voice, and had been
to sing in the course of the evening. Just as she
in an outer room selecting her music, she heard a
of idlers-men and women-talking over the
terious murder in the taxi-cab.
They had at first been unconscious of her pr
She had her back towards them, turning over
leaves of her song. Suddenly there was a hush in!
I



<pb n="107"/>
THEY HAVE NO HEART               107
versation; one of the chatterboxes must have
inted her out to the others,
Whereupon Louisa, serene and smiling, a roll of
usic in her hand, joined the merry group.
"Please," she said, "don't stop. I have heard
-nothing yet. And of course I want to know."
One of the men laughed inanely, and the ladies
. murmured silly nothings.
"Oh!" said some one, "it mayn't be true. Such
lots of wild rumours get about."
"What," asked Louisa placidly, "mayn't be true ?
D Some one said just now that Philip de Mountford has
been murdered."
"Well," murmured one of the ladies, "they say it
was Mr. de Mountford, but they can't be sure, can
they "
The group was dissolving; almost, it seemed, as if it
had vanished into thin air. When Louisa first heard
them talking there were about a dozen men and women,
a brilliant throng of gaily plumaged birds; now the
ladies remembered that they wanted to hear the
latest infant prodigy, who had been engaged to enter-
tain the guests at the post-dinner reception to-night,
and the men, too, feeling uncomfortable and awkward,
made good their escape.
People-the pleasure-loving people of to-day-have
no use for latent tragedy; excitement, yes I and
drama, but only from the secure distance of a private
seat at an Old Bailey trial. The murder of Philip de
Mountford could be discussed with quite an amount
of enjoyment between a dinner-party and a ball



<pb n="108"/>
108           A TRUE WOMAN
supper, but not in Louisa Harris's presence t
too much of a good thing you know !      i
Within a very few minutes Louisa
self almost alone, just the one or two 
whom  she had directly spoken, and-fo
Colonel Harris in the doorway, come to 
daughter. 
" The infant with the violin," he said as
caught sight of Louisa, "is just finishing 
poor little rat ! You promised you would 
Loo. What songs have you got ? " 
"I was just making a selection when y  o
father. What would you like me to sing " .
With an unexpressed sigh of relief the
the original group of gossips dwindled away 
reception room beyond, congratulating them
having successfully engineered their exit.  '
"Doooed awkward, don't you know, Miss 
asking questions."
"I suppose she doesn't realize . . ." 
"She will soon enough . ."
"She ought to have broken off her engs
1Omg ago."
"Isn't it awful ? . . . poor thing I" 
Louisa, left alone with her father, could
nerves to ease their fearful tension. She had no
to hide from him the painful quiver of her lips, 
anxious frown across her brow.
"Do you know," she asked, "anything about
awful business, father "
"There's a lot of gossip," he replied; his voiod



<pb n="109"/>
THEY HAVE NO HEART               109
only gruff, but hoarse, which showed that he was
gely moved.
"But," she insisted, " some truth in the gossip ?"
"' They say Philip de Mountford has been murdered."
"Who says so ? "
i "Some people have come on from the theatres, and
en from the clubs. The streets are full of it . . . and
ening papers have brought out midnight editions,
hich are selling like hot cakes."
"And do they say that Luke has killed Philip de
ountford ? "
"No"-with some hesitation-"they don't say that."
"But they hint at it."
"Newspaper tittle-tattle."
"How much is actual fact ?"
" I understand," he explained, " that at nine o'clock
or thereabouts two men in evening dress hailed a
passing taxi-cab just outside the Lyric Theatre in
, Shaftesbury Avenue and told the chauffeur to drive
to Hyde Park Corer, just by the railings of the Green
Park. The driver drew up there and one of the two
men got out. As he reclosed the door of the cab he
leaned toward the interior and said cheerfully, "Slong,
old man. See you to-morrow." Then he told the
chauffeur to drive on'to 1 Cromwell Gardens, opposite
the Museum, and turning on his heel disappeared in the
fog. When the chauffeur drew up for the second time
no one alighted from the cab. So he got down from his
box and opened the door."
" The other man," murmured Louisa vaguely, " was
in the cab . . . dead! .. ."



<pb n="110"/>
110           A TRUE WOMAN
"That's about it."
" With his throat pierced from ear to ear byl
instrument which might have been a skewer." '
"You have heard it all, then ?"       .
"No I no I " she said hurriedly.
The room was swaying round her; the 
started hopping and dancing. Louisa, who h
fainted in her life, felt as if the floor was gi
under her feet. Memory was unloading one
store-houses, looking over the contents of a
cell, wherein she had put away a strange wint e
in Brussels, a taxi-cab, the ill-lighted boule
chauffeur getting down from his box and fndinj
crouched in the further corner of the cab-de
his throat pierced from ear to ear by an in
which might have been a skewer. And me
raking out that cell, clearing it in every corner;
to find the recollection of a certain morning in
sea Park a year ago when Louisa recoun
impressions of that weird scene, told the tale
crime, which she had almost witnessed.
found a distinct impression that she had told
at full length, and with all the details which she
She remembered talking it all over, and that
she did so, the ground in Battersea Park was '
with the frost under her feet, and an inquisitive !
perched himself on the railings and then flew
accompanying her and another all the way along
as the gates.
Two pictures, vivid and distinct: that even
Brussels, and the morning in Battersea Park, her



<pb n="111"/>
THEY HAVE NO HEART               111
eing with Luke after his letter to her-the letter
ich had come to her in the Palace Hotel and which
dmade her the happiest woman in all the world.
emory-satisfied-had at last emptied the store-
one of that one cell and left Louisa Harris standing
here, staring at her father, her ears buzzing with
the idle and irresponsible chatter of society jack-
daws, her mind seeing all that had happened outside
I: Cromwell Gardens: the cab stopping, the chauffeur
terrified, the crowd collecting, the police taking notes.
Her mind saw it as if her bodily eyes had been there,
. and all that her father told her seemed but the re-
. capitulation of what she knew already.
"Where," she said after a while, "is the dead man
now ? "
"I don't know," he replied, "I should imagine
they would keep the body at the police station until
the morning. I don't suppose they'd be such mugs
as to disturb Lord Radclyffe at this time of night;
~ the shock might kill the old man."
"I suppose they are quite sure that it is Philip de
Mountford who was killed ? "
"Why, yes he had his pocketbook, his cards, his
letters on him, and money too ... robbery was not
the object of the crime. ... "
"It was Philip de Mountford then "
"Good God, yes I of whom were you thinking ?"
"I was thinking of Luke," she replied simply.
The old man said nothing more. Had he spoken
at all then it would have been to tell her that he too
was thinking of Luke, and that there was perhaps



<pb n="112"/>
112           A TRUE WOMAN             A
not a single person in the magnificent hoi
moment who was not-in some way or othe
of Luke. 
The hostess came in, elegant and worl
banal words to request the pleasure of h
Harris sing.
"It is so kind of you," she said, " to offer. 
never heard you, you know, and people say 
such a splendid voice. But perhaps you would
not sing to-night ? "
She spoke English perfectly, but with a
Scandinavian intonation, which seemed to
banality of her words. Being foreign, she 
less of concealing her sympathy, and was m
fearful of venturing on delicate ground. 
She held out a small exquisitely-gloved hand 
it almost affectionately on the younger woman'
"I am sure you would rather not sing t
she said kindly.
"Indeed, Countess, why should you think 
retorted Louisa lightly. "I shall be delighted 
I wonder which of these new songs you wo
best. There is an exquisite one by Guy d'H
Shall I sing that " 
And Her Excellency, who so charmingly .
sented Denmark in English society, follow
guest into the reception room: she
elegant carriage of the English girl, the slender
the soft abundant hair. 
And Her Excellency sighed and murmue
herself-                                  '



<pb n="113"/>
THEY HAVE NO HEART                 118
"They are stiff, these English! and oh! they have
feelings, no sentiment ! "
And a few moments later, when Louisa Harris's
ely fine voice, firm and clear, echoed in the wide
eeption room, Her Excellency reiterated her im-
pressions-
"These English have no heart! She sings and her
lover is suspected of murder ! Bah! they have no
xheart!"
I'



<pb n="114"/>
CHAPTER XIV 
THE TALE HAD TO BE TOLD
AND whilst the morning papers were 
L   millions of English men and women,
details of the mysterious crime discussed
and bacon and buttered toast, Philip de Moun
newly found heir-presumptive to the Earldom 
clyffe, was lying in the gloomy mortuary ch
London police court, whither he had been 
in the same cab whose four narrow walls 
guarded the secret of the tragedy which h
enacted within their precincts.         '
Lord Radclyffe had been aroused at ten o'o
previous night by representatives of the pol
came to break the news to him. It was not
the old man was not yet in bed. He had o
front door of his house himself; his servants, 
plained curtly, were spending their eveningt
agreeably elsewhere.
The house-even to the police officer-a-
lonely and gloomy in the extreme, and the fi
the old man-who should have been surrou
every luxury that rank and wealth can giv
singularly pathetic as he stood in his own do
evidently unprotected and uncared for, and
114



<pb n="115"/>
THE TALE HAD TO BE TOLD             115
oously demanding what his late visitors' business
ight be.
Very reluctantly, on hearing the latter's status, he
onsented to admit them. He did not at first appear
suspect that anything wrong might have hap-
ed, or that anything untoward could occasion this
octurnal visit; in fact, he seemed unconscious of the
teness of the hour,
He walked straight into the library, where he had
obviously been sitting, for an arm-chair was drawn to
'the fire, a reading-lamp was alight on the table, and
papers and magazines lay scattered about.
The police officer in plain clothes, who stood with
his subordinate, somewhat undecided, hardly knew
how to begin. It was a hard task to break such awful
news to this lonely old man.
At last it was done; the word "accident" and
t" your nephew " were blurted out by the man in com-
mand. But hardly were these out of his lips than
Lord Radclyffe-livid and trembling-had jumped to
his feet.
"Luke!" he contrived to exclaim, and his voice
was almost choked, his lips and hands trembled, beads
of perspiration stood upon his forehead: "something
has happened to Luke."
"No, no, my lord    that's not the name....
Philip was on the card and on the letters. ... Philip
de Mountford . . . that was, I think, the poor gentle-
man's name."
"And an accident has happened to Mr. Philip de
Mountford ? "



<pb n="116"/>
116           A TRUE WOMAN
The voice was quite different now. 
choked with anxiety: calm, and as if mildly  i
in passing events. It was obvious, even to the y
present, that one nephew was of far greterj
than the other.
"I am afraid, my lord, that it's worse :
accident...."
The officer paused a moment, satisfied
doing all that was necessary and possible to i
the suddenness of the blow.
"It's foul play," he said at last, "that's
was."
"Foul play ? What do you mean by that
"Mr. Philip de Mountford has been mr
lord ... his body now lies at the police stati
Would you wish him conveyed home at once,
... or wait until after the inquest "
There was silence in the room for a moment
while the old-fashioned clock ticked stolidly
the awful announcement-which, indeed, 
felled a younger and more vigorous man-
clyfFe had not moved. He was still standing,
resting on the table beside the piled-up ne
The light of the lamp, veiled by a red shade, 
the transparent delicacy of the high-bred
smooth, black surface of the coat, and the l
whiteness of the shirt-front, with its single
The face itself was in shadow, and thus thl
officer saw little or nothing of that inward t
self-mastery which was being put so severely'
test.



<pb n="117"/>
THE TALE HAD TO BE TOLD              117
rd Radclyffe, face to face with the awful event,
oe by every power at his command to remain dig-
and impassive. The lessons taught by genera-
of ancestors had to bear fruit now, when a
sentative of the ancient name stood confronting
greatest crisis that one of his kind has ever had
face. The brutal, vulgar fact of a common murder,
realities of a sordid life brought within the four
of a solemn, aristocratic old house.
For a moment before he spoke again the old man
ked round about him-the tall mahogany book-
filled with silent friends, the busts of Dryden
of Milton, the globes in their mahogany casings:
heirlooms from the generations of de Mountfords
o had gone before.
It seemed as if the present bearer of the historic
e called all these mute things to witness this
nt degradation.   A  crime had smirched the
ly escutcheon; for to some minds-those who
dwell on empyrean heights to which the matter-of-fact
trdidness of everyday life never reaches-to those
minds the victim is almost as horrible as the assain.
Lord Radclyffe, however, fought his own battle
Silently. Not with one tremor or one gasp would he
let the two men see what he felt. Conventionality
wielded her iron rod in this shabby old library, just as
she had done in the ballroom of the Danish Legation,
and whilst not two hundred yards away Louisa Harris
sang Guy d'Hardelot's songs and smilingly received
praise and thanks for her perfect performance, so here
the old man never flinched.
I



<pb n="118"/>
118           A TRUE WOMAN
He gave to his nerves the word of comm
soon as he had forced them to obey, he looked
at the police officer and said quite calmly--
" Please tell me all that I ought to know."
He sat in his high-backed chair, curtly bi
two men to sit down; he made no attempt
his face and eyes; once the battle fought and'.
had nothing more to hide: his own face rigid
his firm mouth and smooth brow were mask e
conceal the feelings within.
The officer gave the details at full length:
Lord Radolyffe all that was known of the m
crime. The old man listened in silence until
had finished speaking, then he asked a few q
" You havea clue of course ? "
"I think so, my lord," replied the officer 
"Can I help in any way ? "
"Any information, my lord, that you ti
help us would, of course, be gladly welcomed."
"The man who hailed the cab in S
Avenue.... What was he like ? . . . I 
you if I knew."
"I'll have his description properly written
lord, and bring it you in the morning."
" Can't you tell me now ? Every moment
irretrievable in oases like these."
"I am afraid, my lord, that I cannot tell 
nitely now. There's a dense fog outside . . . 
"The chauffeur's desoriptions are vague,'":
posed Lord Radolyffe, with a sneer; "the 
oses for incompetence."



<pb n="119"/>
THE TALE HAD TO BE TOLD              119
"My lord! " protested the man.
"All right ! all right! No offence meant, I assure
you .. You must pardon an old man's irritability ...
Ibe news you have brought me does not make for
eenness of temper. .... I rely on your department
to clear this matter up with the least possible
,oandal. ...." ,
" I am afraid that scandal is inevitable," retorted
the officer dryly, for he still felt sore at Lord Radclyffe's
ri-tempered thrust; "we shall have to rake up a great
'deal of what might be unpleasant to many parties."
"Why should it be unpleasant "
" We shall have to-know something of the murdered
man's past, of his associates before . . . before he was
able to establish his claim to your lordship's oonsidera-
tion."
" I have no doubt that the late Philip de Mountford
Ahad many undesirable associates in the past," re-
marked Lord Radelyffe curtly.
The silence which followed was tantamount to a
dismissal. The officer rose to go. He felt nettled at
the old man's obvious sneers: they had been like a
:' old douche over his enthusiasm, for the case had
already drifted into his hands and it promised to be the
most interesting and most sensational criminal case of
modern times.
"You have not," he said before taking his leave, "told
me, my lord, what you wish done about the body."
"Surely," replied Lord Radclyffe querulously, "it
is too late now to make any arrangements. What is
the time ?"



<pb n="120"/>
S10           A TRUE WOMAN 
"Half-past ten, my lord." 
"Surely to-morrow morning we can d
that."
"Just as you wish, of course."
"To-morrow morning ... as early as y
... My servants will be at home then . . . 
will be ready ... and I can make arrangemea
or else we'll wait, as you say, until after
quest.". 
The sound of a bell broke the silence that 
"You must excuse me," said his lordship
"my servants are out, and there's some one
front door."
"I can hear footsteps below stairs, my lo
marked the officer.
"Ah I I believe you're right. Those two
guards must have come home and I didn't 
it.... They do pretty much as they like."
Shufing, uncertain footsteps were heard
halL The officer said hurriedly-
One more thing, my lord . . . you will pa
asking, but... you had not thought       I
offering a reward... "
" What for ?"
"The apprehension of the murderer ... or 
information that would lead to conviction. . .
"Oh   ah  yes   a reward, by all means. .
course, I'll give a reward to stimulate incompe
eh ?"
"What will your lordship make it " asked
officer, determined this time to show no resent



<pb n="121"/>
THE TALE HAD TO BE TOLD             121
"Two hundred . . . five hundred . . have what
u like . .. so long as you get that brute."
" Five hundred, my lord, would stimulate us all."
"Very well " said Lord Radlyffe briefly. "Good
evening."
"Good evening, my lord. And to-morrow morning
we'll be ready for the body to be taken away, if you
wish it.... But the inquest will be the day after,
so perhaps it might be best to wait until then . ..
the Coroner's Court, Victoria, my lord... South
Kensington, you know ... everything will be all
right. ... Good evening, my lord."
The two men took their leave, glad enough to have
done with the unpleasant interview.
As they walked to the door that gave from the
library on the hall it was opened from the outside, and
a seedy-looking man, dressed in shabby evening clothes
that bore many traces of past libations, walked un-
ceremoniously midway into the room.
"Will you see Mr. Luke de Mountford?" he
muttered, addressing his master.
"Certainly not," replied his lordship. "It's much
too late. Ask Mr. Luke to call again to-morrow. And
you and your wife can go to bed."



<pb n="122"/>
CHAPTER XV
AND MANY MUST BE QUESTIONED
B1Y the time the police officers reached 
J hall door, Luke had received his order
missal. He stood on the step for a momen
cided what to do-and saw the two men col
of his uncle's study.
They raised their hats as they met him on 
step, and one of them said politely-
"Mr. Luke de Mountford "
"That is my name," replied Luke.
"Mine is Travers-attached to Scotla4ml:
Could I ask you a few questions ? .. ."
"Certainly . . . but not in my uncle's
think... ."
" Of course not . . where do you suggest ?
" Here on the doorstep if you like. .. ."
"Hardly. Might I trouble you to step int
with me and to come as far as Victoria Police
"It's very late, isn't it? . . . I have an
ment at eleven ... close by here....."
He was going to fetoh Colonel Harris and
at the Danish Legation and pilot them home
Langham.
"It's an important matter, Mr. de Mountfo
122



<pb n="123"/>
AND MANY MUST BE QUESTIONED           128
torted the man. " Are you lodging anywhere near
here ? "
" In Exhibition Road, Kensington."
" Ah ! close to Cromwell Road  "
"Not far."
"Then where shall it be, Mr. de Mountford "
" Why not in the cab ? " remarked Luke.
" Just as you like."
The taxi-cab which had brought the police officers
was standing some few paces further on, its strong
lights only just piercing the intensity of the fog: and
its throbbings, as the taxi-meter marked off two-
pences with unerring rapidity, filled the night with
their strangely familiar sound.
The three men got into the cab, the officer telling
[ the chauffeur to remain stationary until told to move
on.
"I know very little about the business, Mr.-er-
Travers," remarked Luke as soon as all three of them
had stowed themselves fairly comfortably in the in-
terior of the vehicle. "I suppose it is about this
ghastly affair that you wanted to speak to me."
" Yes, sir. It was about that. I thought you could
give us some information about the late Mr. de Mount-
ford's past life, or his former friends."
"I know nothing," retorted Luke dryly, "of my
cousin's past or present life. He did not confide in me."
"But you were good friends?" interposed the
other quickly.
"We knew each other very little."
"And to-night "



<pb n="124"/>
124           A TRUE WOMAN
"I saw him at his Club."
"        Where  as that ? "
"The Veterans' in Shaftesbury Avenue."
" About what time "
"Between eight and nine."
" You had some talk with him ? "
Yes."
"Pleasant talk ? " asked the officer indifferen
"Family affairs," rejoined Luke dryly.
" And you parted from him ?"
"Somewhere about nine."
"In the Club ? "
"In the Club."
" The doorstep ? "
"No. The lobby."
"He was alone then ? I mean . .. besides
self there was no one with him ?"
"No one. The hall-porter stood there, of co
" No one joined him afterwards ? "
"That I cannot say. When I parted from 
was alone."
" You know that Mr. Philip de Mountford
murdered in a taxi-cab between Shaftesbury A
and Hyde Park Corner, soon after nine o'clock
"I have heard most of the details of that e
ordinary crime."
" And you can throw no light on it at all ?"
"None. How could I ? "
"Nothing," insisted the police officer, "oOcu
you at this moment that might help us in any
to trace the murderer ?"



<pb n="125"/>
AND MANY MUST BE QUESTIONED             125
c "Nothing whatever,"
The man was silent. It seemed as if he was meditat-
ing how best to put one or two more questions. Up to
now these had been curt and to the point, and as
they followed one another in quick succession there
was a marked difference in the attitude both of the
questioner and the questioned. The police officer had
started by being perfectly deferential-just like a man
accustomed to speak with people whose position in the
world compelled a certain regard. He had originally
addressed Luke as "sir," just as he had invariably
said " my lord " to Lord Radelyffe, but now he spoke
much more curtly; there was a note of demand in
every question which he put, a peremptoriness of
manner which did not escape the observation of his
interlocutor.
As the one man became more aggressive, so did
Luke also change his manner. There had been affable
courtesy in his first reply to the questions put to him,
a desire to be of help if help was needed, but with his
senses attuned by anxiety and nerve strain to dis-
tinguish subtle differences of manner and of intention,
he was quick enough to notice that he himself was,
as it were, in a witness-box, with a counsel ready
enough to bully, or to trip up any contradictory state-
ment.
Not that Luke realized the reason of this change.
The thought that he could be suspected of a crime
was as far removed from his ken as the desire to
visit the moon. He could not understand the officer's
attitude, it puzzled him, and put him on his guard-



<pb n="126"/>
126           A TRUE WOMAN            l
but it was just the instinct of self-preser
caution which comes to men who have had :
the world, and who have met enemies wh
least expected to find one.
" Do you remember," now resumed Trav
that slight pause, which had seemed very long t
but as a matter of fact had only lasted a short i
" whether you saw Mr. Philip de Mountford
with any one when you left him in the lobby
Club ? "
" I told you," said Luke impatiently, " that
alone, except for the hall-porter."
"Alone in the whole Club-house" "
" Alone," reiterated Luke with measured e
" in the lobby of the Veterans' Club."
"How many rooms has the Club ?" 
"I don't know; it was the first time I
been there,"
" Did you know any of the staff ?     '
"No . . . since I had never been there be
" You were not known to any member of the
"Not that I know of."
" You were shown into the Club-rooms witho
known there at all t "
"The Veterans' Club is a new one, and i
apparently are not very strict. I asked if
Mountford was in the Club and was told that I
find him in the smoking-room, and I did."
"How long did your interview with Mr. de
ford last "
" About three-quarters of an hour, I should



<pb n="127"/>
AND MANY MUST BE QUESTIONED 127
s( And it was of a perfectly amicable nature."
"Of a perfectly indifferent nature," corrected
[mke.
( And after the interview what did you do "
"I walked out of the Club."
"But after that ? "
"I walked about."
"In the fog ?"   This in an undisguised tone of
nprise.
"In the fog."
"In what direction ?"
"Really," here rejoined Luke, with a sudden show
f resentment, " Mr.-er-Travers, I fail to see how
ly movements can be of concern to you."
He was certainly not going to tell this man that he
ad made his way through the fog as far as the resi-
-dence of the Danish Minister, and that he had walked
up and down for over an hour outside that house like
a love-sick fool, like a doting idiot, because he knew
that if he waited patiently he would presently hear
the faint echo of a well-trained contralto voice whose
mellowness would come to him through the closed
windows of the brilliantly illumined mansion, and
would ease for a moment the wild longing of his heart.
What the man near him said in answer to his retort
: he really could not say. He had not heard, for in a
moment his thoughts had flashed back to that lonely
vigil in the fog, to the sound of her voice, which came,
i oh! so faintly to his ear, and then to the first breath
of gossip that came from the passers-by, the coachmen
a d chauffeurs who had drawn up in long rows along



<pb n="128"/>
128           A TRUE WOMAN         ,.
the kerb, the idlers who always hang abo
the cold and the damp when a society 
progress, the pickers-up of unconsidered
willingly bestowed.
From these he had first heard the news:
first, for he did not-could not realize that
thing which was being commented on and4!
had anything to do with him. The talk was 4
and soon the name of de Mountford was
The details he got were very confused; ad
allusions as to "seek whom the crime will
never really reached his brain, which was
with the violence of the shook.  -
His first thought after that was to go and
Rad; he had, for the moment, almostforgot
Every other interest in life sank to nothing
the one lear duty; Uncle Rad would be
awful news must be broken very gradually
Bad. He had hurried to Grosvenor Squ
find that emissaries of the police had fores
in his duty.
All this he could not explain to the mae
It would have sounded lame and barely.
Nowadays men do not walk outside houses
their lige-lady dwells, and if they do, 
choose a foggy night for the sentimental
He was thankful, therefore, that Travera
further questions to him, and merely said with
to his original politeness-
"I am greatly obliged to you, sir. I don't
need detain you any longer.... You said 
)



<pb n="129"/>
AND MANY MUST BE QUESTIONED           129
engagement later on ... won't you keep this
b? "
Luke thanked him, but refused the offer of the cab.
It is close by," he said.
"May I call on you to-morrow morning, sir ?"
"If it is necessary."
"I am afraid so.... You see, we don't like to
uble Lord Radclyffe, and we must try and obtain
nowledge of certain facts and verify others."
"Quite so. Well, to-morrow then."
"Thank you, sir. Your address is . . . ?"
"Fairfax Mansions, Exhibition Road."
"Such a nice neighbourhood. ... No fog there to-
naight, I think."
" I hope not. Good night."
"Good night, sir."
Luke made his escape from the cab. He was afraid
*of missing Louisa and her father. His thoughts were
-somewhat in a whirl, and-being overburdened with
'matters of paramount importance-were inclined to
dwell on trifles.
"I ought," he reflected, " to have taken that man's
eab. It might be difficult to get another, and Colonel
Harris hates waiting in a crowded hall."
K



<pb n="130"/>
CHAPTER XVI
AND THE PUPPETS DANCED 
AND so he went to meet Louisa and Cod
-LX at the Danish Legation, and found the
cab, and generally saw to their comparative 
There was no restraint between the three
It was as natural to them all to avoidpe
important matters on the doorstep of a ne
house as it was to eat or drink or breathe.
asked if the dinner had been enjoyable and
tion crowded, and Colonel Harris comforta
plained of both. He hated foreign cooking, and
crushes, and had endured both to-night. N
the terrible events of this night, as yet mere 
hardly admitted to be real-were weighing on 
old man's usual hearty spirits.
But so versed were they all in the art of mak
that each one individually was able to registe
innermost depths of an anxious heart the firmi
tion that the other " had not heard."
Luke was convinced that the gruesome and
news could not have penetrated within the g
mansion where Loo, in an exquisite gown,
modern songs in her pure contralto voice. He
that neither Loo nor Colonel Harris had he
180



<pb n="131"/>
AND THE PUPPETS DANCED             181
bp de Mountford had been murdered in a taxi-cab,
d that police officers had thought fit to speak to him
Luke-in tones of contemptuous familiarity. Nay
ore! now that he himself sat thus opposite good-
red, prosy, sensible Colonel Harris, he began to
hink that he must have been dreaming, that the
whole thing could not have occurred, but that he had
imagined it all whilst leaning against the garden-
silings trying to strain his ears so that they should
hear the soft, faint echo of that pure contralto voice.
Perhaps the wish had been father to the thought;
whilst gazing up at those brilliantly illumined windows,
he might in his heart of hearts have wished the non-
existence of Philip  . . not his death, but the annihi-
lation of the past few months, the non-advent of the
intruder; and, thus wishing, he may have imagined
the whole thing-the murder in the cab, the police
officer on the doorstep of the old home in Grosvenor
* Square.
A sense of supreme well-being encompassed him
now. Loo sat opposite to him. He could not dis-
tinguish her face in the gloom, only the outline of her
head with the soft brown hair perfectly dressed by the
hand of an accomplished maid. Loo, the personifica-
, tion of modernity, of ordinary commonplace life, but
exquisite-just the woman whom he loved with every
fibre of his heart, every tendril of his being, and every
sense within him. A soft perfume of sweet peas clung
to her gown and was wafted to his nostrils. He closed
his eyes, and drew in a long breath of supreme delight.
Now and then as the cab gave a jerk his knee came in



<pb n="132"/>
lot           A TRUE WOMAN 
contact with hers, and down on the ground i
to his own there rested a small neatly shod
sole of which he would have given his hearf
kiss. . 
Oh yes! he was quite, quite happy; 
reality: his exquisite Louisa, the outline of
head, the touch of her knee, the scent of 
which intoxicated him and whipped his se
ness and to dreams.... It was reality, and .
was only the wild phantasmagoria of a wild
tion-the insane thought born of insane
the darkness which enveloped him and Loo, 
you see, give free rein to himself. The world/
gaping, conventionality held no sway wiv
four narrow walls, the puppet could loosen 
which had forced it to dance; it could lie
a while, dead to the world, but enjoying its o
ence and its own vitality.
And Loo, watching him in that same dar
oonoealed him entirely, save to her eyes of
ness, believed that he had heard nothing as
vaguely combated the desire to tell him e s
then and there, so that he should hear the
the best from her lips rather than through i
channels later on.                     . 
But with that subtle perception peculiar 
the moder, commonplace woman of the w   I'
divined that he was living for the moment in 
of his own, from which it were sacrilege to try
him away.                              '
Just then the cab drew up outside the
'"_



<pb n="133"/>
AND THE PUPPETS DANCED                188
otel. The everyday world had returned with its
ig electrio lights, its hall-porters, its noise and
tle, and chased away the illusions of the past few
maoments. Luke jumped out, ready to help Loo down
-a happy second that, for her hand must needs rest
in his.
The glare of the electric lamp above fell full on his
face, which was serene, placid, the usual mask of
supreme indifference; only Louisa read beyond the
iask, and as her hand rested in his for just a thought
'longer than conventionality allowed, she realized that
he knew everything: the murder, the horror, and the
suspicion which had touched him already with the
tip of its sable wing.
. Her eyes and the pressure of her hand bade him
"good night," and she passed on into the lighted hall
-of the hotel. He followed Colonel Harris into the
lobby.
"You have heard ? " he asked quickly and in a
whisper, lest Loo should hear.
" Yes," replied the other.
" And Louisa ? Does she know ?"
"Gossip was all over the confounded place," was
Colonel Harris's muttered comment.
"But you've heard no details ?"
"No. Have you "
"Very little. Only what the police officer chose to
tell me."
"Then," queried the old man, "it's an absolute
fact ?"
"Absolute, unfortunately."



<pb n="134"/>
134           A TRUE WOMAN
"H'm!    As to that...    Have you se
uncle I "
"No. I went round as soon as I knew,
police had forestalled me and broken the news 
"But why didn't you see him ? "
"He sent word that he would rather I came
the morning. Philip's influence still prevale
see8."
"Well! It's a confounded business," ej
Colonel Harris, with hearty conviction; "  but I
going to lament over it. After all said and d
a very simple way out of an impossible situati
" A very horrible way."
"Bah!" I
And the good-natured old man shrugged his s
with a gesture of supreme indifference.
"Well!" said Luke quietly, "it's late n
Youll want to get to bed."
"Well! " retorted the other, with a to
joviality, "it's an ill wind . .. you know."
" Good night, sir."
" Good night, my boy. How will you get back!
"Oh! a taxi is the quickest. Edie might.
heard something, and be anxious. I must hurry
now."
Louisa was standing in the hall at the top
steps. Luke raised his hat to her, and having
hands with Colonel Harris quietly turned to go;
was soon lost in the gloom beyond.
No one who had been standing in the lobby
hotel would have guessed that these three peop



<pb n="135"/>
AND THE PUPPETS DANCED             185
had talked and bowed and shaken hands so quietly
were facing one of life's most appalling, most over-
whelming tragedies.
The world's puppets had been strung up again,
because indifferent eyes were there to watch and gape,
and in the presence of these moder Bulls of Bashan
the puppets danced to the prevalent tune.
F'



<pb n="136"/>
CHAPTER XVII
AND WHAT OF THE SECRET ? 
W   HEN Luke arrived at his uncle's hou
next morning, he was met in the 
Newington, who was descending the staire
gravely beckoned to the young man to follo
the library.
"They called me in last night," he said
to Luke's quick and anxious query. "Th
or whatever he may be-told me that he
fastening up the front door, preparatory to.
bed, when he heard a heavy thud procee
library. He found his master lying full
the floor: the head had come in violent co
fell, with the corer of this table; blood wa.
from a scalp wound and Lord Radclyffe 
apparently in a swoon. The man is a re
and a fool besides. He left his master lying 
had fallen, but fortunately he knew me
where to find me, and within ten minutes I 
spot, and had got Lord Radclyffe into bed." 
" Is it," asked Luke, " anything serious" "'
"Lord Radclyffe has not been over strong
He has had a great deal to put up with, &aiM
age the system is not sufficiently elastic
186



<pb n="137"/>
AND WHAT OF THE SECRET               137
I put it ?-sufficiently recuperative to stand either
tant nerve strain or nagging worries."
"I don't know," interposed Luke stiffly, "that
uncle has had either nerve strain or worry to put
with."
"Oh ! " rejoined the doctor, whose gruff familiarity
med to Luke's sensitive ear to be tainted with
least possible note of impertinence, "I am an old
end of your uncle's, you know, and of all your
y; there isn't much that has escaped my obser-
ion during the past year."
"You have not yet told me, doctor," said Luke, a
e more stiffly than before, "what is the matter
th Lord Radclyffe."
There was distinct emphasis on the last two words.
Dr. Newington   shrugged  his shoulders good-
Lumouredly.
"Your uncle has had something in the nature of a
ke," he said bluntly, and he fixed his keen light-
loured eyes on those of Luke, watching the effect
ich the news-baldly and crudely put-would have
the young man's nerves. He was a man with
t is known as a fashionable practice. He lived
in Hertford Street, and his rounds were encircled by
the same boundaries as those of the rest of Mayfair.
He had had plenty of opportunity of studying those
men and women who compose the upper grades of
English society. They and their perfect sangfroid,
their well-drilled calm under the most dire calamities
or most unexpected blows, had often cost him as-
tonishment when he was a younger man, fresh from



<pb n="138"/>
188           A TRUE WOMAN 
hospital work, and from the haunts of hm
who had no cause or desire to hide the depH
feelings. Now he was used to his fashionab
and had ceased to wonder, and Luke's imn
on hearing of his uncle's sudden illness did 
sarily strike him as indifference. 
"Is it serious ? " asked Luke. 
"Serious. Of course," assented the doctor i
"Do you mean that Lord Radolyffe's 
danger " 
"At sixty years of age, life is always in 
"I don't mean that," rejoined Luke with
show of impatience.  "Is Lord Radclyffe
mediate danger ?"
"No. With great care and constant nursing
soon rally, though I doubt if he will ever be
and hearty as he was this time last year."
"Then what about a nurse ? "
" I'll send one down to-day, but . . ."
"Yes ?"
"Lord Radolyffe's present household is .
hardly adequate to the exigencies of a long 
illness... he ought to have a day and
nurse . . . I can send both . . . but they
some waiting on and, of course, proper 
ordinary comforts...."
"I can see to all that .... Thank you 
advice.  .."
" A good and reliable cook is also ne
who understands invalid cooking . . . all
most important."



<pb n="139"/>
AND WHAT OF THE SECRET               189
" And shall be attended to at once.... Is there
ing else?"
'Perfect rest and quiet, of course, is the chief
"I shan't worry him, you may be sure . . . and no
e else is likely to come near him."
"Except the police," remarked the doctor dryly.
"The police ?"
The grave events of the night before, and those
at were ready to follow one another in grim array
rthe next few days, had almost fled from Luke's
emory in face of the other-to him more serious-
alamity: his uncle's illness.
,. "Oh ! ah ! yes !" he said vaguely, "I had for-
gotten."
"The nurses," rejoined the doctor with a pompous-
ness which somehow irritated Luke, "will have my
uthorization to forbid any one having access to
! Lord Radclyffe for the present. I will write out the
'eertificate now, and this you can present to any one
rwho may show a desire to exercise official authority
in the matter of interviewing my patient."
*  "I dare say that I can do all that is necessary at
I the inquest and so on.... Lord Radolyffe need not
I be worried."
"He mustn't be worried. To begin with, he would
not know any one, and he is wholly unable to answer
: questions."
"That settles the matter, of course. So, if you will
write the necessary certificate, I'll see the police autho-
rities at once on the subject.,,, Would Lord Rad-
I   usin,



<pb n="140"/>
140           A TRUE WOMAN :
olyffe know me, do you think ? " added"
man after a slight pause of hesitancy. 
"Well," replied the doctor evasively
think I would worry him to-day. We'll
gets on...."
" He'll probably ask for me."
"That is another matter, and if he don
of course, see him.... But unless there 
improvement during the day, he won't 
one."
Luke was silent for a moment or two I
doctor sat down at the writing-table and 
pen and ink.
"Very well," he said after a while, " 
at that. Lord Radclyffe-I can promise
shall on no account be disturbed without 
from you. How soon will the nurse arrive !·
" Within the hour. The night nurse will
tea."
* r. Newington wrote out and signed
medical certificate to the effect that Lord
state of health demanded perfect qet
and that he was unable to see any one or
any questions. He read his own wri
very oarefully, then folded the paper ini
handed it to Luke.
"This," he said, "will make everything 
And I'll call again in a couple of hours'
won't forget the cook ?" 
"No, I won't forget the cook."
When the doctor had taken his leave,
..
'?/i



<pb n="141"/>
AND WHAT OF THE SECRET?             141
moment quietly in the library: he folded up the
l certificate which he had received at the hands
r. Newington and carefully put it away in his
et-book.
You won't forget the cook."
don't think that ever in his life before had Luke
the trivialities of life as he did at this moment.
ember that he was quite man of the world enough,
sufficiently sensible and shrewd and English,
have noticed that the degree of familiarity in
doctor's manner had passed the borderland of
t was due to himself; the tone of contemptuous
erence savoured of impertinence.  And there
something more than that.
Last night when Luke wandered up and down
sde the brilliantly lighted windows of the Danish
tion, trying to catch a few muffled sounds of
voice he so passionately loved to hear, he heard
first rumours that an awful crime had been com-
td which, for good or ill, would have such far-
hing bearings on his own future; but he had also
ht many hints, vague suggestions full of hidden
nsio, of which the burden was: "Seek whom the
e benefits."
Luke de Mountford was no fool. Men of his stamp
we are accustomed to call them commonplace-
e a very straight outlook on life. They are not
pered by the psychological problems which affect
moral balance of a certain olas of people of to-
y, they have no sexual problems to solve. Theirs
a steady, wholesome and clean life, and the mirrors



<pb n="142"/>
142           A TRUE WOMAN         A'
of nature have not been blurred by th6i
psychologists. Luke had. never troubled
about his neighbour's wife, about his ho
or anything that is his, therefore his vision
neighbour himself had remained acute.
Although I must admit that at this stage
that he might actually be accused of a low
crime never seriously entered his head, he
felt that suspicion hovered round him, 
people at any rate held it possible that sinoe
benefit by the crime, he might quite well
templated it.
The man Travers thought so certainly,
did not deem it impossible . . . and of c
would be others. 
No wonder that he stood and mused.
the aspect of life had changed for him. He
in that position from which the advent of
known cousin had ousted him so easily
who had come, had seen and had conque
thing needful: the confidence and help of
By what means he had succeeded indoi
been the great mystery which had racked L
ever since he felt his uncle's affection slip
from him.
Uncle Rad, who had loudly denounced t
an impostor and a blackmailer before he set'
him, was ready to give him love and co
moment he saw him; and Luke was di
old coat that no longer fitted. The affection 
was turned to indifference; and what meant



<pb n="143"/>
AND WHAT OF THE SECRET?             148
habits of a lifetime, were changed. Lord Radelyffe,
nnical and didactic, became a nonentity in his own
uehold. The grand seigneur, imbued with every in-
ct of luxury and refinement, became a snuffy old
it, uncared-for, not properly waited on, feeding
yand living in one room.
All this Philip de Mountford had accomplished en-
ly by his mere presence. The waving of a wand-
devil's wand-and the metamorphosis was complete I
at magic was there in the man himself ? what in
etale which he told ? what subtle charm did he
eld, that the news of his terrible death should strike
eold man down as some withered old tree robbed of
support ?
Now he lay dead, murdered! only God knew as yet
whom. People suspected Luke, because Fate had
en a fresh turn to her wheel and reinstated him in
the pleasing position from which the intruder had
sd him.
Luke de Mountford was once more heir-presumptive
o the Earldom of Radolyffe, and the stranger had
en the secret of his success with him to the grave.



<pb n="144"/>
CHAPTER XVIII
IT WOULD NOT DO, YOU KNO0      _
-QINCE Lord Radolyffe was too ill to
thing or to see any one, it devolved,!
to make what arrangements he thought
lying-in-state and the subsequent obs
murdered man. For the present Philip de
lay in the gloomy mortuary chamber of
police court. Luke had sent over
candelabra, flowers and palms, and all t
nalia pertaining to luxurious death. 
The dead man lay-not neglected-only?
and alone, surrounded by all the evid
wealth which he had come a very long way
which Fate and a murderer's hand had
appalling suddenness from him.      '
And in the private sitting-room at thei
Louisa Harris sat opposite her father at 
pile of morning papers beside her plate,
silent and absorbed.
"That's a queer tale," Colonel Harris
"the papers tell about that murder in
ago ... though I must say that to myq
appears some truth in what they say. 
think, Louisa ?"
144



<pb n="145"/>
IT WOULD NOT DO, YOU KNOW             145
I hardly know," she replied absently, "what to
" The details of that crime, which was committed
uta year ago, are exactly the same as those which
tto this infernal business of last night."
" Are they really ? "
No one could have said-and Louisa herself least of
why she was unwilling to speak on that subject.
e had never told her father, or any one, for a matter
that, except . . . that she had been so near to the
tual scene of that mysterious crime in Brussels, and
t she had known its every detail
"And I must say," reiterated Colonel Harris em-
tically, "that I agree with the leading article in
be Times. One crime begets another. If that hooli-
n-or whatever he was-in Brussels had not invented
new and dastardly way of murdering a man in a
b and then making himself scarce and sending the
b spinning on its way, no doubt Philip de Mountford
would be alive now. Not that that would be a matter
r great rejoicings. Still, a crime is a crime, and if we
were going to allow blackguards to be murdered all
ver the place by other blackguards, where would law
u4nd order be ? "
He was talking more loudly and volubly than was
his wont, and he took almost ostentatiously quantities
of food on his plate, which it was quite obvious he
never meant to eat. He also steadily avoided meeting
his daughter's eyes. But at this juncture she put both
elbows on the table, rested her chin in her hands, and
looked straight across at her father.
L



<pb n="146"/>
146           A TRUE WOMAN
" It's no use, dear," she said simply. 
"No use what ? " he queried, with
directness.
"No use your pretending to talk at rand
be eating a hearty breakfast, when your tho
just as much absorbed as mine are."
"H'm! " he grunted evasively, but was
to push aside the plateful of eggs and baoo
indeed, he had no desire to eat.
"You have," she continued gently, "read
papers, just as I have, and you know as welli
what to read between the lines when they
' clues' and of 'certain sensational developm
"Of course I do," he retorted gruffly; " b
nonsense."
" Of course it is. But worrying neverthel
" I don't see how such rubbish can worry yo
"Not," she said, " for myself. But for 
must have got an inkling by now of what
on."
"Of course he has. And if he has a grain
he'll treat it with the contempt it deserves." 
"It's all very well, father. But just 
moment. Place yourself in Luke's position. 
idea that you might be suspected, must in 
terrible."
"Not when you are innocent," he rejoined, 
absolute certitude of a man who has never been
upon to face any really serious problem in lif
shouldn't care what the rabble said about me,
a clear conscience."



<pb n="147"/>
IT WOULD NOT DO, YOU KNOW             147
Louisa was silent for a moment or two, then she
aid-
" Luke is different somehow. He has been different
lately."
" He has had a lot to put up with, with old Radelyffe
going off his head in that ridiculous way."
But Louisa did not reply to that suggestion. She
knew well enough that it was neither Lord Radelyffe's
unkindness, nor the arrogance of the new cousin that
had changed and softened Luke's entire nature.
The day that he had sat beside her on the stairs at
Lady Ducie's ball, the completeness of the change had
been fully borne in on her. When Luke said to her:
"I would give all I have in the world to lie on the
ground before you and to kiss the soles of your feet,"
she knew that Love had wrought its usual exquisite
miracle, the absorption of self by another, the utter
sinking of the ego before the high altar of the loved
one. She knew all that, but dear old Colonel Harris
had forgotten-perhaps he had never known.
That knowledge comes to so few nowadays. Life,
psychology, and sexual problems have taken the
place of the divine lesson which has glorified the world
since the birth of Lilith.
All that Louisa now remarked to her kind and
sensible father was-
" You know, dear, suspicion has killed a man before
now. It was but a very little while ago that a noble-
hearted gentleman preferred death to such dishonour."
"You've got your head," he retorted, "full of non-
sense, Loo. Try and be a sensible woman now, and



<pb n="148"/>
148           A TRUE WOMAN
think of it all quietly. Is there anythin
like me to do, for instance ? "
" Yes, if you will."
" What is it ? "
" Couldn't you see Uncle Ryder ? "
" At Scotland Yard, you mean ? "
"He is at the head of the Criminal 
Department, isn't he ? "
"I've always understood so."
" Would he see you, do you think ? at h
"Tom not see me ? " exclaimed Coo
"Of course he would. What do you want:
him about ? "
" He could tell you exactly how matters
regard to ... to Luke, couldn't he ?"
"He could. But would he ?"
"You can but try."
"It's a great pity your aunt is out of
might have heard a good deal from her."
"Oh ! Sir Thomas never tells aunt any
professional," said Louisa, with a smile. |'
for ever making muddles."
"I am sure she would," he assented,
conviction.
" Do you think I might go with you " ? .'
"What ? To Tom's ? I don't think he
that, Loo; and it wouldn't quite do, you
"Perhaps not," she agreed, with hardly
of disappointment. She was so accustomedS
to being thwarted by convention, wheneveri
carried her out of the bounds which the



<pb n="149"/>
IT WOULD NOT DO, YOU KNOW              149
bed. Moreover, she expected to see Luke soon.
would be sure to come directly after an early visit
Grosvenor Square.
helped her father on with his coat. She was
t satisfied that he should go.alone. She would
an hour with Luke, if he came early, and it was
eary that she should have him to herself, before
many people had shouted evil and good news,
ratulations, opprobrium, and suspicions at him.
Colonel Harris, she knew, would get quite as much,
not more, information out of his brother-in-law, Sir
oma  Ryder, than he could do if she-a mere
nan--happened to be present at the interview.
Thomas would trust Colonel Harris with pro-
onal matters which he never would confide to a
kman, and Louisa trusted her father implicitly.
She knew that-despite the grumblings and crusti-
peculiar to every Englishman when he is troubled
th domestic matters whilst sitting at his own break-
table-her father had Luke's welfare just as much
heart as she had herself.



<pb n="150"/>
CHAPTER XIX
NOT ALL ABOUT IT 
OLONEL HARRIS sent in his card !
Thomas Ryder. He had driven over
Langham in a hansom-holding taxi-cabs 
more whole-hearted abhorrence than befo
inquired at once if Sir Thomas was in his
sanctum, and if so whether he might see him.
Curiously enough the Chief, usually quite
sible to the casual visitor-whether relative ofj
ger-received his brother-in-law immediately. i
"Hello, Will," he said by way of greetin
way Englishmen have of saying that they areH
to see one another.
"Hello!" responded Colonel Harris in 
eloquent tone.
And the two old boys shook hands.
Sir Thomas then resumed his official chair 
his huge desk and motioned his brother-in-law 
arm-chair close by.
"Have a cigar," said the host.
"Thanks," rejoined the other.
The box was handed across, a havana seleo
The cigars were lighted, and for quite three
the two men smoked in silence. One of th
150



<pb n="151"/>
NOT ALL ABOUT IT               151
ome here to find out how much of his daughter's
happiness lay in jeopardy, the other knew what was
in the balance, the danger of his niece's happiness,
the terrible abyss of misery which yawned at her
feet.
But both sat there and enjoyed their cigar. They
were dressed with scrupulous care, in the uniform
prescribed by the world in which they lived as being
suitable for gentlemen of their position and of their
age: frock-coats and dark grey trousers, immaculate
collar and tie with pearl pin. Both wore a seal ring
on the little finger of the left hand, and a watch chain
of early Victorian design. They might be twins but
for their faces . . . convention had put a livery on
them which they would on no account have dis-
carded.
But the faces were very different. Colonel Harris
carried his sixty years as easily as if they had been
forty. There were not many lines on his round,
E chubby face, with its red cheeks and round, childlike
eyes. The heavy cavalry moustache-once auburn,
now almost white-hid the expression of the mouth,
but one felt, judging by the eyes and the smooth fore-
head which continued very far now on to the back of
his head, that if one were allowed a peep below that
walrus-like face adornment that one would see a mouth
that was kind and none too firm, the mouth of a man
who had led other men perhaps, but who had invariably
been led by his womenfolk.
Now Sir Thomas Ryder was-or rather is, for he is
still in perfect health and full vigour--   very different



<pb n="152"/>
152           A TRUE WOMAN        '      _!
type of man. You have no doubt soM  j
town, for he takes a constitutional in the
day on his way to his work, and he goes to4
nights at the theatres, and if so you will 
the keen, sharp face, the closely set eyes, 
mouth free from moustache or beard: 
furrowed all over, especially round the ey
does not look old-that is because of t he'
they form a wonderful network round his e
them an expression of perpetual keen 
The hair is pale in colour-not white, bI
and scanty. Sir Thomas wears it carefull!
across the top of his head, with a parting o
side.
He has a trick when he is thinking deeply 
his hand-which is white, slender, and tap
that scanty covering of what,-but for it,
a bald cranium.
Some people said that Sir Thomas RydG
man without any sentiment, others that 
slave to red tape; but no one denied the 
vertible fact that he was the right man in 
place.                                 '
He looked the part and always acted it, 
blunders had undoubtedly been committedi,
detective department of the Metropolitaa
since Sir Thomas Ryder took the guiding 
his hands.
" I suppose," he said at last, " that you've 
see me about this de Mountford business. "
"I have," replied Colonel Harris simply. 



<pb n="153"/>
NOT ALL ABOUT IT               158
" Well! it's not a pleasant business."
"I know that. The papers are full of it, and it's all
confounded damnable business, Tom, and that's all
ut it."
"Unfortunately it's not 'all about it,"' rejoined
Thomas dryly.
"That's what Louisa says. Women are so queer
ut things of that sort, and the papers are full of
ddle. She is anxious about Luke."
"I don't wonder."
"But it's all nonsense, isn't it "
"What is ?"
Colonel Harris did not reply immediately; for one
.thing he did not know exactly how to put his own
fears and anxieties into words. They were so horrible
and so far-fetched that to tell them plainly and baldly
to his brother-in-law, to this man with whom he was
soberly smoking a cigar in a sober-looking office,
whilst hansoms and taxi-cabs were rattling past in
the street below within sight and hearing, seemed
little short of idiocy. He was not a man of deep pene-
tration-was Colonel Harris-no great reader of
thoughts or of character. He tried to look keenly
at Sir Thomas's shrewd face, but all he was conscious
of was a network of wrinkles round a pair of eyes-which
seemed to be twinkling with humour.
Humour at this moment! Great heavens above!
" I wish," he blurted out somewhat crossly at last,
"you'd help me out a bit, Tom. Hang it all, man,
all this officialism makes me dumb."
"Don't," said Sir Thomas blandly, "let it do that,



<pb n="154"/>
154           A TRUE WOMAN .
Will"; and the speaker's eyes seemed to 
more merrily than before.
"Well then, tell me something about L
"Luke de Mountford," mused the other,
name recalled some distant impression. .
"Yes, Luke de Mountford, who is ed
Louisa, your niece, man, and she's b
heart with all the drivel these newspapers  _
I couldn't bear it any longer, so I've come
Tom, and you must tell me what truth there i
drivel, and that's all I want to know."
Sir Thomas Ryder seemed, whilst the o
talked volubly, to have suddenly made up
to say more than had originally been his in  *
Anyway, he now said with abrupt directnes
" If, my good Will, by 'drivel' you mean 
the matter of the assassination of Philip de Mo
in a taxi-cab last night, grave suspicion rests
cousin Luke, then there's a great deal of truth 
drivel." 
Colonel Harris received the sudden blow 
much apparent emotion. He had been sitting 
arm-chair with one hand buried in his trouser-
the other holding the cigar.
Now he merely glanced down at the cigar
moment and then conveyed it to his lips.
" What," he asked, " does that mean exactly ?T
"That unless Luke de Mountford will within
next forty-eight hours answer certain questions 
satisfactorily than he has done hitherto, he wi
arrested on a charge of murder."
''.



<pb n="155"/>
NOT ALL ABOUT IT               155
'TThat is impossible," protested Colonel Harris
" Impossible? Why?"
Because .. . because .. . Hang it all, man! you
o Luke de Mountford. Do you believe for a mo-
et that he would commit such a dastardly crime ?
y, the boy wouldn't know how to plan such vil-
liny, let alone carry it through."
"My dear Will," rejoined the other quietly, "the
many years that I have spent at this desk have
taught me many things. Among others I have learnt
that every man is more or less capable of crime, it only
depends what the incentive-the temptation if you
like to call it so-or the provocation happens to
be."
"But here there was no provocation, no tempta-
tion, no . . ." Colonel Harris paused abruptly. He
felt rather than saw his brother-in-law's eyes in their
framework of wrinkles resting with obvious sense
of amusement upon his wrathful face. No temptation ?
and what of a peerage and a fortune lost, that could
only be regained by the death of the intruder ? No
provocation, and what of the brother and sister
turned out of the old home ? The good, simple-minded
man had sense enough to see that here-if he wished
to speak up for Luke-he was on the wrong track.
"What questions," he said abruptly, "does Luke
not answer satisfactorily ? "
"How he spent certain hours of yesterday even-
ing."
" He was dancing attendance on Louisa and me."



<pb n="156"/>
156           A TRUE WOMAN
"Oh ! was he? Well, that'sati
At what time did you part from him t " 
"Well! he escorted us to the Danish    i^
where we were dining."
"At what time was that ? "
"Eight o'clock dinner."
" But he was not dining at the Danish
"No. He came and fetched us again 
eleven." 
"That's right, but between whiles ?" 
"Between whiles "        '
"Yes. Between eight and soon after eli
"Well! . . .I suppose   . . I don't
Yes, of course I do! what a stupid ass I.
Luke told me himself that he was going to see
at the Something Club in Shaftesbury AvenuO
"The Veterans' ?                    ,
" Yes, that's it ... the Veterans'. Lukeo
to persuade old Radolyffe to go abroad for 
of his health . . . Algeciras-that was it. . 
" Quite so," rejoined Sir Thomas dryly, 
de Mountford went to the Veterans' Club inL
bury Avenue, and he asked to see Lord
who was more or less of an habitu6 at that
being told that Lord Radolyffe was not
evening, but that Mr. de Mountford was in the 
room, Luke elected to go in and presumably taoI
talk with his cousin."
"I didn't know that," said Colonel Harris. 
"No. But we did. Let me tell you whatf
The hall-porter of the Club showed Luke



<pb n="157"/>
F       NOT ALL ABOUT IT               157
okiung-room, and less than five minutes later he
dloud and angry words proceeding from that room.
t a quarrel was going on between the two cousins
, of course, obvious. One or two members of the
lub remarked on the noise, and one gentleman
tually opened the smoking-room door to see what
was going on. He seems to have heard the words
'blackguard' and 'beggar' pleasingly intermingled
and flying from one young man to the other. This
witness knew Philip de Mountford very well by sight,
but he had never seen Luke. But remember that
Luke denies neither the interview nor the quarrel.
The former lasted close on an hour, and Lord Rad-
olyffe's journey to Algeciras was the original topic
of discussion. At about nine o'clock Luke emerged
from the smoking-room. The hall-porter saw him.
He was then very pale, and almost tottered as he
walked. Men do get at times intoxicated with rage,
you know, Will."
"I know that, and I can well imagine what hap-
pened at that interview. Radclyfe had become such
a confounded fool that he would not move or do any,
thing without this Philip's permission: and Luke was
determined to get him down to Algeciras at once.
As Philip was at the Club, he thought that he would
tackle him then and there."
"Quite so. He did tackle him. And equally of
course the two men quarrelled."
"But hang it all, one's not going to murder every
man with whom one quarrels."
"Stop a moment, Will. As you say, one does not



<pb n="158"/>
158           A TRUE WOMAN 
murder every man with whom one quarrels. 
must admit that this is altogether an exoept
There was more than a mere quarrel betw
two men. There was deadly enmity.. 
enmity, I'll own, on Luke's side. ... We ha
come across-it was not very difficult-two t
of the servants who were in Lord Radoly
before Luke and his brother and sister w
turned out of it. They all have tales to 
terrible rows which used to go on in thehow
the cousins. You, Will, must know how 
this Philip de Mountford." 
Again Colonel Harris was silent. What
use of denying such an obvious truth?            -
" You wanted," continued the other mas
"to hear the truth, Will, and you've gotI
Louisa's sake, for all our sakes in fact, I 
my mind to tell you all ... or most . .
officially known to me at this moment. 
get Louisa out of town at once-take h
if you can, and keep English newspapers i
her."
"She won't come," said Colonel Harris
"Oh, yes she will, if you put it the right l
Which saying on the part of the acute o°
Criminal Investigation Department was but
proof-if indeed such proofs were still n
days-of how little clever men know of o
women.
"The case will be extremely unpleasat,'I
Sir Thomas, who was quite unconscious of thb



<pb n="159"/>
NOT ALL ABOUT IT               159
ih he had just displayed. "It will be hateful for
,and quite impossible for Louisa."
Always supposing," retorted the other, "that
e is guilty, which neither I nor Louisa will admit
a moment."
' That," rejoined Sir Thomas, "is as you please."
He put down his cigar, crossed one leg over the
er, leaned back in his chair, and folded his tapering
ds together, putting finger to finger, with the
ture of one who is dealing with a youthful mind,
d has much to explain.
"Look here," Will, he resumed, "I have three men
ding in my outer office at the present moment.
o of them have come back after having questioned
e past servants of the Grosvenor Square household.
ere was the butler Parker, and an elderly house-
per, both of whom are in service in the West End.
e woman tried to screen Luke and to make light
the many quarrels which broke out between the
uins on all possible occasions: but she broke down
der our fellows' sharp questions. She had to admit
at the arrogance of the one man often drove the
other to unguarded language, and that she had on
ore than one occasion heard the men servants of
the house say that they would not be astonished if
fmurder ensued one day. Well, we have these two
Witnesses, and can easily get hold of the two or three
footmen who expressed those particular views. So
Imuch for the past six months. Now for last night.
The third man who is out there waiting for me to
mfe him is Frederick Power, hall-porter at the Veterans'



<pb n="160"/>
160           A TRUE WOMAN          .
Club. The story which he told to oor
is so important in its minutest detail;
decided to question him myself so that I
no possible loophole to doubt or to ina
re-telling. I am going to send for the
You come and sit round here, the other
desk; from this position you will be ab
the man's face, as well as hear what he
say. Now, would you like that ?" 
"Right you are, Tom," was Colonel
method of acknowledging his brother-i
ness, in thus breaking a piece of red tape,
aside a very strict official rule. He did as
directed, and sat down in the recess behind
desk, in a comfortable arm-chair with
the curtained window.
He would not acknowledge even to 
deeply stirred he was by all that he had
now by the anticipation of what was yet
Emotion-like he was experiencing now
come his way before. He had lost his
on the Modder River... that had been
an acute kind; he had laid a much-loved 
in the village churchyard close to his s
in Kent, and he had escorted his late be
reign to her last resting-place on that 
forgotten day close on eight years ago n
three events in his life had been the great
which his nerves and sensibilities had been
in the past.
But this was altogether different. The



<pb n="161"/>
NOT ALL ABOUT IT               161
ich the good man experienced were such that he
ly knew them himself; he had faced sorrow
ore, never dishonour-some one else's dishonour,
course, still it touched him very nearly, for, though
might not be a very keen observer, he dearly
ehis daughter, and dishonour seemed to be
uching her, striking at her through Luke.
?'



<pb n="162"/>
CHAPTER XX
AND THAT'S THM TRUTH
FIREDERICK POWER was shown in.
I won't have you think that there was
remarkable about the man, or anything that
even momentarily-distinguish him from 
of other hall-porters, who wear an uniform 
cap, have the air of having seen military
and wear a couple of medals on a we
chest.
He was perfectly respectful, all the m
cause Sir Thomas was General Sir Tho
K.O.B.-a fact which impressed the ex
more than any other exalted title, non-
character, would have done.
He saluted and stood at attention, and ais
answer to Sir Thomas's preliminary questions
rang out clear and direct, obviously trut
echoing in the barrack-yard at six o'clock of'
spring morning.
"Your name is . . ?"
"Frederick Power, sir."
"You are hall-porter at the Veterans'
Shaftesbury Avenue ? "
162



<pb n="163"/>
!:     AND THAT'S THE TRUTH               16
" Yes, sir."
"You were in the lobby of the Club last night as
sual ? "
"Yes, sir."
"And Mr. Philip de Mountford, who is a member
of the Club, was in the smoking-room at eight o'clock
yesterday evening ?"
"Yes, sir."
"He came almost every evening, I understand "
"That's right, sir."
"Alone mostly ? "
"Not often, sir. Lord Radclyffe was with him most
evenings,"
"And Lord Radolyffe and Mr. de Mountford dined
together on those oooasions in the Club dining-
room   I "
"Yes, sir."
"But last night Mr. de Mountford was alone ? "
"Yes, sir He had some dinner at about half-past
s even and then he went to the smoking-room."
"Later on a gentleman called to see him ? "
"That's right, sir.  It was about quarter-past
eight. The gentleman asked to see Lord Radolyffe,
but I said that 'is lordship 'adn't come to the Club
this night. Then the gentleman asked if Mr. de
1Mountford was in, and I said yes."
"And you showed him into the smoking-room ?"
"I told 'im he would find Mr. de Mountford in the
smoking-room: yes, sir."
"Isn't that rather against Club rules to allow
strangers to walk in and out of the rooms ?"
i~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="164"/>
164           A TRUE WOMAN         i'
"Well, sir, the Veterans' is a new Club;
the committee ain't very partik'lar."
"I see." 
So far the questions and answers had f
one another in quick succession. Sir Tho
with his clever lean head held somewhat on 
appeared to be reciting a well-learned less1ci
and placid was the tone of his voice and so
the expression of his furrowed face. One
crossed over the other and his tapering 
and wrinkled like his face, toyed with a 
paper knife hardly whiter in colour than they.
He had not told Frederick Power to sit
he might have done in the case of a witness 
a civilian. He preferred to keep the man 
and at attention, confident that he would 
clearer and sharper replies. 
"Well, then," he resumed after a brief
during which he had modified his position
but had not varied the placid expression of ]
" you told the visitor that he would find Mr. d
ford in the smoking-room. What hap
that ?" 
"The gentleman walked in, sir. And he 
door, sir, after 'im."
"Did you hear anything that went on
room ? " 
"No, sir. I didn't pay no attention at first,
"Then afterwards?  After a while, you
attention, didn't you ?"              GI
"Yes, sir, I did. The door of the ski



<pb n="165"/>
AND THAT'S THE TRUTH             165
quite close to the entrance, sir, and presently I
loud voices like as if the two gentlemen was
"Did you hear what was said "
"No, sir, not the words. But the voices they
ounded awful. And one other gentleman 'e come
ong from  the dining-room, and asked me what
te noise was about. There ain't many members not
^t the Veterans', sir, and being a foggy night we
was partik'lar quiet. But this gentleman 'e was
curious about the noise, so 'e just opened the smoking-
room door and peeped in, and then I did 'ear a few
words."
"What were they  "
" Abuse, sir, mostly. One gentleman was goin' on
awful, but I couldn't rightly say which one it was. I
'eard the words 'beggar' and 'lazy, idling, good-for-
nothing,' but I couldn't rightly say 'oo said 'em."
"How long did this go on ? "
"Oh! a long time, sir; I couldn't say for sure.
After a bit it got quiet in the smoking-room. And at
about nine o'clock or soon after, the visitor come away,
and 'e asked me for a light."
"What did he seem like then  "
"I thought he'd been drinking, sir. His face was
queer, and pale and moist-like, and his 'and shook
like anything when he lighted 'is cigarette."
" Mr. de Mountford did not come out with him  "
"No, sir, not just then, but 'e come out of the
Imoking-room  a moment or two later, whilst 'is
visitor was still in the 'all. Mr. de Mountford 'e was



<pb n="166"/>
166           A TRUE WOMAN' i               _
quite alm, sir, didn't look at all as if 
a quarrel He'd his cigar between his lipsl 
and 'is overcoat over 'is arm."
"Did he speak to the visitor then ?" :i
"Not right away, sir. 'E seemed to 
like at first, then he came forward and 'e 
going back to Grosvenor Square now;
like to see Uncle Rad about this b
But I warn you that he is of the same 
ief.' 
"And what did the other gentleman say
"'E just kind o' laughed and shrugged .I.
and said: 'I've no doubt of that.'" 
"Then after that did they agree to go to
Square together ? "
"I don't rightly know, sir, if the two
mid anything about that, but the visitor 'e .
first, and Mr. de Mountford followed 'im into
lobby. Then 'e turned and spoke to me." '
" Who did ?"
"Mr. de Mountford, sir; the other gentle
a yard away from 'im and must 'ave 'eard 
'e said."
"What did he say ? "
"'E said to me: 'Power, I say, you've n2
to allow people to enter the Club rooms
You must keep them waiting in the hall: '
get hopelessly pestered by beggars at 
Them were Mr. de Mountford's very w
take my Bible oath to every one of 'em, and
gentleman 'e was in the outer lobby, sir, mi



<pb n="167"/>
^f     AND THAT'S THE TRUTH              167
ve 'eard every syllable. I caught sight of 'is face,
, my word, there was murder in his eye."
" That'll do, Power," admonished Sir Thomas, thus
hecking the man's flow of excited eloquence.
"Very good, sir," replied the other humbly.
i "And after that what happened ? "
"Both gentlemen went off, sir. I tried to look
after them, but the fog was that thick one couldn't
see one's 'and before one's eyes."
"So you lost sight of them just outside the Club
house ? "
"That's right, sir."
"And did you see either of these two gentlemen
since then ?"
"No, sir."  And the man's voice dropped to a
solemn whisper. "Mr. de Mountford was murdered
in a taxi-cab, sir ... must 'ave been soon after 'e
left the Club."
"Very soon, I should say. But the other ?"
" I saw the other gentleman this morning, sir."
" Where ?"
"Mr. Travers from the police, sir, 'e called to see
me at the Club, and 'e took me in a taxi-cab to Gros-
venor Square, and told the shoffer, sir, to pull up by
the kerb on the garden side. Then 'e told me to
watch a partik'lar 'ouse opposite and see 'oo was
goin' in or out. I didn't 'arf like it, sir, because I'm
not supposed to absent myself for very long of a
morning, though the committee ain't very partik'lar.
But Mr. Travers 'e was of the police, sir, so I thought
it was right to do as 'e told me."



<pb n="168"/>
168           A TRUE WOMAN
" Quite right. And what did you see ?"  i
" Nothing much for close on an hour, sir: a
drew up to the door of the house and an elder
man got out. Mr. Travers told me that it
doctor. 'E rang the bell and went into 
Then after a bit 'oo did I see walking down
and straight up to the front door of the
'ouse I'd been told to look at, but Mr. de M
visitor of last night."
"You recognized him ? "
"Couldn't mistake 'im, sir."
"Did you call Mr. Travers' attention to
"Yes, sir. I told 'imn that was the gentle
had an awful quarrel with Mr. Philip de M
at the Club last night."
"That's all, Power. I won't trouble you
now."
" No trouble, sir."
" Your position at the Club is a permanent o
" Yes, sir.")
" You are always to be found there ?"
" Always, sir, whenever you want me."
"Well! send a line to the Chief Superite
Scotland Yard in case your plans get suddenly
and you are no longer to be found at the Club.
"Not likely, sir. Thank you, sir. Good
ing.i
" Good morning."
Sir Thomas touched the electric button in
behind him, and a man in dark blue uniform a
Frederick Power was dismissed. He salu



<pb n="169"/>
AND THATS THE TRUTH              169
tiemen, and, turning on his heel in proper military
on, he marched out of the room, obviously de-
ted with his own importance and with the ad-
venture which varied so pleasantly the monotonous
v  ess of his existence.



<pb n="170"/>
CHAPTER    XXI
HAVE ANOTHER CIGAB
"W   ELL, William, what do you think el
vT The two men had sat in silence 
considerable time after Frederick Power
out of the room. Colonel Harris, buried in
in no hurry to talk things over. Sir Tho
a very busy man-was the more impatient 
"I must tell you," he said, seeing that
in-law seemed disinclined to speak, "thati
Travers, as soon as Power had pointed
him, went and rang the bell at Radolyffe's
quickly enough established beyond a doubt
man who had just entered it was Mr. Luke
ford. I tell you this now, so as to disabuse
once and for all in case you should imagine
might be a case of mistaken identity. Mo
yourself know and have admitted to me t
intention was to seek out his uncle and his 
the Veterans' Club, after he parted from you 
o'clock last night."
"Yes," said Colonel Harris, "I know that
not thinking of mistaken identity."  M
"You," rejoined the other, "were thinking 
and so am I. I have thought little of any one
170



<pb n="171"/>
HAVE ANOTHER CIGAR                  171
the crime was reported to me last night. And
before Travers gleaned the outlines of the story
ioh Power has just amplified for us, I vaguely
dat the broad lines of it. Now that I know it in
its details, I can see the whole scene in the lobby of
Veterans' Club before me. You may believe me
not as you like, but as a matter of fact I know quite
good deal about Luke de Mountford. I have often
t him, of oourse, and though we have never been
ry intimate-for I am a busy man and have but little
for intimacy with my fellow-men-I have had
n y opportunities of studying him. He has a very
rious power of self-control-almost an abnormal
e, I call it, and a morbid hatred of public soenes or
andal. This, of course, he shares with a great many
en of his class, and his self-control is all the more
remarkable as he is not by any means the impassive
young man about town which he pretends to be.
Well! that same power, I suppose, stood him in good
stead in the lobby of the Veterans' Club. In Power's
picturesque parlance 'there was murder in his eye.'
Of course, he had been provoked beyond the bounds
of endurance, and if he had rushed at Philip de Mount-
ford and strangled him then and there, no one would
have been astonished.  I should," oontinued Sir
Thomas, with emphasis, "because it would not have
been like the Luke whom I had studied. The picture
of two gentlemen at fisticuffs like a pair of navvies
would not have been an edifying one, and Luke--as
I know him-would, above all, wish not to make a
spectacle of himself before the hall-porter or before



<pb n="172"/>
172           A TRUE WOMAN
a crowd in the ante-room of a second-rate
naturally-for that sort of thing beoe
nature-pulled himself together and walked'
the street."
You must not think for a moment that 
Ryder was habitually a talkative man.
of his class and type are rarely talkative,
Thomas's position and occupation had rendS
less communicative than most. But Colon
and he had been brother officers, friends lI
family ties were closely knit by marriage, an
sidered the present crisis a very serious one.
He had had enough to do with crime in the
years since he had obtained the interesting 
he now occupied, but never with a crime which 
him personally as this one did. Luke de MG
was, of course, nothing to him, except in o
with Louisa Harris. But this was a strong tie. 
was his own wife's niece; she was the daugh
friend, of a brother officer. No one who is not
manner or other in touch with military men,
the slightest idea of how much those two m
mean: "brother officer "; what magnetis
them; what appeal they make to all that 
loyal, most willing, most helpful in a man.
Sir Thomas felt that the mud of irretrieva
grace which was bound to smirch Luke de Mo
would in no small measure redound on Lo
Instinctively, too, all his sensibilities recoiled
the idea of a gentleman, one of his own caste,
dragged in this peculiarly loathsome mire. It



<pb n="173"/>
HAVE ANOTHER CIGAR               17,
osible that that type of man should commit a
der ... a murder   just an ordinary, brutal,
Mnonplace murder such as the rough-and-tumble
of humanity commit when under the stress of
arpassions: greed, avarice, jealousy. It was this
xaposition of the mean and sordid against his own
that revolted Sir Thomas Ryder. He was loyal
his brother officer in his endeavour to induce him
keep out of all that mud which would be scattered
round presently, when the papers came out with
eir sensational headlines, but he was also-perhaps
ore so-loyal to his caste; his was the esprit de corps
only of militarism, but of birth and breeding. He
ould not-if he could-have a gentleman held up to
pprobrium, and if this could be avoided by the un-
kortunate criminal's fight from  justice, well! Sir
Thomas was ready and willing to take upon his
*boulders the burden of contempt and ridicule which
the Press and the general public would presently be
hurling at him and at his Department for their hopeless
incompetence in allowing a murderer to escape.
Therefore he was putting the case against Luke more
learly and with a greater wealth of detail before his
brother-in-law than the conscientious discharge of
duty should have allowed. In fact, we see Sir Thomas
Ryder-a hard disciplinarian, a hide and tape-bound
official-freely transgressing the most elementary
rules which duty prescribes. He was sitting in his
private office with his brother-in-law, giving away
secrets that belonged not to him,but to his Department:
Conniving, through the words which he spoke, at the



<pb n="174"/>
174           A TRUE WOMAN         '
fleeing from justice of a criminal who bea
him, but to the State. 
He was making the case against Luke de i
to appear as black as it was in effect, so
Harris and Louisa might take fright and
unfortunate man to realize his danger in
shrink from facing the oonsequenoes of his
deed
But Colonel Harris-with the obstina
who throughout life have never led, but
ruled-would not see the case through his
law's spectacles. He clung to his own 
the possibility of Luke de Mountford's guie
haved quite unconsciously just as Louisa
wished him to behave, had she been pr
prompt him.
To Sir Thomas's most convincing expos6 oel
tion he lent an attentive ear, but the 
shoulders when the other man paused to
was in itself a testimony of loyalty to Luke'sl
"Hang it all, man," he said, "you are
to sit there and tell me that Luke de Mou
man whom I myself would have chosen as a
had Loo not forestalled me-that Luke wo
a deliberate murder. In the name of oo
Tom ! why it's unthinkable. Do you mean to
you actually believe that Luke, after he left
forsaken Club, joined his cousin again as if 
happened; that he got into a taxi-cab with
poked him through the neck whilst the man
another way?"



<pb n="175"/>
HAVE ANOTHER CIGAR              175
"Roughly speaking," assented Sir Thomas, "I
ee that that's what happened."
And you call yourself a shrewd detective !" ex-
ed Colonel Harris hotly; "and you hold the
of men practically in the hollow of your hand I
y, man ! have you forgotten one thing," he con-
ued, his gruff voice assuming a note of triumph,
the most important in all this damnable business ? "
"What have I forgotten, Will ?" asked the other,
t at all ruffled by the gallant Colonel's sudden tone
contempt.
"The weapon, Tom! "
" I haven't forgotten the weapon," rejoined Sir
homas calmly.,
" Oh yes ! you have ! Do you mean to tell me that
e de Mountford habitually walks about the streets
London with an Italian stiletto in his trousers
ket ? for I am told that it was with a thing of that
that the murder was committed, Or, according
you, did Luke escort Louisa to a dinner-party with
the avowed intention at the back of his mind of com-
tting a murder later on if occasion offered ? Did
bring an Italian stiletto from home when he came to
et his fiancee at the Langham Hotel, or did he buy
l ie on the way to the Veterans' Club ? Whioh of these
ock-and-bull theories do you hold, Tom ? "
"Neither," admitted Sir Thomas, with a placid
While.
' Then," concluded Colonel Harris contemptuously,
you think that Luke was-as I said-in the habit of
tarrying an Italian stiletto in his trousers pocket "



<pb n="176"/>
176           A TRUE WOMAN
"No," rejoined the other, still unruffled
know that Luke de Mountford is in the habit
ing a snake-wood walking-stick, which he om
years ago-somewhere abroad, and the top
contains a short pointed dagger which fits into
of the stick. And what's more, you know
too, Will; you have often seen it. Are you,
to swear that Luke hadn't it with him last
" He hadn't it with him."
" You are prepared to swear to that " 
the other earnestly.
Colonel Harris was silent. For the first
the beginning of this long interview he felt al
blood in his body was receding back to his hear
it to beat so wildly that he thought it was
choke him. -The colour fled from his cheeks,
cigar dropped from between nerveless
as lightning a recollection came back to him
of Luke entering the sitting-room of the
Hotel, with his coat on and his hat and sti
left hand.
But he would not give in even now-not,
paltry surmises. Any number of men he kne
sticks that contained weapons of self-def
himself possessed a very murderous-lookin
stick, which he had once bought in Paris.
down this oncoming attack of weakness, an
himself severely for it too. It savoured of di
Louisa and to Luke. He stooped and picked
up, and looked his brother-in-law boldly in 
" I wouldn't," he said, " swear either way,
I



<pb n="177"/>
HAVE ANOTHER CIGAR               177
had his stick with him last night or not. I know
stick, of course. I have got one very like it my-
, So have I," rejoined Sir Thomas, with his placid
" And if that's one of the proofs on which you are
ing to accuse my future son-in-law of having com-
~uitted a murder, then all I can say is, Tom, that you
and I are seeing the last of one another to-day."
But Sir Thomas took this threat, as he had taken
Colonel Harris's undisguised expressions of contempt,
with perfect equanimity.
"If," he said quietly, " I did accuse Luke de Mount-
ford or any other man of murder on such paltry
grounds as that, Will, you would-be perfectly justified
in turning your back on me, if for no other reason than
that I should then be an incompetent ass."
" Well ! what more is there then ? "
" Only this, Will. That the stick which you have
so often seen in Luke de Mountford's hand, was found
this morning inside the railings of Green Park; it
bears unmistakable signs of the use to which it was
put last night."
" You mean . . . that it was stained . . . "
How long a time elapsed between the beginning of
that query and its last words Colonel Harris could not
-ay. The uttering of the words was a terrible effort.
They seemed to choke him ere they reached his lips.
buzzing and singing filled his ears so that he did not
hear Sir Thomas's reply; but through a strange veil
which half obscured his vision he saw his brother-in-
N



<pb n="178"/>
178           A TRUE WOMAN
law's slow nod of affirmation. For the first i
life, the man who had fought against na
in the swamps or sands of Africa, who had
unflinching-the news of the death of his only 
himself totally unnerved. He heard as in a
hum of the busy city in the street below,
omnibuses rattling along the road, the ories 
vendors or hawkers, the bustle of humdrum
life; and through it the ticking of his own 
waistcoat pocket.                     -
He remembered afterwards how strangely
impressed him: that he could hear the tie
own watch. He had never been consci
of such an acute sense of hearing. And yet t
and singing in his ears went on. And he was
painfully consoious of silly, trivial things-
of his watch which obsessed him, the irre
the design of the wall-paper, the broken
inkstand on Sir Thomas's desk.
The great, all-important fact had escaped
tarily from his consciousness. He forgot
de Mountford had been murdered, and 
stick, blood-stained and damning, had 
inside the railings of the Park.
A cycle of time went by-an eternity, or
seconds. Sir Thomas Ryder pulled open i
drawer of his monumental desk.
Colonel Harris watched him doing it, and 
Sir Thomas took a certain Something fron.
drawer, the Colonel knew what that o
be.



<pb n="179"/>
HAVE ANOTHER CIGAR               179
A familiar thing enough. The Colonel had seen it
ver and over again in Luke de Mountford's hand.
slender stick of rich-looking, dark wood, only very
little thicker at the top than at the base, and with a
lver band about six inches from the top. On the
band the initials "L. d. M." daintily engraved.
"Put it away, Tom, for God's sake "  Colonel
Harris hardly recognized his own voice; he had spoken
more from a sudden instinct of shrinking from loath-
some objects than from any real will of his own. One
glance at the stick had been enough. It was thickly
,coated with mud, and about six inches from the top,
there where the silver band showed a deep dark cleft
between it and the length of the stick, there were other
stains-obvious stains of blood.
Yet Colonel Harris had seen worse sights than this
in Zululand, and at Omdurman. But on this stained
stick, that discoloured silver band, he felt it impossible
to look.
" I have broken it to you, Will, as gently as I could,"
said Sir Thomas, not quite as placidly as before. He
too was not unmoved by the distress of his old friend.
s You see that I have no option but to tell you all.
You must keep out of all this, old man, and above all
you must keep Louisa out of it. Take her abroad,
Will, as soon as you can."
"She won't go I " murmured the father dully.
"Nonsense I "
"She won't go," he reiterated. " She has given her
heart to Luke."
" She'll soon forget him."



<pb n="180"/>
180           A TRUE WOMAN
"Not she!"
" And she'll be horrified . . . when she
"She'll not believe it."
" If he is wise, he'll plead guilty .... His
will advise him to do that.... It is
chance ..."
" His one chance ? " queried the other va
"Of escaping the gallows.... If be pl
-many extenuating circumstances will be
. . his own spotless reputation . . . and al
provocation ... he'll get a life sentence,
perhaps. .."
But with a loud oath, the most forcible o
ever uttered in his life, Colonel Harris had
to his feet and brought a heavy fist crah
upon the table.
"And by the living God, Tom," he
not believe it. No! not for all your witn
your cross-questionings, and your damnable 
No   I'll not believe it, and I know that my
not believe it either . . . not until we hear
'guilty' spoken by Luke's own lips. And
leave London, we'll not go abroad, we'll 
Luke; for I swear by God! that I don't 
he is an assassin."
Men who have always been accounted w
have moments of unexpected strength.
Harris now seemed to tower morally and
over his brother-in-law. The passion of lo
in him and caused his eyes to sparkle and
to glow, The oath he uttered, he spoke with



<pb n="181"/>
HAVE ANOTHER CIGAR               181
there would be no faltering, no wavering in his defence
of Luke.
Sir Thomas waited a minute or two, allowing his
old friend to recover his normal self-control as well
as his breath, which was coming and going in quick
gasps. Then he said quietly-
As you will, old man. Have another cigar."
,.



<pb n="182"/>
CHAPTER XXII
THEN THE MIBAOLI  WAS WROUGH
W"HEN     Colonel Harris once more arrived
Lngham    he found Luke and Lo
fortably installed in front of the fire in the
sitting-room upstairs. She was leaning back
the cushions, her head resting in her hand, 
foot of the sofa, his hands encircling one knee
now and then into the fire, now and then
faoe.
Not troubled creatures these, not man andt
fighting a battle against life, against the 
honour, for peace and for love, not souls 
painful memories of the past or grim
future I only two very ordinary human e
a life behind them  of serene contentm
duties worthily performed, a smooth lake w
a ripple of sorrow or disgrace ever dared to
shiny surface.
And the ruling passion, strong in death, was
still in face of this new life to be led: the 
morrow, full of the unknown, the ugly, the
mean, full of nameless dangers, and of po
grace. The puppets were still dancing, 
the invisible strings held by the hand of the i
182     ,



<pb n="183"/>
THEN THE MIRACLE WAS WROUGHT            188
giant called Convention: they danced even as though
no gaping or ravenous lions, no Bulls of Bashan were
there to see. Even before one another they hid the
secret mysteries of their heart, he his overwhelming
passion for her, she her dread for his immediate
future.
They had not forborne to talk of Philip de Mount-
ford's death, they would not have admitted that there
was anything there that could not be discussed with per-
feet indifference-she, reclining against the cushions,
and he in immaculate morning coat, with hair
smoothly brushed, and speckless tie and linen, talk-
ing of things which meant life or death for them
both.
He had told her all he knew: his visit to Philip at the
Veterans' Club, his quarrel with him, the hatred which
he bore to the man that was dead. He made no secret
of the police officer's questionings, nor of Dr. Newing-
ton's extraordinary attitude.
"One would think those fellows had a suspicion
that I had murdered Philip," he aid quite lightly.
And her face never moved whilst she listened to
these details, analysing them in her mind, oomparing
them with those at which the morning papers had
hinted, the "clues" and "startling developmets,"
to obtain confirmation of which her father had gone
out to seek Sir Thomas Ryder.
Luke de Mountford would no more have dreamed
of telling Louisa of the dark suspicions which really
threatened him than he would have laid bare before
her some hideous wound if he happened to be suffer-



<pb n="184"/>
184           A TRUE WOMAN 
ing from one. The police officer's in fi
doctor's easy contempt had sounded a note 
ing of what was imminent, but beyond
had no fear. Why should he have? An
none, why worry Loo with plaints that migt
her ?
Remember that he individually was quite 
that Philip's murderer would soon be 
He too had read his morning paper, andi
well as anybody that for the moment suspii
upon him. "Seek whom the crime will
was a phrase freely used in the Press this
But it was only a question of time; an 
phase to be traversed, some mud that presen
have to be brushed off. No use to worry Lo
it. Fortunately she took it lightly too.
far too sensible to attach importance to 
sense.
Nevertheless mud thrown in such boun
fusion was apt to hurt very considerably. L
to set his teeth this morning when he p
Times, and even now there was in him a
of having been bruised all over, after his
interview with Travers, and his talk with
Newington in the library. Louisa did him 
was calm and sensible and a woman of the ;
She never puzzled Luke, nor had she that,.
longing to be misunderstood, the peculiar at
of the woman of to-day. In face of her 
almost despised himself for the intensity of
passion. She was so pure, so womanly in her 



<pb n="185"/>
THEN THE MIRACLE WAS WROUGHT              185
a girl still, she was hardly conscious of passion.
tshe knew that he was in pain-morally and
tally in pain-and that worse was yet to come, and
,the commonplace, sensible girl, brought forth her
array of calm and of triviality, checking by a
id smile the faintest onrush of passion in him,
for passion could but torture him now, when his very
oul was troubled and every nerve on the jar.
And thus Colonel Harris found them.
When he entered Louisa was recounting to Luke
the menu of last night's dinner.
"And ' Homard C la Danoise ' was a perfect dream,"
she was saying. "I suppose it would not be etiquette
to ask Her Excellency for the recipe."
Luke rose as the Colonel entered and passed his
hand across the back of his smooth head, a gesture
peculiarly English and peculiarly his own. The older
man was undoubtedly the most troubled of the
three.
" It's a damnable business this," he said as soon as
he had shaken Luke by the hand and thrown off hat
and coat.
"Does Sir Thomas Ryder," asked Luke lightly,
"also think that I have murdered Philip ?"
He knew where Colonel Harris had been. Louisa
had not thought of keeping this from him.
"Tom's a fool! " retorted the Colonel involun-
tarily.
It was tantamount to an avowal. Luke never
flinched; he even contrived to smile. Louisa sat up
very straight, and with an instinctive movement gave



<pb n="186"/>
186           A TRUE WOMAN
the sofa cushions a nervy shake up. But her'
fastened on Luke.
"Don't worry, sir," said Luke very quie
get out of it all in good time."
"Of course you will! Damn it all "
the other fervently. 
"The inquest, you know, is to-morrow." -
It was Luke who spoke, and Colonel 
up quickly.
"(Then," he said, " surely some light will
on this mysterious business." 
"Let's hope so, sir," rejoined Luke dryly. I
"Has Uncle Ryder told you anything 
Anything that we don't yet know ? "
Colonel Harris did not reply, and Louisa 
there was something that Uncle Ryder 
something awful, which had caused her fat
the troubled look which had terrified her the-i
he came in.
something awful! . . . which would
"Won't you tell us, father," she said, " 
Ryder told you ? Luke ought to know."
"Oh I " rejoined Luke, "there's no hurry,
Colonel Harris will tell me presently. Loo, 
coming to the Park this morning. I suppose.
go to the Temple Garden Show very well."
"Not very well, I think," she replied, 'I,
come for a walk after lunch with pleasure. 
must tell us now what Uncle Ryder said."
Then, as Colonel Harris still seemed to 
became more insistent, and her voice more 



<pb n="187"/>
THEN THE MIRACLE WAS WROUGHT           187
" Father dear," she said, "I must know as well as
The old man took a turn up and down the room,
th hands behind his back. He would not look either
Louisa or at Luke, for it would be easier to tell
meverything without meeting their eyes. And he
dto tell them everything. To her as well as to him.
was no longer any use trying to avoid the subject,
tending that it was trivial, unworthy of discussion.
Facts had to be faced at last, like the dervishes at
mdurman, and a plan of campaign decided on in the
ent of momentary defeat.
"Ryder," he began quite abruptly at last, "had
the hall-porter of that confounded Club up to his
room while I was there, and questioned him before
me."
"He could," suggested Luke, "only repeat the
story which we all know already. I never denied seeing
Philip at the Club or quarrelling with him, for the
matter of that. Hang it all! I have often quarrelled
with him before."
"Yes," rejoined the Colonel, " they've ferreted out
the old servants of your uncle's household, and heard
innumerable stories of quarrels."
" Exaggerated, I expect. But what of it ?"
" And that hall-porter didn't mince matters either.
Damn him."
"Philip," remarked Luke dryly, "shouted pretty
loudly. I did not."
"The porter said that when you left the Club you
| had ' murder in your eye.' "



<pb n="188"/>
188           A TRUE WOMAN 
" Possibly." 
"You had overheard Philip's last
porter ?" 9
"Yes ... something about pestering
was ready to make him swallow his words
loathe a scene, before people like those who
the Veterans' Club." 
"I wish to goodness you had gone for him 
there."
" Why ? 9
"This accursed business would not have 
"Oh yes, it would-sooner or later."
"What makes you say that ? " 
"Philip must have had an enemy."
" Who murdered him last night, you thinki
"An enemy," assented Luke, "who evi
in wait for him, and murdered him last 
bound to come out at the inquest."
"About this enemy? "   queried Colone
vaguely.
"Why, yes," rejoined Luke a little imp
"surely the police have made other inves
They are not just fastening on me and on!
else."
"Could you," asked Louisa, "help the
that, Luke ?" P
"No," he replied, " I know absolutely noti
Philip or about his past life."
"Did Lord Radelyffe ?"
"I don't know."
" He has been questioned, has he not ?" ,



<pb n="189"/>
THEN THE MIRACLE WAS WROUGHT            189
'" He is too ill to see any one. Doctor Newington
lares that he must not attempt to see any one. His
dition is critical. Moreover, he is only partly
onscious."
"But . . ."
"There's Philip's lawyer, Davies," said Luke;
the police ought to be in communication with him.
t is positively ridiculous the way they seem to do
othing in the way of proper investigation, but only
ae up their minds that I have killed my cousin....
Why! they don't even seem to trouble about the
weapon with which the murder was committed."
"The weapon . ..  "
The ejaculation, spoken hardly above a whisper, had
oome from Colonel Harris. Once more the old man
Iblt-as he had done in his brother-in-law's office-
that every drop of blood in him had receded back to his
heart, and that he would choke if he attempted to utter
another word.
"They say," continued Luke quietly, "that Philip
was killed by the thrust of a sharp dagger or stiletto,
right through the neck. Well, where is that dagger?
Have they found it ? or traced it to its owner ? "
Then as Colonel Harris was still silent he reiterated
once more-
"Did Sir Thomas tell you if they had found the
Weapon ?"
And Colonel Harris nodded and murmured-
"Yes."
" Actually found the weapon ? " insisted Luke.
"Yes."



<pb n="190"/>
190            A TRUE WOMAN        '-
"Where? "
"Behind the railings..... In Green 
Close to Hyde Park Corner."
"Was it a stiletto ? Or a dagger ? Ot
" It was a stick with a dagger fitting
snake-wood stick. It was covered with m
other stains."
There was silence in the room now for
a few brief seconds. A silence solemn and 
ing. All through this rapid succession of q
answers between Colonel Harris and Luke,
kept her eyes fixed upon the younger man'f
seen light indifference at possible danger
with impatience at the singular obstinaoy
cusers. Throughout this time the face she 
mirrored that perfect calm which she und
admired, since it was the reflex of a calm,
soul.
But now there came a change in the face:
not in the face, but in the soul behind it. 
came at Colonel Harris's last words; a
subtle, so undetermined that she was quite.
father had not perceived it. But movement/
none; one mere, almost imperceptible qui
eyelids . . . nothing more. The mouth 
slight fair moustache had not trembled, thi
mained smooth, the breath came and went
as before.
But the change was there, nevertheless I
tint just round the eyes, the stony look in
themselves, a tiny speck of moisture round



<pb n="191"/>
'THEN THE MIRACLE WAS WROUGHT           191
each nostril. Colonel Harris had not looked at Luke,
t he spoke of the stick. He was staring straight
front of him, hardly conscious of the silence which
cast a strange and mystic spell on these three
ople standing here in the banal atmosphere of a
don hotel.
It was Luke who broke the silence. He said quite
etly, asking the question as if it related to most
vial, most indifferent matter-
"Did Sir Thomas show you the stick ? "
The Colonel nodded in acquiescence.
" It was my stick, I suppose "
The query was so sudden, so unexpected, that Colonel
instinctively uttered an exclamation of amaze-
nt.
"Luke! ByGod, man! Are you mad ? "
Louisa said nothing. She was trying to understand
te un-understandable. Luke almost smiled at the
other man's bewilderment.
"No, sir," he said; "not mad, I think. I only want
to know how I stand."
"How   you stand, man?"    ejaculated Colonel
Harris, with  uncontrolled  vehemence.  "Great
heavens, don't you realize that here is some damned
*onspiracy, as mysterious as it is damnable ? and
that you will have to look this seriously in the face,
if you don't wish to find yourself in the dock before
the next four-and-twenty hours ? "
"I am," replied Luke simply, "looking the matter
squarely in the face, sir, but I don't quite see how I
ean avoid standing in the dock, as you say, before the



<pb n="192"/>
192           A TRUE WOMAN        ''
next four-and-twenty hours. You see, I
with Philip, and my stick-which contains
-was found in the Park, covered with
say, and other stains." 
"But, hang it all, man ! you did not
cousin!"
This was not a query, but an assertio
Harris's loyalty had not wavered, but he.l
contrive to keep the note of anxiety out of l
nor did he reiterate the assertion when
answer to it.
Once more the latter passed his hand ove
of his head. You know that gesture. It is
and always denotes a certain measure of 
Then he said, with seeming irrelevance-
" I suppose I had better go now."
His eyes sought Louisa's, trying to readi
thought and felt. Imagine the awful m
he loved her, as you know, with that ii
passion of which a nature like hialmost
by perpetual self-containment-is alone ca
to have to stand before her wondering what
second would reveal! hardly daring to exl
for certitude, because of what that certi
be.
He sought her eyes and had no difficulty
them. They had never wandered away fro
To him-the ardent worshipper-those eyes
had never seemed so exquisitely luminous. 
her soul then and there as he would a book.
of trust and brimming over with compassion
Ng.



<pb n="193"/>
THEN THE MIRACLE WAS WROUGHT             198
Colonel Harris was loyal to the core; he clung
his loyalty, to his belief in Luke as he would to a
k, fearful lest he should flounder in a maze of
oderment, of surmises, God help him I of suspicions.
t in Louisa even loyalty was submerged in a sea of
e. She cared nothing about suspicions, about facts,
ut surmises. She had no room in her heart for
ounchness: it was all submerged in love.
There was no question, no wonderment, no puzzle
the eyes which met those of Luke. You see, she was
t a very ordinary kind of woman.
All she knew was that she loved Luke; and all that
e conveyed to him by that look, was just Love.
Only Love.
And Love-omnipotent, strange, and capricious
ve-wrought a curious miracle then I For Colonel
aris was present in the room, mind you, a third-if
t an altogether indifferent-party, there where at
moment these two should have been alone.
It was Colonel Harris's presence in the room that
ftansformed the next instant into a wonderful miracle:
Luke was down on his knees before his simple-
led Loo. She had yielded her hand to him and he
ad pressed an aching forehead against the delicately
Perfumed palm.
In face of that Love which she had given him, he
ould only worship: and would have been equally
eady to worship before the whole world. And therein
aty the miracle. Do you not agree, you, who know
Ugplishmen of that class and stamp? Can you con-
oive one of them falling on his knees ? save at the
0



<pb n="194"/>
194           A TRUE WOMAN
bidding of omnipotent Love, and by the 
makes a man forget the whole world, defy|
world, give up the whole world, driven to 
forgetfulness, to self-sacrice for the sake 
turing, exquisite moments of transcendentai
. . .~~~~~~
:                 ..~~~~~~~
. ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ -



<pb n="195"/>
CHAPTER XXII
WHY ALL THIS MYSTRY ?
I HAVE often smiled myself at the recollection of
Luke de Mountford walking that self-same after-
noon with Louisa Harris up and down the long avenue
of the Ladies' Mile: the self-same Luke de Mountford
who had knelt at his Loo's feet in humble gratitude
for the love she gave him-the self-same Luke de
Mountford who stood under suspicion of having com-
mitted a dastardly and premeditated murder.
The puppets were once more dangling on the string
of Convention. They had readjusted their masks and
sunk individuality, as well as sentiment, in the whirl-
pool of their world's opinion.
Louisa had desired that Luke should come with her
to the Park, since convention forbade their looking at
chrysanthemums in the Temple Gardens on the day
that Philip de Mountford lay dead in the mortuary
chamber of a London police court; but everybody be-
longing to their own world would be in the Park on
this fine afternoon. And yet the open air, the fra-
grance of bare earth in the formal beds would give
freedom to the breath; there would not reign the
oppressive atmosphere of tea-table gossip: the dying
195



<pb n="196"/>
196           A TRUE WOMAN
chrysanthemums bowing their stately 
suggest aloofness and peace.
And so they went together for a walk in
for she had wished it, and he would have fo
anywhere where she had bidden him to go.
He walked beside her absolutely uno
whisperings and gossip which accompanied 
every step.
"I call it bad form," was a very usual p.
ieated by many a rouged lip curled up in
This was hurled at Louisa Harris. The 
such cases, always contrives to get the lion's
contempt.
"Showing herself about with that man
call it vulgar."
"They say he'll be arrested directly after
quest to-morrow. I have it on unimpeah
thority."
"Oh    I understand that he has been
already," asserted a lady whose informa
always a delightful mixture of irresponsible v
and firm conviction.
"How do you mean ? "
"Well! you see, he is only out on-what 
call it ? . . . I mean he has had to give his 
he won't run away ... or something.... 
Herbert say something about that at lunch. .
what lovely tulips. I dote on that rich cop_
don't you "
" Then does he go about in Black Maria
a policeman?" 



<pb n="197"/>
WHY ALL THIS MYSTERY?             197
. "Probably."
This somewhat more vaguely, for the surmise was
ubtful.
"I can't understand Louisa Harris, can you "
"Oh    she thinks it's unconventional to go about
th a murderer. She only does it for notoriety."
But the Countess of Flintshire, who wrote novels and
ys under the elegant nom de plume of Maria Annun-
ta, was deeply interested in Luke and Louisa, and
opped to talk to them for quite a considerable time.
She said she wanted "to draw Luke de Mountford
out."  So interesting to get the impressions of an
fotual murderer, you know.
The men felt uncomfortable. Englishmen always
do, when the unconventional hovers about in their
fieatly ordered atmosphere. Common sense-in their
Dase-whispered loudly, insisting that this man in the
Backville Street clothes, member of their own clubs,
by Jove ! could not just be a murderer. Hang it all I
Haris would not allow his daughter to go about with
a murderer!
So they raised their hats as they passed by Louisa
Harris, and said " Hello ! how de do ?" to Luke with
quite a genial smile.
But Luke and Louisa allowed all this world to wag
on its own irresponsible way. They were not fools-
they knew their milieu. They guessed all that was
being said around them and all that remained un-
Ppoken. They had come here purposely in order to
w.e and to be seen, to be gossiped about, to play their
rt6e of puppet before their world as long as life lasted,



<pb n="198"/>
198           A TRUE WOMAN 
and whilst Chance and Cireumstance stit
hold up the edifice of their own position, of 
sideration, mayhap of their honour. 
The question of the crime had not been
tween them again; after the understandiung 
from her to him, and his humble gratitude on 
they had left the mystery severely alone., 
nothing to say, and she would never quest
that she would know in good time, that 
would understand what was so un-unders
now.
Colonel Harris alone was prostrated with
Not that he doubted Luke, but, like all sob
Englishmen, he loathed a moral puzzle. 
liked and trusted Luke, he hated the myst
now met him at every turn, just as much as
the so-called problem plays which alien crit
foist on an unwilling Anglo-Saxon public.
He would have loved to hear Luke's voi_
quite frankly- 
"Of course I did not kill my cousin. I giv
word, Colonel, that I am incapable of such 
That was the only grievance which the oldet
the world had against the younger one. The 
frankness worried him. Luke was innocent,
but, d-n it, why didn't he say so ? 
And how came that accursed stick behind
ings of the Park ? 



<pb n="199"/>
CHAPTER XXIV
H       IA HERD OF CACKLING GBZE8
W ,THEN at ten o'clock the next morning Louisa
V tV Harris entered the Victoria Coroner's Court
accompanied by her father, the coroner and jury were
just returning from the mortuary at the back of the
building, whither they had gone in order to look upon
the dead.
Already the small room was crowded to its utmost
holding capacity. Louisa and Colonel Harris had some
difficulty in making their way through the groups of
idlers, who filled every corner of the gangway.
The air was hot and heavy, with the smell of the
dust of ages which had gathered in the nooks and
crannies of this dull and drabby room. It mingled
with irritating unpleasantness with the. sent of opo-
ponax or heliotrope that emanated from lace handker-
chiefs, and wi t the pungent odours of smelling-salts
ostentatiously held to delicate noses.
Louisa, matter-of-fact, commonplace Louisa, looked
round, at these unaccustomed surroundings with the
same air of semi-indifferent interest with which she
would have viewed a second-rate local music-hall had
she unaccountably drifted into one through curiosity
or desire.
199
r'
i[



<pb n="200"/>
200            A TRUE WOMAN
She saw a dull, drabby paper on the wall,
drabby hangings to the single window 
very high, close to the ceiling-the latter
washed was now covered with uneven
grime. 
In the centre of the room, a long table
one end with papers tied up in bundles of va
with pieces of pink tape, also a blotting-pad,
and paper-more paper-the one white n        _
uniform harmony of drabby brown; and in
litter that encumbered the table a long piee i
baize covering a narrow formless somet
Louisa supposed would be revealed in due c
On each side of the table half a dozen chairs_
Victorian design, upholstered in leather that 
been green. To these chairs a dozen men w
now making their way, each taking his seat ia.
silence: men in overcoats and with velvett'
somewhat worn at the back of the neck.. ..i
to Louisa as if they were dressed in some kind''
form, so alike did their clothes appear. She  l
their faces as they filed in .  . haggard 
ound, jolly faces, faces which mirrored suspio
which revealed obstinacy, the whole of 
England personified in these typical twelve
wearing overcoats with shabby velvet collars,
to decide how and when Philip de Mountfor
presumptive to the Earl of Radclyffe, had beef
to death.
Louisa and her father were able at last to 
forefront of the crowd, where chairs had been



<pb n="201"/>
A HERD OF CACKLING GEESE            201
them, immediately facing the table at the further
of which the coroner already sat. Louisa recog-
ed Mr. Humphreys, one of Mr. Dobson's clerks, who
id his best to make her and Colonel Harris comfort-
able. Further on sat Mr. Davies, who had been Philip
Be Mountford's solicitor, when he had first desired an
interview with Lord Radolyffe. Louisa knew him by
ight-Luke had on one occasion pointed him out to
her.
Luke and Mr. Dobson were even now making their
way to the same group of seats. They had-like the
jury and the coroner-been in the mortuary to have a
last look at the murdered man. Louisa thought that
Luke looked years older than he had done yesterday.
he saw him standing for a moment right against the
dull, drabby background of the court-room wall, and
it seemed as if something of that drabbiness had
descended upon his soul. Youth seemed to have gone
out of him. He appeared to be looking out on to a
dreary world through windows obscured by grime.
There was a look not so much of dejection as of
absolute hopelessness in the face. No fear, or anxiety
. only a renunciation. But this was only for one
moment, the next he had caught sight of her, and the
look of blank dejection in his eyes suddenly gave place
to one of acute and intolerable pain. The face which
usually was so calm and placid in its impassive mask
of high-bred indifference, was almost distorted by an
expression of agony which obviously had been quite
beyond control.
The whole thing was, of course, a mere flash, less



<pb n="202"/>
203        A TRUE WOMAN
than a quarter of a second perhaps in d
already Luke was just as he had always been t
well-born English gentleman, perfect in 
feet in attitude and bearing, under whate
stances Fate might choose to place him.
Mr. Dobson spoke to him, and he at
his friend and solicitor aross the body of
room to the row of reserved chairs in 
crowd. .
A whisper went round the room, and 
cool indifference turned to greet those
crowd whom she had recognized as acqua
friends. Some were sitting, others 
against the walls in the rear. Lady Ducie
excited and over-dressed, with large hat
struoted the view of a masculine-looking
sat immediately behind her, and who seemed
pared to do battle against the obstruction.
Further on sat the Countess of Flintshirem
and playwright, eager and serious, noteboo
and a frown between her brows, denoting,
and concentration of purpose. She bowed
Louisa, and contrived to attract Luke's
that-he turned towards her and she was 
carefully in indelible pencil in a tiny note
murderer about to meet his just fate may
infinity of care on the niceties of his own 
(N.B.-The next play written by the 
Flintshire, better known to the playgoing
Maria Annunziata, had an assassin for it
hero. But the play found no favour 



<pb n="203"/>
A HERD OF CACKLING GEESE                208
managers, and though it subsequently enjoyed some
popularity in the provinces, it was never performed
on the London stage.)
Louisa looked on all these people with eyes that
dwelt with strange persistency on trivial details: the
Countess of Flintshire's notebook, Lady Ducie's hat,
the masculine attire of the militant uffragette in the
rear. All these minor details impressed themselves
upon her memory. In after years she could always
recall the vision of the court-room, with its drabby
background to a sea of ridiculous faces.
For they all seemed ridiculous to her-all these
people-in their obvious eager agitation: they had
pushed one another and jostled and fought their way
into this small stuffy room, the elegant ladies with
their scent-bottles, the men about town with their silk
hats and silver-topped canes: they were all ready to
endure acute physical discomfort for the sake of wit-
nessing the harrowing sight of one of their own kind
being pilloried before the mob-it was just a pinch of
spice added to the savourless condiment of everyday
life. Then there were the others: those who had come
just out of idle curiosity to hear a few unpleasant de-
tails, or to read a few unwholesome pages in the book
of life of people who lived in a different world to their
own.
Ridiculous they seemed, all of them I Louisa felt
a sudden desire to laugh aloud, as she realized how
very like a theatre the place was, with its boxes, its
stalls, and its galleries. But in this case those who
usually sat in stalls or boxes displaying starched shirt-



<pb n="204"/>
204           A TRUE WOMAN                  _.
fronts, bare shoulders, and bad manners,
the actors now made to move or dance 
squirm or to suffer for the delectation of pit
On the left a group of young men with
faces, all turned towards Luke and towards
her father. Notebooks protruded out of
pockets, fountain pens and indelible penoia
close to hand: lucky the lightning artist
sketch for the benefit of his journalistic pat
outline of the gentleman with more than
the dock. Close by a couple of boys in blue     _
with wallet at the side and smart pill-box
head, stood ready to take messages, fractionai
hurried reports to less favoured mortals wh
desire kept them away from this scene of 
interest.
Louisa saw them all, as in a vivid dreami:j
afterwards could she believe that it had
reality: the coroner, the jury, the group of jo
the idle, whispering, pushing crowd, the loud
which now and again reached her ear-
' Oh! you may take it from me that 
he'll stand in the dock."       :
"Such brazen indifference I've never seen." i
"And they've actually found the dagger withi
he murdered the wretched man."
" B-r-r-r ! it makes me feel quite creepy."  :I
" Yes I he was at your At Home, dear, waas
a week ago "
"Oh! one had to ask him for form's sak
know." 



<pb n="205"/>
A HERD OF CACKLING GEESE              205
,"Poor Lord Radolyffe, what a terrible blow for
i  They say he'll never recover his speech or the use
of his limbs."
( "Silence there! "
The cackling herd of geese stopped its whisperings,
astonished at being thus reproved. Louisa again felt
that irrepressible desire to laugh; they were so funny,
she thought, so irresponsible I these people who had
come to gape at Luke.
Now they were silent and orderly at the bidding of
authority. An old woman, with black bonnet and
rusty jacket, was munching sandwiches in a corner
seat; a young man at the further end of the room was
sharpening a lead-pencil.
By the door through which a brief while ago coroner
and jury, also Luke and Mr. Dobson had filed out-
the door which apparently gave in the direction of the
mortuary-a small group in shabby clothes had just
entered the court-room, escorted by one of the ushers.
The latter made his way to the coroner's table and
whispered to that gentleman somewhat animatedly.
Louisa could not catch what he said, but she saw that
the coroner suddenly lost his morose air of habitual
ennui, and appeared keen and greatly interested in
what he heard.
He gave certain instructions to the usher, who
beckoned to the group in the shabby clothes. They
advanced with timid, anxious gait, a world of unspoken
apologies in their eyes as they surveyed the brilliant
company through which they had to pass. The feathers
:



<pb n="206"/>
206           A TRUE WOMAN                _
in Lady Ducie's hat attracted the attention'i
them-a young girl with round black eyes
decorated headgear: she nudged her co
pointed to the gargantuan hat, and both
giggled almost hysterically.
The man in front led the way. He was 
oadaverous-looking, with scanty hair and,
moustache: in shape he was very like a
limbs markedly bowed and held away from
ing body. There were five of them alo
men and three women. Louisa was interest
vaguely wondering who they were.
That they were personages of impor
case was apparent from the fact that the
bringing some chairs for the women and pl
close to those on which sat the solicitors, 
and Louisa herself. The men were made to .
by and remained just where they had been t
tweed cap in hand, miserably conscious of
pairs of eyes that were fixed upon them.
"Who are these people, do you know ? " 
Lady Duoie was leaning forward, and had
to catch Luke's ear.
He turned round very politely.
"How do you do, Mr. de Mountford ?" she
in her shrill treble, which she took no trouble tl
"You hadn't seen me, had you ? " 
"No, Lady Ducie," he replied, " I had na4
"I don't wonder," she commented pla
must feel so anxious. Who are those com
over there, do you know ? "



<pb n="207"/>
A HERD OF CACKLING GEESE              W20
"No, I do not."
"Some of your late cousin's former associates per-
iaps ? " suggested Lady Flintshire, "Maria Annun-
siata," who sat close by.
"My dear, how can you suggest such a thing ? " re-
torted the other; "they are so common."
"Silence there!"
And once more the cackling geese were still.
i                                            '



<pb n="208"/>
CHAPTER XXV
THI FOG WAS DENSE, I COULDN'T    G
THE curtain went up on the first sat of t_
I  was not, perhaps, so interesting from th
the audience would have wished, and the
portion thereof showed its impatience 
ooughings and whisperings, which had to
torily checked now again by a loud- 
"Silence, there I " and a threat to clear
The medical officer was giving his 
great length as to the cause of death.
terms were used in plenty, and puzzled
ladies who had come here to be amused. ,
listened attentively, and the coronl
medical man-asked several very pert
tions.
"The thrust," he asked of Dr. Blair,
medical officer of the district, " through the
effected by means of a long narrow ins
two sharp edges, a dagger in fact "  .  ..
" A dagger or a stiletto, or a skewer," 
doctor, "any sharp two-edged. instrunnt,:
cause a wound like the one in the neotki
deuaee" as
208 



<pb n="209"/>
THE FOG WAS DENSE               209
i" Was death instantaneous "
"Almost so."
i He explained at some length the intricacies of the
n throat, at the point where the murderer's
Upon had entered the neck of his victim. Louisa
Kened attentively. Every moment she expected
to see the coroner's hand wandering to the piece of
geen baize in front of him, and then drawing it away
disclosing a snake-wood stick with silver ferrule
stained, and showing the rise of the dagger sheathed
within the body of the stick. Every moment she
expected to hear the query-
"Is this the instrument which dealt the blow  "
But this apparently was not to be just yet: the
opaque veil of green baize was not to be lifted, that
certain long Something was not to be revealed, the
Something that would condemn Luke irrevocably,
absolutely to disgrace and to death.
Only one of the members of the jury-Louisa under-
stood that he was the foreman-asked a simple
question.
"Would," he said, "the witness explain whether
in his opinion the . . . the unknown murderer . . .
the . . . I mean ..."
He floundered a little in the phrase, having realied
that in his official capacity he must keep an open
mind . . . and in that open mind of an English jury-
man there could for the present dwell no certainty
that a murderer... an unknown murderer did
exist.
They were all here-he and the others and the
P
I   



<pb n="210"/>
210           A TRUE WOMAN         'I
coroner-in order to find out if there had
der committed or not.
The coroner, one elbow on the table, oam
holding firmly the somewhat fleshy chit
the juryman somewhat contemptuously.
" You mean . . ?" he queried, with
effort at patience.
"I mean," resumed the man more
present instance, would a certain medical  '
eal knowledge be necessary in order to
or to thrust . . so precisely .  . . just
spot to cause immediate death ?-"
With amiable condescension the  oro
query to the witness in more concise word..
" No, no," replied the doctor quioldy, 
had understood the question, "the t
special anatomical knowledge. Most ly
know that if you pierce the throat from
suffocation is bound to ensue. It was
done."
"When the deceased's head was turned
asked the coroner. 
"Why, yes ... to look out on the foi
or at a passer-by. .... It would be fairly
would-be murderer was quick and dee
the victim unsuspecting."
And Doctor Blair, with long tapering
towards his own throat, giving illustra
easily the deed might be done.
Given the requisite weapon of course."
After a few moe courteous questions of ,!
. .,



<pb n="211"/>
THE FOG WAS DENSE               211
kind, the first witness was dismissed . . . only mo-
mentarily, for he would be required again . . .when
the green baize would be lifted from the hidden Some-
thing which lay there ready to hand, and the medical
man be asked to pronounce finally whether indeed
the dagger stick were the requisite weapon for the
deed, which had been so easy of accomplishment.
The chauffeur, who had driven the taxi-cab, was
the next witness called: a thick-set man in dark blue
Melton coat and peaked cap; he came forward with
that swinging gait which betrayed the ex-coach-
man.
He gave his evidence well and to the point. He had
been hailed on the night in question by two gentlemen
in evening dress. It was in Shaftesbury Avenue, just
opposite the Lyric Theatre, and a little while after he
had heard St. Martin's Church clock strike nine o'clock.
"The fog was so dense," he added, "you could not
see your hand before your eyes."
He had just put down at the Apollo, and had crossed
over to the left going down towards Piccadilly, when
the two swells hailed him from the kerb. He couldn't
rightly see them, because of the fog, but he noticed
that both wore high hats, and the collars of their
overcoats were turned up to their ears. He hardly
saw their faces, but he noticed that one of them
carried a walking-stick.
"Or it might 'ave been a umbrella," he added, after
a moment's hesitation, " I couldn't rightly say."
"You must have seen the faces of your fares,"
argued the coroner, "if you saw that one of them
I



<pb n="212"/>
212           A TRUE WOMAN
carried a walking-stick... or an umr
You must have seen something of their 
reiterated more emphatically. 
"I didn't," retorted the man gruffly. "
out in that there fog, sir ? If you was, you'
'ow you couldn't see your 'and before your 
I saw the point of the stick-or the umbrella, Ii
rightly say which-only because one of th
waved it at me when 'e was 'ailing me ..'
'ow I seed the point."
The coroner allowed the question of ident
to drop: clearly nothing would be got out of 
The gentlemen, he declared, entered the cab,
one of them gave directions to him, putting
out of the right-hand window. 
"I didn't turn to look at 'im," he said 
"I could 'ear 'is voice plain enough-so whyt
I take a look at 'im ? 'Ow did I know
a-goin' to be murder done in my cab, and me
to say what the murderer looked like "
He looked round the room defiantly, an
expecting applause for this display of sound
sense, opposed to the coroner's tiresome offia
" And what directions," asked the latter,"
gentleman give you ?"
"To go along Piccadilly," replied the wite
'e told me to stop."
"And when did he tell you to stop ?"
"By the railings of Green Park, just by 'YI
Corner. One of 'em puts 'is 'ead out of the 
and calls to me to pull up."            ;



<pb n="213"/>
~r        THE FOG WAS DENSE               218
" Which you did ? "
"Which I did, and one of 'em gets out, and standin'
on the kerb 'e leans back to the interior of the cab,
and says: 'S'long-see you to-morrow'; and then
'e says to me: 'No. 1 Cromwell Gardens,' and dis-
appears in the fog."
"Surely you saw him then  "
"No. The fog was like pea-soup there, though it
looked clearer on Knightsbridge way. And 'e got
out left side, of course. I was up on my box right-
'and side ... a long way from 'im. ... I could see
a man standin' there, but not 'is face. 'Is 'at was
pulled down right over 'is eyes, and 'is ooat collar up
to 'is ears."
"Had he his stick... or umbrella with him
then ?"
"Yes. With 'is 'ands in 'is pockets, and the tip
pointing upwards, like a soldier's bayonet."
"You saw that and not his face ? " once more in-
sisted the coroner, making a final effort to draw some
more definite statement out of the man. It would
help justice so much if only this witness were les
obstinate... no one would believe that he really
saw nothing of the face of the man who had twice
spoken to him. He may not have seen it clearly,
not the upper part of the face, perhaps, but surely
he saw the mouth that had actually framed the
words.
But the chauffeur was obstinate. He was not going
to swear away the life of a man whom he had not
rightly seen, only through a fog as thick as pea-soup:



<pb n="214"/>
214           A TRUE WOMAN
this was the fortress behind which after a w
trenched himself. 
In vain did the coroner, pleased at ha
this slight advantage, try to draw him 
plaining to him, with the quiet patience 
moved by official ambition, that far froi
dizing the life of any man, he might be a
of an innocent one, falsely accused through.I
stantial evidence. In vain did he press an_
the man was obstinate. After a very long
and when the coroner had almost given up
and oross-examining, he admitted that he
that the gentleman who directed him to No.     _
well Gardens had a moustache.          '
"But mind I" he added hurriedly, "I won  D
to it, for I didn't rightly see ... the fog 
dense in the Park. And 'e wasn't the samet
one 'oo told me to go along Piccadilly until 'e 
me. The dead man done that." 
"How do you know," came as a quick re
the coroner, " since you declare you could not tM
faces"                                 '
"The first gent 'oo spoke to me," replied the 
feur somewhat sullenly now, "'ad no 'air on 'is
the second one I think 'ad . . . but I can't 
say ... I wouldn't swear to neither. And I :
swear . . ." he reiterated with gruff emphasis.
A sigh went round the room, a tremor of excit
the palpitation of many hearts, and in-dra
many breaths. No one spoke. No one fram
thought that was uppermost in the mind of ev



<pb n="215"/>
THE FOG WAS DENSE              215
the interested spectators of this strange and un-
understandable drama. The dead man who lay in the
mortuary chamber was clean-shaved, but Luke de
Mountford wore a moustache.
Lady Ducie's feathers nodded in the direction of the
literary Countess who went by the name of Maria
Annunziata, and the latter made hasty notes in her
diminutive book.
But Louisa leaned slightly forward so as to catch
fuller sight of Luke, and she encountered his eyes fixed
steadily upon her.
After that the driver of the cab concluded his evi-
dence more rapidly. There was little more there than
what every one had already learned from the news-
papers. The second pulling up in Cromwell Gardens this
time: the silent fare, the descent from the box, the
discovery of the huddled figure in the far corner of the
cab, the call for the police.
People listened with less attention; thoughts were
busy with the contemplation of a picture: two men,
one clean-shaved-the dead man of course-and the
other wearing a moustache. The first link in the chain
of evidence against the assassin had been forged, and
was ready to be riveted to the next.
The crowd in the body of the court could only obtain
a view of the top of Luke de Mountford's head; it
was smooth and fair, of that English fairness of tint
which is golden when the light catches it. And the
group of elegantly dressed women who came here to-
day in order to experience an altogether novel sensa-
tion, shuddered with delightful excitement as they
. '



<pb n="216"/>
216           A TRUE WOMAN       ';
thought of Black Maria and handcuffs, ald
police officers in blue: a jumble of i
riot in frivolous and irresponsible mind,
amongst which was one that the public 
allowed to witness a final scene on the gallo
I
:,



<pb n="217"/>
CHAPTER XXVI
THE NEXT WITNESS, PLEASE
IfHE air grew more and more heavy as the morning
1  dragged on. It was now close on twelve o'clock.
Frederick Power, hall-porter of the Veterans' Club,
*:had finished his evidence. With the precision of a
soldier he had replied curtly and to the point to every
question put to him, and had retold all that had ooc
o urred on that foggy night, in the smoking-room and
the lobby of the Veterans' Club in Shaftesbury Avenue.
It was but a repetition of what he had told Sir
Thomas Ryder in Colonel Harris's presence the day
before. Louisa had had it all at full length from her
father; she had drawn the whole story out of him,
point by point, just as the man had told it originally.
Colonel Harris, reluctant to tell her, was gradually
driven to concealing nothing from her. Moreover,
since she had made up her mind to attend the inquest,
she might as well hear it all from him first, the better
to be prepared for the public ordeal.
Though she knew it all, she listened attentively to
every word which Frederick Power uttered, lest her
father had-in telling her-omitted some important
detail. She heard again at full length the account of
Luke's visit to the Veterans' Club, his desire to see
217



<pb n="218"/>
218           A TRUE WOMAN
Philip de Mountford, the interview in the
room behind closed doors, the angry words o
violent quarrelling.
Then Luke's return to the lobby, his de
final taunt spoken by Philip, and the look otl
in his eye, sworn to by the hall-porter. She
to it all, and heard without flinching the last
which the coroner put to the witness- 
"Did Mr. de Mountford's visitor carry a 
he left the Club ? "
" 'E 'ad a stick, sir, when 'e came," was
reply, " and I 'anded it to 'im myself when 'eo
Louisa had been sitting all this while at the
end of the row of chairs, right up against the
sat with her back to the wall, her head lea
it, her hands hidden within the folds of a mo
sable muff lying idly in her lap. She had
on her right, and beyond him Mr. Dobson 
clerk; she saw them all in profile as they&
straight before them at the coroner and at
ceeding witness.
Luke sat further on, and as he was
towards her she could watch his face, all
that she listened to the hall-porter's evidence.
perfectly still, the features as if moulded in
eyes, which actually were a clear hazel, app
dark and almost as if they had sunk back wi
circling lids. He sat with arms folded, 
muscle in face or body moved. No stone-ca
could have been more calm, none could have:
mysterious.



<pb n="219"/>
THE NEXT WITNESS, PLEASE               219
Louisa tried to understand and could not. She
watched him, not caring whether the empty-headed
fools who sat all round saw her watching him or not.
When the coroner asked the hall-porter about the
stick and the man gave his reply, Luke turned and
met Louisa's fixed gaze. The marble-like stillness of
his face remained unchanged, only the eyes seemed as
if they darkened visibly. At least to her it seemed as
if a velvety shadow crept over them, an inscrutable,
an un-understandable shadow, and the rims assumed
a purple hue.
It was her fancy, of course. But Luke's eyes were
naturally bright, of varying tones of grey, blue or
green, with never a shadow beneath them. Now they
appeared cavernous and dark, and again as he met
her gaze, that swift flash of intense misery.
No longer had she the feeling that she was living in
a dream, no longer that this was a theatre wherein
she and Luke and the dead man were puppets dancing
and squirming for the benefit of shallow-hearted dolts.
That sense of unreality left her together with the
hysterical desire to laugh which had plagued her so in
the earlier part of the proceedings. On the contrary,
now an overwhelming feeling of intense reality op-
pressed her, so that she could have screamed with the
awful soul-agony which the sight of Luke's misery had
caused her.
All her nerves were on the rack, her every faculty
concentrated on the one supreme desire to understand
and to know.
Love, the omnipotent, had encountered an enemy-



<pb n="220"/>
220           A TRUE WOMAN         "
grim, unexplained Mystery-and he sat
almost cowed by this first check to his s
Louisa had sought and compelled Luke's
Love had gleamed in one great flash out
Yesterday, at her glance, he had knelt at
buried his sorrow with his aching head in
palm of the dearly loved hand.
To-day the look of Love brought but ^a
misery, an additional load of sorrow. The 
sponse remained tearless and hard, and irole
dark rings of utter hopelessness.
I'll grant you that if Louisa Harris had
extraordinary woman, a woman endowed
wonderfully complex, wonderfully passiona
derfully emotional nature-if, in fact, she ha
true product of this century's morbid mode
would, whilst admitting Luke's guilt, have 
a passion of self-sacrifice, pining to stand
pilloried in the dock, and looking forward to a
world of idealistic realism in the form of a pi
suicide after seeing the black flag hoisted over
prison.
But Louisa, though a modern product of,
modern world, was an absolutely ordinary.
just a commonplace, sensible creature who .
and felt in a straight and essentially wholesome
Though she had read Tolstoy and Dostoi
every Scandinavian and Russian crackbrain
ever tried to make wrong seem right, black
white, and animalism masquerade as love, yet,
never been led away from her own clean outloo



<pb n="221"/>
THE NEXT WITNESS, PLEASE            221
She loved Luke and would have given-did, in fact,
yeher whole life to him; but she loved him without
aysis or thought of self. It never entered her mind
[t this moment to wonder if he were guilty or not
Guilty, if he was capable or not of committing a crime
to gain his own ends. All that troubled her was his
misery which she would have given her very soul to
alleviate, and the hopelessness in him which she had
given the world to console.
The mystery troubled her, not the sin; the marble-
like rigidity of his face, not the possibility of the crime.
For the moment, however, she was brought back
quickly enough to present realities. The coroner-
satisfied with Frederick Power's answers-was giving
him a moment's breathing space. The grating of
fountain pens against paper was heard from that corner
of the room where sat the journalists; the crowd
waited silent and expectant, for-unversed though
most people there present were in proceedings of this
kind-yet instinctively every one felt that one great
crucial moment was just about to come, one great,
leading question was just about to be put.
The coroner had fingered the papers before him for
the space of a few seconds, then he looked up once more
at the witness, his elbow resting on the table, his fleshy
chin buried in his hand, in an attitude which obviously
was habitual to him.
" The visitor," he said, speaking loudly and clearly,
"who called the night before last at the Veterans' Club
and had an interview with the deceased, you saw him
well, of course "
I



<pb n="222"/>
22         A TRUE WOMAN
"Yes, sir," was the prompt reply. 
"You would know him again ? "
"Certainly, sir."
"Looking round this room now, should yOu
he was present ? "
The man looked across the room straight
and said, pointing to him-
"Yes, sir, the gentleman sitting there, sir.",
As every one had expected the reply, no
astonished. The many pairs of eyes that 
Luke now expressed a certain measure of
compassion, such as might be bestowed 
dangerous animal brought to earth by a w
gun-shot.
The coroner made no comment. He t
jury, glancing along either row of solemn faoe
sides of the long table. Then he said-
"Would any of you gentlemen like to ask
nes a question  "
Receiving no reply, he added-
" Next witness, please I "
~ 



<pb n="223"/>
CHAPTER XXVII
AND PEOPLE WENT OUT TO LUNHEON
AND now it was Luke de Mountford's turn at last.
i;   A wave of excitement swept over the crowd,
every neck was craned forward, every eye fixed on
this next witness, as he rose from his seat, and with
courteous words of apology to those whom he dis-
turbed in passing, he made his way to the centre
table.
An absolute embodiment of modern London society I
Luke stood there, facing the crowd, the coroner, and
jury, as he would have faced friends and acquaint-
ances in the grand stand at Ascot, or in the stalls of
a West End theatre. There are hundreds and thou-
sands of young Englishmen who look exactly as Luke
de Mountford looked that morning: dress is almost
an uniform, in cut, style, and degree of tone: hair and
even features are essentially typical. Luke de Mount-
ford, well-born, well-bred, behaved just as Eton and
Oxford had taught him to behave: concealing every
emotion, raising neither voice nor gesture.
An Englishman of that type has alternately been
dubbed hypocritical, and unemotional, He is neither:
he is only conventional. Luke himself, facing the most
abnormal condition of life that could assail any man
225



<pb n="224"/>
224           A TRUE WOMAN
of his class, was so absolutely drilled into 
blance of placidity, that it cost him no ef
strain himself, and none to face the forest of i
eyes levelled at him from every side. And s
was no effort, the outward calm appeared
natural; an actor who has played one
hundred times and more, does so night
until the r6le itself becomes reality, and he
dinary everyday life, seems even to himseUl
and unnatural.
Now Luke was given the Bible to kiss, and
take the oath. From where he stood, he 
Louisa and a number of faces turned towa
undisguised curiosity: mocking eyes and
tuous eyes, eyes of indifference and of horror
own as with quick glance they swept right
crowd.
I don't think that he really saw any one!
Louisa: no living person existed for him 
moment except Louisa. Hypocritical or
nature  which? none could say, none wo
the trouble to probe. All that the crowd sa
man to all intents and purposes accused of a
murder, oonfronted at every turn with un
proofs of his guilt, and yet standing there j
he were witnessing the first act of some ra
play.
Hypocrisy or effrontery, were the two alt
which the idle and the curious weighed, whilst
pating the joy of seeing the mask torn
wooden image before them.
.~~~~



<pb n="225"/>
AND PEOPLE WENT OUT TO LUNCHEON             225
The coroner was asking the witness his name, and
Luke de Mountford's voice was quite steady as he
gave reply.
" You were," continued the coroner, " until quite
recently, and are again now, heir-presumptive to the
Earl of Radclyffe "
"It was supposed at one time," replied Luke,
"that besides myself, there was no other heir to my
uncle's title."
" Deceased, I understand, arrived in England about
six months ago ?"
" So I understand."
" He made claim to be the only son of Lord Rad-
clyffe's elder brother "
"That is so."
" And to all appearances was able to substantiate
this claim in the eyes of Lord Radelyffe "
"Apparently."
"So much so, that Lord Radclyffe immediately
accorded him that position in his household which you
had previously occupied  "
"Lord Radclyffe accorded to the deceased the
position which he thought fitting that he should
occupy."
"You know that the servants in Lord Radclyffe's
household have informed the police, that in conse-
quence of Mr. Philip de Mountford's advent in the
house, you and your brother and sister had to leave
it? "
"My brother, sister, and I now live at Fairfax
Mansions, Exhibition Road," said Luke evasively.
Q



<pb n="226"/>
226           A TRUE WOMAN
"And the relations between yourself and
ceased have remained of a very strained
understand." 
" Of an indifferent nature," corrected Luke. 'e
There was a pause. So far these two-the
and the witness-had seemed almost like
tagonists, going through the first passes of a d
foils. Steel had struck against steel, curt
had followed brief questions. Now the corn
paused to draw breath. One of them was
the preliminary skirmish for his life, against 
were bound to overwhelm him in the end;
was just a paid official, indifferent to the
interested only in the issue. The man st
the foot of the table was certainly interes
coroner had made up his mind that he was t
party . . . a gentleman, and yet a cowardly
He amused himself during this brief pause
quick analysis of the high-bred, impassive
quite Saxoh in character, fair, and somewhat
of lid . . . in no way remarkable, save for the
total lack of expression: there was neither ind
nor bravado, neither fear, remorse, nor def
only a mask made of wood, hiding every lint
mouth, and not allowing even the eyes to 
signs of vitality,
Beyond that the whole appearance was 
English: the fair hair neatly groomed, with
suspicion of curl here and there, and a glint
in the high lights, the stiff neck encased in
maculate collar, the perfectly tailored  lot



<pb n="227"/>
AND PEOPLE WENT OUT TO LUNCHEON 27
hands, large, but well-formed and carefully tended,
which, lightly interlaced, hung in marble-like stillness
before him.
When a man happens to be out in mid-winter, with
a stout stick in his hand, and he comes across a layer
of ice on the top of a pool, or a trough of water, he
always-or nearly always-is at once a prey to the
silly desire to break that layer of ice. The desire is
irresistible, and the point of the stick at once goes to
work on the smooth surface, chipping it, if not actually
succeeding in breaking it.
The same desire exists, in a far stronger degree,
when the ice is a moral one-one that covers the real
nature of another man: the cold impassiveness that
hides the secret orchard to which no one but the
owner has access. Then there is an irresistible longing
to break that cold barrier, to look within, and to probe
that hidden soul; if not within its innermost depths,
at any rate below the ice-bound surface: to chip it,
to mark it, and break its invincible crust.
Some such feeling undoubtedly stirred at the back
of the coroner's mind; the hide-bound, red-tape-ridden
official was more moved than he would have oared
to admit, by a sense of irritation at the placidity of
this witness, who was even now almost on his trial.
Therefore, he had paused in his questionings, afraid
lest that sense of irritation should carry him beyond
the proper limits of his own powers.
And now he resumed more quietly, with his voice
less trenchant, and his own manner outwardly more
indifferent.



<pb n="228"/>
228           A TRUE WOMAN 
"When," he asked, "did you last see
eased ?" 
"In the lobby of the Veterans' Club," repli
"the night before last."
" You had called there to see him ? "
"Yes."
"For what purpose ? "
"To discuss certain family matters."
"You preferred to discuss these family
at a Club, rather than in your cousin's own ho
"Yes."
" Why ?"                              '
"For private reasons of my own."
"It would help this inquiry, if you wo
these private reasons."
"They have no bearing on the present issue.'
"You refuse to state them ? " insisted the 
"I do."
The coroner was silent for a moment: iti
seemed as if he meant to press the point at 
thought differently, for after that brief while, hL,
said-
"Very well."
Then he resumed-
"Now, Mr. de Mountford, on the night in q
you say, you went to see the deceased at the V
Club. You were, I understand, shown 
smoking-room t "
" Yes," was the simple answer.
" Your cousin was in the room ? "
"Yes."
;;



<pb n="229"/>
AND PEOPLE WENT OUT TO LUNCHEON            229
"Alone ?"
" Alone."
" And how long did your interview with him last "
"About an hour, or less perhaps."
"Was it of an amicable character ?"
This question was identical to the one already
put to Luke on the actual night of the crime, by the
detective charged to elucidate its mysteries. And
Luke's reply was identical to his former one-
" Of an indifferent character," he replied.
"There was no quarrel between you and the de-
ceased gentleman ? "
"Our interview was of a private nature," rejoined
Luke with unalterable calm.
" But other witnesses," retorted the coroner sharply,
"heard angry voices issuing from the smoking-room."
"That, no doubt, is for those other witnesses to
s- ay."
"You deny, then, that you quarrelled with the
deceased on the night when he was murdered ? "
"I deny nothing. I am not on my trial, I pre-
sume."
Again a pause. The coroner closed his eyes, and
stroked his heavy chin. He had not yet succeeded
in chipping the smooth surface of the ice.
"At what precise hour, then, did you last see
the deceased alive ?" he asked, allowing his voice
once more to appear harsh and his manner more
peremptory.
"At nine o'clock, or thereabouts, the night before
last."



<pb n="230"/>
280           A TRUE WOMAN 
" Where was that ?" 
" He was in the lobby of the Veterans'
I just outside."
"He made certain remarks to the hall-
that moment which offended you very
understand."
"Mr. Philip de Mountford was not always 
in his speech when he spoke to servants."
" And his remarks offended you  "     :,
"My opinion on this point is of no co
I imagine." 
" You then left the doorstep of the Veterani '
and a moment later the deceased joined you. 
street."
"I finally left the Club soon after nine, bul' i
not again see Mr. Philip de Mountford alive."- 
"The deceased suggested that you shoul
with him, then and there, to see Lord Rad
Grosvenor Square; he hailed a taxi-cab,
entered it with him," insisted the coroner with
slow emphasis.
"I last saw Mr. Philip de Mountford alive 
lobby of the Veterans' Club," reiterated Luke
" soon after nine o'clock."
" He overtook you in the street outside the 
"It is not true."
"And hailed a cab ? "
"-He may have done so, but not in my comp
"You entered the cab with him, and he
driver to follow along Piccadilly."
"He may have done so," once more rei



<pb n="231"/>
AND PEOPLE WENT OUT TO LUNCHEON             l81
Luke, in the same calm and even voice, "but not in
my company."
"You parted from him in the lobby of the Club "
"I have told you so."
"And you never saw him again after that ?"
"Never."
"You were not with him when he came out of the
Club "
"No."
" When he hailed a taxi-cab ?"
"No."
"You were not with him when he entered the cab
and put his head out of the window, telling the driver
to go along Piccadilly until he was stopped  "
" No."
The answers had come clear, sharp, and distinct,
quick ripostes of the foils against the violent attack.
Now the adversary drew breath-the pause was
dramatic in its effect, far-reaching in its significanoe.
The coroner, with eyes steadily fixed on the witness,
made a quick movement with his hand. He drew
away the long narrow strip of green baize in front of
him, revealing a snake-wood stick, with ferrule stained
and tarnished.
"Is this your stick ? " he asked curtly.
"It is my stick," replied Luke.
He had not flinched, yet there were many scores of
pairs of eyes fixed upon him when that green baize
covering was removed. But not one of those who
gazed so steadily upon him could boast that he or she
had seen the slightest tremor of the lids, or the merest



<pb n="232"/>
2S2            A TRUE WOMAN            -
quiver of the mouth. The voice sounded
clear, the cheeks, though pale, had assumed no
hue.
"Very well. That will do," said the coroner.
What more was there to say ? The d
stained and rusty, told the most graphic t
was to tell. Yet Luke de Mountford stepped
away from the table, looking neither self-o
nor dazed. He went back to his seat, beside
son, and leaning towards him answered some w
questions which the solicitor was putting 
He folded his arms before hih, and after 
allowed his head to fall forward a little, lo
eyes as he did so. He seemed a little tired, but'
wise unperturbed, even though the hal-por
now recalled, and was busy identifying the
which lay across the coroner's table, with
which he himself had handed to Mr. de Mo
visitor at nine o'clock the night before last. 
And the police, too, added its share to this:
that was going on, of enmeshing a criminal. 
was the constable, who had found the stick
the railings of Green Park, and had taken it
away to his chief's at Scotland Yard, before the
on it had been further disturbed; and therel
finally, Dr. Blair, the district medical officer,:
recalled, who examined the dagger which fitted/
that snake-wood stick.
He had been shown it yesterday, it seems, -
found how accurately it fitted the wound in
murdered man's throat. To this he swore n



<pb n="233"/>
AND PEOPLE WENT OUT TO LUNCHEON            28
open court, for the coup de thtre, the production
of the dagger-stick, had been kept back until now, in
order that it should work its fullest and most dramatic
effect.
Colonel Harris, sitting near his daughter, would
have given worlds to know what she thought. He
himself did not know what to think. His simple, un-
sophisticated mind was in a maze. The question of
Luke's possible guilt had suddenly loomed up before
him, dissipating the former blind impulse of partisan-
ship and loyalty. Mr. Dobson too looked puzzled,
the old family solicitor, who had seen Luke and his
brothers and sister grow up, who a few hours, nay,
minutes ago, would have sworn to his client's inno-
cence before the entire world, he too now was face to
face with a hideous feeling of doubt.
Not one other person in the room either, believe
me, who was not convinced of Luke's guilt. Louisa
knew that well enough as her aching eyes wandered
over the sea of faces, meeting hollow compassion,
morbid curiosity, at best a certain sympathetic
horror in the glances round. She knew that every
one here, the officials, the jury, the police, the public,
believed that Luke struck his cousin in the dark, she
knew that Mr. Dobson had begun to doubt, and that
her father had begun to fear.
And she, with all the fervour of unconquered Love,
prayed in her heart that she might understand.
She prayed to Love to open the eyes of her mind, for
it was her reason which did not understand, which
yearned to understand.



<pb n="234"/>
254           A TRUE WOMAN          :!     _
Her heart oared nothing, cared for no ^
for the man she loved and the bitter, bi
which he endured alone, shut away from 
from her.
There was general stir in the court-room, th a
had risen, also the jury. The journalists were
agitated parlance with the boy messengers. 
like one who has received a sharp blow on
wondered what all this stir meant.     ,
Was it all over ? Had Luke irretrievably 
self in that secret orchard of his, into which
obviously determined that even she should noti
Then she found out that the stir only
luncheon hour. All these people were going to 
to chatter. Heavens above I how they would 
Her father said something about getting a
trying to find a decent hotel where to have l
But she scarcely heard. She had just seen 
appearing through the crowd in company
Dobson, and he had not even glanced back t    _
at her.
Every one whispered round her. Lady
nodding feathers worried her almost to dis
She allowed her father to lead her away and to g
way for her through the crowd.
Presently she found herself sitting near him
cab. He was silent, and would not look at her. 
that he had begun to think that Luke had 
cousin: but once she heard him repeating the]
"damnable!" twice under his breath.  Th
knew that his loyalty was at bay.



<pb n="235"/>
AND PEOPLE WENT OUT TO LUNCHEON              285
It seems that they had luncheon somewhere to-
gether. She did not take the trouble to inquire where
she was: an old-fashioned hotel somewhere in Ken-
ington, with table-cloths that looked as if they had
been used for several previous luncheons, and foreign
waiters who wore weird-looking shoes, and trousers
frayed at the edges.
To please her father she ate a little, though she
thought that eating must choke her. But it was
wearisome to argue, and he-poor dear-looked so
miserable.
Time was precious, and luncheon interminably
slow; it was past two o'clock when Louisa saw Luke
again in the court-room.
I'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="236"/>
CHAPTER XXVIH 
WHIH TELLS OF AN UNEXPECTED TU !ii
T seems that coroner and jury had not
so much time over luncheon as the
interested spectators. When the crowd
back again into the seats the coroner
examined and dismissed one witness, andF
tioning another.
The past and present servants of the:
Square household would all have to pss
coroner during the course of this long
was only two o'clock, and already the gas
lighted: two incandescent burners just 
coroner's table. Hard, uncompromising 
threw a sickly green tinge on every face, 
deep black shadows under every eye.    I
It was this light, no doubt, that made 
seem positively ghastly to Louisa: it look
like a death-mask, so deep and cavernous 
eyes appear, and so hollow the cheeks. 
sitting in his usual attitude, with arms fol
tween Mr. Dobson and one of the women
black, whose presence here had puzzled every
Old Parker, ex-butler to Lord Radclyffe,
evidence. He had a tale to tell, how Mr. de 
28,



<pb n="237"/>
AN UNEXPECTED TURN OF EVENTS 287
I d  " went on awful" when he-the innocent, well-
d  ervant-had thought it his duty to introduce
.Philip into his lordship's presence.
'Just think of it, your honour," he exclaimed,
his lordship's rightful heir."
8  Then he added, with calm effrontery-
Mr. Luke, 'e give me the sack then and there I
was that wild ! "
I Just a paltry, silly, meaningless revenge. The death-
k on Luke's face relaxed for a moment, when he
Booked on the fat creature standing before the jury:
Vaily trying to look pompous and self-righteous, and
f y succeeding in being a liar.
The evidence would have been of little worth but
the corroboration from  other servants of the
Grosvenor Square household. The present two-mae
and wife-wastrels and drunkards, counted for noth-
Bing: they had only entered Lord Radclyffe's service
-recently, when all visitors had ceased from calling
at the inhospitable house, and they had seen little
or nothing of Luke; but the others-those whom
Philip's arbitrary temper had driven out of the house-
they had many a tale to tell of the dead man's arro-
gance, his contemptuous treatment of his younger
kinsmen, and the bitter words that often flew be-
[ tween the cousins, when doors were closed and eaves-
droppers behind the keyholes. 
These witnesses-an ex-housekeeper, a footman, a
maid-were trying their best, poor things, to " do the
right thing by Mr. Luke "-little guessing how ill they
succeeded. They had been dragged into this, much



<pb n="238"/>
98            A TRUE WOMAN 
against their will. As a class, they hated
and its doings, even though the cook might ,
ally show a preference for the local guardian.
and order. As for the detective in plain ,
the man who wore a peaked cap instead of the 
helmet, him they hated and feared, espec
he seemed to mean mischief for Mr. Luke. ' i _
They gave their evidence unwillingly
admission had to be dragged out of them,
realized that the revelations of past quarrels 
"the gentlemen" would not be to the
of the dead, only, perhaps, to the undoing
living.
The hours wore on wearily. The atmosp ,
surcharged with the heat from the gas brack
become intolerably oppressive. Opoponax a
heliotrope waxed faint to the nostrils.
badly-fitting window-frame, something of the
fog had penetrated into the room. It hung 
the air round the gas that burned yellow
through it, and obscured the far comers of tlh
throwing a veil over the twelve mutes in
overcoats, with threadbare velvet collars,
eager and perspiring journalists, whose foun
had scraped the paper incessantly for so long. 
Hot, tired, and oppressed humanity
warm breath felt in the close, ill-ventilated;
Smelling-salts would not dispel the unple
mingling odours of damp clothes and muddy 
which rose from the plebeian crowd in the rear
But nobody stirred: no one would have 



<pb n="239"/>
AN UNEXPECTED TURN OF EVENTS             289
eav9ing before the last act of this interesting play.
The chief actor was not on the stage for the moment,
but his presence was felt. It was magnetic in its
appeal to excitement. Every question put by the
coroner, every reply given by the witnesses, had, as it
were, Luke de Mountford for its aim: every word
tended towards him, his undoing, the enmeshing of
his denials in the close web of circumstantial evidence.
Then a diversion occurred.
The man in the shabby clothes, who looked like a
beetle, and who had marshalled his companions into
the court-room early in the day, was called upon by
the usher to come forward. His strange poorly-clad
figure detached itself from the groups immediately
round him: his long, loose limbs seeming to swing
themselves forward.
His four companions-the three women and the
other man-were seized apparently with great agita-
tion, and whispered eagerly among themselves. No
one in the crowd could guess why these people had
been called. They seemed so completely out of the
picture, which had its invisible frame in Grosvenor
Square.
" Go on, Jim ! "whispered one of the young women,
"they can't do nothing to ye."
And the beetle-like creature shambled forward,
with arms dangling beside him, a humble apologetic
look on his care-worn face. He might have been any
age from thirty to sixty: time, and a perpetual
struggle for existence, had wiped away all traces of
actual age. The cheeks were hollow, and eyes, mouth,
I



<pb n="240"/>
40            A TRUE WOMAN
and moustache had a droop which added to
melancholy of the face.
He was obviously very nervous, and loo
at his own friends, who strove to encou
signs and whispers.
He nearly dropped the Bible when it
to him, and no one could really hear the
he repeated mechanically at the usher's bi
At last, he mustered up a sufficient 
courage to state his name and address.
"James Baker," he said, in answer to the.
question. "Bricklayer by trade."
" And where do you live ?"
" At 147 Clapham Junction Road, sir," 
man, scarcely above a whisper.
"Speak up, please," admonished the cor
jury can't hear you. You came here, I
prepared to make a statement ?"
"Yes, sir."    ..-
"Of what nature ? "
The man shifted his position from one-
other. Heavy beads of perspiration stood
pallid forehead.
"Go on, Jim, don't be afeeard," cameo
body of the court.
"Silence, there I" ommanded the
"I wish to say, sir," resumed the mn,
steady his voice, " that the deceased, whom
in the coffin yonder, is my own son, Paul
" Your son ! "                     i
"My son, sir," asserted the man,



<pb n="241"/>
AN UNEXPECTED TURN OF EVENTS            241
steadily, " my son, and 'is mother's, as is sitting over
there. My son, Paul Baker, as left 'ome two year ago
come next Christmas. We all come 'ere, sir, to-day, me
and 'is mother and sister, an' Smith and Jane-we all
come 'ere to swear to 'im."
" Your son !"
The exclamation once more came from the coroner,
but had any one else dared, that exclamation would
have been echoed and re-eohoed by every mouth in
the court-room, coupled with emphatic ejaculations
of incredulity.
It was as if in a new Castle of some grim Sleeping
Monster a magic wand had touched every somnolent
spirit. Smelling-salts and scented handkerchiefs were
forgotten: the jurymen leaned forward, half across the
table, oblivious of their own dignity, in their endeavour
to obtain a fuller view of this wielder of the magic
wand: the beetle-like creature with the sad eyes and
pale hollow cheeks. Even the reporters-accustomed to
sensational events-gave up scribbling, in order to
stare open-mouthed at the shabby figure standing
by the table.
At first, of course, the predominant sensation was
one of sweeping incredulity. Coroner and jury had
met here to-day in this stuffy room in order to conduct
an inquiry on the death of Philip de Mountford, heir-
presumptive to the Earldom of Radclyffe. The
crowd of fashionable and idle gapers had pushed and
jostled, in order to hear the ugly story of how wealth
and position are fought for, and intrigued for, even
at the cost of crime.
R



<pb n="242"/>
341            A TRUE WOMAN
And now, to think that the man who lay
just a bricklayer's son ! It was absolutely
Not till a few moments later did the spe d
that if the seedy man at the table spoke
they were witnessing a drama even more
than that of the original murder; a drama
tion and of fraud, and a mystery far d
that which had originally confronted the
mongers.
Strangely enough, incredulity died down,
down very quickly. A subtle wave filled 
atmosphere, compelling every mind to
before the man's assertions were proved to
The most indifferent became conscious of
whelming conviction that the witness was
the truth.
This conviction was absolutely paramo
minds of the chief actors in the play. To
to Colonel Harris and to Louisa, to Mr. 
the solicitors, the truth of the statement
in question. An unerring instinct forced
believe: and such beliefs are as unconq
they are overwhelming. Truth that is an
unquestionable truth, finds its way to the 
the latter is attuned to subtle or psychic im
And as the truth was borne in upon thesi
so did they realize the fullness of its me
deep significance of its portent.
To some of them it seemed as if in a
illuminated world, all the lights had sudd
extinguished; to others, as if in a dark an t
*'·'^^^^^^



<pb n="243"/>
AN UNEXPECTED TURN OF EVENTS            248
cavern, full of black impenetrable shadows, dazzlin
lights had been suddenly switched on.
Louisa, looking across at Luke, saw that to him
it meant the latter, and that some of the new dazzling
light had illumined the darkness of his soul.
Something of the tense rigidity of his attitude had
gone from him: not the sorrow, perhaps, but the
blank hopelessness of a misery that flounders in a sea
of the Unknown.



<pb n="244"/>
CHAPTER XXIX
THE WORLD IS SO LARGE
AS for the man who had made the extr
assertion, he seemed quite unconscious
effect which it had produced: as if the fact
supposed heir to an earldom, being actually 
of a Clapham bricklayer, was one that 
natural place in everyday life.
He had his cap in his hand-a shabby
cap-and he was twirling it between his n
and round with an irritatingly nervous ges
eyes, now and again, were furtively raisedi
coroner, as if he were wondering anxio
punishment would be meted out to him far
created so much commotion, and then wi
furtiveness he dropped them again. His 
were bowed, and his knees parted company 
another: thus giving him more than ever thi
ance of a beetle.
Of course, the coroner had to recover  i
manner as quickly as possible. But even to I
statement had come as a surprise. He had o
very vaguely that a witness had come forw
eleventh hour, having only just had time to
cate with the police before the opening of 
244   .



<pb n="245"/>
r       THE WORLD IS SO LARGE              M45
In view of the importance of the evidence, the wit-
ness was called as soon as possible: what he had to say
would materially affect the whole trend of the in-
quiry. He had, it seems, brought others with him-
members of his own family among them-in order
that they might corroborate the truth of what he
said.
Quite a minute or so had elapsed in the meanwhile:
then, at last, was the coroner able to resume with at
least a semblance of official indifference.
"Now," he said, "let the jury understand a little
more clearly\what you said just now."
"What I said ? " rejoined the man vaguely.
"Yes: what you said. Let us understand it clearly.
You went to the mortuary this morning, and saw the
body of the deceased "
"Yes, sir."
" And you state here, on oath, that in the deceased
you recognized your own son ?"
"I'll swear to 'im!  replied the witness simply.
"Ask 'is mother there I "
And with long, thin finger, generously edged with
grime, he pointed to the woman in seedy black hat
and shabby tweed jacket, who sat quite close to
Luke de Mountford.
"Never mind about his mother just now," ad-
monished the coroner. "We want your statement
first. You realize that you are on oath  "
" Yes, sir. I've sworn my Bible oath."
" And you understand the importance of an oath  "
"Yes, sir."



<pb n="246"/>
246           A TRUE WOMAN 
"And you swear that the body of the
man, whom you saw in the mortuary oh
morning, is that of your son  " 
' I swear to that, sir."
I believe that had coroner and jury, and
every man there present, dared to put their
into words at that moment, the ejaculation:
I am blowed! " or "I'm d--d!" as the oae
be, would have been generally heard thro
room. The women, on the other hand, were
excited even to think.
"Now," resumed the coroner, " tell the jury
when you first identified the deceased as your0
"This morning, sir."
" In the mortuary chamber ? "        :
"Yes, sir."
"You had not seen the body before ? "
"No, sir."
"Did you know that other witnesses ha
that the body is that of a gentleman called P
Mountford ?" 
"Yes, sir. I knew that."
"Then do you mean to assert that tho
witnesses have sworn false oaths ? "
" Oh, no, sir," rejoined James Baker, with 
getio smile of self-deprecation, "I wouldn't 
a thing, sir."
"Well then "                           I
"They was mistaken, sir, that's all Paul 
clever, sir; ask 'is mother there I "
And once more the lean and grimy finger



<pb n="247"/>
F       THE WORLD IS SO LARGE             247
to the seedy-looking matron, who nodded a melan-
choly head, half in pride, half in regret.
"Clever, did you say " asked the coroner, more
briskly now. At last he held a thread in this ex-
traordinary tangled skein.  "Then do you mean to
assert that your son-Paul Baker-went about the
world oalling himself Philip de Mountford ?"
"That must 'ave been it, sir, I think."
"Deceiving people ?" 
" Aye I 'e was ever a bit o' no good."
"You think he imposed upon his lordship the
Earl of adolyffe " 
"'E must 'ave done, sir, mustn't 'e now ? seein'
as 'ow 'is lordship must 'ave been took in." 
"You helped him in the deception, I suppose ?"
"Me, sir? Lor' bless ye, no I Me an' 'is mother
ain't clever enough for such things I We knew nothin'
of Paul's doin's, and 'e allus went 'is own way, sir."
"But at least you knew that this fraud was going
on?" 
"Not exactly, sir."
"How do you mean, 'not exactly' ?" retorted the
coroner sharply. "You seem to be unconscious of
the fact that this story which you are telling the jury
is a very serious matter indeed. If it is true, you are
not only making a grave accusation against your dead
son, but with this accusation you may be involving 
yourself, or some other member of your family, in an
exceedingly serious charge of fraud: the penalty for
which, if proved, would be very severe indeed. On
the other hand, if the story you tell is nothing but a



<pb n="248"/>
248           A TRUE WOMAN       "      .
cook-and-bull tale, which further e
presently demolish, then you lay yo
charge of perjury, and of conspiracy to"¥
ends of justice. I have thought best to 
word of warning-the last which you wi 
me-because really you do not seem to -be
scious of the extreme gravity of your
The bricklayer from Clapham had li
admonition, delivered with solemn em
small measure of severity, with a kind o
difference. He retained his humble, ap
tude, but clearly the coroner's threats did 
his simple equanimity.
"I thank you, sir, kindly," he said, 
coroner had ceased speaking, "but I oa.n
Paul would go on 'is own way. Ask 'is mo
'E never would be spoken to, wouldn't PauL: 
and 'is mother allus said 'e'd oome to 
day."
"Did you know anything at all of this 
"No, sir. We knew nothin' of it really.
Paul left 'ome nearly two year ago come
'E didn't tell us nothing."
" Then you last saw your son alive two y
"Yes, sir. That's the last me and 'is 
of 'im. Christmas Day, sir, 'twas two year wag
Paul, 'e said then 'e'd 'ad enough of knockin'
London. 'B was goin' abroad, 'e was, that's
said. And 'e left 'ome, sir, the next d
'Oliday, 'twere-and that's the last me and 'U
seed:of 'im."



<pb n="249"/>
THE WORLD IS SO LARGE              24
H e had told this with all the simple fatalism pe-
oliar to his class. The son went "abroad"; and
"abroad" to a Clapham labourer is a very vague
term indeed. It means so many things: geographi-
ally it means any place beyond a twelve-mile radius
from home; the Antipodes are "abroad," but so is
Yorkshire. Domestically it means that the traveller
passes out of the existence of those that are left behind,
as surely as if he had stepped into the grave. Finan-
cially it means a mouth less to feed, seeing that the
intending traveller is nearly always a wastrel at home.
In any event, the proposed journey "abroad" is
taken with quiet philosophy by family and friends.
The traveller starts for " abroad " as easily, as simply
as he would for the nearest public-house. He has no
impedimenta, nothing to burden him or to cause him
regret. Strangely enough, no one ever has any idea
where the money comes from that pays for the journey
"abroad." The traveller, being a wastrel, never has
any himself, and the family is invariably too poor to
provide it. But the wastrel goes, nevertheless.
And life within the narrow precincts of the family
circle goes on just as it had done before. Sometimes,
news comes from the traveller-a picture post card
from " abroad," usually a request for pecuniary assist-
ance-seldom  does good news arrive; still more
seldom does the traveller come back home.
But it is all very simple. Nothing to make a fuss
about.
" Then," said the coroner, " he didn't tell you where
he meant to go "



<pb n="250"/>
250           A TRUE WOMAN 
" No, sir," replied Jim Baker, "he jut
abroad." 
"Do you know where he went ? "
"No, sir,"
"Did you ever try to find out "
"No, sir. Where 'ad been the use ? "
Where indeed ? The world is so large l
Baker family so insignificant I
"He didn't write to you ?"
"No, sir."
"Nor communicate with you in any way.?i
" No, sir."
" You had no idea what had become of hiu
"Not until last summer, sir." 
"What happened then ?"             :
"His sister, sir, our Emily, she was 
with Harry Smith-young Smith, from ne
us, sir-and she was down in the West End 
with 'im one day, and 'oo should they mee
Paul."
"Did they speak to him  "
"Yes, sir. They says: "Ello, Paul,
know as 'ow you was 'ome'; and 'e s
like at first, and pretended 'e didn't know
that they'd made a mistake. But they 
and went on talkin', so I suppose Paul, 'e 
best to make a clean breast of it all."
"Do you mean to say that he told his 
his friend that he was carrying on a cim
against the Earl of Radelyffe ? 
"Oh no, sir, not all that. 'E only told e



<pb n="251"/>
THE WORLD IS SO LARGE              651
was in for a good thing. A gentleman's gentleman, 'e
told 'em 'e was, and doin' well for hisself. 'E said
'e would come and see the family-'e meant me and
'is mother, sir-some day soon. But 'e never come."
"Did he say where he was living ? "
"Yes, sir. 'E gave 'is address to Emily. Up 'Amp-
stead way, it were. A long way, sir. Me and 'is mother
never seemed to 'ave the time to go and look 'im up;
but Emily, she went with young Smith one Sunday,
but they never found the street: not where Paul said 'e
was livin'. There weren't no such street in 'Ampstead,
sir."
"And you never thought of making further in-
quiries ? "
"No, sir." This again with that quiet philosophy,
the stolid fatalism peculiar to those who live from day
to day, from hand to mouth: who have neither leisure
nor desire to peer outside the very circumscribed
limits of their own hearths.
"You never made any effort to know more about
what your son was doing, or how he was living "
suggested the coroner; who, though accustomed to
this same quiet philosophy in men and women of
that class, was nevertheless strangely moved in this
instance by the expression of a fatalism that carried
in its train such extraordinary consequences.
But Jim Baker, mildly astonished at the coroner's
insistence over so obvious a matter, explained
meekly-
"We knew that Paul was doin' well, you see, sir.
'E was that splendidly dressed when Emily and young



<pb n="252"/>
252           A TRUE WOMAN 
Smith seed 'im, they was quite respectful 
So we knew 'e was all right." 
"And you never troubled any further
son ?" 
" We didn't want to interfere with 'im, sir i'
men don't allus like their servants to be 'avin
or to 'obnob with poor people like us."   .
More calm philosophy, not unmixed with a  ;
sense of pride this time, and a sublime, if 
vein of selflessness.
"Well !" rejoined the coroner, not
time: the man, who looked so like a beetle,
so humble and apologetic, compelled quite  |   _
amount of regard, "we'll leave that m
moment, Mr. Baker. Now will you tell the j
made you come to this court to-day ? Wha
to think that the man who had been m
cab the night before last, and of whom all
papers spoke as Mr. Philip de Mountford, w  _
you think that he was your son ? "
Jim Baker, by way of a reply, plunged one of
hands in the pocket of his shabby coat, and 
a portion of very grimy newspaper, carefully
up quite small. He undid the folds, until 
lighted on that which they sought. Then he 
paper out towards the coroner, and poin
picture sandwiched in among the letterpress.  I
"I saw this," he-said, "in the Daily Gra
terday. ' It's the picture of Paul,' I says to 
The coroner took the paper from the wit
laid it down on the table, glancing at it



<pb n="253"/>
~r       THE WORLD IS SO LARGE             258
There had been innumerable portraits of the murdered
man published, both in the morning and the evening
papers of yesterday.
"It's Paul to the life," insisted Jim Baker. "I
was at my work, you understand, when I seed the
paper in one o' the other chaps' 'ands. I couldn't
give up my work then. I 'ad to wait till evenin' to
speak to my missus. Then we talked it all over: and
young Smith, 'e took a day off and me too, and Mrs.
Baker and Emily and Jane Smith, they all come
along."
" And you looked on the face of the dead man, and
you swear that it is your son ? "
"I take my oath, sir. Ask 'is mother there. She
knows 'er own son. She'll tell you just what vaccina-
tion marks 'e 'ad on 'is arm, and about the scar
on 'is leg, and all. The ladies, sir, they are that
sharp . .."
Jim Baker-feeling, no doubt, that his ordeal was
nearly over-was losing his nervousness, or perhaps
it took a new form: that of jocularity. The coroner
thought it best to check his efforts at humour in the
bud.
" That will do," he said curtly.
And the Clapham bricklayer at once retired within
his shell of humble self-deprecation. He answered a
few more questions that the coroner put to him,
but clearly his own cirole of vision was so circum-
scribed, that-willing as he undoubtedly was-he
could throw no light whatever on the unknown events
which led up to the extraordinary fraud practised



<pb n="254"/>
254           A TRUE WOMAN
on the Earl of Radolyffe, and which culmin
mysterious murder in the taxi-cab.
The father of the strangely enigmatic 
who indeed had taken many a secret with
grave, was far too indifferent, too fatalistio
forth any theory as to his son's motives, or
ducements and temptations which had firs
birth to the astoundingly clever deception.
Wearied and impatient at last, the cor
up his questionings; he turned to the jury
accustomed formula- 
"Would any of you gentlemen like to
witness any questions ? "
The foreman of the jury wanted to kno
witness's son had any birth-marks on him,
palpable means of identifioaton.
"Yes, sir," replied Jim Baker, "but 'is
tell you better'n me ... she knows best . .
the vaccination marks and all."
The foreman then asked the coroner whether
would be allowed to identify the marks.
assured by the coroner that after adjo
very day every means would be taken to
Jim Baker's statement, the jury seemed smt
And the coroner called the next witness. - .i



<pb n="255"/>
r
CHAPTER XXX
AND THEN EVERY ONE WENT HOME
rHOUGH the hour was getting late, no one among
the crowd thought of leaving the court. Even
the desire for tea, so peculiarly insistent at a certain
hour of the day in the whole of the British race, was
smothered beneath the wave of intense excitement
which swept right over every one.
Although the next witnesses-who each in their
turn came forward to the foot of the table-swore to
tell the truth, and faced the coroner with more or less
assurance, they could but repeat the assertions of
the head of the family. Nevertheless, the public
seemed ready to listen with untiring patience to the
story which went to prove that the man, whom
everybody believed to be the heir of one of the oldest
titles and richest rent rolls in England, was the son of e
a Clapham bricklayer: a master of audacity and of
fraud.
The mother-a worthy and simple soul-was the
first to explain that Paul, her only son, had always
been something of a gentleman. He had done very
well at school, and never done a stroke of work like 'is
father. When he was fifteen, he was quite stage-
255



<pb n="256"/>
256            A TRUE WOMAN            I
struck. "Always play-acting," as the mo
"and could recite poetry beautiful!"
Mrs. Baker seemed distinctly proud ofd
deeply-rooted horror of work. She tho
the instincts of a gentleman were really in
he was a grown lad, he went as footman mi
man's family, somewhere in the Mi
mother loftily supposed that it was there
learned his good manners.
" He was a perfect gentleman, sir," sh:e -'
complacently.
It appeared, too, that the wastrel had hI
in his career, when the call of the stage p
irresistible: for he seemed to have left the 
family in the Midlands somewhat ab
walked on as super for a time in the va
dramas produced at the Grand Theatre, N'
whenever a crowd was required on the
seems also to have existed a legend in 
the fond mother and of the doting sister,
hal once really played a big part in a 
But this statement was distinctly wan
roboration.
What was obviously an established fact
the man had a certan spirit of adven
and that he had been a regular rollingf
regular idle, good-for-nothing wastrel, p
certain charm of manner which delighted
and which was readily mistaken by the
for that of a gentleman. 
They were all called in turn: the sitfer
J ~ ~~~~~



<pb n="257"/>
AND THEN EVERY ONE WENT HOME            257
Smith "from next door," and the latter's sister.
Not one of them swerved for a moment from the
original story told by Jim Baker. Emily and young
Smith told of the meeting, which occurred on a fine
summer's afternoon, between themselves and Paul.
By the strange caprice of wanton coincidence, the
meeting occurred inside Green Park. Paul seemed a
little worried, thinking that the passers-by would see
him talking to " poor people like us," as Emily Baker
had it, "although," she added proudly, "I 'ad me
new 'at on, with the pink roses." Otherwise he was
quite pleasant, and not at all " off-'and."
The account of this interview was fully corroborated
by young Smith "from next door."   Jane Smith,
who at one time had considered herself engaged to
Paul Baker, had a few tender reminiscences to recount.
She had seen the prodigal once on the boards of the
Queen's Theatre, Lewisham, and she declared that
he looked "a perfect gentleman."
The day wore on, or rather the commencement of
evening. The evil-smelling fog from outside had
made its home inside the dismal room. People there
only saw one another through a misty veil: the corners
of the room were wrapped in gloom. Exciting as was
the story which had been unfolded this afternoon,
one or two among the audience had given way to
sleep. Lady Ducie's feathers nodded ominously, and
the old dame who had munched sandwiches was
inclined to give forth an occasional snore.
Louisa's eyes were aching. Constant watching had
tired them; they even ceased to see clearly. Her
8



<pb n="258"/>
35y8          A TRUE WOMAN
brain, too, had become somnolent. She was 
hearing these people talk. From the mo
Jim Baker had stated that the murdered man,
own son, Louisa had known that he had
truth. Instinct was guiding her towards
showing her the truth, wherever possible. She
at first-deeply interested-to the scrappy
which told of Paul Baker's early life; but
from  Clapham  Junction Road had 
little to relate. They no more uder
adventurous-spirited son than they would 
capable of aiding and abetting the fraud
concocted.
They themselves were far too simple, and
to be dangerously criminal. And so the,
quickly lost its interest for Louisa. She he
the fragmentary statements which she h
more easily surmise the life history of P
than could the doting mother, who 
plaoently every mark on the skin and on tha
her son, and knew nothing whatever
nothing-of his thoughts, his schemes: of
that was in him, and the ambition which
end.
And now the last of the Baker contingent
missed. Jane Smith-the sweetheart of the
man-was the last to leave the coroner's 
did so in a flood of tears, in which the otherla
and incontinently joined.
The coroner-somewhat impatient with 
for their vague notions on the most imprt



<pb n="259"/>
AND THEN EVERY ONE WENT HOME 259
of the case had severely tried him-adjourned the
inquiry until the morrow.
He ordered the jury to be present at a quarter
before ten, and gave the signal for general with-
drawal.
After which every one went home,



<pb n="260"/>
CHAPTER XXXI               i
AND TRERE ARE PEOPLE WHO DO NOT 
FOR the first time, I think, in the whole co
her life Louisa Harris felt that convention
be flouted, and social duties could not be fulfi
When the coroner-rising from his seat-ga
signal for general exodus, she had felt her 
firm hand grasping her arm and leading her out
fog-ridden, stuffy room into the cold, grey 
outside.
The herd of cackling geese were crowding ro
Heavens above! how they cackled and gossip
seemed as if the very floodgates of a noisy, bi
stream had been torn asunder, and a whirl
chattering women been let loose upon the earth.
Convention, grim and untractable, tried to 
strings to make all puppets dance. But fo
Louisa Harris rebelled. She closed her ears
sinuating calls from her friends, responding
mere curt nod to the most gushing: "Oh, Miss
how are you ? " which greeted her from every
She turned her back resolutely on convention."
slave for once rebelled against the taskmaster.
puppet refused to dance to the ever-wearying m
ous tune.
260



<pb n="261"/>
PEOPLE WHO DO NOT CARE              *61
She had lost sight of Luke the moment the court
rose. She supposed that his solicitor, Mr. Dobson,
knowing the ropes, had got him away from the
reach of cackling geese, by leading him through some
other more private way. But she was far too dazed,
too numb, either to wonder or to be disappointed at
this. She felt as if she had pitched head foremost down
a long flight of stairs, and had only just had sufficient
strength to pick herself up, and not to let other people
see quite how severely she had been bruised.
Mentally, morally, even physically she felt bruised
from head to foot.
Colonel Harris contrived to steer her through the
crowd; at the gate outside, even the smoke-laden
atmosphere seemed pure and invigorating in compari-
son with that stuffy pen, wherein the herd of cackling
geese had found its happy hunting-ground. Louisa
drew in a long breath, filling her lungs with fog, but
feeling a little freer, less choked in spite of the grime
which she inhaled.
"I think," said Colonel Harris now, "that you'd
better go straight back to the Langham and get some
tea. You'll feel better when you've had your tea."
"I feel all right, dear," she said, trying to smile.
"So much the better," he retorted, with an equal
effort at cheerfulness  "I'll come along as soon as I
can."
"Where are you off to, dear ?" she asked.
" I'll just go and have a talk to Tom," he replied.
"I'll come with you. I can wait in the cab. I don't
suppose that you'll be long."



<pb n="262"/>
262           A TRUE WOMAN 
He tried to protest, but obviously she hadl'
her mind. Perhaps she did not like the idea
back to the hotel alone. So he hailed a
and told the man to drive to Scotland Yard.
He had deliberately-and despite former
-selected a taxi-cab. He wanted to see TolI
as possible.
Louisa leaned back in the comer of the ve
and motionless. Father and daughter did not
a single word whilst the cab rattled t
crowded streets of London. Hansoms, on
numerable other taxis, rattled along the
way, just as they had always done before thi
they would go on doing to the end of time,
walked along, busy and indifferent. Many 
the shrieking news-vendors without even sto
buy a paper.
Luke stood accused, almost self-convio
horrible crime, and there were thousan
millions-of people who didn't even oare I
The taxi-cab flew past the railings of the G
there where another taxi-cab had drawn up a
of evenings ago, and where a snake-wood stick
with tell-tale stains had been found clumsily
the mud. Louisa peered out of the window
cab. People walked past that spot, indiff
busy. Two girls were standing olose to the
chatting and giggling.
And Luke to-morrow-or perhaps to-nigh
be under arrest-charged with murder . . . 
cruel, brutal murder ... a vulgar, cowardly'



<pb n="263"/>
r       PEOPLE WHO DO NOT CARE              268
The snake-wood stick had told a tale which he had not
attempted to refute.
Presently the cab drew up and Colonel Harris
jumped down.
" I won't be longer than I can help," he said. " Will
you be all right ? "
" Yes, father dear," she replied; "I'll be all right.
Don't hurry."
She saw her father disappearing through the wide-
open door, above which a globe of light shone yellow
through the fog. She remained huddled up in her furs
-for she felt very cold. Her feet were like ice, and the
fog seemed to have penetrated to her very marrow.
Few people were to be seen in the narrow roadway,
and only an occasional cab rattled past.
From the Embankment close by came the cry of
news-vendors, rushing along with the late editions of
the evening papers.
A church clock not far away slowly struck six. But
she held no count of time. A kind of drowsiness was
upon her, and the foggy atmosphere, coupled with in-
tense, damp cold, aoted as a kind of soporific.
She may have waited years, or only a few minutes,
she did not know, but presently her father came backe
His presence there under the lintel of the door seemed
to have roused her from her torpor, as if with a swift
telegraphic current. As he stood for a moment beneath
the electric light, adjusting the collar of his coat, she
saw his fee quite distinctly: its expression told her
everything. Luke's arrest was imminent. It was but
a question of a few hours, moments perhaps.



<pb n="264"/>
S64     .     A TRUE WOMAN 
"I am going to Exhibition Road at oneei
speaking quickly, like a man deeply troubled; i
And without waiting for her assent, w
foregone conclusion, he gave the chauffeur the.
"Fairfax Mansions, Exhibition Road," a      _
"Drive as fast as you can !"    .
Then he jumped in beside Louisa. The    j
moaned and groaned whilst it manoeuvred foe
then it rattled off once more at prohibited
" It is," she said simply, " only a question .
I suppose ?"                           i
"The warrant is out," he replied curtly. ?!
moment now the police may be at his door." 
U' Uncle Ryder is convinced of Luke's guilt y
"Absolutely."
"Beyond that what does he say?"       'A
"`That unless Luke chooses to make a bolt 
had better plead guilty and intense provoca
he thinks Luke would be wise to catch the 
for Calais."
"They'd get him back on extradition."
" Tom says they won't try very hard. And
keeps his wits about him, and has a si
money, he'll be able to get right through to 1
from thence to Tangiers. With money and i
much can be done; and Tom says that if Luke
get away to-night he himself is prepared to ta
blame and all the responsibility of having
criminal to escape. It's very decent of Tom,'i
the Colonel thoughtfully, "for he risks bis
future."                            ·



<pb n="265"/>
PEOPLE WHO DO NOT CARE             *65
But the sorely troubled father did not tell his
daughter all that Sir Thomas Ryder had told him in
the course of the brief interview.
In effect, the chief of the Criminal Investigation
Department had given a brief alternative by way of
advice.
"A ticket to anywhere via Calais at once ... or
a revolver."
And he had added dryly-
" I see nothing else for it. The man has practically
confessed."
But this Colonel Harris would not admit, and so the
two men parted. Louisa's father, thinking a great
deal of his friend, but still more of his daughter,
wanted, above all things, to have a final talk with
Luke.
Louisa, in the meanwhile, sat silent in the corer of
the cab.
She was trying to visualize this new picture: Luke-
a fugitive from justice !
The taxi-cab was making a slight detour as White-
hall and the Mall were closed for road repairs. The
chauffeur was driving round.by St. Martin's Lane. At
one of the theatres there, a popular play was filling
the house night after night with enthusiastic crowds.
It was only half-past six now, and in a long queue, ex-
tending over two hundred yards away from the pit
and gallery doors of the lucky playhouse, patient
crowds waited for the evening's pleasure.
People were going to theatres-they laughed at
farces, and wept at tragedies. Was there over such a



<pb n="266"/>
266           A TRUE WOMAN
tragedy enacted inside a theatre, as now took
the life of a commonplace man and woman? I'
Luke !-a fugitive from justice ! Money
ence could do much ! they could enable a
criminal to escape the consequences of his own
They could enable him to catch express 
molested, to fly across land and sea under oo
night, to become-Cain-like-a wanderer on
of the earth without rest and without peace. -
Could they prevent him from seeing ever
his elbow the grim Angel of Remorse, hold
hand the glass wherein relentlessly flowed 
of time, and in the other the invisible sword
tarded but none the less sure vengeance ?
prevent his hearing the one word: Nemesis ?
Luke !-a fugitive from justice ! accused of
which he did not commit, self-convicted,
accused, and fleeing from its consequences as 
from Remorse.
And people went to theatres, and laughed
People ate and danced and sang. Ne
shrieked their wares: the latest sensational 
gentleman-oriminal who had money and inf
with their help evaded the grip of justice.



<pb n="267"/>
CHAPTER XXXI
A MAN MUST ACT AS HE TINKS BEST
LOUISA knew the flat in Exhibition Road very
well.  She had helped Edie to furnish it, and
to make it pretty and cosy; for Edie's passion was
for dogs and for golf; drawing-room chairs and sauce-
pans were not much in her line.  So Louisa had
chosen practically everything: the piano, as well as
the coal-scuttles, and every stick of furniture in
Luke's room.
To-night she went up the well-known stairs very
slowly: she ached so in every limb that she could
scarcely walk. She seemed to have aged twenty years
in two days.
Edie was sitting alone in the pretty drawing-room,
buried in a capacious arm-chair, her hands folded
before her. The room was in darkness, save for the
glow of the firelight. She jumped up, when Colonel
Harris and Louisa were announced, and the neat
servant in black dress and smart cap and apron
switched on the electric light.
"Oh!" said poor little Edie impetuously, "I am
so thankful you've come."
267



<pb n="268"/>
268           A TRUE WOMAN 
She ran up to Louisa and put her arms
kissing her.
"Do come and sit with me," she contin
to relinquish Colonel Harris's hand after
shaken it. "I feel that in this solitude I
dotty."
Whilst she spoke, she detached with
febrile movements Louisa's fur from round h
and dragged the older woman nearer to he
to the fire. Then she threw herself down
hearthrug: squatting there in front of the 
nervy fingers picking at the fringe of the
cheeks were red and blotchy, with traces of
tears; her hair, touzled and damp, clung
moist temples. Suddenly she burst into a
weeping.
"Oh, Loo, what does it all mean ? " she e
between heavy sighs, " what does it all mean i
say Luke has murdered that odious Philip 
have been cooped up here for two days now, not'
to go out! ashamed to face any one ! and Lu
Luke . . . oh !"
The outburst was almost hysterical. The
girl was obviously fearfully overwrought, and
dured a severe nerve-strain, by not having the
for giving vent to her feelings. Colonel Harris,
an Englishman's horror of feminine see
clearing his throat, looking supremely uncom
all the time.
" Sh ! . . .h ! " admonished Louisa impa
"be quiet, Edie, you mustn't go on like



<pb n="269"/>
A MAN MUST ACT AS HE THINKS BEST          269
quiet now!" she added more severely, seeing that
the girl made no effort to control herself; "what will
your servants think ?"
"Do you suppose," retorted Edie, "that I care
what they think ? They can't think more, can they ?
when they all talk of Luke as if he were a murderer."
"Do for God's sake be silent, Edie. This is too
awful."
And Louisa-almost roughly-dragged herself away
from the girl's hysterical embrace. She had tried so
hard for two days and two nights to keep herself
together and her nerves in check.  All day to-day
had been one long, continuous battle against the
danger of "breaking down," that bugbear of the
conventional woman of the world.
Now this danger-backed up by this poor child's
grief-loomed greater than ever  . . .now . . . that
" breaking down " would become a positive sin: the
most abject form of cowardice. But Edie's bewilder-
ment, her loneliness, were intensely pathetic. Louisa
had tried to be severe, and insisted on checking the
access of hysteria; but her heart went out to the
child, and to her puzzlement in face of this awful,
un-understandable riddle.
"Look here, Edie," she said gently, putting her
own kind arms round the quaking shoulders of the
younger girl, "you are just going to show father and
me how brave you'can be. You are Luke's nearest
and dearest one on earth: you must not add to his
troubles by this exaggerated show of grief. We'll all
have to be brave . . . all of us . . . but Luke will



<pb n="270"/>
270           A TRUE WOMAN 
have to be the bravest of us all; and so we
do our best to keep up our courage, and help
She was not accustomed to making su
speeches, nor yet to preach and to admonish.
before now, had never placed her in the 
admonishing others: everybody round her-the  _
with whom she came in contact-always
very much as they should: in the proper,
tional, worldly manner. People she had
to do with did not give way to hysterical 
had they occasion to display fortitude in the
an overwhelming moral shock.
Therefore, Louisa was not sure if her words[
carry weight, or if they would produce the ef
desired. She gazed anxiously at Edie w
spoke: looking with hopeful, yet fearful
the poor girl's face, wondering if she had suo
calming the hysterical outburst.
Edie hung her head, wilfully veiling her 
neath the drooping lids. She twirled her
handkerchief into a tight wet ball, and toyed 
nervously.
"It's not much good," she said at last, in v'
tones, so that Louisa had some difficulty in 
what she said, "my trying to be brave .. 
Luke is such a coward 1" 
" Be quiet, Edie," retorted Louisa, all her
and sympathy gone, and pushing the girl
away from her. "You have no right to 
that.".



<pb n="271"/>
A MAN MUST ACT AS HE THINKS BEST          271
"Well, Colonel Harris," rejoined Edie, turning to
the man in her distress, "I ask you, if it isn't just
cowardice to run away now, and leaving me and Jim
to face the whole thing alone "
" To run away ? What do you mean ? " demanded
Louisa, placing her hand on the girl's shoulder, forcing
her to turn round and to face her.
"Who's running away ? " queried Colonel Harris
with a frown.
"Luke," said Edie hotly, "is running away. He
came home just now, and calmly told me that he was
going off abroad to-night; and since then he has been
shut up in his room, packing his things. I have been
all alone here all day. Jim won't be home till late
to-night. Poor old Jim ! what a fearful home-coming
it will be for him  .. ."
But to this renewal of Edie's lamentations, Louisa
had not listened, only to the words: " Luke said that
he was going abroad to-night! "
Luke: fugitive from justice ! The monstrous, un-
believable picture, which she had tried to visualize
just now, had become a mirror, reflecting awful,
hideous reality.
" Where's Luke ? " asked the Colonel. " I'd better
see him."
"No, father," interposed Louisa quickly.  "I'd
sooner speak to Luke. Can I go to him, Edie ?"
"Yes, I think so," replied the other. "I don't
suppose that he has looked his door."
"Louisa," said her father gently, "I don't think



<pb n="272"/>
272           A TRUE WOMAN 1
you'll be doing any good, dear. A man must
thinks best."
"I'm not," she replied, "going to interf
Luke's plans. I only want to speak to him.
bother, Edie. I know my way."
'' 



<pb n="273"/>
CHAPTER XXXIII
IF YOU WOULD ONLY LET YOURSELF GO
LUKE was sitting at a desk, writing, when Louisa
entered his room. Only one lamp, shaded with
yellow silk, hung above the desk, throwing golden
light on paper and blotting-pad, and on the hand
which held the pen.
When Luke turned at sound of the opening door,
his face remained in deep shadow. He could not, of
course, see her distinctly, as her figure was silhouetted
against the light in the passage behind her; that was
no doubt the reason why he did not rise to greet
her when she entered, but remained seated at his
desk.
"May I come in, Luke ?" she asked.
"Certainly," he replied. "I was just writing to
you."
"Then give me your unfinished letter, and tell me
what else you were going to write."
" Oh ! I had only got as far as your name," he said,
pointing to the empty page before him.
"Was it so difficult then," she asked, "to tell me
everything "
She had come forward into the room, and stood
beside his desk, one hand resting upon it, her faoe
T                 278



<pb n="274"/>
274           A TRUE WOMAN
looking down at the letter whioh he had not 
to write. He still made no attempt to rise:
her face was in full golden light, and he co
every feature.
"It is so difficult," he said, "not to writei
when one is saying good-bye."
"You are going away  " she asked.
"Yes."
"To-night ? "
" In half an hour." 
" You are going abroad ? "
" Certainly."
" Why ?"
This last question came abruptly, in harsh, 
ant tones, altogether different to those of her
contralto voice. He turned his eye away
face, and looked down at his own hands, whi
clasped in front of him.
"Because," he replied, without the sighe
tation, " I cannot face what lies before me if I
"Why not ? "
"For many reasons. There's Uncle Rad
sider first and foremost, then Edie and Jim and
" What have they to do with it ? " 
"Everything. After the evidence at the
to-day, a warrant will be out for my arrest
the next few hours."
"What of it t "
"The evidence against me is overwh
should be tried, perhaps hanged for murder:
sent to penal servitude for life. I cannot c



<pb n="275"/>
IF YOU WOULD LET YOURSELF GO 275
1 must think of Uncle Bad, of Edie, of Jim, and of
Frank."
"You have yourself to think of first and foremost."
"Well," he retorted simply, "I have thought of
myself, and I do not see how, with my own dagger-stick
brought up in evidence against me, and my ill-feeling
towards ... towards the dead man so well-known,
I can possibly escape condemnation."
He spoke in such even and perfectly natural tones,
that just for a moment-it was a mere flash-Louisa
wondered if he were absolutely sane. It seemed im-
possible that any man could preserve such calm, in
face of the most appalling fate that ever threatened
human being. She too-like the indifferent hide-
bound official this afternoon-was seized with an
irrepressible desire to break through that surface of
ice. The outer covering must be very thin, she thought,
her presence must have melted all the coldness that
lay immediately below the surface. Without saying
another word, quietly and simply, she came down on
her knees. Her skirts had not swished as she did so:
not a sound from her revealed the movement. When
he looked up again, her face was on a level with his,
and her eyes-those great luminous eyes that shed no
tears at moments such as this-looked straight into
his own.
"For pity's sake, Loo," he said, "don't make a
drivelling coward of me now."
And he rose, pushing his chair aside, leaving her
there, kneeling beside the desk, humbled and helpless.
And he retreated within the shadow of the room.



<pb n="276"/>
276           A TRUE WOMAN
"Luke," she said, imploring him, "you 
to tell me all that troubles you."
"Nothing," he replied curtly, "troubles 
are wasting your sympathy, you know. And.
a train to catch."
"You are not going, Luke ? "
"Indeed I am."
"You condemn yourself for a crime w
have not committed."
"I am already as good as condemned.
not choose to hang for the murder of the
bricklayer's son."
He laughed-it almost sounded like a
laugh-would have done so, no doubt, to
except hers. Then he added dryly--
"Such a purposeless crime too. Fanoy,
hanged for killing Paul Baker."
"Luke," she said simply, "you don't s
realize how you are hurting me ! "
One ejaculation: "My God " escaped 
He stood quite still, in the shadow, and po
hand wandered with the old familiar ges
the smooth back of his head. She remained,
knees, and after a while he came back to her,
down on the chair beside the desk, his eyes on
with hers.
"Look here, Loo," he said quietly, "I hav
go, and that's all about it. I have got to, do 
derstand ? The consequences of this crime 
faced... not by any one... not by -
There's Uncle Rad to think of first.... He i



<pb n="277"/>
r     IF YOU WOULD LET YOURSELF GO            277
and ill . .. he has more than one foot in the grave.
. . . The trial and the scandal couldn't be kept from
him; it would be bound to leak out sooner or later.
... It would be too big a scandal! . . . and it would
kill him outright.... Then ! you see, Loo, it would
never do ! . .. I should be Earl of Radolyffe and a
felon . .. it wouldn't do, now would it ? Who has
ever heard of a peer undergoing a life sentence . . .
or being hanged ? . . . it wouldn't do . . . you know
it wouldn't do. ..."
He reiterated this several times, with quaint in-
sistence: as if he were discussing with her the possi-
bility, or impossibility, of attending a race-meeting,
or a ball in Lent-she proving obstinate.
She did not reply, leaving him to ramble on in his
somewhat wild speech, hoping that if she let him
talk on uninterruptedly he would sooner or later
betray something of that enigma which lay hidden
behind the wooden mask which he still so persistently
wore.
"Besides," he continued, still arguing, "there's
Frank to think of ... the next heir to the title....
I believe that people in penal servitude live an uncon-
scionable time . . . especially if they are wanted to
die .... Think of poor old Frank waiting to come
into his own . . . into an old title held by a felon. ....
It is all much too much of a muddle, Loo ... it is
simpler that I should go. .. ."
" But," she said, really trying now to speak as
simply, as calmly, as he did himself, "all these
arguments, which you are using now, Luke, will



<pb n="278"/>
278           A TRUE WOMAN 
equally apply if you make yourself a 
justice." 
" Oh ! I shouldn't be that for very long 1 " i
lightly.
" You are thinking of suicide " ?
"No," he replied simply, "I am not. O
chances of a wandering life."
"You seem to look at every chance, Luke,t
one."
" Which one is that ? "
"That though you might be arrested, tho
might be accused, and even tried for the ml
... of that man. . truth might come o
your innocence proved."
"That would be impossible, Loo," he said
"Why    ... in Heaven's name, Luke,"
claimed passionately-" why ? "
"My dagger-stick was found inside the
of the Park . .. and the stains on it are irre
proofs."
" That's only circumstantial evidence," she
"you can demolish it, if you choose."
"I cannot," he replied. "I should plead
. .Mr. Dobson says that if I plead guilty,
can plead extenuating circumstances . .. inten
vocation and so forth . . . and I might get a
lenient sentence."
"Luke," she said, looking him straight 
face, compelling his eyes to meet hers, for in thei
depths she meant to read the truth, to com
truth at last. He had never lied in his life.



<pb n="279"/>
T     IF YOU WOULD LET YOURSELF GO            279
lied now she would know it, she would read it in his
face. " Luke ! you are shielding some one by taking
the crime on your own shoulders."
But his eyes remained perfectly clear and steady as
they gazed straight into hers. There was not a shadow
in them, not a quiver, as he replied quietly-
" No, Loo, I am shielding no one."
"It was you who killed that man . . . Philip de
Mountford  ... or Paul Baker . . . whoever he
may be ? "
And he answered her firmly, looking steadily into
her face-
" It was I."
She said nothing more then, but rose to her feet,
and went quite- close up to him. With a gesture that
had no thought of passion in it, only sublime, motherly
love, she took Luke's head in both her hands, and
pressed it to her heart.
" My poor old Luke! " she murmured.
She smoothed his hair, as a mother does to an
afflicted child: the motherly instinct was up in arms
now, even fighting the womanly, the passionate in.
stinct of a less selfish love. She bent down and kissed
his forehead.
"Luke," she said gently, "it would do you such
a lot of good if you would only let yourself go."
He had contrived to get hold of her hands: those
hands which he loved so dearly, with their soft, rose-
tinted palms and the scent of sweet peas which clung
to them. His own hot fingers closed on those small
hands. She stood before him, tall, elegat ... not



<pb n="280"/>
t80           A TRUE WOMAN
beautiful! . . Louisa Harris had never been 
ful, nor yet a fairy princess of romance . . . o
commonplace woman! a woman of the world,!
whose graceful form-her personality even-
tion invariably threw her mantle ! . . . but a 
for all that! . . .with passion burning bene
crust of worldly sang-froid-with heart attuned 
every quiver, every sensation of joy and of pain. 
A woman who loved with every fibre in her-who
the supreme gift of merging self in Love-of gi
her soul, her heart, her mind and every thought
a woman who roused every chord of passion in a
heart . . . the woman whom men adore 
And now as Luke de Mountford held her ha
she stood close beside him, her breath comi
going in quick gasps, with the suppressed exoi
of latent self-sacrifice, her eyes glowing and t
he half slid from the chair on which he was 
and one knee was on the ground, and his face
up to hers. 
le almost smiled, as she repeated, with a little
"If you would only let yourself go ! "
"If I would let myself dwindle down to the
of drivelling fools," he said. "God knows, 
would be easy enough now, when I hold those
little hands of yours; and the scent of sweet peast
comes from your dear self reminds me of sum
old-fashioned gardens, of enduring peace.  i
dare not even kiss your hands, and yet my wh
aches with the longing to press my lips on the
see how easily I drift into being a drivellig
·  . ~'



<pb n="281"/>
IF YOU WOULD LET YOURSELF GO M81
Would to God I could lie on the ground here before you,
and feel the soles of your feet on my neck. How lucky
slaves were in olden days, weren't they ? They could
kneel before their mistress and she would place her
naked foot upon their neck. I am a drivelling fool,
you see .... I talk and talk and let the moments slip
by .... I am going, Loo, and this is the vision which
I am taking with me, the last impression which will
dwell in my memory, when memory itself will seem
only a dream. You, Loo, standing just here, so close
to me that your sweet breath fans my cheeks, your
dear hands in mine, the scent of sweet peas in my
nostrils. The light of this lamp throws a golden radi-
ance over you, your lips are quivering ... oh I ever
so slightly, and your eyes reveal to me the exquisite-
ness of your soul. Loo! I am a lucky mortal to
have such a vision on which to let my memory
dwell!"
She listened in silence, enjoying the delight of hear-
ing him unburdening his soul at last. His love for her I
never had it seemed so great and so pure, now that he
spoke of parting! and there was a quaint joy in hearing
him thus rambling on-he, the reserved man of the
world. Convention had so often sealed his lips, and
restrained his passion when he was still wandering
happily with her on the smooth paths of Love. Now
Fate had hurled stone upon stone down that path.
The way was rugged and difficult, parting too was
close at hand: all the restraint of past months tore at
the barrier of convention. Luke, about to lose the
mortal presence of his love, allowed his lips to say that



<pb n="282"/>
282           A TRUE WOMAN
which he had hidden in his heart for so long. 
of the world lost himself in the man who lOV
When he had ceased speaking, she said qu
"You talk, Luke, as if we were going to 
"To-night, Loo. I must catch the night $
"My luggage can be sent on," she rejoined
"I am quite ready to start."
" To start ? " he repeated vaguely.   4
"Why, yes, Luke," she replied, with a sm
you go to-night, or at any time, I go with you.,
"You cannot, Loo "     he stammered,
stupidly, feeling quite bewildered, for he h
forcibly dragged back from a happy dream
to one of impossible reality.
" Why not ? "
" You have said it yourself, Loo. I shall 
tive from justice ... a man with whom no
woman would care to link her fate."    "
"Let us admit then," she said, almost gailyy
I am not a decent woman, for my fate is irre
linked with yours."
"This is preposterous .. ." he begaan
But already she had interrupted him, 
quietly in that even, contralto voice of hers 
loved to hear.
"Luke," she said, " you must try and unz
You must . . . because I have so fully mads
mind, that nothing that you could say wo
me change it, unless you told me that you 
loved me. And this," she added, with the 



<pb n="283"/>
IF YOU WOULD LET YOURSELF GO          Sf
smile, " you cannot now pretend, Luke, after all that
you said just now. It is not that my mind wanted
making up. My mind has very little to do with it all.
It knows just as my heart does that I could not now
live without you. I'm not talking nonsense, Luke,
and I seem to be too old for mere sentimental twaddle;
therefore, when I say that I could not now live parted
from you, I say it from the innermost conviction of my
heart. Sh . . . sh . . . dear," she whispered, seeing
that he wished to interrupt her, " don't try and say
anything just yet-not just yet-until I have told you
everything. I want you to remember, Luke, that I
am no longer very young, and that ever since I can
remember anything, I have loved you.... I must
have loved you, even though I did not know it. But
if you had never spoken of love to me, if you had never
written that letter which I received in Brussels, I
probably would have been satisfied to go on with my
humdrum life to the end of time;-who knows ? I
might have found contentment if not happiness, by and
by, with some other man. We women are meant to
marry. Men are fond of telling us that our only mission
on earth is to marry. But all this possible, quiet con-
tent one letter has dissipated. I could never be happy
now, never, save in continuing to love you. Life to me
would be unspeakably hideous without you and your
love. Therefore I say, Luke, that you have no longer
any right to keep me at arm's length. You have no
right, having once come into my life, having once given
substance and vitality to my love, to withdraw your-
self away from me. Love, dear, is a bond, a mutual



<pb n="284"/>
284           A TRUE WOMAN
bond, as sacred, as binding as any that are co
on this earth. You-when you wrote that let
first you spoke to me of love-entered into a
me. You have no right to force me to break it.
The mellow tones of her contralto voice died
the heavy atmosphere of the room. They eho
re-echoed in the heart of the man, who was nowi
ing before Louisa, as he would before the
dumb with the intensity of emotion which her
words, the sublime selflessness of her sacrifioei
brought to almost maddening pitch. She stoodl
near him, so devoted, so noble, and so pure, 
wonder or will you smile, when you see him wi
young head bowed to the ground pressing his lips
point of her shoe ?
"Luke ! don't," she cried, in passionate sy
She understood him so well, you see !
" Kiss your feet, dear ? " he asked. "I wo
down in the dust for your dear feet to walk ov
I only wonder why God should love me so that h
you for this one beautiful moment to me.
dearest saint, I cannot accept your sacrifice. 
heart! dear, dear heart ! do try and believe me, -
I say that I cannot accept it. As for imagning
I don't understand it and appreciate it, why, ae
think that to-morrow's sun will never rise. I wa
you, my saint! and I worship your love: the p
most tender sentiment that ever glorified this
world. But its sacrifice I cannot accept. I
I would sooner do that most cowardly of all d
my life here and now, than be tempted for onil



<pb n="285"/>
IF YOU WOULD LET YOURSELF GO             285
instant into the cowardice of accepting it. But the
memory of it, dear, that I will take with me. Do not
think of me in future as being unhappy. No man can
be unhappy whose heart is fed on such a memory I "
He had her two hands imprisoned in his, the scent
of sweet peas floating gently to his nostrils. As he
buried his lips in their fragrant soft palms he was
entirely happy. The world had floated away from him.
He was in a land of magic with her; in a land where
the air was filled with the fragrance of sweet peas, a
land of phantasmagoria, the land of Fata Morgana,
which none can enter save those who love. Time sped
on, and both had forgotten the world. The fire
crackled in the hearth, the clock alone recorded the
passing of time. The noise of the great city-so cruel
to those who suffer-came but as a faint echo through
the closely drawn curtains.
There was a discreet knock at the door, and as no
reply came from within, it was repeated more insis-
tently.
Luke jumped to his feet, and Louisa retreated into
the shadow.
" Come in! " said Luke.
The door was opened, quite softly, from outside, and
the well-drilled servant said-
" Two gentlemen to see you, sir."
"Where are they, Mary  " he asked.
"In the hall, sir."
Did they give their names ? "
"No, sir."
"Where's Miss Edie, Mary ?"



<pb n="286"/>
286           A TRUE WOMAN 
"In the drawing-room, sir, with Colonel
" Very well. Then show the two gentlen"a
dining-room. I'll come in a moment."
" Very good, sir." 
And the discreet little maid retired, closing
after her.
.1



<pb n="287"/>
CHAPTER XXXIV
WHICH ONLY SPEAKS OF FAREWELLS
HE door had scarcely closed, and already she was
near-him.
" Luke! " she whispered, and her voice was hoarse
now and choked, " the police ! "
"That's about it," he said; "I thought that they
meant to let me get away."
"So father understood from Sir Thomas Ryder.
What will you do, Luke ? "
" I can't do anything, I am afraid. I wanted to get
away. ..."
"And I have kept you ... and now it is too
late."
A very little while ago, she had hated the idea of
his going.  Luke-a fugitive from justice-was a
picture on which it was intolerable to look. But now
the womanly instinct rose up in revolt: at the very
thought that he should be arrested, tried and con-
demned ! What mattered if he were a fugitive, if he
were ostracized and despised ? What mattered any-
thing, so long as he lived and she could be near him ?
A very little while ago she would have done anything
to keep him from going: she almost longed for his
arrest and the publicity of the trial. She was so sure
287



<pb n="288"/>
288           A TRUE WOMAN
that truth would surely come out, that his i
would of necessity be proved.
But now, womanlike, she only longed for 
and forgetting all the traditions of her past
old lessons of self-restraint: forgetting ev
except his immediate danger, she clung to 
all the true passion in her, which she no lo
to keep in check.
"No, Luke," she murmured in quick jer
"it is not too late ... not at all too late..
stay in here quietly, and I'll ask father to 
speak to them.... He'll tell them that you
come home yet, and that he is waiting here
himself.... Father is well known ... th
suspect him of shielding you . .. and in t'
while, you can slip out easily ... we'll
luggage on  ... you can write and let us kn
you are... it is quite easy... and
late...."
Whilst she spoke, she was gradually edging
the door. Her voice had sunk to a hoarse
for maddening terror almost deprived her odi
With insistent strength she would not allow
detain her; and he, whilst trying to hold 
was afraid of hurting her. But at the last,  I
had almost reached the door, he contrived
stall her, and before she could guess his pw
had pressed a finger on the button of the
bell.
She heard the distinct tinkle of the bell,
made her pause.



<pb n="289"/>
WHICH ONLY SPEAKS OF FAREWELLS            89
"What is it, Luke " she asked. "Why did you
ring ? "
" For your father, dear," he replied simply.
" Then you will do what I want you to ? " she re-
joined eagerly. "You will go away? "
He gave no immediate answer, for already the
maid's footstep was heard along the passage. The
next moment she was knocking at the door. Luke
went up to it, gently forcing Louisa back into the
shadow behind him.
" Mary," he said, with his hand on the latch of the
door, holding it slightly ajar, "just ask Colonel Harris
to come here, will you  "
"Yes, sir.9"
The girl was heard turning away, and walking away
briskly along the passage. Then Luke faced Louisa
once again.
He went up to her, and without a word took her
in his arms. It was a supreme farewell, and she knew
it. She felt it in the quiver of agony which went
right through him as he pressed her so close-so close
that her breath nearly left her body, and her heart
seemed to stand still She felt it in the sweet, sad pain
of the burning kisses with which he covered her
face, her eyes, her hair, her mouth. It was the final
passionate embrace: the irrevocable linking of soul,
and heart, and mind: the parting of earthly bodies,
the union of immortal souls. It was the end of all
things earthly, the beginning of things eternal.
She understood, and her resistance vanished. All
that had been dark to her became suddenly trans-
U



<pb n="290"/>
290           A TRUE WOMAN
figured and illumined. With the merging
passion into that Love which is God's br
the pure and selfless woman, God's most pe
on earth-became as God, and knew what
and what had been evil.
Neither of them spoke; the word "fare
not uttered between them. His final kis
her eyes, and she closed them after that;
to imprint on her memory the vision of
lit up with the divine fire of an unoon
passion.
The entrance of Colonel Harris brought 
back to present reality. He, poor man, looked
troubled, and distinctly older than he usu
" Did you want me, Luke t " he asked.
"Yes, sir," replied the latter, "thb police'
and I thought that perhaps you and Louisa
so kind as to take Edie along with you. Jim
to sleep in barracks to-night, and Edie ought
stay here alone." 
"Yes. We'll take Edie," said the Coloeli
"she'll be all right with us. Are you ready, 
"Yes, dear," she replied.
And she passed out of the door without i
word, or another look. 
The supreme farewell had been spoken. 
words-even another kiss-would have
crated its undying memory.
The two men remained alone, and Colonde
without any hesitation, held out his hand to
Mountford.



<pb n="291"/>
WHICH ONLY SPEAKS OF FAREWELLS           291
" The police is here, sir," said Luke, without taking
the hand that was offered him.
" I know they are," muttered the other, " that's no
reason why you should refuse an old friend's hand."
Then as Luke-hesitating no longer-placed his
burning hand in that of his friend, Colonel Harris
said quietly, almost entreatingly-
" It's only a temporary trouble, eh, my boy ? You
can easily refute this abominable charge, and prove
your innocence ? "
" I think not, sir," replied Luke. " I cannot refute
the charge, and my innocence will be difficult to
prove."
" But you are mad, man! " retorted the older man
hotly. "You are mad I and are breaking a woman's
heart I"
" Heaven forgive me for that, sir. It is the greatest
crime."
Colonel Harris smothered a powerful oath. Luke's
attitude puzzled him more and more. And his loyalty
had received such a succession of shocks to-day, that it
would have been small wonder if it had begun to totter
at last.
He turned away without another word. But at the
door he paused once more-in obvious hesitation.
" There's nothing else I can do for you ? " he asked.
"Nothing, sir. Thank you."
"You . . . you were not thinking . . . of . .  "
"Of what, sir ? " asked Luke.
Then, as he saw the other man's eyes wandering
to the drawer of the desk, he said simply-



<pb n="292"/>
292          A TRUE WOMAN 
"Of suicide, you mean, sir "  :
Colonel Harris nodded. 
"Oh no," rejoined Luke. And he added,
slight pause: "Not at present."
"What do you mean by that "
"I mean that I shouldn't exactly hang 
murder of the Clapham bricklayer. I shou
come to that. I am sorry I did not manaug
away to-night. I thought they meant to let
"I think they did mean to. Some b
suppose, on the part of the subordinates."  :
"I suppose so."
"Well, Luke," said Colonel Harris with a d
"I have known you ever since you were a c
by G-d, man! I confess that I don't un
you."
"That's very kindly put, sir," rejoined Lk
the semblance of a smile; "you have every
call me a confounded blackguard."
" I shall only do that after your trial, my boy
the other, " when I have heard you confess
own lips that you killed that d-d sooun
moment of intense provocation."
"I had better not keep the police waitia
longer, sir, had I "
"No ! no ! that's all right. I'll take my
away at once, and we'll see after Edie, and J'm/
we'll look after them  . . and Frank too w
comes home."
"Thank you, sir."
"S'long, my boy."



<pb n="293"/>
WHICH ONLY SPEAKS OF FAREWELLS           298
And Colonel Harris-puzzled, worried, and miser-
able-finally went out of the room. On the threshold
he turned, moved by the simple and primitive instinct
of wishing to take a last look at a friend.
He saw Luke standing there in the full light of the
electric lamp, calm, quite serene, correct to the last in
attitude and bearing. The face was just a mask-
marble-like and impassive-jealously guarding the
secrets of the soul within. Just a good-looking, well-
bred young Englishman in fact, who looked in his
elegant attire ready to start off for some social function.
Not a single trace either on his person or in his neat,
orderly surroundings of the appalling tragedy which
would have broken the spirit of any human creature
less well-schooled in self-restraint.
Convention was triumphant to the end.
The man of the world-the   nglish gentleman-
hypocritical or unemotional?  which ?-was here
ready to face abject humiliation and hopeless disgrace
as impassively as he would have received the welcome
of a hostess at a dinner-party.



<pb n="294"/>
CHAPTER FXXXV
WHIOH TELLS OF PICTURES IN THE WIE
Tdid not take poor little Edie very long to 
things on and to make ready to go away 
Colonel Harris and with Louisa. Something of
truth had to be told to her, and we must do hb
justice to state that when she understood the
strength of the calamity which had befallen her
Luke, something of her brother's oalm dignity s
itself in her own demeanour.
She pulled herself together with remarkable 
and before Mary-the maid-she contrived to 
just as if nothing of great importance had occu
" I am going to dine out to-night, Mary," she
quite calmly, " and I mayn't be home until som
to-morrow. So don't sit up for me."
" No, miss," replied Mary demurely, who kept
own counsel, like the well-drilled good-class
that she was.
" And tell cook that Mr. de Mountford won't
either, nor Mr. Jim. I'll see her to-morrow and
her know when we all come back."
"Very good, miss."
Louisa gave ungrudging admiration, and w
praise to the young girl. She was proud of
294



<pb n="295"/>
TELLS OF PICTURES IN THE FIRE         29
behaviour, and grateful to her too. This atmosphere
of reserve did her good. She could not have endured
a scene of weeping and keep her own nerves in check
all the while.
It was close upon eight o'clock when at last they
reached the Langham Hotel. Colonel Harris ordered
the dinner to be served in the private sitting-room.
Of course, none of them could eat anything. Their in-
ward thoughts were following Luke de Mountford along
that weary Calvary which he had set himself to mount.
Soon after dinner Edie elected to go to bed. The
poor child had a vague desire to be alone, and also a
vague, unhappy feeling that she was in the way. She
was quite woman enough now to understand how much
more acutely Louisa Harris must be suffering than she
did herself, and since she-the sister-longed for
solitude, how much keener must be that longing
in the heart of the woman who loved and had lost
Luke.
So she went quietly off to bed. Louisa kissed her
with real affection. Edie seemed like something of
Luke: like a tender bequest made by a dying man.
After that she herself said "good night" to her
father. Colonel Harris was obviously in such acute
distress that Louisa felt that, above all things, he must
have the companionship of those of his own sex. The
atmosphere of woman's sorrow was essentially bad for
him. He was not a young man, and the last two days
had tried him very severely. Louisa hoped that if she
pretended to go to bed early, he would perhaps be
induced to go to his Club for an hour.



<pb n="296"/>
296            A TRUE WOMAN
If he only sat there for an hour, reading thei
and nodding to his many friends, it would 
out of himself.
"I am very tired, dear," she said, after she 
Edie safely tucked up amongst the blankets; "
I'll follow Edie's good example. It's no usen
here, staring into the fire. Is it, dear "  I
"Not a bit of use, Loo. And I suppose youl
like to be alone "
"I shan't go to bed, dear, unless you goPS
Club."
"Very well, Loo. It seems the right thing
doesn't it t You go to bed, and I'll go to the
an hour. As you say, it's no use sitting s
the fire."
Her room gave on one side of the sitting-r
her father's on the other. She waited  ntil
Harris went away, having helped him on with 
coat. After he left she felt a little twinge of
The night was cold and raw, and he really
wanted to go out. He would have been quite
to sit in front of the fire, smoking and reading.
only gone because his own innate kindliness
had suggested to him that Louisa wished to
alone.
He too, like Edie, felt a little in the way/.r
daughter's grief was of a nature that a fathl
cannot soothe. The greatest solace for it now,
be solitude. So, in spite of the fog, in spite of i
pleasantness that met Colonel Harris on every
every newspaper, he sallied out of the hotel 



<pb n="297"/>
TELLS OF PICTURES IN THE         FIE    2W
into a hansom, with the avowed intention of spending
a couple of hours at his Club.
Louisa, left alone in the sitting-room, in front of the
cheery fire, sat down for a moment on the sofa and
rested her head against the cushions. There was
memory even in that, for when she closed her eyes, she
could imagine that Luke was sitting at the foot of the
sofa; she could see him almost, with his eyes turned
ever towards her, and that quaint gesture of his when
he passed his hand over the back of his neatly groomed
head.
The memory was intolerable now. She rose-restless
and feverish-and stood by the fire, one hand on the
high mantelshelf, her forehead resting against that
hand, one foot on the fender, and her aching eyes
gazing into the red-hot glow.
It was one of those big red fires, partly made up of
coke and partly of coal, wherein only here and there
tiny blue flames flit waywardly, and in the building
of which hotel servants are usually past-masters. The
glowing coal heaped up high in the old-fashioned grate
presented a wonderful picture of mysterious architec-
ture: streets and lanes of crimson incandescence,
palaces and towers of molten heat, and the little blue
flames dancing, and peeping out from the fiery depths,
mocking and wayward, twirling and twisting as with
the joy of life.
Louisa gazed into this city of brilliant crimson and
gold, the streets, the palaces, and the towers. And as
she gazed-with eyes almost seared-these same streets
of fire assumed different shapes, they became stately



<pb n="298"/>
998           A TRUE WOMAN
and wide, with rows of trees forming an ae
the middle, and tal houses on either side. One
people were walking along the pavement, but
as if they had business to transact and did not
loiter. One figure, that of a woman, in neat 
serviceable hat, was walking briskly between 
of trees.
The blue flames danced, and disolosed a few 
hurrying past swiftly in the night, huge
lumbering along, and one or two flying mo
And far ahead-right in the heart of the glo
distant lights of a more busy thoroughfare. N
wide street was more dark and lonely than before
the solitary female figure appeared in the fiery
walking among the trees. The last of the  l
tramoars had been merged in the distant lights ;
from afar came flying on the blue flames, a ta
lightning speed.
It came along, its headlights burning more an
brightly; it rattled past the solitary female pede
Then it stopped in the dark angle made by a hug
of coal: the blue flames gave a hiss and from
corner of the grate crowds of people came
the spot where the taxi-cab had halted. The 
female pedestrian also hurried to the spot. She ^
on the outskirts of the crowd, and yet she saw
thing that went on in and around the mot
horror-stricken driver, the bustling gen
huddled-up mass in the darkest oorer of the
Then the coal, consumed by its own po
together in a formless heap, and the picture v
is_



<pb n="299"/>
TELLS OF PICTURES IN THE FIRE          299
Louisa closed her eyes, for the heat in them was in-
tolerable. But only for a moment, for now her mind
was made up.
Ever since she had parted from Luke, one thought
had been dominant in her mind, one memory had
obtruded itself beyond all others, taking definite shape
in the visions conjured up by the glowing embers of
the fire: that night in Brussels !-the great, unforget-
able night, on which her whole life's history seemed
to find its birth-time.
One great resolve, too, had now taken definite shape.
Louisa rang for her maid, and asked for hat and
cloak. The maid, somewhat horrified that her mistress
should think of going out alone at so late an hour, was
too well drilled to offer advice or make comment. She
brought a warm wrap and a closely fitting, simple hat,
and respectfully wished to know when she should
expect her mistress home.
"In about an hour's time," said Louisa. "Come
down into the hall with me, and tell the porter to call
me a cab."
Then she went down, accompanied by her maid. A
cab was called, and she directed the driver to 56 Chester
Terrace.
The address was that of Lady Ryder's town house.
The maid-feeling more satisfied-went upstair again.



<pb n="300"/>
CHAPTER XXXVI
PEOPLE DON'T DO THAT SORT OF TH
TADY RYDER was out of town. She
ing at a country house in the Mi
peroning her nieces-Louisa's twin ste
Thomas Ryder was at home.
It was for him that Louisa had asked 
butler opened the door in answer to her ring.u-
" Sir-Thomas is in the library, miss," said
"Will you come into the drawing-room ? and
Sir Thomas you are here, miss."
"No " she said, " don't announce me. 
the library."
Sir Thomas put down the paper, which he
reading, when his niece entered. He did not se
astonished to see her. No doubt the exercise 
profession had taught him never to be 
anything in life. He rose, when he recognized' 
was, and carefully folded his eyeglasses, and
them into their case and into his waistcoat 
Then he said--
"My dear Louisa! this is quite unexpeo  t
your father with you  " ?(
"No !" she replied. "I came alone. May
down t" 
300oo



<pb n="301"/>
PEOPLE DONT DO THAT SORT OF THING 801
"Certainly, my dear child," he mid genially, and
himself wheeled a capacious arm-chair round to the
fire.
" I am not disturbing you, Uncle Ryder "
" No ! no I take off your cloak, won't you ? I was
only looking at the evening paper, preparatory to
turning in early."
She glanced at the paper on the table: that page
was uppermost that bore the startling headline, in
unusually large type: "The Murder in the Taxi-cab.
Sensational Developments." The chief of the Criminal
Investigation Department studied the accounts in the
newspapers, the opinion of pressmen and reporters.
Everything interested him: he weighed everything
in his mind, no silly advice, no empty tittle-tattle, was
ever dismissed by him without its due meed of con-
sideration.
Uncle and niece now sat opposite each other, facing
the hearth. He looked straight into the fire, knowing
that she would not wish him to see the misery in her
face.
" Will you have something, Loo ? " he asked kindly.
"A cup of tea, or something ? "
"No, thank you, uncle. We had dinner, and father
has gone to the Club. I came to see you about Luke."
"Yes ? " he said.
"All along," she continued, "ever since father saw
you yesterday, I wanted to speak to you. Silly con-
ventionality kept me back."
" It certainly is not usual .. ."he began.
" No," she broke in quickly, "I know it is not, But



<pb n="302"/>
80t           A TRUE WOMAN
this is an unusual case, far too serious for 
of taot or convention to creep in. The ma
I love best in all the world is falsely accused of
abominable crime. He was arrested-by your
I suppose-about an hour ago."
He put up his hand in gentle deprecation. 
"Stop a moment, my dear," he said quite
but very decisively. "If you have any ideai
back of your head that I, personally, have
fluence at my command, with regard to 
Mountford's fate, then the sooner you get t
out of your head the better. If you came here 
with the notion that by pleading with me y
save Luke from the consequences of his r
get that notion out of your head, my dear,
us both from a very painful interview. 
Mountford was not arrested by my orders: I
an automaton of the law, which takes its own
without any personal interference on my part. 
ally, I-as an automaton-did just as duty
law of this country direct. Personally, I sent
your father some sound advice to Luke de Moun
She listened, impassive and silent, to his
and then said simply--
"I beg your pardon, Uncle Ryder: I mu*l
expressed myself badly. I knew quite well t
personally, bear no animosity against Luke :..
indeed should you ? I had no intention wha
coming to see you to-night, of making a 
lamentation and supplication. On the con
knew quite well that-acting from the best of



<pb n="303"/>
PEOPLE DON'T DO THAT SORT OF THING 808
-you advised Luke to fly from justice: since in your
opinion his condemnation is a foregone conclusion.
Father hadn't the chance of passing your advice on
to Luke; because, when he got to Fairfax Mansions,
Edie told us that he was packing up his things, meaning
to catch the night boat to Calais."
"Then why the dickens did he miss his train  "
exclaimed Sir Thomas gruffly.
"It was not altogether his fault," she replied.
"Our arrival delayed him a little; but he would
have had plenty of time even then, only the police
came, you see, and it was too late."
"I know. It was silly, officious blundering on the
part of one of my subs. I meant de Mountford to have
plenty of time to get away; and I could have managed
it somehow, to leave him unmolested, if he kept some
distance away from England. The whole thing has
been most unfortunate."
"I don't think so, uncle," she said quietly. "I am
glad, very glad, that Luke has been arrested."
"Are you " he retorted dryly. "The outlook for
him is not pleasant."
"I know that. But at any rate, now there is a
chance that he can prove his innocence."
Sir Thomas Ryder gave a quick sigh of impatience.
"My dear child," he said gently, "do try and be
reasonable about that. You only lay up for yourself
further stores of misery and of disappointment. De
Mountford is guilty, I ten you. He practioally con-
fessed at the inquest, and he practically confessed
to our fellows after his arrest."



<pb n="304"/>
804           A TRUE WOMAN 
"Practically," she said with strong
"but not really. Luke has never confessed
has committed a murder."               '
"Well! he admits that the stick with 
murder was done was his stick, that he hadi.
hand the night that the murder was o
that he went out with it in his hand five 
before the other man was murdered."
"I know all that," she rejoined, " but let me
this, Uncle Ryder. Luke has admitted all tha
say; but he has never admitted that he kil
de Mountford-or Paul Baker-whoever he
Luke, Uncle Ryder, is allowing the awful
to rest upon him, because he wishes to shield
perpetrator of the crime."
"Nonsense " broke in Sir Thomas curtly.. :
" Why nonsense ? "
"Because, my dear Loo," he said slowly andi
"people don't do that sort of thing. The oo
of having taken another person's life-o
murder-are so terrible that no one will bear 
the sake of any one else on earth."
"Yet I tell you, uncle," she reiterated with 
at least equal to his own, "that Luke neve
that man, and that he pleads guilty of the
order to shield some one else."
"Whom ? " he retorted.
"That I do not know ,. as yet. But
reason why I came here to-night, uncle:
must help me to find out."
Sir Thomas abruptly rose from his chair, and 



<pb n="305"/>
PEOPLE DON'T DO THAT SORT OF THING 806
stand on the hearthrug, with legs apart, and slender
hands buried in the pockets of his trousers, in the
attitude dear to every Englihman.
His eyes, in their framework of innumerable wrinkles,
looked down, not unkindly, at the pale, serious face
of the girl before him.
He, who was accustomed to give every scrap of advice,
every senseless piece of tittle-tattle, its just meed of
attention, was not likely to leave unheeded the calm
assertions of a woman for whom he had great regard,
and who was the daughter of a brother officer and
one of his best friends. Of course, the girl was in love
with de Mountford, so her judgment on him was not
likely to be wholly unbiassed. At the same time, Sir
Thomas-like all men who have knocked about the.
world a great deal, and seen much of its seamy side-
had a great belief in woman's instinct, as apart from
her judgment, and he was the last man in the world
to hold the sex in contempt.
"Look here, my dear," he said after a little while,
during which he had tried to read the lines in the in-
teresting face turned up towards him, " I honour you
for your sense of loyalty to de Mountford, just the same
as I honour your father for the like reason. And in order
to prove to you that I, individually, would be only too
happy to see the man's innocence established beyond
a doubt, I am going to argue this soberly and sensibly
with you. You hold the theory that Luke de Mount-
ford is shielding some one from the consequences of an
awful crime by taking the burden on himself. Now,
my dear, as I told you before, people don't do that sort
I



<pb n="306"/>
306           A TRUE WOMAN
of thing nowadays. In olden times, theoe
of a crime-especially where the aristocracy 
cemed-were quite picturesque: the Tower, the
and all that sort of thing. But to-day the 
nalia of vengeful justice is very sordid, very
anything but glorious. It means the lengthy 
before a police magistrate, then the trial, t
dragged up to the light, the most private secrets 
to the morbid curiosity of the million. In order
that sort of thing, my dear, a man must be either 
-then he cannot help it; or wrongfully aouse
he hopes for the establishment of his innocenoe. 
a man does not prepare himself to face all that
Quixotic motives alone, knowing himself to be
cent, and because he desires that another sho
spared those awful humiliations and the ohanoe'4
disgusting and shameful death."
"What do you mean by all that, Uncle Bd
she asked.
"I mean that if we are going to admit this 
motive in de Mountford's attitude now, there oanai
be one mainspring for it."
" What is that  "
"It is perhaps a little difficult . ." he said
what hesitatingly.
" You mean," she interposed quietly, " that if
is taking this awful crime upon himself for the 
another, that other can only be a woman whom heo
"Well I " retorted Sir Thomas, "it is not you, m
I presume, who killed this bricklayer from Clap
She did not reply immediately; but her lips



<pb n="307"/>
PEOPLE DON'T DO THAT SORT OF THING 807
framed themselves into a smile. Luke, and another
woman 1 To Sir Thomas Ryder that seemed, indeed,
a very simple explanation. Men have been known to
do strange things, to endure much and to sacrifice
everything for the sake of a woman I But then, Sir
Thomas knew nothing of Luke, nothing more than
what the latter chose to show of his inward self to the
world. The memory of those few moments in the
room in Fairfax Mansions laughed the other man's
suggestion to scorn. Louisa shook her head and said
simply-
"No, Uncle Ryder, I did not kill the Clapham
bricklayer in the cab."
" And you won't admit that Luke may be shielding
another woman? " said Sir Thomas, with just the
faintest semblance of a sneer.
"I won't say that," she replied gravely. "You see,
I don't really know. I would take a dying oath at this
moment-if I were on the point of death-that Luke
never committed that abominable crime. I won't even
say that he is incapable of it. I'll only swear that he
did not do it. And yet he is silent when he is accused.
Then, to me, the only possible, the only logical conclu-
sion is that he is shielding some one else."
"Have you questioned him ? "
"Yes."
"Put the question directly to him, I mean  "
" Yes."
"And what did he say  "
"That his own stick condemns him, and that he
would plead guilty at his trial,"



<pb n="308"/>
808        A TRUE WOMAN             ::
"He never told you direotly or indirectly
killed the man  "
For the space of one second only did Louisa h
She had asked Luke the direct question : "Was i
who killed that man ? " and he had replied: " I
I." She had asked it then, determined to kno
truth, convinced that she would know the truth
he gave reply. And she did learn the truth th
there, not as Luke hoped that she would interp
but as it really was. He had never really lied 
for she had never been deceived. Now, she did no$i
to hide anything from Sir Thomas Ryder, the_
man in the whole world who could help her to
Luke's innocence in spite of himself, therefore
her uncle reiterated his question somewhat
she replied quite frankly, looking straight up at 
"He told me directly that it was he who had
the man." -
"And even then you did not believe him ?"
"I knew that he tried to lie." 
"You firmly believe that de Mountford knowsj
killed that Paul Baker-or whoever he was ? "
"I do."
"And that he means to go through his trial, 
plead guilty to a charge of murder, so that the':
criminal should escape ? "
"Yes " 
"And that he is prepared to hang-to hang,
you " reiterated Sir Thomas, with almost
bluntness, "if he is condemned, in order to alo
real eriminal to escape ?"



<pb n="309"/>
PEOPLE DON'T DO THAT SORT OF THING 809
"Y ee."
" And you yourself have no notion as to who this
person may be ? "
" No."
" Is there anybody, do you think, who is likely to
know more about Luke de Mountford's past and present
life than you do yourself ? "
"Yes," she said, "Lord Radclyffe."
"Old Radolyffe !" he ejaculated.
"Why, yes. Lord Radolyffe adored Luke before this
awful man came between them. He had him with him
ever since Luke was a tiny boy. There's no one in the
world for whom he cared as he cared for Luke, and the
affection was fully reciprocated. My belief is that Lord
Radclyffe knows more about Luke than any one else
in the world."
" But old Rad is very ill just now, unfortunately."
"It would kill him," she retorted, "if anything
happened to Luke, whilst he was being coddled up as
an invalid, almost as a prisoner, and no news allowed
to reach him."
Sir Thomas was silent for a moment, .obviously
buried in thought. That he was still incredulous was
certainly apparent to Louisa's supersensitive percep-
tions; but that he meant to be of help to her, in
spite of this incredulity, was equally certain. There-
fore she waited patiently until he had collected his
thoughts.
"Well, my dear," he said at last, "I'll tell you
what I will do. To-morrow morning I'll go and see if
I can have a talk with old Rad , ."



<pb n="310"/>
810           A TRUE WOMAN
"To-morrow  morning," she broke in
"Luke will be dragged before the
the first stage of that awful series of hmi
which you yourself say, Uncle Ryder, that 
who is innocent can possibly endure I" 
" I know, my dear," he said almost apolo
"but I don't see now how that can be avoided.'
"We could see Lord Radelyffe to-night! " 
"To-night? " he exclaimed, "Why t it's ni
ten o'clock."            ,
" In matters of this sort, time does not count."i
"But old Rad is an invalid I "
" He may be a dead man to-morrow, if he hearsi
Luke-Luke, who was the apple of his eye, 
is the heir to his name and title-is being drag
open court before a police magistrate, charged i
an abominable crime."
"But the doctor, I understand, has forbidden'I
to see any one."
"I think that the matter has passed the bo
a doctor's orders. I would go and force my way,
his presence without the slightest scruple. I know
any news that he may glean about Luke, within'
next few days, will be far more fatal to him thmE
few questions which I want to ask him to-night."
"That may be, my dear," rejoined Sir T
dryly, " but this does not apply to me. Old Radi
very old friend of mine, but if I went with you oi
errand to-night, I should be going not as a friend,
in an official capacity, and as such I cannot do it 
out the doctor's permission."



<pb n="311"/>
PEOPLE DONT DO THAT SORT OF THING 811
"Very well, then," she said quietly, "we'll ask Dr.
Newington's permission."
For a little while yet Sir Thomas Ryder seemed to
hesitate. Clearly the girl's arguments, her simple con-
viction, and her latent energy had made a marked im-
pression upon him. He was no longer the sceptical
hide-bound official: the man, the gentleman was tear-
ing away at the fetters of red tape. All the old in-
stincts of chivalry, which at times might be dormant
in the heart of an English gentleman-but which are al-
ways there nevertheless, hidden away by the mantle of
convention-had been aroused by Louisa's attitude to-
wards the man she loved, and also by the remembrance
of Luke's bearing throughout this miserable business.
After all, what the girl asked was not so very diffi-
cult of execution. There are undoubtedly cases where
the usual conventional formulas of etiquette must
give way to serious exigencies. And there was un-
answerable logic in Louisa's arguments: at any time
in the near future that old Rad-either through his own
obstinacy, or the stupidity or ill-will of a servant-got
hold of a newspaper, the suddenness of the blow which
he would receive by learning the terrible news without
due preparation would inevitably prove fatal to him.
Sir Thomas Ryder prided himself on being a diplo-
matist of the first water; he did believe that he could
so put the necessary questions to Lord Radclyffe, with
regard to Luke, that the old man would not suspect
the truth for a moment. The latter had, of course,
known of the murder before he had been stricken with
illness; he had at the time answered the questions



<pb n="312"/>
112           A TRUE WOMAN 
put to him by the police officer, without seemi
greatly shocked at the awful occurrence, and it 
likely that he would be greatly upset at a prof
visit from an old friend, who at the same time 
unravelling of the murder mystery at heart.
Al these thoughts mirrored themselves 
Thomas's wrinkled face. He was taking no tro-
conceal them from Louisa. Soon she saw that sI
won her first victory, for her uncle now said with 
determination-
"Well, my dear I you have certainly got on the
side of me. Your aunt always said you had ai
persuasive way with you. I'll tell you what we 
It is now a quarter to ten-late enough, by j
We'll get into one of those confounded taxis, and
to Dr. Newington's. I'll see him. You shall 
the cab; and if I can get his permission, we'll go 
have a talk with old Rad-or rather I'll talk first
you shall pretend that our joint visit is only a
denoe. As a matter of fact he knew all about
murder before he got ill, and he won't think it 
unnatural that I have obtained special medical
mission to question him myself on the subject.
you must work in your questions about Luke as
you can afterwards. Is that agreed now  "
"Indeed it is, Uncle Ryder," said Louisa, as
rose from her chair, with a deep sigh of infinite con
ment. "Thank you," she added gently, and p
her neatly gloved hand upon his arm.
With a kind, fatherly gesture, he gave that
hand an encouraging pat. Then he rang the belL,



<pb n="313"/>
PEOPLE DONT DO THAT SORT OF THING 818
"A taxi-quickly I " he said to his man. " My fur
coat and my hat. I am going out."
Louisa had gained her first victory. She had put
forward neither violence nor passion in support of her
arguments. Yet she had conquered because she be-
lieved.
A few moments later she and Sir Thomas Ryder were
on their way to Dr. Newington's in Hertford Street.



<pb n="314"/>
CHAPTER XXXVII
IT IS ONE HUIMAN LIFE AGAINST THE OTH
ONCE more Louisa was sitting in the dark
of a cab, seeing London by night, as the
flew past lighted thoroughfares, dark, narrow
stately mansions and mean houses. The same
less monotony of bricks and mortar, of pillars
railings; the same endless monotony of everyda
whilst some hearts were breaking and others
misery to which cruel, elusive death refused its as
solace.
She waited in the cab whilst Sir Thomas Ryder
in to see the doctor. Fortunately the latter w
home, and able to see Sir Thomas.
At first he was obdurate. Nothing that the
officer of police could say would move his 
dictum. Lord Radelyffe was too ill to see any
He was hardly conscious. His brain was working
feebly. He had not spoken for two days, for ,
was difficult.
"If," said Dr. Newington, in his habitual pom
manner, "he had the least inkling now, that 
favourite nephew of his was guilty of this awful m
why, my dear sir, I wouldn't answer for the 
quences. I believe the feeble bit of life in him 
go out like a candle that's been blown upon."
814



<pb n="315"/>
ONE HUMAN LIFE AGAINST THE OTHER 815
"Who talks," retorted Sir Thomas somewhat im-
patiently, and assuming a manner at least as pompous
as that of the fashionable physician, "of letting Lord
Radolyffe know anything about his nephew's position ?
I don't. I have no such intention. But de Mount-
ford's plight is a very serious one. There are one or
two points about his former life that Lord Radolyffe
could elucidate if he will. I want your permission to
ask him two or three questions. Hang it all, man, de
Mountford's life is in danger ! I don't think that you
have the right to oppose me in this. You take a most
awful responsibility upon your shoulders."
"A medical man," said Dr. Newington vaguely,
"has to take upon himself certain grave responsibilities
sometimes."
"Y es. But not such a grave one as this. You must
at least give me the chance of interrogating Lord Rad-
clyffe. Supposing he knows something that may
throw light on this awful affair, something that may
go to prove de Mountford's innocence or guilt-either
way-and suppose that owing to your prohibitions,
all knowledge of his nephew's fate is kept from him
until it is too late, until de Mountford is hanged-for
he risks hanging, doctor, let me tell you that I-suppose
that you have stood in the way, when some simple
explanation from your patient might have saved him I
What then ?"
" But the patient is too ill, I tell you. He wouldn't
understand you, probably. I am sure he couldn't
answer your questions."
The doctor's original pompous manner had left him



<pb n="316"/>
816            A TRUE WOMAN 
somewhat. He was now more like an obstin^a
arguing, than like a medical man whose 
ments must be final. Sir Thomas Ryder-onei
keenest men to note such subtle ohanges in a
saw that he had gained an advantage. He wasM
enough to press it home.
"Let me try, at all events," he said. "The
matter is of such enormous importance !
doctor, it is a question of one human life 
other. With regard to de Mountford, let me
that unless we -can get some very definite proof,
his innocence, it is bound to go hard with him.
that a few weeks hence Lord Radelyffe, 
from this severe illness, is confronted with the
that his nephew is being tried for murder, or
has been condemned-I won't even mention 
awful possibility-do you think that you or
will save the old man's life then, or his reason.m
haps ? "
Dr. Newington was silent for a while. Cl
was ready to give way. Like most men who ou
are very pompous and dictatorial, his blust
only veneer. The strong will-power of a more
mined intellect very soon reduced him to com
And all that Sir Thomas Ryder said was logioa
carried a great deal of conviction.
"Very well," said the doctor at last, " I'll givei
permission to interview my patient. But on two
ditions."
"What are they?"
"That the interview takes place in my p



<pb n="317"/>
ONE HUMAN LIFE AGAINST THE OTHER 817
and that at the first word from me, you cease ques-
tioning my patient, and leave his room."
"Very well," assented Sir Thomas, without any
hesitation, content that he had gained his point, and
quite satisfied that the two conditions were perfectly
reasonable and such that the doctor was really com-
pelled to impose. " I must tell you that I came to see
you to-night at the instance of my niece, Louisa Harris,
who was fianoe to de Mountford before this unfortu-
nate business. It was she who adduced certain argu-
ments which she placed before me, and which led to
my strong desire to question Lord Radclyffe to-night,
before de Mountford is brought up before the magistrate
to-morrow. She is down below in the cab, waiting
for me."
"I cannot allow her to see my patient also," pro-
tested the doctor quickly.
"No, no. She shall not see him, unless you give
permission."
" Why don't you send her home right away, then "
" Because," retorted Sir Thomas tartly, "you might
give that permission, you see."
The argument between the two men had lasted
close on half an hour. It was long past ten o'clock
when at last Louisa saw them emerging through the
lighted doorway. The next moment they were seated
in the cab with her, Sir Thomas having given the
chauffeur the address of Lord Radclyffe's house in
Grosvenor Square.
The doctor tried to be bland and polite, but he was
not over-successful in this. He did not like being



<pb n="318"/>
818           A TRUE WOMAN 
opposed, nor hearing his pronouncements
In this case he had been forced to give way, 
against his better judgment, and all the way in 
he was comforting himself with the thought thati
rate he would keep women away from his pa
that he would in any case out the interview vety
and demand its abrupt cessation very pere
He would then be backed up by two nurses; a-
must do him the justice to say that he was h
anxious about his patient.
Louisa took no notice of the fashionable
efforts at conversation. She preferred to re
silent for those few minutes which elapsed be
departure from Hertford Street and the arrival
east side of Grosvenor Square. When she
uncle coming down the steps of the doctor's
company with the doctor himself, she knew
second victory had been won to-night:
Thomas Ryder would be allowed to intevien i
Radolyffe. She had, of course, no suspicion,
Newington's conditions to the interview, 
victory gained was an important one, and
moment she was content.



<pb n="319"/>
CHAPTER XXXVIH
THE HAND OF DEATH WAS ON HIM TOO
A  REPECTABLE-LOOKING       butler opened the
door in answer to Dr. Newington's pull at the bell.
Luke had had time-on the day preceding the in-
quest-to put some semblance of order in his unole's
household. The doctor had sent in the nurses, and
he had seen to a nioe capable housekeeper being in-
stalled in the house. She took the further management
at once in her own hands. She dismissed the drunken
couple summarily, and engaged a couple of decent
servants-a butler and a cook.
The house, though no less gloomy, looked certainly
less lonely and neglected.
Mr. Waren, who had been Lord Radlyffe's sec-
retary for years, but who had been speedily given his
congi when the impostor took up his permanent abode
in the house, was installed once more in the library,
replying to the innumerable letters and telegrams of
inquiry which poured in with every post.
Louisa and Sir Thomas were shown into the room
where the young man was sitting. He rose at once,
offering chairs, and pushing his own work aside. In
the meanwhile the doctor had gone upstairs.
819



<pb n="320"/>
820           A TRUE WOMAN              :
Several minutes elapsed. No one   po
Warren, who had always been deeply ata
Luke de Mountford, was longing to ask
which, however, he was too shy to formulate.
there was a knock at the door, and one of the
came in to say that Lord Radolyffe would be
to see Sir Thomas Ryder upstairs.
Louisa rose at the same time as her uncle,
latter detained her with a gesture full of kind;
pathy.
"Not just yet, my dear," he said, "I'll call
soon as possible."
"But," she asked anxiously, "I shall be
to see him, shan't I "                             ; 
"I think so," he replied evasively. "But y
you do not see him, you can trust to me. Oh
can " he added insistently, seeing the deeply 
look that had crept into her face at his wolre
am going to do to-night what I often have to do
oourse of my work. I am going to borrow you
and your mind, and allow them to speak thro
lips. When I go upstairs, I shall onlyoutw 
the police officer, searching for proofs of a
inwardly I shall be a noble-hearted woman
discover proofs of her fiance's innocenoe. That 
be right, dear, won't it ?"
She nodded acquiescence, trying to appear,
tent. Then she pleaded once again, dry-eyed-c
broken-voiced-
"You will try and get permission for me to see,
Radclyffe, won't you "
:/



<pb n="321"/>
THE HAND OF DEATH WAS ON HIM             821
"I give you my word," he said solemnly.
Then he went upstairs.
Mr. Warren, quiet and sympathetic, persuaded
Louisa to sit down again by the hearth. He took her
muff and fur stole from her, and threw a log on the
fire. The flames spurted off, giving a cheerful crackle.
But Louisa saw no pictures in this fire: her mind was
upstairs in Lord Radelyffe's room, wondering what
was happening.
Mr. Warren spoke of the murdered man. He had
not been present at the inquest, and the news that the
tyrant, who had ruled over Lord Radclyffe for so long,
was nothing but an impostor, came as a fearful shock
to him.
There was the pitifulness of the whole thing I the
utter purposelessness of a hideous crime. So many
lives wrecked; such awful calamity; such appalling
humiliation; such ignominy!  And all just for
nothing! A very little trouble, almost superficial
inquiry, would have revealed the imposture, and saved
all that sorrow, all the dire humiliation, and prevented
the crime, for which the law of man decrees that there
shall be no pardon.
The man who lay ill upstairs-and he who was lying
in the public mortuary, surrounded by all the pomp
and luxury which he had filched by his lies-alone
could tell the secret of the extraordinary success
of the imposture. Lord Raddlyffe had accepted the
bricklayer's son almost as his own, with that same
obstinate reserve with which he had at first flouted
the very thought of the man's pretensions. Who could
Y



<pb n="322"/>
22            A TRUE WOMAN
tell what persuasion was used? what               I
what threats t                           ,?
And the man was an impostor after all I and b
been murdered, when one word, perhaps, woui dB
effaced him from the world as completely,  ii
majestically, than had been done by death. 
Mr. Warren talked of it all, and Louisa 
half an ear, even whilst every sense of hearing
was ooncentrated on the floor above, in a v
deavour to get a faint inkling of what went on mn
Radclyffe's room. She had heard her uncle'f;
on the landing, the few hurried sentences exeo
with the doctor before entering the siek chab
opening and shutting of a door. Then again the 1
footsteps of the nurses, who had evidently beeiI
out of the room when Sir Thomas went in. 
heard the faint hum of their voices as they
the stairs, even a suppressed giggle now and 
they were happy, no doubt, at the few 
respite from constant watching which had ap
been accorded them.                       _
They ran quickly down the last flight of stairs
across the hall towards the servants' quarters.
chattering was heard faintly echoing through 
baze doors. Then nothing more.             .
iLess than a quarter of an hour went by, 
again she heard the opening and shutting of a
and men's footsteps on the landing.  .           |
Louisa could not believe either her eyes, whioh  B
gaing on the clock, or her ears, which heard now 
distintly the voice of Sir Thomas descendig



<pb n="323"/>
THE HAND OF DEATH WAS ON HIM              828
stairs, and Dr. Newington's more pompous tones in
reply.
"The interview," remarked Mr. Warren, "did not
last very long."
But already she had risen from her chair, desperately
anxious, wondering what the meaning could be of the
shortness of the interview. She was not kept long in
suspense: for a moment or two later Sir Thomas Ryder
came in, followed by Dr. Newington. One glance at her
uncle's face told her the whole disappointing truth
even before he spoke.
" It was useless, my dear," he said, " and Dr. New-
ington was quite right. Lord Radolyffe, I am sorry
to say, is hardly conscious. He is evidently unable
to understand what is said, and certainly quite in-
capable of making any effort to reply."
" I was afraid so," added Dr. Newington in his usual
conventional tones. "The patient, you see, is hardly
consoious. His mind is dormant. He just knows me
and his nurses, but he did not recognize Sir Thomas."
Louisa said nothing: the blank, hopeless disap-
pointment, following on the excitement of the past
two hours, was exceedingly difficult to bear. The
ruling passion-strong even in the midst of despair-
the pride that was in her, alone kept her from an utter
breakdown. She was grateful to her uncle, who very
tactfully interposed his tall figure between her and
the indifferent eyes of the doctor. Mr. Warren looked
more sympathetio than ever, and that was just as
trying to bear as the pompousness of Dr. Newington.
As a matter of fact, Louisa had absolutely ceased



<pb n="324"/>
324           A TRUE WOMAN             ,
to think. The whole future from this mom_
peared as an absolute blank. She had not begun
visage the possibility of going back to the hotel, h/
utterly failed in accomplishing that which she hB
heart and mind to do: the throwing of the first
ray of light on the impenetrable darkness of '
supposed guilt. She certainly had not envisae
going to bed to-night, the getting up to-rm
the beginning of another day, with its thousand
one trivial tasks and incidents, all the while that
had failed in doing that which alone could pr
the awful catastrophe of to-morrow! 
Luke standing in the dock, like a common 
I'll just see about getting a cab, dear," said l
uncle kindly.   -
The first of those thousand and one trivialities,
would go on and on from now onwards, in em
monotony, whilst Luke mounted, step by step 
alone, that terrible Calvary which meant his trial
his condemnation-and on the summit of which 
awaited him already an awful and shameful deat'
It was indeed unthinkable, No wonder that:
mind rebelled at the task: refusing all tho
remaining like a grey, blank slate, from which e
impression of past and future has been wiped out. 
Sir Thomas Ryder went out of the room, and
Warren went with him. They left the door ajar, so 
she could hear them talking in the hall. Mr. W 
said- 
"Don't go out, Sir Thomas. It's a horrid
Fletcher will get you a cab."
~"i..



<pb n="325"/>
THE HAND OF DEATH WAS ON HIM 825
And Sir Thomas replied: "Thank you."
"Won't you," said the younger man, "wait in
the library ? "
He had apparently rung a bell, for the man-servant
came into the hall, and was duly told off to whistle for
a cab.
" I'd rather go into another room, for a moment,
Mr. Warren, if I may," said Sir Thomas. "There are
just one or two little questions I would like to put
to you."
"Certainly, Sir Thomas," replied Mr. Warren with
alacrity.
The two men went together into the dining-room.
Louisa, by shutting her eyes, could almost see them,
sitting there in the stately and gloomy room which
she knew so well. She could call to mind the lqst
oocasion on which she had lunched there, with Lord
Radclyffe and Luke, and Edie and Jim. It was the
day-on which the impostor first forced his way into
the house. Louisa had a clear vision of him even
now, just as she had seen him standing that day in
the hall, before his interview with Lord Radclyffe.
Parker was helping him with his coat, and Louisa had
seen his face: the bricklayer's son, who had come
forward with his marvellous array of lies, and who had
been so implieitly believed, that he himself had to pay
for his lies with a most horrible death.
For that death now-and because of the impene-
trable mystery which the impostor had taken with him
to his humble grave-Luke stood in danger of being
punished with death that was even more horrible than



<pb n="326"/>
$56           A TRUE WOMAN
that caused by a stab in the neck under cover 
ness and of fog. 
The one chance that there had been of finding/!
to the mystery had been dissipated by the silen
sick man upstairs. The hand of death was u
too. He also would take the secret of the briol
son silently with him to the grave. 
Louis's eyes, vacant and tearless, wanderediY
lesaly round the room. Dr. Newington was 
at the desk, writing either a letter or a p        1
which apparently required a considerable am
thought. He seemed deeply absorbed in 
wrote, and from time to time referred to a :
note-book which he took out of his poolet. -:
The scratching of his stylo against the paper 
only sound that struck Louisa's ear, the rest 
house seemed lonely and still. Only from far 
came the shrill screeohing of the oab-whistle. 
Louisa rose and went to the door, peeping o1r
the hall It was deserted, and the dining-room
was shut. She slipped out into the hall. Dr. N
ton apparently did not trouble himself about'
Very softly she closed the library door behind
Then she ran swiftly upstairs.
"i
.~·! 
,~;;5



<pb n="327"/>
CHAPTER XXXIX
A MER  WOMAN FIGHTIoG FOB THE TING SHE LOVED
OUISA reached the landing slightly out of breath.
1   She knew her way about the old house very well.
Two doors now were opposite to her. One of these had
been left ajar-intentionally, no doubt-it was the one
that gave on a smaller morning-room, where, in the
olden days, Lord Radolyffe used to have his breakfast
and write his private letters, the library being given
over to Mr. Warren and to official correspondence.
Prom this side of the house, and right through the
silence that hung over it, Louisa could hear very
faintly rising from the servants' quarters below the
sound of women's voices chattering and giggling. The
nurses, then, had not returned to their post. With the
indierence born of long usage, they were enjoying
every minute of the brief respite accorded them, con-
tent to wait for the dootor's call if the patient had
immediate need of them.
Through the chink of the door the red glow of a
shaded lamp came as a sharp crimson streak cutting
the surrounding gloom.
Louisa pushed open the door that was ajar, and tip-
toed softly in.
The little room had been transformed for present
827



<pb n="328"/>
828           A TRUE WOMAN              !
emergenoies. The desk had been pushed aside,  -
small iron bedstead fitted up for the night n1
woman's paraphernalia were scattered about
massive early Victorian furniture: a comb and 
a cap and apron neatly folded, a couple of long _
littered the table which used to look so severe w
heavy inkstand and firm blotting-pad. The pi'  '
been relegated into a comer, and the portrait of t
which always hung over the mantelpiece had 
removed.
The door into the bedroom was wide open, and
out any hesitation Louisa went in. The bed wai
mediately in front of her, and between it and
hanging lamp beyond, a screen had been place
that the upper part of the sick man's figure wa
visible at first in the gloom, and the light lay
red patch right across the quilt at the foot. 
Louisa advanced noiselessly, and then halted 
the bed. The room was pleasantly warm, and,
smell of disinfeotants, of medicines, and of lavel 
water hung in the air-the air of a sick-room °P
sive and enervating.
Gradually Louisa's eyes became accustomed to t
semi-darkness. She fixed them on the sick man, , 
lay quite still against the pillows, his face no less
than the linen against which it rested. Louisa had
idea that any man could alter so in such a brief 
It almost seemed difficult to recognize in the w
emaciated figure that lay there with the stillneM 
death, the vigorous man of a few months ago. 
The face had the appearance of wax, deep lines



<pb n="329"/>
FIGHTING FOR THE THING SHE LOVED 829
the nostrils to the corners of the mouth accentuating
its hollow appearance; the hair was almost snow-white
now and clung matted and damp to the forehead and
sunken temples.
Lord Radolyffe seemed unconscious of Louisa's
presence in the room; but his eyes were wide open
and fixed on a spot high up on the wall immediately
opposite to the bed. Louisa looked to see on what
those eyes were gazing so intently, and turning she
saw the splendid portrait of Luke de Mountford
-painted by the greatest living master of portraiture
-which we all admired in the rooms of the Royal
Academy a few years ago. It had been taken away
from the boudoir, and brought in here so that the sick
man might have the semblance now that he was parted
from the reality.
Only a feeble breath escaped Lord Radclyffe's parted
lips: there was no distortion in the face, and the
hands lay still-waxen-white against the quilt. Louisa
looked down on the sick man without, at first, at-
tempting to speak. She looked down on this the last
chord of hope's broken lute, the frail thread on which
hung Luke's one -hanoe of safety: this feeble life
almost ended, this weak breath which alone could
convey words of hope I For the moment Louisa's
heart almost misgave her, when she thought of what
she meant to do: to bring, namely, this wandering
spirit back to earth, in order to make it conscious of
such misery as no heart of man could endure and
not break. It seemed like purposeless, inhuman
cruelty!



<pb n="330"/>
890            A TRUE WOMAN 
Even if she could call that enfeebled mind 
the hideous realities of to-day, what chance waI
that the few words which this dying man cou i
would be those that could save Luke fr
gallows ?
Was it not better to let the broken heart sink 
in peace, the weakened mind go back to the  ^
shadows, unconscious of further sorrow ?
Uncertain now and vaguely fearful, she look
at the portrait of Luke. The eyes in themagnfi
painted  picture seemed  endowed with
vitality. To the loving, heart-broken woman it
as if they made a direct appeal to her. Yet,
appeal did they make ? 
To let the old man-" Uncle Rad "--die in
ignorant of the awful fate which must inevitably
the man whom he loved with such strange, snoh
during affection ?
Or did those eyes ask for help there, where no
human being could lend assistance now 
"Lord Radolyffe ! "
The words escaped her suddenly, almost 
ing her, though all along she knew that she had
to speak.
"Do you know me, Lord Radelyffe ?" she.
again. "It is Louisa Harris."
No reply. The great eyes with the shadow of d
over them were gazing on the face, on which they
always loved to dwell.
" Lord Radolyffe," she reiterated, and the deep
of her contralto voice quivered with the poignaaey4



<pb n="331"/>
FIGHTING FOR THE THING SHE LOVED           881
her emotion, " Luke is in very great danger, the gravest
possible danger that can befall any man. Do you
understand me "
Again no reply. But the great eyes-sunken and
glassy-slowly fell from the picture to her face.
" Luke," she repeated, dwelling on the word, "I
must speak to you about Luke."
And the lips, stiff and cold, opened slightly, and from
between them escaped the word, feebly, like the breath
of a dying man-
"LukeI"
"He is in grave danger, Lord Radclyffe," she said
slowly, "in danger of death."
And this time the faded lips framed the words dis-
tinctly-
" Luke ... in danger of death I "
The hands which had lain on the quilt up to now,
still and waxen as those of a lifeless image, began to
tremble visibly, andtheeyes-those great, hollow eyes-
had a searching anxious expression in them now.
"Philip de Mountford has been murdered," said
Louisa. "You knew that, did you not ?"
The sick man nodded. Life and consciousness were
slowly returning, and with them understanding and
the capacity for suffering.
" And Luke is accused of having murdered him."
The trembling of the hands ceased. With a quick,
jerky movement they were drawn back against the
figure, then used as a leverage. With a sudden acces-
sion of strength, the sick man slowly but steadily drew
himself up, away from the pillows, until he was almost



<pb n="332"/>
88a           A TRUE WOMAN
sitting up in bed. There was understanding 
eyes now, understanding and an awful look of h
"It is not true! " he murmured. 
"It is true," she said. "Luke was, known to
quarrelled with Philip de Mountford, and the
stick with which the crime was committed was 
in the Park-stained' with blood-the dagge
which belonged to Luke."                           I=
"Luke didn't do it," murmured the sick man.
"I know that he didn't," she replied firmly; "
he pleads guilty. He owns that the stick was his,
will give no denial, no explanation. He is taking
himself the crime of another .. ."
"It is not true!" once more murmured the
man.
Then he fell back exhausted against the pillowal
There he lay once more, with that awful stillnea:
death: the hands rested on the quilt as if modelle
wax. The eyes were closed, and from between
pale, parted lips not the faintest breath seemedix
escape. Helpless and anxious Louisa looked round
On a table close by stood an array of bot
She went up to it, trying to read the labels, wond
if there was anything there that was a powerful re
tive. She found a small bottle labelled "Bra
and took it up in her hand; but as she looked up 
she saw Dr. Newington standing in the doorway
the boudoir. One of the nurses was with him, and
was armed with his most pompous and most
sional manner.
"What are you doing here ? " he asked sternly.i
·s~   *',



<pb n="333"/>
FIGHTING FOR THE THING SHE LOVED           88
"I think," she replied, trying to master her excite-
ment, "that Lord Radclyffe has fainted. I did not
know what to do."
" I should think not indeed," he said. " And why
did you not ring for the nurse ? and why are you
here ? "
" I wished to see Lord Radelyffe myself," she replied.
"Without my permission ?"
"You would have refused it."
"Certainly I should. And I must request you to
leave the sick-room at once."
Baffled and miserable, she stood for a moment hesi-
tating, vaguely wondering if she could rebel. Indeed,
she had no option but to obey. The doctor was well
within his rights: she utterly in the wrong.
She turned towards the door ready to go; but in
order to reach it from where she stood, she had to go
past the foot of the bed.
The nurse was busy administering restoratives, and
Dr. Newington had taken up the attitude dear to
every Englishman: his stand upon the hearthrug, and
his hands buried in the pockets of his trousers. He
was treating Louisa like a disobedient child, and she
had no one to appeal to in this moment of oomplete
helplessness.
One moment only did she debate with herself. The
nurse just then had gone to a side table to fetch some
brandy. The patient, so Louisa heard her tell the
doctor, had not actually fainted; he was merely in a
state of exhaustion.
Swift and furtive, like some small animal in danger



<pb n="334"/>
584           A TRUE WOMAN 
of its life, Louisa slipped in between the screen i..
bed, and before the doctor or nurse could pre
she had bent right over the sick man and wh
close to his ear- 
"Lord Radclyffe, unless you make an effort
to-morrow Luke will be standing in the dock
.a a felon. Make an effort for Luke's sake !" 
And the spirit which had gone wandering in th 
of shadows came back to earth at sound of thae 
name.
"Luke I" he whispered, "Luke, my boy. 
strong. I can help you."
"Miss Harris.. ." interposed the doctor
But the sick man's words had put new strength'
her. She was ready to fight the doctor now. Th6e
ventional woman. of the world was transformed 
just a mere woman fighting for the thing she lo
child, lover, or husband ! it is all the same when
womanly instinct of combat is aroused.
Dr. Newington would have had to take
Harris by the shoulders now if he meant to eject
for until the patient spoke, here she meant to 
Doctor," she said quietly, " you have another
to perform than that of watching over your p
An innocent man is accused of a terrible crime.
Radclyffe, though very weak, is fully conscious. 
he can save his nephew by a word, that word mu
spoken to-night."
"Send for Tom Ryder," murmured the sick
"he'll understand."
The words came in gasps, but otherwise fairly ,l



<pb n="335"/>
FIGHTING FOR THE THING SHE LOVED            85
tinotly. Dr. Newington, in all his professional ex-
perience, had never been placed in such an extraor-
dinary dilemma. He was not quite so obstinate about
the whole thing as he had originally been, and a kind
of hopeless bewilderment showed itself upon his face.
" Will you send for Sir Thomas, doctor ? " asked
Louisa. " You see that Lord Radclyffe wishes it."
The doctor shrugged his shoulders. The responsi-
bility was getting all too heavy for him. Besides being
a fashionable physician, he was also a man, and as
such not altogether inhuman. He had seen much
acute suffering, both mental and physical, through-
out the length of his career, but never had he been
brought face to face with such an acute psychological
problem, and-frankly I-he did not know how to deal
with it.
So he sent the nurse to ask Sir Thomas Ryder once
more to step upstairs, whilst he himself went up to his
patient, and with the mechanical movement born of
life-long habit, he placed his white, podgy fingers on
the feebly fluttering pulse.
"God only knows what will be the issue," he said
almost inaudibly. "I don't."
The sick man, on the other hand, seemed to be
husbanding his strength. He had most obediently
taken the brandy which had been given him, and now
he lay back quietly among the pillows, with eyes closed
and lips slightly parted. The hands wandered some-
what restlessly along the smooth surface of the quilt,
otherwise Lord Radclyffe lay perfectly stil. It even
seemed-to Louisa's supersensitive gaze-s if an ex-



<pb n="336"/>
886           A TRUE WOMAN 
pression of content had settled over the pale fa
the sick man opened his eyes and looked up'
portrait; the lips murmured the one word-" 
and slowly, very slowly two tears formed in the 
eyes and trickled down the wan cheeks. 
"You had better," said the doctor curtly, " I
the patient to me and to Sir Thomas."
"Certainly," she replied. "I'll wait in the 
room. '
"Sir Thomas will call you, no doubt, if your pre
is desirable."
She was ready enough to obey now: her 
footstep was heard on the landing outside.
she relinquished her place beside the bed, and a
did so she bent down and kissed the poor old hand
wandered so restlessly along the folds of the quilti
As Sir Thomas entered the room  she was '
leaving it. They met under the lintel of the door.  1
"He seems stronger," she whispered, point
the sick man. "I think that he will make an ef
for Luke's sake." 
She waited a moment in the doorway, until she  I
Sir Thomas Ryder installed on one side of the
and the doctor on the other side, with his finger on 
patient's pulse. Then she retreated into the mo 
room, and moved by some unaccountable impulse I
went to the piano, and opening it, she sat down, 
with exquisite softness began to play the opening 
of one of her favourite songs. 
She sang hardly above a whisper; the velvety 
of her voice sounded like the murmur of ghosts th
Ii0



<pb n="337"/>
FIGHTING FOR THE THING SHE LOVED            87
the heavy tapestries of the room. Whenever her voice
died away in the intervals of the song she could hear
the hum of men's voices, her uncle's low and clear, now
and then a word from the doctor, and through it all
the voice of the sick man, feeble and distinct, speaking
the words that would mean life to Luke.
z



<pb n="338"/>
li?
CHAPTER XL
AND THUS HEB HOOU HAD OOMB 
HALF an hour had gone by.     The fountsin"
dropped from  Sir Thomas's cramped f
He had been writing, slowly but incessantly,
since he sat down beside the sick man, and 
first question to him. Lord Radelyffe, with 
nacity peculiar to a strong nature, had clung
own strength and will-power, and had spoken l
so that Sir Thomas could not only understand, 
could write down what he heard, word for WM
not omitting a phrase-accurately and succinetly.
Once or twice Dr. Newington had to interfere.
patient was in danger of exhaustion, and brandy
again to be administered. Lord Radelyffe t
eagerly: what will-power he had left was concen
on the desire to keep up his strength.
Prom the boudoir came the gentle murmur
tender song, whispered by Louisa's appealing
tralto voice. The sick man seemed to enjoy iti
seemed to soothe him too, for every now and
lay quite still, and listened attentively; and
he did so his eyes always sought the portrait of 
When all was finished, and the last word
Sir Thomas rose and grasped his old friend's e
hand.
888



<pb n="339"/>
AND THUS HER HOUR HAD COME 889
"You'll feel better to-morrow," he whispered
cheerily, "when you have your nephew with you.
The doctor here must allow you to see him, if you see
no one else."
"Lord Radolyffe must have rest now," said the
doctor impatiently.
" Certainly, my dear sir," rejoined Sir Thomas. " I
need not trouble you any more. I can but hope that
your patient will be none the worse for the effort."
The doctor did not reply. The patient, after the
great effort, was in a dangerous state of collapse, and
required every attention.
Sir Thomas Ryder took his leave, and, going through
the smaller room, he beckoned to Louisa to follow him.
A moment later the doctor was heard ringing for
the nurses. Sir Thomas in the hall was struggling
with his coat, whilst Louisa stood by, quite still and
patient. She knew that her hour would come, and
she was grateful to her uncle for taking her away from
here so quickly.
She had not asked a single question, and Sir Thomas
had not volunteered any information. But she was
content to wait, until the time when he told her every-
thing.
The cab, which had been alled all that long while
ago, was still waiting at the door. It was now past
eleven o'clock.  Silently Sir Thomas and Louisa
Harris stepped into the cab, Mr. Warren, sympathetic
and attentive to the last, giving the address to the
chauffeur on their behalf.
Less than five minutes later they had arrived at the



<pb n="340"/>
40            A TRUE WOMAN :
Langhanm Hotel, but they had not exchanged ;
word during that time.
Colonel Harris was in the sitting-room
for his daughter's return. The maid had 
that her mistress had gone to Sir Thomas
and had promised to be home again in about an
so he was not really anxious, only very worried 
her. Personally, he saw no issue to the terrible 
and his heart ached for her as much as it
Luke.
He found himself quite unable to sit at the-
Luke de Mountford's name was in every man's
The obsession was unendurable; the countless
ments, adduced by indifferent lips, were po
nerve-racking. Colonel Harris, after half an hour, l
enough of it, and went back to the Langham. 
He did not greet his brother-in-law very w
he did not feel very well-disposed towards him, 
had a vague idea that Sir Thomas Ryder was 
measure responsible for Luke's terrible fate.
"Loo, dear, it's very late," he said with 
reproach, when she came in.
"You'll have to forgive her, Will," interposed
Thomas. "She came over to have a talk with
and we went on to try and see old Rad, who is d
I am afraid, poor chap.
"Now, my dear," he added, turning to 
whilst he dived into his breast-pocket, from whic
extracted a notebook, "go to your own room
read this through very quietly, while I talk to
father."



<pb n="341"/>
AND THUS HER HOUR HAD COME            41
He gave her the book, which she took without a
word.
"It won't," he added, "take you very long to
read. When you have finished, bring me the notes
back; I want them to-night."
She kissed her father before she went out of the
room. He and she had both guessed-by that un-
explainable subtle intuition born of sympathy-what
the pages of that notebook contained.



<pb n="342"/>
CHAPTER    XLI 
WHICH TELLS OF THE CONTENTS OF THE    OTE
LOUISA sat beside the fire and read. The 
were written in Sir Thomas's clear caliap
in short, jerky sentences, just as the sick man
spoken them, usually in reply to questions put to i
As Louisa read on she could almost hear
Radolyffe's whispered words, whilst she herself 
Tosti's melancholy song: "Good-bye "
"I was not altogether ignorant of my br
Arthur's marriage over in Martinique, but he 
always given me to understand that the ma
was not a strictly legal one, and that his sonP
had no right whatever to claim any possible suo 
to our family title and estates. Even on his dea
bed Arthur assured me of this, and said to me m
emphatically: 'Luke is your heir! my son Pi
has no legal claim  '
"I never made the slightest effort to communi
with Arthur's widow or with his child; for Arh
had assured me that they were well provided for,
quite happy amongst their own kindred. After
catastrophe of St. Pierre I completely lost sight
them. 
"Then came a letter addressed to me from
342



<pb n="343"/>
THE CONTENTS OF TIE NOTEBOOK           84S
Vincent, the first inkling which I had that not only did
Arthur's son know of his father's position in life, but
that he had full and justifiable reasons for believing
that he himself was heir-presumptive to the family
title and estates which would have been his father's,
had the latter outlived the present holder.
"This letter was followed by several others, about
which neither Luke nor Mr. Warren knew anything;
for I told them nothing. At last there came one from
Brussee. By this time I had searched carefully through
some letters which my brother Arthur had deeired
that I should destroy after his death, but which I had
always kept by me, meaning one day to comply with
his wish.
"I had more than a suspicion, then that my brother's
marriage was a perfectly legal one, and that his son
was the only true heir-presumptive to the title and
estates, which I had always fondly thought could only
devolve upon Luke. I went over to Brussels deter-
mined to see this Philip, before he set foot in Englnd.
The thought that he would supersede Luke was mote
than I could bear.
"  arrived in Brussels early one morning having
crossed over in the night. At once I drove to the
mean hotel whereee was lodging. He was sharing a
room with a man with whom he had picked up
a casual acquaintapoeship on the sea voyage between
the West Indies and Antwerp. The two men bad
come over together in the Belgian boat. They
looked a pair of young blackguards, but it did
not take me very long to be convinced that for



<pb n="344"/>
$44           A TRUE WOMAN            "!
some reason best known to himself my brother 
had deceived me, and that his son Philip was
the legitimate and rightful heir to the title w i
hold, The papers were authentic and udi
This much I knew, and that Luke whom I loved 
in all the world, more than any father has ever 
his son, would never be Earl of Radelyffe, so 1 l
Philip de Mountford lived.       '
"Men will say that I am an abandoned 
and indeed it may be so. May God forgive me 
after, for I killed my brother's son. I pretend
rejoice at his home-coming, and in half an hour
gained his confidence. In the afternoon we went
together, and after a short walk we picked up a 
cab. - Philip gave the driver the address of restaur
at which I had asked him to dine with me, I e
carefully in the shadow, so that the man shouldn't
me. Then, on the way in the cab, I killed him. W
his head was turned away from me I plunged an 
Italian stiletto, which I had carried about with me 
since I had had letters from Philip, straight into
neck.
" He died instantly without a groan, and I was
to death; but I managed to sit quietly beside
until the cab pulled up. Then I jumped out and
the chauffeur to drive my friend on to some rem
place on the boulevards. 
"I watched the cab until it was out of sight,
I hailed 'another, and drove straight to the Gate 
Nord, and crossed back to England that night. 
threw the stiletto overboard into the sea. I had sp
.?f.



<pb n="345"/>
THE CONTENTS OF THE NOTEBOOK           85
twelve hours in Brussels, and I had killed Philip de
Mountford, and made sure that Luke would be Earl
of Radolyffe after me.
"It was not likely that, in their search for the missing
criminal who had stabbed an unknown stranger in a
cab, the Belgian police would suspect an English
peer. The mystery of that crime has remained im-
penetrable, because nothing was ever known of the
stranger who was murdered. At the mean hotel
where he lodged no one knew 'anything about him.
Only one person knew, and he was silent for purposes
of his own.
" Before the police searched the unknown stranger's
room, the room which he shared with the ohanoe friend
whom he had picked up on the Belgian boat, the latter
already had found and concealed the papers, which
would have revealed the identity of the murdered
man, if not that of his murderer.
" I, at home in England, wondered how it was that
the Belgian police had never discovered that the
murdered man was named Philip de Mountford, and
that he olaimed to be the heir to the Earldom of
Badolyffe. I expected paragraphs in the paper, some
unpleasaitniess even, but none came.
"I could not unerstnd it, for I had forgotten the
existenoe.of the ohanoe friend.
"And then one day last April I understood  Once
more I had letters from abroad, from a man who
laimed to be my brother's son. At first I thought the
whoe thing a silly imposture, until the day when a
man confronted me in my own house, armed with every



<pb n="346"/>
846           A TRUE WOMAN 
proof that I had killed Philip de Mountford in Br
He had the latter's passports, his birth and 
certificates, his letters of identification: all, ali
papers that he had filched from among the 
man's things, and which he now flaunted before.
daring me to prove him an impostor. 'If I am 
Philip de Mountford,' he said to me, 'then whe
Philip de Mountford ?' And from that hour, I 
as wax in his hands. He held me, and he kew.
I might have proved him an impostor, and he O
prove me a murderer.
"Heaven alone knows how I did not lose my r
then ! I floundered in a sea of wild conjectures, 
projects, wild hopes of escape. But my tyrant 
me, and I dared not rebel.                    i
"And once more I was obsessed with the am
certitude that Luke would never be Earl of Radol
after me, while this man lived.
"He had so taken upon himself the person
of Philip, the evidences which went to prove his id 
tity with the late Arthur le Mountford's son we 
so strangely oircumstantial, that short of my p
laiming loudly that I had killed my brother's son w
my own hand, nothing could prevent the impos
from succeeding in filching Luke's inheritance.
" And evqn if I had confessed then, it seemed to 
that this man would still succeed in proving that I had
murdered an unknown stranger-a ohanoe 
who was an English bricklayer's son-and that he 
he only was Philip de Mountford, the late Arthur's s
"When did I first dream of killing him, as I kile4



<pb n="347"/>
THE CONTENTS OF THE NOTEBOOK 847
the other ? I could not tell you that. But it was
some time ago, and I watched my opportunity with
patience and perseverance. Then at last the oppor-
tunity came, following on terrible provocation. That
dark, foggy November night, that you all remember
so well I I was to meet my tyrant at the Veterans'
Club at nine o'clock. I drove up there, and as I
stepped out of the cab I came face to face with Luke.
Something in the boy's manner told me what had
happened. He didn't tell me, but I guessed. The
two men had quarrelled, and Luke had had to endure
the other's arrogance.
"The news upset me. I felt faint and choked with
the fog. Luke didn't like td leave me, and seeing how
I tottered he gave me his stick to lean upon. We
walked together for a little while up and down, and
I felt stronger and better. I begged Luke to leave me.
Presently-as the impostor came out at the Club
door-Luke obeyed at last, and said ' good night' to
me.
"Paul Baker-I knew that that was his name-
wanted me to drive straight back to Grosvenor Square,
but asked me to drop him first near the railings of
Green Park. He often walked about there in the
evenings-it was a curious fad which he had. We
called a cab, and he told the driver where to pull up.
When I was sitting next to him, I realized that I had
a stick in my hand. I really had forgotten that it
was Luke's. Whilst I toyed with it, I noticed that the
top came out, and that a sharp dagger was concealed
inside the body of the stick.



<pb n="348"/>
1848          A TRUE WOMAN 
"Paul Baker was looking out of the window .
fog, and inside the cab it was very dark, so 
not know what I was doing. I killed him, jus^! .r
had killed Arthur's son, with a dagger-thrust
the neck. This time I did not feel sick, beo
hated this man so. When the driver pulled up 
Green Park, I jumped out quite ooolly and told ,
man to take my friend to some distant ad
Kensington.
"I threw the stick away behind the railings in
Park. I had forgotten that the stick was Lu
I knew that it was not mine, and that therefore
could not trace it to me.
"I did not imagine for a moment that Luke
be accused of a crime which he had not commi
I did not think that justice could be so blind. 
"All I wanted was to be rid of my tyrant, and t
Luke's inheritance should not be filched from him'. !
aJp
'~   Z



<pb n="349"/>
CHAPTER    XLIT
WHICH TELLS ONOC MOIRE OP COMMONPLACE InCIDETS
THE notebook fell out of Louisa's hands on to
her lap.
How simple the tragedy seemed, now that she knew.
How understandable was the mystery of Luke's
silence. He knew that Uncle Rad was guilty. There
lay the awful difficulty I
"Uncle Rad has been father, mother, brother, sister
to us al! Bless him!"   That was Luke's feeling
with regard to Uncle Rad.
The un-understandable was so simple after all I
Louisa went back to the sitting-room. The two men
were sitting, smoking in silence. Colonel Harris, too,
understood the mystery at last. His loyalty was
crowned with the halo of justification.
The public never knew, I think, that Luke de Mount-
ford had actually been arrested for the murder of
the Clapham Road bricklayer. The police the next
day applied for a remand, and then Luke was brought
quietly before the magistrate, and equally quietly
He was free to go and see Uncle Bad.
849



<pb n="350"/>
350           A TRUE WOMAN                  _
Louisa did not see him the whole of that day
he sat by the bedside of the sick man, whose 
and perturbed spirit was slowly sinking to rest.
Bad was at peace, for he held the hand and 
into the face of the man on whom he had lavished,
storehouse of an affection that had known no bou
The two men understood one another Pere
He who had committed a crime, and he who was 
to bear its burden-both had done their share for  
other's sake.
It was only after the magnificent obsequies of  _
Earl of Radolyffe that the truth about the m
of the bricklayer's son was made known to the pu
at large.
It had to be done for Luke's sake. Colonel Ha
insisted upon it with all the weight of his fate
authority. Sir Thomas Ryder did likewise.    :
For Louisa's sake too it had to be. But twenty-fo
hours before the publication of the confession in 
newspapers, Luke and Louisa had been quietly m
ried by special lioence, and had gone abroad. 
Once more we must think of them as the commo
plaoe, conventional man and woman of the world,
who outwardly behaved just like thosands of English
men and women of their class behave.
When they came back from their honeymoon-which  h
lasted one year abroad, and all the rest of their lives
after that-there was not a trace in them, in their 
appearance, their manner, their mode of life, of the .
terrible tragedy which had threatened to annihilate
honour, life, and love. 
A\     ~~~~~~~~~,i



<pb n="351"/>
COMMONPLACE INCIDENTS             851
"Ah    those hEnglish! " murmured the foreign
Excellencies who graced the English oourt. "They
have no heart, no sentiment! Lord and Lady Rad-
clyffe! they behave just as if he had never been
accused of murder ! as if his uncle had never been the
awful criminal that he was! They are hypocrites,
these English, and they have no heart I "
Convention was once more the master I Its giant
hands held the strings which made the puppets dance.
But at times his grip would relax: when Luke and
Louisa were all alone, no prying eyes to watch, no
indifferent gaze to see the unburdening of their hearts.
Then Luke would lie at Louisa's feet: for his love was
worship, and his passion uncontrolled. His arms
would encircle the perfect form that he loved with
such intensity that at times the happiness of loving
had in it an exquisite sense of pain. The tragedy
of the past was never quite absent from them then:
the ghost of a great crime, and the shadow of a still
greater renunciation, threw a mystic halo over their
love for one another.  And at those times-like
Paolo and Franoesoa-they read no more.
But these English, they have no heart, you know !
THE END



