<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->



<pb n="9"/>
FAIRY BOOK.
INTRODUCTION.
WHILE Prudy was in Indiana visiting the
Cliffords, and in the midst of her trials with
mosquitoes, she said one day,-
"I wouldn't cry, Aunt 'Ria, only my
heart's breaking. The very next person
that ever dies, I wish they'd ask God to
please stop sending these awful skeeters. I
can't bear 'em any longer, now, certainly."
There was a look of utter despair on
Prudy's disfigured face. Bitter tears were
trickling from the two white puff-balls which
had been her eyes; her forehead and cheeks
were of a flaming pink, broken into little
9



<pb n="10"/>
10             FAIRY BOOK.
snow-drifts full of stings: she looked as if
she had just been rescued from an angry bee-
hive. Altogether, her appearance was ex-
ceedingly droll; yet Grace would not allow
herself to smile at her afflicted little cousin.
"Strange," said she, " what makes our mos-
quitoes so impolite to strangers ! It's a
downright shame, isn't it, ma, to have little
Prudy so imposed upon? If I could only
amuse her, and make her forget it!"
"Oh, mamma," Grace broke forth again sud-
denly, " I have an idea, a very brilliant idea!
Please listen, and pay particular attention;
for I shall speak in a figure, as Robin says.
There's a certain small individual who is not
to understand."
" I wouldn't risk that style of talking," said
Mrs. Clifford, smiling; " or, if you do, your
figures of speech must be very obscure, re-
member."



<pb n="11"/>
INTRODUCTION.          11
: "Well, ma," continued Grace with a sig-
nificant glance at Prudy, what I was going
to say is this: We wish to treat certain
young relatives of ours very kindly; don't we,
now?-certain afflicted and abused young
relatives, you know.
"Now, I've thought of an entertainment.
.hem! Yesterday I entered a certain Eng-
lishman's house,"-  here Grace pointed
through the window towards Mr. Sherwood's
cottage, lest her mother should, by chance,
lose her meaning,- "I entered a certain
Englishman's house just as the family were
. sitting down to the table,- festal board. I
;  mean.
"They were talking    about mistle-toe
boughs, and all sorts of old-country customs;
and then they said what a funny time they
had one Christmas, with the youngest, about
.the mizzle, as he called it: do you remember,
maK? do you understand ?"



<pb n="12"/>
12            FAIRY BOOK.
( You mean little Harvey ? Oh, yes."
"Pray do be careful, ma! Then Mr. Sher-
wood said to his- I mean, the hat said to
the bonnet, that there were some wonderful 
- ahem -   legends, about genii and sprites
and - and so forth; not printed, but written,
which the boy liked to hear when he was
'overgetting' the measles. A certain lady,
not three inches from your chair, ma, was the
one who wrote them; and now "-
Prudy had turned about, and the only rem-
nants of her face which looked at all natural
-that is, the irises and pupils of her swollen
eyes - were shining with curiosity.
" There, now, what is it, Gracie ? what is
it you don't want me to hear ? "
Grace laughed. " Oh, nothing much, dear:
never mind."
"You oughtn't to say 'Never mind,' " pur-
sued Prudy: " my mother tells me always to
mind."



<pb n="13"/>
INTRODUCTION.           13
:I-only mean it isn't any matter, Prudy."
"*iOh I do you? Then don't you care for
. my skeeter-bites ? You always say,' Never
mind !' I didn't know it wasn't any matter."
"Now, ma," Grace went on, " I want to ask
you where are those I-don't-know-what-to-
call-'ems ? And may I copy them, Cassy and
I, into a book, for a certain afflicted rel.
ative ?"
"Yes, yes, on gold-edged paper!" cried
Prudy, springing up from the sofa; " oh, do,
do; I'll love you dearly if you will! Fairy
stories are just as nice ! What little Harvey
Sherwood likes, Ilike, and I've had the mea-
sles; but I shouldn't think his father and
mother'd wear their hat and bonnet to the
dinner-table 1"
" Deary me !" laughed Grace; " how hap.
pened that little thing to mistrust what I
meant?"



<pb n="14"/>
14             FAIRY BOOK.
"It would be strange if a child of her age,
of ordinary abilities, should not understand,"
remarked Mrs. Clifford, somewhat amused.
"Next time you wish to ask me any thing
confidentially, I advise you to choose a better
opportunity."
"When may she, Aunt 'Ria ? " cried Pru-
dy, entirely forgetting her troubles; "when
may she write it, Aunt 'Ria, she and Cas-
sy ?"
"A pretty piece of folly it would be,
wouldn't it, dear, when you can't read a word
of writing ?"
" But Susy can a little, auntie; and mother
can a great deal: and I'll never tease 'em,
only nights when I go to bed, and days when
I don't feel well. Please, Aunt 'Ria."
" Yes, ma, I know you can't refuse," said
Grace.
Mrs. Clifford hesitated. "The stories are



<pb n="15"/>
INTRODUCTION.           15
yellow with age, Grace; they were written
in my girlhood: and they are rather torn and
disarranged, if I remember. Besides, my
child, my flowing hand is difficult to read."
"Oh, mamma, I think you write beautifully I
splendidly !"
" Another objection," continued Mrs. Clif-
ford: " they are rather too old for Prudy, I
should judge."
"But I keep a-growing, Aunt 'Ria! Don't
you s'pose I know what fairy stories mean?
They don't mean any thing! You didn't feel
afraid I'd believe 'em, did you? I wouldn't
believe 'em, I promise I wouldn't; just as
true's I'm walking on this floor !"
"Indeed, I hope you would not, little
Prudy; for I made them up as I went along. 
There are no fairies but those we have in our
hearts. Our best thoughts are good fairies;
and our worst thoughts are evil fairies."
\                                         ..



<pb n="16"/>
16             FAIRY BOOK.
" Oh, yes, auntie, I know! When we go
bathing in the ocean, Susy says, Let's be all
clean, so the spirit of the water can entel
our hearts.' And it does; but it goes in by
our noses."
Mrs. Clifford had tacitly given her consent
to Grace's copying the stories.  This task
was performed accordingly, much to the dis-
gust of Horace, who declared that of the
whole number only the tale of " Wild Robin"
was worth reading.
"And ' Wild Robin,"' said Grace, instruc-
tively, " is the only one that has a moral for
you, Horace. When our soldiers are starv-
ing so, it is really dreadful to see how you
dislike corned beef and despise vegetables!
Such a dainty boy as you needs to be stolen
a while by the fairies."
" Well, Gracie, I reckon you'd run double-
quick to pull me off the milk-white steed.



<pb n="17"/>
INTRODUCTION.           17
couldn't get along without me two days.
ok here! what story has a moral for you,
nmiss? It's the 'Water-kelpie.' You are like
the man that married Moneta: you're always
wanting money."
"ut it's for the soldiers, Horace," said
Grace, with a smile of forbearance toward
her brother. "I'm willing to give all my
pocket-money; and I mean the other girls
shall. If we're stingy to our country these
/   days,we ought to be shot! 'Princess Hilda's'
the best story in the book. I wish Isa Har-
rington could read it! She wouldn't make
any more mischief between Cassy and me ! "
"I like 'The Lost Sylphid' the best," said
Prudy; "but was she a great butterfly, do
you s'pose ? The stories are all just as nice;
just like book stories. I shouldn't think any-
body made 'em up. Aunt 'Ria can write as
2



<pb n="18"/>
18            FAIRY BOOK.
good as the big girls to the grammar-school.
I promised not to believe a single word; and
I sha'n't. I'm glad she called it my Fairy
Book."



<pb n="19"/>
'CRISTOBAL.            19
1.
4;a R I S TOB AL.
A CHRISTMAS LEGEND.
LONG ago, in fair Burgundy, lived a lad
named Cristobal. His large dark eyes lay
under the fringe of his lids, full of shadows;
eyes as lustrous as purple amethysts, and,
-alas I as sightless.
He had not always been blind, as perhaps
a wild and passionate lad, named Jasper,
might have told you. On a certain Christ-
mas Eve, a merry boy was little Cristobal,
as he pattered along to church, trying with
his wooden shoes to keep time to the dancing
bells. In his hand he carried a Christmas
candle of various colors. Never, he thought,



<pb n="20"/>
20            FAIRY BOOK. 
was a rainbow so exquisitely tinted as that
candle.  Carefully he watched it when it
winked its sleepy eye, eagerly begging his
mamma to snuff it awake again. How gayly
the streets twinkled with midnight lanterns !
And how mortifying to the stars to be out-
done by such a grand illumination ! 
A new painting had just been hung in the
church,-- the Holy Child, called by the peo-
ple " Little Jesus," with an aureola about his
head. Cristobal looked at this picture with
reverent delight; and, to his surprise, the
Holy Child returned his gaze: wherever he
went, the sweet, sorrowful eyes followed him.
There was a wondrous charm in that plead-
ing glance. Why was it so wistful? What
had those deep eyes to say ?
The air was cloudy with the breath of
frankincense and myrrh.  Deep voices and
the heavy organ sounded chants and an-



<pb n="21"/>
CRISTOBAL.             21
lthems. There were prayers to the coming
Messiah, and the sprinkling of holy water;
and, at last, the midnight mass was ended.
Then, in tumult and great haste, the peo-
piple went home for merry-makings.    Cris-
tobal, eager to see what the Yule-log might
have in store for him, rushed out of the
church with careless speed, stumbling over a
: boy who stood in his way,- the haughty, in-
solent Jasper. Jasper's beautiful Christmas-
i,-candle was cracked in twenty pieces by his
ifall.
" I'll teach you better manners, young
; peasant!" cried he, rushing upon Cristobal
in a frenzy, and dealing fierce blows without
mercy or reason.
-: It was then that Cristobal's eyes went out
:like falling stars. Their lustre and beauty
remained; but they were empty caskets,
'; their vision gone.



<pb n="22"/>
22             FAIRY BOOK.
Then followed terrible anguish; and all
Cristobal's mother could do was to hold her
boy in her arms, and soothe him by singing.
At last the fever was spent; but the pain
still throbbed on, and sometimes seemed to
burn into Cristobal's brain. He cried out
again and again, 'What right had that
fierce Jasper to spring upon me so ? I meant
him no harm; and he knew it. Oh, I would
like to see him chained in a den ! He is like 
the wicked people who are turned into
wolves at Christmas-tide. I would cry for
joy if I could hear him groan with such pain 
as mine !"
Poor Cristobal never hoped to see again.
He carried in his mind pictures of cities and
hamlets, of trees, flowers, and old familiar 
faces; but oftenest came Jasper's face, just
as it had last glared on him with blood-thirsty
eyes. It was a terrible countenance. Only
l



<pb n="23"/>
CRISTOBAL.             23
itne charm  could dispel the horror, - the
remembrance of the beautiful Child in the
church.  That picture blotted out every
thing else. It was like the refrain in the
F Burgundy carols, " Noel, Noel," which comes
again and again, and never tires of coming.
A whole year passed away. Cristobal's
mother only prayed now that her boy might
suffer less: she had ceased to pray for the
healing of his blindness.
Now it was Christmas-tide again. Ever
since Advent, people had been clearing their
throats, and singing carols. They roasted
chestnuts, drank white wine, and chanted
praises of the "Little Jesus," who was soon
to come, bringing peace on earth, good-will to
men.
In the streets, one heard bagpipes and min-
strels; and, by the hearthstones, the music of
the wandering piper. The children began to



<pb n="24"/>
24             FAIRY BOOK. 
talk again of the Yule-log, and to wond
what gifts Noel would bring to place unde
each end of it; for these little folks, who havy
no stocking-saint like our Santa Claus, be
lieve in another quite as good, who rains
down sugar-plums in the night. 
Everywhere there was a joyful bustle.
Housewives were making ready their choi-
cest dishes for the great Christmas-supper;
fathers were slyly peeping into shop-win-
dows, and children hoarding their sous and
centimes for bonbons and comfits.
Everybody was merry but Cristobal; or
so thought the lad. He had no money to
spend, and little but pain for his holiday.
cheer. A patch here and there in his worn
clothes was the best present his thrifty moth-
er was able to make; always excepting the
little variegated taper, which few were too
poor to buy.



<pb n="25"/>
a,         CRISTOBAL.             25
;.iChristmas Eve  came.   Family friends
dropped in. The Yule-log was set on the fire
-with shouts and singing. "Oh that I could
see these kind faces!" moaned Cristobal.
"No doubt, Jasper's chestnuts are popping
merrily; and his shoes will be full of pres-
ents. And here am I! My head aches, and
' my eye-balls burn."
He stole out of the room, and, throwing
himself on a wicker bench, mused over his
troubles in solitude.  One might have sup-
posed him sleeping; for how should one im-
agine that his beautiful eyes were of no
manner of use, except when    they we:r
closed ? When Cristobal said, " Let me see,"
he dropped his eye-lids; and what he saw
then, no artist can paint.
On this night, a beautiful child appeared
before him, as like the picture of the Little
Jesus as if it had stepped out of its frame on



<pb n="26"/>
26            FAIRY BOOK.
the church-wall. Even the crimson and blue
tints of the old painting were faithfully pre.-
served; and every fold of the soft drapery 
was the very same.
"I saw you, Cristobal, when you came be.
fore me with your colored candle, one year
ago."
"I knew it, I knew it!" cried Cristobal, 
clasping his hands in awe. "I saw your
eyes follow me; and I never once turned but 
you were looking. They told me it was only
a picture; but I said for that very reason
your eyes were sorrowful,  you longed to 
be alive."
The child replied by a slight motion of the
head; and the aureola trembled like sunlight
on the water. The longer Cristobal gazed,
the more courage he gathered.   "Lovely
vision," said he, "if vision you may be, --I
have said to myself, I would gladly walk to



<pb n="27"/>
CRISTOBAL.            27
ne with peas in my shoes, if I could know
hat you wished to say to me that Christmas
Tight."
"Only this, little brother: Are you ready
for Christmas ?"
: "Alas! no: I never am. I have only two
- ous in the world."
[': "Poor Cristobal! Yet, without a centime,
o ne may be ready for Christmas."
But I am so very unhappy !"
' You do indeed look sad, little brother:
- there is your pain?"
"In my eyes," moaned the boy, pouring out
,the words with a delightful sense of relief;
for he was sure they dropped into a pitying
heart. " Beloved little Jesus, let me tell you
that since I saw you last I have been wick-
edly injured. Now I have always a pain in
my eyes: there are two flames behind them,
which burn day and night."



<pb n="28"/>
28             FAIRY BOOK. 
I grieve for you," said the Child with ex 
quisite tenderness; "yet, dear boy, for all
that, you might be ready for Christmas: bt,
is there not also a pain throbbing and burn-
ing in your heart ?"
" Oh, if you mean that, I am tossed up and
down by vexation: I am    full of hatred
against that terrible Jasper. It was all about 
a miserable Christmas-candle he carried. I 
broke it by pushing him  down. Tell me,
was he right to fly at me like a wild' beast ?
Ought he not to suffer even as I have suf-
fered ?  Is it just, is it right, for the great  ]
man's son to put out a peasant boy's eyes,
and be happy again ?"
"Misguided Jasper !" said the Child sol-
emnly; "let him answer for his own sin: 
judge not, little brother."
Cristobal hid his face in his hands, and
wept for shame.
I



<pb n="29"/>
F  'CRISTOBAL.                           29
!     "Shall I give you ten golden words for a
Christmas-gift ? Will you hide them in your
heart, and be happy ?"
"I will," answered Cristobal.
"They are these," said the Child with a
voice of wondrous sweetness: " Pray for
them which despitefully use you and perse-
cute you."
Cristobal repeated the words, a soft light
stealing over his face. "I will remember,"
he said, looking up to meet the pleading eyes
of the Child: but, lo! the whole face had
melted into the aureola; nothing was left but
light. Yet Cristobal was filled with a new
joy; and, as he opened his eyes, his dream-
if dream it were - changed, becoming as
sweet and solemn as a prayer. It seemed to
him that the roof of the cottage glittered
with stars, and was no longer a roof, but the
boundless sky; and, afar off, like remem-
! .



<pb n="30"/>
30             FAIRY BOOK.
bered music, a voice fell on his ear, " For if
ye forgive men their trespasses, your heav.
enly Father will also forgive you your tres.
passes."
Cristobal arose, and, although still blind,
walked in light. "It is the aureola which
has stolen into my heart," thought Cristobal.
"The pain and hate are all gone. Now I am
ready for Christmas. I wish I could help
poor Jasper, who has such a weight of guilt
to carry!"
Next day, " golden-sided " Burgundy saw
no happier boy than Cristobal. He walked
in the procession that night, carrying a can-
dle whose light he could not see; but what
did it signify, since there was light in his
soul ?"
Hark! In the midst of the Christmas-
chimes breaks the jangling of fire-bells. The
count's house is on firel  The sparks pour



<pb n="31"/>
CRISTOBAL.            31
out thicker and faster; tongues of flame leap
to the sky; the bells clang hoarsely; the
Christmas procession is broken into wild dis-
order; the wheels of the engine roll through
the streets, unheard in the din.
Cristobal rushed eagerly toward the flames,
but was pulled away by the people.
"We cannot drown the fire !" they cried:
"the building must fall!  Are the inmates
all safe ?"
"All, thank Heaven!" cried the count.
"No: Jasper! See, he waves his hand
from the third story! Save him! save my
boy !"
Jasper had set fire to a curtain with his fa-
tal Christmas-candle.  Now he raved and
shouted in vain: no one would venture up
the ladder.
"0   Little Jesus," whispered Cristobal,
" give light to my eyes, even as unto my
soul! Let me save Jasper I"



<pb n="32"/>
32            FAIRY BOOK.
At once the iron band fell from Cristobal's
vision. He saw, and, at the same moment,
felt a supernatural strength. He tore away
from the restraining arms of the people; he
rushed up the ladder, shouting, "In the
name of the Little Jesus !" He reached the
window, heedless of his scorched arms.
"Jasper!" he cried, seizing the half-conscious
boy, "be not afraid: I have the strength to
carry you."
And down the ladder he bore him, step by
step, through the crackling flames.
Jasper was revived; and the fainting Cris-
tobal was borne through the streets in the
arms of the populace.
" Wonder of wonders !" they all shouted.
"It was the Little Jesus," gasped Cristo-
bal: "he opened my eyes; he guided me
up ^he ladder, and down again!"
" Hallelujah " was now the cry. "On the



<pb n="33"/>
CRISTOBAL.             33
birthday of our Lord, the blind receive their
sight."
"It is a triumph of faith," said the saints
reverently.
"A miracle," murmured the nuns, making
the sign of the cross.
"Not a miracle," replied the wise doctors,
after they had first consulted their books:
"it is only the electrifying of the optic
nerve."
But hardly any two could agree; and what
was so mysterious at the time is no clearer
now.
" Dear little Cristobal," sobbed the broken-
hearted Jasper, " how could you forgive
such a wicked boy as I ?"
" It was very easy," replied Cristobal,
" when once the Little Jesus called me
'brother,' and bade me pray for you."
" Oh that I could repay you for your won-
3



<pb n="34"/>
34             FAIRY BOOK. 
derful deed of love," said Jasper, through
his tears.
"Do not thank me," whispered Cristobal,
with a look of awe; "thank the Little Jesus.
And when he comes again next year, to ask
what feelings we hold in our hearts, let us
both be ready for Christmas."'
I
,                              .~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="35"/>
r           A    WILD ROBIN.             35
[I~        WILD    ROBIN.
A SCOTTISH FAIRY TALE.
IN the green valley of the Yarrow, near
the castle-keep of Norham, dwelt an honest,
sonsy little family, whose only grief was an
unhappy son, named Robin.
Janet, with jimp form, bonnie eyes, and
cherry cheeks, was the best of daughters:
the boys, Sandie and Davie, were swift-footed,
brave, kind, and obedient; but Robin, the
youngest, had a stormy temper, and, when
his will was crossed, he became as reckless
as a reeling hurricane. Once, in a passion,
- he drove two of his father's " kye," or cattle,
. down a steep hill to their death. He seemed
I not to care for home or kindred, and often
pierced the tender heart of his mother with



<pb n="36"/>
86             FAIRY BOOK.
sharp words. When she came at night, and
"happed " the bed-clothes carefully about his
form, and then stooped to kiss his nut-brown
cheeks, he turned away with a frown, mutter-
ing, " Mither, let me be."
It was a sad case with Wild Robin, who
seemed to have neither love nor conscience.
"My heart is sair," sighed his mother,
" wi' greeting over sich a son."
" He hates our auld cottage and our muckle
wark," said the poor father. " Ah, weel! I
could a'maist wish the fairies had him for a
season, to teach him better manners."
This the gudeman said heedlessly, little
knowing there was any danger of Robin's
being carried away to Elf-land. Whether the
fairies were at that instant listening under
the eaves, will never be known; but it
chanced, one day, that Wild Robin was sent
across the moors to fetch the kye.



<pb n="37"/>
WILD ROBIN.             37
"I'll rin away," thought the boy: "'tis
hard indeed if ilka day a great lad like me
must mind the kye. I'll gae aff; and they'll
think me dead."
So he gaed, and he gaed, over round swell-
ing hills, over old battle-fields, past the roof-
less ruins of houses whose walls were
crowned with tall climbing grasses, till he
came to a crystal sheet of water, called St.
Mary's Loch.   Here he paused to take
breath. The sky was dull and lowering; but
at his feet were yellow flowers, which shone,
-on that gray day, like freaks of sunshine.
He threw himself wearily upon the grass,
not heeding that he had chosen his couch with-
in a little mossy circle known as a "fairy's
ring." Wild Robin knew that the country
people would say the fays had pressed that
green circle with their light feet. He had
heard all the Scottish lore of brownies, elves,



<pb n="38"/>
88            FAIRY BOOK.
will-o'-the-wisps, and the strange water-kel-
pies, who shriek with eldritch laughter. He
had been told that the queen of the fairies
had coveted him from his birth, and would
have stolen him away, only that, just as she
was about to seize him from the cradle, he
had sneezed; and from that instant the fairy-
spell was over, and she had no more control
of him.
Yet, in spite of all these stories, the boy
was not afraid; and if he had been informed
that any of the uncanny people were, even
now, haunting his footsteps, he would not
have believed it.
"I see," said Wild Robin, "the sun is
drawing his night-cap over his eyes, and
dropping asleep. I believe I'll e'en take a
nap mysel', and see what comes o' it."
In two minutes he had forgotten St. Mary's
Loch, the hills, the moors, the yellow flowers.



<pb n="39"/>
WILD ROBIN.            39
He heard, or fancied he heard, his sister
Janet calling him home.
"And what have ye for supper?" he mut~
tered between his teeth.
" Parritch and milk," answered the lassie
gently.
" Parritch and milk ! Whist ! say nae mair !
Lang, lang may ye wait for Wild Robin:
he'll not gae back for oatmeal parritch !"
Next a sad voice fell on his ear.
" Mither's ; and she mourns me dead!"
thought he; but it was only the far-off vil-
lage-bell, which sounded like the echo of
music he had heard lang syne, but might
never hear again.
"D'ye think I'm  not alive?" tolled the
bell. " I sit all day in my little wooden tem.
pie, brooding over the sins of the parish."
" A brazen lie ! " cried Robin.
"Nay, the truth, as I'm a living soul I



<pb n="40"/>
4AC             FAIRY BOOK.
Wae worth ye, Robin Telfer: ye think yer.
sel hardly used.    Say, have your brithers
softer beds than yours?   Is your ain father
served with larger potatoes or creamier but.
termilk?  Whose mither sae kind as yours,
ungrateful chiel? Gae to Elf-land, Wild Rob-
in; and dool and wae follow ye! dool and
wae follow ye !'
The round yellow sun had dropped behind
the hills; the evening breezes began to blow;
and now could be heard the faint trampling
of small hoofs, and the tinkling of tiny bridle-
bells: the fairies were trooping over the
ground. First of all rode the queen.
"Her skirt was of the grass-green silk,
Her mantle of the velvet fine;
At ilka tress of her horse's mane
Hung fifty silver bells and nine."
But Wild Robin's closed eyes saw nothing;



<pb n="41"/>
HI;         rWILD ROBIN.            41
his sleep-sealed ears heard nothing.  The
queen of faries dismounted, stole up to him,
and laid her soft fingers on his cheeks.
" Here is a little man after my ain heart,"
said she: ¢'I like his knitted brow, and the
downward curve of his lips. Knights, lift
him gently, set him on a red-roan steed, and
waft him away to Fairy-land."
Wild Robin was lifted as gently as a brown
leaf borne by the wind; he rode as softly as
if the red-roan steed had been saddled with
satin, and shod with velvet. It even may be
that the faint tinkling of the bridle-bells
lulled him into a deeper slumber; for when
he awoke it was morning in Fairy-land.
Robin sprang from his mossy couch, and
stared about him. Where was he? He
rubbed his eyes, and looked again. Dream.
ing, no doubt; but what meant all these nim.
ble little beings bustling hither and thither



<pb n="42"/>
42            FAIRY BOOK.
in hot haste? What meant these pearl-be 
decked caves, scarcely larger than swallows'
nests ? these green canopies, overgrown with
moss? He pinched himself, and gazed again.
Countless flowers nodded to him, and
seemed, like himself, on tiptoe with curiosity,
he thought. He beckoned one of the busy,
dwarfish little brownies toward him.
"I ken I'm talking in my sleep," said the
lad; "but can ye tell me what dell is this,
and how I chanced to be in it ?"
The brownie might or might not have
heard; but, at any rate, he deigned no reply,
and went on with his task, which was pound-
ing seeds in a stone mortar.
"Am I Robin Telfer, of the Valley of
Yarrow, and yet canna shake aff my silly
dreams ?"
"Weel, my lad," quoth the queen of the
fairies, giving him a smart tap with her wand,



<pb n="43"/>
WILD ROBIN.            43
" stir yersel', and be at work; for naebody
idles in Elf-land."
Bewildered Robin ventured a look at the
little queen. By daylight she seemed some-
what sleepy and tired; and was withal so
tiny, that he might almost have taken her be-
tween his thumb and finger, and twirled her
above his head; yet she poised herself be-
fore him on a mullein-stalk, and looked every
inch a queen.  Robin found her gaze op-
pressive; for her eyes were hard and cold
and gray, as if they had been little orbs of
granite.
" Get ye to work, Wild Robin !"
" What to do ?" meekly asked the boy,
hungrily glancing at a few kernels of rye
which had rolled out of one of the brownie's
mortars.
"Are ye hungry, my laddie?" touch a
grain of rye if ye dare! Shell these dry



<pb n="44"/>
44            FAIRY BOOK.
bains; and if so be ye're starving, eat as
many as ye can boil in an acorn-cup."
With these words she gave the boy a with.
ered bean-pod, and, summoning a meek little
brownie, bade him see that the lad did not
over-fill the acorn-cup, and that he did not so
much as peck at a grain of rye.   Then,
glancing sternly at her unhappy prisoner, she
withdrew, sweeping after her the long train
of her green robe.
The dull days crept by, and still there
seemed no hope that Wild Robin would ever
escape from his beautiful but detested prison.
He had no wings, poor laddie; and he could
neither become invisible nor draw himself
through a keyhole bodily.
It is true, he had mortal companions:
many chubby babies; many bright-eyed
boys and girls, whose distracted parents
were still seeking them, far and wide, upon



<pb n="45"/>
WILD ROBIN.             45
the earth.  It would almost seem that the
wonders of Fairy-land might make the little
prisoners happy. There were countless treas-
ures to be had for the taking, and the very
dust in the little streets was precious with
specks of gold: but the poor children shiv-
ered for the want of a mother's love; they
all pined for the dear home-people. If a cer-
tain task seemed to them particularly irk-
some, the heartless queen was sure to find it
out, and oblige them to perform it, day after
day. If they disliked any article of food,
that, and no other, were they forced to eat,
or starve.
Wild Robin, loathing his withered beans
and unsalted broths, longed intensely for one
little breath of fragrant steam from the tooth-
some parritch on his father's table, one glance
at a roasted potato. He was homesick for
the gentle sister he had neglected, the



<pb n="46"/>
46            FAIRY BOOK.
rough brothers whose cheeks he had pelted
black and blue; and yearned for the very
chinks in the walls, the very thatch on the
home-roof.
Gladly would he have given every fairy-
flower, at the root of which clung a lump of
gold ore, if he might have had his own cov-
erlet " happed " about him once more by the
gentle hands he had despised.
"Mither," he whispered in his dreams,
"my shoon are worn, and my feet bleed; but
I'll soon creep hame, if I can. Keep the
parritch warm for me."
Robin was as strong as a mountain-goat;
and his strength was put to the task of thresh-
ing rye, grinding oats and corn, or drawing
water from a brook.
Every night, troops of gay fairies and plod-
ding brownies stole off on a visit to the up-
per world, leaving Robin and his companions



<pb n="47"/>
WILD ROBIN.             47
in ever deeper despair. Poor Robin! he
was fain to sing,-
"Oh that my father had ne'er on me smiled !
Oh that my mother had ne'er to me sung !
Oh that my cradle had never been rocked,
But that I had died when I was young !"
Now, there was one good-natured brownie
who pitied Robin. When he took a journey
to earth with his fellow-brownies, he often
threshed rye for the laddie's father, or
churned butter in his good mother's dairy,
unseen and unsuspected. If the little crea-
ture had been watched, and paid for these
good offices, he would have left the farm.
house forever in sore displeasure.
To homesick Robin he brought news of
the family who mourned him as dead. He
stole a silky tress of Janet's fair hair, and
wondered to see the boy weep over it; for



<pb n="48"/>
48             FAIRY BOOK.
brotherly affection is a  sentiment which 
never yet penetrated the heart of a brownie. 
The dull little sprite would gladly have
helped the poor lad to his freedom, but told
him that only on one night of the year was
there the least hope, and that was on Hal-
low-e'en, when the whole nation of fairies
ride in procession through the streets of
earth.
So Robin was instructed to spin a dream,
which the kind brownie would hum      in
Janet's- ear while she slept. By this means
the lassie would not only learn that her
brother was in the power of the elves, but
would also learn how to release him.
Accordingly, the night before Hallow-
e'en, the bonnie Janet dreamed that the long-
lost Robin was living in Elf-land, and that he
was to pass through the streets with a caval-
cade of fairies. But, alas ! how should even



<pb n="49"/>
WILD ROBIN.                49
a sister know him in the dim starlight, among
the passing troops of elfish and mortal ri-
ders? The dream assured her that she
might let the first company go by, and the
second; but Robin would be one of the
third: -
"First let pass the black, Janet,
And syne let pass the brown;
But grip ye to the milk-white steed,
And pull the rider down.
For I ride on the milk-white steed,
And aye nearest the town:
Because I was a christened lad
They gave me that renown.
My right hand will be gloved, Janet;
My left hand will be bare;
And these the tokens I give thee:
No doubt I will be there.



<pb n="50"/>
50              FAIRY BOOK.
They'll shape me in your arms, Janet,
A toad, snake, and an eel
But hold me fast, nor let me gang,
As you do love me weel.
They'll shape me in your arms, Janet,
A dove, bat, and a swan:
Cast your green mantle over me,
I'll be myself again."
The good sister Janet, far from remember.
ing any of the old sins of her brother, wept
for joy to know that he was yet among the liv-
ing.  She told no one of her strange dream;
but hastened secretly to the Miles Cross, saw
the strange cavalcade pricking through the
greenwood, and pulled down the rider on the
milk-white steed, holding him fast through all
his changing shapes.    But when she had
thrown   her green   mantle  over him, and
clasped him in her arms as her own brother



<pb n="51"/>
WILD ROBIN.              51
Robin, the angry voice of the fairy queen
was heard: -
'Up then spake the queen of fairies,
Out of a bush of rye,
'You've taken away the bonniest lad
In all my companie.
Had I but had the wit, yestreen,
That I have learned to-day,
I'd pinned the sister to her bed
E're he'd been won away!'"
However, it was too late now. Wild Robin
was safe, and the elves had lost their power
over him forever. His forgiving parents
and his leal-hearted brothers welcomed him
home with more than the old love.
So grateful and happy was the poor laddie,
that he nevermore grumbled at his oat-meal
parritch, or minded his kye with a scowling
brow.
. ' 



<pb n="52"/>
52            FAIRY BOOK. 
But to the end of his days, when he heard
mention of fairies and brownies, his mind
wandered off in a mizmaze.  He died in
peace, and was buried on the banks of the
Yarrow.



<pb n="53"/>
,  . ~    THE VESPER STAR.         53
THE VESPER STAR.
ONCE upon a time, the new moon was shin-
ing like a silver bow in the heavens, and the
stars glittered and trembled as if they were
afraid.
"What frightens you?" said the placid
Moon; "be calm, like me."
"I am freezing," answered the North Star;
- ( that is why I shake."
" We are dancing," said the Seven Sisters;
"and, watch as closely as you please, you can
never get a fair peep at our golden sandals.
our feet twinkle so."
"I am sleepy," grumbled the Great Bear;
"I am trying to keep my eyes open. Per.
haps that is the reason I wink so much."
A,



<pb n="54"/>
54             FAIRY BOOK.
Thus, with one accord, they made excuses
to the pale Moon, who is their guardian,- 
all but the sweet Vesper Star: she was si-
lent; and when a white cloud floated by, she
was glad of an excuse to hide her face.
' Let the North Star shiver, and the Seven
Sisters dance, and all the golden stars hold a
revel," th-ought she; " as for me, I am sad."
For you must know that the Vesper Star
has a task to perform, and is not allowed to
sleep. She keeps vigil over the Earth, by
night; and never ceases her watch till the
world is up in the morning. For the sick
and sad, who cannot sleep, she feels an un-
utterable pity, so that her heart is always
throbbing with sorrow.
The Moon looked at the Vesper Star, and
said, "Dream on, sweet sister; for you, the
noblest of all, have told me no falsehood."
This the Moon said because she knew that



<pb n="55"/>
THE VESPER STAR.         55
none of the stars had given a true reason for
twinkling so gayly that night. The truth was,
they were filled with envy, and were trying
to be as brilliant as possible, to compete with
a flaming Comet which had just appeared in
the sky.
It is not for man to know how long and
how peacefully the gentle stars had travelled
together, doing the work which God has ap-
pointed, without a murmur. But now that
this distinguished stranger had arrived, the
whole firmament was in   dismay.  How
proudly he strode the heavens! how his
blaze illumined the sky! The Stars whis-
pered one to another, and cast angry eyes on
the shining wonder.
"Make way for me," he said, sweeping
after him a glorious train of light.
" Not I," muttered the fiery Mars.
"Not I," quoth the majestic Jupiter; "
do not move an inch."



<pb n="56"/>
56            FAIRY BOOK.
The Comet flashed with a lofty disdain.
"Puny Stars," said he, "keep your places,
give out all your light, - nobody heeds you;
the place of honor is always by the Vesper
Star; here I make my throne."
The Vesper Star smiled sadly, but without
a twinge of envy.
"Welcome, shining one ! Warm me with
your fires; let us work together."
" Work !" cried the Comet, throwing out
sparkles of scorn; "I was not born to work,
but to shine ! "
"Indeed !" said the Vesper Star; "you
have come into strange company, then; for
here we all work with a good will." "He
does not burn with the true fire," thought
the good Star; and she wrapped herself
about with a soft cloud, and said no more.
"Oh that I could be set on fire like the
Comet!" thought the cold North Star. "I



<pb n="57"/>
rF              THE VESPER STAR.          57
would gladly burn to death if I could aston-
ish the world with my blaze !"
"Let us die!" said the Seven Sisters;
"let us die together; we have ceased to be
noticed."
"Ah, hum!" growled the Great Bear;
"so many years as I have kept watch in this
sky; and now to be set one side by this up-
start of a foreigner! I've a great mind to
go to sleep and ne'/er wake up ! "
" Hush !" whispered the Vesper Star gen-
tly; "do your duty, and trust God for the
rest."
And lo ! that very night there was an end
of the Comet's splendor.
" Adieu, my dull friends," said he; "I am
tired of a quiet life: a little more, and I
should fade out entirely !"
Then, with a blaze and a whiz, and a dizzy
wheel, he flashed out of the sky; and no one



<pb n="58"/>
58            FAIRY BOOK.
knew whither he went, or whence he came,
any more than the path of the quick light,
ning.
The stars were ashamed of their envy, and
went to their old work with a stronger will
and a steadier purpose: but to the Vesper
Star was given a brighter and sweeter light
than to any other, because she had done her
work without envy and without repining.



<pb n="59"/>
THE WATER-KELPIE.        59
TIHE WATER-KELPIE.
ONCE there lived under the earth a race
of fairies called gnomes. They were strange
little beings, with dull eyes and harsh voices;
but they did no harm, and lived in peace.
They never saw the sun; but they had
lamps much brighter than our gaslight, which
burned night and day, year after year.
They had music; but it was the tinkling
of silver bells and golden harps,- not half
so sweet as the singing of birds and the bab-
bling of brooks.
Flowers they had none, but plenty of
gems, -" the stars of earth." There were
green trees in the kingdom: but the leaves



<pb n="60"/>
60            FAIRY BOOK.
were hard emeralds; and the fruit, apples of
gold or cherries of ruby; and these precious
gems the gnomes ground to powder, and
swallowed with much satisfaction.
They heaped up piles of gold and dia-
monds as high as your head; and never was
there a gnome so poor as to build a house of
any thing a whit coarser than jasper or onyx.
You would have believed yourself dreaming,
if you could have walked through the streets
of their cities. They were paved with rosy
almandine and snowy alabaster; and the pal-
aces glittered in the gay lamplight like a
million stars.
These gnomes led, for the most part,
rather dull lives. Like their cousins, the
water-sprites, or undines, they were roguish
and shrewd, but had no higher views of life
than our katydids and crickets.  Indeed,
they hardly cared for any thing but frisking



<pb n="61"/>
THE WATER-KELPIE.         61
about, eating and sleeping. But, after all,
what can be expected of creatures without
souls? One sees, now and seen, stupid hu-
man beings, whose eyes have no thoughes ir
them, and whose souls seem to be sound
asleep. Such lumps of dulness might almost
as well be gnomes, and slip into the earth
arid have done with it.
These underground folk had a great hor-
ror of our world.  They knew all about it;
for one of them had peeped out and taken a
bird's-eye view. He went up very bravely,
but hurried back with such strange accounts,
that his friends considered him a little insane.
" Listen !" said the gnome, whose name was
Clod. " The earth has a soft carpet, of a new
kind of emerald; overhead is a blue roof,
made of turquoise; but I am told that there
is a crack in it, and sometimes water comes
pouring down in torrents. But the worst



<pb n="62"/>
62             FAIRY BOOK.
plague of all is a great glaring eyeball of 
fire, which mortals call the sun."
When Clod told his stories of the earth, he
always ended by saying,-
" Believe me, it is bad luck to have the
sun shine on you. It nearly put my eyes
out; and I have had the headache ever
since."
Now, there was a young girl, named Mon-
eta, who listened very eagerly to the old
gnome's stories of the earth, and thought she
would like to see it for herself. She was a
kind little maiden, as playful as a kitten; and
her friends were not willing she should go.
But Moneta had somewhere heard        that
fairies who marry mortals receive the gift
of a human soul: so, in spite of all objec-
tions, she was resolved to take the journey;
for she had in her dark mind some vague as-
pirations after a higher state of being.



<pb n="63"/>
THE WATER-KELPIE          63
Then the gnome-family declared, that, if
she once went away, they would never allow
: her to return; for they highly disapproved
of running backward and forward between
- the two worlds, gossiping.
H "Have you no love of country," cried
they, "that you would willingly cast your
lot among silly creatures who look down
upon your race ?"
The old gnome, who had travelled, took the
romantic maiden one side, and said,
"My dear Moneta, since you will go, I
must tell you a secret; for you remember I
have seen the world, and know all about it.
Mortals are a higher race than ourselves, it is
true; but that is only because they live atop
o' the earth, while we are under their feet.
They make a great parade about their little
ticking jewel they call Conscience; but, after
all, they will any of them sell it for one of
,



<pb n="64"/>
64            FAIRY BOOK.
our ear-rings ! I assure you they love money
better than their own souls; and I would ad-
vise you, as a friend that has seen the world,
to load yourself with as much gold as you
can carry."
So Moneta donned a heavy dress of spun
gold, which was woven in such a manner,
that, at every motion she made, it let fall a
shower of gold-dust. She filled the sleeves
with sardonyx, almandine, and amethyst; and
hid in her bosom diamonds and sapphires
enough to purchase a kingdom.
Then she went up a steep ladder, and
knocked on the alabaster ceiling, using the
charm which the gnome had given her:-
"Mother Earth, Mother Earth, set me
free !"
At her words there was a sound as of an
earthquake, and a little space was made, just
large enough for her to crawl through.



<pb n="65"/>
;        TTHE WATER-KELPIE.        65
When she had reached the top, the earth
closed again, and she was left seated upon a
-rock; and the light of the sun was so daz-
zling, that she hid her face in her hands.
Thus she sat for a long time, not knowing
whither to go, till a young man chanced to
come that way, who said, "What do you
-here ?"
She raised her face at his words, and could
not speak, so great was her surprise at the
beauty of the strange youth.  He, for his
part, could not help smiling; for she was as
yellow as an orange; and an uglier little
creature he had never beheld: but he said
in a kind voice,-
" Come with me to my mother's house, and
you shall be refreshed with cake and wine."
She arose to follow him; and, as she
walked, a bright shower of gold-dust srrin-
kled the earth at every step.
.         6~~~~



<pb n="66"/>
66             FAIRY BOOK.
The young man held out his hands eagerly
to catch the shining spray, thinking he would
like such a rarely-gifted damsel for his wife;
and, in truth, he smiled so sweetly, and
dropped such winning words, that in time he
won her heart and she became his bride.
"And, when she cam' into the kirk,
She shimmered like the sun;
The belt that was about her waist
Was a' with pearles bedone."
So great was her love for him, that she
forgot her lost home under the earth; and
every day, when she bade her husband
"good-morning," she placed in his hand a
precious stone; and he kissed her, calling
her his " dear Moneta," his " heart's jewel."
But at last the diamonds, sapphires, and ru-
bies were all gone; and she was also losing
the power of shedding gold-dust. Then her



<pb n="67"/>
THE WATER-KELPIE.         67
husband frowned on her, and no longer called
her his "heart's jewel," or his "dear Mo-
neta."
At length she presented him with a little
daughter as lovely as a water-sprite, with
hair like threads of gold. Now the father
watched the babe with a greedy eye; for its
mother had wept precious tears of molten
gold before she received the gift of human
grief, and he hoped her child would do
the same; but, when he found it was only a
common mortal, he shut his heart against the
babe.  Moneta was no longer yellow and
ugly, but very beautiful; with deep eyes, out
of which looked a sweet soul: yet she had
lost her fairy gifts, and her husband had
ceased to love her.   The good woman
mourned in secret; and would have wished
to die, only her precious child comforted her
heart.



<pb n="68"/>
68            FAIRY BOOK.
One day, as she was sitting by the shore
of the lake, a water-kelpie saw her weeping,
and came to her in the form of a white-haired
old man, saying,- 
"Charming lady! why do you weep?
Come with me to my kingdom under the wa-
ters. My people are always happy."
Then she looked where he bade her, and 
saw, afar down under the waters, a beauti-
ful city, whose streets were paved with red
and white coral.
The kelpie said, " Will you go down? "
"No," sighed Moneta, thinking of the kind
words her husband had sometimes spoken to
her: "I cannot go yet."
But the kelpie came every day, repeating
the question, Will you go now?" and she
answered, "I cannot go yet."
But at last her husband said,-
" How often the thought comes to me, If



<pb n="69"/>
THE WATER-KELPIE.         69
I had no wife and child, all this gold would
be mine!" and he knitted his brows with a
frown.
Then Moneta looked in his face, and
said,- 
" Dear Ivan, I have loved you truly; but
you no longer care for Moneta. I will go
away with the little child, and all our gold
shall be yours. Farewell !"
Then she embraced him with falling tears.
His heart was stirred within him; and he
would have followed her, only he knew not
-which way she had gone.
Soon the water-kelpie came to him in the
form of a horse; and ran before him, neigh.
ing fiercely, and breathing fire from his
mouth. This is the way kelpies take to an-
nounce the fact that some one has gone un-
der the water.
So the man followed the kelpie. His heart



<pb n="70"/>
70             FAIRY BOOK. 
was swelling with grief; and all his love for,
his wife and child had come back to him. 
He looked into the lake, and saw the fairil
city.  In a transparent palace Moneta was -
sitting, crowned with pearls, the child sleep-
ing on her bosom. He shouted,- 
"Come back, 0 Moneta!" but she heard
him not.
He went every day to the same spot,,
never leaving it until the water was clear,
and he had seen his wife and child. He t
cared no more for his fine castle and his
gold; for the castle was empty, and the gold
'could not speak. 
"Alas," cried he, "if I could listen to the:
music of Moneta's voice! if I could hold the
child in my arms once more !" 
Now he cared for nothing but to gaze into]
the waters at Moneta and her child. 
One day, the water-kelpie appeared to him
in the form of an old man.             I



<pb n="71"/>
THE WATER-IKELPIE.       71
^ Why sit you here, sighing like the north
d?" said the kelpie.
-I have loved gold better than my best
ends," replied Ivan; "and now my best
nds are taken away from me, and the gold
left; but I love it no longer."
;Ah, ah!" growled the kelpie; "I have
eaPrd of such men as you: nothing is dear
it is missed. You should have thought
that before.  If your lost ones were to
r*turn, you would treat them as badly as
ver, no doubt."
J!:" No- no," groaned Ivan; "I would love
hem better than all the wealth in the world I
uwould love them better than my own life 1
[Ah, the sting it is to think of my own ingrati-
e!"
" Hold !" said the kelpie: "grumble to
yourself if you like, but don't vex my ears
with your complaints. Suppose I were to
t C::cmat



<pb n="72"/>
72            FAIRY BOOK.          -
bring back Moneta and the child,- would'
you give me your chests of.gold?"       B
"That I will," cried the man, "right joy.
fully."
" Not so fast: will you give me your castle 
as well?" 
"Ah, yes, castle and gold; take them, and 
welcome." 
"Not so fast: Moneta and her child are
worth more than these. Will you give me
the castle and gold, and ten years of your
life ?" 
"With all my heart." 
"Then," said the kelpie "go home, and
to-morrow  you shall see Moneta and her 
child." 
When the morrow came, the husband and I
wife wept for joy at meeting once more; and
Ivan said,- 
"Can you forgive me, dearest Moneta ?"
71:i



<pb n="73"/>
THE WATER-RELPIE.         73
[neta had already forgiven him; and the
e -father, mother, and child-loved
;another, and were content to the end of
A ir lives; and Ivan said, 
tIOnee for all I have found that gold can-
make one happy; but, with the blessing
-a clear conscience, warm hearts and loving
1!ds are the sweetest things in life."
p.  : 



<pb n="74"/>
74             FAIRY BOOK.
THE LOST SYLPHID.
"I tell the tale as 'twas told to me."
I HAVE heard that one night, on a distant
shore, a band of water-nixies were dancing"
to gentle music, their golden sandals twink-.:
ling like stars. 
A lord and lady were walking on the same :
shore. The lord's eyes were bent on the 
ground; but his wife paused, and said, -
"Listen, my lord, to that enchanting rmu-.
sic I"
"I hear no music," he replied, laughing. 
"You must wake up, dear wife. 
"With half-shut eyes, ever you seem 
Falling asleep in a half-dream.'"
. i,



<pb n="75"/>
§IW   THE LOST SYLPHID.         75
i'rt, my lord, those exquisite beings in
I      W-er robes ! surely you see them !"
ee the play of the moonbeams, my
d nothing more."
the wife stood transfixed. One beau-
ry, taller and fairer than her compan-
had wings, and floated through the
- scarcely touching the earth.
as ever such a vision of lovliness?"
he enraptured lady: " she must be my
ttle daughter,- eat of my bread, and
pon my bosom."
,kneeling, she sang,-
ir little nixies, that dwell near the water,
ve me the winged one to be my own daughter."
WH o dance ceased.  The nixies, bewil-
?l"ooked north and south, and knew
ilch way to flee; but the winged fairy,
d by the human love in the lady's
:



<pb n="76"/>
76            FAIRY BOOK.            :
eyes, glided slowly forward. Then the ni
ies stormed in fierce wrath, their willow
figures swaying to and fro as if blown by thI
wind. 
"They shall not harm   you, little onll
Come with me, be my own daughter, and.?.
will carry you home." 
"Home!" echoed the lovely child; "',
home is in the Summer-land.  Oh, will yo
indeed carry me there?"
Then she folded her white wings, an
nestled in the lady's bosom  like a genti
dove, and was borne to a beautiful castle tha
overlooked the sea. The water-nixies soo
forgot her, for they could not hold her meml
ory in their little humming-bird hearts.
She was not of their race.  Her wings
were soft and transparent, like those of :
white butterfly; and she ever declared tha
she had once alighted from a cloud, and bee



<pb n="77"/>
:-  THE LOST SYLPHID.         77
t im a nixie's net spread upon the
tin time, her wings dwindled and disap-
; and then the lord, who was now her
jr, could not remember that she had ever
other than an earthly child.
You fancy you were once a sylphid,"
: :h;  but there are no sylphids, my
one, and there is no Summer-land."
h.e child became as dear to the lord and
as their very heart's blood; and they
t her foreign birth, and almost believed,
the world did, that she was their own
daughter.  But the child did not for-
: She longed for the true home she had
b ..but whither should she go to seek
:Dear papa," said she, one day, "I beg
+will not say again there are no sylphids;
.! riemember so well how I spread my



<pb n="78"/>
78             FAIRY BOOK. 
wings and flew.  It was glorious to see - 
clouds float under my feet!"       :  :
" Very well," said the lord; "if you ii
I will say there are sylphids in the air, a,
trolls inside the earth; and, once on a timii
I was myself a great white butterfly: do yo
remember chasing me over a bed of roses ,? 
"0 papa, now you laugh! I love th
twinkle in your eye; and I am so glad it
you, and no one else, who is my papa; bu!
just the same, and forevermore. I shall keep
saying, I was a sylphid "              -if
Sometimes, when she set her white teeth
into some delicious fruit, she said withI
dreamy eyes,- 
"These grapes of Samarcand came across 
the seas; but they are not so sweet as thet
fruit in my own garden, mamma."           I
"And where is your garden, my child? "  ]i
" Oh, in the Summer-land. I always forget ;



<pb n="79"/>
THE LOST SYLPHID.         79
:you have never seen it. When I go
e again, mamma, I will certainly take you
or I love you with all my heart. I can
r go without you."
en she heard the evening-bells from the
er, shed said, Oh, they are like the joy-
s at home, only not so sweet. Nothing,
i, is so sweet. Even my dear mamma is
8o lovely as the lady who comes when I
sleep."
te One- they called her Little One for
want of a name-loved to prattle about
wonders of that mysterious fairy-land,
h no one but herself had ever seen. Her
r would not check her, but let her tell
retty visions of remembered rainbows,
alaces, and precious gems. She said,--
The child has such a vivid fancy! It is
ill of us who can see pictures when our
are shut."
., ,I :



<pb n="80"/>
80              FAIRY BOOK. 
But the lord was not so well pleased; 
once, when his daughter looked at a fro
stream and murmured, " We have the ha
est rivers at home; they sing all day l1
all the year, without freezing! Can I fi
that Summer-land    again!    Oh, I wou.
creep all over the world to seek it,"
replied, -
" Little One, it is some cloud-city you ar
thinking of, some dream-land, or isle of Lon
Ago, which you will never see again. I beg
you to forget these wild fancies." 
But still the child dreamed on. Once she?
heard the glad song of the Hyperboreans:- -
"I come from a land in the sun-bright deep,
Where golden gardens glow; 
Where the winds of the North, becalmed in sleep, 
Their conch-shells never blow." 
She clapped her hands, murmuring to her. 
self, - 
-X



<pb n="81"/>
:  THE :LOST SYLPHID.       81
is my home ! I think I remember
iwas 'a land in the sun-bright
*bhen she journeyed, with her parents
ant countries, she always hoped that
ship would bear her away to the Happy
,;; and when they once touched a bright
-, and some one cried, "The isles of
Be! the isles of Greece!" she thought
_ was home at last, and hardly dared look
P  remembered shore. But, alas, she had
yet reached the Summer-land: this was
ir home.
len she heard her father say that the
ets she wore had been brought up from
deep places under the earth.
I wonder I had not thought of that," she
ldto herself. " Since there are such beau-
gems in my lost home, it must lie under
:earth. No doubt if I could only find the
ii:$  0    6               :
[0,0 , :6



<pb n="82"/>
82             FAIRY BOOK. 
right cave, and walk in it far enough' 
should come to the Summer-land."
So she set out, one day, in wild haste, bi
only lost herself in a deep cavern; and, whea
she found daylight again, she was all alon
upon the face of the earth. Her father an
mother were nowhere to be seen.      She
shouted their names, and ran to and fro seek:c
ing them till her strength was all spent. It
was growing dark; and Little One could onlyi
creep under a shelter, and weep herself
asleep.
Next morning it was no better, but far 
worse.  Her wretched parents had gone 
home, believing her drowned in the sea. :
Poor Little One was now all alone in the' :
world, and her heart ached with the cold.
Kind friends gave her food and shelter, and 5
her clothing was warm as warm could be;;
still her heart ached with the cold. People 



<pb n="83"/>
THE LOST SYLPHID.         83
ised her beauty so much that she dared
~ look up to let them see how lovely she
but she had lost both her father and
er, and her heart ached and ached. She
ght winter was coming on; and the
d was growing so chilly, that now she
i certainly set out for the Summer-land.
i she said,-
;iifI am a sylphid, perhaps my home is
I the hills, and far away. Yes: I think it
i, be in the country where the music
r she thought, when she heard music,
i seemed to hover and float over the
and lose itself in the sky; so she be-
set her face toward the country where
ii c goes. But, though she gazed till
Yes ached, she never saw her long-lost
nor so much as a glimpse of one of its



<pb n="84"/>
84             FAIRY BOOK. 
One night, after gazing and weeping t
she could scarcely see, and had no tears lef
the bright being who visited   her dream
came and whispered,- -
"If there be a land so fair
O'er the mountain shining, 
You will never enter there
By looking up and pining." 
"Dear me    then what shall I do?" saii
Little One, clasping her hands. " I am tired
of the dropping rain, and the bleak winds
I have lost my father and mother; I long lo
go home to the Summer-land."              :
"There are hills to climb, and streams to i
cross," said the fairy. 
"But I have stout shoes," laughed Little,
One.
" There are thorns and briers all along the
road."
*                        :0~~~~~~?



<pb n="85"/>
THE LOST SYLPHID.         85
"w But I can bear to be pricked."
:'a" Then I will guide you," said the fairy.
"fIow can that be?" cried the child.
' You come to me in dreams; but by day-
ight I cannot see so much as the tips of
your wings."
'L" Listen, and you will hear my voice," re-
lied the fairy. " Set out toward the East,
: dawn, to.morrow, and I will be with you."
; When Little One awoke, the sun was rising,
d she said,-
;" Oh that golden gate! The sun has left
open: do you see it, beautiful lady?"
'IkI see it," whispered the fairy: "I am
se beside you."
' Then," said Little One, fastening her
ss, and putting on all the jewels she could
ssibly carry, " I think I will set out at
;  for, if I make all speed, I may reach
Summer-land before that golden gate is



<pb n="86"/>
86             FAIRY BOOK.             :
She pressed on, as the fairy directed, up 'a
steep hill, her eyes fixed on the glowing east
ern sky. But, as the sun strode up higher,,
the morning clouds melted away. 
Where is my golden gate ?" cried the
child.
"Weeping so soon?" whispered the fairy.,
" Do not scold me, dear Whisper," moaned.
the child; "you know I have lost my kind
father and mother; and the thorns prick me;
and then this is such a lonely road; there is?,
nobody to be seen." 
The truth was, there were children gather-.
ing strawberries on the hill, and old women
digging herbs; but Little One did not seer-
them, for she was all the while watching the6
sky. But she was soon obliged to pause, and
take breath. 
" Look about you," said the Whisper, you:r
may see some one as unhappy as yourself.": i-



<pb n="87"/>
: - 0  THE LOST SYLPHID.         87
1The child looked, and saw a little girl driv-
aga goat; while large tears trickled down
iher cheeks, and moistened her tattered dress.
/or a moment, Little One's heart ceased ach.
Hig with its own troubles.
/.! " What is your name, little girl?" said she:
/' and why do you weep? "
Y "My name is Poor Dorel," replied the
;child; "my father and mother are long since
- dead; and I have nothing to eat but goat's
milk and strawberries: " and, as she pqoke,,
!: the large tears started afresh.
": " Poor Dorel! you are the first one I. ever
F:-saw who had as much trouble as I. I, too,
j: have lost a father and mother."
i  "Were they a king and queen ?   asked
Dorel, wiping her eyes, and gazing at Little
/  One's beautiful dress and glittering orna-
i                    d        ments.
t "They loved me dearly," replied Little
-/.



<pb n="88"/>
88            FAIRY BOOK.. -
One sadly; "yet I never heard that th
were king and queen. Come with me, d
ling Dorel !" I never before saw any one wk
was hungry. Come with me! I live in -
country where there is food enough f
everybody."                       X;i
"Where is that?" said Dorel, eagerly. 
" I do not quite know, little girl; but it iA
not in the bosom of the earth, and it is notBi
the sun-bright deep: so I suppose it is ov
the hills, and far away."
" Now I know who you are," said Dorel
"You are the lost sylpliid; and people sad
you have travelled all over the world. Bui,
if you do not know the way home, pray ho,
can you tell which road to take ?"  -
" Oh! I have a guide, - a beautiful fairyl
called Whisper: she shows me every step of
the way.  I wish you would go too, little:
Dorel !"
:  -  .       0  t34~~~~~~~~~~~::



<pb n="89"/>
'!.1    THE LOST SYLPHID.         89
" I think I will not, little' Sylphid; for, if
have only a Whisper for a guide, I do
t believe you will ever get there; but, oh,
u are very, very beautiful! "
--" If you will not go," said Little One, " let
e, at least, give you a few of my jewels:
ou can sell them for bread."
So saying, she took from her girdle some
irquoise ornaments, and placed them in Do-
el's hand with a kiss which had her whole
rt in it.
-' Now I love you," said Dorel; "but more
r the kiss than any thing else; and I am
ing before you to cut down the thorns
t shoot out by the wayside. I am a little
Buntain-girl, and know how to use the
ning-knife."
4ittle One danced for joy. She found she
Ed now walk with wonderful ease; for not
were there no more sharp thorns to
S : 



<pb n="90"/>
90             FAIRY BOOK. 
prick her, but her heart was also full of
new love, which made the whole world loo
beautiful. 
" You see the way is growing easier," a
the Whisper. 
' Pour out thy love like the rush of a river, 
Wasting its waters forever and ever." 
"So I will," said Little One. "Is there
any one else to love ?"                 '
By and by she met an old woman, beint
nearly double, and picking up dry sticks with -
trembling hands. 
"Poor woman!" said Little One: "I am
going to love you."
"Dear me !" said the old crone, dropping
her sticks, and looking up with surprise in :
every wrinkle: " you don't mean me ?  Why, 
my heart is all dried up."
" Then you need to be loved all the more,"
cried Little One heartily. 



<pb n="91"/>
THE LOST SYLPHID.         91
he poor woman laughed; but, at the same
, brushed a tear from her eye with the.
rner of her apron.
I   I thought," said Little One, "I was the
ly unhappy one in the world: it seemed
pity my heart should ache so much; but,
I would rather have it ache than be dried
I suppose you never were beaten," said
ep old woman; "you were never pelted
h whizzing stones?"
i " Indeed I never, never was !" replied Lit-
One, greatly shocked by the question.
By'5 By your costly dress, I know you never
ere so poor as to be always longing for
iod. Let me tell you, my good child, when
W:e is beaten and scolded, and feels cold all
iter, and hungry all summer, it is no won-
er one's heart dries up ! "
- -Little One threw her arms about the old



<pb n="92"/>
92              FAIRY BOOK. 
woman's neck.    "Let me help you p
sticks " said she; " you are too old for h
work; your hands tremble too much."      :
Swiftly gathering up a load of fagots, 
put them together in a bundle.          :
" Now, how many jewels shall I give her ?
thought the child. " She must never wan
for food again."
" How many?" echoed the Whisper. 
"Give as the morning that flows out of heaven:  H
Give as the free air and sunshine are given."
" Then she shall have half," said Littli
One in great glee.   " Here, poor woman,l
take these sapphires and rubies and dia
monds, and never be hungry again!"       'I
"Heavenly child!" said the stranger, lay?1:
ing her wasted hand on the sylphid's bright
head, and blessing her, "it is little excepts
thanks that an old creature like me can given;-
*                       0,--y~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.f



<pb n="93"/>
THE LOST SYLPHID.         93
tmay be you will not scorn this pair of lit-
:'shoes: they are strong, and, when you
ye to step on the sharp mountain-rocks,
y will serve you well."
iLittle One's delicate slippers were already
ch worn, and she gladly exchanged them
the goat-skin shoes; but, strange to re-
te, no sooner had she done so than she
und herself flitting over rocks and rough
aces with perfect ease, and at such speed,
at, when she looked back, in a moment, she
ad already left the old woman far behind,
d out of sight. ,They were magical shoes;
t, no matter how fast they skimmed over
e ground, Dorel, out of pure love, con-
ued to go before, talking and laughing and
oothing the way.
nOne by one Little One sold her jewels to
uy bread, which she shared with all the
edy she chanced to meet. After many
r 



<pb n="94"/>
94           . FAIRY BOOK.
days there remained but one gem; and
wept because she had no more to give.; B
through her tears, she now, for the first ti
fancied she could see the spires and turr
of her beautiful home, though, as yet, v'
far off.
"How fast I have come !" said she, lau 
ing with delight.  "But for these mag
shoes, and Dorel's pruning-knife, I sho
have been even now struggling at the f
of the hill." 
Then she looked down at her torn dress. 
"What a sad plight I am in! no one w
know me when I get home !" 
"Never fear! " said the fairy: "you a
sure to be welcome."
Little One now held up her last jewel i
the sunlight, while a starving boy looked 
it with eager eyes.                  :"
" Take it!" said she, weeping with the t



<pb n="95"/>
1 ; X  THE LOST SYLPRID.       95
p:st pity. "I only wish it were a dia.
ond instead of a ruby, - a diamond as
/!rge as my heart!"
The boy blessed her with a tremulous
oice. Little One pressed on, singing softly
/ herself, till she came to a frightful chasm,
of water.
II" How shall I ever cross it !" she cried in
rm.
( -"May I help you, fair Sylphid ?" said the
rateful boy to whom she had given her last
el. " I can make a bridge in the twink-
g of an eye."
i:.0So saying, he threw across the roaring
wrrent a film which looked as frail as any
pider's web.
i:^ It will bear you," said the Whisper: " do
inot be afraid !"
I- So Little One ventured upon the gossamer
ridge, which was to the eye as delicate as
i -,: 



<pb n="96"/>
96             FAIRY B BOOK. 
mist; but to the feet as strong as ad'
She hushed her fears, and walked ove
with a stout heart.
Now, she was on the borders of the S
mer-land. Here were the turrets and spi
the soft white clouds, the green fields, 
sunny streams. Instantly her long-lost wi
appeared again; and she spread them lik4
happy, bird, and flew home.   Oh, it -
worth years of longing and pain! She w
held in tender embraces, and kissed loving
by well-remembered friends. To her gre
surprise and delight, her father and moth
were both there they had arrived at th
Summer-land while seeking their Little On
"Now I know," said her father, "that mi
daughter was not dreaming when she longe
for her remembered home." 
Little One looked at her soiled dress; bnt
the stains had disappeared; and, most won



<pb n="97"/>
THE LOST SYLPHID.         97
1rfl! all the jewels she had worn on her 
ek and arms, and in her girdle, were there
iet, burning with increased brilliancy.  Lit-
e One gazed again, and counted to see if
ny were missing. Yes: two she had sold for
read were not there. It was the jewels she
d given away which had come back in
Some mysterious manner and were more re-
endent than before.-
;" Ah! " said she, with a beaming smile,
-'now I know what it means when they say,
S All you give, you will carry with you.' It
Was delightful to scatter my gems by the
Wayside, but I did not think they would all
aJ given back to me when I reached home !"
Then, intwining arms with a bright syl-
phid, she flew with her over the gardens in
a trance of delight. 
(: "Here," said Little One, "is my own dear
garden. ? rrenember the border and the
Q  Q     7 



<pb n="98"/>
98             FAIRY BOOK.
paths right well; but it never bore sue
golden fruit, it never glowed with such beat
tiful flowers." 
" Your fairy, the one you call Whisper, ha
taken care of it for your sake," said the
sister sylphid. "Do you know that tho
flowers, and those trees with fruit like'bon
ny beaten gold,' have been watered by yout
tears, Little One?  It is in this. way the''
have attained their matchless beauty an
grace."
"My tears, little sister?" 
"Yes, your tears. Every one you shed
upon earth, your fairy most carefully pre;
served; and see what wonders have beent
wrought " 
"If I had known that," said Little One
clapping her hands, " I would have been grad.
of all my troubles! I would have smiled[
through my tears !"
i!-a



<pb n="99"/>
THE LOST SYLPRID.         99
X Now I know no more than I have told of
this story of the Lost Sylphid. I tell the
tale as 'twas told to me; and I wish, with all
my heart, it were true.
?.-          
_0    
St,¢
?E 



<pb n="100"/>
100           FAIRY BOOK.
THE   CASTLE     OF  GEMS. 
Once upon a time, though I cannot tell
when, and in what country I do not now re- 
member, there lived a maiden as fair as a,
lily, as gentle as a dewdrop, and as modest :
as a violet. A pure, sweet name she had,- -
it was Blanche.
She stood one evening, with her friend  I
Victor, by the shore of a lake. Never had i
the youth or maiden seen the moonlight so 
enchanting; but they did not know
"It was midsummer day,
When all the fairy people 
From elf-land come away."       !
Presently, while they gazed at the lake, 
which shone like liquid emerald and sapphire
-..



<pb n="101"/>
-i"       ETHE CASTLE OF GEMS.       101.
and topaz, a boat, laden with strangely beau.
iful beings, glided towards them across the
waters.   The fair voyagers were clad in
:robes of misty blue with white mantles
about their waists, and on   their heads
I wreaths of valley-lilies.
They were all as fair as need be; but fair-
lest of all was the helms-woman, the queen of
the fairies. Her face was soft and clear like
moonlight; and she wore a crown of nine
large diamonds, which refracted the evening-
rays, and formed nine lunar rainbows.
The fairies were singing a roundelay; and,
as the melody floated over the waters, Victor
and Blanche listened with throbbing hearts.
Fairy music has almost passed away from the
.: earth; but those who hear it are strangely
moved, and have dreams of beautiful things
- which have been, and may be again.
"It makes me think of the days of long



<pb n="102"/>
102           FAIRY BOOK. 
ago when there was no sin," whispered
Blanche. 
" It makes me long to be a hero," answered
Victor with a sparkling eye. 
All the while the pearly boat was drifting 
toward the youth and maiden; and, when it
had touched the shore, the queen stepped :
out upon the land as lightly as if she had
been made entirely of dewdrops.       :
"I am Fontana," said she; "and is this 
Blanche ?"
She laid her soft hand upon the maid-
en's shoulder; and Blanche thought she :l
would like to die then and there, so full was 
she of joy. 
"I have heard of thy good heart, my 
maiden: now    what would   please thee '
most ?" said the queen.
Blanche bowed her head, and dared not -
speak.



<pb n="103"/>
of::: '     THE -CATLE OF GEMS.       103
!    Queen Fontana smiled: when she smiled
t  it was as if a soft cloud had slid away from
-the moon, revealing a beautiful light.
?-,  "Say pearls and diamonds," said Victor in
her ear.
"I don't know," whispered Blanche: "they
-are not the best things."
';  " No," said the queen kindly: "pearls and
^- diamonds are not the best things."
f-  Then Blanche knew that her whisper had
been overheard, and she hid her face in
iher: hands for shame.  But the queen
only smiled down on her, and, without speak-
i  '-ng, dropped into the ground a little seed.
Right at the feet of Blanche, it fell; and, in a
-1 moment, two green leaves shot upward, and
between them a spotless lily, which hung its
h ead with modest grace.
Victor gazed at the perfect flower in won-
o der, and, before he knew it, said aloud, "Ah,
how like Blanche !"



<pb n="104"/>
104            FAIRY BOOK. 
The queen herself broke it from the stem,,i
and gave it to the maiden, saying,- 
"Take it! it is my choicest gift.  Till it;
fades (which will never be), love will belX
thine; and, in time to come, it will have.
power to open the strongest locks, and swing 
back the heaviest doors. 
'Gates of brass cannot withstand
One touch of this magic wand.'" '
Blanche looked up to thank the queen; 
but no words came, - only tears.
"I see a wish in thine eyes" said Fon- 
tana. 
'"It is for Victor," faltered Blanche, at   ;
last:" he wishes to be rich and great." 
The queen looked grave. 
"Shall I make him one of the great men
of the earth, little Blanche?  Then he may  ?::



<pb n="105"/>
THE CASTLE OF GEMS.          105
>-ne day go to the ends of the world, and for-
get thee."
; Blanche only smiled, and Victor's cheek
Bl flushed.
X-:" I shall be a great man," said he,-" per-
i --haps a prince; but, where I go, Blanche shall
I? go: she will be my wife."
' "That is well," said the queen: " never
^  forget Blanche, for her love will be your
dearest blessing."
Then, removing from her girdle a pair of
spectacles, she placed them in the youth's
hand. He drew back in surprise.    "Does
' :she take me for an old man?" thought he.
He had expected a casket of gems at least;
X: perhaps a crown. 
"Wait," said Fontana: "they are the eyes
of Wisdom. When you have learned their
use, you will not despise my gift. Keep a
pure heart, and always remember Blanche.
And now farewell!"



<pb n="106"/>
106           FARY BOO. B OO
So saying, she moved on to the boat) fl<o
ing over the ground as softly as a creeping :
mist.
When Blanche awoke next morning, her '
first thought was, " Happy are the maidens 'i
who have sweet dreams I" for she thought 
she had only been wandering in a midsum- l
mer's night's dream; so, when she saw her lily 
in the broken pitcher where she had placed H
it, great was her delight. But a change had I
come over it during the night. It was no  !
longer a common lily, its petals were large
pearls, and the green leaves were now green  !
emeralds. This strange thing had happened 
to the flower, that it might never fade.
After this, people looked at Blanche, and
said, "How is it? she grows fairer every
day " and every one loved her; for the hu- -
man heart has no choice but to love what is 
good and gentle. 



<pb n="107"/>
THE CASTLE OF GEMS.       107
:i 'As for Victor, he at first put on his spectam
aBes with a scornful smile: but, when he had
worn them a moment, he found them very
elonderful things. When he looked through
:them, he could see people's thoughts written
l  lt on their faces; he could easily decipher
th fine writing which you see traced ott
igren leaves; and found there were long
mtories written on pebbles in little black and
l. gray dots.
i' When he wore the spectacles, he looked so
1l  wise, that Blanche hardly dared speak to him.
IC the saw that one day he was to become a
great man.
At last Victor said he must leave his home,
- and sail across the seas. Tears filled the
:i eyes of Blanche; but the youth whis.
i peered,- 
:   I am going away to find a home for you
:y   d ,:anme: so adieu, dearest Blanche 1"
SH[  - :: 



<pb n="108"/>
108           FAIRY BOOK. 
Now Victor thought the ship in which he'
sailed moved very slowly; for he longed to ]
reach the land which he could see through
his magic spectacles: it was a beautiful king- 
dom, rich with mines of gold and silver. 
When the ship touched shore, the streets
were lined with people who walked to and 
fro with sad faces. The king's daughter, a 
beautiful young maiden, was very ill; and it 
was feared she must die.
Victor asked one of the people if there 
was no hope.
It so happened that this man was the 
greatest physician in the kingdom  and he
answered, 
" Alas, there is no hope !"
Then Victor went to a distant forest where 
he knew a healing spring was to be found.
Very few remembered it was there'; and
those who had seen it did not know of its
power to heal disease.



<pb n="109"/>
THE CASTLE OF GEMS.       109,
;;Victor filled a crystal goblet with the pre-
jcious water, and carried it to the palace.
The old king shook his head sadly, but con-
~-ented to let the attendants moisten the
-- parched lips of the princess with the water,
i as it could do no harm. Far from doing
harm, it wrought a great good; and, in time,
;: the royal maiden was restored to health.
; '  Then, for gratitude, the king would have
given his daughter to Victor for a wife; but
- Victor remembered Blanche, and knew that
I  no other maiden must be bride of his.
:; Not long after this, the king was lost over-
board at sea during a storm. Now the peo-
ple must have a new ruler.   They deter-
I  mined to choose a wise and brave man; and,
: young as he was, no man could be found
braver and wiser than Victor: so the people
I  elected him for their king. Thus Fontana's
gift of the eyes of Wisdom had made him
truly " one of the great men of earth."
SI  'f



<pb n="110"/>
110           FAIRY BOO. BOO
In her humble home, Blanche dreami
every night of Victor, and hoped he wol
grow good, if he did not become great, 
Victor remembered Blanche, and knew th
her love was his dearest blessing. :-
" This old palace," thought he " will nev
do for my beautiful bride."           k
So he called together his people, and to
them he must have a castle of gems. Some
of the walls were to be of rubies, some Of
emeralds, some of pearls. There was to i!
any amount of beaten gold for doors ani
pillars; and the ceilings were to be of milk:
white opals, with a rosy light which comei
and goes.
All was done as he desired; and, when fte:
castle of gems was finished, it would need a
pen of jasponyx dipped in rainbows to Ade*
scribe it. 
Victor thought he would not have a guard



<pb n="111"/>
THE CASTLE OF GEMS.       111
if soldiers for his castle, but would lock the
lfour golden gates with a magic key, so that
P :o one could enter unless the gates should
: swing back of their own accord.
When the castle of gems was just com-
A pleted, and not a soul was in it, Victor locked
: the gates with a magic key, and then dropped
the key into the ocean.
- ;. " Now," thought he, "I have done a wise
thing. None but the good and true can enter
my castle of gems. The gates will not swing
:open for men with base thoughts or proud
: hearts!"
Then he hid himself under the shadow of
a tree, and watched the people trying to
enter.. But they were proud men, and so the
gates would not open.
King Victor laughed, and said to him-
I ave de        a wise thing with my magi
, I have done a wise thing with my magic



<pb n="112"/>
112           FAIRY BOOK.           IX
key. How safe I shall be in my castle of
gems " 
So he stepped out of his hiding-place, andi
said to the people,- -
" None but the good and true can get in.-" 
Then he tried to go in himself; but the 
gates would not move.                      ji
The king bowed his head in shame, and 
walked back to his old palace.
" Alas " said he to himself, "wise and :'
great as I am, I thought I could go in, I see 
it must be because I am filled with pride. 
Let me hide my face; for what would i
Blanche say if she knew, that, because my   i
heart is proud, I am shut out of my own cas-
tie?  I am not worthy that she should love 
me; but I hope I shall learn of her to be ??B
humble and good."                          i
The next day he sailed for the home of his
childhood.  When Blanche saw him, she :
i .                    f~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="113"/>
|/, -   THE CASTLE OF GEMS.      113
blushed, and cast down her eyes; but Victor
1.knew they were full of tears of joy. He
held her hand, and whispered,-
(' Will you go with me and be my bride,
beautiful Blanche ?"
' "I will go with you," she answered soft-
- ly; and Victor's heart rejoiced. 
All the while Blanche never dreamed that
'^ he was a great prince, and that the men who
came with him were his courtiers.
F When they reached Victor's kingdom, and
l, the people shouted "Long live the queen !"
Blanche veiled her face, and trembled; for
, Victor whispered in her ear that the shouts
.were for her. And, as the people saw her
j beautiful face through her gossamer veil,
' they cried all the more loudly, -
. "Long live Queen Blanche! Thrice wel-
i: come, fair lady!"
I-  The sun was sinking in the west, and his
~~~~~~~~



<pb n="114"/>
114            FAIRY BOOK. 
rays fell with dazzling splendor upon the ca
tle of gems. When Blanche saw the silen
closed castle and its golden gates, she r^
membered the words of Queen Fontana, who
had said that her lily should have power to
"open the strongest locks, and swing back :
the heaviest doors." 
Like one walking in a dream, she led Vic-.
tor toward   the resplendent castle.  Shoie
touched, with her lily, the lock which fas.'
tened one of the gates. 
"Gates of gold could not withstand  '
One touch of that magic wand."
Ih an instant, the hinges trembled; and the '!
massive door swung open so far, that forty
people could walk in side by side. Then it
slowly closed, and locked  itself without 
noise.
One of the people who passed in was the
·   .



<pb n="115"/>
f ·      THE CASTLE OF GEMS.     115
inrg,- wose heart was no longer proud. The
;Ithers, who had entered unwittingly, could
Diaot speak for wonder. Some of them were
, poor, and some were lame or blind; but all
were good and true.
: ·I At the rising of the moon a wonderful
: thing came to pass. The people entered the
Y castle of gems, and became beautiful. This
/ was through the power of the magic lily.
Now there were no more crooked backs
and lame feet and sightless eyes; and the
king looked at these people, who were beau-
y tiful as well as good, and declared he would
:- have them live in the castle; and the gen-
r tlemen should be knights; and the ladies,
- maids of honor.
: To this day Victor and Blanche rule the
kingdom; and such is the charm of the lily,
- -so like the pure heart of the queen,-that
the people are becoming gentle and good.



<pb n="116"/>
116           FAIRY BOOK. 
Until Queen Pontana shall call for the -
magic spectacles and the lily of pearl, it is
believed that Victor and Blanche will live in  I
the castle of gems, though the time should be :
a hundred years. 
:3:
''               0          ~~~~~~~~~~~ff



<pb n="117"/>
THE ELF OF LIGHT.       117
THE   ELF OF LIGHT.
A NORSE TALE.
'- In the strange island of Iceland, thrown
-up, by fire, from the depths of the sea, there
, :once lived a lad who worshipped the god
I Odin, and was taught from two absurd books
b called the Eddas. He wished to fight and
1die on a battle-field, so that his soul might
-,-:cross a rainbow-bridge, and dwell in the
;,-beautiful halls of Valhalla. There-so the
; Eddas say- are the chosen heroes, who are
- forever fighting all day, and feasting all
Hil 'night.
Thus, instead of a Bible, young Thule
studied wild fairy-tales; yet. for all his hea-



<pb n="118"/>
118            FAIRY BOOK.
thenish training, he had some noble traits,' 
which a Christian lad might imitate. 
He lived with his widowed mother at the
edge of a forest. The snow piled itself illn
drifts, and the wind howled through the:
trees, and crept in at the windows; for the  -
cottage was old, and a blind hurricane might
almost have mistaken it for a. heap of brushl.
wood. But Thule was quite as happy as if
the hut had been a palace. He loved the'
winter-beauty of his mother's face, and the
silvery hair half hidden under her black.
cap.  All the fire they burned was made     -
of the dry sticks he gathered in the forest,
and more than half the money they used :
was earned by his small hands.
In one of the ice-months of the year, when
the weather was sharper than a serpent's
- tooth, Thule came home from a hard day's 
work; and, the chillier he grew, the more he
-i~



<pb n="119"/>
THE ELF OF LIGHT.        119
:9histled to keep up a brave heart. Looking
/iat the horizon before him, he saw the cold
glare which we call Northern Lights, but
which he knew to be the flickering of hel-
imets and shields and spears.
i'i "The warlike maidens are out to-night,"
tlought the boy: "they are going to the bat-
1'-tle-fields to decide who is worthy to be slain.
H tow1 I love to see the sky lighted up with
'the flash of their armor! Odin, grant I may
,o:ne day be a hero, and walk over the bridge
1 .of a rainbow ! "
T. Then Thule went to his whistling again;
1 but ;just as he struck into the forest where
-tthe deep shadows lay, he heard a faint moan,
whbich sounded like a human voice, or might
have been a sudden gust of wind in a hollow
Perchance it is some poor creature even
older than I," thought the boy: " I hope not
.troll I



<pb n="120"/>
120           FAIRY BOOK.
Hurrying to the spot whence the soundA
came, he found an ugly, long-nosed dwarf ly-.1
ing on the ground, nearly perishing with
cold.. It was growing late, and the boy him- -
self was benumbed; but he went briskly to
work, chafing the hands and face of the 
stranger, even taking off his own blue jacket
to wrap it about the dwarfs neck.
"Poor old soul, you shall not die of cold !" -
said he; then, helping him to rise, he added
cheerily, "We will go to my mother's cot-
tage, and have a warm supper of oat-cakes 
and herrings; and our fire of dry boughs will
do you good."
The noble boy knew there was barely sup-
per enough for two, but did not mind going
hungry to bed for charity's sake. In the ear
of his heart, he heard the words of his
mother:-
" Never fear starving, my son, but freely
share your last loaf with the needy."



<pb n="121"/>
THE, ELF OF LIGHT.      121
They walked through the forest, the old
Fan leaning heavily on the youth's shoulder.
" Why should you befriend a poor wretch
Iwho cannot repay you?" whined the dwarf
In a hollow voice which startled Thule, it was
?o like the echo sent back by a mountain or a
iock.
1" I do not ask or wish to be repaid," was
?the reply. "Don't you know what the prov-
ii erb says? 'Do good, and throw it into the
SBea; if the fishes don't know it, Odin will! "'
:' "Yes: Odin shall know it, never fear," an-
s-wered the dwarf; "but, as I happen to be
-- informed that your tea-table is not quite large
i: enough for three, I think I will decline your
i 7invitation to supper. Really, my lad," he
.--' continued, "it would delight me to do you a
i little favor; for, though I am only a poor
i-: dwarf, I know how to be grateful. By the
-  way, have you seen such a thing hereabouts
I as a green alder-tree ?"
.,  



<pb n="122"/>
122            FAIR  BOOiK.         :
"A green alder-tree in winter-time " cried .
Thule. 
"'A curious thing, indeed," said the dwarf; |
"but I chanced to see one the other night in  ,
my rambles. Ah 1 look, here it is right be-
fore your eyes."
All the other forest-trees were dry and
hard, their hearts frozen within them; but ' 
this tree was alive, hidden behind a clump of
firs. When Thule began to dig about its 
roots, it seemed to come out of the ground
of its own free will, and to lie over his shoul-
ders as if it would caress him.
"Take home the little tree, and plant it be- 
fore your door, my lad." 
The youth turned to thank the stranger;
but he had vanished. Then Thule ran home
with all speed to tell his mother of the little
old man who had faded from his sight like a
wreath of smoke.



<pb n="123"/>
THE ELF OF LIGHT.        12 
{  t "'Now I wonder what it is you have seen," 
Bi said the good woman, raising her hands in
:f surprise. "Was he brown, my son, with a
I  long nose ? 
` "As brown as a nut, mother, with no end
: of nose."
' : Just as I supposed, my child!   That
.- dwarf is a wonderful creature,- one of the
I night-elves, a race gifted with great under-
*  standing. Know, my son, that he carves
. runes upon stones; and he no doubt assisted
|  in making Thor's hammer, that terrible in-
strument which can crush the skull of a
giant."
I-  "One thing I observed," said the boy: "he
blinked at that flashing in the sky, which peo-
: ple call Northern Lights; he had to shade his
: eyes with his funny little hand."
f "Did he, indeed? Poor Elf ! Light is pain-
ful to his race; and 1 have even heard that
I                                               -



<pb n="124"/>
124            FAIRY BOOK.
a stroke of sunshine is able to turn them into  :
stones. I am almost afraid of this little tree," 
added the good mother musingly. t You     r
know what we read in the holy Eddas: Both
the alder and the ash trees should be held sa-
cred; for Odin formed man from the ash, and 
woman from   the alder. Nevertheless, the 
night-elf could not have meant to do you a
mischief. Let us plant the tree as he di-e
rected."
"What, in the frozen ground, under the
snow??" 
But it now, for the first time, appeared that
there was a spot of earth near the south
window, which must have been waiting for
the tree, since it was as soft and warm as if 
the sun had been shining on it all the year. 
Here they planted the alder; and Thule
brought water, and moistened the roots. 
Next morning the tree seemed to have



<pb n="125"/>
|(B,/       THE ELF OF LIGHT.       125
grown a foot higher; and by daylight its
leaves showed a silver lining.     -
, "May Odin favor my pretty alderl" said
Thule; "nor let the frost pinch it, nor the
:winds blacken its green buds I"
Thule went into the woods again; and, as
e'was whistling at his work, he happened to
look down, and there, on the ground, at his
feet, lay a purse, well lined with gold. He
counted the pieces: fifty, all bright and new.
" I will go to the town," thought the boy,
shaking his head and sighing (for the gold
was very tempting), " I will go to the town,
. and ask who has lost a purse with fifty pieces
of precious gold. Ah, me! I wish I could
keep it!" then we should swim in herrings
and oil; and who knows but, for once in my
life, I might even get a taste of venison "
: But next moment he loosened his greedy
clutch at the purse. " No matter how brave-
-"' 



<pb n="126"/>
126           FAIRY BOOK. 
ly it shines 1 it is not my gold; and it is too
heavy for me to carry. Stolen money is
worse than a mill-stone about one's neck, so 
my mother says." 
" Keep the purse, little boy," said a sweet 
voice close by his elbow. He turned, and
saw a beautiful child, as radiant as a sun-
beam, and clad in garments of delicate and ?
transparent texture.
" I will be your friend, little boy. That
purse was dropped by a lady who wears a fur
cloak and long veil.  If she asks for her
treasure, I can say it fell into a hole in the
ground.   Everybody believes me: never
fear !"
" Poor misguided angel !" said the boy, 
amazed by her wondrous beauty no less than
by her apparent want of truth. "You are, i
indeed, a lovely little tempter; but I have a
dear mother at home, and I love her better



<pb n="127"/>
:-*~ ~    THE ELF OF LIGHT.       127
1 ! ian a million pieces of gold. I must go to
Ithe town, and seek out this lady you mention,
i who wears a fur cloak and long veil."
Nay, if you will be so stupid," said the
h:' ining child, "why, I will even go with you,
[  and show you the way."
I  So, gliding gracefully before the bewil-
dered youth, she led him out of the forest, in-
I to the most crowded part of the city, up to
the door of a splendid mansion; but, when
:' Thule turned his head only an instant, she
I.was gone, and no trace of her was to be
seen: she seemed to have melted into sun-
ts hine.
|.  The lady of the house received the purse
-'; with thanks, and would gladly have given
Thule a piece of the gold; but, much as the
&' boy longed for it, he put it aside, saying,
: ' No, madam: my mother assures me I must
be honest without the hope of reward. She
s:,;  g  .                                .



<pb n="128"/>
128            FAIRY BOOK. 
would not like me to take wages for not be 
ing a thief!" 
The next morning the alder-tree had grown 
another foot; and Thule and his mothering
watched the growing leaves, and touched ;
them with reverent fingers. They were cer-.;
tainly of a tender green, lined with shining 
silver.
"May Odin favor my pretty alder!" said -.
Thuie; "nor let the frost pinch it, nor the: 
winds blacken its green buds !" 
Then Thule kissed his mother, and trudged :
off to the forest as usual. But he seemed 
doomed to adventures; for this time he was 
met by three armed men, who were roaming i
the country as if seeking something.
"Prithee, little urchin," said one of the 
men, " can you tell us what has become of a
young alder-tree, whose green leaves are 
lined with silver ?"
1 t



<pb n="129"/>
THE ELF OF LIGHT.        129
I A' I dug up an alder-bush, kind sirs," re-
Iplied the boy, trembling, and remembering
Irat his mother had said she was almost
afraid of that little tree.
[ -!t There are many alder-bushes," said an-
other of the men gruffly; "but only one is
ireen at this time of year, and has silver-
m[ined leaves. It was placed here by com-
imand of the giant Loki, and no one was to
iiouch it under pain of death; for, when his
'mountain-garden should be laid out in the
[  -spring, the tree was to be uprooted, and
iplanted therein."
Thule grew almost as stiff and white as if
;ii frost-giant had suddenly breathed on him.
i He knew that Loki was a pitiless god, feared
by all, and beloved by none,- a god who
,"had an especial grudge against the whole hu-
; man race.
"I will hold my peace," thought Thule.
!  - LE 0  0                      f



<pb n="130"/>
130            FAIRY BOOK.
"I will never confess that the tree I carried :
away has silver-lined leaves. I will hasten a
home, pluck up the bush, and burn it: then :
who will be the wiser ?"                 A
'But Thule, in spite of his trembling, could
not forget his good mother's counsel:-
"Your words, my boy, let them be truth,
and nothing but truth, though a sword should i
be swinging over your head." 
Then, as soon as his voice returned to him,-
he confessed that the tree he had removeda 1
was really just such an one as the men de- 
scribed, and begged for mercy, because, :as
he said, he had committed the sin ignorantly, -
not knowing the mandate of the .terrible ,'
giant. 
But the men bade Thule lead them to his
mother's house, and point out his stolen treas- :
ure; declaring that they could show no mer- 
cy; for, when Loki had made a decree, no !
man should alter it by one jot or one tittle. 



<pb n="131"/>
-t       YiTHE ELF OF LIGHT.      131
1^ t Oh !" thought the unfortunate boy, wring' 
his hands, and trembling till the woollen 
F'seI on his cap danced a gallopade, " oh, if
e cruel night-elf, who led me into this mis-
cehief, would only come forward now, and help
lie out of it I But, alas, it is of no avail to
ovok~e him; for it is now broad daylight,
edthe sun would strike him into a stone im-
sge in a twinkling."
^-n-ena Thule, followed by the messengers
o- Loki, had reached the door of his cottage,
i: found his gray-haired mother sprinkling
eroots of the beautiful alder, and fondling
I   leaves with innocent pleasure. At sight
the armed men, she started back in af-
right. 
?t"It is indeed the giant's tree," said the
iaien to Thule. " Pluck it up, and follow us
With it to Loki's castle on the mountain."
"e ' To Loki's castle "shrieked the wretched



<pb n="132"/>
132            FAIRY BOOK. -
mother. "Then he must pass a frightful wil-
derness, be assailed by the frost-giants; and,
if there -be any breath left in him, Loki will
dash it out at a glance 1 Have mercy on a
poor old mother, O good soldiers !" 
The unhappy boy touched the tree, and it
came out of the ground of its own free will;
and, in a trice, stood on its feet, shook out its 
branches into arms, and in another moment 
was no longer a tree, but a child, with a
beauty as dazzling as sunshine.
"Unfortunate men!" said she, in a voice-
whose angriest tones were sweeter than the
music of an A2olian harp, "unfortunate areo
you in being the servants of Loki ! Go, tell
your cruel master that the schemes he has '
plotted against me and mine have all failed-:'
my enchantment is over forever.   Yonder i'
boy," said she, pointing to little Thule, "has
saved me. I was, and still remain, an elf of.
_ =Cis
:          4~~~~!



<pb n="133"/>
THE ELF OF LIGHT.       133
itight, as playful and harmless as sunshine.
the merciless Loki, enraged at the love I
ear the children of men, changed me to a
little alder-tree, which is the emblem of girl-
hood. But he had no power to keep me in
tat form forever. He was obliged to make
a condition, and he made the hardest one that
his artful mind could invent: 'Since you love
Portals so dearly,' said he, ' no one but a mor-
al shall free you from your imprisonment.
You shall remain a tree till a good'child shall
uch you,-a child who is generous enough
to SHARE HIS LAST LOAF WITH A STRANGER,
inest enough to GIVE BACK A REWARD FOR
^I;$ HONESTY, brave enough to SPEAK THE
TRUTH WHEN A LIE WOULD HAVE SAVED HIS
liFE.- Long shall you wait for such a deliv-
jerer!' 
"f-'' .Now how amazed will Loki be when
he learns that this little boy has been



<pb n="134"/>
134            FAIRY BOOK.; 
tempted in all these particulars, yet proves:
true.  My poor soldiers, you may return
whence you came, for the alder-tree will 
never rustle its silver leaves in the moun-
tain-garden of Loki."                 - 
Then the men disappeared, not sorry that
the good boy had escaped his threatened 
doom. 
Thule, looking at the beautiful elf so lately 
a tree, could hardly trust his own eyes; and
I fancy that many a boy, even at the present
day, would have felt rather bewildered underS
the circumstances. 
"Shining child!" said he: "you look vastl
like the wonderful little being who led me
out of the forest yesterday."   -    -
"That may well be," replied the elf ofi
light; "for she is my sister. The 'brow
dwarf who pointed out to you the alder-treeo
' . 
_ _ ·0 ,_



<pb n="135"/>
THE ELF OF LIGHT.        135
also an excellent friend of mine, though,
range to say, I have never seen him. We
ve to aid each other in all possible ways;
Fyet we can never meet, for there is a fatality
i   my eyes which would strike him dead.
he had heard of Thule, the little woodcutter
|who was called so brave and generous and
true. He tried you, you see; and so did my
frolicsome sister, who was fairly ablaze with
delight when she found you could not be
tempted to steal!"
Thule's mother had stood all the while on
the threshold, overawed and dumb.   Now
she came forward, and said,
I am prouder to-day than I should be if
|^my son had slain ten men on the battle-
field" 
|  The beautiful elf of light, penetrated with
Igratitude and admiration, remained Thule's
te'' -  - 
r':. 



<pb n="136"/>
136           FAIRY BOOK. . 
fast friend as long as he lived. She gav
the lad and his mother an excellent homei
and made them happy all the days of their,
lives.
7'-



<pb n="137"/>
THE PRINCESS HILDA.       137
[~:
TE   PRINCESS HILDA.
PRINCESS HILDEGARDE sat at an open win-
dow, looking out upon her garden of flowers.
? She was very beautiful, with a face as fair
and sweet as a rose. Not far off sat, watching
her, her young cousin Zora, with a frown on
I her brow.
V There was bitter hatred in Zora's heart be-
l cause Hildegarde was rich and she was poor;
R.: -because Hildegarde would, in time, be a
i. queen, and she one of her subjects. More-
over, Hildegarde was so beautiful and good
A- that the fame of her loveliness had spread far
k  and wide; and it was for her beauty that
:  Zora hated her more than for any thing else,



<pb n="138"/>
138           FAIRY BOOK.: 
In childhood Zora had been very fair; and
the courtiers had petted her, and pronounced-l
her even fairer than the princess; but her
beauty had never meant any thing but bright 'i
eyes and cherry cheeks: so it could not last. :-
If she had only cherished pure thoughts and
kind wishes, she might still have been as:
lovely as Hilda; but who does not know that,~-B
evil feelings write themselves on the face ? I(
Jealousy had pulled her mouth down a t:
the corners; deceit had given it a foolish ;;
smirk; spite had plowed an ugly frown inff
her brow; while she had tried so many arts .
to make her rich brown skin as delicately ,
white as Hilda's, that it was changed to they 
tint of chrome yellow. 
It was said in those days, that Zora was i:a 
the power of wicked fairies, who twisted her :;
features into the shape that pleased them :i
best.
- .:: '~



<pb n="139"/>
^      THE PRINCESS HILDA.       139
I  -At any rate, how the amiable Princess
da was to blame for all these deformities
^t would be hard to say ; and she little
reamred of the malice in her cousin's heart,
But, while Hilda was looking out of the
indow, a noble knight passed that way; and 
so delighted was he with the rare sweetness
Q of her face, that he forgot himself, and
: paused a moment to gaze at her. The prin-
|;cess blushed, and let fall the silken curtain;
but Zora had seen the knight, and knew he
r was the royal Prince Reginald. She ground
1 her teeth in rage; for she had determined
that the prince should never see her beauti-
ful cousin.
If  : " They shall not meet," said she to herself:
'? "no, not if there are bad fairies enough to
:   prevent it."
-I- 0But, when the princess looked up, Zora
was smiling very sweetly. Who could have
{0:



<pb n="140"/>
140            FAIRY BOOK. 
dreamed that she was thinking of nothing
but how to ruin the peace of her gentle.
cousin? ?
Zora could hardly wait for nightfall, so
eager was she to do her wicked work. When :'
it was dark, and all was quiet, she stole out
of the castle, wearing a black mantle which -i
hid her face.
"Now," thought she, "no one' can recog- -I
nize me, and I will seek the fairy Gerula." 
You must know that Gerula was one of
the most wicked and hideous sprites that 
ever existed. She dwelt in a cave far from  :j
the abodes of men. It was hidden by huge 
trees through which the wind never ceased : -
howling. At evening owls hooted overhead, l
and many creeping    things wound   their .
length along the ground. The more toads
arid snakes she could see about her, the bet-  i
ter was she pleased; for fairies, as well as 
*                          A:.~~~~~~~~~~~~~!



<pb n="141"/>
i -        THE PRINCESS HILDA.       141
ortals, are attracted by what is akin to
'themselves.
She was descended from a race called ko-
I- bolds or goblins; and she loved all the metals
I which lie under the earth as well as the liv-
I  ing things which crawl up out of its bosom.
i   So acute were her ears, that she heard
I-. Zora's steps from  a great distance.  She
brushed back her elf-locks, and gave a low
-grunt like some wild beast. It pleased her
. that the Lady Zora should find need of her
counsel; but, when Zora had reached the
cave, the cunning fairy pretended to be sleep-
ing, and started up in seeming surprise.
" What brings a body here at this time of
night?" said she.
"I am Lady Zora. I have come, sweet
fairy, to beg a favor. The Princess Hilda is
hateful to me: work one of your charms on
her, and let me see her face no more."
t.
.::':



<pb n="142"/>
142           FAIRY BOOK. ' 
The old fairy pricked up her ears and said
to herself, "Ha! ha I will have nice sporti
out o' this " then said aloud, "Say, what
harm has the princess done to my rosebud,
my lily, my pride ?"
Zora's eyes flashed. "Prince Reginald haa 
seen her; and to see her is to love her. lMy
heart is set on wedding Prince Reginald.
Take her out of his way! " 
Just then a broad gleam of moonlight fell 
on the treacherous maiden. It was strange 
how much she looked like the cruel fairy; :
and Gerula gazed on her with delight.
"My beautiful viper I " said she, using the ,
sweetest pet-name she could think of, "I will 
do your bidding. But first say what you will 
give me if I put Hildegarde out of your  '
way."
Then she chuckled, and rubbed her hands 
in great glee. Zora started back in alarm. 



<pb n="143"/>
T I did not know you sold your charms for
Iold; but I would give you half my fortune
If need be, any thing, to be rid of Hilda."
I  The fairy chuckled again. " Just the dam-
sel for me," thought she.
I will give you a diamond necklace," said
I Zora:- ' it is worth a small kingdom, and was
:given me by my cousin Hilda. You can
surely ask no more ?"
i: '"Diamonds !" said the goblin, snapping
I-:fer fingers. "What think you I care for
I  them? Do I not tire of stooping to pick
them up? for they are given me by my
ousins, the gnomes, any day. No diamonds
. fr me! Keep them and your gold. I ask
but one thing, my dear."
Here she spoke in low hissing tones, more
' terrible than her loudest croakings.
; " Promise me, if you do not marry Prince
'0 



<pb n="144"/>
144           FAIRY BOOK.
Reginald, you will let me change you into a,
charming green snake."
"Alas " cried Zora, turning pale, "who -
ever heard of such a cruel request ?"
"Cruel, am I?" said the goblin in delight. 
"Oh, I must seem cruel to one who is so 
gentle and lovely as Hilda!"            :
"Alas," cried Zora,. "I may fail to win
Prince Reginald." 
"All the better," chuckled the   fairy. -'
"When you become a snake, you and I shall 
enjoy each other's society, I assure you."  - 
Zora shuddered. 
"But it's all one to me," added the goblin,
beginning to yawn. " On the whole, I think
you may as well go home."
Zora wrung her hands, and groaned. 
"Yes," said the gnome: "go back to the  '
castle. Ugh! I would sooner trust one of
my winking owls to do a daring deed than 
:!:



<pb n="145"/>
i/: '   THE PRINCESS HILDA.       145
onu :! Fie upon you   Creep back to your
bed, and let Hilda marry the prince: a
:toveely pair they will make. Off with you,
for I have to make up my sleep I have
lost."
But Zora was thinking.
|  "I am silly indeed !" she said to herself.'
";'Why do I fear that I shall not win the love
of Prince Reginald?  Only Hilda stands in
I my way." Then she said aloud,-
Of !  "Lovely being ! sweetest of all the race I
Great as is my horror, I will consent to your
will."
Just then was heard a crackling in the dry
leaves.
"Only a snake," said the goblin. Zora
trembled.
"Will you promise me that Hilda will
never trouble me again?"
"I promise," said the goblin, with one of



<pb n="146"/>
146            PAIRY BOOX.
her merriest laughs, as loud and hoarse a    i
the song of a frog.
Just then a sigh was heard not far from th
place where Zora stood.   "There is some Xi
one here: we are watched," she whispered. 
But Gerula thought it the howling of the i
wind; for she was busily musing over the 
charm she was about to obtain of her cousins,
the gnomes, and her eyes and ears were not.
as sharp as usual.
She took from the ground her crooked staff. 
Hush," said she; "if the sky were to fall
on your head, you are not to speak; for now
begins the charm." 
Then she drew a circle three times on the 
ground, with her staff, and said in low tones,- 
"Hither, ye cousins, that come at my call:
The princess is young and fair;
Mix me a charm that shall bring her to woe
Spin me your vilest snare."
*:: '



<pb n="147"/>
THE PRINCESS HILDA.         147
A mist arose, in which Zora could see dim
igures, one after another.   Zora held her
breath.  Gerula muttered   again  in low
>tones, -
-?    " "Hlda is gentle, and dreams of no guile;
The little gnomes sit and weep;
Make her, - if must be, -a snowy wee lamb,
In the fold with her father's sheep.'"
Zora clapped her hands in delight.   But
just then, a faint sound was heard, as of some
one talking between the teeth. Then Zora
spoke, and the charm was broken. She did
not intend to speak; but asked, " What noise
was that? " before she thought.
"You have broken the charm," said the
fairy. "The soft-hearted gnomes are unwill-
ing to punish Hilda; but I hoped, by my
craft, I could force them to keep her a lamb
forever; or, at most, to let her grow to a
sheep, and die by the knife.



<pb n="148"/>
148             FAIRY BOOK.
"I will now weave a new charm; but I
fear me they will repent; and Hilda will"
not be got out of the way, after all. Not
a -word more, I warn you." 
So saying, the goblin made another circle
three times, on the ground, and again mut. 
tered,-
" How long is fair Hilda a snowy wee lamb ?
The little gnomes cry, 'We fear 
Till comes a brave lion so tender and true, 
She lives by his side a year.'"  :
Zora clapped her hands again. "That is 
well," said she, "for never was a lion seen :-
who could let a little helpless lamb pass his  i
way without tearing it in pieces." 
"True," said the gnome, well pleased, "it ;i
has worked well. Hilda will never trouble
you again: so creep home softly, and go to
your rest: dream    of bats and    creeping
: - :.



<pb n="149"/>
THE PRINCESS HILDA.        149
snakes; and to-morrow, at sunrise, ask your
icousin to walk with you in the park. Now
adieu !"
"Adieu, sweetest and best of fairies I" said
| Zora, drawing her silken mantle closely about
' her face. As she left the hideous cave,
' snakes hissed after her, and a bat flew in her
I[ face; but she had sold herself to evil, and
I walked on without fear of the creatures she
so strongly resembled.
Next morning, at the first peep of the sun,
she cried, " Awake, dearest Hilda, joy of my
life, and walk with me in the park. I have
lost my diamond necklace; and last night I
dreamed it was lying in the grass."
So Princess Hildegarde opened her eyes,
and hastened to follow her cousin; for her
-heart was quickly moved to any act of kind-
ness.
" What a fine flock of sheep ! " cried Hilda,



<pb n="150"/>
150            FAIRY BOOK. 
as they were walking in the park. "Such
innocent"-' 
She would have said more, but the words-
on her tongue were suddenly changed to ten,- 
der bleatings; and even as Zora stood look-.u
ing at her, she crouched down on all fours, 
dwindled in size, was enveloped in white 
fleece, and became a dumb lamb. 
Overwhelmed with horror and surprise,
she raised her pleading, tearful eyes to the 
face of her cousin. But Zora gave a mock-
ing laugh, and said, pointing her finger at 
her,--
" Who now is the heir of the throne ? Will 
they set the royal crown on a sheep's head, 
think you?  Bravo, sweet creature! You
may stand now between me and Prince Regi-
nald as much as you please.  It's all my
work. I tell you once for all, I hate you, Hil.
degarde."



<pb n="151"/>
THE PRINCESS HILDA.       151
Was this Zora's return for her cousin's
love?   The princess would fain have ex-
Ipressed her grief and amazement.
"Pray don't try to talk, my .bonny.wee
t thing! It is not one of your gifts, at pres-
.-ent. Your voice has ceased to be musical.
1 can sing now as well as you. Go to nib-
bling grass, deary, and a long life to you!"
Then the treacherous Zora turned on her
heel, and left her poor cousin to her mute
despair.
A search was made far and wide for the
missing  princess.  Forests were hunted,
rivers were dragged; but without avail.
Deep gloom fell on the people, and the queen
nearly died of sorrow. They all believed
Hilda dead, all but Zora, who knew too well
her cruel fate.
Then Zora was treated like the king's
daughter. Wherever she went, there were ser-



<pb n="152"/>
152            FAIRY BOOK.
vants to follow her; yet none loved her, an
behind her back they made wry faces, an
said she looked like one who was tormente
by evil fairies. 
But, alas for Zora, nothing more was seen
of Prince Reginald.  She watched the win
dows day after day, hoping to see him ride!
by on his coal-black steed; but he nevert
came. Then she grew crosser than ever, and(:
the frown on her brow ploughed deeper still.'
She dreamed every night of horrible' goblins 
and slender green snakes.              i-
All the while, poor Hildegarde roamed- 
about the park. The other lambs were con- ,
tent to nip the sweet grass, and frisk in the 
sun; but the princess remembered something 
better, for her soul did not sleep. :
The king himself, in his walks, was struck 
with the beauty of the lamb; its fleece was Iam
far softer, finer, and whiter than was common. ::
"S,<



<pb n="153"/>
THE PRINCESS HILDA.      153
:e said to his chief shepherd, " Watch well
onder snow-white lamb, and give it particu-
ar care."
For there was something in its soft dark
eyes, as they were raised to his face, which
stirred the king's heart, though he knew not
wi-  ly.
One day the city was thrown into a great
tumult. A lion had been seen in the thicket
which bordered the park.   The huntsmen,
hearing of it, stole out privately to waylay
him in a snare. He was caught alive by the
king's favorite huntsman.  It was agreed
that such a fine lion had never been seen be-
fore; and the king ordered a strong iron
cage for the beast, and made his favorite
huntsman his keeper.
Now the cage was in the midst of the
park; and such was the terror of the sheep
and deer, that none of them went near it.



<pb n="154"/>
154           FAIRY BOOK.              I
"I will go," thought poor Hildegarde; " le
the lion tear me in pieces. Sooner would 1
perish, than live on, a poor wee lamb all my 
days."
So she went up to the cage, though with ad
faint heart; but the lion put his paw out of /!
the bars, and stroked her face, as if he would : j
bid her welcome. The keeper reported the i
fact with great surprise. 
It may be-that the beautiful brown eyes of - |
the lamb tamed the fierce spirit of the lion; ;
for they were human eyes, full of Hilde- 
garde's own soul. Be that as it may, the :
lamb went every day to the cage, till the lion  ?
learned to watch for her, and gave a low :!-
growl of joy when he saw her coming. At  :
last the keeper ventured to drop her care- 
fully into the cage. The lion was beside 
himself with joy; and, after that, the lamb
was. placed in the cage every morning, and ;!
only taken out at night.



<pb n="155"/>
THE PRINCESS HILDA.      155
Then the king invited all the noblemen in-
to his park, to see the strange sight of a lion
and a lamb living together in peace. And all
the while Hildegarde loved her shaggy com-
panion, and asked herself every day how it
could be that a lion should have such speak-
ing eyes and such a tender heart. But she
I: almost believed that he was a human being,
shut up, like herself, in a cruel disguise.
At last, when a whole year had gone by,
the time came for Hilda to be disenchanted;
for the good little gnomes had declared that
if she could live for a twelvemonth in peace
with a lion, the charm would then be at an
end.
Hilda did not know this; but awoke at
sunrise, and, going to drink, saw the image
of her old self in the fountain; and faint
voices repeated in chorus these lines:-



<pb n="156"/>
156           .FAIRY BOOK.
" Thrice welcome, sweet Hilda I the little gnomes sa
At sunrise their charms shall end;
Bo go to the lion, and open the cage; 
The prince is your own true friend."
This was so sudden and unexpected that-
the happy Hilda could hardly believe her:,
senses.  She gazed at her jewelled fingers; 
she touched her velvet robe. "It is Hilde-
garde," said she dreamily; "where has she
stayed so long ?" 
She went to the cage; and, finding the key '
hanging on the outside, would fain have freed  i
the poor lion, but thought of the terror it
would cause the sheep and deer, and dared 
not do it. 
She put her soft white arms within the 
bars, saying, -
" You have been a true friend -to the little 
white lamb. She has found her tongue again, 
and can say so. Kind old lion, gentle pris.
oner, Hildegarde will not forget you."



<pb n="157"/>
THE PRINCESS HILDA.      157
The noble beast looked at the disenchanted
princess, and the next instant was changed
. his true form; and, in place of a tawny
lion, it was the brave Prince Reginald.
tilda blushed with joyful surprise, and
. 'would have taken down the key to unlock the
;cage, but the prince said,-
" Loveliest Hildegarde, will you be my
°:bride? Speak before you unlock the cage;
for, if you say nay, Reginald must again be-
come a dumb beast, and, as he has been for a
year, so will he be for the rest of his days."
-  Hildegarde cast down her eyes, and an-
swered, "If so be the lion and the lamb
could live side by side for a year, may not
: Reginal 
-Reginald   and  Hilda dwell together   in
peace?"
".Then," said the joyful Prince Reginald,
"I pray thee unlock the cage."
Now, as they walked together in the park



<pb n="158"/>
158           FAIRY BOOK.              :
the prince told Hildegarde, that he had loved
her for a twelvemonth'and a day. 
He described Hilda's visit to the cruel gob-l:
lin. He said that he himself had overheard<-
the two talking together, had ground his i
teeth, and sighed. Then the gnomes, seeing :
his grief, had come asking him if he would be :
changed for a year, and maybe for life, into a  l
lion; and for Hildegarde's sake he had gladly
consented.
Hearing all these things, the grateful prin- 
cess wept, and said,-
"Now I know that Prince Reginald is my 
own true friend."
The prince led Hilda to the palace, and
presented her to the king and queen. Great
was the wonder, and loud the rejoicing
throughout the land.
The treacherous Zora was seen no more,
but was changed into a slender green snake;



<pb n="159"/>
THE PRINCESS HILDA.        159
and the king said she deserved her fate;
t" for, mark you," cried he, " there is no crime
worse than to play false to those whom we
pretend to love."
-:.:  But Prince Reginald and Hildegarde were
pa married, and lived in peace all the rest of
their lives.
.



<pb n="160"/>
160            FAIRY BOOK.
GOLDILOCK S. 
" A king lived long ago, 
In the morning of the world," I'
who had two children, Despard and Goldi-
locks. They were twin brother and sister,
but no more alike than a queen-lily and a
nightshade, a raven and a dove.
Goldilocks was a bright young damsel, 
with hair like fine threads of gold, and a face 
so radiant that people questioned if the blood
in her veins might not be liquid sunshine.
Her eyes were as soft as violets; and her 
laugh was like the music of a spring robin. 
Despard, on the other hand, was as melan 
choly as an owl. His raven hair cast gloomy  -
*   0= 



<pb n="161"/>
GOLDILOCKS.              161
shadows, and his mournful eyes pierced you
with a sudden sorrow. He was too low-
spirited to chase butterflies, weave daisy-
[ chains, and dance with Goldilocks among the
[flowers. He liked better to play at a mimic
I  funeral, and deck himself as chief mourner,
,in-a friar's robe with sable plumes.  He
could never understand why laughing Goldi-
locks should object to making believe die,
i and be buried in the large jewel-coffer, which
stood for a tomb.
He always said that, if he lived to be a
I  man, he should grow all the more wretched,
|  and creep over the earth like a great black
cloud. When Despard spoke so hopelessly,
-Goldilocks paused in her song or her play,
and stealthily brushed a rare tear from her
eye.  She was afraid her brother's words
might prove true.
These children lived in what is called the
'  0  *0 0 .11



<pb n="162"/>
162           FAIRY BOOK. 
Golden Age, when the rivers flowed with a
milk and wine, and yellow honey dripped 
from oak-trees. Their childhood would prob- ]
ably have lasted forever; but the Silver Age 
came on, and every thing was changed. :i
Then, it was sometimes too warm, and some- 
times too cold.  People began to live in 
caves, and weave houses of twigs.  The
king, their father, died, and went, so it
was said, to the "Isles of the Blessed."
The children were shipwrecked upon a for-
eign shore, all because of a sudden swell '
of the ocean. Here they were desolate and 
homesick. The strange people among whom 
they had fallen did not know they were the .
children of a king. No one was left to care
for them but their old nurse, named Sibyl.
This aged woman was growing lame, and 
her hair was gray; yet she loved the twins,
and would spin all the day long, to buy black
- ?if



<pb n="163"/>
GOLDILOCKS.          163
bread for them, and now and then a little
choice fruit.
"Alas," she sighed, "alas, for the Golden
Age, when the forests had never been
robbed, when oxen were not called to draw
the plough, and the beautiful earth laughed,
and tossed up fruit and flowers without wait.
ing to be asked !"
The frocks that Sibyl made for Goldilocks
were coarse; but on fair spring days she
took from the chest a delicate, rosy robe, em-
broidered with gold, and smiled to see how it
adorned the child.
But as for Despard, she had no hope that
he would ever look well in any thing. She
would part Goldilocks' wonderful hair, and
say,-
"Old Sibyl knows who is her love; she
knows who would be glad to give her pome.
granates and grapes, when she is too old to
spin, and too weak to sit up."



<pb n="164"/>
164           FAIRY BOOK. 
Little Goldilocks would laughingly re'.
ply,- -
"And I know, too: when I am a woman Il
shall weave a net of my hair, and fish up a3ll ;
the gold that has sunk to the beds of the riv-
ers. Then I know who will have a set of
hard gold teeth, and a silver rocking-chair."  :
"Thou art lovely enough to be a goddess,
little Goldilocks. And what wilt thou do 
with the rest of the gold ?"
" Oh, Despard shall have all he can carry;
for Despard is good, let people say what they 
may. And I will have a crown made for him,
with diamonds set in it as plenty as plums in 
a pudding."
"Listen, my children," said the old Sibyl, 
sadly: "there will be no one to give me
grapes and pomegranates when I am faint
and weak. I can read by the stars that you
are soon to go on a pilgrimage, and leave
.   .~~~~~~!
d'!!



<pb n="165"/>
GOLDILOCKS.          165
your old nurse behind.. You may well weep,
my good little boy: there is to be no rest for
your feet till you have travelled over the
whole world, from north to south."
Despard groaned aloud; but Goldilocks
clapped her hands and laughed. "Oh, let us
start to-night," she cried.
"When the sun-god has made twelve jour-
neys in his winged boat," sighed Sibyl, " and
when the young moon has arisen out of the
ocean, then you may go."
And, at the appointed time, the faithful
nurse, with many tears, prepared her foster-
children for their long journey. She took
from a worm-eaten coffer some family heir-
looms, which had been lying since the days
of the Golden Age, enveloped in rose-leaves
and gold paper.
She placed in the hand of Despard a dag
ger with a jewelled hilt, a quiver of poisoned



<pb n="166"/>
166          -FAIRY BOOK.
arrows, and a glittering sword, with a blade!
sharper than a serpent's tooth.
But to Goldilocks she gave a flask of
smooth, fragrant oil, a vase of crystal-bright
water, and a fan made of the feathers of the o
beautiful bird of Paradise.
Kissing the little pilgrims, she said,- 
"These gifts have been saved for you 
these many years: use them as an inward:
voice shall whisper you: I give you my bless-
ing. The gods attend youa! Farewell."
The children at first walked on sorrow-
fully; but soon the gay spirits of Goldilocks 
rebounded, and she waltzed hither and thith- 
er, like a morsel of thistle-down.
"See, brother," said she, "we almost-fly I :
What a glorious thing it is to go on a pil- 
grimage! I am glad the beautiful Silver
Age has come, and Jupiter has given us
leave to take a peep at the world !"



<pb n="167"/>
GOLDILOCKS.           167
"All very well for you to say," moaned
Despard; " you flit about as if you had
wings on your feet; while, as for me, it is
true I move with equal speed, but so pain.
fully that I wonder my footprints are not
stained with blood."
Soon the children observed, not far off,
a party of youths rowing on the bosom of a
lake. They sat in a rocking, unsteady little
bark, but were in gay spirits, blowing bub-
bles, watching idle clouds, and throwing up
empty shouts to be caught up and echoed by
the hills.
"I wish we had not seen these happy peo-
ple," sighed Despard; "for, if you can be-
lieve me, sister, I really feel as if I must pelt
them with my arrows."
So saying, little Despard began to fire his
poisonous darts at random.
"Why, brother," cried Goldilocks, in alarm,



<pb n="168"/>
168            FAfIY BOOK. 
"are you possessed by the furies?  Take
care how you aim, or you will surely do misx
chief."
Even as she spoke, several of the gay,
youths dropped to the bottom of the boat, ap- 
parently wounded. Their companions pushed
for the shore; and Goldilocks almost flew, to-
pour into the red wounds her brother had  x
made the smooth healing oil from her flask. 
"Poor dears," said she, pitying their pain, A
'I have done my best; and, see! these ugly ,~
gashes are almost healed. I cannot promise 
you, though, that they will not leave scars."
The youths thanked the sweet girl, and as- !
sured her it was almost a pleasure to be i
wounded, if one might be nursed by such -:
gentle hands as hers. But as for Despard, it 
was hardly strange that they should look
upon the poor boy as a wicked little highway -
man; or, at best, a saucy, careless fellow. 



<pb n="169"/>
GOLDILOCKS.           169
; Some of the older youths, however, patted
him on the shoulder, and said, " For your
sweet sister's sake we can even endure
your pranks."
Do not despise me," said the boy, sadly;
' for as I am moved, so must I do. Not for
the whole world would I fire a poisonous
arrow, if the mighty Jove did not compel
me."
As they walked on, Despard, against his
will, flung into the air a quantity of winged
torments, which he found stowed away in his
wallet, such as gnats, wasps, and flies.
" There, now," said sweet Goldilocks,
ready to weep, " why could you not look be-
fore you, and see those pretty children play-
ing yonder in that fragrant meadow ?"
" I saw them," said Despard; " but what
good did that do ?"
"0 brother, I wish the Golden Age would



<pb n="170"/>
170            FAIRY BOOK.               "
come again, and then you would cease scat, 
tering mischief and trouble."
The little ones, suddenly stopped in their
play by the army of insects, ran hither and 
thither over the meadow, screaming with
pain. But Goldilocks appeared in the midst 
of them, with her shining hair, violet eyes, 
and laugh like the music of a spring robin.
"Come to me," said she; "let me kiss
away the stings." 
In a very short space the children were
soothed, and had forgotten their trouble.
Then they threw their little arms about Goldi-
locks' neck, and begged her to stay and play
with them. 
" Sweet children, it is my mission, -so the
stars say, - to travel all over this world,
from north to south. But, for all that, I will
frolic with you till the sun sets."
"Will the sad boy come too? "asked the
children.



<pb n="171"/>
GOLDILOCKS.            171
Goldilocks shook her bright curls. "He
is planting a garden," said she; "no need to
ask him; he hears nothing while he is at
play, and his games are as solemn as mid-
night."
The children made believe that the beauti-
ful Goldilocks, in her rose-colored dress, with
her beaming hair and flying feet, was a great
butterfly, which they were trying to catch.
Now here, now there, the glowing butterfly
flitted from flower to flower, leading her fol-
lowers a merry chase. Every child thought
to seize and hold her, for a kiss.    She
laughed; and the breezes danced with her
hair, like-
"Zephyr with Aurora playing,
As he met her once a-Maying."
But before any one had kissed or even
touched her, she had disappeared, leaving



<pb n="172"/>
172            FAIRY BOOK.   .           a
the children gazing into the air, and seeking 
their late companion with tearful eyes. 
Goldilocks had only gone back to Despard, 
who was still planting flower-seeds.
"What a miserable game," said Goldi-
locks; "it is worse than playing funeral! -
Who thought you could make flowers grow ?
Our old nurse said it was only Demeter, the
goddess, who could do that. Here, now, you
have called up a bristling crop of thistles 
and brambles ! On my word, Despard, it is a
pity !"
"Well, well, Goldilocks, see what you can ,
make of them.    I am   doomed to work,
though I don't wish it; and my work is
always disagreeable, though I can't tell 
why "                                       iI
Goldilocks knelt, and blew on the prickly
plants with her sweet breath. By the nod.
ding of the next breeze, they were changed
to roses, violets, and hare-bells.



<pb n="173"/>
GOLDILOCKS.           1S 3
"It is pleasant to see any thing smile, 
even a flower," said Goldilocks, laughing as
she spoke.
"I think," replied Despard, "that this is a
strange pilgrimage.  I believe our very 
thoughts are alive.  I wish I could stop
thinking."
By and by they came to a rude house, - as
fine a one, though, as people in the Silver
Age had yet learned how to build. Despard
paused, and knocked gently. "Why linger
here ? " whispered his sister.
"I know not," sighed the boy, "but so
must I do."
" How now, little ones ? you startled me
so !" cried a woman, opening the door by the
width of a crack.
"Let us come in," said Despard, sorrow-
fully; "we are two little wanderers; and our
hairs are wet with night-dews."
' *~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ .



<pb n="174"/>
174           FAIBY'BOOK.
"Come in, then, little ones, and welcome;
but never, at any one's door, knock so loud 
again," added the woman, pressing her hand
against her heart.
"I only tapped with the ends of my fin. 
gers," said the boy. 
" Ah," said the woman, "it was louder to
me than thunder."  Then, after she had set 
before them a supper of bread and milk, she 
rocked her baby, and sang to it a sweet cradle-
song about mother Juno and high Olympus.
The children lay down on beds of rushes;
and Goldilocks, soothed by the lullaby, fell
asleep; but soon awoke, and saw her brother
leaning, on tiptoe, over the osier basket.
The baby's face looked, in the moonlight,
white and pinched; and its sick hands were
pressed together like two withered rose-
leaves.
"Let me kiss him," whispered Goldilocks
.: ::



<pb n="175"/>
GOLDILOCKS.           175
smiling. But bitter tears rolled down Des-
pard's cheeks.  Drawing his little sword
from its sheath, he pricked the baby's heart
till one red drop, the life-drop, stained the
steel. The sick baby ceased to breathe.
" 0 Despard, what have you done?" cried
Goldilocks, seizing his arm.
"I know not," said the boy; "but as my
heart moves me, so must I do."
Hearing voices, the mother awoke, and, as
her habit was, turned at once to the cradle.
The baby lay there beautiful and still; the
pinched look gone, and its furrowed brow
smoothed into a baby's smile. The mother
wept bitterly.
"Ah, little stranger," said she, turning to
Despard, "I knew you when I let you in.
Why did I open the door for you ?"
" Poor mother," said the boy sorrowfully,
" if you had not opened the door, I must have
come in by the window."



<pb n="176"/>
176           FFAIRY BOOK.
But Goldilocks threw her soft arms about
the woman's neck, and comforted her till it
was morning, and the "gilded car of day"  -
had risen from the ocean. The tears on her
cheeks she dried with her fan, made of magi. 
cal feathers.
When the children, set out again on their
journey, the woman gave Goldilocks a loving
kiss, and then embraced Despard, saying,-
" For the sake of your sweet sister, I love 
even you." 
" Poor little brother," said Goldilocks when
they had gone farther on their journey, "you
are as good as I; but how is it ? you make 
people weep, while I must go with you to
dry the tears you call-forth."
"I am a black cloud," groaned Despard,    'X
"you a sunbeam."                            :
" But I like to have a cloud to shine on,"
said loving little Goldilocks.



<pb n="177"/>
GOLDILOCKS.           177
Footsore and weary, the little pilgrims
travelled on; and, when they had gone from
north to south, and back again, the Sibyl met
them with tender kisses; and, when they
were refreshed, bade them go forth again.
"For," said she, "this world is always
new, my dears. The people who are born to-
day were nrot here yesterday; and every
mortal must see the faces of my foster-chil-
dren."
It was now the Brazen Age, and Despard
and Goldilocks had grown to be a youth and
maiden; but still they travelled on. The
Iron Age came; and Despard's raven hair
was frosted; but Goldilocks' curls never
faded. Let her live as long as live she may,
she can never grow old.
Their pilgrimage is not over yet; nor will
it be while the earth revolves about the sun.
12



<pb n="178"/>
178           FAIRY BOOK.
The brother and sister come to every house;
they knock at every door.
To all the children who open their eyes
upon the light, come Despard and Goldilocks,
the bitter and the sweet of life, the twin an-
gels of Happiness and Sorrow.
THE END.



<pb n="1"/>
LITTLE PRUDY SERIES.
FAIRY BOOK.
BY
SOPHIE MAY.
BOSTON:
LEE AND SHEPARD, PUBLISHERS.
NEW YORK:
LEE, SHEPARD AND DILLINGHAM.



<pb n="2"/>
p       -7
<Vq.           <:
Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1865, by
LEE & SHEPARD,
la the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the District of Massachusetts.
i      MAY 27 1960



<pb n="3"/>
THIS
IS DEDICATED
TO LITTLEE BESSIE.



<pb n="4"/>
SOPHIE MAY'S BOOKS. 
Any volume sold separately.
DOTTY DIMPLE SERIES. Six volumes. Illustrated.
Per vol., 75 cents.
Dotty Dimple at her Grandmother's.
Dotty Dimple at Home.
Dotty Dimple out West. 
Dotty Dimple at Play.
Dotty Dimple at School.
Dotty Dimple's Flyaway.
FLAXIE FRIZZLE STORIES. Illust. Pervol.,75 cts.
Flaxie Frizzle.
Doctor Papa.
Little Pitchers.
The Twin Cousins.
(Others in preparation.)
LITTLE PRUDY       STORIES. Six vols. Handsomely
Illustrated. Per vol., 75 cts.
Little Prudy.
Little Prudy's Sister Susy.
Little Prudy's Captain Horace.
Little Prudy's Story Book.
Little Prudy's Cousin Grace.
Little Prudy's Dotty Dimple.
LITTLE PRUDY'S FLYAWAY SERIES. Six vols.
Illustrated. Per vol., 75 cts.
Little Folks Astray.
Prudy Keeping House.
Aunt Madge's Story.
Little Grandmother.
Little Grandfather.
Miss Thistledown.
LEE AND SHEPARD, PUBLISHERS, BOSTON.



<pb n="5"/>
CONTENTS.
PAGU
INTRODUCTION  ......................  9
CRISTOBAL .................. ...... 19
WILD  ROBIN  .......................  35
THE VESPER STAR  ................... 53
THE WATER-KELPIE .................. 5
THE LOST SYLPHID  ................... 74
THE  CASTLE  OF GEMS  ................. 100
THE  ELF  OF  LIGHT  ................... 117
THE PRINCESS HILDA ........... ...... 137
GOLDILOCKS ........................ 100



<pb n="1"/>
1"-i-
THULE A ND THE DWARF. - Page 122.



<pb n="2"/>
~~~dI~ ~
K~~~~~~ N
£
UTTLE PRUDYuS STOrY ~
11~~11     -~~
-II



<pb n="3"/>
Vh, S     ' 'v/'      /!
(A.         -I Page 82
CHRISTOBEL, - Page 82.



<pb n="4"/>
ii!!~- i/
____ _. 
/*~~~~~"i /
!R 1B I EI LN.- ii,/
WILD ROBIN IN FAIRY LA D.- Page 41.



<pb n="5"/>

iL·
\\
------------ '---------------------
,
i
h
F-t·ZJ
----- i- I,- ii
- `"""YE" B=i--==----j
F=------
 r
-
z E. 84"
-e 'r
TfE WATEB I$LPIE.--PI1&8 70.



<pb n="6"/>
A                       f//fl
ac ,,;
THr, LOST SYLPHID. -Page 95.



<pb n="7"/>
_                                I~~~~~~~~~t
_                              ~~~~~~~~~I
_____,-i~-~-~~
THE    PRIN(2EYS     HXILDA.--Page      147.                     1



