<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
INTRODUCTION
To write a good Anglo-Indian novel needs very special
gifts and qualifications. In the first place, a writer must
have practically had the entree to the society of the two
most exclusive places on the face of the earth, London
and Calcutta. When the late Colonel Meadows Taylor
began his brilliant series of Anglo-Indian tales, one and
all the critics, even when according the highest praise to
them, said they feared that the stories would not be popu-
lar in Britain, save among the limited circle of retired
Eastern officials. A few years showed how very fallacious



<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
ii              FAMILY LIKENESS
It is so easy to fail, because one stratum of Indian life
is so absolutely distinct from another.  The writer who
is under the fond delusion that because he has seen a
good deal of military life and military society in Calcutta,
he is thereby quite warranted to pose as an authority on
official civilian life, or mercantile life, or upon the condi-
tions of society at Madras and Bombay, never made a
more hopelessly humiliating blunder in his whole existence.
The military and the civilian circles of society are broadly
differentiated and demarcated, while the entire social
structure at Calcutta is as widely different from that at
Madras and Bombay as the customs of the East are
different from the customs of the West. It is here so
many writers fail, but it is also here that those few writers
who describe Anglo-Indian life with adequate knowledge
and appreciation score their most undoubted and undeni-
able successes. Such an one is the writer of the work we



<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
INTRODUCTION                     iii
beautiful Loire, she entered upon that "self-study,"
ch holds in it the making of every life that ever comes
high fruition. Miss Sheppard read widely and well
vell-nigh all branches of literature and more than one
science.  The evidence of a well-stored mind peeps
unobtrusively at every turn in Mrs. Croker's novels-
ibtrusively, because she is not one who drags in allusions
show her learning, but to aptly point a moral, or to
rn a maxim or an epigram. In comparatively early
she was married to Lieutenant-Colonel John Croker,
of the Royal Scots and Royal Munster Fusiliers, with
rn she spent fourteen years in India and Burmah.
'his fact it is which gives not only their picturesque-
s, but also their pathos, to Mrs. Croker's graphic sketches
ife in India. She drew from the inexhaustible depths
Ler own vast experience those " village tales and jungle
edies" which have made her name a household, word
rPuVr Ancrln-Tnrl-taT   mrt- A  .r  m-  1 



<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
iv              FAMILY     LIKENESS
great artist, that those types of character-study are the
most true as well as the most telling which are drawn
from living prototypes. Among all the writers of the
present 'day, there is none that shows more verve and
more vigour in both the conception and the execution of
her characters.
The earliest novel which Mrs. Croker issued was a story
entitled Proper Pride, which saw the light in 1882, and
was followed by a long list of others: Pretty Miss Neville
(I883); A  Bird of Passage (1886); Diana Barrington
(1888); Two Masters (1890); Interference (I891), the
majority of which, although showing an acquaintance with
Eastern life, belongs to what may aptly be termed Mrs.
Croker's " English Period."
In 1892 she issued the novel we now present in this
form, to wit, A Family Likeness, following it up with a
magnificent succession of studies of Anglo-Indian, military,
I 톓 el  * '/  1     r  .  , 1  ,"      I      ..



<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
INTRODUCTION                     v
es, but nevertheless it has been spoken of by press
public alike as taking rank amongst her best work.
led, as we saw, in I892, it has remained a favourite
e then, and there are elderly Anglo-Indians to-day
, shake their heads mournfully over the episodes in
nd remark, " That is just what happened to So-and-So
the 'eighties,' when we were lying at Serampore or
dwan." as:
Te have no intention of spoiling the reader's appetite
a really good story by recounting anything that would
a clue to the plot. That is a foolish device of callow
ewers. Let the reader enjoy all the pleasure he can,
ollowing the fortunes of that wonderfully ugly baby,
:h developed, "ugly-duckling-like," into the gloriously
itiful Juliet Carwithen, the absolute replica-if the
i might be used-of the old painting of an ancestress
he Carwithen family.  The plot is admirably con-
'tPn  nrfl n  the r'oo..r f-;-  +1   - -  -- I



<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
vi              FAMILY    LIKENESS
ample, to take Dolly Carwithen. There is no better test of
the deftness as well as the delicacy of Mrs. Croker's work
than when we come to study this great creation. In the
hands of a lesser artist we should simply have loathed
"Dolly," have considered him such an impossible sneak
and a cad to boot, that the sooner he made his exit from
the pages of the novel, the sooner we should have been
pleased. Yet such is Mrs. Croker's art, that we find our-
selves actually pitying " Dolly," making excuses for him,
and feeling that despite his bad record he might have been
infinitely worse. Of course he is thrown into unfavourable
contrast with Gerald Romily, a hero sans peur et sans
reproche. Gerald is a noble fellow, and we rejoice when,
all his troubles and misunderstandings over, he goes out
of our life to begin his own new existence with the one
woman on earth for him-Juliet Carwithen.     Gerald's
manly sincerity, his patience, his clear pure soul, and his
__1_ _1 _-  L   _1     4_  ...._ -:-  . J__.!__. *1  :_i _1_ '- I_  L _ 1-'



<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
INTKRDUCTUION                   vii
ily with a passionate affection which time rather in-
ed than modified; though she longed to escape from
squalor and the misery of those utterly uncongenial
es; though, in fine, when she heard the remark made
Irs. Dickson that Gerald Romily must never make
ra/liance, she felt as though her heart would break;
iespite all, she had the nobility of nature in her to
Gerald lest she should compromise his future, and
only when his and her friends proved to her beyond
intest shadow of doubt that his future would be in
ay imperilled, or his family honour smirched by his
age with her, that she consented. It was a touch
ie genius on the part of Mrs. Croker to make Juliet
ier consent before she discovered that her father was
Ily in India and under the same roof with herself.
Carwithen is one of the most charming women in
allery of modern fiction. Between her and " Dear
Disdain" there is much in common. Tn Tlip;i



<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
viii            FAMILY LIKENESS
schoolmistress; how faithful the portraits of Mrs. Warry,
the warm-hearted friend of the girlish Juliet, of the
dreadful Nootes, of the delightful Cassons, of the purse-
proud Hodder, and of the unbearably vulgar William John
Pogson, to whom his doting stepmother, Mrs. Noote, seeks
to marry the horrified Juliet. The whole novel is one
brilliant procession of life-like characters, who play their
parts upon the stage of life with a naturalness that often-
times leads us to imagine we are reading a true history of
actual events, and to forget that all these personages are
but such stuff as dreams are made on, compounded of
the aether of imagination, which, when we close the
book, fade into the baseless fabric of a vision. But with
us abide the lessons taught by this great novel, that come
what may, it is better to dare, and to do one's bounden
duty, than to seek escape from  responsibilities which
sooner or later return to crush us under the weight of
.s   ~ .~ ., 1  ._1!.! _. ,_  톜      . . a :  ,- __ _ 



<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
In general, the odd pages OCR-ed more poorly than the even pages, due to the fact that the book was not flat on the scanner -- the text curves toward the spine on the left side of the page. Most of the odd pages are a little garbled, for that reason, on the left edge of the text file; however, there are blocks of text in which the odd pages are extremely garbled, beyond my ability to correct. A listing of garbled areas follows.

poor OCR sections:
odd pages, 131 - 155
	(pages 1554 and 155 were upside down - I've corrected this, but it affected 	the OCR quality)
odd pages, 171 - 203
page 192 is missing
page 213 was upside down - I've corrected this, but it affected the OCR quality
the author portrait (obviously), "opinions," spine, and title page did not OCR; I have not included text files for them.<pb n="1"/>
A FAMILY LIKENESS.
CHAPTER I.
TO AWAIT AN ANSWER.
U Adieu, she cried, and waved her lily hand."
IT was a sultry afternoon towards the middle of August; a
glittering blue sea stretched between Dover and the white
ooast of France-a sea to allure the most invincible lands-
man,-and hundreds of eager tourists were hurrying on
board the Calais-Douvres, as she lay alongside the jetty,
with her steam up; whilst heavily laden porters staggered
across a second gangway, carrying the enormous sacks that
contained the Indian mail.
Meanwhile the pleasure-seeking local population lined the
upper pier, and critically surveyed the great travelling horde
as they embarked for their autumn holiday. Proud and
complacent the individual who could recognize and indicate
some well-known public character, be it peer, politician,
author, or actress, or even the hero or heroine of some recent
society scandal.  Well-dressed women, soldierly looking
men, pretty girls, children and their nurses, and idle sailors,
were all more or less resting their elbows on the cold stone
parapet, their whole attention concentrated on the stream
of people whose departure they were superintending with
such flattering interest. There go a young couple, a bride
and bridegroom, basely betrayed by their new portmanteaux;
here comes a burly paterfamilias, followed by his wife and
a flock of chattering daughters ; parsons abound, singly or
in pairs, and strong-minded females in blue spectacles and
B



<pb n="2"/>
a               A FAMILY LIKENESS.
gauze veils serenely occupy the best places-places which
have been the just reward of a timely arrival-whilst poor
helpless creatures, with about twenty small parcels, are being
mercilessly hustled to and fro in the throng. Numerous
Americans, with prodigious Saratoga trunks, and a vast
multitude of Cook's tourists, are all on the wing for the
Continent. Two or three days of old-fashioned summer
weather have set the world moving, the Calais-Douvres is
absolutely crammed, and the crowd of spectators on the
upper pier have never enjoyed a more satisfactory inspection.
Some few favoured individuals are down alongside the
steamer, taking leave of friends, and obtaining a nearer
view of coronetted handbags, and Redfern's latest travelling
costumes. A group of four stand close by the gangway,
and have attracted more than one glance and smile, and the
whispered comment, " Old Indians."  The tall gentleman
with aquiline nose, sweeping grey moustache, and a puggaree
round his hat, is Colonel Romilly, a retired officer, who,
after thirty-eight years' service, has luckily survived-as so
many fail to do-to draw his pension of eleven hundred and
twenty-five pounds per annum. Next to him is his wife, a
lady with delicate features and frizzy hair, holding a large
white-covered umbrella, with a frill like a pillow-case, over
a somewhat florid bonnet-a gay, vivacious, fussy little
matron, who looks surprisingly juvenile to be the mother
of the broad-shouldered young man beside her.   Gerald
Romilly is six and twenty, an officer in a Ghoorka regiment,
and at present enjoying a year's leave in England. The
family have come over from Folkestone to speed a friend,
who is on the point of returning to the East-a sharp-faced
elderly matron, with keen eyes and a brisk manner, and
undoubtedly an experienced traveller.  Observe her neat
bundle of wraps, her dust-cloak, umbrella, and handbag 
She has no encumbrances, and possibly congratulates herself
that she is not as others are, overwhelmed with hampers,
cages, baskets, and bundles.
"This is a frightful time of year for you to be going
back, Teresa," said Mrs. Romilly, with a slight sniff. "I
cannot reconcile myself to it. But you will surely come
home next May ?"



<pb n="3"/>
TO A WAIT AN ANSWER.                 3
"It will not be my fault if I am not home within twelve
months," said Mrs. Manders, emphatically. "Of course I
kow that I shall be grilled alive in the Red Sea, but it is
only for a few days, and Tom's extravagance is so unbridled
when I am away that, if I did not go back for a while, he
would have us all in the poor-house; I am certain the
servants are making their fortunes-they want me to keep
them in check," and she laughed a little dry, complacent
laugh. "And really, with a boy at Eton, and three girls
costing five hundred a year, and the rupee little better than
a shilling,-I have to think of every pice."
" A hundred and thirty a year for each of the girls is pre-
posterous !" exclaimed Mrs. Romilly, "and I have often
said so, Tessy; people always add on for Indian children,
and I cannot see why. They don't eat more, and I can
answer for it-judging by Gerald-that they don't learn
more than others. I wonder you don't ask Mrs. Gace to
reduce her terms for three of a family."
"Perhaps Mrs. Manders is afraid that she might reduce
the children to match ?" suggested young Romilly, with a
twinkle in his grey eyes. " When I was a little chap, and
supposed to be receiving every indulgence, and more than a
mother's care, I never had butter on my bread if I had an
egg for breakfast; the combination was considered too rich !
The same applied to meat and pudding; and in Lent I
abstained, sorely against my will, from milk and sugar in
my tea-in fact, the only thing that they supplied, without
stint, was physic."
"Yes, very likely; but that was twenty years ago," an-
swered the lady; "people dare not treat children in that
fashion nowadays-my young folk will be well cared for-
and, Jerry, I particularly beg that you will not spoil them
when they go to your mother for their Christmas holidays
-don't teach Algy to smoke, and don't put nonsense into
Nita's head, and tell her that she is pretty I"
" Is she pretty, Mrs. Manders ?" he asked, with an air of
ingenuous simplicity.
Mrs. Manders's only reply was a scornful stare, and, turn-
ing abruptly to his mother, she said-
"Now, Susan, let me find you quite settled down by the



<pb n="4"/>
4               A FAMILY LIKENESS.
time I come back. You have been nearly a year at home,
and here you are, still haunting the offices of house-agents,
and still going from pillar to post, a sort of genteel vagrant."
" Quite true," acquiesced her son. " The Wandering Jew
has a strong rival in my mother."
" But it is so difficult to make up one's mind," pleaded
Mrs. Romilly, piteously. " You see, we have all the world
to choose from; no ties now. If I had one or two married
daughters-- "
" Instead of one unmarried and unruly son," interrupted
Mrs. Manders.
"And advertisements are so deceptive.    A splendid
Elizabethan manor house is generally tumbling to pieces,
and about ten miles from the nearest station ; a mansion in
its own grounds is a wretched villa, close to a high-road. I
went to look at a place the other day, and it was within a
stone's throw of a large cemetery, and our nearest neigh-
bours would have been the inmates of a military prison on
one hand, and a lunatic asylum on the other. And John
here, likes the sea, and I like the country, and Gerald prefers
London; it is so hard to please every one. I think I shall
wait till you come home, and establish myself near you."
" At any rate, we will stick to Folkestone for the present,"
put in Colonel Romilly. " It is a cheery sort of place, and
we have a capital house, and can always meet our Indian
friends as they go through."
" Yes, so you can," assented Mrs. Manders, "and I expect
your house is as usual, a sort of family hotel, or glorified
dak bungalow. I'm certain you have not shaken off your
old habits."
" If our house is a family hotel, I should be glad to know
what yours is at the present moment," inquired Gerald
Romilly. "The Kalka races are on now, and if I know
anything of my godfather, every room is full, and not merely
that, but the compound is white with tents. All he wants
is a big sign-board inscribed, ' The Manders Arms, good
entertainment for man and beast,' the whole surmounted by
the family crest, a one-legged stork."
" A one-legged goose would be far more appropriate, and
so I often tell Tom," said Mrs. Manders, with angry deci-



<pb n="5"/>
TO AWAIT AN ANSWER.                  
'don. " I dare say he has forty people to dinner and tiffin
every day of his life I"
" I expect your khansamah is making a good thing of it,"
continued young Romilly, provokingly. " Think of all the
eggs, and butter, and meat he charges for that he has never
purchased; think of the charcoal and Europe stores he is
wasting and selling-think-- "
" Be quiet, Gerald 1" interrupted Mrs. Manders, irritably.
" I have no patience to think of the robbery that I know is
taking place."
"How I wish I was going back with you, Tessy I" ex-
claimed Mrs. Romilly, with a mist in her blue eyes. " I do
indeed; I'd gladly go on board this minute, just as I am.
I declare I would give ten pounds on the spot for the whiff
Of a bazar, or the sniff of a huka I "
Mrs. Manders cast up her eyes and hands (containing bag
i4 umbrella). " For mercy's sake, Susan, don't let people
xMar you saying such awful things; they will think you are
tay. You were always absurdly fond of India."
" And am still. And why not ? My best and happiest
years were spent out there. I shall never take root in this
country, with its leaden skies and yellow fogs. Fancy Simla
now-the rains nearly over I  Jakko Hill would be just
paradise. I believe I will go back with Gerald. There is
a charm about India that, despite all its drawbacks, keeps a
hold on one's heart."
At this juncture, the group was joined by a smart-looking
woman in a neat tailor-made gown. She had a pair of
bright brown eyes, a straight nose, and an animated ex-
pression, and but for a somewhat heavy jaw, you would
have said that she was handsome, and at a little distance
you would have said that she was young; but if you looked
searchingly into the face behind the spotted veil, you dis-
covered that you were gazing into the countenance of a
woman of eight and thirty. She had an admirable figure,
and was faultlessly dressed, save for a large pair of solitaire
diamond earrings, and an equally dazzling pin.
"My dear Mrs. Romilly," she gushed, extending both
hands, I am delighted to meet you. I suppose you have
come to see off some friends ? "



<pb n="6"/>
6               A    FAIL Y LIKENESS.
" Yes. We came over from Folkestone to catch the boat 
train."
"Ah ? "-with a quick,'critical look at Mrs. Manders--
"and we have come down to say good-bye to dear Lady
Castle Blarney-Dolly's cousin, you know; she is going to
Carlsbad"-glancing to where a majestic dowager, in a
long semi-regal mantle, was leaning over the side, conversing
with a handsome middle-aged man, dressed with studied
care, in a creaseless summer suit, and listening to whatever
the countess was expounding, with his hands behind his
back, his head slightly bent forward, his whole manner
indicating charmed and respectful attention.
"You will come back with us and have tea, after the
boat goes ? " said the new-comer persuasively.     N
"Thank you," replied Mrs. Romilly, who never had been
known to refuse tea; " we shall be very glad-   " 
" Did you ever behold such a crowd ?" continued the
other lady vivaciously.
"No, not often," rejoined Colonel Romilly; "this
holiday-making is a new thing since my days, and with
most people the great event of the year, and not for one
class, but for all. I believe I see our greengrocer on board.
I wonder where he is going, and what he is looking forward
to most ?"
"That question is easily answered, sir," said his son
promptly. " He is going to see Brussels sprouts and
Jerusalem artichokes, and looking forward to French beans."
"Don't be so silly, Gerald," said his mother, giving
him a playful little push. "You are like a clown in a
circus."  Then, addressing her Dover acquaintance, she
said-
"I hear Mrs. Lightbody is crossing to-day, after all."
"Yes, she is on her way to Aix; and what do you think ?
She has actually left the baby behind ! "
" I can't say I wonder at that," remarked young Romilly,
emphatically.
"No, of course you don't," said Mrs. Carwithen, turning
to him with a laugh, and now beginning to discuss a recent
ball with considerable animation, once more leaving the
other ladies to themselves. Meanwhile Mrs. Manders, who



<pb n="7"/>
TO A WAIT AN ANSWR.                   7
bad been, so to speak, shouldered out of the conversation,
had been making excellent use of her sharp black eyes;
presently she fixed her attention on the aristocratic-looking
gentleman, with a flower in his button-hole, talking to the
old lady with a pug under her arm, and a footman standingc
behind her.
"Susan," she said, "just tell me who that man is. I am
positive I recognize his face, but I cannot think where I
have seen him 1"
" Oh, that"--following his glance-" is Mr. Carwithen;
but I am sure you have never seen him before, my dear; he
is not an old Indian."
"I never said he was I " retorted the other tartly; "but,
ll the same, he has been in India."
: Yes, for a short time, twenty years ago. He hated the
contry, and we are always quarrelling about it. He says
(jfwq_ name of Lucknow makes him feel queer."
' :   arwithen I Lucknow     Twenty years ago I" repeated
-. EFl.anders, slowly, with her eyes still fixed on the subject
her inquiry. "Ah, yes    I thought so. So that is the
=an I"
"Hush-sh-sh, Tessy I This is his wife behind us, talking
to Gerald. Then you know him ? "
"I know of him," expressively.  " Dear me I he wears
well, though getting a little grey, a little stout."
Mrs. Carwithen had pricked up her ears. The name of
Carwithen is long, and not easily slurred over. She had
caught it; and more, she had heard Mrs. Manders exclaim,
"So that is the man ! "
Gerald Romilly had been at a loss to understand why Mrs.
(arwithen had flushed up unaccountably, and given him
several random answers; he was not aware that she was
absorbed in another conversation.
"Do tell me what you know about him          Teresa "
pleaded Mrs. Romilly, in a low, eager voice. "It will be
quite safe with me."It wi be
"So he is married ?" remarked her friend, calmly ignor-
ing the question.
"Yes, yes; years ago. She has a large fortune.  We
met them at Cannes, and know them pretty well.  Now



<pb n="8"/>
8              A FAMILY LiKENESS.
come, do tell me; I believe you have some joke about 
him."
"Joke I" indignantly. " No, indeed."
"Well, story.  Really, Tessy, I think you might tell 
me."
"No, not just now "-with a shake of her head-" it's an
old tale, twenty years old. You shall hear it when I come
back; it will keep very well till then.  Here, I see they
have all the mails on board. I must be off. Good-bye,"
shaking hands with Colonel Romilly.   "I'll not forget
your messages to Tom, nor the Nepaul pepper. Good-bye,
Susan "-kissing her,-" mind you write often, and don't
spoil the children. Good-bye, Gerald."
" What I "-looking contemptuously at her proffered hand
-"Mrs. Manders, do you not mean to kiss me too, con- 
sidering that you used to kiss me when I was- "
"A   troublesome urchin in pinafores, as sharp as &
knitting-needle." 
"If that was the case, I must have had more than one
good point," he retorted, with a smile.
"Well, well, well, I've no time to bandy jokes with you
now ; you argue every question-you are a loss to the Bar,"
impressing a hasty kiss on his bronzed cheek.
"Teresa, Teresa !" cried Mrs. Romilly, clutching her as
she spoke; "never mind Gerald-you know him of old;
but give me just one word, one little hint."
But Theresa was already on board; in another moment
the gangway was withdrawn, the paddles churned, passengers
waved handkerchiefs. Mrs. Manders waved her umbrella as
she leant over and screamed-
"When I come back. Good-bye. I'll write from Port
Said."
"Happy woman !" exclaimed Mrs. Romilly, "with her
face set towards Colaba Lighthouse. But really, John, she
is as great a tease as when we were schoolfellows. I wonder
what she knows about Mr. Carwithen. I declare I'd have
gone over to Calais if I had thought she would have told me.
I always mistrusted that man-he has such shifty eyes; and
in spite of his sleek ways, I am  certain his heart is no
bigger than a gooseberry."



<pb n="9"/>
MISS BUDD PROPHESIES. 
are the most shamelessly inquisitive woman I
_       : psaid her husband, with a laugh; "and, my dear
_      surell y the size of Carwithen's heart is of no particular
-te~  n   ce to you !"
h! ier lady, even Mrs. Carwithen, who had made no
whatever, and was still conversing in a distrait
with Gerald Romilly, would gladly have accompanied
'Wanders all the way to Bombay, on the chance of
her secret, and of gleaning a few particulars con-
the earlier years of her. handsome, well-born,
Se husband.
CHAPTER     II.
HMISS BUDD PROPHESIES.
"For time will teach thee the truth."
happen never to have seen one before, there is
id Qui lye," explained young Romilly, as he waved
wwildly to Mrs. Manders. " She and my mother are
friends; they were at school together, have lived in
station for years, and shared houses in the hills.
Ather could not get on without her; she was the
of her purse and her conscience; she assisted her
up her mind, and to manage-me!    I know that
Mrs. Manders who put me into the service, and she
It me down with an iron hand ever since I was the
of the table. Strange to say, I am uncommonly
!ofher.
ho is Mrs. Manders ?" inquired Mrs. Carwithen,
edly, for she was still deep in certain curious con-
'is the wife of the collector of Undermore. I don't
:if that will convey much to you."
Oh,; a collector's wife I" scornfully.
Why do you raise your eyebrows, Mrs. Carwithen ? A
rs wife is rather a swell, I can assure you. Old
rules a district four times the size of Kent. He is
king in his own ground. On state occasions he rides



<pb n="10"/>
o10             A FAMIL Y LIKENESS.!
on an elephant, and sits in a howdah with looking-glass
panels, and Mrs. Manders walks out of a room before most 
of the ladies in the station."
" Nonsense ! You don't mean to say so. Then they are
quite in society, those sort of people I We met a rather
nice couple at Florence last year, and made some excursions
together, till the lady informed me that her husband was a
collector, and, as I thought he had something to do with
tickets or taxes, I just dropped them quietly."
" Tickets-no ! but he has something to say to taxes. It
is well for you that Mrs. Manders does not hear you," said
young Romilly, with a laugh, as he followed Mrs. Carwithen
and his parents up the pier.
"And this Mrs. Manders, when is she coming home ?"
continued Mrs. Carwithen.
"Some time next year, I hope."
"And she corresponds regularly with your mother ?"
"Yes, like clockwork-never misses a mail."
"What marvellous energy I Oh, here is Nancy Budd 1"9
as they were accosted by a somewhat buxom damsel, wearing
an elaborate French costume, and a small flower-bed on her
head, in the shape of a hat-a toilette that was all very well
for Trouville sands, but a little startling in Dover. Miss 
Budd's dancing black eyes and rather shiny features were
brimming over with good humour, as she cordially accepted
Mrs. Carwithen's invitation to come back to tea, and also H
the escort of Mrs. Carwithen's companion-the lady having
hurried on, and attached herself to Mrs. Romilly with a
view of putting some searching questions to that artless and
amiable matron.
" So you have just come back from abroad, Miss Budd ?"
said Mr. Romilly, by way of commencing conversation.
"Yes, from Trouville. We had a ripping time there I
At least, I can answer for myself."
"I am sure you enjoy yourself wherever you go," he
rejoined, with a glance at her commonplace, good-natured
face, with its broad cheeks, broad nose, and broad smile.
"And only think ! Jessie Collins-my dearest friend,
you know-turned up there most unexpectedly, and when
we met at the Casino, and rushed into each other's arms,



<pb n="11"/>
MISS BUDD PROPHESIES. 
ltl tyon should have seen how the people stared-especially
the French officers I"
- " I'm sure there was not a man among them who did not
iish he was between you."
"Now, really, Mr. Romilly, how can you be so very
sily ?"
, "Alas  I'm afraid I was born so. I don't mind making
a small bet that you had not as great a show of pretty girls
over there as we see here."
"No; only they all look so frightfully dowdy, after
Trouville. They have no style, no chic "-she pronounced
it cheek-" about them."
"I can't say that that is much loss! Pray who is the
young lady in the pink frock and sailor hat ? "
"You don't admire her, do you ? She is a Miss Big-
wither-a nobody. Her face is not bad, but her feet would
ealUly frighten you. She is an heiress though. Your mother
will be making inquiries about her;" and Miss Budd
giggled significantly.
"My mother"-with a laugh-" is as anxious to what
she calls 'get me settled' as if I was the eldest of a large
family of plain daughters. And who is this charming vision
with all her hair down ?"
"She is Miss Danvers-one of a large family of pretty
and penniless daughters. She is not the eldest either; but
Miss Violet Angel-to give her her proper name."
"A most proper name, indeed ! " he exclaimed. "I've
often heard of a Blue Devil, but this is the first time I have
seen a Violet Angel."
"Upon my word, Mr. Romilly, you are too ridiculous,"
rotested his companion, with another giggle.   "How
crowded the parade is to-day-almost like the Park in the
semonI I do love the Park, only I never know who all
the smart-looking people are-nor who are in the grand
arriages and on the drags. I never happen to be with any
ne who can point me out the celebrities, and it is so
,  aggravating."
canl quite enter into your feelings, Miss Budd. Don't
hin   a catalogue would be a capital invention?  It
sell like wildfire, or might be leased with the chairs-



<pb n="12"/>
12              A FAMILY LIKENESS.
a nice little book, containing the names of all the what you
call celebrities who frequent the Row, each name numbered, 
and each individual to wear his number, clearly printed, 
either on his back or round his neck, or on the top of his :
hat. The carriages I should simply placard-no equipage,
or well-known individual, society beauty, actress, preacher, .
racing man, cabinet minister, and so on, to be allowed to 
enter Hyde Park without their label, and I should leave the:
supervision in the hands of the police."
"Now I know that you are joking, as usual, Mr. Romilly; 
but, for my part, I think it is a splendid idea, and I should
like to see it brought into force."
"Then you would have no objection to wearing a ticket
yourself, and to be ticketed as Miss Nancy Budd from
Dover ?" 
"Not the smallest," she answered promptly. "No one 
would take the trouble to read it, unless-unless I wore
something very remarkable."
Romilly secretly glanced at her fantastic headgear, and
wondered what her ideas of a remarkable article could be.
"Here comes Miss Montgomery !" she proceeded in an
excited tone. "I wonder if it is true that she is engaged 
to young Gray, of the Marines. For my part, I don't
believe a word of it."
"Yes, it is a true bill," responded her companion.
"How can you possibly know?      Why are you so
certain ? "
"For a very simple reason. Because the man has given 
it out," he answered with an air of tranquil conviction.
"Now, really, Mr. Romilly, you are too horribly cynical;
it does not suit you at all. It is not considered the man's
place to publish an engagement."
"No, it is generally given out for him. My engagement
has been announced repeatedly."
"That just shows me what I have always suspected."
And she nodded her head till the roses on her hat became
violently agitated.
" Suspected what ?"
"That you are a shocking, shocking flirt. Now, don't
ntt+mnrt t.n rlonv it. 1 "  And ehp hannrx- h.,r nroanrl . -m 1;



<pb n="13"/>
MISS BUDD PROPHESIES.                    13
what she imagined to be quite a French air. "But,
me how you like Folkestone. It must be frightfully
iving with two old people. What do you do with
al day ?"
>- As to old people; if you mean my father and mother,
are in some ways younger than I am. I am never dull.
!  oth~ e and boat, and stroll over to Shorncliffe, and of an
evening I join the mob upon the Lees, and listen to all
; varieties of open-air music, and touching songs about' love
*aed twilight."
i .-; #I wonder why love and twilight are always coupled
.:  ether?" said Miss Budd, with her head on one side, and
:  would-be sentimental expression on her countenance-
w. there it was as much out of place as on the face of an
eight-day clock. "Can you tell me, Mr. Romilly ?"
.  I am sorry to say I am quite the last person to ask.
;4' s not a riddle, is it ?
:   "SNo,"-rather sharply-" I never give riddles."
#i:, I a" m afraid I cannot even hazard a conjecture, no more
I::ln why eggs and bacon generally appear in company.
- (era you give me a reason for that ? "
" Oh, 'Mr. Romilly, what a dreadfully prosaic young man
ua uare I " she exclaimed impatiently. "The idea of com-
-r.mg the two! Eggs and bacon, indeed!"       And she
her head, and once more set every rose on her hat in
Th"ey are by no means a bad combination. I can vouch
ftrm, but I know nothing of the other."
Do you mean to tell me seriously that you have never
love-not once ? " she demanded, with a searching
IG from her prominent black eyes.        "Come now,
I "
, I will think. Don't hurry me. Yes-I remember
I was desperately in love once."
MbII and where is the young lady now ?"
relly do not know; and, only you might be scan-
I would add-or care."
_~    1 was she pretty ? "
1. S11She had lovely hair, and beautiful sharp teeth.
_     l*gm1 particularly, as she bit me severely in the arm



<pb n="14"/>
14             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
during one of our numerous quarrels. We have not met
since we were in pinafores."                         i
"I might have guessed the sort of answer I would get "1'
cried Miss Budd, indignantly. "You have not one scrap 
of sentiment in your whole composition "
"No, thank goodness I no more than a sack of potatoes,
or yonder old bathing-machine. However, my father and:
mother make up for my deficiencies."
" How do you mean ?"
"Well, they are fond of places, and associations, andi
anniversaries, and old letters. They are very susceptible
and tender-hearted. A child could impose on either of
them. They are quite a fortune to beggars and impecunious
acquaintances."
"Then, if I were you, I would never trust them  out
alone," said Miss Budd. "How they must waste money ! '
" I don't know about wasting money; but they don't ge
much return, I am ready to admit. Only last month, a'
stranger in the train burst into tears and told my father
some harrowing tale, borrowed ten pounds to tide over
financial crisis, to be refunded in a week, got hastily out a
the next station, and, of course, has never been seen since
As to my mother, bath-chair men, crossing-sweepers, an
organ-grinders have but to assume an attitude of melan
choly dejection, and out comes her purse; and she actuall
gives cabbies double fare, on the understanding that they
will buy a feed for the poor horse."
"Talking of charity and purses, they are getting u
amateur theatricals here next week in aid of-I forget what>
fund-but you must promise to come over. They are sur
to be capital. Tickets only ten shillings." 
"Only ten shillings! Miss Budd, you seem to forget
that you are talking to a penniless subaltern. I think thatw
ten shillings is a round sum  to pay to see the average
amateur enjoy the delusion that he or she is acting."
" Now really, Mr. Romilly, you must not be so dreadfully
sarcastic. Mr. Ffolliott is taking a part. I adore him oni
the stage. Of course, only on the stage," she repeated, with
a giggle. " I am sure he is quite as good as any professional.
Have you ever seen him play ?" 



<pb n="15"/>
MISS BUDD PROPHESIES.                15
; Ie is my cousin. I have seen him play the devil
[ fool pretty fairly. I suppose we can all do that if we
J doubt if I should adore him, even on the stage. I
met him since he was a lad. I believe he belongs
alchelor Club, and is considered a smart young man,
r wears less than a two-shilling flower in his
Fi ole; and I know he has no desire to be introduced
Xdian relations."
Ffolliott had spoken of his father as an old
oloinel, and inquired "what was the difference
-a Ohoorka and a gorilla?" These remarks had
's ears-repeated by the usual good-natured
|J.felt a burning desire to administer a kicking
coosin.
be -introduced to his Indian relations I "
_:--i ra tone of tragic protest. "Then all
_,   is, that the loss is his."
_ _kin d of you, Miss Budd; but I doubt
.i nyour light. I know I am a fool to
_:-or noes.",,
M::u~ are foolish in another fashion, if I may
may say anything," was the gallant response.
/.pexmit me to tell you that you are foolish to
cly.e and sentiment."
u1gh at love I" in a tone of shocked surprise.
,at any rate, you think you are invulnerable; and,
.day, Love will pay you out, and you will do some-
1   will astonish yourself and all your friends. Do
in prophets ? "
,Ye   m snall profits and quick returns."
er you go as usual, gibing and joking ! Well, you
ae that, before you are thirty, you will do something
ly romantic. Yes; you have it written in your
and th6n ydou will recall this walk on Dover Esplanade,
ey Budd. ",
will not ruire the fulfilment of her prophecy to recall
to my recollection, and if this desperate romance
arriage, I most solemnly promise and vow to send
rge consignment of wedding-cake, carriage paid."



<pb n="16"/>
x6             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
" Be sure you do! though, somehow, I cannot pictu
you a married man; your spirits are far too high."
" Yes, at present; but, no doubt, when the fate you pr
diet has overtaken me, my spirits will be in the othe
extreme. I am to do something extraordinarily rash anl
romantic, am I not ? Ah I I see Mrs. Carwithen wavinm
her parasol; shall we go in ?"
" I wonder why she asked me to tea ? " said Miss Budd
speculatively, as they strolled towards their destination.
"That is easily answered; for the pleasure of yo
company."
" I doubt it, for it is a well-known fact that she rath
snubs girls, and only likes married women, and what a
called nice smart people."
"Surely, Miss Budd, you are both nice and smart ?"
"Am I ? "-looking at him with a flattered smile. " B
not in the sense Mrs. Carwithen means. I have no gran
relations. I am not intimate with Lady This or Lord Tha
I don't know even one duchess."
"And I am in the same unhappy position; so we ar
both in the one boat."
" Oh, but you are very good family," she rejoined, wit
blunt candour. "I remember Mrs. Carwithen looking yo
up in Burke. She said that the Romillys had some splendi
connections, and were really gentry, and had blue blood i
their veins."
"I am   sure we are immensely obliged to her," sai
Romilly, half mockingly.
" Oh, look I She has picked up Major and Mrs. Blundel
he is in a regiment quartered in the shaft, and only latel
home from India."
" Then, in that case, they will suit my people down to th
ground," remarked her companion, as he followed her in
one of the best houses on the parade, and upstairs into
cool drawing-room, whose open windows, with gay strip
awnings, overlooked the sea-front, and through whic
floated a soft sea-breeze and the dreamy strains of the lai
new waltz.



<pb n="17"/>
CHAPTER     III.
PORTRAIT OF A LADY.
"She in thee,
Calls back the lovely April of her prime."
WImTHE's drawing-room  was not only cool, it
almost dim, after the glare of the parade. The
the house disliked a bold searching light, and was
:o veils, shaded lamps, and window-blinds. When
,had become accustomed to the gloom, it discovered
*i Carwithen was a woman of taste; indeed, she
lthe decoration of her house almost as important
men of her person. The curtains and furniture
d-fashioned brocade. There were valuable inlaid
taming china and Dutch silver; water-colours
nown artists were displayed on easels; fine Persian
arbout the floor, where they were distributed with
art; and palms, flowers, and photographs were libe-
tered over the apartment. The most remarkable
one that instantly caught the attention, was not a
-  e cabinet, a Japanese bronze, or even a Watteau
it was a large, half-lenth painting, which was
nthe best light the rooms affordedthe portrait of a
young woman in a picturesque black hat.  She
quantity of reddish-brown hair, a pair of mischievous
es, a delicate tip-tilted nose, and a perfect mouth
the whole pose indicated grace and spirit, with a
of coquetry.  The lady was very slim, and dressed in
WCs altogether a striking picture; the vivacity of the
and the brilliant bewitching face captured the
ol   f every tbeholder. Mr. Romily did not notice
lai ammedia tely, for he happened to be standing
bri   o n i, talking to Major Blundell about many
iends-for he and his wife had but recently



<pb n="18"/>
i8              A FAMILY LIKENESS.
returned from the North-west Provinces, and were alr
in high favour with Colonel and Mrs. Romilly. Prese
a smart man-servant appeared, bearing tea on an anti
silver tray; the cups and saucers were old crown Der
the teapot dated from the reign of good Queen Anne,
everything about the equipage was in perfect keeping-
ancient, elegant, and costly, and spoke of wealthy
refined ancestors. To tell the honest truth-which s
truth Mrs. Carwithen would sooner perish than reve
these family treasures had all been picked up at pawn-offi
curiosity shops, or auctions, by that ambitious lady,
subsequently imposed them on her guests as dear old
looms-articles that had been among " Dolly's people"
generations. Whilst Mrs. Carwithen poured out tea,
fingers that glittered with diamond rings-heirlooms al
Mr. Romilly made himself useful in handing about tea
cake, and it was during an expedition to Miss Budd, cu
hand, that his eyes first fell upon the -picture, and he h
suddenly and exclaimed, " Hullo !" 
"Well, Mr. Romilly, you seem knocked all of a hea
they call it," said Miss Budd, with a titter. " Please 
me my tea, and stare at her afterwards; she is not thir
"Who is she ? Do you know her ?" he asked eag
feeling strangely attracted, and as if the eyes of the pi
held him by a look.
"I believe she is Mr. Carwithen's ancestress; his
grandmother, Lady Juliet."
" His great-grandmother I " echoed the young man,
tone of profound disgust, his gaze still riveted on the
trait. " I was in hopes she was of the present time;
girl got up in fancy-dress."
" Oh no," with a glance of complacency at this dead
in her companion's attentions; "you can see that it 
old painting ! She was a girl about a hundred and tx
years ago. What do you think of her ?"
" I think she has the most beautiful-well, if not ec
beautiful-bewitching, fascinating face, I ever saw "
looking persistently at the portrait.
"You are not singular in your taste, though w
seldom admire her. Thev sav she has a saucy air, a



<pb n="19"/>
PORTRAIT OF A LADY.                 19
; but men are crazy about her; they all fall in
Lady Juliet, and, I believe, in old days, she was
idous toast, and there were half a dozen duels fought
am not surprised; look at her eyes," continued young
ly. "How they seem to speak and laugh, and follow
od the room, almost as if she were alive."
is a good thing for you she is not," rejoined Miss
emphatically. "I never saw such a desperate case
at first sight."
M. Romilly shows his discrimination," observed Mrs.
ithen, as she joined them. "I am always so enthu-
about Lady Juliet myself. You never see that piquant
atic type now; it went out with hoops and sedan-
H ave you noticed her delicate hands, her exquisite
fingers?"
'have, and her whole air, a mixture of dignity and
fie  Mrs. Carwithen, I am her slave. If my mother
only find me a wife like her, I would marry to-
dare say you would, Mr. Romilly," rejoined Mrs. Car-
, with a touch of severity in her voice, as she folded
arms and gazed at the picture. "She was a duke's
er, and a celebrated beauty. The Carwithens are
of the oldest families in England, and date from the
rchy, so that, although she married a Commoner, it
not considered a bad match-quite the contrary. Of
ethere are Commoners and Commoners."
res, and I am only a common Commoner. I keenly
iae the difference," he replied, with exaggerated
ty, which his hostess accepted in entire good faith.
It is said that my husband resembles her to a remark-
egree," continued Mrs. Carwithen, with a complacent
ather lord andmaster.  I see itmyself. Don'tyou?"
d Romilly's glance followed hers. Yes, there was an
ted rsemblance in the set of the eyes, the shape of
oread, and the well-kept taper hand, with which
s Carwithen was stroking his moustache, as he lay
is chair, and watched his wife with an air of lazy        I
ion.



<pb n="20"/>
go              A FAMILY LIKENESS.
He was proud of his family, but she was ten times pTou
She was fond of trotting out his ancestors, and he could
that she was putting Lady Juliet through her paces n
Unlike most well-born men, he talked a great deal, in sea
and out of season, about his connections, his wealthy, we
born connections-bien entendu, to one who was a che
and another who was a lunatic he never alluded, and
they were nearer kin than the Marquis of Castle Blar
that he so constantly referred to as " my cousin."  He
assiduously devoted to relations owning fine country se
moors, and town houses; he kept up an indefatig
correspondence with them, remembered their childre
birthdays, was liberal with tickets and bouquets to t
womenkind when in town, and they, seeing that he was,
eminently presentable connection, who had married a
wife and sown his wild oats, frequently invited the 
Carwithens, for the fashionable three days' visit.
Dolly wore obtrusive diamonds, had enormous ears, and 
too effusively "a Carwithen;" but, on the whole, she
a good-natured creature, and quite tolerable. Meanw
Mrs. Romilly and Mrs. Blundell were deep in conversat
the former listening with avidity to all the latest news f
the North-west-how the Greys had let their house in
souri, and gone to Cashmere; how Miss Lamb had
shamefully jilted by Mr. Wolfe, and how clever Mrs.
had married off her two plain daughters.
"Now you see what these Anglo-Indians are like,
Carwithen I When once they get together, no other co
has the smallest interest for them, exiles though they wei
remarked Gerald Romilly. " My mother is perfectly ha
in hearing about her old friends, and Major Blundell
my father are deep in the entries for the civil service cu
"Yes, I can quite understand it," rejoined the 1
tolerantly, "when people have been many years in I1
and have crowds of acquaintances. But there is my 
band; he was out there for some time, and he loathes -
country and the people, and he made no friends, for he i
the society out there is so dreadfully third-rate, he c,
not be bothered calling on people he did not want to kn
But he is so fastidious."



<pb n="21"/>
PORTRAIT OF A LADY.                  i
Liddy, what nonsense you talk!" he said,
group, teacup in hand. "I made as many
mot young fellows; but Asia is a vile hole, and
hot winds, prickly heat, snakes, and cholera-
r of early morning parades-I was glad to clear
lot know that you had been in the service," said
i some surprise.
I" broke in Mrs. Carwithen, eagerly; he was in
.rfey Hussars-such a crack regiment; but as he
ast (Now, Dolly," shaking her finger at him play-
lknow you did), he exchanged into a regiment
Cavalry; but he could not stand the climate, and
to come home. His health was completely
he has never been the same since."
you see, she knows all about me," said Mr.
and he glanced at his wife with a curious smile.
, of course I do, and how you rode races, and
night playing cards. I know everything about
in India." (This was not the case, as no one
than herself that the accounts Dolly had given
in the army were by no means as ample or
as she could have wished.)
confess that I should like to go out there for
er, she continued. " India is quite the rage
iBlarney often talks of spending a winter there,
go out, we shall certainly look you up, Mr.
"he rejoined; " we will consider it a bargain."
in the present instance, there are two to the
y won't agree."
eo.urse he will, if you ask him nicely, Mrs.
Idi a is a capital place, and you really ought
a pause, his mother was heard saying in
tually gives him twenty-five rupees a month,
ide~r him'I She was talking of her khan.
cold weather is superb," continued Romilly
out of the common. Travelling is easy ui



<pb n="22"/>
22              A FAMILY LIKENESS.
these days. I can promise you plenty of entertaini
you will undertake to come out this autumn. You
see a camp of exercise, Agra, Delhi, the Snows, the P
glacier. We can go there together, if you will come
stay with me at Durano."
"Durano!" echoed Mr. Carwithen, suddenly ups
his cup of tea. "What infernal saucers "-wipin
sleeve as he spoke, and looking much put out.
"No, no, many thanks; but you will never catch m
in that part of the world again; and, I must say, I w
at your enthusiasm. Why, it was only yesterday your
was describing your experience in the field, and with c
among the troops; thermometer a hundred and fift
an eighty-pound tent, nothing to do all day, potted 
night, and sixteen funerals every evening." 
"Yes, that certainly was a bad time; but it is only
in a way, and Mrs. Carwithen is not likely to go int
field or on service on the frontier; she will have the 
side of things. The Taj at Agra and Futtehpore-Sik
alone worth a journey."
"How I long to see them I" said the lady, raptur
"and-"
"And vipers, cobras, scorpions. Bah !" interrupte,
htsband, peevishly; "don't talk of the beastly countr
us change the subject."
"It's his monomania," explained his wife, with a
fidential smile, tenderly wiping his wet cuff with hera
handkerchief (she was always so affectionate in p
"Still, Dolly dearest, eighteen years make a great diffe
and you know if I set my heart on going to India you,
refuse to take me."
"Can't I? Just try me"-with a hoarse, constr
sort of laugh. And then, with an evident desire to c
the conversation, he said, " Romilly, have you seen this:
photo of Lord Windermere ? Rattling good chap; I 
you know him. And here is one of Lady Candypeel-
met her, I suppose ?-a connection of mine. A fine-o
woman; eh ! splendid figure. And here is the Duch'
Kilwater. She was a cousin of his. You know the 
about their marriage ? Hullo !" he exclaimed, finding.



<pb n="23"/>
pORTRA1T OF A LADE                  23
y was not particularly interested in his collec-
celebrities, "there is that unfortunate Wing-
with Miss Mawe. I hear he is going to marry
La thundering young ass I "
is a pretty girl," remarked Gerald, as he
the open window, and glanced out.
girl I Bah I there are thousands ten times better
And think, my dear sir, of the Wingfield estates."
she has considered them."
fellow, this is no joking matter. If that young
to make a disgracefully low match, and marry
e's daughter, he had much better shoot himself
e is bound to do it sooner or later; these in-
savour of insanity. There ought to be an asylum
young men, where they could be shut up till
to their senses."
tomilly was silent, for his host spoke with
and, indeed, he was accustomed to be listened
certain amount of respect whenever he lifted
on the subject of precedence, pedigree, entail,
aces-he was especially great on the latter
tI  fellow Hobie has come back," he remarked
There he is, with his four black poodles.
but eccentric. They say he has made a bet
go over to Calais in his bath I "
I knew him long ago-it must be the same-
but mad as a hatter. His name usea to be
t has he done with the other b ? "
he has it in his bonnet now," returned the
nwi.king gravity.
aot bad, by Jove, not bad. Blundell, did you
' sake, don't serve it up a second time ; it
i," protested young Romilly.  "I see my
,and we have to catch the half-past six train,
to lose."
was saying, "I am so sorry to tear myself
delightful budget of Indian news, Mrs.
renmember your promise of spending a long
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 



<pb n="24"/>
24              A FAAMILY LIAENESS. 
day with me next week, and I will read you Amy
letter.  We"--again turning to her hostess-" we
discovered so many mutual friends; " and, brimming
with smiles, the little lady made her adieux, and r
downstairs, carrying her husband and son in her train.
"Not bad sort of people, Blundell," said Mr. Carwi
apologetically; "but they have been too long out of
country. Did you ever see anything like her bonnet
of a burlesque-or the cut of Romilly's boots ? I b
he buys them second-hand."
"I did not get beyond his fine old face. He is, or w
most distinguished soldier. Many a time I heard of
Jack Romilly. He was one of the heroes of the Mu
Sword in hand, he held a door against- " 
"Yes, yes "-impatiently-" very likely; but that'
ancient history now. I know some of his folk in Cream
-really quite nice people."  This was high praise from
Carwithen.
"The son is a smart-looking fellow," remarked H
Blundell, feeling certain that he and his wife would al
"told off " after their departure.
"Not a bad sort of chap, and always well turned
admitted Dolly. "But, by Jove, when I am in town,
I catch sight of the old boy, I always run up a side st
I would not be seen with him in Piccadilly for fifty gui
-ha, ha, ha ! Oh, must you go ? Just wait a second
me. I'll walk with you as far as the club."
CHAPTER     IV.
A YOUNG MAN'S FANCY.
" Why, this is very midsummer madness I"
PEOPLE do not invariably retire from the Indian ar
settle down at home, and live happy ever after, as is t
Eastern day-dream. At any rate, Colonel Romilly wa
exception to the rule. Colonel Romilly, who was accusto
to an active life and congenial employment, found him
k



<pb n="25"/>
_:MAN'S FANCY.               25
n of fifty-six, shelved for the remainder
- init was a sharp change to sink suddenly
iof considerable social importance, with
yfriends, into the role of an old fogey, with
and nothing to do. It was too late to
to farming or politics, or any special fad;
. connected with another hemisphere and
i    existence. To meet the boat, to read the
iial household messages-how his former
have stared and sneered-went but a short
ig in the great empty hours, until it was
1 to drop in at the club for a rubber of whist.
oo, missed her large establishment, her ponies,
her friends. But since Gerald had been at
busier, brisker, and better; and Colonel
echoed his wife's constant wish, that
in in England and settle down."  He
and a distant relation had recently left
a year. Why should he go back to
Icould have accompanied him it would have
thing; but, after having taken a solemn
country, after being entertained and feted
h parting gifts, after scattering their house-
'ancient retainers to the four winds, how could
d his mother strolled up and down the Lees
:  afternoon, she was urging him with all
wat her command to leave the service, and to
with them.
month your leave will be up, and you will
nds of miles away, and goodness knows when
you again. We might as well have no son,"
-dear mother, you surely would not wish me to
ce at twenty-six, and turn into a loafer at
not loaf I " protested his mother, with asperity.
.yon suggest what I am to do ? I am fond
on and of my regiment, and I am not clever
out a fresh career."



<pb n="26"/>
26             A FAMIL Y LIKENASS. 
"You might marry," said Mrs. Romilly, briskly.
"So I might; but on what ?"
"Why, of course you have something; and she
have something."
"And supposing that her face was her fortune " 
"I am not going to suppose anything so ridiculo
know dozens of nice girls--"
"For that matter, so do I. And you, my dear m4
see in every nice girl a possible daughter-in-law."
"And pray why not ? "
"I wonder you are so anxious to get rid of me. 
seem to forget that-
"'My son is my son till he gets him a wife;
My daughter's my daughter all the days of her life.'
"Now, Gerald, you are too provoking. I want y
marry some pleasant, ladylike girl, with a little mon
am certain to like her. No one ever said that I was
to get on with; at Julna I was the only lady who 
quarrelled with Mrs. Bickers ; I simply would not figh
even when she managed the mutton club, and gave me
the legs. And if you had a nice country place, wher
could shoot and farm, I would come and live near y
would give me a new interest in life."
"But if you were to take up some pet charity-orj
politics, or the Primrose League-would not that a
just as well ? "
"Really, Gerald; I had no idea you were so hear
Primrose League I as if it would be the same as my
child. Charity ! my charity begins at home."
"Oh! and that old impostor, yesterday, that bo
two pounds to bury his dead wife, and, in a fit of ab
helped himself to my new umbrella as he went throu
hall ? However, supposing that I did marry to plea
and to give you an interest in ltfe, and that the ma
proved to be a failure ?"
"It could not be ! "-with much decision.
"No; such things never occur I" 
Not with the sort of girl I have in my mind; and



<pb n="27"/>
A YOUNG MAN'S FANCY.                 27
X boy, have the best heart and sweetest temper in the
I don't want to flatter you, but- "
you are flattering me absurdly," he interrupted.
by no means a sweet temper. Just ask my bearer i "
well "-impatiently-" then call it whatever you
Of one thing I am certain-you would be extremely
'; and she has fifteen hundred a year of her own."
i!  So you have already selected the young lady?
uy I ask her name ? " he inquired rather dryly.
Nancy Budd," rejoined Mrs. Romilly, triumphantly.
,mother; not if she had fifteen hundred thousand
d ray why not ? To what do you object?"
object to the shape of her hats, the size of her hands,
slang, and, above all, I object to her saying 'Really,
omilly,' every five minutes."
indeed, I must confess I had no idea that you were
p, or so hard to please. Well, there is Miss Skinder,
and refined girl, who has inherited two fortunes,
s certainly born with a silver spoon in her mouth."
[ranted, my dear mother; but you will allow that it
have been a table spoon ! "
rald  I am ashamed of you. What do you say to
Moss ? She is strikingly handsome. What magnificent
uite true; but have you seen her mother ? I was not
ed when she told me that it was not easy to get round
*  She must weigh close on twenty stone; and Mrs. Moss
me that her daughter was the image of what she had
at her age I You should also bear in mind that it
likely that any of these fair damsels would look at
ld they not ? thought Mrs. Romilly, with a quick
at her son. He was not much above middle height,
d a slight, well-knit figure; his close-cropped brown
bited a wave inherited from her own frizzy locks;
was tanned to mahogany, but to strangers-much
mother-it was a handsome face, with its clear-cut
and sweeping auburn moustache; and even by men
are never prone to admire one another-Gerald



<pb n="28"/>
28             A FAMIL Y LIKENESS.
Romilly was considered a remarkably good-looking ;
Yes! Mrs. Romilly had every reason to be proud
boy; he was a model son. Her deeply interested neig
noticed how attentive he was to his mother-escorti
to bands, and concerts, and even to tea-parties I-a
patiently whilst she gloated over shop windows or e
twenty minutes of "last words" when parting with
lady friend.
"Well, Gerald," she began, after a moment's silence
me seriously what you think about getting married." 
"Seriously, then, I don't approve of married officers
spoil the mess, and throw a lot of duty on the soft-
bachelors. If I were at the head of affairs I should i*
order that any man who married before he was fiv
thirty should receive a compassionate allowance, and b
pulsorily retired."
" You are talking rubbish, as usual, Gerald, and wi
a very different song one of these days," said his 
"Now, confess, have you never seen a girl that you
to marry, supposing you were not in the service ?"
A pause, and then, with a smile, he answered, " Yes
"Who is she ?" she asked in a flutter of curiosity.
me all about her."
"I have seen one girl I could have married, whom I
have adored; but we never, never can be anything
another; I may not even speak to her ! "
" Oh, my dear boy," in a shocked, voice, "what a
going to tell me ? She is not a married woman ? "
"Well, not exactly."
"Where does she live ? Where have you seen her 
"I have seen her, and so have you, in Mrs. Carw
drawing-room," and then in a mysterious whisper he
"hanging on the wall."                                  I
"Hanging on the wall!" echoed Mrs. Romilly, alt
face betrayed sincere perplexity.
"Yes, Lady Juliet, lovely Lady Juliet; the girl i
black hat."
"Of course you turn everything into a joke," criedl
Romilly, in a tone of intense exasperation. "And'
nothing in the picture; nothing but a woman with a



<pb n="29"/>
AAM   'l s  AP/CY.         29
eyes, and quantities of red hair, a
_ ^^^^VBlvrse done it now, and wounded me in
Pray what do you call my mous-
forgive you this time, if you will please
Zil dmire red hair, and if in your travels
a girl with a face like Lady Juliet's,
home at once, and wire for me, for you
daughter-in-law at last."
imunch as saying you will never marry!"
y, impatiently. "I dare say you think I
Mercenary old match-maker; but you know
that I would snatch at any straw to keep
sHowever, I have one consolation- " and
lp slightly.
is that ? that you are always first with me,
lw very well that if you really insist on it, I
home, and chuck the service."
; after all, I could not be so selfish. I can see
question ;" and then she added with a little
ps one idle man at home is enough. My
that being so fastidious, and so invulnerable,
far of your entangling yourself with some
out in India."
dleed," emphatically. "And here comes Dolly
n-n-arm with Lord Hougham. Yes, happy
as he likes to be seen. I wonder what has
over tothese parts ? What do I behold ? He
vig the earl, and I believe he is coming to
not care for Mr. Carwithen; his keen eyes
in this brilliant specimen of humanity. He
teld this ornament of society between his eye
and found him to be paste. Mr. Carwithen
ble dandy-that was a pardonable weakness ;
.sgusting toady, and always running after big-
was a failing for which this bronze-faced,
ug man felt the most measureless contempt.
Dolly Carwithen did not like young Romilly;
tongue and a merry, mocking eye, and not a



<pb n="30"/>
30              A FAMILY LIKENESS.
grain of deference in his manner, for a man who w
who was familiarly slapped on the back by at leas
dozen peers, and who gave the best little dinners in
They avoided one another by mutual consent, a
considerable success, and therefore Gerald Romill
good deal surprised to find himself accosted and dra
by Mr. Carwithen-it was merely to ask some trvi
tion about the trains; and this question answere4
still remained in his vicinity, and finally suggested t
should take a little turn together-this with his m
ranted bonhomie, an air specially reserved for pe
higher grade than a lieutenant in a Ghoorka r
Gerald could not but accede; his mother preferred re
near the band. She had met some friends, and t
nothing to prevent his accepting Mr. Carwithen's best
-and his company.
After a few trifling observations, Dolly nodded
the sea, and said, " I suppose you will soon be cro
your way out ?"
"Yes; in about three weeks, my time will be up.':
"Ah I and where is your regiment now ? You
but I forget."
"At Durano, in the Himalayas; it is our head-qu
"I suppose you know the place pretty well, eh,
people ? "-with a swift glance out of the corner of
As Mr. Carwithen made the inquiry, there was a s
perceptible change in the expression of his face, a
from languid politeness to keen interest; and in a 
flashed on his companion that he had thus drawn h
in order to ask him some special question-well al
other ears.
"Yes, I know it, I dare say, as well as you know
"What sort of a billet is it ? " continued Mr. Ca
carelessly.
"Oh, a capital station, but not a bit fashionable;
mahseer fishing, there is chikor and karkar shooting,
much else, unless you are a first-class athlete, and ca
like a goat."
"Do you know the neighbourhood ? "
"Yes, I know the neighbourhood," repeated Rom



<pb n="31"/>
A  S FANCY.             31
b people," indifferently.
ross a a couple of the name of-of
t.here was that furtive glance out of
, ," and he laughed. " I am sure, if I
the name."
P Fais  "-with ill-disguised anxiety.
l i ,they are not in the station; but there
H oo es and f planters and retired officers
hills within a radius of forty miles."
they never show up ? "
y. They live like hermits among their
locks and herds."
tenrstence," said Carwithen, shrugging his
iwould kill me in a week."
t would; and regarding these Nootes, I can
'about them, if you like. Shall I look them
t, no account, my dear fellow," rejoined the
y. "I merely asked because I came across
a small matter of business, and-and that's
t interest me in the least. Ah, I see Lord
oking for me everywhere; he came over with
-is dining with us this evening-such a
w-introduce you to him another time. Ah,
a he hurried off.
hens were wealthy people-that is to say, he
s per annum, and she had many thousands ;
ssessed birth and connections, whilst she---
must be disclosed, Rumour for once was
Was the daughter of an obscure money-
his origin was obscure, though his trans-
quite the reverse. Having acquired a large
ia most unenviable reputation, he had departed
g his ill-gotten riches to his only child, Miss
iek, a personable spinster of twenty-six, with
a strong will, and a large fund of social
s Gammick resided on the Continent for



<pb n="32"/>
32              A FA.IZL Y LIKENESS.
the first year after her bereavement, and had a consi
number of worshippers, but among them all she k
head cool. Birth for bullion was her bargain, and s
as fully resolved to have the worth of her money as
be expected from her father's daughter.  She
peerage at her fingers' ends, and was prepared to
any one above the rank of a knight. Nevertheless,
end, she gave her hand-and an iron one he found'
good-looking, graceless Dolly Carwithen. True, his
was ancient, his second cousin was a peer, but his 
and rivals hinted that there was some story about
India, that he was in debt, and that he had bee
at work heiress-hunting for the last three years.;
Gammick listened demurely to all these tales-listen
was lost to her herds of adorers; for she married!
Carwithen. They had now been husband and w
fifteen years, and on the whole the alliance had 
out well for both parties. For a poor man, what'
an easier or more agreeable form of livelihood than a 
wife who worships him?    And, on the other ha'
low-born Miss Gammick was well satisfied with her:
monial venture. 'Her husband's relatives tolerat
she moved in good society, her card-plate exhibi
names of great ladies, and she had been prese
court. She was most enthusiastic about Dolly's a
(having none of her own), and discovered many
facts respecting them, which she brought to light 
first time, to the amazement of the family. A Car
had been second cousin once removed to Queen Bl3
and been a conspicuous figure in the sacking of 
a Carwithen had been one of the seven champi
Christendom; a Carwithen had placed the historical
for King Canute; and a Carwithen had taken part in
one of the eight crusades-not even excepting the cli
futile expedition.
Mrs. Carwithen had also a wonderful collection
called heirlooms, very valuable possessions, having
round sum of money. But Lady Juliet was no in
she was a bond fide ancestress, and had been fished 
a lumber-room in Dolly's old home, covered with d



<pb n="33"/>
32              A FA.IZL Y LIKENESS.
the first year after her bereavement, and had a consi
number of worshippers, but among them all she k
head cool. Birth for bullion was her bargain, and s
as fully resolved to have the worth of her money as
be expected from  her father's daughter.  She
peerage at her fingers' ends, and was prepared to
any one above the rank of a knight. Nevertheless,
end, she gave her hand-and an iron one he found'
good-looking, graceless Dolly Carwithen. True, his
was ancient, his second cousin was a peer, but his 
and rivals hinted that there was some story about
India, that he was in debt, and that he had bee
at work heiress-hunting for the last three years.
Gammick listened demurely to all these tales-listen
was lost to her herds of adorers; for she married!
Carwithen. They had now been husband and w
fifteen years, and on the whole the alliance had ,
out well for both parties. For a poor man, what'
an easier or more agreeable form of livelihood than a 
wife who worships him?    And, on the other ha'
low-born Miss Gammick was well satisfied with her:
monial venture. 'Her husband's relatives tolerat
she moved in good society, her card-plate exhibi
names of great ladies, and she had been prese
court. She was most enthusiastic about Dolly's a
(having none of her own), and discovered many
facts respecting them, which she brought to light 
first time, to the amazement of the family. A Car
had been second cousin once removed to Queen Bol
and been a conspicuous figure in the sacking of 
a Carwithen had been one of the seven champi
Christendom; a Carwithen had placed the historical
for King Canute; and a Carwithen had taken part in
one of the eight crusades-not even excepting the cli
futile expedition.
Mrs. Carwithen had also a wonderful collection
called heirlooms, very valuable possessions, having
round sum of money. But Lady Juliet was no in
she was a bond fide ancestress, and had been fished
a lumber-room in Dolly's old home, covered with d



<pb n="34"/>
34              A FAMILY LIKENESS.
returned fourfold ;-he was always most attentive to
public, and in private; remembered her special ta
favourite flowers, her birthday, and, above all, he
her to open his letters I The Carwithens had. a
London as a pied-a-terre, and roamed about the great
of the year-to the baths abroad, to Cowes, to kc
At present they had rented a furnished house in
where they entertained, and gave first-rate dinners t
important social creditors; far be it from  them  $
their doors to passing acquaintances-as did the be
Romillys, indifferent to clothes, to pedigree, to all 
memories of auld lang syne.
Mr. Carwithen, when he examined his mind,
confessed that he had done well for himself in 
Lyddy Gammick; he had led a luxurious and fai
cessful existence since he had made her his br
enjoyed a fine income, without the exertion of ear
he had nothing to do but gratify his tastes and
He liked his clubs; he liked to be admirably turn
and to pass for a man of five and thirty; he likedl
dinner; he liked writing letters from grand country
and castles-with the address printed on the note-
to less fortunate mortals. On the whole, his likin
gratified; good looking, the husband of a devoted 
with no bills, no malady, no encumbrance, and no
anxiety than slight misgivings as to the competence
cook or his tailor.
And yet he was in a similar position to the prin
whom we have read; there was one little pea bene
pile of forty down feather-beds, that interfered with
repose.



<pb n="35"/>
( 35 )
CHAPTER     V.
^^^f  iDOLLY'S SECRET.
"Pluck the heart out of my mystery."
Hamlet.
quite true that Dolly Carwithen had a secret in his
secret connected with India; and, as there is no
to conceal it, pending Mrs. Manders's return, it shall
ged without delay.
very wet August afternoon, nineteen years ago, a
procession might have been seen winding its way up
p bridle-path that leads from the Brewery to Chotah
It was the last and worst burst of the monsoon, and
n was coming down like a waterspout. The small
an torrents were brown rushing rivers, boiling over
irty white foam. The low country was enveloped in
mist. It was not a promising day, and nothing but
ost urgent private affairs would be likely to summon
e person from beneath the noisy shelter of their zinc
A11 up and down the usually thronged bridle-road
was not a soul to be seen, save this little party who
making their way in the very teeth of the weather:
by a handsome young man of four or five and twenty
act, Dolly Carwithen--looking hollow-eyed, haggard,
ressed. He seemed to be buried in his reflections,
tally indifferent to the miniature cataract that was
g off his mackintosh, down the sides of his panting
and trickling out of the toes of his boots. His
twas reduced to a mere pulp. Truly he resembled
iional drowned rat, as he and his steed at last
into the bazar road. Here was no view awaiting
of a lovely lake, reflecting surrounding hills, as in
or-no, nothing but sheets of impenetrable fog and
shrouded in sullen-looking clouds. The bazar
y, save for a few shivering pack ponies, waiting
y under dripping verandahs, whilst their owners



<pb n="36"/>
36             A FAMILY LIENESS.
squatted within, drinking smoke from the inevitable huka,
and listening to all the local gup.
At the corner of the bridge Mr. Carwithen halted an
looked behind him, and the dejected expression of hi4
countenance gave way to one of angry impatience.
"What the mischief is keeping them ?" he muttered
" It will be dark before we get there. I'd like to thrash
the life out of those devils of coolies ! "
Ere he had concluded this benevolent wish, the remainder
of the procession turned the corner. First, a stout hill-man,
with enormous shoulders and brawny limbs, carrying a bo
upon his back, his person enveloped in a coarse brow
blanket, fastened across the chest with rude brass pins.
Next came a "dandy," a sort of chair, borne by four other
coolies; in this sat a benumbed ayah, with an umbrella overi
her head, and a sleeping infant in her lap.
" Chullo I Chullo I " shouted the young man impatiently.
"Come, get on ahead of me, you lazy brutes."
And he proceeded to herd the party up a narrow, slippery
path that led to a mall overlooking the lake. After follow-i
ing the mall for some time, under dripping trees, and
sponge-like overhanging ferns, they came in sight of a large
grey house, with a high zinc roof-a severe-looking residence,
and it did not need the gravelled playground or the board
outside the gate, on which was painted "Miss Bruce's
Establishment for Young Ladies," for "School" was written.
all over it in capital letters.
There was no straggling flower-garden, no waving creepers,
weedy walks, or barking dogs-everything was plain ani
neat and simple, from the bright windows and white painted:
swing to the stern old bearer who invited the new arrivals
into the verandah.
Dolly Carwithen took off his soaking hat and coat; the
ayah disentangled herself and Miss Bruce's new young lady
from their wraps; the coolies and pony got under shelte
when Miss Bruce herself came on the scene-a short, spare
lady of about thirty, neatly dressed in black, with black
hair, black eyes, a very long nose, a very long chin, and a
tightly closed mouth-by no means a beautiful face, but
the face of a clever and determined woman.



<pb n="37"/>
DOLLYS SECRET.                     37
" I scarcely expected you this dreadful day," she said in a
cheery voice, as she offered her hand to Dolly, much sur-
prised to find that this good-looking young man was the
paterfamilias who had been in correspondence with her. He
was of such a widely different type to the parents of her other
charges.
Miss Bruce, an accomplished and enterprising English
governess, had Fcome out to India a few years previously
with the idea that a well-managed exclusive girls' school, if
situated in the hills, would pay. It would be a new experi-
ment, and she was excessively sanguine of its results. She
rented a large house, added a schoolroom, furnished the
premises, laid in three second-hand pianos, secured two
efficient assistants, and confidently awaited the result. But
alas for her hopes, for her friends' fine promises, and her
own circulars, officers and civilians still continued to send
their daughters home, just as if " St. Oswald's" was not in
existence, or ready to supply what Miss Bruce declared must
be a long-felt want.   She was accordingly advised to
moderate her expectations, and to what our American
cousins call "climb down "-in other words, to open her
arms to the children of Eurasians and tradespeople-children
whose parents were willing and able to afford a good educa-
tion in a good climate. The change had answered extremely
well. The school numbered fifty boarders-punctually paid
for-and who possibly gave less anxiety and trouble than
those delicately reared hot-house plants-daughters of
colonels and collectors. Yes, the school was in a most
flourishing condition, and Miss Dix, the head-governess and
lady principal's right hand, was amazed to hear that they
were about to receive an infant aged but two months, and
her amazement naturally found speech.
"Why?" echoed Miss Bruce.       "I'll tell you, Agnes.
Firstly, because all is fish that comes into my net-even
this little minnow. Secondly, because sixty rupees a month,
and her ayah paid for, is a consideration. The child won't
cost ten. Thirdly, and lastly, because she is likely to be
permanent."
For all these reasons, and also by means of his handsome
face and gallant bearing, Miss Bruce smiled graciously on



<pb n="38"/>
38             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
Dolly Carwithen when she said, "I scarcely expected you
to-day."
" But you got my telegram ?" he inquired, as he dried
his damp face in his silk handkerchief.
"Oh yes. Won't you come in ? Oh, never mind your
boots! " she added recklessly, ushering him into a com-
fortable carpeted room, with tempting armchairs and a
roaring wood fire, and beckoning to the ayah to follow
them.
"This is my assistant, Miss Dix," she continued, as a
pale, refined-looking woman, wrapped in a shawl, rose and:
bowed. " Miss Dix will have a good deal to say to my little 
charge," now turning to examine the infant, who suddenly
opened a pair of brown eyes, and having stared at thet-
stranger for some seconds, wrinkled up its face, and gave'
vent to a succession of yells. Miss Bruce could not truth-:,
fully say, "What a lovely child I what a little angel! " for
at present its nose was a button and its hair of a blazing,
red, so she merely exclaimed-
"Poor darling I she must be cold and hungry," and,
addressing her ayah in fluent Hindustani, sent her out of:
the room in company with Miss Dix, who, taking the child:I
in her arms, limped away with her down the corridor. Miss
Dix had been lame from her birth.
"You see, I had to come up to-day," explained the young'
man, seating himself. "I only got three days' leave; the''
child is not a bit the worse."
"I hope not. You will have some refreshment, won't
you ? A cup of hot coffee, or a peg, or anything ? "
"Thanks, no; I am going to the hotel. I can't stop
long," he went on uneasily, with a glance at his wet boots.
"And I go down first thing in the morning."
But, surely this young man, with a pair of somewhat 
faithless-looking blue eyes, was not going to leave the child
and depart in this fashion, without one word on business ?
Miss Bruce's face assumed its gravest professional aspect,
and her nose seemed to grow longer as she said-
" I see you are very wet, and it would be cruel to detain 
you now. But you wVli call and make all arrangements 
to-morrow, before leaving the station ? "



<pb n="39"/>
DOLLYS SECRET.                   39
Armangements ? " he echoed, with a blank look.
Yes, of course, about the ehild," said the lady, who had
ive disposition and prompt manner.
Oh, aw," pulling his moustache.  "Sixty rupees a
th, is it not ?"
Yes, paid in advance, and you pay the ayah," said Miss
in her most practical tones.
;All right; if you like."
Why, you suggested it yourself I " she exclaimed, with
ueh of impatience.  Am I to have entire charge of the
and keep her here for her holidays, and provide her
ies ?"
"Yes, rather," with an emphasis that did not say much
his parental affection. " You see, I shall be with my
imern. I am going to a camp of exercise this autumn;
ay, I can't be lugging a baby and an ayah about the
Irld."
Of course not. The clothes will be extra, and I must
an additional cow; and there will be wood for baths,
all that," resolved to drive a good bargain with this
ewhat nonchalant young officer.
"Oh, I say, I can't afford more than sixty rupees for
erything. You see, she does not eat. She won't want
on for ages. Mrs. Warry said sixty was too much," he
.ded with boyish candour.
Miss Bruce made a mental note of Mrs. Warry's name,
d said with affected resignation-
"Well, it is very little; but I suppose I must try and
ke it do! A young child is a great responsibility."
"Yes; but she is as hard as nails. It's a bore she is so
- y ugly. Only for that, I'd have packed her off home
ashot."
I wonder you did not send her to your own people."
I'er   tell you the reason," he rejoined, with an air of
perficial frankness.
MJy people don't know   I am  married. I may as well
you, and make a clean breast of it, for some one else is
o be good enough to do it for me. My wife was not
mY own class of life-a barrack sergeant's daughter--
so, you see, I funked telling the old folks at home."



<pb n="40"/>
40              A FAMILY LIKENESS.
" But surely they must know some day."
"Yes, some day; if the child had been pretty, or lik'
Carwithens, I might have despatched it.  But it's 
a hideous little devil, they would pitch it into the stree
"I don't think there would have been any risk of t
rejoined Miss Bruce. " What is her name ?"
" Juliet-an old family one-but you may call her
Car-the other is such a mouthful, and Car is good en
for school use."
"Nevertheless, I think she had better be known b
full name," said Miss Bruce, stiffly ; "otherwise
might be awkward complications."
"Very well, it's all one to me. No, by Jove, on s
thoughts, it is not. Carwithen is not a common name, 
might ask questions; for the present she is to be Car
She can take the rest of her name within a year or so,
the joke, eh ?"
"No; my sense of humour is somewhat deficient,"
Miss Bruce, stiffly.
"Oh, come. I suppose I may call my own property 
I please ? " he exclaimed, rising. " I'll ride up to-mi
and bring you the coin; it's with my baggage. I'm 
to leave the child with you for a long time, you know.'
i "Yes, I quite understand that, and I will do my
best for her, you may be certain. I'll make her my S.
charge."
" Yes; but you'll never make her a beauty. Now I
be off."
Shaking hands with alacrity, and seemingly thankf
have disposed of a troublesome business, he hurried
pulled on his moist mackintosh, mounted his pony,
galloped away.
" What a harum-scarum creature, and how handso
is I " mentally exclaimed Miss Bruce. " Fancy his t
me all his family affairs. He has forgotten to pay
coolies. Well, I am not going to do it for him," and, '
ing the window, she shrieked out a sentence that sent 
all streaming after him. Then she went upstairs,
looked critically at her new boarder. She was sound 
on the ayah's lap, and, really, not at all so plain, o0



<pb n="41"/>
.:!. :         DOLLY'S SECRET.                  4
her hair, which was very abundant and very red. She had
dark eyelashes and a lovely skin.  Poor mite!  What
would be her fate, in a world where she was evidently not
wanted ?
Then Miss Bruce proceeded to judiciously cross-examine
the ayah. " How long had she been with the mem sahib ? "
"One year-very pretty lady-dark eyes-dark hair-
and so young [when she died. Sahib very sorry for two
three days."
"Sorry for two or three days !" thought Miss Bruce.
"What an eloquent sermon on matrimony I After all, I
believe a single woman, like myself, has far the best of it.
I won't have the child's box unpacked until to-morrow, and
until I see if that young man means to pay. Supposing he
was to go down, and never come near me ! It's rather a
shame to doubt him, but these gay and reckless youths are
sometimes very careless about money. If he plays me false,
I shall just send the child to the dak bungalow. I cannot
afford to support strangers' children."
During that night, had Miss Bruce but known it, little
Juliet's destination hung by a hair.
Dolly had gone to a popular hotel, and there, warmed,
refreshed, and reclothed, had presented himself in the card-
room, and been welcomed with acclamation by several
acquaintances, who were glad to see any new face that
dreary day, and to the query, "Hullo, Doll, what brought
you up here ? " he simply shrugged his shoulders, laughed,
and said, "A bazar pony."
He had not intended to play cards-had merely come to
look on-for he had barely sufficient cash to pay three
months in advance and his return journey. But he was as
weak as water where cards were concerned, and where his
own pleasure was in question, and he was easily persuaded
to cut in. Rubber followed rubber, and, alas! his rupees
soon began to melt like snow before the fire; rupee points
and a gold mohur on the rub, and bets, soon runs away with
a considerable sum, and presently Dolly was cleared out.
Luck was dead against him. After dinner, and fortified by
a bottle of champagne, he went to the Club Baboo, and
borrowed one hnndlrpm rllnooa  hi; onnh onnA rch;in .a



<pb n="42"/>
42              A FAMILY LIKENESS.
once more sat down to tempt Fortune, and Fortune
tively threw herself into his arms.
"Carwithen's luck" that night was talked of for
seasons I He held extraordinary cards-honours,
aces, kings seemed to tumble out of his hands at his
he betted audaciously, he backed himself heavily; it
the same, he could not lose I He played till three 
in the morning. Who would believe that this 
fierce-eyed young gambler, with wild hair and
hand, could ever develop into staid, self-contained,
Adolphus Carwithen ? He rose at last, the winnerict
thousand rupees, and, with his pockets stuffed with
cheques, and I 0 U's, he staggered off to bed, 
drunk with success I It was late when he awoke,
he dressed and ate his breakfast he came to an un
prudent resolution. He would pay over half his wi
to Miss Bruce there and then, nearly four years in a
and then he need not bother his head about the 
the whole of that period. She would be provided for
cost to him; no-and he chuckled at the thoug
price of her maintenance had all come out of the
Algy White, Skippy Byng, and Bobby Langsta
would keep the rest to pay some of his debts, and t
couple of ponies 'for the Umballa races. Yes, he
make over the coin to Miss Bruce at once; strike 
the iron was hot, and ere he changed his mind-he S
changed his mind. He sorted out notes and chequ
the I 0 U's, and put them in a large envelope, an
settling his bill, set off on his return journey, laden 
spoils. No; he was not going to stop another 
give his friends their revenge, although they dem
clamorously; his leave was up, and he was off.
deaf to all entreaties and blandishments, and his dis
companions angrily remarked "that it was the
they had ever known Carwithen so keen about ret
his duty I"
Miss Bruce was delighted to see him, and repented
her base suspicions; and her surprise was unbounded
Dolly placed a thick packet of notes in her hands,
with his most offhand air-



<pb n="43"/>
MlR CAR WITHZE"S PAST.              43
two thousand rupees, payment in   advance.
eee that it's all square, for I have not a minute to
, my dear Mr. Carwithen, I don't want all this," she
e   "Six months--  "
Flp it now you have got it-that is my advice to you,"
pted impatiently as he picked up his whip.
supposing anything were to happen, and the child
m-were to die ?"
_No uch--" he pulled himself up sharply. "No fear
. Just see that it's all right, please, for I must be
Bruce hastily counted it over, and said, "Yes, I
it's correct. So I will send you a formal stamped
r can you wait now ? Wait five minutes, and see
gld, and take a receipt" 
o,not a second, or ' miss my dk. I shall have to
all the way to catch it, as it is. However, I can always
nders with my own spurs and another fellow's nag,
with a hasty shake of the hand he was gone. Within
weeks, every single rupee of his winnings was also
t in paing bills-lost on a racecourse, and he said
isl  as he thrust his hands into his now empty
"What a comfort it is that for once in my life I
one sense, and paid up Miss Bruce like a man-ay,
anobleman I The rest of that coin would have gone
e way, and I am still that to the good."
CHAPTER VI.
R. CARBWITHENS' PAST.
"A man of pleasure is a man of pains."
YOUNG.
the air of a man who had triumphantly discharged a
Dolly Carwithen clattered downhill at break-neck pace
onfiding Algy Brigg's best polo pony, his heart was
ithin him, he had got rid of the child, perhaps it had
i, equally blessed relief to him to get rid of his wife.



<pb n="44"/>
44             A FAMILY LIKENESS
Who knows ? At any rate, he was bearing his loss
creditable fortitude.  He had been married a yea
marriage, like many other matters in which Dolly wa
cerned, had proved a failure. A good-looking, we
reckless youth, his parents had placed him in a
regiment, endowed him with a first-rate outfit, guns, sa
and a small allowance, and seen him off to India, 
that their handsome boy, with common prudence,
swim gallantly enough down the current, in spite of 
dangerous brass-pots.
But alas I Dolly, instead of being commonly prude
uncommonly imprudent, and already a thorough-going
man of the world, determined to make the present life
what it could of pleasure. He had joined the Iron
Hussars at Lucknow, and found soldiering, with in
of polo-racing, dancing, and shooting, an agreeable f
existence. He was not a bad sort of youth, his
declared, but hot-headed, rash, and easily led into ial
of follies. He was frequently getting into trouble
injudicious treatment of the natives-to put it 
having a heavy hand, and a hot temper. He
"mucker " over the big yearly races, he fell into a
monetary scrape through which his comrades pull
gallantly, but he would not suffer any comrade to d
him from the meshes of pretty Miss Smithson, the 
of a retired old barrack sergeant. He had given 
taken advice (and loans) so often, that he was resolv
firm for once, and show them all-meaning his 
officers and acquaintances-that he was not a weak-
idiot, who did not know his own mind, and who was
to be in leading-strings, like a good little boy. No,
made a stand. (Unfortunately, Dolly was gener
when he ought to have yielded, and vice versa.) 
interfere in other fellows' private affairs ? he d
furiously; then why should other fellows meddle
concerns ? Lottie Smithson was as much a lady as
the stuck-up old cats who were jealous of her.
quite in society-that is to say, she went to church
band, to the reading-room, to public concerts, and a
tion balls. Whatever her manners and breeding mig



<pb n="45"/>
MR. CARWITHREA"' PAST. 
be desired, one thing was undeniable: her beauty.
was small and dark, with a rose-leaf complexion, and
features-a curious contrast to her burly sire, with
urple face, and coarse but shrewd countenance.
r. Smithson said he was a gentleman by birth, but this
eent was generally supposed to be a fiction. Nothing
his manners, appearance, or tastes, displayed even a shred
good breeding. He had "got on," he declared, had saved
ey, had made lucky investments in some Indian mills;
ay rate, he was now the possessor of a neat little bunga-
in Dilkoshd, a pony-cart, and a pretty daughter. Lottie
half-educated, vain, and romantic. She could sing,
ie, we have missed you," and "Rosalie, the Prairie
er," with an exquisite untrained voice. She danced
a fairy. She could do her hair in various ways, and
e herself look charming when he dropped in for tea, and
for an atrocious dinner; but Dolly was in love in those
and did not know what he was eating. Opposition
fanned a little flame into a blaze. Crafty Papa Smith-
a invitations " to show himself a man," and not under
one's thumb. Also-last, not least-the beauty and
rtios of the young syren herself had had their due
t. Miss Smithson needed no bidding to fall down and
e this handsome young hussar, and to Dolly, who was
med to be somewhat ruthlessly snubbed at mess, this
guised worship was delicious. He endured with stoicism
brother officers' chaff and their gratuitous advice; the
el's wife had talked to him like a mother, and spoken
his youth, the girl's undesirable connections, his father's
Pointment; and Dolly had assured her there was
g in the story, it was only a bit of ill-natured station
p, and turned the subject into a joke. He had not the
courage to give Lottie up, or to avow the truth; but
it came to his ears that the colonel had sent in his
for the depot at home, and that he was to sail in the
trooper, love, stubbornness, old Smithson's exhortations,
laddening taunts carried the day, and one morning he
into the cantonment church and married Miss Char-
Jane Smithson by special licence, and thought he had
au exceedingly fine and independent action, and shown



<pb n="46"/>
46              A FAMILY LIKENESS. 
that he was not a man to stand any one's nonsense, or to be
kept under any one's thumb. But what about his father-in- 
law's broad and horny digit i
He was subsequently surprised to find that, in conse-
uence of this dashing explit, he was compelled to leave
the regiment. The colonel did not fancy married subalterns,
much less a subaltern who mude an indiscreet alliance I and
the colonel's wife, who cons:dered "the boys" her special
care, could not tolerate young men who told her deliberate
lies. She had affected not tD see Dolly when he swaggered
up to her carriage at the bund. His brother officers had
declined to call upon his wife. He abused all the world
roundly in the bosom of his family, and presently exchanged
into a regiment of Bengal Cavalry, in a distant station, and
departed to another garrison, and another social sphere. At
first all went well. Sodabee was a change for the better.
Here he was treated with unusual consideration by his new
comrades; his wife was visited, and made much of. They 
set up a pretty bungalow, aad a pony-cart, and, had this
pony been the extent of his stable, all would have been well;
but he purchased a couple of third-rate racing animals, and
they ran away with all his ready money. Old bills poured
in; and his pretty little wife proved to be a bad house-
keeper. She could sing nigger melodies from shilling books,
she could braid her hair, she could do tatting; but she
could not make a pudding to save her life, and she could
not keep down the bazar bills, or ever resist buying trash
from passing hawkers. Their money became unpleasantly
scarce. Her health gave way. Dinners were squalid. Dolly 
spent most of his time in the mess, or in driving a fasci-
nating lady friend about the station in his dog-cart. There
ensued scenes of mutual recrimination. Strong language
on one side, tears on the other; and when Mr. Smithson
came to pay a voluntary visit, matters were not improved.
There was no occasion for him to be on his good behaviour
now; he had secured his gentleman son-in-law, and his
Lottie was a real lady, and as good as the best I But young
Dolly seemed to be going the pace-gambling and racing,
and generally playing the deuce. He scolded his daughter
4n-/n ,viraftori fnr nnt mlanancin l hir lhnhnnAd hlt.oar  " An1



<pb n="47"/>
MR. CARWITHEAPS PAST.               47
mcold twist him round her little finger I" he said, "and
es knows you are fool enough I You have a pretty
but not an ounce of brains "  He proceeded to make
completely at home in his son-in-law's establish-
s: secured the best armchair, with his feet on the second
e first read of the paper, smoked all Dolly's prime
and consumed quantities of whisky and water and
well-known station club Madeira; worst of all, he won
'ys money at flukers, gave him unpleasant advice, and
1y made such an uproar in the mess that he had to be
e out-although he was young Carwithen's father-in-
I Dolly was still fond, in a way, of his pretty little
les wife; but he could not tolerate Mr. Smithson, and
lhim so, frankly, to his face, and that worthy took his
uture, carrying off Dolly's best portmanteau, railway-
and silver cigarette-case, and leaving behind him a
ig daughter, a powerful odour of stale tobacco, and
cur-rse.
on after this the baby was born, and its sex And appear-
proved an unqualified disappointment. Mrs. Warry,
dly old neighbour who lived close by, was truly kind
useful at this juncture. She came in and took com-
, made jellies and broth, and was a real Samaritan to
poor helpless, thriftless, delicate girl, who clung to her
o a sheet anchor, though she was not a lady, was enor-
y stout, and undeniably vulgar. And then Mrs. Car-
who was never very robust, caught a chill, and died
suddenly, leaving her untidy bungalow, handsome
, and unwelcome infant, to do the best they could
ut her I The ayah had been right; Dolly had been
bly cut-up for the first two days, when he looked at the
chair, the closed piano, and his wife's tiny rings lying
he dressing..table But at the end of forty-eight hours,
to pull himself together and face facts and duties.
was to be done with the baby? Mrs. Warry-who
Undertaken many tasks-who packed away the dead
belongings, and who made out a list for the auction,
isas Bruce's establishment at Chotah Bilat, and
was approved of and instantly carried out, as has
ftft   In three months' time, Dolly felt once more like



<pb n="48"/>
48             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
a gay young bachelor. The grave in the cemetery and
child m the hills seemed both unreal. He could pa
empty bungalow without a pang, and felt as if the
he had spent there, with frousy servants, meagre me
a piteous wife, had all been part of a horrible nig
He soon returned to his old ways of flirting, racing, g
getting into rows, and running into debt; and, inm
prisingly short time, he fell into yet another scrape.,
was concerned in the ownership and running of a
called "Blue Ruin," which was backed for a large
money. The pony was unmistakably pulled; there
hideous row; the matter was hushed up, for the
the regiment, but Dolly had to go. Dolly was known
a casual sort of chap, but this was quite beyond a jo
Men will stand a good deal. A man may drink, 
bad words, may even, under strong provocation,
fists. He may forget his father and mother, his fi
the wife of his bosom, yea, even his card account;
may not pull a horse. Dolly was desperate when
done it. "Cleared out," as he expressed it, and 
broke;" but, fortunately for him, at this critical j
he came in for a legacy, a modest income, and a cer
of ready money; and was thus enabled to pay
pressing debts, and to take his departure for Eng
was a significant fact that not a soul came down to
way station to see him off, save his bearer,-who had
a comfortable income out of him,-and old Mrs.
with the bill for his wife's tombstone and a packet of
wiches. Three years ago he had arrived in the 
bright-faced boy, with all the world before him, with
start, good health, good looks, and a good opinion of
Now, he was returning a disgraced man, with de
directions and a cloud over his name; without a 
and without a single friend to give him a parting 
and wish him good speed.
But Dolly had still his handsome face, ple
manners, fine old family name, and sufficient money
his club account and tailor. So he made his way int
at home, keeping rather aloof from military men,
need not have been alarmed. Dolly's "Blue Ruin



<pb n="49"/>
SCHOOZ-DAYS                    49
gone further than Bombay. News travelled slowly.
eonvulsed Lucknow would fall flat in London-and
were then sixpence each-and he assured all inquirers
1       e h-ad cut India and the service on account of his
He had tact, and a certain amount of accomplish-
He could warble a song, lead a cotillion organize
festivity, and hold a gun fairly straight. Also he
wie in his generation, and only cultivated people who
be usefl, who would mount him with hounds, give
few days' shooting; or, at worst, ask him to dinner.
a great favourite with ladies, married and single;
_     be never breathed a word to them, or any one, of his
Bgirl at Chotah Bilat. Indeed, he rarely remembered
and  actually forgot to mention her existence when he
for his second wife-rich Miss Gammick. She
in almost every respect from the first Mrs. Car-
_   .   oShe was wealthy, clever, strong-minded, and, above
^       he managed him."  Yes, if dissipated old Joe Smith-
ould have looked out of his grave-e had drunk
*    ric acid in mistake for gin-even he would have been
to admit that she managed him beautifully.
CHAPTER VII.
SH00L-DAYS.
A maid whom there were none to praise
And very few to love."
winters' snows and seventeen south-west mon-
had drifted or pattered on the high zinc roof of St.
s, and that roof still sheltered Dolly Carwithen's
He had never claimed her; he never wrote to
dlatterly transacted business with Miss Bruce in an
aanner, and entirely through his Bombay agents.
arr, as she was called, had been a bright, good- 
and (despite her father's dismal forebodings)
bay, the pet of the whole establishment, from Miss
t the dhoby inclusive; and had found a second
ii xAgnes 1z, the lame governess, who had taught



<pb n="50"/>
50              A FAMILY LIKENESS.
her to walk, to say her prayers and the alphabet, and 
her with all the highest instincts of an English gentle
She was different to her schoolfellows-sturdy girt,
large appetites and loud voices; naturally of a finer
dainty, spirited, and sensitive, and chiefly remarkable
pair of merry eyes and a great cloud of red-brown
flitted about among her companions, like a butter
cabbage garden.  In winter-time, when school bro
and the teachers and pupils went away for a three
holiday, Miss Dix and Juliet were specially drawn t
They had no home, and they stood side by side w
the vast collection of dandies, and the crowds of ch
coolies, who had come to carry the girls away; a
would remain at their post till the very last happy
kissing traveller had been carried round the corner.
two were almost the sole occupants of the great b
ing, with its empty dormitories and silent class-roo
during the cold grey winter days, when snow lay
surrounding mountains, when all the houses and sho
closed, when starving bears and panthers invaded the
malls-the forlorn child and the friendless gover
drawn very closely to one another.
Time went on, and Juliet passed from the sah-
afore stage into a clever, hard-working girl in the
school, with a great talent for music, and a 
immense curiosity respecting her own future.
extremely popular in her class, generous and open
to lavishness, and the very soul of honour, as h
held at school-she never carried tales, broke her
did anything mean. True that she was passionate,
disdainful little ways, and occasionally was notd
to sit in the seat of the scornful; but, then, she had
heart to match her temper, and there was a 
mystery about her-she was surely "somebody," and
firm  belief her schoolfellows gave her the nic
"Lady Juliet."  It was all very well for old girls 
that Juliet Carr was somebody-something more
was demanded by new-comers, who generally c
their cross-examination with the unsparing severity
th tlir age and sex. The last and most searching



<pb n="51"/>
SCHOOL-DA YS                   5S
minatfions had been carried out by Marie de Souza,
w young person, with a greasy black pigtail and
y face, who constituted herself spokeswoman for a
of inquisitive friends on a certain wet holiday.
Where was her mother ? " she demanded of Juliet.
"She was dead," was the answer in a low voice.
And her father ? "
rNo; he lived in England."
What was he ? "
"A gentleman."
Oh, really, only a gentleman I Not a prince or a duke I
she any sisters or brothers ?"
mShe did not know; she thought not."
Thought not I how funny I" screamed Marie. "Did
father ever come to see her ? "
/ Never," replied Juliet, and she felt her face becoming
"Why not ?" persisted her tormentor.
"She did not know."
"Had she any relations in India ?"
"No."
"And why did she stay out here ?"
Ain the same reply in a tremulous whisper, " She did
e de Souza whisked her pigtail, and folded her arms,
looked round her little clique; and, with an air of
gnt inquiry, begged to hear what they thought of
a case, and if they did not admire the cheek of little
giving herself airs. She had better be very " choop "
I don't give myself airs," protested Juliet, indignantly.
Yes, you do   You won't eat fat, or onions, or pepper-
thmrgs good enough for us, your betters. You would
pick up the note one of Grigson's boys threw you, and
are always showing off grand white pocket-handker-
and you carry your head miles up in the air  Has
ne," appealing to her companions, "ever heard of a
wo has no relations at all, and no one to see her, and
Kgets aletter or a cake ?"  She paused, and her chorus
as with one voice-



<pb n="52"/>
52              A FAMI쥾Y LIKENESS.
Never I "
"She could not be a real lady," continued Marie 
ladies, such as they were, always had papas and
and people to see them. She had nobody, and therefore
nobody-she was quite different to them, and must lea
keep her place.
Juliet was about to make some passionate reply, when
door opened and admitted Miss Bruce; and, like magico
sitting dissolved.
Several monotonous years rolled by, and Juliet Car
past seventeen, the leader alike in school and playgr
and the acknowledged beauty of the school. There w
malcontents now; those of former years had fallen 
the spell of her fascinations and charm of manner, and
now her most ardent followers. She was not the uncr
queen of St. Oswald's because she was the longest i
but because she was clever, brilliant, sympathetic, 
born leader-if not of men-of girls. In any eme
the others turned to her instinctively, and never t
vain. 
When the lamp had burst on that never-to-be-forg
night, it was Juliet Carr who alone stood fast, and r
to tear down curtains, to stamp out flames, and to
away with coolest air the smoking remains of the 
all the mischief: and her hands and arms had been
ingly scorched. In the tennis-match against a rival 
lishment, it was Juliet Carr who entered the lists and
the victory. In quarrels she was judge and paifi
she was the soul of their dances and humble attem
theatricals. In dress her taste was unquestioned; s
the universal model; but somehow no one could a
gown, a ribbon, or flower quite as Juliet did, or wear i
such grace. Miss Dix and Miss Bruce recognized the
extraordinary influence with considerable satisfactioni
not a little amusement.
" I went past the summer-house just now," remarkerd&
Bruce to her coadjutor, "and there was Juliet hol
court-that is to say, she was telling some story-and
thirty girls were hanging round her, drinking in every



<pb n="53"/>
SCHOOL-DA YS                     53
more of her than of either of us, Agnes, and value
opinion enormously."
iheae has what the Irish call 'a way with her,' and
most of the school round her little finger. I wonder
idoes it ?" said Miss Dix, thoughtfully.
force of character, a wonderfully sympathetic nature,
;also beauty," returned her friend.
o    think that tells among other girls ? " said Miss
a dubious smile.
am certain of it. Beauty tells with every one-beauty,
, and perhaps a little of what we call her grand
IShe is a good girl, Agnes, and has to thank you
.I wonder what her fate will be ? I am often very
about her ? " and Miss Bruce sighed profoundly.
Why?" remarked her companion, laconically.
ecause she is so remarkable-looking, so clever, and so
t-o out of the common."
If she were stupid and ugly and common, I could under-
our feelings. Her face will be her fortune."
Wat is the good of beauty and accomplishments to a
who has no friends, no home, and who is destined to
with an uncultivated class-her mother's people--
ultimately to marry some worthy clerk or sergeant ?"
Dhe will never do that," protested Miss Dix, indignantly.
does not belong to her mother's class; she could no 
mix with them than oil with water; she is of a different
in mind and manners, an aristocrat to the tips of her
a, and she is the daughter of a mean, selfish hypocrite,
ashamed of her and her plebeian origin. Little does
w that instead of resembling her lowborn relations,
as a sort of mischievous freak, has endowed Juliet
the face and grace of some patrician ancestress. Mr.
en has good blood in his veins."
es. Much good it has done him I I suppose he is
ndoubtedly he is, although I have not heard from him
last three years. His agents remit the money regu-
and I send them a receipt twice a year. I conclude he
the land of the living."



<pb n="54"/>
54              A FAMILY LIKENESS.
" And all Julict's letters have been returned unop
",That is part of his scheme. He wishes to ign
existence. I heard of him indirectly through Miss
the season before last. He is married again, is very
and quite one of the lights of London society, ai
exclusive."
"You did not mention Juliet to these friends, I s:
"No; for if I were to do so, she would be removed
I wonder what she thinks of it all ?"
"When she was younger she was always asking me
her father, and to describe him; now she rarely na
she is too proud; but I think she secretly worships
the same, and hopes for the day when he will come 
her away, like some prince in a fairy-tale."
" Poor child I And she has a wonderful stock of
I always pity her when the letters are handed round; 
seen her eyes fill with tears. Of course there is n
for her."
" I pity her most when the holidays come; that
day is a dreary one for her. But on the whole
amazed at her spirits. She is too proud to show her
to the world. Heredity is wonderful, and asserts
strange ways, but in nothing stranger than in this
girl, brought up in these hills, a girl who is the
daughter of an old barrack sergeant, who has never
what is called society in her life, and yet who has the
tastes, the air, and the manners of an arch-duchess."
"Yes," sighed Miss Bruce. "I have often spoke
about that trick she has of holding her head, as
above every one else; but it is no good. She ca
herselfi; like the deformed man, she was born so."
Miss Bruce's expression that Juliet Carr was e
looking was perfectly just. Quantities of wavy
hair, hazel eyes, pencilled brows, delicate features, and
like a rose leaf combined to produce a tout ensemble
governess often found herself gazing at in involunt
ration. Miss Bruce was secretly annoyed to see
and admiring glances levelled at her seat in church, 
looked poisoned daggers at the group of young 
lined the steps whilst all her young ladies (and o



<pb n="55"/>
SCHOOL-DA YS.
tioular) passed under their critical inspection.
to receive inquiries about "her beauty " even from
she relinquished taking Juliet with her to concerts
; but, to make amends, she gave her the entree
own sitting-room, a charming apartment, with corn-
chairs, artistic prints, fragrant flowers, and an
llant supply of Miss Bruce's sole extravagance, the best
i ines, and many new books. Here, in the quiet cool
ent, with the last mails in her lap, Miss Bruce was
e  moment a happy woman; but she could scarcely
the pages of the Spectator, Saturday, and Athenceum
the same satisfying effect on the sanguine imagina-
f a young creature of seventeen. Be that as it may,
as fully resolved as any abbess of the Middle Ages
rose in her fair garden of girls should blush unseen.
et had occasional fSts of depression-hours when she
the prey of terrible revolt and longing, and when she
ask herself if she was never to look forward to any-
beyond the yearly concert-the examinations and the
up? She had received many warm invitations to
any her schoolfellows, but" the agents "-that great
mysterious power in her life-put a stern veto on any
beyond the walls of St. Oswald's. Was she never to
from the clanging of the inexorable bell ? never to
a peep into the world beyond class-rooms ?  She was
to the fact that a different world existed even at her
a world in which there were young men and maidens,
men and chaperones; also tennis and boating, and picnics
balls.
was the end of April; the rhododendrons were in full
, and made brilliant crimson patches on the wooded
es; lovely wild white roses half veiled the great forest
and cuckoo echoed cuckoo across the smooth green
with, long ever-shifting shadows on its surface-a sur-
nimated with numbers of canoes, outriggers, and
ss. The speckless blue sky overhead formed a refresh-
ntrast to the heavy pall of clouds which hung above
below--clouds for heat, not rain, alas I clouds
were the cause of driving people up to the hills, of
shops, hotels, houses, of sweeping wintry desolation



<pb n="56"/>
56              A FAMILY LIKENESS. 
off the face of the place, and inaugurating the seas
Miss Bruce's young ladies went for their solemn da
menade, they encountered not a few smartly dressed
" dandies," or young men on ponies, bound for various
parties and at homes; and as they walked in the 
of the upper mall the strains of the band at the 
rooms, and the clatter of ponies at polo, ascended to
and envious ears.
Sometimes at night, when the soft Indian dusk had
Juliet would sit at her open window and survey 
lake the winding train of lanterns like fireflies, d
where stalwart hill-men were carrying fair burthens
dinner at Government House, or down to balls at the
rooms; and who can blame her that, as she sat res
elbows on the window ledge, and following the po
with fascinated eyes, she breathed more than one
envy and discontent. Occasionally, at long intervals, 
impatience found speech, and her confidante was in
Agnes Dix. One day, as they paced the garden 
the governess leaning on her favourite pupil's arm, th
began unexpectedly-
"Dixie, don't you think it very strange that I am 1
year after year, and no one has ever come to see me bu
Warry ?  No one writes to me, or even asks for me,
Christmas to Christmas."
" At any rate, you are paid for most punctually," re
Miss Dix, who kept the accounts. " I wish every o
settled for as regularly; and this shows that some
thinking of you."
" The agents I" exclaimed the girl, contemptuously. 
what is payment ? "
"It is a good deal, my dear," rejoined the go
emphatically.
"What reason can my father have for keep
here ?"
"You are no worse off than French girls, who never
their convents till they are grown up; and I sup
wishes you to be well educated, and I must say you
credit, Juliet. I was very proud of your papers at t
exam."



<pb n="57"/>
MRS. WARR Y.                    57
B i the good of half the things I know ? It is far
rtant for me to know a little about my people. I
I have any people ? " and she halted and transfixed
nion with a pair of searching bright eyes. "Do
Imow what you know yourself-that you have a father
stepmother," rejoined the other slowly.
hps my stepmother does not wish to have me. Per-
m father is poor-and waits until I am what is called
kI-to send out money to fetch me."
hps," echoed Miss Dix, mendaciously.
ut no matter how poor he may be, he might write-a
only costs twopence halfpenny."
Dix bent her head in assent.
metimes I feel so wretched, so hopeless, so alone-that
lmy, outside St. Oswald's, as if I was not wanted in the
and eighteen years is a long time to be at school. On
her hand, sometimes, indeed most often, I feel quite
ine-I have my ups and downs-I feel that I am
ody, or going to be somebody, that I have delightful
in store. You may think I am crazy, or it may be the
ating hill air, but often I seem to hear a voice saying,
arr, your father is in the drawing-room.'" 
es Dix looked down and held her peace. In her
that message would never be given to the anxious
beside her.
CHAPTER VIII.
MRS. WARRY.
I A good, familiar creature."
Othel/o.
of Miss Carwithen's school-days would be incom-
were Mrs. Warry, her only friend, her only visitor
the outer world, omitted. One of the gibes most
Y flung at Juliet had been that no one ever came to
.T*his stigma was removed once for all by the
obe-forgotten descent of Mrs. Warry-the good-



<pb n="58"/>
58              A FAMILzY LIKENESS
natured neighbour who had wound up Dolly 
domestic affairs. Ten years after she had been
of sending Miss Bruce a permanent boarder, she
Chotah Bilat, and established herself in one of
hotels, where her colloquial Hindustanee and her
knowledge of Indian servants' "ways" ensured
highest attention and respect. She, however, r
a scant supply of either when she came panting
Oswald's to make inquiries about "the little girl
had left there."
"Who," thought Miss Bruce, "can this fat,
looking old woman be ? " surveying her visitor as
flowed the sofa, fanning herself with a recent num
Scientijic American. She was preposterously stout,
a grass-green silk dress, a maroon plush mantle, a bl
and a pair of yellow thread gloves inches too lo
short, fat fingers.
" I came to ask about Carwithen's little girl," 
at last. "She is here still ?"
"Oh yes," replied Miss Bruce. "She has b
for ten years."
"He has never given no sign of sending 
suppose ? "
"No, not up to the present."
"No, nor won't, no more nor paying me what,
me for his wife's funeral expenses and headstone
beloved and all I-and the servants' wages; but I
let the poor creatures be at the loss. Well, I sup
see her ? "
" Oh yes, certainly."
" She ought to be a precttie child. Juliet is her n
"Yes, we call her Juliet Car; her father thought
"Oh, deed he? whatt a rascal I First he d
child, then he steals half her name; but I'll look 
I can put me hand on copies of the registers; s':i
not think he will be playing any tricks on Ferna
for he won't."
"Well, for the present, Mrs. Warry, please m
to the child; call her Carr, and don't talk to her 
father more than is quite necessary. Your truet



<pb n="59"/>
MRS. HARRY.                    59
diturb her mind; she is at present quite
_     g^ m$l she may come out with me, and spend the
? I'm stopping at the new hotel."
item       Bsurveyed Mrs. Warry with doubtful eyes.
Craaid I cannot permit that; I don't allow my
days out, unless with people with whom I am
hoquamted, or who are friends of their parents."
am I ?" demanded Mrs. Warry, suddenly
voice. "Aren't you personally acquainted with
I seeting on your sofer this blessed minute ?
_  d   M ^s ^of parents-I closed her mother's eyes, and
fathers bills. I don't know what you call thatt I
_-lp..I'm not respectable enough for a girl as has
up by Miss Bruce I Anyway, I'm as respect-
mother was-and a deal more respectable than
r,       1or grandfather  Miss Minx, at Mussouri, never
pupils to me; and I know heepes of folks as has
here-and I'll take good care to let them
I thinks of this establishment I"
was Miss Bruce's dreaded rival, and had already
of her best-paying pupils. This formidable
with the loud voice and angry eyes was possibly
theland; therefore, with the best grace she could
_Mis Bruce succumbed to her wishes, and within
hour Mrs. Warry departed, gingerly leading forth
"the little Carwithen girl" to spend the day.
delighted with Juliet, with her looks, voice, air,
_ emL. At first she had insisted on her company
a spirit of contradiction and opposition than from
else; but the child's beauty, naive remarks, and
de for small gifts, threw her into a transport of
ur. She beamed with complacency when the
t creature stroked and admired her pretty
and literally swelled with pride when she noticed
at the table 'h6te fixed on the lovely little girl
a girl with a mane of bronzy hair, and clearly
features-not a grandchild, surely ?
was the beginning of a new era for Juliet. She
out by Mrs. Warry each half-holiday, and carried
/EH                           ^^^



<pb n="60"/>
60              A FAMIL Y LIKENESS
about to every description of entertainment. She
with toys, sweets, and smart new clothes of a bri
Miss Bruce was amused one day to discover the
principal and most expensive milliner's a  hot
Mrs. Warry, seated in state, was gravely superi
shopwoman trying costumes on Juliet,-over her 
day frock. Each proved to be so becoming that 
failing to make up her mind, gave an imperial
them all, hearing which, Miss Bruce interfered
strated, saying-
"But, my dear Mrs. Warry, she could not wear
in the next five years 1 She is growing too--"
"Oh, whatt matter ? She can wear them every
no way of spending my money as pleases me so w
lots of house propertee in the Doon, and no one
after me, except a nephew in the commissariat as
abide."
" Well, of course it is very good of you to be so
to Juliet," said Miss Bruce; "but I am afraid
will give her a taste for dress "-pointing to where
was trying on a large fancy hat-" and make her
"There'll be no making, or giving, much neede
way to her mother's daughter 1" was the sarcastic
" Then I can only hope she won't take after her
and I really beg you will reduce your order
least half."
Well, maybe you are right, especiallee as I'm
soon, and couldn't see the frocks on her; but 
the money in another way."
It would have astonished Mrs. Warry's connec
held her in great terror-to have witnessed her
subjugation to this fair-skinned little girl, to hear
ing her great mind down from share lists and h
and tenants, and "propertee," generally, and
most serious attention to dolls' names, and
ball gowns.
She turned Juliet's head a good deal, and M
not sorry when she finally took her departure. 
correspond with Juliet, beyond a Christmas and
card, if they can be considered to constitute a 



<pb n="61"/>
AIRS. WARRY.                    6x
People declared that Mrs. Warry was unable to write,
was untrue. She hated writing, that was all. After
or two the cards ceased to arrive, and Miss Bruce
the conclusion that Mrs. Warry had either forgotten
or departed this life. Neither of which events
her personally the smallest pang of regret.
while Juliet was seventeen-the queen, the beauty,
aple of the school; and it was therefore really too
that, at the very beginning of what promised to
inusually gay season, she should have a vulgar,
visiting-card presented to her, on which was in-
"Mrs. Warry," come back again at the most un-
us time, to turn the girl's head with folly and
-and to find Mrs. Warry, with bonnet-strings
occupying the roomiest armchair in the drawing-
with the air of a proprietor.
ell, here I am again, you see," she remarked, with
chuckle. "I thought I'd give Chotah Bilat a turn
r and look up Juliet. How is she ?"
y well, thank you."
sign of being sent for, of course ?"
Bruce shook her head. "You have not been here
ong time, Mrs. Warry."
0; but I've been home -I mean England" (Mrs.
' home, the home of her ancestors, was generally
to be Calcutta), "and to France too."
how did you like it ? "
ell, not much. The beds are cruelly small in France;
could not talk the language, and was always catching
at the Hindustanee. Ay, and it was hot I And I
the punkah; and there was hardly a bath would
England ? "
gland was better. But there's no place like India,
mind. I must say I liked the theatres in London
uch. I used to laugh and cry, till they nearly put
nd one night, who do you think I saw at a play ?
Ily Carwithen and his second wife. He was very
ehanged, considering; and she was just a blaze of
They were in a box, and I was in the pect. I like



<pb n="62"/>
62              A FAMIL Y LIKENESS.
it; there's no grand manners wanted, and no
I found myself, by luck, next to Dolly's foot
got talking, and I gave him peppermint sweeties
he took me for a cook-ha, ha I But we got very
he was a nice young man. He told me about
was never married before. Oh, dearie me, no I
for society, and so is she. She had a lord in the
them, and looked as if she could eat him. And
upper hand of Dolly. Eh, but he is a fine 
now, Miss Bruce, I hear that Miss Juliet has go
great beantee. She can't be left at school. Her
will burst, with all it's holding. And I've an off
you, if the girl is what I thought she'd turn out.'
" An offer, Mrs. Warry ?"
"Yes; she has no belongings as want her,
belongings as I want; and why shouldn't I adopt
daughter ? "
" Your daughter I" gasped Miss Bruce.
"Yes; and a good thing for her, too. She'
plentee of money, plentee of life, and societee.
I must have a look at her first; and, supposing
for her, I'll take the look now."
CHAPTER IX.
A LADY WITH A GOOD MEMBOILY. 
"A lovely apparition sent
To be a moment's ornament."
THE yearly concert at St. Oswald's took place at
ning of the season, and the practising that went 
weeks and weeks, on pianos of various ages,
formers to match, was absolutely maddening;
to an end at last. The printed programmes
rooms were decorated, and the great first-claa
into a concert hall, with forms across it. At the
were chairs and armchairs for the party from



<pb n="63"/>
1   DDY WITH A GOOD MEAMORY.              63
a small sofa, entirely reserved (by desire) for
of Mrs. Warry. A sort of stage had been erected
with plants. The walls were embellished
y red and young bamboo; the girls got out their
and had a pair of cew gloves apiece, and all
'ons were complete. By five o'clock every seat and
vim oeoupied, and the gravel sweep outside displayed
graifying mob of ponies, dandies, and jampannies.
fis t piece, played simultaneously on four pianos by
llittle girls, nearly lifted the roof off the room. Then
duet, rather a feeble performance, for Lottie Smidt
from fright. Miss Bruce fidgeted with her new
;gloves, and there was a hot spot on either cheek;
fiasco would be fatal to her concert.  But here
de Souza appeared upon the stage; a girl who had
esmallest doubt about herself-sallow and thin, in
red merino, with a large blue ring on her bony yellow
and her black hair shining like patent leather. She
a roll of music in her hand, and surveyed the com-
with an encouraging smile, that plainly said, "  ow
are going to have a treat."  Miss De Souza settled
leisurely at the instrument, carefully arranged her
looked at the pedals, and then suddenly roused up her
*,~id audience with a bang which shook every flowerpot
the stage I
was the pianist par ezcellence of St. Oswald's, and
splendidly in a hard, loud, mechanical style. Her
flew over the keys, and tore up and down the bass
treble, with a precision, dexterity, and strength that
edf he rlisteners.  The piece under execution was
e, Sweet ome,' by Thalberg, and, when it was con-
d, Marie received universal applause - applause the
more of astonishment than pleasure. And Marie
and bowed, and backed herself off the stage, leaving
ano a Twreck.
rvellous 1, exclaimed a lady in the front row.  "  I
er how she does it ?  What wrist power I "
_tm glad it was not my piano," said another.
_ now tlhere ensued the usual pause.  People talked,
! odded to frinllds and fluttered programmes, and said



<pb n="64"/>
04              A PAMILY LtA.tN&5 f
"it was getting uncommonly hot-could one
Would there be tea ? Did any one know wh^
ordinary old person was, with all the fruit on
(Mrs. Warry was wearing a Parisian bo
composed of red-glass currants.)
All at once there was a startling silence;
ceased to talk and yawn and rattle papers and
Who was this divine creature now standing
dressed in white, with a roll of music in her
She was slight, fair, and young, and held he
air of a princess. She was a lady. How in the
that was unexpected came this beautiful girl
Oswald's, a school ostensibly devoted to the
masses ? Here was unmistakably a daughter of
Programmes were eagerly referred to. The a
the list was-" Song,' Serenade by Schubert,'
Carr."  In another moment a voice, the proper
to such a face, was swelling through the ro
every heart-a rich, pure mezzo soprano, sr
and sweet, coming from such youthful lips. 
chords of the accompaniment had gradually
there was a moment's expressive silence, and
of enthusiastic applause broke forth. Such a
hands and hammering of sticks and parasols; in
a tumultuous uproar had never been heard under
St. Oswald's-not even on a wet half-holiday I
was encored and re-encored, flowers and bouquets
to her, and the previously bored audience would
kept Miss Carr on the stage for the remainder 
noon; but this, of course, could not be permit
de Souza, peeping through a hole in the cur
flaming eye, felt her heart grow hot within her.,
not been encored, and she had not been 1
bouquets; yet she had played her piece with
fault, and had practised four hours a day for the
weeks. It was disgusting-this scene of ano
triumphs.
During the interval Miss Bruce was overw_
compliments, and surrounded by questioners 
Carr; but all inquiries were politely and cleverly



<pb n="65"/>
*2rmk  A GOOD MEMORY.            65
_ m     of the girkl  She had been with them
woman, on a front sofa, beamed and 
anod took such a lion's share of the con-
_ 1.y   , Bthat she left an impression on mostf
bat in this gaudily dressed old enthusiast
m~  r    relation to the fair songstress; which
B.ewildered and mystified them  to the last
onoert was concluded, and the adience au  were
g and Miss Bruce, flushed and complacent, was
erself that it was a over, and well
, urisd at being accosted by a sharp-looking
Manders.
~3bly, Miss Bruce," she said, in an offhand
just wanted to ask you a little question about
that the whole of her name ? "
you mean ? " said Miss Bruce, brusquely.
mean what I say. Is her name Carr, or does
imagine, lack two syllables ? " and she dropped
a mysterious whisper.
name she has gone by for eighteen years," said
ytifflyt and looking full into Mrs. Manders'
bly," was the unabashed rejoinder; " but I
the rest of it. Is she not the daughter of Dolly
p " still speaking in a cautious undertone.
e was staggered by this blunt question, hesitated,
rticulated a faint, reluctant " Yes."
was certain of it I She is so like him. I heard
sent the child up here, and it all came back to
e was singing. I was in Lucknow when there
hubbub about his marriage with Lotty Smith-
, silly little thing. Her daughter is pretty, but
mistaken if she is silly."
re quite right. She is a clever girl, with a
y fine character."
she does not take after her father; he has a very
He seems to have forgotten her, forgotten that
N ow I understand why he avoids Anglo-
Y                        I 



<pb n="66"/>
66             A FAMILY LIKENESS
Indian acquaintances; and I have not forgotten. .
is one thing upon which I pride myself, it is
memory-both for facts and faces."
"I trust you will keep your discovery to yo
Manders," said Miss Bruce, gravely.
" Yes, if you will tell me why I am to do so."
" Because Mir. Carwithen does not wish his r
talked of, or it to be known that he has a daght
If this came to his ears, he would remove her at'
some out-of-the-way place; and she has
among us." 
,' And nowhere else, I suppose I I wish I cod
her. I have taken a great fancy to her face, man
often take fancies. I only came up for ten days
down to-morrow. However, a line to you will al
her. She ought to marry well."
"Oh, my dear Mrs. Manders, she is only eig
would not put such ideas into her head ?" said
in dismay.
"No; I shall leave that to some young man.
like her, with her face and voice, should marry
I have quite fallen in love with her myself. Well,
I have enjoyed your concert most thoroughly;"
Manders bustled out to her dandy, was hoisted
shoulders by four stout jampannies, and presentl
Mrs. Warry remained by special invitation to
remainder of the evening at St. Oswald's. She
made up her mind that Juliet was to be her'
daughter, and her pride and triumph at her rect
could not possibly have been surpassed had she
girl's own mother or grandmother.
She had a long talk over the matter with Mis
she made a toilette in that lady's chamber.
"I'm ready to do anything to please her," she
"I can't take me eyes off her. I declare I never
a beauty in my life. I'll rent a fine house at
get her into all the first society. I'll get her
Paris. I'll get her an English pony, and a
She shall go by her own name-Carwithen ;--it'



<pb n="67"/>
A LADY WTITH A GOOD MEMORY.              67
( arr. I procured copies of the registers in case of any
Ofs, and paid five rupees each, and I brought them
..producing a small paper bundle from her pocket.  I
rit you'd like to look at them."
ere is no harm in having them, at any rate," said
Brce, as she opened the packet, and glanced over the
No. And now the sooner I can have Juliet the better
be pleased. You write to Carwithen this mail, and tell
as a lady offers to take his daughter off his hands for
and ever, that I will relieve him of all trouble and
and will leave her a fortune of two lacs of rupees;
he need never hear her name again. You will write and
him all this, won't you ? " said the old woman with
ulous eagerness.
"Yes, I will; and meanwhile you will speak to Juliet
sef," said Miss Bruce, impressively.
"Oh, I don't think there will be any trouble with her.
knows me of old. She knows she will have the best
everything; all a young girl wants-clothes and jewels,
amusements and balls; and I know what I want-a
lhter as will do me credit. You will write by next mail
arwithen, and tell him to wire reply; I'll pay," con-
ed Mrs. Warry, volubly. "You may give my name.
laps it will be best. He will remember as I knew the
d an infant, and remember all the money he owes me,
he will see that out of her own family I've the best right
he girl."
*'Very well, Mrs. Warry," acquiesced Miss Bruce; "I
do whatever you wish; and though we shall be very
to lose Juliet, I would not for a moment stand in her
ywhen she is offered a good home. This school must be
ken up some day, and may possibly be broken up before
and I should be thankful to know that Juliet was
vided for-and well provided for I Come, there is the
bell; let us go.  I am having a little party in my
room: some of the elder girls-Marie and Juliet-
two of the governesses."
Of this party Mrs. Wan  proved the life and soul. She
niusually excited, talked and laughed, and told stories,



<pb n="68"/>
68             A FAMILY LIKENESS,
and was in extraordinary spirits; she even went so
to tender her milliner's address, and to offer to sing a
She stroked and petted Juliet whenever she came near
and watched her every movement with intense
and complacency.
When ten o'clock struck, and, carefully wrapped
was packed in her dandy by Miss Bruce and Juliet, her
words were, "Now, Miss Bruce, don't forget what I!
you, and your promise. The mail goes out on Thursd
But alas for human projects I On Thursday the big
bags coming down the post-office hill met the fune
Mrs. Warry on its way to the cemetery.  She had
suddenly of apoplexy the morning after the concerti
Juliet Carwithen had lost one of her few friends.
CHAPTER X.
"WHAT IS TO BECOME OF ME ? "
"What shall, alas I become of me ?"
J. LYLY"
JULIET felt Mrs. Warry's death very much, though she
fifty years her senior, and was in the opinion of many 
a fat, vulgar old woman, with an over-bearing manner
sharp tongue. She had never been sharp or rude to Ju
never shown her anything but affection and generosity,
Juliet mourned her accordingly. Worldly Miss Bruce
hoped that Mrs. Warry's generosity would extend to
favourite, even after her death; but, alas I there waS
will, and the two lacs of rupees went to gladden the 
the detested nephew in the commissariat.
The concert had been long a triumph of the past; A
was approaching, and it was a matter of common
among the girls that Miss Bruce's jampannies were
wearing their shabby last year's suits, and that she had'
got herself a new bonnet since Christmas. It was 
that she had refused eleven fresh boarders, had pro
her parrot to the parson's little boy, and found a comf



<pb n="69"/>
t"W WIAT IS TO BECOME OF ME I"             69
e situation for the school cat. What did it all mean ?
had come over Miss Bruce ?     There was much
ecation on the subject; but one evening all wondering
d whispering was finally set at rest. Juliet Carwithen
sent for to Miss Bruce's private sitting-room. This
no uncommon occurrence, but it was unusual for Juliet
remain away an hour, especially on dancing night, when
her partners were waiting, and still more unusual for her
to return looking as white as a sheet, and with traces of
recent tears upon her face. Her companions crowded round
with one accord, confident that she was the bearer of
Some special tidings. She had been Miss Bruce's mouth-
piece more than once. Juliet waved her hand with a quick
imperative gesture to the performer at the piano, and in an
instant there was a silence suitable to the proverbial pin.
BA Juliet stood in the middle of the room, every eye fixed
upon her expectantly, there was a suppressed thrill of excite-
ment among the girls who swarmed round her. Judging
by her face, Juliet was the bearer of bad news.
; "Some one is dead / " shrieked Marie de Souza. " You
come to tell us of a death ? "
l "No," with a somewhat hysterical laugh, "I come to
tell you of a wedding. Miss Bruce is to be married at
Ohristmas."
Whereupon there ensued another silence of fully ten
seconds, during which the ticking of the clock was the only
sound.
"This is a joke," shouted Marie. " She is older than my
mother I "
"It is an old affair," began Juliet.
"So I should think," sneered Marie.
"Don't interrupt," broke in several voices. "Go on,
Juliet; tell us everything."
" Of course you are all surprised; but I am sure you will
be glad Miss Bruce is able to give up teaching and settle
down into a home of her own in England."
.In her old age," added Marie the irrepressible, with
"Piteful emphasis.
l   Then, won't she be married out here ? When is it to
be ? Whom is she going to marry ? What is to be done with



<pb n="70"/>
70             A FAMIL Y LIKENESS.
the school ? " were questions volleyed at Juliet all at
and a perfect Babel ensued.
"The school is sold for an hotel, and breaks up
November. Miss Bruce will be married at home; Miq
is to live with her," explained Juliet by degrees. "  I
anything else you wish to know ? "
"Yes," answered a girl promptly.  "Pray what
become of you ?"
" Oh,-I-I- " and her voice trembled a little-" I 
here next week; the agents have found another home
me. I am going to live near Durano, about forty mile
with some people of the name of Noote."
At this information there instantly arose a violent ola
of tongues. A dozen voices at once demanded why
could not come home with them, and stay for months.
months, or years ?  Why should she mind the ag
They would not allow her to go to these strangers,
above all, she must not think of going anywhere before
school broke up. She must go to Tundla with 
Preston, to Calcitta with Kitty Collins, to Basaule
Freda Muller, to Benares with Charlotte Vince.
Leaving Juliet the centre of a buzzing swarm of inq
tive, eager, hospitable companions, urging, protesting,
wailing, we go back to her interview with Miss Bruce.
She found her teacher slowly pacing her sanctum,
she opened the door Miss Bruce halted in the middle of
room, and said-
" So you have come at last I and I have been wal
and down trying to make up my mind to tell you
thing, and searching for words to tell it in. Yes, w
have to say will surprise you very much. Are you pre
Juliet, to be immensely astonished ? "
" Yes, I am, I think; but I scarcely know how it fe
be immensely astonished," replied the girl, with a sigh.
"I want you to be my Mercury to the school, Juliet,
to tell them that I am going to be married. I see you
scarcely credit your ears; and no wonder, child. I I
quite an old woman to you ?"
"Oh no, Miss Bruce," faltered Juliet, whose breath 
been momentarily taken away.



<pb n="71"/>
66 WHAT IS TO BECOME OF ME 1"            71
But oh yes, Juliet; and why not? It is an ancient
Years and years ago we were engaged; there was
sal barrier, want of money, and it was broken off, and
went one way and I another. Three years ago, when I
at home, we met again; finally, six months ago he
o  He is well off now, and-and--  "  Miss Bruce
herself blushing and stammering, beneath the girl's
innocent, interested eyes. It would be so much more
sing for this beautiful young thing to be confiding a love-
to her, than to be the repository of one-such an old,
one-from a hard-featured elderly woman like herself.
"We are connections," she went on, "and have known
h other all our lives. His name is Radford-Edgar
ford-and he is a good man-too good for me."
^Oh, Miss Bruce I " expostulated her listener.
Yes, this battling for my living out here alone has made
hard and calculating and worldly, and oh so different to
hat I once was. We shall be well off, and Agnes is to live
ith us. I hope to have a nice little house in the cool,
n country at home, and a flower garden, and all the
west books, and I ought to be very happy."
"And will you be married out here, at Chotah Bilat ?"
" Oh dear me I a thousand times no. Fancy the scene-
the girls as spectators I I am giving up the house at the
of the term, and we are to be married in London early
Hi the new year."
"I hope you will be very happy, Miss Bruce," said Juliet,
imidly. She had never seen any one who was engaged to
e married before, and was a little awed. "It was very
_ood of you to tell me first;" and then, suddenly turning
le, as if struck by an after-thought, she added-" What
to become of me ? "
"Oh yes, yes," rather nervously, and now sitting down.
That is all settled; in fact, everything has been arranged
olle time ago, but I did not like to upset the girls' minds
the middle of the term."
A   udse.
And--about me?" repeated her companion, bending
her, and gazing at her with shining eyes, in which
deferred burnt as with a steady flame.



<pb n="72"/>
72              A FAMILY LZIKENESS.
"Of course if Mrs. Warry had lived there would
been no difficulty. However, I wrote most fully to
father some months ago, and told him of the step I
templated, and asked him if he would now receive you
give you a home ?"
" And what did he say ?" inquired Juliet, turning a
with crimson cheeks and sparkling eyes on her comp
and expecting that the next sentence would convey
release.
"Dearest Juliet," taking her hand, "I am sorry to
you that he said no. I can't bear to hurt you, but you
hear the truth at last. I hate to destroy your inn
illusion-your father is a heartless, unnatural parent*"
" Oh, Miss Bruce, don't," snatching both her hands
and holding them up, as if to ward off some blow. '
no, no I "
"But yes; you must look at facts, my dear; you
eighteen, and can reflect and reason-at any rate, to
extent."
"I don't wish to reflect and reason about my fa
said the girl, firing up.
"Nevertheless, I beg you will listen to me, if ony
a few moments, my dear. Why has he left you out
for eighteen years-deserted you, in short ? Simply be
he is ashamed of his first marriage, and afraid to acknow
you to his new wife."
" Who was my own mother ?" inquired the girl,
white face.
"Her name was Smithson. She was extremely
but not a lady by birth.   Her father was a
sergeant."
Juliet became very red, then pale to the lips.
"Your father has thousands a year, Juliet; he 
you fifty pounds. He takes no interest in you or
affairs."
"And his messages in your letters ?" said Juliet,
stifled voice.
"They were made up by me-merely wicked fction
mine. I confess my sin, and beg you will forgive me, 
but I had not the heart to withstand your pleading



<pb n="73"/>
"WHAT IS TO BECOME OF MER"                  73
to tell you when I had a letter that there was no mention
_yoa. I meant well; that is my only excuse. As for your
ly written letters, over which you spent such time and
and your yearly present you stitched at for months-
here," suddenly pulling out a drawer, " they have never
this house."
"Why ?" demanded the girl, sharply.
"Because your father returned several, and said he did
wish to receive them. He was afraid his wife might
them, and ask awkward questions." 
"Miss Brace," said Juliet, after a moment's silence, "you
y think me a rude, ungrateful girl, but I cannot believe
; no, I cannot. You admit that you have deceived
DeeA."
"Yes; to spare you pain, my dear child. I would be
elast to deceive you or come between you and a loving
her and a happy home."
"Give me some proof. Show me something in his own
ting," said Juliet, in a choked voice.
"I have nothing but his last letter-he has not written to
for several years-and that I cannot show you."
"You dare not."
Miss Bruce flushed angrily. " Juliet, have you gone mad ?
ow dare you speak to me in such a manner ? It was to
you; but, if you insist--"
"I do insist," she answered passionately.
Very well; I wash my hands of the matter. You shall
the letter, read the letter, and-regret it all your
As Juliet stood waiting for some proof which might
ge the whole current of her life-stood with a white
eand twitching lips-Miss Bruce was searching hastily in
big desk, and presently snatched out a letter, and almost
it at Juliet. She did not often lose her temper, but
anger was hot within her. It seemed hard that this
-willed, romantic girl should make light of her word-
et all the years she had been under her roof, cherished
ost as her own child, and yet pin her entire faith on her
dched, heartless parent.
"That is the letter, read it for yourself; you know the
i~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 



<pb n="74"/>
74             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
handwriting, and when you have mastered the con
may keep it."
Juliet opened it instantly, it was quite a long e
ran as follows:-
"DEAR MADAM,
" Your news was indeed a most unwelcome
as I had looked to you to give J. a home for y
I have always found you most trustworthy and
She must now find an asylum elsewhere, but not
roof. My wife is not aware of her existence, and 
feel no more affection for her than for a stranger
the street; she is merely the unpleasant reminder
horrible mistake.  You will think I am  an
monster; but recollect that I have not seen the girl
was a hideous infant, and as such I must always
I find it impossible to realize that she is a grown-np:
person. Even if I were to bring her home, and
upon my family, she would be unhappy and out of 
her ideas are Indian, her accent 'chee, chee,' her
and customs that of the lower (her mother's) co
would be wretched with us, and we should be wret
her. I can picture her in my mind's eye sandy and
her hair plastered with cocoa-nut oil, a lumpy fi
shoes, bad corsets, playing a little and giggling a  |
I am convinced she is fond of sweets, cheap scent, 
powder. She has no more brains than a rabbit, and
to be in love (naturally you know nothing about t1
and doubtless a prey to unrequited affection. She 
say, I am positive. How can she help herself ?
firm believer in heredity, and it is in the blood. It
good of you to write of her in such glowing t
permit me to remind you, my dear madam, that
not had an opportunity of seeing well-bor En
for the last twenty years-pray excuse my candid 
your establishment is patronized by tradespeople. 
any rate not dark, and' parmi les aveugles,-yon
rest. She is in her proper place-her native co
there I wish her to remain. I am happy to tell
my agents have discovered another excellent home



<pb n="75"/>
"_ WHAT IS TO BECOME OF ME       "        75
peable elderly couple are most anxious to receive her,
Bay as they happen to be connections on her mother's
Captain Noote is a retired officer, farming his own
in a most healthy and delightful part of Kumaon;
Noote is a cheerful, energetic person, who says she will
*  mother to the girl; in short, the arrangement is in
way desirable, and J. is far better off than thousands
other young women who have to go out and earn their
living. I am to pay sixty pounds for her maintenance,
to allow her ten pounds per annum for dress and pocket-
*   She will find it amply sufficient; for, as there are
ly to be any balls or dinner-parties in the neighbour-
she won't require many evening dresses. Should she
, as no doubt, with her charms, she is bound to do "-
Mr. Carwithen meant to be sarcastic-" some clerk
worthy young sergeant, I shall endow her with two
sand pounds (not rupees), shall think I have done my
handsomely, and wash my hands of her for ever. I
you registered a watch, brooch, and pair of earrings
J.-a little showy, perhaps; but young men are so
enary nowadays that they require more bait than a
able appearance, and in these gauds they will see signs
tokens that her face is not her sole fortune. When I
that J. is about to follow your example, it will be the
news she can possibly impart; needless to assure you
it will not be difficult to obtain my consent, for once
changes her name and state she will have no further
on, dear madam,
"Yours most faithfully,
"A. CAIWITHEN."



<pb n="76"/>
76             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
CHAPTER XI.
OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN.
"From good to bad."
SPrNS         #    _
JULIET read her father's letter over rapidly at
quick catchings of the breath, and half-subdued 
second perusal of it was more deliberate, as if
committing it to memory. And when she raised 
and handed it back to Miss Bruce, it seemed to that
if something had gone out of the girl's face. What 
look of gay innocent childhood, the careless shallow
of the schoolgirl. In that bitter moment all Juliet's 
her fairy palace, her secretly worshipped idol, had'
shattered into atoms.
" Here are the things," said Miss Bruce, producing
cases, and opening them hastily.
"Don't-don't show them to me I" cried her pu
sionately. "Give them away; throw them into the
And she burst into tears, and covered her face
slender hands.
"Juliet, my love, if you wish, I will send them 
am sorry now I showed you that letter. I was a
woman to be angry because you did not trust me.
you to curb your temper, and I cannot curb my own.
know how brusque I am, and I am afraid I tore a
veil too rudely from your eyes."
Juliet's sobs were her only reply.
"He is not worth a tear, my dear. It seems a 
ing thing to say to a girl of her own father; but
true."
"In future I shall earn my own living," burst out
suddenly. " I will owe nothing to him."
" My dear child, you are talking folly. What could
do ?"
"Teach-give music lessons-at first."
"No, no; I know what a struggle teaching is.
shall never share my experience, nor know what it is,



<pb n="77"/>
OUT OF THIE FRYING-PAN. 
pupils do not come. Listen to me, Juliet; I have a
Go to these Nootes; be prudent, self-reliant, and
ant; conjugate the verb 'to wait' for one year. By
time I shall be thoroughly settled.  You shall come
to me for a long, long visit, and we will look out
ng for you-some nice place as companion, or you
turn your voice to account. I am not going to allow
father to carry out his programme, and bury you alive
g these ills. You will see that you will have many
days with me in dear old England."
liet shook her head despondently. " I don't believe I
ever have any happy days. I don't see where they are
come from."
Never have any happy days I this young creature, with
beautiful face, her exquisite voice, and all her golden
,h before her I
"Come, my dear, that is nonsense. You have only one
to wait; and what is one year at your age ? Kee up
rstudies; keep up your singing; and, above all, keep
your heart," kissing her affectionately as she spoke.
erhaps you would rather not go back to the schoolroom
ight-defer your news till another time; but I know
girls would rather hear it from you than any one. How
will miss you I How I shall miss you, dear Juliet;
seem almost like my own child-mine and Agnes's. I
hoped to have kept you with us till the very last; but
d an urgent letter from Mrs. Noote this afternoon which
precipitated everything. She has arranged to receive
this day week. She is actually clamouring to have you.
wishes to take you off my hands to-morrow."
I wonder why ?" exclaimed Juliet; "she has never
me."  Miss Bruce had her own opinion, but wisely
it to herself. "And I am sure I am not the least
ous to go to her."
"You shall not stay with her longer than I can help,
," said her friend as she kissed her again. " We will
over our little plans to-morrow. You had better go to
now; never mind telling the girls to-night."
'ut Juliet was far too excited to think of bed or sleep,
as we have seen, went straight to the first-class room



<pb n="78"/>
78             A FAMILY LIKENESS 
and discharged her piece of news at once among
credulous school-fellows.
It dawned at last, the day of Juliet's departure
Oswald's. Mrs. Noote had sent her bearer to 
and six sturdy paharis, or hill-men, and a somewhat
dandy, as a means of transport to carry her to
home, which was, literally, "over the hills and f
The bearer-a truly villainous-looking person, with
red beard, after the manner of vain, elderly Mu
placed a letter in Juliet's hand and salaamed to
The letter was written with a very scratchy steel 
thin, cheap paper, and the ink had been watered
almost invisible.
"DEAR JULIET (it began),
" I am not going to call you Miss, as you
relation. I send my own dandy for you. The
be one rupee each. We are forty-two miles from y
you must stop all night at Pouch-kala dk bung
start next morning before sunrise. We shall be very
to have you. Be sure you bring your bedding, b
and your own sheets and towels; and if you have a
glass, and a dhurri, so much the better.
"Yours,
"ELIZL N
Juliet read it, and handed it to Miss Brace, who, 
over it, exclaimed-
"I am surprised she does not ask you to bring a
table and sideboard I If you stop at Pouch-kala b
you must take lots of insect-powder I"
" Her spelling is curious," remarked the girl.
"I hope she is not curious in other ways. Be 
guard with these strangers, child. I know nothing
them, beyond the fact that Mrs. Noote's butter has 
class reputation. Your father's agents selected this
for you without any reference to me, and I am sorry
I know no one in Durano. I wish I did, that I 
and ask them to be kind to you. Be discreet,



<pb n="79"/>
OUT OF THE7 FRYING-PAR.              79
about your affairs; lock up your money and your
I must confess that I don't like the look of their
; I trust it's not 'like master, like man I'"
I; don't suppose I shall have many letters to lock up,"
reoined with rather misty eyes.
By dearest Juliet, why, almost every girl in the school
send you reams I And Agnes and I will write to you
ently, and we shall expect volumes from you I Keep
b on your hot temper, my dear child. Keep your mind
employed, be forbearing and amiable, and you'll see
quickly the time will pass ere we meet again.'
half an hour the partings were over. For once, matters
been reversed-instead of Juliet seeing off the whole
ol, the whole school, with tears, huggings, kisses, and
i, had seen off Juliet I For the first time in her
she went, and her fellow-pupils remained behind. Yes;
had done with school, and caught a final glimpse of the
zinc roof as she was carried down the hill, weeping
y behind her veil, whilst the red-bearded bearer stalked
n  beside her, stick in hand, and three grumbling
lies brought up the rear, with her bedding, bath, and
riginal old trunk that had contained her scanty infant
eighteen years previously.
It was a lovely September morning as Juliet was hurried
upwards, past many familiar landmarks, then over the sharp
brow of the mountain, and, losing sight of the glittering
rook-bound tarn, of the very last white house, she was
nly plunged into a totally new scene.  They were
.ding   through a forest covering the hillsides; thick
es of ferns, as yet untouched by the frost, outlined the
branches of magnificent trees of flex and evergreen oak.
Noisy rivulets brawled down from rock to rock till lost in
green chasms of ferns and undergrowth. Upon the ground
spread an exquisite flower-carpet of great lilac daisies,
delicate purple orchids, and fairy-like white blossoms, whilst
and there a branch, or a flaming creeper, touched by
xsAutux'a vivid fingers, gave a brilliant finish to the picture.
ow the narrow road skirted desperate precipices of blue
6   ig shale,--sliding ever, with little trickling slides,
the valley far below. Now Juliet, looking down from



<pb n="80"/>
80             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
dizzy heights, beheld a great sea of waving trees-oak,
and young bamboo-with numerous families of grea
monkeys crashing among their branches. Now they
through miles of gigantic rhododendrons, who i
their moss-grown velvet arms across the path, and 
whose boughs occasional glimpses of the dim blue
could be discerned. It was a lovely scene, but i
lonely. Save for a strolling hill cow, who calmly di
the road, or a surly monkey, growling and impudently
ing pine cones, there was no sign of life. And th
a strange absence of birds, an absence of sound-a
melancholy silence-only broken by the whisper of 
streamlet, trickling among the underwood, and the
of the barefooted jampannies.
Juliet's bearers conversed incessantly, little guessing
the Miss Sahib understood the Pahari tongue-not
they disclosed any secrets. They discussed her w
she was agreeably light. They talked of their several
nias, or money-lenders, of the last great wrestling
of the corn and walnut harvest, and of the Sirkar's
forest laws. They also chattered of ghosts, weddinga
wages, and at noonday came to a determined halt
summit of the Gangu Pass, so much extolled by
Heber when he visited those hills. They halted for
long hours, cooking, eating, and smoking; but wh
hurry the Kumaoni coolie ? Meanwhile the Miss Sah
aloof, gazing dreamily at the exquisite and varied
and mournfully reviewing her past life and future pr
She was in unusually low spirits-certainly this was 
her "down" days.
During the afternoon, as the party advanced int
interior, the prospect changed. As they emerged fro
woods, the country became bolder and barer-rich vm
of yellow corn came into view, valleys tilled in terraces
to the very last inch, and dotted with comfortable flat
stone houses, the homes of the thick-set women, with T
faces and short coloured jackets, and massive silver neo
who were constantly encountered herding cattle, or c
ponderous loads of stone.  The sun had set, the 
were hunting the valleys, and the stars were out ere



<pb n="81"/>
IF      OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN.               8S
od Pouch-kala bungalow showed prominently on the
of a hill. The rarely disturbed khansamah was aroused;
lit a pair of thin candles, laid a clean sheet and knife and
k on the table, and then withdrew to slay a sleepy rooster.
tired and hungry guest meanwhile took a chair into the
dalh, and there, that cool autumn night, contemplated
" The silence that is in the starry sky,
The sleep that is among the lonely hills."
*h watched the planets come out; then the fires and lights
opposite heights. These lights, at irregular intervals,
ented so many domestic hearths, where the Kumaoni,
his day's toil-his wife from the reaping, his children
m herding-gather round the logs, bake chupatties and
chestnuts and corn. Poor as they were, they were
r off than she was I They had a home; she had none.
ntly a great yellow moon slid out from behind the
oulder of a hill, and animated and beautified the land.
As Juliet gazed in rapt admiration, she was brusquely
nealled to sublunary matters by the voice of the khansamah
laying-
"Miss Sahib Khana-tyar 'hi " and she withdrew from
the romantic to the commonplace, from the glories of the
mows by moonlight to whitewashed walls and a vile dak
bungalow dinner.
The first glimmer of light found the travellers once more
on the road. The dawn of an autumn day among the
Kumaon hills, who shall describe it ? Even the stolid
Paharis will stand to watch the sun slowly creeping up over
the low ranges, over the grey haze of the middle distance,
and suddenly awakening the cold white peaks, and turning
them first to a rosy pink then to a brilliant crimson. The
air was sharp and crisp, the dew lay heavy on the grass at
the roadside, and long silver cobwebs wove the wayside
lowers together; the blue convolvuli, red bush berries, and
little mauve orchids, were all united by one fairy chain. As
the hours wore on, herds of small cows and great unwieldy
buffaloes were driven up the hillsides among bracken and
furze by children of tender years, a dak runner fled by,
droves of pack ponies were encountered, and it became



<pb n="82"/>
82              A FAMILY LIKENESS
evident that they were approaching a station. Soon 
came into view where it lay along the hillside, crow
its old bazar and fort; but Juliet was borne
onward, past the cantonment and clock-tower, past 
past solitary bungalows, past all signs of life, away
the wilds by winding paths little better than water
Still onward and upward, into the primitive laai
stretches to the very foot of the snows. Juliet was
ning to think that Kala Dara was a myth, and that
being carried off into Thibet, when she suddenly ca
sign-post-a stick, to which was nailed a bit of a wi
on this was rudely daubed a sort of deformed hand,
portentous forefinger, beneath which was scrawled-- '
D NOOTE
Butter and Bacon.
"There it is I there is Kala Dara," exclaimed the
indicating a long low cottage surrounded with loose
walls, and standing against a background of funereal-
pines. It was indeed quite in the country, and where
ing dresses were not likely to be required; in facet,
totally out of the world. True, that from the valley
the blue smoke of a village, with its stone roofs,
gardens, goats and ponies, and no doubt the site com
a matchless view. Juliet must only hope for the 
trust that she would find the inmates of the cottage s
in themselves.
After toiling up a rocky path, they reached a ricke
leading into an untidy garden, overgrown with str
single dahlias and noisome marigolds.  The vera
front of the house was of stone, its rough-hew
clothed with ragged creepers; in it was seated an 
with a long grey beard, and a fur cap on his head, 
and reading a newspaper. The moment he was a
the approach of the party, he took his pipe out of his m
arose, and came shuffling forward, shouting, "Eliza I"



<pb n="83"/>
( 83 )
CHAPTER XII.
INTO THE FIRE.
"And from bad to worse."
SPENSEB.
bN answer to his summons, a tall, thin woman, with a sharp,
weather-beaten face, and very fair but scanty hair, bustled
out of the house, turning down her sleeves as she came. She
was neatly dressed-possibly for the occasion-and accosted
her visitor with outstretched hands.
"Well, I truly never did  We were not expecting you
for another two hours.   Welcome I welcome I" kissing
Juliet loudly as she spoke. "You must have been awful
cramped "-helping her out of the dandy.
" Yes, I am a little stiff," responded the girl in a faint
voice.
" This is my husband, Captain Noote. He is a bit hard
of hearing; you have got to shout at him."
Captain Noote touched his cap, and offered a not very
clean hand.
" Glad to see you, miss; glad to see you I Eliza," turning
eagerly to his wife, "what about that whisky, eh ? Did
Ibrahim order it in Chotah Bilat ? "
" Yes, yes," scornfully; "you and your whisky I Come
in, Juliet, and make yourself at home. I dare say we have
not got things quite as elegant as you have been used to;
but we are plain people, same as your own folk, and don't
go in for show."
This fact was sufficiently patent, without any explanation,
thought Juliet, as her eyes wandered round the sitting-
room. Bare, smoke-stained walls, the floor covered with
greasy cocoa-nut matting, a few ancient chairs, a still more
ancient sofa, positively on its last legs, and propped with
bricks. In the middle of the apartment was a square table,
on which was spread a coarse cloth, with several obtrusive
holes, under which newspaper had been inserted by the artful
khitmad-llar. in tile vain hnon t.l:t. t.lhv minrlt .,.+ .-.



<pb n="84"/>
84             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
the eye. Some steel knives and forks, with green haa
three tumblers, and a blue glass salt-cellar, comprised
appointments. There was not a flower, an ornament,
book to be seen, though, certainly, in one corner, there 
a dusty heap of newspapers piled on a straw table.
"This is our sitting-room," explained Mrs. Noote,rub
her bony red hands with an air of complacency ; " we 
good deal in the verandah. I suppose you didn't happ
bring a looking-glass ? " staring into Juliet's coune
of blank dismay.
She was not the least sort of girl that she had looked
but a slim, fine young madam, with a grand air and 
who wore very neat walking-shoes (she noticed them as'
got out of the dandy), and kept her face covered wi
white gauze veil. She was likely enough to make a
about Captain Noote's pipe, and might object to the
of spirits, and expect late dinner, afternoon tea, and a
post. Well, blessed are those that don't expect I
Juliet's expectations had fallen extremely low; but she
not prepared for her room, the door of which Mrs. N
flung open with as great a flourish as if she was sh
her into the state apartments of a palace. It was low,
bare rafters, and one window, and contained a ch
chest of drawers with scarcely any handles (the defie
supplied as in the table-cloth-stiff rolls of paper
stuffed into the apertures); there was a tiny lookig-
a tin basin, and a couple of chairs. There had 
been some feeble attempt to furbish up the place, for
atmosphere reeked of whitewash and damp boards..
curtain had been hung across the window, and
looped back with string, and one gaudy picture was
above the chimney-piece.
" There I you see I have done my best to make it
snug," said Mrs. Noote. " You have brought your
bath, and lamp, eh ?" 
" Yes."
"That's all right," she said briskly; "and now, 
you will give me money, I will go and pay the men-it
be ten rupees-and I'll let them go. Dinner is alws1
three o'clock. After dinner you might unpack and a 



<pb n="85"/>
!NTO THE FIR.                   85
she hurried out of the room, money in hand, and Boon
a shrill altercation testified to the payment of the
Juet removed her hat, sat down on the edge of her bed,
gazed about her. It was all so much worse than she
expeoted-the house, the surroundings, and the people.
was tired, hungry, and miserable, and on the verge of
; but she must be brave and keep a stout heart, and
and bear in mind that it would not be for long. In
of her resolution, a few salt drops did trickle down her
but she quickly dried them, and bathed her face,
ed her hair, and was ready to respond, when a knock
kthe door, and an overpowering smell of cabbage sum-
d her to table. Captain Noote dined in his cap, but
invested himself in a clean paper collar in honour of the
.He carved, and helped her abundantly to stewed
and cabbage, pressed on her whisky and water, and
ed her very good health in a potent tumblerful of the
.-kThe kid was succeeded by an apple-dumpling, the apple-
ling was removed by a jar of tobacco and a box of
Dinner was over, and now Captain Noote pre-
to enjoy himself; he lit his pipe and proceeded to ask
new-comer a whole vocabulary of questions, seemingly
only idea of conversation. How long had she been at
1? how old was she ? had she any brothers or sisters,
or aunts ? Could she cook, ride, or play cards ? How
was Miss Bruce ? had she saved much money ? What
the crops like as she came along ? was there most
or murga, which ? On which side of the road was
most murga ? Had they begun to stack it yet, and
they stacking it in trees or on the ground ? Had she
eany pigs as she came along ?   Meanwhile Mrs.
had produced her knitting, but watched her visitor
small, attentive eyes. She took stock of the cut of the
' dress, the shape of her hands, and every turn of her
features; and she soon perceived that this madden-
eatechism and the combined fumes of tobacco and whisky
beooming too much for this fastidious young lady; and
her husband very .short in his queries, she invited



<pb n="86"/>
86              A FAMILY LIKENESS.
her to accompany her into the garden. This garden
rather a wilderness, but it was not so much the garden 
Mrs. Noote wished to display, as the view-and this
magnificent. Kala Dara was less than forty miles from
foot of the snows, which extended right across the hori
At present the setting sun had touched their peaks, a
misty golden glow blended all lines in a flood of glo
range over range seemed to blaze, whilst the pin
valleys were steeped in a mysterious purple gloom. 
Noote indicated the effects, and spoke of the snows pr
as if they were her private property and a mere adjunct
Kala Dara. She pointed out the road to Durano, and
faint winding path along a neighbouring rise that led 
Thibet. Then she indicated the direction in which li
their nearest neighbours, the Cassons.
"He was a tea-planter, and she," said Mrs. Noote, "
nice enough woman, but not the right stuff for a plan
wife. As for her drawing-room, and fal-lals and dress,
the wages she pays her servants-I truly never did I"  "
And is not that another's house, that little dot on
hill to the left ?" inquired Juliet, with a desperate effort
appear interested.
"Yes; it's a house, sure enough, and a big one, 
empty. The Traffords, people that owned and built it, w
off years ago, for three or four of the family died there
cholera. They are buried in the garden, and if you'd 
to see their graves, it's a pleasant walk, only a bit over ti'
miles. Are you a good walker ? "
" I do not know. We never took very long walks
school; we played tennis a good deal."
"There's no tennis in these parts," said the other gri
"A fine fool's game, knocking balls over a net. You
have to take to walking, my young miss."
"Does no one live in that house now ? " asked Juliet.
" Trafford's Rest ? No; it used to be let of a hot wet
to poor mean folks, who just came up for the sake of 
air, and got it cheap, and were no sort of good to ms
customers. It's partly furnished, but it's in awful repa
the roof leaks, the upper rooms are dangerous, and the own
won't do a hand's turn, as the lease is nearly out, and



<pb n="87"/>
INTO TIE FIRE.                   87
And goes back to Government. There's an old chokidar
Sc-e n charge, who sells peaches and apples, and keeps good
tfowl; but folks around won't go anigh the place. They
sy it's haunted; they call it the Devil's Bungalow."
"Have you lived here long?" inquired Juliet, after a
",BA matter of eleven years and more; ever since Noote
tired. We got the place cheap, and he had always a taste
for mountains. He's a North-countryman is Noote, and he
loves to farm a bit, and has a real turn for pigs."
"And does he keep anything else ? "
"Yes, sheep and cows; and I have good English fowl,
and sell my eggs well. I've a lovely incubator; and, beside
the fowl, I've a fine dairy."
"Are you never lonely ?"
"Not I," scornfully. "I have never time to think of
such nonsense; what with milking, and calves, and chickens.
It's only idle folks is like that, and I never was one for
society at any time. I send in a coolie to Durano for papers,
and with eggs and butter, and now and then I go in myself.
I have friends there."
" You go on Sundays, I suppose ?"
"Bless your dear little heart!  No; it's a matter of
seven miles. I've rarely been to church for years. Sunday
is the day I make out my butter bills. I often think it
would be a fine thing if we had one of those prayer-wheels
in the village, turned by water-like those over in Thibet-
that does the praying for everybody."
Juliet gazed at Mrs. Noote in the vain endeavour to
ascertain whether she was in jest or earnest, and then
said-
" Have you ever had a girl to live with you before "
" No; it's quite a new idea; a grand idea, I call it. You
see, we are quiet, retired, professional people, and can offer
good air, and plenty of fresh milk, fine scenery, and-
and--   "  She paused to see what else there was to offer,
and added-" and all that I So when William John heard,
through a clerk at Skippers', as they were on the look-out
for a very quiet home for a young lady, he mentioned me;
and it turned out we were related to your folk, and I could



<pb n="88"/>
88              A FAMILY LIKENESS.
give the best of references. It seemed quite a provide
thing for you, and here you are I"
Here she was indeed I
"You see, Captain Noote being a cousin to your 
papa was a great point in our favour. Old Joey Smit
he was a caution; his face was a sort of red, and the 
his nose was blue. Ay, how he did drink and carry onl
be sure I" casting up her eyes at the mere recollection.
"And did you ever see my mother ? " asked her compl
timidly.
"Yes, once or twice. She was a pretty and a 
genteel-looking girl, and as to her singing of 'Cam
Races,' and ' Ka-Foozelum,' it was a real treat; but I 
spoke to her beyond passing the time of day. You see,
was not in the same set," she concluded, loftily.
"And the Skippers you speak of, and William Jo
are they lawyers ? I am afraid I am asking a great
questions I "
"As to that, I'm well used to them I Captain 
never stops only when he is asleep. William John is
son; he will be proud to hear you were asking after
I was married before, to a Mr. Pogson-I need scarce
you, when I was a mere child. William John is as i
young fellow as ever stepped, nigh on six foot; he
civil appointment, but he will be coming up to us 
long. I can see that you and he will be very thick;" 
she smiled with hideous significance.
" I-I did not know that you had a son," faltered
unhappy girl. The elder pair were bad enough, but
six-foot son, who would " be pleased to hear she had
asking for him," was absolutely the very last straw.
"I am tired," she said presently; "and, if you d
mind, I will go and unpack, and not come out again
you will kindly send me in a cup of tea, I'll say
night."
" Oh, very well," returned Mrs. Noote, shortly, with a
of her head. "Oh, very well then, good night; but
only six o'clock."
She would have liked to have expatiated still further
William John's perfections.



<pb n="89"/>
M RS. NOOTE'S PRECAUTIONS.                 89
*ep take you in a cup of tea myself, and I hope you will
be rested. It's a pity if you are delicate."
I,"Well," said Captain Noote to his spouse; "so she has
ie to bed, has she ? She looked very tired, very pale and
, but quite the lady."
_4 great deal too much the lady," rejoined his wife, with
s iort. " You should have seen how she wrinkled up her
when you smoked, and the way she looked round her
oomn; and I can tell by her eye that she means to try and
me down to church every Sunday. Just let me catch
at it l"
"Anyhow, she has a grand air; something you don't see
ery day; maybe it's her long throat, and the way her head
fixed on. She's like a young duchess."
"Duchess! much you know of duchesses," retorted his
e, scornfully. "You are thinking of a Dutch-cheese;
at's more in your line. I wonder what William John will
say to her ? "
" " Oh, you need not be anxious about him; he, he, he 1"
with a wheezy laugh. " William John would think well of
any girl who had two thousand pounds pinned to her
petticoat I"
CHAPTER XIII.
X  MRS. NOOTE'S PREOAUTIONS.
1|       *' l"What can an old man do, but die ?"
HOOD,
PBOSPECTS that assume a gloomy aspect overnight frequently
look bright on a sunny morning, after a good rest. Although,
CU the other hand, it must be confessed that hopes which
resent a brilliant appearance, sometimes seem rather tar-
Fi hed, and just a little of the gilt is off when we inspect
the     by the practical light of day. As far as Juliet was
oncerned, her affairs did not seem so dispiriting when she
E    ned her eyes and found the ayah beside her, bearing her
Eotah hazree--a wrinkled old person, in tight lilac calico
r  rOuers and a Dlaid shawl. with a  t nn nnlindlvr for   A  



<pb n="90"/>
90              A FAMILY LIKENESS.
of excellent Kousani tea aroused the sleeping girl ,j
effectually; and now, by the light of the sun, the
not look quite so bad: it was clean, at any rate; with'
of her own belongings, she would soon transform it. 
glanced at the long narrow window, and could
restrain an exclamation of delight; there, she beheld,
framed, the vast perspective of endless dazzling white
She sprang out of bed, and threw the lattice wide
and looked out into the dewy garden, with her elbo,
the sill.
What fragrant bushes of heliotrope and straggling
of tuberoses, what wild flowers and fantastic
had apparently struggled over every obstacle to join
more civilized relations in Mrs. Noote's neglected g
Beyond it lay the yellow valley, the swelling hills, an
out of a faint pearly mist, and clearly defined against a
quoise sky, Juliet recognized her old friends, Trisul
three peaks) and Nanda-Devi (the storm god), who
his noble white head higher than any mountain in B
territory. They seemed to have come nearer to her, b
reality, it was she who had decreased her distance from
by close on thirty miles. The thin, stimulating hill ailr
fresh flowers, the songs of the ever busy minars, and
shouts of the reapers in the corn, combined to assure
that it was a sin to be in the house, and, dressing at
she set forth to explore her surroundings. Her first
covery was her hostess in the dairy yard, shrieking fi
anathemas at her gwala, or milkman, a sturdy pahari,
ing a battered old forage cap (whose various vicissi
would possibly fill a volume) and an expression of
scorn, that would not have been unbefitting on the co
nance of a Roman emperor. Doubtless he was say
himself, "What a devil of devils is this screaming w
pig; the curse of my father be upon her I" 
Mrs. Noote was attired in a large straw hat, a pa.i
Captain Noote's boots, and wore her dress kilted higb,
with her arms akimbo, she superintended the milking
herd of buffaloes and small hill cows. She was app
much occupied; but when she descried Juliet, she 
out-



<pb n="91"/>
MRS. NOOTES PRECAUTIONS.               91 
Y oh, so you are up ! You are an early bird, like me, I
I've just done, and I'll take you round the place, and
w you what is to be seen."
Evidently Juliet herself was an unaccustomed spectacle
those parts. The milking languished, the two or three
faced women, the imperial-looking gwala-handsome
bronze Apollo-all stopped, and stared, and muttered to
another, What brought a Miss Sahib to such a place ?
ewas not of the same caste as the Lal mem sahib "-
ning the "red missis," or Mrs. Noote-" she was as
utiful as Lucksmi herself, and her statue was as elegant
?the juniper tree. Why had she left her own people ?
ho was she ? "
Mlrs. Noote noted the sensation her guest had created-
even the very cows seemed to be gazing at her in amaze-
ent,-and, bestowing a pithy sentence of abuse on her
tainers, hastened to carry off the new-comer. She exhibited
with much pride two half-bred English heifers, and greatly
mystified Juliet by informing her that she had " taken them
out in butter from a lady customer."  She displayed her
poultry-yard of cochin-chinas, turkeys, and guinea-fowl.
I"At Christmas I got eight rupees apiece for my turkeys.
Oh, when you are an understanding woman like me, poultry
k very paying  But you must have as good as six dozen
eyes to be up to these hill-servants; they coax the hens
away, and get them to lay in the stable, or their own go-
dwns, tempting them with bits of chupatties. I had a
lovely incubator-a real wonder for hatching-but that fool
of a bearer meddled with it one evening, and it blew up-
went off like a cannon firing hundreds of eggs."
Juliet was then taken round the orchard, and shown the
gs and vegetable garden, full of cabbages and cucumbers;
so the hairy Bhootia pony, the plough-bullocks, and finally
e storeroom, full of grain, flour, dried onions, bacon, and
uch-like uninteresting articles. Beyond it was a sort of
mber-closet, the door of which stood open. Whilst Mrs.
pote carefully weighed out some four, and counted out
otatoes, Juliet continued to explore-that is to say, she
tood on the threshold and peeped in. She saw empty wine-
*8e, hampers, baskets, old kerosene oil tins, sacking, straw,



<pb n="92"/>
92              A FAMILY LIKENESS. 
a broken fishing-rod, a rusty rat-trap, and what was
curious long thing standing up in one corner ? W a
coffin ? She looked again. Yes, it was; and she
a pair of searching eyes on her companion.
"Well, I truly never did!" exclaimed Mrs. Noote
fully. "I never meant you to look in there; th
Bluebeard's chamber. Never let on what you saw, foi
life. Now, promise me."
"Yes; I'll say nothing about it, of course, if you
wish it."
" Wish it I Hark at the girl I I should just think
and as I expect you are dying to know what I am
with a coffin stuck up there, I'll tell you. You see,
quite in the wilds, seven miles from Durano, and they
keep them ready made. This was ordered for a man
of small-pox; but he recovered, though not expec
I took it off his hands, and he was uncommon glad
me have it at less than half price; and it was brough
quietly one night after dark-and here it is till it's 
"Wanted for what?" inquired Juliet, trans
with her searching dark eyes.
"Bless the girl I I never did  Why, for Captain
to be sure, when his time comes. He is an old man
past seventy, and I see him failed very much of late 
in a tone in which complacency was more conspicuous
regret. " People die and are buried at once up here
we are miles from clergyman or a doctor, and it's a
convenience to have it handy, and will be a fine sa
expense and coolie hire. Of course, I don't let him k
as it might give him a turn. Still, it's a comfort t
to know that it's in the house." 
"Of course," acquiesced Juliet; "but it might be
quired for you or me, might it not ?"
"Rubbish and trash! not likely. Now, come
breakfast is ready, and I'm as hungry as a kite."
Juliet followed her reluctantly into the frowsy si
room, where the meal was laid-fresh eggs, cream, b
hill honey, and excellent Kumaon tea awaited them;
there was no bread, only some rather tough chun
Captain Noote had a remarkable appetite; he ravenedo



<pb n="93"/>
MRS. NOOTE'S PRECAUTIONS.              93
food like a starving animal, and permitted no stint at
e. There must be plenty to eat and drink always, plenty
tobacco in his jar, and the supply of spirits never suffered
twax low (little, little did he suspect how his deceitful
iza watered the whisky). In other respects, Mrs. Noote
might screw and scrape as she pleased; and, indeed, he often
jked with her about her stocking and her savings. Her
,nugs amounted to a sum that would have made him open
his little pig's eyes in amazement. She put by all the fowl
money, and the most of what he allowed her for groceries,
Wages, and clothes, and remitted it to her account in the
- Bank of Bengal. She worshipped money for its own sake;
the accumulating of rupees was her ruling passion. A liberal
'table she was forced to keep, alas I for Noote would have
his own way. He had a good deal in his power, and she
was not certain if he had made his will; but when he could
not see, or feel, her grip upon money was unrelaxing. She
could not endure to part with it, and managed her house-
keeping on the exchange and barter system current among
her poorer neighbours, where coin was almost unknown: a
maund of grain for a young calf, a woollen blanket for a
dozen geese; and transacted business for a goat, or half
a goat, as she would, in England, for a crown or half the
amount. The red-bearded bearer was in her confidence,
and could a tale unfold, how his mistress weighed out flour,
and salt, and sugar; how she put him on an allowance of
three matches a day-one for the fire, one for the lamps,
one for contingencies; how it went to her heart to buy a
stamp I She had wheedled her husband into allowing her
to take a companion, and the sixty pounds a year, all clear
profit, was the companion she yearned for, and her own
special and much-esteemed perquisite.
Juliet accepted her present lot without any outward signs
of discontent, she bided the good days that were coming,
and in a short time had made herself tolerably at home.
She explored the garden, the village, the surrounding hills;
she unpacked her belongings, and arranged her own room
with an effect that seemed magical to Mrs. Noote-she
scarcely recognized it for the same apartment. There were
books, an extemporized writing-table, a quantity of hill



<pb n="94"/>
94             A FAMILY LIKENESS. 
grasses in a gigantic jar, dozens of photographs, i
little lamp, a gay rug, a folding looking-g
presents to the queen of the school,-and she f
gaunt red hands, and ejaculated-              ;
" Well, I truly never did I " in her shrillest key of
ment. Juliet soon became accustomed to Captain
marvellous feats with his knife, his strongly coloured
and water, his homely language, and his one perpe
-" my old regiment."  She learnt as much about
matters in a fortnight as if she had been brought
barrack square. Captain Noote she liked, and did to
he taught her to ride the grey Bhootia pony; he
a big yellow dog and an alpenstock with which to 
hills, and keep off inquisitive cattle. On her part, shed
him how to play backgammon, she answered his im
able questions, and she sang to him his favourite so
liked old ballads, such as " Annie Laurie," and " 
Cup of Sparkling Wine," and was not averse to ca
that injunction in a practical manner. But Juliet
impossible to extend her liking to Mrs. Noote-the
of the coffin rankled in her mind, and she found her
a vast contrast to that of those cultivated, intellectua
Miss Bruce and Miss Dix. Mrs. Noote could barelyI
her spelling was remarkable, and her arithmetic in
hensible; her habits were not refined, neither was
guage. She was a shrewd woman, however, and soon
her new inmate's talents to her own benefit; and J
of any employment for the seemingly endless hour,
out Mrs. Noote's butter bills, undertook her correspol
dunned her customers, and trimmed her bonnets,
the tablecloths, and worked in the garden. And Mrs.
although, as she said to herself, she couldn't abear
had fully made up her mind on two points-Juliet 
to introduce her to genteel society in Durano, and ul
to become her daughter-in-law. She was conscioz.
Juliet had adapted herself wonderfully to their wa
was clever with both head and hands, quick and 
and had a delightfully small appetite; but there
standoffishness about her new boarder that she never
get over-a polite reserve that held her at arm's length]



<pb n="95"/>
MRS. NOOTE'S PRECAUTIONS.               95
er loud, sharp speeches and occasional explosions never
appeared to ruffle the girl's complete self-possession. She
merely gazed in silence, with calm, interrogative eyes. It
was true that none of the sharp speeches or outbreaks had
been directly levelled at the girl herself; and Mrs. Noote
had a suspicion that beneath all that nonchalant demeanour
lay a temper that it would not be well to arouse. After tea,
Captain Noote and Juliet played backgammon together,
whilst Mrs. Noote knitted socks, with feet like bags, and
watched the couple keenly with her sly little blue eyes.
Even to her they seemed a strongly contrasted pair, as they
Bat at the corner of the table, intent on their game: the
coarse broad hands of the one, the dainty taper fingers of
the other; the captain's common, weather-beaten face and
fur cap, and the girl's fair skin, delicate features, and wealth
of bronze-coloured hair. "What would William John say
to her ? " she wondered as she watched.
The mail went to and from Kala Dara but once a week-
every Wednesday a coolie was despatched to the post-office.
It was Tuesday evening, and two letters were ready for the
morning's post, one lay in Mrs. Noote's wool-basket and the
other in Juliet's blotter. What would have been the result,
if the two ladies could have exchanged and read them ?
Mrs. Noote's effusion was intended for her son, and was
laboriously written with blots, erasures, and much startling
spelling. It said-
" DFEA WILLIAM JOHN,
"The cousin arrived here more than a month
ago. I hurried her up, as I saw no reason why the pay
should go to the school, and she's eighteen, and if her educa-
tion was not finished, it ought to be. She is quite a beauty
-and very much the lady-with small white hands, and a
quiet way of speaking, and awfully particular about her dress,
and bath water, and the way her linen is made up. She is a
great scholar, and writes a lovely hand, and is a help in the
ouse, I will say, and Noote fairly silly over her. f expect
they made a lot of her at that school. She writes packs of
letters to them. She is one of your stand-off ones, and has
a cold manner for a girl; but I'll soon cure that, and take



<pb n="96"/>
96              A FAMILY LIKENESS.
her down a peg. What is she but old Smithson's ga
after all ? She is tall and thin-maybe you would thin
scraggy-but she has splendid eyes and hair, and two
sand pounds safe and certain; and is to be had for the
You may be sure I shall give my own Billy the first c
she has never spoken to a young man in her life, mind
get a month's leave, and come up as soon as you can. I
paving the way for you beautiful. You will see No
good bit failed, but I am well and hearty.
"Your affectionate mother, 
"E. NOOT,
The other was to Miss Dix.
"DEAREST MISS DIX,
"I wrote to Miss Bruce last week, and i
your turn to-day to be inflicted with a stupid letter,
good long grumble. I have been here nearly five weeks,
it seems like five years, and yet I am never idle-ind
do her justice, Mrs. Noote finds me plenty of occupatio
am learning to milk, to make bread, to saddle a pony,
to garden. We seem to have no neighbours, and one 
exactly the same as the other. The only difference bet
Sunday and Monday is, that on Sunday we always ha
pudding for dinner-a roly-poly-and Captain Noote 
in the evening instead of playing backgammon with m
beggar-my-neighbour, with a pack of greasy coal-black 
Last Saturday Mrs. Noote announced that she was go
down to Durano, and intended to take me. We were,
spend the night there, and return after service on Sun
Needless to tell you, I was delighted to accompany her.
took the big grey pony, and rode it turn about; that is
say, I rode half a mile where the road is fearfully stee
Mrs. Noote is nervous going downhill-and she rode the
of the way, her only apology being,' That I was young.'
must confess that I did not mind. It was a lovely 
and a perfect afternoon, and about four o'clock we f
ourselves descending the hills above Durano. It is not
fashionable place like Chotah Bilat, nor nearly as large,
scattered; but people seem to live in it, and make their ho



<pb n="97"/>
MRS. NOOTES PRECAUTIONS.                 97
there instead of rushing up for a few months. We passed a
good many comfortable bungalows standing in gardens and
orchards, and went through a most curious old bazar, with
a long paved street, interrupted by stone steps, which the
on negociated most skilfully. Meanwhile I helped to keep
Mrs. Noote in the saddle. The shop fronts were all made of
elaborately carved wood, and the wares displayed were most
various-huka heads, crinolinettes, country saddles, and
Aspinall's enamel, all jumbled up together. At last we found
ourselves at our destination-a dismal, tumbledown little
bungalow, the abode of Mrs. Noote's friends, Mr. Rozario,
the apothecary, his wife, and family.
" Mrs. Eulalie Rozario is a very stout, handsome Eurasian,
who received us with a child in her arms and two clinging
to her dress. Our arrival was unexpected, but she gave us a
most hearty welcome. Everything indoors seemed at sixes
and sevens, and there were half a dozen children screaming
and fighting in the sitting-room; but nothing seemed to
ruffle the beautifully even temper of our hostess. She sent
out to borrow a loaf and two tea-cups, and prepared for a
meal by laying a filthy cloth at one end of the table. The
meal consisted of coffee, bread and butter, and hill honey.
There were eggs also; but as Mrs. Rozario casually mentioned
that she always bought them from the lepers, I did not touch
them.
" Mr. Rozario now appeared-a big man with an immense
black beard, and round black eyes. He hailed Mrs. Noote
with effusion, and seemed extremely surprised to see me. The
children collected round me, and glared at me open-mouthed;
and, growing bolder, felt my dress, and pinched my arms and
face and hair-I suppose to see if I was real. Mrs. Noote
gossiped volubly with the Rozarios, and I stole away into
the garden, the children swarming after me. I opened the
gate, and went out on the mall; it was overhung with trees,
like the lanes you describe in England, with houses peeping
through the branches, and banks covered with ferns. A
good many broad-shouldered little Ghoorkas went by, and
then two ladies walking, then some men riding. It appeared
quite gay, after Kala Dara. People stared so hard, and
looked back so often, that I thought I must be doing some-



<pb n="98"/>
98              A FAMILY LIKENESS. 
thing odd in standing at the gate, so I went indoors 
presently to bed, which, I am sorry to say, I shared with 
less than three of the children.
"The next morning we all went to church, all but t
Rozarios' baby. It is a dear little church. The service 
very well conducted, and the singing and responses seem
to come from the very hearts of this small congregat
among these remote hills. I wish I could come    ve
Sunday, but not with the Rozarios. The children foug
and cried and scuffled over bread and jam, and wiped th
hot, sticky fingers on my dress; and altogether I was in a
thing but a religious frame of mind; meanwhile Mrs. 
zario sang serenely, and never troubled herself in the le
about her progeny.
"After service, people clustered outside the church
groups, and walked home together, the Rozarios' frien
escorted us, and I was presented to them as a young relat
who had come to live with Mrs. Noote. They all st
very hard as Mrs. Noote informed them that I had had
tip-top education over at Chotah Bilat, and could 
French and play the piano just like any lady I and when
had got over their first astonishment, two very dusky yo
women, in black velveteen, trimmed with pea-green 
embraced me rapturously, took my arms and walked me
and told me that they adored me; and asked how much
paid for my gloves, and where I got my exquisite hat, 
how old I was, and how I really liked the Nootes, and h
I did my hair I
"After dinner, Mrs. Noote and I set out on our ret
journey, and I received a very warm invitation from 
and Mrs. Rozario to return and pay them a visit 'whene
I wanted a little change or gaiety ;' but lonely as Kala D
is, I prefer it to Durano, and the Rozarios' hospitality.
am sure they mean kindly, but they were totally unprepa
for me, and their astonishment seemed to get on my nerves
whenever I looked up, I found eighteen black eyes fixed up
my face; they called me ' Miss' at every second word. M
Rozario tried on my hat, gloves, and veil, the girls in vel-
vetecn hugged me and stroked me as if I was a dog or a ca,
and told me that I looked just like a lady; and that every



<pb n="99"/>
^ f'r      MRS. NOOTE'S PRECAUTIONS.              99
one was asking who I was I I felt like a porcupine; but I
really did my best to be polite, and to swallow down the
compliments, the dinner, and the stuffy atmosphere.
" Oh, how thankful I was to find myself alone on the
breezy hillside once more. Mrs. Noote rode home ahead of
.me, without any offer of the pony, or remark. When we
arrived, she discovered that Captain Noote had been celebrat-
ing the sabbath in another fashion-to quote her expression,
'he had got at the whisky I' The result of this discovery
was a most unpleasant scene, during which I escaped into my
own room, and locked the door. I heard Mrs. Noote shriek-
ing that 'it was the last time she would spend Sunday in
Durano,' and I heard it without a pang. In future I shall
take my Prayer-book up the hills, and hold service among
the mountains, and receive a sermon from the everlasting
snows. You will think I am   a discontented, detestable
wretch, who can do nothing but find faults in her neigh-
bours, and I expect you will write me a fine long lecture.
After all, it is my nature to be fastidious, I am afraid, and I
cannot help it, no more than I can help what Mrs. Noote
calls my red hair.
"I am not such a martyr as I may lead you to imagine.
I have some pleasures-my letters, for one. Then, I am great
friends with all the villagers, I am actually taking music
lessons, and learning to play the sitar, or hill guitar; also I
enjoy my daily rambles-the beauty of this part of the
world makes up for much. Captain Noote and I get on
remarkably well together, but with Mrs. Noote I have nothing
E     in common, not even a taste for backgammon. We are both
on our best behaviour so far, but some day or other I prepare
you for a grand explosion. Do write me a long long letter
soon, dear Dixie, and tell me every scrap of news.
"Yours most affectionately,
W-r^~ (L~~~" JULIET CARE.
P.S.-M-rs. Noote has a son she is continually praisig;
he is coming up here on a visit in the spring."



<pb n="100"/>
100             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
CHAPTER XIV.
MRS. NOOTE SURPRISES MRS. CASSON.
"This is the prettiest low-born lass that ever 
Ran on the greensward; nothing that she does or seems
But smacks of something greater than herself,
Too noble for this place."
SOME people declare that in the month of October the
Himalayas are to be seen at their best. The snows stand.
out like huge white waves against a steel-blue sky; the air,
is sharp and crisp; and, although the fringes of ferns have'
withered away from the branches of the trees, they have 
merely changed them for a new coat of velvety green moss, 
whilst their trunks are festooned with graceful Virginia
creeper in every shade, from scarlet to pale yellow. The.
eccentric cherry trees are a blaze of pink blossom, and the
ground is carpeted with purple and white orchids and many,
delicate autumn flowers. By the middle of the month the
crops have been gathered, the walnut trees shaken, and coolies 
and jampannis, employed all the season on the hill stations,
now flock with their earnings to their mountain homes.  ;
Most of Mrs. Noote's customers had departed to the.i'
plains, and she had comparative leisure from her labours
in the dairy and poultry-yard. One afternoon she appeared 
in the verandah unexpectedly attired for visiting,-and ,
uncommonly smart she looked I Both bird and beast had 
been compelled to contribute to her toilette; her fur
shoulder cape was made of the skin of wild cats, and a 
couple of green parrots' wings were stuck jauntily in her
bonnet. She wore a neat black dress, red silk gloves, and
carried a somewhat bloated umbrella.
"Ain't she a gay old girl I Ain't she a wonderful 
woman I" exclaimed Captain Noote, admiringly; "and she
will show 'em all how to dress I Where are you bound for,
Lizzie ? where are you going to now ? "
"I'm  going over to Casson's. You look sharp"-to
Juliet,--" and get ready. It's nigh on five miles, but you
are a good walker, and we will take the pony and ride in



<pb n="101"/>
MRS. NOOTE SURPRISES MRS. CASSON.         o10
turn. Mind you put on your best hat and gloves, for I
want you to look very stylish, and surprise them."
Juliet needed no second bidding. The prospect of seeing
new faces was delightful, and in a short time she came out
of her room, equipped according to order.
"You will do finely," said her hostess. " I must say you
are a genteel-looking girl, when all is said and done; if you
only had a bit of colour in your face, you would not be bad
looking I" and with this encouraging remark they set forth.
It was, indeed, a long distance; the road was steep, the
path narrow and stony, in some places strewn with loose
boulders. Mrs. Noote talked incessantly the whole way, and
rode the most part of it, whilst her lodger climbed beside
her like a real young mountaineer, and could breast a hill
almost as stoutly as the Greame himself. She was delighted
at the prospect of enlarging her borders, and seeing some-
thing different from their own valley, every ridge and tree
and hut of which she knew by heart. Meanwhile her selfish
companion conversed, with her usual loquacity, on the subject
of the lady they were about to visit.
"She is just a bit too fine, in my opinion, for a planter's
wife," she remarked, as she banged the pony with her
umbrella. "She never soils her hands, and she would not
stand by and see a pig or a calf killed for all you could offer
her. But I'm told she has a heap of money.  Her people
were greatly against the match, and her coming and burying
herself out here; but it's not much she buries herself I" and
Mrs. Noote snorted. "She goes off for weeks and weeks,
and spends the winter on the plains. I believe she is mad
for balls and dancing. Not like me, that cares no more for
such things than a crow does for Sunday."
" Then I suppose Mrs. Casson is quite young ?
She would like to make out she is; but she's nearer my
age than yours; and one day I said to her 'people of our
time of life.' She was rarely vexed, I could see, and she
has never been quite friendly or free with me ever since.
But she is not a woman who sees her duty at home, and
lays herself out to it like people I could mention;" and
L톜. Noote nodded her head three times with an air of
heartfelt superiority.



<pb n="102"/>
102             A FAMILY LIKENESS. 
"There's the house now," she added, as they reached
brow of a hill, pointing to a bungalow about half a m
below them. "You see, they have a flower garden,
tennis ground, and greenhouse, and all sorts of nonse
I hope she is in, for I never sent word ; but I will say
for her-you never take her aback. She is always 
and tidy. I mind one time she caught me picking featl
Here, you get up, and ride now I" 
It was scarcely worth while to mount; but Juliet was
polite to say so. The last half-mile was all a descent,
Mrs. Noote was nervous riding downhill; and she
Mrs. Casson to see her visitor on horseback, and to ima
that she (Mrs. Noote) had made the journey on foot.
her young companion was not permitted to say nay.
Snow View, the name of the Cassons' estate, was a pret
house, surrounded by tea-gardens, with a long veran
facing west. A smart servant ushered them into the draw
room, and another led away the pony. Juliet's eyes ro
round the room, eagerly taking in every object. It was n
expensively furnished; the curtains were of Madras mslin
the floor was covered with cane-matting and a few kh
rugs; the chairs and sofas were of wicker and bam
tastefully upholstered; there was a piano; the walls w
hung with water-colours; there were flowers; greatgr
from the Terai jungles, in stands; and plenty of 
papers, and magazines.
Juliet had not half feasted her eyes when Mrs. Cas
entered-a tall, slight, ladylike looking woman, with
blue eyes and fluffy fair hair. She welcomed Mrs. N
civilly, but not effusively, and then turned to her oth
visitor. Could they really have come together-
grasping, garrulous Mrs. Noote, and this beautiful grac
girl ?
"Mrs. Casson, this is my niece, Juliet Carr, who
staying with me," said Mrs. Noote, with transparet
pride.
Juliet became scarlet with amazement and indignation.
"Oh, indeed," said Mrs. Casson, shaking hands, an.i
endeavouring to keep her astonishment out of her counte'
nance. "I had no idea you had a niece; I have not seeR:



<pb n="103"/>
R^  J   NOOTE SURPRISES MRS. CASSON.        103
x       o for some months. Have you been long at Kala Dara,
m  itis POarr ? "
"About six weeks."
eally I And how do you like this part of the world "
"Oh," colouring, as she caught Mrs. Noote's keen little
eyes fastened upon her, "I like it pretty well, thank
*    "MAnd anyhow it's a pleasant change from school, where
she has spent all her life," added Mrs. Noote, sharply.
"I suppose so," rejoined Mrs. Casson, rather doubtfully.
" And how is Captain Noote ? " she continued, anxious to
change the too personal topic, and still deeply mystified.
l     "Thanks, just as usual-very busy. And how is your
good gentleman ? "
"Quite well, thank you; he is out shooting shikar
to-day."
"And it's well to be him that can afford to amuse
himself," rejoined Mrs. Noote, with a sniff. Mrs. Noote's
manner was a curious mixture of servility and aggres-
siveness.
Meanwhile Juliet's eyes wandered from familiar magazines
to old china; from old china to pretty photographs; finally,
to the open piano, on which stood her own last new song.
Mrs. Casson interpreted her wistful look, and said-
" I am sure you play or sing, Miss Carr."
"Yes; I am very fond of music."
"So am I; but I have so little time for practising. I
got some new songs last mail," rising as she spoke. " Would
you care to look over them ? "
Juliet also rose with alacrity. It was delightful to talk
once more to an educated lady, with conciliating manners,
and her fingers were actually quivering to touch the keys of
the piano.
" Can you play at sight ? " inquired her hostess. " Do you
know this one ? " placing it before her.
" Oh yes."
"Then perhaps you would show me how it goes; it is
peculiar time. I have never heard it sung; and I cannot
quite manage it."
Juliet hastily removed her gloves, and sat down before the



<pb n="104"/>
104            A PAMILY LIAZ^VtzO. ..
instrument.  She required no pressing, and no seca
bidding. She was not the least shy or nervous. She fo
all about Mrs. Noote (who was leaning her hands on the
of her umbrella, and looking daggers at her and the
tion she was receiving); she thought of nothing but 
music before her as she struck a few chords with a pract
hand.
"I am certain that you can sing it," said Mrs. C
whose opinion of the young lady was rising every moment,
And Juliet, longing to hear her own voice, admitted
she did sing; she did not even add the usual formula, "
little," and began " The Sands o' Dee." 
As her voice rose and swelled through the room, 
Casson held her breath; and even Mrs. Noote ceased
scratch the matting with her umbrella, and felt that she
listening to something out of the common. As the 
ended in a sort of sobbing wail, there was a moment's pa
and she exclaimed--
"Why, Juliet, you have quite a nice voice   Just
your mother. I truly never did "
Mrs. Casson said nothing, but there were tears in
eyes, and the songstress was amply satisfied.  At 
juncture tea was brought in-a dainty service, an old sil
tea-pot, hot cakes, and actually baker's bread. As               i
Casson presided over the cups and saucers, she and Ju
continued to talk of books and magazine articles, of so
and their different settings of major and minor keys, 
flats and sharps. It was all pure Greek to Mrs. Noote,
was pretending to read the home news, but who was er
furious that Juliet should absorb so much attention,
that Mrs. Casson should treat the girl as she had ne
treated her, viz. as her equal.
Mrs. Casson speedily recognized a kindred spirit in Mi'l
Carr; her freshness, vivacity, beauty, and accomplishment
fairly took her bystorm. Who would expect to find suchararat
avis in this part of the world, and least of all in the squalid
nest of old Mrs. Noote ? As for Juliet, this encounter with
this fascinating, cultivated woman, this return to boo}k,   H
to music, to interesting topics after two months of the
undiluted society of her hosts, was as water in the desert to a



<pb n="105"/>
MRS. NOOTE SURPRISES MRS. CASSON.          105
hhrety soul. The dainty tea, the refined surroundings, the
low voice of her hostess, were intensely appreciated.
Mrs Casson noticed the heavy frown on Mrs. Noote's
brow, and hastened to include her in the conversation; but
what could Mrs. Noote talk of that was amusing or interest-
ng ? The price of butter, the rascality of her cook, the
perfidy of her market coolie, and the weight of pigs ? She
was rather short in her manner, and her voice was unusually
rai g, as having devoured a quantity of buttered scones,
nd drank three cups of tea, carefully brushed the crumbs
off her bonnet-strings, she rose to depart, although pressed
to remain, assured that there was a moon, and for te first
time in her life she was invited to dinner I
"No, no; I must be going," she declared. " Noote will
be uneasy."
At this moment Mr. Casson appeared in a shikar kit, gun
on shoulder, with a well-filled game bag. He was intro-
duced to Miss Carr, and talked to Mrs. Noote, whilst his
wife had a few last words with Juliet, lent her several books,
picked her a bunch of chrysanthemums and mignonette, and
aid-                                                              -
"I hope you will often come over to see me; and I shall
go and pay you a regular formal visit. You may expect me
* very shortly."
Oh, indeed, Mrs. Casson," broke in Mrs. Noote, who
bead been listening to this, " it's uncommon kind of you,
I'm sure, but young girls don't expect to be called on. I
never did. As to Juliet coming over here often, I could
not allow her to walk so far alone, and I can't spare a
servant I "
"    But indeed, Mrs. Noote, I walk nearly as far every day,
and quite alone," protested Juliet, eagerly.
Only in our own neighbourhood; and that's another
affair.  Come, get on the pony; Captain Noote will be
sending to search for us."
" Oh, do you ride, please; I can walk."
d;Not at all," very sharply, secretly fearing that if she
rode Mrs. Casson might accompany her new acquaintance
part of the way on foot. She had never bargained for this
Sudden friendship, or for }Jrs. Casson takilg, a fancy to the



<pb n="106"/>
o16             A FAMILY LIKENESS. 
girl. She had merely brought her over to show her
now most sincerely repented of her vanity. She toil
the hill in an extremely bad humour.
Juliet, too, was rather ruffled. How dared Mrs.
introduce her as her niece ? And the storm at w
had hinted in her letter to Miss Dix seemed already o
horizon.
The contrast between Juliet and herself had never
Mrs. Noote so forcibly as this afternoon. In Mrs. a
drawing-room there was this girl chattering away 
books and stuff, and looking quite at home, and Mr.
treating her as if she was some grand visitor, and n
much of her, and scarcely speaking to herself. It
not answer for Mrs. Casson to take up Juliet. She 
be introducing her all over the country, and to 
men; and that would never do.   Where would
John be then ? The sooner the girl learnt her pl
better.
" I must say they turned you out well at that o
Juliet," she began. " What with your playing and 
and book talk, and no 'chee-chee' accent, no pow
your face, no lovers-eh ?"
A haughty stare was her only reply.
"I declare, when I see the grand air and walk of y
can hardly keep from laughing."
"I cannot help my walk.   I had no idea that it.
grand or even funny," said Juliet.
"Grand I I should think so-just as if the whole co
belonged to you. And to see you to-day sitting up 
talking to a lady as if you was a lady, and when I 
of your old granny, Peggy Smithson, lawks I felt as
should split my sides."
"Why did you tell Mrs. Casson I was your niece ? ".
" Because it's easier to say than Miss Carr, whoseg
father was a relation of Noote's. ' Niece' comes quit
and you should be very much flattered at my makng
" I would rather you made me out what I really am,
Noote; please don't call me what I am not."
"Hoity toity I And don't I call you what you are



<pb n="107"/>
I        oI
oRS. NOOTE SURPRISES MRS. CASSON.              107
hour of the day ? Sure your name is no more Oarr 
than you are my own niece."
( I have always been called Carr. My father wished it."
"And now you'll always be called my niece, because I 
wish it."
Juliet walked on in silence.  She could not argue with
this detestable woman, she was too angry to speak.
"In some ways you are like your mother," continued
Mrs. Noote, "though she was prettier than you. I never
knew her; for we were both beauties, and both had our
own friends. She was a petted little thing, and fond of
playing at being the lady, just like yourself, and mighty
proud when young Carwithen married her. Lawks I what
a rumpus there was, and what talk I I truly never did hear
anything like the things as was said. Well, well, her grand
match did her no good; he neglected her shameful; she
never had a rupee. It was as well she died, for later on he
got into disgrace, and had to fly the country."
"Disgrace I What disgrace ?" asked Juliet, sharply.
"Something over a horse-race. Oh, it's well known. He
has got married at home, and where there's no stories about
him, and left you out here all these years; and much good
it's done you, being a gentleman's daughter. Your mother
married above her station. Don't you go and make that
mistake; it brings trouble anyway.  Your father wishes
you to marry among your own people."
" Who are my own people ?" inquired her companion,
abruptly.
"I cannot rightly say now; they are all dead.   Old
Smithson used to brag of his family; but that was all my
eye. He was a gin-drinking, beer-swilling old rascal; and
you see, between him on one side, and your father on the
other, you've no call to beproud."
She looked at the girl walking beside her, with her clear-
cut features and delicate, half-scornful grace, her slender
figure, her swift, elastic tread, and secretly wondered how
slle came to be so different to any one she had ever seen-
so different to Lottie Smithson, who could not walk a yard,
who was always complaining of heat, or cold, or exertion,
anBd whose tears were ever near her eyes and her feelings on



<pb n="108"/>
o08             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
the surface. Juliet Carr was uncommon in every way
never complained, she never wept, she kept her thoug
herself-too much to herself-and even now, after
been distinctly shown her place in society, and beeni
Noote flattered herself -taken down a peg, she was w
along with her head as high as ever I  The only chan
her usual appearance was a crimson spot on either
Such an aristocratic-looking niece was a profitable 
appendage; people might ask her out now, but nob
step should Juliet stir without her newly elected aunt.
" The idea," she broke out, "of the Cassons asking
over to spend the day I And without me! as if I was
good enough company. Such impudence I I just
Mrs. Casson, as I came off now, that you never st
yard without me; and as to her coming over to us, as
offered, to have a chat with you, I said we had very
time for visitors. She won't invite herself over again
hurry."
This was Juliet's last expedition into society for
time.
Winter came. The snow lay two feet on the gro
long rambles were impracticable, and Juliet was, like Ma
in the moated grange, "aweary, aweary," of hours of
forced idleness, of hours of backgammon in an atm
reeking with tobacco, weary of Captain Noote's qu
and Mrs. Noote's nagging tongue. She spent most of
pocket-money on books and papers and postage stamps;
wrote long letters to her school-fellows and Mrs. Badf
but many of the eagerly expected replies Mrs. Noote po
into the middle of the kitchen fire. It gave her a 
thrill of pleasure to see the girl's face of blank disap
ment when she merely handed her two or three papers
a post-card; it was her revenge for some of Juliet's 
speeches, and nonchalant, disdainful ways.
Mrs. Noote complained to Mrs. Rozario that her ni
had a wonderful taste for low company, a statement i
the latter absolutely declined to believe.
"She is not that sort," she protested indignantly.
" Maybe not, but she is always down in the village, po
about among the people there. She gives them qui



<pb n="109"/>
' MRS. NOOTB SURPRISES MRS. CASSON.           Iog
dresses rag dolls, and makes jackets for the children,
they stuff her with stories about fairies and devils and
her music. Why, she and Gindia, the gwala's wife,
as thick as thieves."
" Teach her music I Oh well, I cannot get over that I"
mped Eulalie, in a tone of horror.
"No. And you should hear her playing on the sitar,
d singing hill songs; and when she passes through the
'llage I declare they salaam to her, as if she was a goddess,
never takes no notice whatever of me-no more nor if
was so much dirt."
Mrs. Noote's arraignment was partly correct.  Juliet
imoke the Pahari tongue fluently; she was in a way a hill
girl herself, and when she went down to the village, on an
rrand to the Bunnia's shop, or on her own account, every
one was glad to see her. First of all, she had made friends
with the sturdy brown children, and then with their parents
-who were children too-most of them high-caste Brah-
mins, whose simple dignity and singlemindedness and courtesy
afforded a strong contrast to the inmates of Kala Dara.
They all adored the Miss Sahib, whom they named among
themselves "Sunduria," that is to say, " the beautiful," and
gladly welcomed her under their flat stone roofs, and offered
her dahlias and marigolds. She knew their family histories
and ancient feuds, and all about their lawsuits, leases of
land, and the condition of their cattle and crops. It was
true that Gindia taught her how to play the sitar-an in-
rtument made out of a gourd with strings like a guitar-
and Gindia's old grandmother, Neoli, poured into her ears
m any legends and tragedies, and tales of self-immolation,
and desperate pilgrimages to almost inaccessible mountain
shrines. She gave her a smooth dark-green stone, pierced,
to wear as an amulet against the evil eye, and cautioned 
her to beware of the big blind bull who haunted the Taka
valley, or of the Dekkanee woman, who cast spells near the
old water mill, and above all of the mad fakir.
-   Juliet, on her side, had many strange things to impart to
Wondering listeners. She told them  that the world was
round; she told them of the great countries beyond the
Kala Pani--i.e black water, or sea; she told them about



<pb n="110"/>
10o             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
ships and steamers, and many things entirely new'to,
for these simple people had not had a college educat
the rising generation in the neighbourhood of Duran
they knew of the great world was when their broth
were jampannis, who had been carrying gay mem
season, came home in winter, and counted out their
rupees in the midst of a transported circle, many o
never handled a silver coin from one year to another. 
adventurous relatives brought in a breezy whiff of
atmosphere, and related wonderful tales of pony ra
boating, and dancing, and relapsed in a few hon
smart jampannis in blue-and-white livery, carrying
picking up tennis-balls, into common hill coolies
skull caps and the universal brown blanket.  Th
people were a contented race; their interests were
in a flock of goats, a good harvest of murga, and a fe
acres. They minded their cattle and their crops;
was the will of God.
At last spring came-welcome spring. The pine
began to carpet the ground, the rhododendrons
masses of crimson, white, and even pink flowers. Sh
might be met carrying tiny kids and lambs round th
(after the manner of scriptural pictures), and Julie
menced her long rambles once more. She feared no
nothing, not even me "Bhoots," against which she
expressly cautioned, as, armed with a staff, and acco
by Pouchee, her dog, she explored far beyond
valley; meeting strings of soft-footed camels, or t
flat-faced Tartars, coming in from Thibet, and spi
dustriously as they walked in the rear of flocks of
long-haired goats, laden with borax and salt. 
droves of Bhoetia ponies, tied head and tail, and 
pilgrims bound to the thrice holy shrines of Gang
Badrinath; but she never once encountered a Euro



<pb n="111"/>
({ lII J)
CHAPTER XV.
THE MOUNTAIN SPIRIT.
When she had passed, it seemed like the ceasiug of exquisite
mSioe."-Evangeline, Part I.
PIaOTUR  a Himalayan village at seven o'clock one bright
dewy morning in early autumn, the long crooked street
paved with irregular slabs, and bordered with low walls of
rde blocks of stone. At either side flat-roofed houses, with
* eborately carved wooden fronts, slant away among gardens
of pumpkins, pepper, tall sunflowers, and tangles of single
dahlias.  To the rear are rows of primitive cowsheds.
Houses, gardens, and cowsheds are alike half swallowed up
and lost to view among the high-standing yellow crops. In
narrow doorways old men are sitting drowsily, smoking the
ever-soothing hookah, whilst their sons and daughters are
out gathering in the harvest; children of tender years are
leading whole brigades of sheep and cattle to their daily
meagre pasture; and two or three yelping long-legged
pariahs appear to be left in sole charge of the juvenile
population-babies, kids, calves, and pony foals.
It is an ordinary Kumaoni hamlet, lying far remote from
big towns and cantonments, where the milking, reaping,
weaving, and grinding, goes on with unbroken monotony
year after year-nay, century after century; where a
woman's brightest dream is to be possessor of the heaviest
silver necklet; a man's ambition is bounded by a pair of
plough-bullocks; and the only intelligence that ever pene-
trates from the outer world is that received from neighbour-
ing villages, where news is shouted from hillside to hillside,
ud thus flies through the country, literally by word of
mouth.
Through such a village Gerald Eomilly was walking one
rl mornig, with a gun upon his shoulder and a tune upon
ip. He had left his parents still studying advertisements,
and roaming England in search of a home, and had arrived
India a year previously; he had spent the cold weather
t a camp of exercise, and subsequently been sent on a survey
ip to the frontier of Tlibet, and had but recently return Pe



<pb n="112"/>
12s            A FAMItY .Lf     fl  .!.
to his accustomed haunts and accustomU
then he obtained a few days' leave, ad .
wilds fishing and shooting far beyond  i
bungalows, merely camping in an eighty
subsisting on the spoil of his rod or
hours were those, when he landed a 
from its home in a snow-fed river, or bro
after half a day's hard stalking I He  I      _
these expeditions now, and on his way to a ^     _
as he tramped through this little hamlet, 
pure light-heartedness and the ehilrating
exquisite autumn morning.
In turning a sharp angle he wa sudd
woman's approach, not a swarthy, fiatfaced 
short, blue skirt, tangled locks, and reaping-ho
Juliet Oarwithen, straight from her frame. 
forgotten the picture and his whimsical ad
she came to remind him of her existence I Ye,
recognized the big hat, the white gown, '
red-brown hair, and the piquant face. 
She carried a stick in her hand, and wore 
gloves, and the only difference from the 
fact that the stick was an alpenstock, and
accompanied by a large foolish-looking yeow
The apparition met his bold gaze ofma
counterglance of haughty displeasure; as
seemed to come into her cheek as she passed 
an arrow, and light as the dew.
This was a strange time and place to se"t
English ghost-a Kumaoni village at seven
morning I The appearance seemed to be 
and walked with a springy, not to say la
the sort of gait he would have expected in
was too much astounded to shout or run
merely leant against the wall bordering the r
gazing, until the slight figure and broad hait
a curve leading through fields of yellow  f
vanished. Whe she had disappeared he
and, hurring t the nearest house, asked a 
smoking min his doorway-
: f;..



<pb n="113"/>
b    in  ahib who had passed by ?"
dn slowly removed his hookah, and
k50-     aHe had not seen her.
playing a jew's-harp, to a woman grinding
same question, and received the same reply;
she had paned so lightly, and drifted away so
he could not wonder.
a en a ghost-a young and lovely one, too-
like to see again. He did not divulge his
a     to a soul, bt he dwelt upon the vision in the
the night. His friends remarked that he had
alf as gooda bag as usuaL   Why? Was game
H:Fow ooud he confees that he had not been looking
he had been walking miles over the mountains
of another srt of quarry-the ghost of a pretty
* t*  Mmas, the brother   offier who shared Mr.
^  Mm  0i1w, was surprised when he asked him, with
cazlabl , if any English people lived near Kala 
lon  that I ever heard of," replied his comrade,
an old retired soldier who sells bacon and butter,
he is miles from it."
he any daughters ? " inquired the other, carelessly.
No-but stop, let me see. I think I heard the other
that he had a pretty niece. Why do you ask ?"
ere idle curiosity," colouring to a deeper shade of tan.
And you are off to beat the same neighbourhood on
y ? " exclaimed Captain Mackintosh, suspiciously.
Yes, I think so."
Although you had such wretched sport last time; and
ay that makor and even gurool have left the country ?"
Yes," he assented doggedly.
G erald, come now, own up; you have some other game
What sort of game ? " inquired Romilly, briefly.
'I amn aware that you are not a lady' man; but still, for
-I know, you may have met your fate in the shape of
o fair mountain spirit."
"If you think so, I invite you to come out and see the



<pb n="114"/>
14             A FAMILY LItRNBS    t      ,
fair mountain spirit. You are not thinking of
yout?" 
"No; and you know very well that I
"  ,if you like to come this time, aai
roughig it, and engage to walk from twenty
good,5 I  indulge you with a bottle of the bes
But this invitation was emphatically decli
Bomilly's game was possibly a myth, and 
worth the candle-the candle being represented
fare, viL black bread and spring water, rising
break, and following the steps of an active 
sportsman. Roughing was all very well, but 
fully endured downright hardship-there was
that; and Captain Mlckintosh suffered him to
peace-  d alone.
He haunted the neighbourhood of Kala Mutt,
round in a circuit of fve miles, and saw nothin
goats, and buffaloes. At last he arrived at tJ
that it must have been a trick of his imagin
ever it was, it was a curious experience, and a
he was resolved to keep to himself. He had
set the messtable in a roar at his expense. 
laugh if he told them that he had met the o
portrait, walking down the street of an o
village !
He still continued to go out shooting in q
sport; sometimes in company, but generally
afternoon, after a hard day's work, he min
lost his way, and found himself close to a '
storied bungalow, and in a part of the hills to 
never yet penetrated. He was in luck, for a
was brewig, the last word of the monsoon, 
banks of ink-black clouds were drifting
sheet lightning flickered round the mountains,
"Te Cind, that grand old
Swept his thundeu-harp otf pns
If the wort came to the worst, thog fl
perhaps these people would put him up tor 
4j'



<pb n="115"/>
6* way, throug h wfid tea-
eata   ' quarrters, and a mom-
_lalle si des but desolation
-  dedA so he made his wa;
The door stood wide, ani
t    tas ose; but the premises
sa down upon the steps and
id beSa to speoulate as to
a, tW o get home. Presently
_l nin mad louder, and after
- - roring down upon the
lood-p     of heaven had let
mlyoamptumlated     him-
is fi the niok of time,
above his head,
themountains.
caused neither
:ds0   theo house. It was
:b his feet, walked across
door to the left; it opened
fished   asm a drawing-room.
who trned her head and
LbrSed-a girl, whose love-
in the shadow of that
tr)et or gem of colour.
sIt my loel'    -
Room cad JGie.
dinoluntarily, as h advanced
_  and took off his eop
I    l rvMin he approached
mnso.  Ymu; here vas we Same
rty e>,ye  who bad stared at her



<pb n="116"/>
1x6            A FAMILY LIKNE SS
so strangely when she passed him in Basita village
weeks before. She reonised him as one of a type she
seen at Ohotah Bilat, loitering on the church step
galloping along the mall  He was an officer, and
from Drano. What had brought him to this part of
world ?
"I did not expect to see you here," was his astoun
remark.
"I don't understand you," rejoined the young lady
a clear but freezing tone-a tone that, as he mentally
marked, would have frozen a salamander-a beautiful
invaded her cheeks, and went and came with every b
and there was a look of prod inquiry in her eyes.
then, was no spirit from the other world, but a real
human being, who must be treated aooordingly.
"I hope you will excuse my unceremonious entra
said the stranger. "I took shelter from the rain, and
no idea the   e e was occupied. Will you give me 
room till the storm is over ? 
" It is not my house," rejoined the lady, closing the
as she spoke; "you have as much right to be here
have."
" Then you do not live here ?"
"No; no one lives here, or has lived here for y
come sometimes to practise on this old piano."
" I am very sorry I have interrupted you," he said.
wish you would go on singing-will you ? "
" No, thank you, I had quite finished," rising and w
away from the instrument, and seating herself in a
backed chair, looking-had she but known ib-morio
lady Juliet than ever.
I must introduce myself. My name is Romilly."
Lady Juliet bowed-a north-pole bow.
"I am quartered in Durano. You know
course ? 
eGerasd Bamlly, for once in his life, was actually
embarrassed-his glib tongue faltered-his me
was sobered; in the company of this shabbily 
sitting among dingy surroundings, he was less a



<pb n="117"/>
IV, PACE.               I7
_Su., than he had ever been in the
to draw u an old armchair at a respectful
th ramnd taeble, seated himself, and, with one
_1 '. mes, took in the situation. A long,
i,'_b iamm narrow windows, looking into a
'we a damp room-judging by the walls;
9_ i., d and been nailed up again by
", -* dt.~[ ' wp a aneient and gaudy, the
*iiolJ f s" g.,bb , connected by enor-
l b,  ; ; the sofas and tables were
. gra     ano seemed to totter on
wit -age; a few weatherstained
- ,sos     wool-work screens
of a former genera-
e*d out of date, and
s she sat with her
... '.   inteztly  fixed upon
,? _~d ~ _fromi t1e roof of
:     inldifferent to Gerald
- r e one of the faded prints
Oha be P he asled himself. How
ind faiy porly ait to be sitting
.S        ha-g  uKJ maonhills ? Was
'   l ~    ~her face from its steady
-    met~    she bl.sh .
with a genial
I have often seen
fN," was the somewhat
is Oarwithen-Juliet Oar.
. lboked at him in.astonished
-v  e   Mv e m o  f o e    head,
_,* ".l y      asiked in a low voice.
IwAs at hom 1a yer on leave



<pb n="118"/>
X18            A    FAMILY LIKNESS. 
I knew a Mr. and Mr. Carwithen in Dover, and inW
drwing-room hangs a half-length picture of you."
"Of me? Imposible! I       have never even been 
At any rate, it is a portrait of Lady Juliet
ad might have been painted for you. I believe it is
than a hundred years ol'd."
"And," struggling to speak gravely, "do you think
I am more than a hundred years old ?"
"No; but for the life of me, I can't understand.
are her image; you might have walked out of the 
You wear the very same sort of hat and dress."
" You seem to have taken an interest in the picture."
"Yes; I used to be fearfully ohaffed about it-"
stopped abruptly.
"Why ?" she demanded, transfixing him with a pair
beautiful eyes.
"Oh-well-I-I can't exactly tell you."  No; it
not possible to confess to this somewhat austere young
that it was because his insane admiration of the picture 
a jest and a byword, and that actually a photograph 
had been premed upon him by Mrs. arwithen as a 
Sift.
"Do you take me for a ghost?" continued the i
eopy of the picture.  Perhaps you don't know that
is a haunted house, and that no one will stay here after 
but myself."
Yes; she had the same mischievous look in her an
the portrait; and he was drifting into love, faser tn
autumn leaf drifted on a flush October river.     i
"I must confess that I thought you were& ghlc 
I met you in the village some weeks ago. It Be*A g
to come across ou in these wild region. Yb'*     liv
here,yosay ?  repeating thisqestio fo te watm.
"No    i   d hboe has not been  ibitd    ye
belonged, or belongs, to a General Traff4, ad must ]ha 
been a delightFal spo one. Yea ea o  *e remains of
orchards ra l  gidu     terra   Thee s quite a 
ness of lovely Aea; the roead helitope grown
enormous bushes; and t te tubeross and lonquils m



<pb n="119"/>
PACE TO FACE.                   i19
ight. The old chokidar allows me to pick them, and to
ramble about the house, and to play the piano, and to dust
this room."
'     "Why is it deserted ? It is in a grand situation, and I
noticed quantities of tea,-and a tea-house, and coolie lines,
as I came over the hills."
"( There was cholera in the neighbourhood, and three of
the Traffords died in one day; they are buried under a
deodar in the garden; and then General Trafford shut up
the house, and left the place almost as it stood, and has
I    never been near it since. At first, his agents used to let it
for the summer; but it is too out of the way, and in too
bad repair. The roof is in a dreadful state, and some of the
floors upstairs are not safe, and it has a bad name among
the natives; they call it the ' Devil's Bungalow."'
"And you come here by yourself ? "
"Oh yes; I Am not the least superstitious. I come over
about three times a week."
"Do you come from a distance ?" he asked craftily.
"About three miles. I live with people of the name of
Noote."
"Nootel" he gave an involuntary start.    Yes; he
remembered-the name, and Mr. Carwithen's sly inquiries.
"Do you know Mr. Carwithen, who lives in Dover ? " he
continued.
" No," dropped from her pretty lips like an icicle.
" Have you never seen him ?" he persisted.
"No "-a pause. "When did you see him last ?"
"Let me think. I believe he came to see me off when I
started for India."
" The I conclude that he is a great friend of yours," and
she turned and looked at him keenly.
" Seeing people off is not always a proof of attachment,"
he answered with a smile. "As you do not know him, there
is no harm in my telling you that there is not much love
lost between me and Mr. 0arwithen."
"Why does he not like you ?"
"I believe he thinks that I am wanting in proper respect
for Adolphus Carwithen, Esuire; and I dislike him becaue
he is such a worldly old snner, always turning over his



<pb n="120"/>
Seo             A FAMILY LIKENBESS
bread to see on which Bide is the butter, and running 
big-wig---- ,,
Stop, Mr. Romilly I interrupted the young lady,
a small, imperious-looking hand. "Before you say an y
more, I ought to tell you that Mr. Carwithen is my 
"Your father I" stammered Romilly. "I though
might be some distant connection, or even your
but-your father   Well, what is said is said. After
Miss Oarwithen, you are not in earnest, are you ? You
me just now you had never seen him; and the 
know has no family--  "  He paused, conscious of
intolerable embarrassment.
"No," with a rather tremulous smile about her lips.
suppose he has never mentioned me ?"
"Never."  A momentary silence ensued, during w
Gerald was endeavouring to collect his scattered wits. 
withen the father of a grown-up daughter I the fath
this beautiful, aristocratic-looking girl I
"I suppose, from what you say, I must resemble
ancestress--my grandmother, or great-grandmo
presently remarked his companion.
" There is no suppose in the matter-it is a fact."
"It is strange that you should recognize me fr
And you are the first person who has ever called me by
real name."
"Why, are you not always called by it?" he a
surprise.
"I believe my father did not wish it; he thought
was sufficient," with a little smile; " and I am ko
here as Juliet Carr."
"Your real name is far prettier, and I shall  l
you by it."
Juliet made no direct reply; she was not likely to 
young man again, so what did it matter.
" How dark it is in here from the rain " she said,
" And this room has a damp, mushroomy smell 1I
shall go into the verandah and see if there are any 
its clearing."
Bomilly hastened to follow her, carrying a chair,
he placed well away from the wet, drifting rin.



<pb n="121"/>
PACE CB     PACE .               rt
'What an evening I "she exclimed, as she looked out on
leaden grey sky, the banks of lowering clouds, the
a sea, the steps a cascade, and all the battered zinc
from the roof discharging torrents of tawny water.
hall I get home ?"
"Oh, I expect it will clear," he rejoined cheerfully. " It's
much too bad to last; but the worst of the storm has not
'come yet.  See those masses of clouds drifting slowlT
towards one another; when they meet, there will be a gran
crash; and look at the lightning playing round the mountains
-are you afraid ?" l"
"No, I am accustomed to it; I have lived in these hills
all my life. Will you not get a chair for yourself "
"Thank you, I would rather stand."
He was leaning against a pillar, looking down on his new
acuainTtance, and in the fuller light of the verandah he was
reaizing how lovely she was. Ai he gazed, he marvelled at
the tenacity of type in some races. Here was Lady Juliet
revived in the person of her descendant. Had the original
Lady Juliet such a wealth of hair? such gold splashes
among the bronze? Had she as clear a complexion, as
finely pencilled eyebrows as her great-great-randdaughter ?
Pooh I not she I She was a fashionable eighteenth-century
beauty, made up with white lead and red pamt, and probably
half her hair was false I thus cruelly wronging his former
divinity. There was, at any rate, no deception about her
exquisite prototype, who sat gazing dreamily at the rain,
wrapt in her own thoughts, and apparently oblivious of his
presence. She was about nineteen years of age, and had
lived in these hills all her life. How ? Why? Where?
How came she by her English accent, her manners, her air of
calm, unruffled repose ? Possibly the latter was inherited from
the ancestress who had endowed her with her face and figure.
In spite of Juliet's appearance of tranquillity, her mind
was in an uproar. Here was a man who had recently seen
her father, who could tell her much about him and about
his mode of life. How was she to question him ? He had
confessed to their mutual dislike; but this was an unparal-
leled opportunity. Time was precious; such an occasion
was not likely to fall to her lot twice.



<pb n="122"/>
12             A FAMILY LKANESS             2
Thus it will'be seen that each was anxioos
examine the other; and the lady, as sometimes is
had the frsta well as the last word I
" I know you do not like my father," she began 
" I would never have told you that, had I knowa 
"No, of course not; but I have never seen him,
any one who knew him, and I should like to hear
about him. How does he look ? is he well ?"
" He was very fit indeed, and looks surprisingly y
have a grown-up daughter."
"Yes, I suppose he does. i believe he is a 
man, is he not "
" Well, I should not call him busy, though he has
something on hand. He does a little yachting, a.
shooting, a good deal of visiting at country housew.-
has heaps of friends, of people who like him, so don't'
what I say; I take queer likes and dislies."
" Yes; tell me some more, please."
"Mr. Carwithen is a wonderful letter-writer, as no
gyou can testify.",
Juliet winced, and her colour deepened perceptibl.
"Hullo I" thought her companion, "of course Ive
the wrong thing now, and put my foot in it somewh
"I suppose you know Mrs. Carwithen  " she asked.
an effort.
" Oh yes, much the best of the two; we get on
house on fire. She makes her house very pleasant,
fond of society. She has ripping diamonds, and goes
court balls. Surely she is not your mother, is she "
"No; my mother-" and she hesitated. 
about to add, "never had ripping diamonds, or 
court balls. She was a sergeant's daughter," but 'r
the insane impulse. Why should she open her hi
this gay stranger, with his merry grey eyes? 
merely added, "My mother died when I was two J
old."
" And youn  ve been in the hills ever since ?"
"Yes, at school, until last year, and now I
Captain and Mrs. Noote."



<pb n="123"/>
PACAE T   PAC&                   3 1
'EWha l   the butter and bacon people?" with raised
" The batter and bacon people," she echoed demurely.
"And have you never been down to Durano ? "
Yes, once or twice, to church. I hated it."
Hated church, Miss Oarwithen ? I am astonished at
yOU."
"No, no; it is a dear little church. I wish I could go
every week; but I detested staying at the Bozarid-and
eeping there."
Rozarios ? " in a puzzled tone. "I don't seem to know
the name; except the apothecary."
" Yes; we stayed at the apothecary'."
"Good Heavens I surveying her i great astonishment.
And, to tell the truth, I did not like it."
"I should rather think not. Do you know no ladies in
the neighbourhood ? "
"Yes; once we went to see Mr. Oasson. She was
charming, and she was extremely kind to me, and asked me
to go and spend a long day with her; but Mrs. Noote was
quite angry, and would not hear of it."
"And her reason, if I may presume to inquire "
"Was because Mrs. Casson did not invite her also."
"Invite old Mother Noote to spend the day I That
would be a treat."
" It would have been a great treat for me; but Mrs.
Noote will not allow me to go anywhere without her."
" And how came you to be here ? "
" Oh, she knows that I never see a soul in this direction,
and she does not mind as long as I never meet any one."
"And to-day is the exception that proves the rule. I am
glad you like Sophy Oasson, she is a cousin of mine, a sort
of second cousin twice removed; but any relation is near in
India. Bobbie and I were at school together. He isf-"
Whatever he was about to add was cut short in a violent
manner, the storm which had been raging and raving round
the valley, making it resound as with a crack of msketry,
and shaking the walls of the old bungalow at each peal, now
culminated in one frightful crash of thunder diectly over.
head, the house seemed to rock to its foundations  As



<pb n="124"/>
124             A FAMILY LIKENSS&
Juliet started from her seat, there was a qi
glare, a blinding light cleft the black heavens in 
they discharged a thunder-bolt which struck a tre
a few feet of the verandah, and with a loud  u
buried itself in the wet earth. So sudden and so
the bolt, so blinding the flash, so stifling the su
Juliet could neither see nor speak; she staggered
with her hands extended before her, and found h
oeived in some one's arms. Yes; a man, a strang
was holding her tightly. She felt the rough tw
against her cheek. She was conscious of a
assuring grasp about her waist; the impropriety of
ceeding never even dawned upon her mind-for it was 
filled with the fear of death. In a very short time, 
minute, Juliet had come to her senses, coughed, o
eyes, and quickly disengaged herself, still trembling v
"I thought I was struck blind," she gasped, half
with the fumes of sulphur. "What an escape I"
shuddered.
"Yes, thank God I" said her companion. " It was
shave," pointing to the ploughed-up ground and 
smoking tree. "For once in our lives, we were 
few feet of death; but the worst is over now-two t
bolts never fall in the same place. I suppose this is
chokidar ? He seems pretty well frightened out of his
It was Krookia, the chokidar (or watchman) whe
on the premises, a tall old man in a dirty turban andu
green wadded coat, who now tottered into the ver
"It was to be looked for," he shouted. "T
blight on the bungalow; all the world knows it is th
house. The sahib and the Miss Sahib had better
worse befalL"
"It will clear in ten minutes, and then we will
Gerald. "You can close the house as soon as you
don't mind us."
"Yes; and a poor man that can nver go, but mu
with these devils for six rupees a month I" cried
passionately.
" It sounds a s    sum, considering the society, b
is cheap, and you an live on it comfortably. Why, 



<pb n="125"/>
PFACE   0 PACE.                  s25
mnty-filve-seers of barley for the rupee. You are as well
B  as any ghoorka in the line."
The sahib is joking. I can hardly exist. I swear it
o the cow's tail, and this house is so lonely, so far from the
baaar. Does the sahib not want a chuprassi, or a chokidar,
that he may lift his slave out of his misery ?"
"Why, Krookia, you told me one day that you had large
property and lands, said Juliet.
"' "Hazoor I I did but jest. I have a share in my ancestral
village, which is twenty koss from here; the share is but
seven rupees. You ask the people of my pergunnah; my
brother is rich, he owns ponies and takes road contracts,
but Krookia is a poor, poor man."
Krookia had recovered his wits, got over his fright, and
his two speaking eyes fixed on the sahib, saying, "Buck-
sheesh, bucksheesh, and again, "bucksheesh."
"How   come you to be twenty koss from    your own
village ?" inquired Gerald, authoritatively.
"Lord of the world I I was servant here, in the General
Sahib's time. I was khitmaghar, when many sahibs and
Miss Sahibs were here."
"Then you were here when they died?" interrupted
Juliet, " those two girls who are buried in the garden."
"Alas I I was here then. I saw the two sisters carried
forth in the same hour; one of them was beautiful, as it
might be you, Miss Sahib; and a sahib in a pltoon(regi-
ment), as it might be Mis sahib, loved her. When I saw
you and the sahib in the verandah just now, it brought the
old days back."  He blinked on them benignly, and Juliet
became scarlet  "But she is dead," proceeded Krookia;
"withered i one day, like a flower, and the sahib got
another wife. It is ever thus with young men: they love,
and they forget; except"-suddenly pulling himself up-
"this sahib here. It is written on his forehead that he
would never forget."
"I never shall forget such an arrant old humbug," remarked
Gerald; and then catching sight of Juliet's face of cold dis-
pleaure, he hastened to change the subject, and exclaimed-
"You see, I am a true weather-prophet. Look I it is
going to clear, after all."



<pb n="126"/>
6              AJ FAMILY LIKRNSS&
CHAPTER XVn.
ArFIB THBE TOBM.
But to be young was very heaven. 
BY six o'clock it was a lovely evening. The do
ceased, the storm passed off, and with one of thou,
changes common to the Himalayas, the clouds had
and the snows stood out with that dazzling brilliac
liar to breaks in the rains. A few heavy drops
sullenly from the roof of the verandah, a few little 
rivulets of tawny water scoring the gravel-drive, a few
beaten to the earth, and the blackened remains of a 
laburnum tree were all that testified to Nature's recent
break. No one would believe, looking across the 
now so green and brilliant, that it had so lately 
the month of the bottomless pit, and had been filled 
clouds and lightning, and, as it were, flames and smoke.
" It is quite fine now," said Juliet, drawing on her gi
and taking her alpenstock, "and I must go." 
"You will allow me to accompany you home ? "
"Oh no. Pray don't think of it. I am accustomed
roam all over these hills quite alone, and I shall only
taking you out of your road."
"You cannot do that. I have no road to be taken 
of I My offer is not entirely disinterested. I am lost, 
one of the babes in the wood. I have not the fa
notion as to where I am. Perhaps, if I go as far asCap
Noote's, he will give me a guide of some sort ? "
"Perhaps so,' she assented rather dubiously; "and .
think I must be starting; it gets dark sosoon. 
The chokidar tracked them down the terrace and betwe
the wet hedges out into the grass-grown avenue. He 
the craving of his kind for buckheeah, and was prepared 
follow the sahib for miles; but the ahib happily divi
his intentions, and threw him a couple of rupees, a do
that made his od visage wrinkle with glee.
"Ah," he muttered, as he saw them pass along



<pb n="127"/>
to bwes', ;  I   w that      s       l  
the tea boshee, "I knew that some uahib log would oome
sd find her out for she has a voice like running water,
face like the young moon. She will go and never return
She will cross the Kala Pani with him, and poor old Krookia
win get no more rupees."
Meanwhile the young couple descended the hill side by
i de. The ground was wet, but the grasses, for which the
place was famous, lifted their feathery heads as if merely
refreshed by the storm, and thousands of others, resembling
small snowballs, looked whiter than ever after the recent
rain. What had been meek little runnells stealing timidly
down the hillsides, were now bold, brawling torrents of
dirty water, flecked with solid blocks of creamy foam, raging
tumultuously towards the valley.
The avenue soon gave place to the cart track, and the
track to a narrow path along the side of a ridge, overhung
with straggling brambles. Narrow as it was, Gerald con-
trived to walk abreast with his companion, whose pretty,
slender feet got over the ground with practised ease. The
sun was setting gorgeously, as if summoning the world, and
saying, "Behold the finest sunset that has ever been I"
Here and there he touched a range, and turned it into
dazzling gold; and here and there the peaks he had aban-
doned looked grey and deathlike-like mountain ghosts.
On the left hand, a fringe of pines-storm-worn veterans-
stood out in sharp black outline against a glowing orange
sky. All around was silence-the intense silence of the
great lonely hills at nightfall, and there was not a sound to
be head, save the rushing of the streams and the murmur
of two young voices.
" So you ave been nearly a year in this part of the world,
Miss Oarwithen," said her escort.  "Don't you find it
desperately sow? You have not even our resources. You
do not smoke or shoot 1"
"No; but I sew,and I read a good deal, and write letters,
and try to keep up my French and German."
"And when your literary labours are over, what do
you do ?"
"I go for long walks with my dog."
"And after your rambles "



<pb n="128"/>
12l8            A FAMILY LKRNESS              4I
"I go home to tea, as I am doing now, and I read'
to Captain Noote, and I play bakammson."
"I sppose he is an old fogey  "  e asked uspici
"Oh yes; 'as old as the hills' his wife says. I
he is seventy."
"A gentleman ?" 
"What do you call a gentleman?" she rejoined, 
sa mile.
" Let me see," taking off his cap, and running his
through his crisp locks. "Position, breeding, 
and money are supposed to make one; but my idea 
gentleman is a man who respects himself, and makes 
do the same."
"Do you know that your definition would apply 
hundreds of people around us ? " 
"Yes. Quite true. I know many gentlemanly men a
four or five rupees a month. My own bearer has the
and manner of the old regime; and Captain Noote ?"  ;    _
"Has not the air and manner of the old r4gime, 
you will soon see him, and then judge of him for yoursel
"What a diplomatic reply. Has he no marked
liarities ? "
"He wears a fur cap always. He never ceases 
questions-idle, unnecessary questions; and he eats
eggs raw-a horrible spectacle- -and he gobbles o
his food."
" Well, I myself like an egg that has been merelyar
through the kitchen, and though I don't wear a fur 
am afraid I am always asking questions too, am I not ? '
"You have not asked me about Mrs. Noote," she answe
evasively.
"No; for I believe I have seen her with my own ey
at our sports. We met, 'twas in a crowd, and she wore n
wreath f roses, but cape of cat-kins, and rode a big 
pony, which she was whacking with her umbrella."
"Yes, that was M. Noote," said Juliet, with a smile.
"I am ashamed of being always in the interrogat
mood, Mis (withenb; but you can retaliate, and ask
questions"
"Yes, thank you. But I really don't want to kn



<pb n="129"/>
FP AF R  fB  SRJO   . 1a9
anything about you t Oh, I dont mean to be so rude.
Please forgive me. I did not quite mean that; but I shall
never see you again, after to-day; and-and--"
"Pray don't be sure of that," he interrpted. "I fancy
you and I will meet often." It was Kismet. He had dis-
covered Lady Juliet for limself, and was firmly determined
not to lose sight of her.
"Mrs. Noote does not care for strangers," said Juliet,
gravely.
"Perhaps she may care for m. I am generally a great
favourite with old ladies."
"But she does not consider herself old. Have you any
sisters ?" continued the girl, wishing to make up for her
late unfortunate remark.
"No, not one; not even a sister-in-law."
" And are you not sorry ?"
"No; I cannot say that I miss them. I generally get on
very well with other fellows' sisters."
"Do you really " was her simple exclamation. "And
where have you been since you came out from home "
"First to a camp, and then I went on a survey trip to the
frontier; it was rather a long and tough business. The
precipices were awful We could only get forward like
natives, in our bare feet, and at the rate of ten miles a day;
the route was scarcely practicable."
"What was the road like ? Anything like lds-a narrow,
slippery path ?"
"There was none in many parts; in others, round the
face of sheer precipices, there were wooden supports intro-
duoed into the rock, and covered with slabs of stone, about
two feet wide-a drop of about three thousand feet. You
crawled along like a fly on the side of a house. Ah, that
was a bad bit, pecially where, in some places, the wood had
rotted away, and a tree trunk was flung across, and you
had to get over on it as best you could, with a ghastly
looking drop, and a river roaring for you below I"
" You must have a good head ? "
"Yes, luckily for me.  I don't often lose it-But, by
Jove, I've lost it now," he added to himself.
"And when you got to the frontier, what did you find ?
K



<pb n="130"/>
p3              A FAMILY LIKENCS.
"Ob, foti    men in pgt    and filhy
ad o      -.now  es        aed spears       bo
wrrO    id sing   They oould   ng stone fS r sixty
aOde      s-me grad shots at sm.   They were
ad d live on the fesh of wild hore."
"An what d    you live on ? 
"Very little indeed; dal and attar, and now and
ome yak beef.    We couldn't manage muoh
yoU see."
"Yes; I am surpried you got beck alive.
yo go to next ? "
"To Tamashabad-a gay station on the plains ;
was not particularly gay when I was there. t lepent
my time attending funerals. By the way, taling of
I suppose you will not always live in thse wilds, bI
emerge into what is called 'the world' ?"
"hope to go to England next year. I have some
friends there who are going to send for me.
"But, Mr. Oarwithen P-Pardon me, I am inmo
you must find me worse than aaptain Noote 1"
He had an intense desire to fnd out wh this be
rl had been cong       to the wilds of an  , and
&imld not keep his ifs from finding spee       s 
" I snppoae yon ay maet any one in your rambles !'
"Yes; I know a great number of hill eople,
about our own villge. I  n spea the dalect,
ver good friends. I make their children bead-n
and Ijakets      o f scraps of my old dresses; an
tell me stories, and give me preemts of berries and
rooms."
"Berries nd mushrooms I You don't men to "r
Srt lhem 7 "                           '      .
efg them P  "                          ~ '
"Wh      wild strawberries and rapberri   (  a
**do?                              . ** '  * .ao;  1,
:"AN       to tell the ta'le.  ".  ,    ' - '.. i
Yes, tt    hear manj.       eri lI    of ttOe,
are jot Pu tbml       aa e heot,   e a t you sm
snxpooe ci 'Tf$'il0 h1 T iionll aij luifand ^^fiH
and love 'Laflin. Ltb atun,*, hItWUB wa a h
tragedy."



<pb n="131"/>
AM=HC^'  2fTSSTBS S7TORM          131
ias t about? Bt I need not ask. Land or
ow ld you guee ? It eos all about a beautiful
e oot two men their lives. Purooli lives in the
ll; bu, handsome as she is, I hate to look at her."
y.Do% yon like looking at handsome people ? Ido," he
ith emphais.
No, no. Not when their face has been the cause of
- bAh, she is a sort of Hill Helen-' many drew swords
fought. Where'er I came, I brought calamity.' There,
wre nearl down I" he exclaimed. "You had better
to me.'
o thanLk you," she replied, with a rather derisive
but next moment she was thankful to snatch at an
ed as she was, she found it diffieult to proceed.
wa a mere goat-path at the best of fim, and had
positively dangerous from slips in the reoent storm.
lSbingh, a herdsman in quest of two strayed kids,
I   he encountered the Miss ahib, and stared hard
beneath his wet, brown blanket as he saw her being
down the hill by a youing and active sahib-a sahib
~      S.      u'.i-oo. a iin m  rano, without doubt I He squatted
adB looked after the pair in amazement. He
-n Am          mnre surrised if he could have
*   rhib was saying to himself, as he held
his own. He    s sa ing-
_     Pt!----1 m,,r            ~_o' riin_ the hand of Mrs.
W r,  ;'4- anada he involuntarily
4 ith that conviction.
ay. ooum no longer distinguish each
~     I.t Wmas gone; the stars were out; "the
-P . .    bpurple gloom; " it was time that
: Once in the valley, she set off st the
ti  r  speed, for she feared, as well she might, the wrath
aNooe.
fe   an that girl be ?" -r. Noote lbad S lously
o   ? her husband.  She went to    d   Best



<pb n="132"/>
132            A FAMILY LIKENESS 
"Well, she an't come to much harm thare-an 
said the captain. 
"No. r don't mind her spending her days there '
betae than racing hot foot to Durano or the Cassons,
meting young men, and getting her head turned.
bad enough the day she gts her English letters " 
"Well, I declare, I think she is wonderfully content
she never asks for aught, not even to go to church; she
no diversion, no company of any kind, and she is here 
a year. She's a good girL"
"She ain't much trouble, that I'll allow; and she 'i
water-drinker, and has done up my bonnets beautiful,
is a reat help with the butter; but I always feel sh
brooding over some plan in her head, that she isloo
forward to some scheme."
"No, no; nairy a bit. What scheme could she havej
It's you that has the plan. I wonder how she will take 
it ?  And he took his pipe off the chimney-piece, and l
the room4hckling.
"Beven 'oelook-not a sign of that girl I" repeated M
Noote, for the third time. Bhe was getting seriously un
regarding the safety of her precious sixty pounds a ye
Had Juliet fallen down'   khnd, or been gored by
buffalo ?  Ah I there was the click of the gateat  t
and the sound of voices  She hurried into the verada
lamp in hand.
CHAPTER XVlII
AN UNWELWO0M   GUF ST.
II leave my oharaoter behind me.a
Sacoolfor Se.M L 
OWrz, I truly never didl" cried Mrs. Noote, in 
sharpee key. "Oall thi an hour for a respectable girl
be coming ome t" 
I could not come any sooner," rejoined Juliet, boli
advancing into the light; and her hostess was startled 
see that she was accompanied by a good-looking y



<pb n="133"/>
AN rUNWELCOME GUEST.                133
lan officer and' entlemn. This was beyond
^bthing,; where had she picked him up ?
:^w-j # . Noote, this is Mr. Romilly," said the girl, intro-
u.'toing him as coolly as if she brought home a companion
ever night of her life.
f"II met him at the' Rest.' Perhaps you can spare a coolie
to show him the road to Durano; he has lost his way."
i"Oh, of course-of course I" replied Mrs. Noote, only
too delighted to be rid of him so quickly; and, raising her
voice, she called, "Button Singh."
"What's up now ? What makes Miss. Judy so late ?"
inquired Captain Noote, as he shuffled out, pipe in mouth.
"Oh I "-catching sight of the stranger, he snatched away
his pipe and touched his cap-" your servant, sir. What
can we do for you "
"I've been out shooting, and have missed my way. If
you can give me a guide to Durano, I shall bse bged."
* "Surely, sir, surely, it's seven long miles, b   we will
manage it; but come in-come in; we are jit sitting
down to a bite of supper, Cold pig's cheek and soda cakes,
if you'll condescend to our humble fare."
Condescend to sit at table with Lady Juliet I Needless
to say, he accepted the invitation with effusion.
Mrs. Noote said nothing. She was excessively put out;
once Noote came across a gentleman, he was merely an old
sergeant saluting and "ir-ing," and letting himsef down.
However, she would give it to him to-morrow, encouraging
officers about the place, when he knew  her plans for
William John, and him coming up in three weeks. Just
for the present she dissembled her feelings, and went in
search of another cup and saucer, and a pair of candles;
but she subsequently dispensed hospitality with an un.
pleaant straight line between her brows, and her lips so
tightly closed  they might have been pasted together.
Meanwhile Juliet, who had retired to change her wet
Bkirts and shoes, now joined the company in a soft white
dre, with her hair freshly arranged.  he ws spised to
find Mr. Eom'ily (artful wretch) in brisk oonvea tion with
his hostes; his cheeriness had proved irresble; he was
young, merry, and handsome; and, after all, Mr. Noote



<pb n="134"/>
134             A FAMILY P LJIS= AT
was a s.omm-but a shrewd one, too. Not once
sufer him to masm a remn      to Juliet, who was
ua me    eaeS ily pretty. She herself answered, or
.MkMev: ey one of his question, and poured forth 
d   easelee  dhatter. She might bridle his to
ipvent his speaing to Miss Orwithen, but she 
control his eyes; and, whilst Mr Noote gabbled wayoi
Durano society, he was stealing many glances at her
Yes; the slender hands, delicate nostrils, fine lines of.
and brow, were all nnmistakble signs of race. He
more than ever amazed to see this brilliant creature 
such surroundings ; he dawdled purposely, so as to
the meal; but at last it was over, and Mrs. Noote, 
left the room, displayed considerable tactical abilit
calling to Juliet to follow her. "There was a note fa
to wnte, a*d she had better leave the gentlemen to
their smoake.
CaptaitNoote now hastened to place a square 1
oontaminjy'hisky on the table; also a goblet of water,
tumblers, and his pipe, and assured his guest that he was
to think of stirring-he must wait for the moon.
Young Romilly was aniously awaiting the return 
Juliet, so he gladly lit a cheroot, poured out some
whisky and water, and let the old man "bukh," whilst 
glance wandered round the apartment.     What a
What a home for this refined and well-bred girl I
a couple of companions I He noted the rickety fu
the stained walls, and the lack of the ordinary omf
life. What had Miss Oarwithen .done to deserve 
retreat ? What a contrast to her father's luxurious 
The old sergeant at his elbow, with his red shinj'
and eoae, weather-beaten features, was imbibin
pomttio, and beooming each instant more gar
more Ommiaative.
."Y    Ms, il' unusual for us to take inboarde
expained,apqafmos of nothing; "but the missus, sbe
she wantse  aoni,       a   we bhad a spare room ;
sixty poundiSa  ' ain't no blin  nt I   he's no 
or expense; p     take what's going, and has no e
luxurie" 



<pb n="135"/>
I A_ W   LCOM      GtUES.          13
;ed oWrt*l has not" acquieseed hi lIstener,
ai pai  " e otinued the old man, on whomthe
was completely lods  "It suits her folks, and it
OIL"
."1How did you hear of the young lady? for I don't
she heard of you."
Tiee T     yoe've y aid it I That's what she i-a  young
_ Wty, ad not a bit proud, though 'Liza differs  She goes
'-ong the Pahari fol, and talks and plays with the children.
ve seen her herding goabt ere now, and picing wood for
old women. She makes out all Eliza's butter-ill beau-
tify, and goes her me   s.   She dust this room, and
ddle her own pony. No; she is noprend; but I won't
deny she is a dainty little husy  When the mountain
srea     are coming down yellow and muddy, would you
believe that she strains every drop of her bath-uate herself
through a calico bag ? She won't  t eat oarse  t, or fat,
or onions. No; she'd rather have ohupattie, id she
would not touch whisky to save her life I  She's mortal
particular about her handkerchiefs, and her shoes and
stockings. Lord    what a foot it is! and what lovely
ankles I and-"
But how did you come across her?" interrupted his
listener, impatiently.
%     "Well, you see, Mr. Oarwithen married a sergeant's
daughter."
"Mr. Oarwitn-arried~               nt'    daughter,"
eated young Bomilly very slowly, a if he eoUd not
re    bellevoe hi era.
"Ay, amighty prety girl, bat no more use nor a wax
doll, nor alf  amuamig. She died, and left this child
a baby, and (arwithen smuggled her off to a boarding-
chool and cipped half her name, and went home, and
never came bc, and wont take her with him at no riee
h   ashamed of he--that's the si   of it; thoagh  d be
prod to have sch a daughter."
I s hoald rather utnk you wold," md tb jotng mn
;  aticall; "but you have not told me how yu cme



<pb n="136"/>
!36            A FAMILY IEzR   N za t
" Well, my stepon knows a clerk in Skippers', the
and he heard as how they were looking for a home
yomng womant very quiet and retired (with a wink),  H
he meationed s, and she came a year ago; and here
hard and fast."
"8o it would seem; but I suppose she will leave you
"Maybe not. Shell have two thousand pounds do
putting his hand to his mouth, and speang in a
mysterious whisper--"and Elis-that's my wife-
as she would be the very ticket for William John I" "
The old man had taken too much whisky, or he
would have divulged such a family secret; but 
lingering gleam of caution, he added, "Don't go to
let on as I told you  William John is a clerk, a
assistant on the E.I.B.-a promising chap, with sho
like a buffalo, and a hand the size of a ham. Eliza
Miss Judy her niece; and she will be her daugh
law as sure as you sit there I But mind you neve
on.'
" You may make your mind perfectly easy on that
said his listener, with prompt sternness. "You must
joking. It is impossible that a young lady-_ "
He paused.   Why argue with this wretched w
sodden old creature ?
"Impolsible that a grand young madam would
Billy John I with a madlin chuckle. "Wait till yo'
him-a strapping lad, with a moustache, and evening ol
as good as your own, and a hundred and twenty 
a month. After all, she is only old Smithson's 
daughter, and her folks main anxious to get rid of he. i
woiud be a good thing to have her married to a Raec
manl"                                       -  ' ' 
"And is  m s Oarwithen really Mm. Noot 
Ir'llU explan  *st confidentialdly -4akI4
gulpof rwhisky ad water. "When weheard l0   was
neoted with o  Bnithson-wB knew hia  lg ago--h
sits down     d smatr  drat of * ittba ,ayg as 
Smitheoni relatiob   ta. She w  mal keen for the m
and she thought this would clin&h the bine  She 



<pb n="137"/>
_' 1;fi0irLOM, 4 c~. 1GU37
d sh wrote, and  e ent it to ipper', and
_^'^^H ppbe~d at her offer; d'ye see ? "
i   dded Gerald, apparently deeply interested, as
his head on his hand, and steadily surveyed the old
with a pair of handsome dark-grey eyes.
_  1f oourse we are all related in Adam; that's how Eiza
oat of it; but still, I don't say as she ought to give out
Miss Judy's her niece, when she is no more her niece
she is yours. And they are not a bit alike; indeed,
ay one might see as she was a bit above us. So what's the
t good of making believe, and telling lies ? "
What, indeed ?" repeated his listener contemptuously.
"Of course it seems mortal queer, a young lady living
here in this sort of wildernes, and never a friend to come
nigh her, and no belongings whatever. At first I suspected
it might be madness,or fits; but there's no sign of either.
I cannot say how she  ed on at the school; and she looks
just what she is-an innocent child; but looks is deoeitfuL
' Still waters run deep,' and maybe--"
"Stop I" shouted the young man, bringing down his fist
on the table, with a bang that made the whisky-bottle
stagger. "How dare you speculate in this way about an
inoffensive, friendless young lady, yo drunken old rascal "
,.   "Heyday I Well, Itruly never did I What's all this ?"
inquired Mrs. Noote, in her shrillest key, as she entered.
" Pretty doings, calling a man names in his own house."
"That is true," admitted Gerald, "and I beg his pardon;
he is an old man. I have a hot temper, and forgot myself;
but he said something that riled me, and I dropped on
    hium"
"Ay, and so he has been talking, has he ? "-sternl
surveying her drowsy husband. " Just like the old Poggle,"
and she glanced at the whisky-now at a very low ebb.
"He has been making an ass of himself as usual. Noote,
go to bed," she added, raising her voice authorittivey.
"Off now, without a wordI As for you, sir," to Gerald
"the moon is up, the coolie is waiting to show you your road
home, and I hope you may never find your way back to
these parts. We want no gentry about the place, calling
honest folk names I Don't let me ever see your face here



<pb n="138"/>
138            A FAMILY IflNE &_
raL" And with this polite vdictian,      nd
$ waved him out 
fYs, tiher was his guide, urapped in a brow'
easwing his gun and game-bag. But where w
It was evident that he had not the smallest
bidding her adieu; but he bade Mrs. Noote a
night, with exageated civility, and took his
The extreme politenese of his leave-taking
hoastes ten times more than if he had deliberate
her, and she shook her fist furiously after his
figure, and muttered a bad word.
As he tramped seven long miles back to his qc
was never aware of the roughness of the road, the
of the hill, much lesthehe distance. He seemed to
the ground by magic, for his thoughts were full
Carwithen; he wa resolved to emancipate her f
Nootes, root and branch-but how ? This was the
that he was working out in his brain, as he co
ground with a speed that left the nimble-footed
panting after him in vain.
Old  oote and his confidences and his whisky,
MBr Noote, with her fierce eye and shrill to
BAeinty detestable, but the member of the family
hated most bitterly was William John-the would-l
for this dainty, elegant, refined girl-a ticket-coll
the E.I., a monster with a hand like a ham  J
not likely to Yield to such a fate without a struggle;
rate, it was his mission to rescue her-his-and
thought I oh, second thought-his and Bophy Casa
could not move in the enterprise alone; Sophy
home in a week's time, and there was not a day to be
*         0*       *        * 
Nex morning Mrs. Noote was injured and
ad Oaptain Noote was pitiably meek; he was 
from. ad headache; he had nmoked too much the 
evaniniE -- 
" I Mtbat Jiui" mid Mrs. Noote, "that you
be bringing Z   moe  of these rowdy young men
plate."
" I did not know that Mr. Romily was rowdy,



<pb n="139"/>
-C P  ROuILLY AND    VLIEZT.            139x
ii    h    dre, e anwerd. "At any ate, I am not
' i- him again."
6suld hope not; he abused my husband most scanda.
.;Didn't he, Noote? "
that he did  rejoined the captain-who, by the way,
'vnsBr been a commissioned officer-and would have
to anything his Eliza wished, in his present abject
E And drank a lot o' whisky."
'"Eh, he did so," agreed the hoary-headed sinner.
" I wonder he got home alive I Some of those officers are
t terrors of wickedness," continued Mrs. Noote; "and,
this, I can't have you going to the' Iest' any more.
-Yo will be having a regiment hanging round it now; so
mind that. Do you hear "
Yes, Mrs. Noote; but I hope you will think twice before
i rtting off one of my few pleasures-the use of the old
piano; and I really don't think any one could fnd the place.
Mr. Romilly came on it quite by accident."
Such accidents may become common. No, no; you
sop at home, and maybe, by-and-by, I may find you a
uitable and respectable  iend to take you there and escort
you home." She was thinking of William John, and of the
admirable opportunity this would afford him of paying his
addresses.
CHAPTER XIX.
ROEMILY AND JULT.
"A jet prosperity lies in the er
him that hear it, never in the tonge of him that makes t.
O      OAso   generally spent all the winter in the
a ns. She had now been from home for eight moth
pying a round of visits; she had even been to AUstaa a.
among various new   ocenes, she had almo empletly
forgotten Mrs. Noote and Mrs. Noote's nieos E.   hinty- 
ai honur of her return to snow View, shblred a visit
from Gerald Bomilly. He discovered her tding on a table



<pb n="140"/>
140            A FAMILY LIKANESS.
in the drawing-room, utting up curtains and
"getting the house to rights, as she called it.
firstgeetings wee over, she said- 
"Yu see the place is upside down, and you are
the way, Gerald. I know you are dying to talk to 
You wi find him in the tea-house; but be sure you 
back to tiffn."
"My dear Sophy, you don't know what you are d
dismissing me in this summary manner I At ay r
don't mean to budge; you will find me an inval
assistant, and I have come here on purpose to have a 
square talk with you."
"With me l" in a tone of delighted surprise.  "A
about what ? "
"Oh, time enough to tell you when we have fixed up
room; duty first, pleasure afterwards," and, taking o_
coat, he set to work on the spot, and hammered in nails,
put up curtain-poles and pictures, as cleverly as if he were
upholsterer's carpenter.
"You are certainly a young man of most varied
complishment, " exclaimed his cousin admiringly. "I
no conception you had so much taste, and were so han
What a treasure of a husband you will be I All the 
you have hung one of these curtains inside out I of what
yon have been thinking ? Well, now for it, Gerald,"
off her apron. " I am going to rest for a bit, my arms
dropping, as she spoke, into an easy-chair, and gazing at
interrogatively.
She was longing to hear what special errand had brou
her cousin to Snow View, and she was always pleased to
deferred to and consulted, and if she had one fault to
with her good-looking relative, it was this: that he n
deferred to, or consulted her at all.
"Well, to make a long story short," he began, as he
went over and threw himself into a chair and crossed hi
legs, "I lot my way, out shooting, about ten days ago."
"There's nothing new in that, is there ?"
"No; buatt ita a new experience to come upon a la
straggling old hue  with verandahs and dormer window
fully furnished, and standing in a great tangle of gardens'



<pb n="141"/>
-.p   sROMILLY AND yU           . 4lr.
qad   t  em pty," added Mr. a  n  U I know the
not emnp; I found one person there."
hokidar, of course. The place is called Trafford's
it is a g t pity it has been allowed to fall into ruin,
r   a most lovely spot. And is this all you have to
I have a great deal to tell you, if you will just give me
n The individual I found at Trafford's Rest was an
el pretty girl, playing on the old piano I" 
o  gracious, erald   What was she like?" now
erect.
e had dark aburn hair and dark hael eyes; she
[es," interrupted Sophy; "I have it. I can tell you all
ther-she is Mrs. Noote's niece."
ra. Noote calls her her niece, you mean."
tShe introduced her as niece, the day she brought her to
me. I must say I was astounded." 
N So I should imagine," he agreed sarcastically.
rI took the greatest fancy to her. I was quite fascinated
her beauty, and her air, and her singing, and she is a
delightful girl to talk to, so unobtrusive, nd yet so
and well read.' 
"Then I wonder you did not cultivate her ? " he asked
tI ed to; I did my best. I asked her to spend a day,
wm ferociously refused by Mrs. Noote. Twice I rode
to see her, and she was out, and I had to pay my visit
fold harridan, and then I went away fr   om hoe, and
andidlay confess that I had entirely forgotten her
BB fter all,my dear Gerald, she is of low birth;
* I make a friend of her, I must associate with the
aE d that would be a fearful price to pay for her
o am      o wrong in one particular. She is not of low
Is     on her father's side. She is the daughter of
ruwAwit en  you have heard of him. He married
s      oAa he  ages ago, and keeps his fit alliance a
frm every one even from his seond wife. He



<pb n="142"/>
14             A FAMILY IfNRSS.           .
has done i    tmost to hid  his daughter,
liv" 
"And rw hav unearthed her, my clever coui
Wi     amockldng laugh. "Pray how did you 
ahewa?"            ', 
lFrom a family pictue I aw at the
reognised the young lady on the spot. I asked 
name was not Juliet Carwithen, and he' owned uEiq
Americans sa."
"She is called Miss Carr-e nd Mrs. Noote's nie
"Although she happens to be neither one nor 
Her father is a detestable old hypocrite, always
against low marriages; he worships the great, he gro
duke, he has heaps of money, and lives in the lap of 
and the very best society, and he goes and hides a
only child among these hills, shut up in a squalid'.
with a tipsy old soldier, and his termagant of a wife I 
"You are quite eloquent, I declare, Gerald I" ex
Sophy, with twinkling eyes. "I have never seen 
this character before-the champion of a distressed d
" I am-and I look to you, if you have a scrap of wo
heart, or wit, or pluck, to rescue Miss Oarwithen and
her friend. Goodness knows she wants one! I can'
anything; I am a man."
"Yes; you could not dash over to the Nootes', and
her off on the crupper of your pony, could you ?"  i
"But you can, Sophy. You might ask her on a
For my part, I'll write to the mater, this very mail, 
her how I have come acros Miss Oarwithen. My
shall not be marked 'Private and confidential,' bt w
as a firtclas torpedo, as far as Dolly is concerned
deham him into acknowledging his daughter," and
to his feet, he began to ace the room. 
" No, my dear quixotic Gerald, yo will do nothig of.
ind," rejoined  r. Oasson, with an air of great
atin. 'W>, sbhould you meddle in other people's f
affairst       m i most e   rdina  if you mixyo
up in Miak OW  lha s  coucerw-tless h  we are to  ^
a new piny,_,  .,-- "   And she paused, and loo.
him criticaly, with her head on one side.      I
";f--



<pb n="143"/>
-          onarst in jwsr.                    4
i     whd ?at " he demanded rather aharply.
Rmmilly and Juliet.
9lpahyI *" he exclaimed, as he flashed an angry glaoa
tr^My dear Jerry, why should I not teas you a litte ?
;about is fair play. I promise to do one thing for
I will beard lrs. Noote, and carry off her prie on
here; though I am sre I shall have a tough fight;
i  mr, if the worst comes to the worst, I'll threaten to
my custom.   It will be Miss Oarwithen, versus
r a  Bacon I and, remember, if she coms, Gerald, no
in  I"
j.:Jmiss Carwithen is not a girl to flirt."
^  Hal ha I Bo you have been making  p  enti already ?
ta' dear cousm, how angry you can look 1 "
I look what I am," snatching up his cap and striding
the door. "It's the fist and last time--"
no, Jerry," rushing after him, " it's not the first and
Do not let us part like this. Come, I am going
thoroughly serious and sensible. You may rely on me
Juliet's faithful ally, to rescue her, if I can, from the
and to be her friend; but I could not help being
deal tickled at your extraordiry interest in this
*  girl. I've never known you trouble your head about
drf eur spins., not once in all these years; what is the
reason is, because I am sorry for Miss Carwithen.
no home; no friends."
is that all ? "
not "--confronting Mr Casson's m oking eyes
gaze; "but it is quite enough for to-day."
rBiad, you may rely on me, that this beautiful
shall no longer be left to wither away unseen and
among the mountains."
ai no longer an fear of tat," rejoined  omilly,
"Young      legg ran across her th other day,
doe nothing but rave about her ew  auno. Ene
for mabeer in the Sardar, anleoame donwn
bank, and landed him on the spt         ;And, talk
, hereis Jimmy  legg," as a pa. au d a dandy



<pb n="144"/>
144            A FAMILY LIANES. ;S
passed the window. "He has a lady with him, and,
the contetb of the cruetsnd, it is Mrs. Dickson I" :
"Oh, what shal  I do, Jerry ?" cried his cousin,
wringing her hands. "I am not fit to be seen; an
look at this room - She'll come in and kiss me, and
me, and go straight home to Durano, and say that my
is like a pig-Ay. Bun -tell Hassan, Darwaza, Bnd
"You can't say that, you know very well, Sophy, 
people come out some miles to see you. Have her i
molify her with tea and cake. Here," pushing about
as he spoke, "sling those draperies into the next room, 
do your duty."
h a few seconds, enter Mrs. Dickson, a prim,
maidish-looking lady, with a long red face and pro
teeth. She waattired in an immense drab dustoak,
enfolded her hostess in it and her embrace as she kised 
effusively on either cheek. Her companion, Mr. Glegg, 
a slight, fair-haired young man, with a large nbse, and
pair of merry, roving eyes, and was got up in brown ri
boots, cords, and a Jairan coat.
" So glad you are back, Mrs. Casson," he said. "
yon awu lly, down in Durano. I overtook Miss Dicks  o
coming out here, and that was one of the few thin
on which we agreed."
" I wish you did not live so far away, Sophy," said Mid
Dickson, divesting herself of her cloak and gloves and veil 
" it is quite in the wilds-the very back of the world. Y
ought to take a little house down in Durnano, and y 
Robbie come and spend the season there, such as it is. L
can move down there quite easily with a couple of dozen ail
coolies."
"Yes; but the tea-plantations, how are we to get ia.s,
down? "s
"Ah   true, I forgot. But I consider it a high test of
friendship, coming out all this way to see you. I have
always to take on two extra jampannies. As it is, they
grumble at the distance."
" After al, Ms Oeasson does not live so very far away,"
protested Mr. ieogg; "nothing to some people, who ar
seven miles further out-people who have a girl living



<pb n="145"/>
'       ROMJLLY AND YULIET.                145
i"-ere    Mrs. Oasson and her cousin exchanged swift
"I was fishing in the Sardar," now repeating his
for the twentieth time, "about twelve miles from
o, up in the wilds. I had a fine big mahseer on, who
given me a grand bit of play, and happened at that
t to be sulking under a stone. I chanced to look
ly across the stream, and nearly fell bang into the
laer,when I saw a beautiful English girl standing on
hbank. She was all dressed in white, and the bushes of
*ulow broom behind her set her off just as if she was a
Cure I"
-1 Jimmy, you have been reading poetry " exclimed
rald Romilly.
U "S  was a poem, if you like 1 standing there with her dog,
the water tumbling over the boulders, and into
clear dark pool; she looked extraordinary in that lonely
with the great hills behind her, the water at her feet,
lad not a living thing in sight but a few cattle and a couple
Vo golden eagles. She did not see me."
" But I am sure you soon rectified that misfortune."
". Of course I did-I kicked a big stone into the river
acoidentally on purpose."
"And what did she do ? What was the result of this
Mdelcate manoeuvre "
"She seemed surprised. To tell the honest truth, she
d; went straight up the bank, and vanished, and I lost
abseer after all."
GoWhat is she like ? " inquired Mrs. Dickson in a judicial
.it voice.
Ik^ke a star, a queen, or a beautiful flower I 
NPoor Jimmy I this is very bad I" exclaimed Romilly,
ia air of profound sympathy.
_"Oh yon never admire any woman," retorted the other.
ra legs of a pony, or a fine pair of horns, are more in
i- Bne. rd give anything to know her."
P^H erhaps I can tell you a little about her," observed Mrs.
omplacently. < Of course I am the last person to
but my maid-you know I can't endure an ayah,
^ipou aye, dear; but it comes to the same thing,
L



<pb n="146"/>
46      .       A FAMILY LItENSS. 
Your mid is u blaak as my sah, and looks absurd,
in *1oPr     dkihsL "                                   _
M  asyrate,she is mnnected with thewifeof
a    eoar.    The Romaio  are most reepetbleeo
meo or twie the have been talkgof a ver   er
youg peson, who came to their hoe wt tir
the Notes. She is a connection of theirs, a niece or
an looks mwh above her station. I am told she isi
paid for, and has been well educated, but she cannot
to get into society; indeed, I believe she knows her
and is a very modest, retiring young woman."
" Poor young woman   I see you know all about her,
Dinkson," sneered Jimy. " I am sorry to hear she 
likely to get into society, for she is the handsomest
have ever seen "
"Oh, if every one who has a pretty face is to ge
societ, we should all be in a very disaeeable l
rem  ed Mrs. Dickson, with a ni that dilay
front teeth.
"On the oontrary" argued Jimmy, "Ithink it would
a prqcious good thing. We can spare all the ugly
women who have had their day i "
" You only say this from the pure spirit of ont
and because you wish to know this girl."
"I wish to goodness I coud make her acquaintance,"
answered fervently.
"Nothing easier, no doubt; go up and speak to her.",
,No, tank you," he retorted angrily. "Even if_
beyond the pale of your associate, I should not treat q
as anything ut a lady, and she i8 a lady.         -
"Well well," soothingly, "what I mean is-make
extse, offer her an umbrella, run after her with a
e  , and pretend you thought it was her,"
t    Iaason and her cousin had listened with I
imnS  iIce whit this battle, so to  peak,  ged over     1
i      Mbo i B rwithen ; there wa no chance of getting
a word   f       At last RBaniy brob in, no longer
t o  re r aBi n                  .,c     o       _'oa 
AU this sine   intrcive! Mr Dickson, you ane



<pb n="147"/>
oiL AY           yNDvr.t              471
this way yoMursf"tudyig her with severe,
faee became a deep beetroot colour as ihe
ou- are quite the rudest man I ever met I  am
Norri adoes not hear yotL"
,-ao Iapely to learn the lady's name through your
ooin'slSsb and ?" he continued undauntedly.
N     arr; but   ar ithen,  said  ophy. "She is all
sa-beautiful and tall and graceful. I know
[edI am gong to ask her to sta with me."
you der, dear Mrs. Casson I' ced Jimmy, jump-
;"you always know nice people. Please remember
am a friend of yours too."
your modesty has ever been consp      Io  " re-
hi comrade, as he rose and handed Mrs. Dickson
-ou know what I mean, old fellow. I was so
Ihardly knew what I was saying. I mean that-
friend of Mrs. asson s, I may claim an intro-
to another friend."
you will know soon enough. Wait till yO see her."
Ranswer, " I have seen her," so utterly astounded
that for some seconds he sat staring and speech-
Dickson took up the parable.
aLlyu, BSophy, I had no conception that you were
wi  this young lady. Is she not Mrs. Noote's
ralhtion whatever, I understand."
_  she may be everything that is charming,"
myterious and disagreeable smiles.
quite charming."
^^^^HS    ~lf|    Bso strange her living out here. Who is
_WO are her people ? "
affected not to have heard the quetion, and
tiher husband luckily postoned 1ei repetition.
_^^^^^  I_    Murs Dikson was being  arned down the moun-
lt  dy a mpannies, she exclaimer aloud-
t!i l telh I  o  itnnid of meI Here I am.



<pb n="148"/>
148             A FAMIZY LL ENES 
comin away, and every one wil be wanting to know 
this girl, sand I cannot tell them a single tng, excp
her nmm      is  awith, and that she is nth  a
H]APTER     XX.
TO BEAD FRENOLH
"Id on parlet ftranua
IT is a great advantage to have an ally who is prompt
action, and a woman of her word. The very day after
cousin's visit saw Mrs. Casson and her bay pony stan
at Mrs. Noote's wicket gate. Juliet was at home on
occasion, and delighted to see the visitor. She threw d
an old coat she was mending, and flew to open the
helped the rider to dismount, and conducted her indo
Mr   Noote accepted the call entirely as a compliment
herself; she talked of the season's crops, her salt bu
and the prevalence of small-pox among her poultry, .ar
permitting Juliet and Mrs. Oasson to exchange a word.
last she rose to get out tea, as she never trusted her
to any one, and the two ladies were left alone for ash
time.
" I have come over specially to ee you, Miss Carwithe
began Mrs. assn.
"It is very good of you; but how did you know
my name was Oarwithen ?" inquired Juliet, with 
colour.
"My cousin, Mr. Bomilly, told me. It seems that
knows your people at home. Have you seen much of him
" I have met him once," she answered rather coldly.
Only onoe  I   Ms.    asson mentally ejaculated; 
thought Gerald knew her very welL"
"What a dull time you must have had here all this year
I suppose you lrve never been away ?" she said aloud.
"No; except tice down to Dumano for Sundays."
"And do ;ou know any one there 7 Do people come
to me you ?



<pb n="149"/>
l t  RAD FRENCH.                 149
; I know no one except Mr. and Mr. RoBzrio."
Er. and Mrs. Bozario I " ejaculated the visitor in a high
ad astonishment. "Well, I think it is time you made
other acquaintances, and had a little change. Would
care to come and stay with me ?"
"*Thank you, I should, very much indeed; but Mrs.
Roote won't- 
. Mra Noote will," interrupted the other. "Just leave
her to me. I shall begin by asking her to bring you to
spend a day; then I shall borrow you alone; then I shall
induce her to spare you to me for a long visit."
Enter Mrs. Noote with a plate of stale biscuits and a pair
of suspicious eyes. What had these two been talking about ?
What nonsense had Mrs. Casson been pouring into the girl's
ears ?-her eyes were dancing in her head  She was ex-
tremely relieved and surprised when her visitor said, in her
most persuasive manner-
"Mrs. Noote, I want you to come and spend a long da
with me this week; and, of course, to bring Miss Carwithen.
"Carwithen I" echoed Mrs. Noote, rather shrilly.
"Yes; don't you think her own name is prettier than
Carr ?"
" Her father does not think so," rejoined the other tartly.
"That may be; but every one should be called by their
real name, otherwise it leads to misunderstandings  And
now about this day, Mrs. Noote. I want you to come down
and see my new Hansee cow, and tell me what you think of
her; and I will give you a sitting of black Spanish eggs."
Here was indeed a bribel "Black Spanish eggs were
':      valuable, and it was known that Mrs. Casson was exceedingly
chary of hers.
"Well, thank yo; I'd like to come. A day's outing will
do me good. I can't come on Thursday, it's butter day;
but I'll see about Saturday, if that will suit; and I'm to
Ep       bring Juliet ? '
r-       " Oh yes, please," with assumed indifference.
"Well, in that case, I must borrow the Bunnia's pony,
and we will be with you about twelve o'clock."  And so
the matter was settled.
On Saturday Mrs. Noote was to be seen walking mincingly



<pb n="150"/>
ISo             A FAMILY    IKEANE S 
about M. COasson's garden, holding a green-eilk 
ove her  andy head, and talking in a whispering voice,
finlyopeoiaded that sh was conducting herself in the
la   ae manner, and that Mrs. Oaaon had suddenly 
a fancy to her, and would be the means of introducing
to th  best society in Durano. Already she saw
linching at the Parsonage, and patronizing the Bosa
8he would get Juliet to turn her black silk at once,
send to Ohotah Bilat for a veil and new gloves. As
Juliet, she seemed absorbed in papers and magazines,
quite neglected, whilst Mrs. Casson made much of hAr,
escorted her round the cowsheds and poultry-yrdsh
Mrs. Oasson placed thirteen beautiful white eggs m a
she said in a careless way-
"Your young friend must find it a little dull ? "
"Oh, lord, no I not half as dull as school," replied 
Noote, emphatically.
" I suppose she is pretty well educated ? "
Prety well I Lawks I why, she talks French and
just the same as you and I do English; ay, and reads 
writes them, too, and thinks in them."
" Indeed I How wonderfully clever she must be I Then
Mr. Noote, I want you to do me a small favour," handin
her the basket of eggs as she spoke.
"Why, certainly, anything,' rejoined Mrs. Noote, in
fulness of her heart. If she succeeded in raising 
Spanish fowl, she would get twenty rupees apiece for them
"You know I am rath   onely out here" continued
Casson 
"Well I'm sure you're welcome to come up and see
any day, and Ill drop in on you whenever I can
an hour; only say the word," rejoined Mrs. Noote
"Oh, thanh; but what I mean is, that I have a
deal of idle time rd like to employ profitably; my a
is horribly rat.   and rd be so much obliged to youif
would allow  r-   arwiithen to come over and red
speak  it with m,'a   e a week ?"
Mr Noote brad hard, and reVrded heosr 
a look of searh  in  rogation.



<pb n="151"/>
70 RA D FRENCH.                   51S
sudden desire for improving hersel struck
u  t I" she granted incredulously.
with a imple, unabashed air; "since you yor-
that she is such a wonderful proficient." A las
w      r poor Mrs. Noote entangled and driven into a
by h    wr own boastful words. "It would be an im-
advantage to me," pleaded this cunning woman;
is if you can spare her."
*- Oh," with an air of lofty condeension, "I dare say
-qFm  쳗re her. But how is she to get here ? It's nigh on
"I vll send my pony half-way."
I ee you are bent on it," sad M     Noote, croay; and
tore was sort of gleam in her eye as she said, " ind you
dman1't go turning her head; and she's not to get to know
any young men, not at no price."
After all, this going and coing would cement the in-
msacy between the houses of Noote and Oasson, and Mrm.
l ?ote liked to feel that she was conferring a favour, eepe-
sela   a favour that cost her nothing; not even the loan
*  of her pony. So it was all rranged, much to Juliet's
belight and astonishment; she could scarcely believe her
-    r when 1 Mrs. Classon took her aside, and whispered cona
tially . to her that she was to come over and spend a day
:: 8lown View once a week, and that she expected her next
y without fail.
l   two ponies and their idesw ad scarcely turned the
of the hill, when Gerald EMlly came galloping up
the opposite direction.                     t      p
pJut in time to be late I" cried his cousin, vivaciously.
Noote and Mmis Oarwithen are scarcely out of sight;
bhave been spending a long and happy day with m."
No.sensee" jumping off his pony; " and how did they
ALM   No^te poked about the place, and asked questions,
ba0ed     "me    on my  extravagnoe, and engrased me
and dropped her h's, and washed her fae in her
endwasdi        ly familiard intimate and
njoyedherf very much indeed."



<pb n="152"/>
152             A FAMILY LIKAENTESt
"And Juliet "-he coloured, and added-" oh, I !
Miss (arwithen-did she enjoy herself ?" 
"Yes, in   kimming through the new maga
playing the piano.  he is quite easily amused; I
not talk to her much, as Mrs. Noote was so monopo
and sspicious.  However, she is coming here by 
"You are not in earnest ? I thought Mr. Noote 
not trust her out of her sight. Why is she allowing her
come ? " 
" She is coming once a week, as a great favour, in
to complete my education, and to teach me Frenc," rejo
Sophy, demurely.
"Sophy I" cried her cousin, with a shout of laug
"you are the cleverest woman in the world."
"Still," with twinkling eyes, "my French and Ge
are very rusty."
" Did the old woman make any stipulation ? Was th
no bargain ? " he asked, as he took a turn up and down
verandah.
"No, not what you'd call a bargain; I gave a sitting
Spanish eggs and some flower-seeds, and I have pro
and vowed not to turn the girl's head; and you, J
must promise me the same."
I" got to turn Miss Carwithen's head I She is a g
deal more likely to turn mine I What day does she
to you ?"
I shall not tell you; you want to know too much."
"Then I shall com     and spend a week here,"
answeed with decision, " and find out I" 
"( Don't be silly, Gerald. I have secured Miss Carwith
company for myself; and you know very well that youn 
not a ladies' man
"It's never too late to mend I "
"Don't talk nonsense, but go away and get ready
dimnner."
There are a number of tea estates   attered over
Kumaon hills, and among planters Bobbie Casson was 
sidered a man of credit and renown; and not merely in
,,



<pb n="153"/>
T o RBAD FRENCH.                 S53
idebor~hood. Casson's tea-chest, with their brand
with three peaks), commanded a fair price in
Lrne; for Bobbie understood his business, the
of gardens and nurseries, the manufacture of green
black tea, and the proper complexion and manipulation
- l  leaf-although he had started in life with a totally
t destination-like not a few other young men. He
failed at Sandhurst, and was subsequently at his wit's end
a profession, nay, a livelihood; New Zealand, Minnesota,
8outh Africa, were proposed; sheep, corn, gold, and diamonds
-rwe discussed in turn, and then Colonel Romilly, an old
friend of his father's, suggested tea-a small estate in a
B  good climate, healthy outdoor employment, absence of un-
eeiable society, and a temptation to spend money. This
advice was considered sound, and at twenty-two Robbie
: Oson set out to seek his fortune on the spurs of the
Himalayas.
He liked the life, for he was his own master. He worked
hard, and at the end of four years took a run home, a
bronzed, good-looking, prosperous young fellow (for all his
' connections drank aasson's Kumaon tea). When at home,
he fell in love with, and married, Sophy Clare, a pretty girl
with a respectable fortune, and carried her away to his tea-
'garden, greatly to the dismay of her relations. "A girl
with five hundred a year, who might have made an excellent
match, to marry a penniless planter, and throw herself away
Jin the wilds of the North West!"  But the bride elect
: turned a deaf ear to every remonstrane, and married Robbie,
; nd departed loaded with wedding-prMBnts, varying frop a
/] [otorph-frame to a piano. Thus it came to pass, hat
w.o View was a somewhat glorified edition of a planter's
mlow: there was a garden and tennis-court; the
ktoess of the house had her daily post, her staff of ex-
b    servants, her pony, and her own way. There was no
to live in the rough, she said; her mhnage was
l, her dresses simple, but by no means behind the
o; she went down to Durano frequently, she visited
and now and then took a trip home. She was a
h        influence and importance in her own circle, and
Osrwithen little guessed what a lucky girl she
BX 



<pb n="154"/>
tS4            A FAMILY LIZENAISS
might consider herself at being  taken up by Mr 0
Some people thought Mr. asmon a heavy young ma
his big frame, low speech, and laty brown eyes. Tb
"that Mrs. Omson had the brain of the firm;" a
tainly Bobbie was not an eloquent r fluent talker, hi
were spo   , not intletua, and e rarely opened
Neverthle, the aamona agreed admirably. Mrs.
always quoted her husbands opinions with eviden
faith, aaR he, on his part believed that Sophy, like t
" could do no wrong:' She had a good deal of leisu
on her hands, and he was pleaed to see that Sop
recently discovered a charmng young companion,
pretty bright girl, who sang and talked, and wall
read with his wife whilst he was down at the tea-ho
over the hills shooting birds, and stalking makor.
she came once a week, now oftener, and he knew tha
the desire of his wife's heart to secure her for a len
visit.
With this end in view, Mr  Casson boldly rod
Mrs. Noote's one afternoon, having previously sent
offerigs of eggs, chickens, and young cabbage ph
smooth the way.
After some conversation.about the weather, the
visitors in Durano, and Captain Noote's lumbago, Mrs
said quite briskly, "  r Noote, I have come to ask
allow Juliet to spend a month with me."
Mrs Noote drew down her upper lip, and shook I
solemnly.         J
" Run away, Juliet,-my child," continued her frieni
put on your hat; you must walk part of the way ba
me. Meanwhile, Iam going to talk Mrs. Noote ove
she nodded reasuringly.
"Now, Mrs. Noote," she began, in her pleasante
" you keep the girl too dose. She never leaves thi
to spend a dull day with me.  he never ees any on
own age, or mixes with other yong peope."
"Ites by her father's wish he is kept retred, and
company," rejoined Mrs. Noote, sevrely.
"Have you that down inblack and white ?"
No; it's understood, and  m responible."



<pb n="155"/>
!hn   ~               I ni>
&   fzi tje to ,Jar coming and
How soon he tracked
bourn; but al Sin
out you w   a; nd l  trda
_ W-q Pp et-* Par, Way
h~ls~qsr7~a~of the fty I 
with him.   id 1*1 Sug amention
to ay tha  liet isnevr toeak
b a   Set? I think you make a
II a ve  tight hand over Julie  Milhe
_s 'wn mistre. She could leave you,
h* allowbance would ease; bat he
adf  riends  She Bau always a gm
young Raiy," sneered Mrs. date.
ir     my thmnt    she is one d
simesfcm living out of the world,'
*h is as free to go as I am I "
My' bore, she loses her allowanoe"
aa    the 9r  Cimapty.
atolO~   thd r B m ehe M m this Jight
Ilab   lmwr &~~   ce Ileo 1 '
't ~  a o' redf advier,
arr 0 PML p no private
PAvde dbting-room I
y pear I Well, I
h     Svnty rupees a month
's e^it will ost you nothing
;w     rI ask no more 
and I will. allowr  A
go go; bu4' mind - tm ' i



<pb n="156"/>
156            A FAMILY LIKENS 
a day longer than the month, for I've a particule
wanting her at home."
"Yes, I promise, and I'll take the greatest care
and I will send my dandy for her the day after 
"Very well; but she can't be going out with
evening, then. I've a heap for her to do (butter 
And you will promise me to keep all those
officers at armns length ? "
Mrs. Oasson laughed, and made no reply.
" Well, if you don't promise"-and    . Noo
became crimson, whilst her light eyebrows stood
startling relief-" not one step shall she go I So 
choice."
" Very well, then, I promise. I'll give no parties    J
mean to take her down to Durano for a day or two,
see the place."
"Well-well, I suppose you must do that, if ya
but don't be hawking her about to dances."  it
final clause the treaty was concluded without 
hostilities.
Mrs. Casson thought that perhaps it was all for the
that Juliet's escort had been denied to her; for, wii
mile of Kala Dara, she was rather startled to find  e
Romilly sitting on a boulder, with a brace of chikor b
him, and a gun between his knees.
" What a felicitous coincidence I" he cried, as she
insight. "Well, what luck" 
"It is all right," she rejoined; "she is coming
month."
"French leave--eh?" and he laughed. "What isn
Juliet going to teach you now ?" 
"She might teach you to treat me with proper 
Jerry, only that you will see nothing of her."
What do you mean ?" he inquired, suddenly beco n
serious.
"I have made a solemn vow and promise to Mrs N
to keep all raesaly officers at arm's length; and are you
a rascally officer ?
"Certainly not. I am your cousin; I am one of
family. And why are soldiers to be tabooed "
*    '!    _



<pb n="157"/>
7P RA D      EC mAl i Nr
qM    as it is her father's wish as Mis Car.
ive i retired," explained Sophy, mimiscing
old hypocrite I And I wish I had his head
pon-with his lubs, and carriaes and ia gr and g
iNew I understand why he came snaking np to
nd asked me if I had ever met any people of
foote in
what did you my ? that they were in the butter
ald rd never head of them, but would make
and ten he got into a jolly fright, and begged
ttrouble.'
is the old man like P "
man   I wish he heard youa   He goes in for
youmg and fascinating, and has a most seductive
chiely reserved for swells  He clips his words
of 'anusm" and 'gettin' and' goin',' and pute
heaty manner to men of position; but is
in a deuce of a hurry if he meets inferior acquaint-
He never says an unpleasant thing to any one's
gives them a good word behind their back-unless
to be in the peerage."
lAt be delightfhi I"
a great on birth, and death on low marriages."
better and better I Does he expect to hide his
wMit the sergeant's daughter always? "
ra hlp it,", rejoined Gerald, grimly.
'bot iaa dae regard for our own Mre. Grundv-.
? W    itL tl1 ehe say when she hears that Mr.
winaim not ffect her society, is much interested
ti    o at a charming young lady who lives in
bClsnwht the old dule called a     twopenny
I^   M      ?of me, as long as she does not say
friend-that I never 6ould get over I "
e brave I But when she comes and talks to
nd rpeats, and suggest and msinates,
like a defenceless rabl t-my    tonge
.',



<pb n="158"/>
15S             A FAMILY UKNAST. 
"e     tongue paralsed, Sophy I Com e o's
trOp fort     "
How rud      And what a vile French accentl" I 
"Ah   you see, rve not had  our advantages.
think that Mrs. Noote would aow Miss Carwithen t
French with me?" 
Gerald, you are too preposterous I Look here, I:
to ask you a very serious question."
"Then you must wait till 1 am in a serious mood. 
chikor are for you "-handing them to her syce. "1
o'clock; I shall be late for meal  Good-bye."
two moments he had passed down a steep pathway,
out of sight.                                   .
"I wonder-very much," said Mrs.    asson,
herself and pony-" if he really cares for Juliet ? I I
if I ought to encourage it?  I wonder what his m
would say ?"
CHAPTER XXL          '_
THE INTBLzLIGT TILBVLLfB.
None but himself a be hib paralel."
THKOBaL      .
Miss Cawumm       arrived punctually at Snow View,
with stringent commands and cautions from Mrs. ia
She ilooked brilliantly lovely and radiantly happy, as
stepped out of the dandy and received an     e
welome from her friend, who immediately conducted'
to her room, to prepare for tiffin. What a contrast to
own bower at the Nootes'    A pretty bright a
(papered with pale green), a brass bed with whe 
greenand-.white chairs, a writing-table,a cheval glas,
quatities of. flowers.  The air of refinement; the
servants in lnowy clothes, instead of Mrs. Noote's
drowsy fna bbamg; the tempting luncheon, presided
by Sophy i  dainy gown, trnspd      Juliet into
world. S   hidb a whole month of Elysium before her,
was resolved to make the most of every moment.



<pb n="159"/>
STE HNTELgWGET TRAVELLZER.              59 
yl  w  the Bsociety of her friend now, without the
쳓iought that she had to tear herself away at a
]our, like Cinderella. The first week went all too
* thaee were teas on the hillsides, and tennis and rides,
vimtors from Durano-one or two ladies; and Mr.
who came to call, and remained for seven hours I- 
r-toned to his quarters to rave about Miss Oarwithen.
had been ladies out to lunch; but, so far, Sophy had
be promise to the letter, and had not invited any men
they arrived of their own accord she could not help it.
was it she, but Robbie, who had requested Gerald
a to come out to stay a week or so, and help to
a young lady I"
met Jerry," he remarked, casually, to his wife. " He
was coming over to see you some day, so I told him
f ad get ten days' leave, and remain. I'm going
next week, along the Sardar, and after this ram  we
to catch tons of mahseer I "
i[   don't think," lowering her voice, "that there is
e of Gerald being caught himself, do you ?"
his Sophy, with a meaning glance.
t on earth do you meana  demanded Robbie, with
i-oh, I see, you mean Miss Carwithen I Not the
Jerry Romilly will never marry. As for her, she
of girl to fall in love with a man merely
- staying in the same house."
*    for the sake of argument, that they fell in
ater, what would you say ? "
their taste, and accorded my consent."
houot Mrs. Bomilly? She expects Gerald to
heiress and a beauty all in one I "
about being an angel, but Miss arwithen
. Tisre is not a girl to touch her in the whole
buit she has no belongings, no home, no for.



<pb n="160"/>
160            A FAMILY LIKENESS.
the young people alone. They will never think
another unless you put it into their heads."
" If it comes to that, I think Gerald has som
his head already," rejoined Sophy, with a nod.
" Not he I" retorted her husband, with immense
as he picked up his topee, and went out.
Gerald Bomilly had accepted Mr. Casson's invitation
alacrity, had secured ten days' leave, and was cantering
to Snow View with a light heart, and a good pony
him, when, at the foot of a steep ascent, he overtook a
elderly man, leading a hired bazar tat. As he was abo
pass, the stranger, who was mopping his face, and 
both warm and breathless, panted out, "I say, you y
chap."
" Yes," pulling up. "What do you say ?" surveying
speaker's shining countenance, assertive nose, and d
but well-cut tweed suit. He looked like a well-to-do
mercial traveller, who had strayed out east by mistake.
"I say," he repeated, "do you know the road to Oass
the tea-planter ?
"Yes; I am on my way there now."
"That's first class. Then we will go together.
name is Hodder-Bernard Hodder-and well respected
the back of a cheque. What's yours ? "
"Bomill , replied the young man, shortly.
"Oh, I suppose you live hereabout-tea-planter 
"No."
"Officer ?-cut of one, something."  ,
" Yes; and you are travelling "-" for tea," he was 
to add, but luckily refrained.
"Yes; I'm glad you did not ask if I was aglob
young sir, for I consider it a most impertinent nickname
Im an intelligent traveler; a man going about the world
with my eyes pen, and with plenty of money and leisr
I've made my   ile  I've done Bombay, and Delhi
Agra, and an thoe plaoes. I also have been to ut
The nawab there took a great fancy to me, and offere
lots of shooting, add horses to ride; he pressed me to
back again, and I will  He has Al wine and chero



<pb n="161"/>
_^^B   ~,       h2flSLtZNT TA PvsLLaJ             161
r htnd fellow, and we wre wonderful pals.
lia eoould not combine walking and taking, Mr.
nrambled into the saddle, and continued, "I came
to have a good look at the snows.  s I was told,
the thing to see."
lI think you will be able to manage tt," said his
, politely. "They are one of the sights of the
't yon make that brute of yours walk slower ? " he
ifretfuy, as he jogged painfuly alongside.
't you make that brute of yours walk faster?"
domilly. "May I ask if you now the assons ? "
No; my nephew does, and he has given me a letter.
are so deuced expensive, and dAk bungalows are
and of course people in the jungle are only too
kul to see a strange face."
h,are they ? Do you make a long stay ?
Dpends if they do me well," he answered loftily.
I    r sppose you are expected ? "
oTd   not write; but it will be all right," was the
d reply. "Have they any family, these Oassons ? "
No."
So much the better. I loathe children;.noisy, greedy
beasts I Any visitor except yourself ? "
Yes; they have a young lady staying with them."
Oh ho 1" suddenly hustling his pony alongside, and
g   omilly a violent dig with his cane. "So tat
ts for the milk in the coooa-nut "
Wmhat do you mean ?" inquired the sufferer, surveying
to dder with a disagreebly steady stare.
, I only mean," a little cowed, "that that's why you
P.t up so smart I Is she good-looking ?"
"You had better make up your mind to ride either before
behind me," remarked the other, without deigning to
Sotioe the question. " I see you are a timid rider; and my
are has an uncertain temper, and might kick you over the
K thnd  We are coming to a place where there is a drop of a
thousand feet."
"A-drop-of a toueand feet I "stammered the sranger.
'Oh, then-then--I'l just lip off."



<pb n="162"/>
i6s            A FAMILY- LIKANSS
Whih plreoantion he proceeded to take at once,
to hiksye in English "to come along and lead
which command had to be translated by his com
be :sood watching this bold, handsome young 
jauntily along what seemed to him the brink of de
-the merest ledge-one leg and stirrup actually
over a ghastly precipice of dark-blue shale-he d
strong dislike to him on the spot. What business
beggarly officer-for of course he was a beggr-
such nerve and good looks ?-to tell him to his face
was a timid rider, and to snub him about the girl
Jove, he would cut him out I
It was very hard luck, thought Romilly, that this
tious vulgarian should descend on Snow View just
resent time   With every yard of the road he 
himself as a coarse-minded, purse-proud little cade
seemed to take it quite as a matter of course tha
door in India should fly open to him, for the simple
that he had condescended to visit the country I He b
of his wealth, of his importance, and of the "atten
which he had received, and the " attentions " he anti
Romilly's share of the conversation being confined
somewhat scornful monosyllables, ere the two trav
had arrived at the end of their journey, they were
on the footing, not of old friends, but of old enemies..
At length Snow View came into sight, and its i
who were sitting in the verandah, rowded hospitably
meet them.
"Mr. Caeon, I presume ? " said the stranger, a
Bobbie rather pompously as he walked stiffly up the 
"Yes." 
" I've got a letter here for you, from Bob Flande,.
neptew in Bombay, asking you to put me up for a w
two, as.I uderstnd you are under great obligations to
Bobbie'.s aO  blood boiled. It was exactl the
wa       wi   tr  Indian hopitality he took the
and sauid4 *amwcn in and sit down ad make yo
home. Let me introduce you to Mr. Casson and
Carwithea. Thid" to his wife, "is Bob Flandere's
Mr. Hodder."                                  ^



<pb n="163"/>
T=rn B   WLUGNT TrVnuLEan                 163
laid-
B  The bearer of this is my maternal uncle, Mr.
rwho has taken the travelling mani late in life, and
Ime casally mention a friend in the Himalaas, has
viiting you. I would have spared you if I could,
have expectations from Uncle L, who appears to
he has a right to the run of every house in India,
u if he were a royal personage.  I am afraid
hate me pretty well; but he won't stay more
couple of days, if you give him low diet and lots of
Yorse, most abjly,
"BOB EuID.
Flanders had never reokoned on Miss Oarwithen, nor
uncle would fall intantlp under the spell of her
Mr. Hodder at once determined to extend his visit,
indifferent to the fact that his stay was a great
ence. Young Romilly had to occupy a tent, and
for him; but this only enhanced the comforts of
room in Mr. Hodder's estimation.) When the
had been presented to the two amazed ladie, he
to make himself thoroughly at home, seated
A, the roomiest chair, and dusted his boots with his
hirsty work walking," he remarked, as he looked
at Mr   Oasson. "I walked up most of the way
it was to save your neck," exlaimed his late
,yo see, you thought wrong, young man, as no
often do. So these are the snows, screwing up
Yes, thank you, I'll take a peg, and a pretty
whisky. Well yes, they are fine nough;
not ay that I don't prefer Switerd.   es
aid Sophy, to whom saob a statement was
, util peaks you are looking  t are twelve



<pb n="164"/>
164            A FAMILY LIAN SS 
thousand feet higher than Mount Blanc; but
prefer beauty on a small scale."
"No, no I like 'em tall, like Miss arwithen 
h laughed, and evidently expected applause. 
Gerald Romilly felt an insane desire to fling the 
wit out of the verandah, but fortunately contro
impulse.
I made up my mind to see these snows," contin
other pompously, as much as to say, and the snows
much honoured I "And once my mind is made up,*
his hard little eyes on Gerald, "there's no tuning me.
a man of iron I
"Oh, reallyl I should have said you were
another metal altogether."
" Ah, ha, ha I Yes; not bad. You mean gold, of
Yes; that's what they all say at home," and he 
the speaker approvngly.
No; you   ave not quite hit it yet " replied
carelessly.
"Thanks, Casson, thanks. Yes, I'll like to go to 
room, and have a wash. Don't make any difference for
you know. Don't put yourselves out, now. No chain
Mrs. 0asson-no champagne I I get lots of it at 
don't let me put you to any expense." And waving 
podgf hand with an air of sublime     condescension,
Ltodded off with quick, short steps in the wake of
master of the house.
CHAPTER XXII.
i\        GERALD BROILLY SUGGESTS HIMSELF. 
"For every why he had a wheredbre"
HuiDIua
Youg Flandes's uncle remained for a week, and
himself thoroughly at home; he laid down the law
politics, religion, ooking, and taste; he discoursed of
anti  and soldieing as one in authority, and disp
i ienorance and aroance without stint. He swore



<pb n="165"/>
BGERALD ROMILLY SUGGESTS HIMSELF.           165
who could not understand him; he secretly
the dogs; he bragged openly of his money, and he
lized Miss Oarwithen. His attentions amazed and
the young lady as he hung over the piano, beating
with his podgy forefinger, paid her fulsome compi-
and presented her with enormous bouquets (of  s.'
's choicest flowers), kissed his hand to her, pushed
sats next her, and altogether conducted himself in a
r that made Gerald Romilly feel that the same house
too confined a sace for him and Mr. Hodder.
he was seized with an overwhelming impulse to
t the intelligent traveller, but he was more than
years his senior; he was his unhappy friend's guest
ol man of the sea, so he forebore; but he could not
restrain his tongue, or from speaking out of the
of his heart to his cousin Sophy.
i"What marvellous power you women have Il" he ex-
Ied impatiently. "There is the intelligent traveller,
fifty-five, a hardened, narrow-minded, money-grubber,
the skin of a rhinoceros, and a heart of granite, com-
y bowled over by a girl of nineteen, and she scarcely
to notice him; as far as one's masculine amour prore
,oerned-an humbling and pitiable spectacle. They
is a  ood thing women and horses don't know their
When will he transfer his inspiriting presence ?
is he going ? "
i wsh t knew 1" rejoined Sophy, with an inhospitable
is not possible that he is going to be a permanent
Io  " cried the young man  "Why don't you give
had dinners? Don't mind us; we are prepared to
a=y sacrifice."
dare not; you heard his graceful remarks last night ?"
es; that the soup was not up to the mark, and the
was thin, and that he must send you a cookery-book
Bombay. Poor Sophy, your face was a studyl I
ever regretted that I could not draw so bitterly as
this last week."
; and when he found that it was you who had
m the large silver bowl, he made things pleasant all



<pb n="166"/>
l66            A FAMILY LIKXRNES
rn    by rying,'O     sob  I ee you pyyonrf
mn    od quite right too. Yo cant expect to
m    b lk and to hae the run of your teeth for
Pt Gerald, yew face was a study then I " 
:Look here, Sophy," exclaimed her cousin, j
hbi feet, "if he does not depart soon, Imust, for
tt Ill throttle him. I've a beastly temper, and
wis to do him an injury. What is he waiting for, 
tell me ?" halting before her.
Possibly he believes that everything comes to
waits, rejoined Sophy, who was in a teasing
"and he is waiting for Juliet Oarwithen. I
telling her that he had a fine house at Olapham, a
acres of grounds, a lot of glass, two gardeners
carriage and pair; but that once he was married to a
smart, aristocratic-looking girl, who would stare o
the old frumps in the neighbourhood, he would et
much grander establishment, and give his wife 
and saddle horses, and a thousand a year for dress.
can have all this if she chooses to hold up one little
I.uppoee he is waiting for that signal"
" olpy, for a clever woman, you talk a vast
d     _am se.  The man is older than Miss  arwi
father."                       '
" Possibly; though, properly speaking, she has no fe
I wish some really nice old gentleman would adopt her..
"Why should not a really nice young gentleman
her-as his wife ? "
" Who can you suggest" inquired Mrs      on 
raised eyebrows. "She knows no one." 
A' No one I" he repeated. "Think again."
"Of whom are you thinking, Gerald? Who do
suggest P"
Imsu  et myself I" was the unepecte reply. 
me to prB   the'idea to you."
The ide-      e are aware, wa no stranger to
ao      who brtele     eclaimed, "Oh, Gerald I
tone of as n       ini ng back in her chair as she
"you havecpety     taken my breath away I Ide
fool nnit Rstnnned " 



<pb n="167"/>
G  AULD ROMILLY SUGGESTS BIMSELP.         167
pyou    ill recover again.  hall I go and get some
on your head ? "
o wretched boy I You would joke if you were going
you look upon marriage and hanging as ynony-
I shall certainly impart this information to
no," impatiently.  "Have you said anything to
ertanly not.   I have told you, simply because I
you ought to know what are called my 'inten-
And pray how long has this idea been in your mind ? 
eince the first day I saw Miss Carwithen."
ow, tis nonsense I flatly refuse to believe," exclaimed
Oson, resolutely. " Fancy Jerry Romilly falling in
mg first sight I "
is a perfectly true tale," he rejoined, with a certain
s air of deprecation. " And I have not the smallest
for suposing that Miss Carwithen cares a brass
for me. I fatter myself that she prefers me to Mr.
bt; Int  am not muc puffed up by that conviction.
jgirl could care for such a fellow, with his long-winded
without a gleam of wit or point ?-a man who has
heart than a mouse, and who spends half his time
iEgu his diary, looking at his tongue in the glass, and
s servants."
_" exclaimed his cousin, with a sudden gesture of
"what will your mother sa ? "
aher will be delighted, when she sees Juliet."
umne heure, when she sees her."
iow, Sophy, what do you say ? for you will be
ble," and he laughed rather maliciously.
rising and giving him her hand, " that I acoord
I accept the responsibility; and that, if you
Oarwithen for your wife, I shall be very gad.
^.ym, Sophy. You are a trump. Bamaber that
told you has been for you ear a "
Robbie'sa ear also?  m a tone of ken dis



<pb n="168"/>
68             A F AMILY LIfENES.r 
"Wel, yes; you may tell him, if you like. 
safe but itisto gono further."
Sophy felt ecrety much elated and full of
Here was a real homegrown love affair under her
at least, a far as Gerald was concerned. Unfo
takes two to make a love affair, as well as a
she was utterly in the dark respecting Juliet's id
subect. w
Juliet was a charming, beautiful, warm-hearted
she had her reserves. Por instance, she never spok
father, and she never said much on the subject of 
Bomily. She referred to him in a playfl, je
that told nothing of her real opinion. She could be
siastic enough over a flower, a song, a kitten; 
enthusiasm stopped short at mankind.
Sophy felt burning with impatience as she wat
Hodder strolling up and down the garden with Jui
dinner, talking, talking,ng, king, all on the one
topic-himself             and hi s  aatan  his rhalt
ticulating, boring. How weary the poor girl must be 
there were Bobbie and Gerald discssing flies and
making no effort to interfere. Well, if they did not
her, she would; and in a few minutes the intrepid 
carried off her guest, and Gerald had ucceeded to hi
with amusing promptitude.
"I never saw any one like the intelligent trave
grumbled.  "He won't suffer any one to speak to.
He never gives any of us chance. He plays t
you, or think he plays tennis. I never saw such a
He walks next you on the hill-paths, and tries to          I
me over the khud. He sits beside you at table, in 
pass you the mustard and salt,and hurls comp
your Bead that make us all feel exoessively de trop.
ever, I am getting hardened. I don't often find
blushing now."
"No. I hould think you would be surprised if
found yourdf doing that," retorted Juliet.
On the ontrary, I have more than once done
duty, and have had occasion to blush for yon I "



<pb n="169"/>
waurr   Z sczs-otn       BJMELS . 69        
b.omiD       Whatdo yon mean? Whatodd
In
for you when I heard you guein     Mr.
weight to be eleven stone. I blushed when I
arighim that he was improving in his tennis
i Dd his Hinduanee. Now, all these statements
I"
he askedme. And what could    sa      I I cannot
to a man of his age, and snab him."
you dome. Alas see what it is to be young "
neer Cunnb any one," mid Juliet, emphatily.
r   not when you told me you did not want to know
about me P "
Oh,that was because I did not think I should ever see
^sam," she answered, with a bright fluh.
Pes, that's one way of getting out of it."
.But, Mr. Romilly, you my vey hap things to Mr.
sometimes, she said, gaing at him with a serious
Do I " with an air of demure surprise.
Yes; and whenever he begins a story, you always take
or watch and look at it in the most open way. I'm
he notices it."
1 am delighted you think so. When he begins one of
ntmnable yarns, I feel inclined to lie down and howl
a dogl  I'm afraid I don't care for the intelligent
;e my bump of veneration is not properly developed.
always so intensely condescending to my tender age,
o sorry for mincapacity, ignorance, and poverty. He
me with his money, and sometimes, when he is
forth about I, and I, and swelling himself out with
I feel inclined to run over and stuff an anti-
down his throat."
hope most sincerely that you will restrain your feel-
an rate, as long as I am in the room," said Juliet,
, of Mr. Hodder's ponderous attentions to Juliet,
Gerald Romilly continued to make  onsiderable
k acquaiutanoeship, and she began to look at life



<pb n="170"/>
170             4 FAMILY LIXENES
and heAse with new eyes-eyes that Mr. Ho
diamonds had no power to dzle. There is no
sojern ia the sme country house, not to speak o
bualowia the Himalas, for promoting frien
it, fiendship-between two young people I
tmnnaand picnics, and riding-parties. Mr. Hodde
equestrian exercise, and on a narrow path on a P
pony, who ambles, by preference, on the extreme 
precipice, Mr. Hodder's heart, instead of being in:
possession, was invariably in his mouth.  How
perience had made him cunning.  He used to
merry riders to go on ahead, and lag behind until
venient corer concealed him from sight. He wo
cautiously descend, and lead his much-pleased 
quently enduring martyrdom for miles, and until
almost reached the place arranged on for the pic u
his tardy appearance excited no comment. Mr.od
known to be somewhere in the rear-he was not
horseman-these rides were Gerald Romilly's opport
When Sophy and Bobbie good-naturedl led the
was his agreeable post to ride at Miss Carwithen's left
aero  profound and gloomy chasms, through splendid
through thickets of wild raspberries, bilberries, an
rnm, wheiu lurked alarmed pathers, black phe
other beasts and birds; or along narrow mountain
hanging deep misty purple valleys, above which, in 
the golden eagles sailedpoised,on widespread wing.
the scenery and te company were much to Bomilly'
CHAPTER XXII.
XB HODDEB'S DIARY.
'And what so tedious  a twice-told tle?  * '
Poft
IT was a bplessy  wet day. There is no compromise
rain in the Wi     h; no sn shows, no half-howut
ludes of fine waher;g  a good steady downpour, t
the valleys in mi, nd redes the montain 



<pb n="171"/>
hfft i%     i aflM have been a baugalow
t   us Warn paspect whatever within  fty
r^^^^ *if ted  a cold, serhing rain swp
^tt s iilfc^쳋 thm ofa ifta Caesa a &
ir  hbrd^ iup under a dahlia bosh, looking
faetthausve, and their mistres evidently
;e ah stde tood gazing out on the dreary
ska f0   an her face was that of extreme
Pf l bs f P. hE id. of him at Me I " she exclaimed,
ba 1  f oofala l bid har.
i a       to the i  mediine, ad to write up
1w reloo0ald  std -텺r. Hodder any I1e,"
atJ. "I)Pt ~ I lo*ok crass-? We have ha 7i
_,S      v ooia.ialjejhsAatdegh o'clock this morn-
eaaeelia-_rytireeom' BWAie offered to take
tothe t~rmiiin_ id show him all his tea
kihe                 laa bnbah le go ont with
:i;>. *ff#rmO, said >ulieL. Are all
ar e not; he is a lametAe
'Intelletual peole, whom
,eQq bnin  rsh a8ir, and
Site ame  oe-not like
_   and 'ms% and all
td  Itkamphs on all
_Z eret to avoid
tey are," meachad,a
_  -  ar4" she added,as
Bbl Pe      merging~ from the
-bcao,,   mad BPbbie, a  he
_etgp_ "And lJam     home
an _ ly OUSSON" rejoined
YOU Mret       far yoar.
Z- ;A4- - As~tJ ,



<pb n="172"/>
t17            A FAMILY fLIKNES ;
"What have you been doing ? " inquired Romml 
wrong out his damp cap; "yon both seem in
sprita. Haa Hodder not been entertaining you ?
told you about the rajah that took such an exrao
fancy to him ?--extrordinary indeed -and the
received? and the troops tht were out in his honour 1 
"He has been maddening" retorted Sophy; "hes
never stopped talking of himself all day." 
"You forget, Sophy, that he offered to give us a humo
recitation, and to read us his diary," said her  i
demurely.
"Oh, did he, indeed? and from what I know of
cousin, Sophy, I am certain that he got no further than
first line of ' The crew of the Nancy Bell,' or 'January 
landed at Apollo Sound, and lost my new silk umbrella.'
"You are quite right, Gerald," responded the lady 
assured hi tat it would be a shame to deprive you of
pleasure of hearing his experiences, and the reading has
reserved until after tea."
"Now, I call that a most mischievous jestl  It is
often that you are so unselfish, Sophy," observed her 
impressively, "and I guarantee that, as far as I am conoer
I shall remember your remarkable good nature. Now,
must go and change, and make ourselves fit for the dra
room-and the reading."
In a short time all the inmates of Snow View
assembled round the tea-table, where Sophy was 
tea and hot cakes.
"This is Mrs. Noote's butter," said Bobbie, as he 
it to Jliet. "You recognize it, I dare say ? "
"Yes, I should think so I considering how often I
made those prints myself."
"Do you always live with these common butter people
inquired Mr. Hodder, with ill-conealed disapproval. 
"For the present I do." And turning to  erald, she
"Every few daI receive a note from Mn. Noote, to
me that my visit here is ping, and that they are o
forward to my retrn.   had no idea she was so fond
me                         " "
"She is not very fond of m," he rejoined, with a



<pb n="173"/>
^  ir.     zrS DIARY.               73
a i  forget how she bundled me out of the
'poor old Noote, with his look of miserable
,  much as to may, Don't tear me to pieces too
nad how his wife shouted, 'Noote, go o bed,' just
as speaking to a dog. If I had been her unhappy
I should have taken a stick to her."
you hold very strong ideas on the subject of marital
,"  remarked Sopy; "ideas picked up in this
g of ideas picked up in this country reminds me
u suggestion about my diary, Mr. (asson;" and, to
unconoealed dismay, Mr. Hodder suddenly produced a
drab-coloured book, with the word  Diary" printed
the cover in bright green letters.
^rI don't like diaries," remarked Romilly, with disconcert-
ceandour. "They are a sort of jointstook affair, of which
one person gets the credit. Mackintsh, who lives with
keeps one, and occasionally drives me crazy by demand-
what he was doing on Thursday fortnight, or what was
date of somebody's dinner-party ? "
.I keep mine most regularly," protested Mr. Hodder,
dignity; "and have done so since I was a lad. I can
l what the weather has been every day for the last
years."
,."'Then you can easily tell me what sort of a day it was
e     I was born 7 " said Homily.
, "No difficulty about that," snarled Mr. Hodder; "a bad
, I should think I"
' A nasty one for m," exclaimed the young man, with
: good-humoured laugh, and the other continued-
"But a truce to jokes. This," sharply tapping the back
the diary, "is for publication; it is intended to be a sort
humnorous account of my travels out here, and will interest
pi ple at home.    I don't think any one has thought of it
.Iora description of daily life, written in a pleasant,
-B _y form. Ahem-" and clearing his throat twice, and
"ore any one could interfere or expostulate, he began-
*  Moday,    ept. 25th.-Arrived at Bombay; heat most
ei~ve. W' Went to hotel, nameless, as I do not wish to
RWVV  any special hotel the benefit of my advertisement.



<pb n="174"/>
174            A FAMILY LIZ    ENA S
Ia rges ta-b     crowded-irly good dinner,
qIawr Bcarr; pehased to find all the servants po
t      iseigent    an-with whom I ted fr
b     oa v rdah; ave him my ideas about the o
ad its apebiti     Semed a good deal struck.
in Bombay twenty year  Slept badly.
" Tuwday, Spt. 26t.--Hea intense, left off my
and cholera-belt-hope I shall not take a chil;
squalid. Spoke to manager, and complained of the
Shopping-prices enormous-a topee, eighteen
white  mblla, fifteen shillings. Bought blue 
and veil-went to chemist' and bank."
Hullo I" interrpted Bomilly. "Excse me,
but there is some one outside the verandah, making
"Oh yes," remarked Sophy.  It'sonly oneof my
" Only lepers I" repeated Mr. Hodder. "Wh, y
mean to say they actually come out about the 
thought they were all shut up in asylums. This 
reported."
"Who is to report them ? " inquired Sophy. " No
one  There area good many sufferers among these 
shall be back directly. You need not be at all
Iere is no fear of infection; and anyway, thee men
only the white leprosy, which is not considered cont
"I don't like it at al," grumbled Mr. Hodder, 
Sophy and Gerald-tanding under an umbrell-holi
ammated parley with two wretched creatures, o
palings. They were wrapped in the invariable hill 
a brown blanket drawn over their heads, and 
and wet and miserable.
"Poor creatures," said Sophy, as she returned, 
the sudden change, and their dreadful disease is mos
in odd weather. There has been -a death-a trly
releae-and they wanted a little help."
"Why don't they go to the asylum?  rve no
thn-im      I'm sure they should not be encowu
Mr. Hodd    .
"Some go   & some will not, but remain in their
with theitr etiC , who are wonderfully good to 
spite of the'  tli  a they believe leprosy to be a X



<pb n="175"/>
iStmid a Pnrhinor
_3Raw-luy, "I have been tWdMd
/tlii e  kin -order to get thedieee,
'!_. mdimtlm  to fthe asylum--and for
q Ake  qees a month, granted for
Eitrau!I I don't believe
iVM doo much for idleness
~ iP"r~i~:m'  ~ t destitue mman, the evil of
ii samgdum      les terrible than
tdqtntu . Ithard f onepenioner,
yin an _umn--who aved modt of his
*Patkw~b    dd  , qmte ri, and to a
_f; "A, Gei, ."id Sophy.
O"histenwruped. "Nothingbeyond
r: ro, I. k a Mknw ahomedan who has
Lbi, aad lived in the leper asylum,
tGrbty years. There. a hero, if
'4z  tof  'wveuavtion,"
air. "And
_:_   .i. a to go
! _ rt-,hil
"t.d~l I`,  u have
_~~~i                  d r,0
fifa :-y~L-   Dl
" besai4,~a       s



<pb n="176"/>
176            A FAMILY LIKENES&
some stuff in hand. Give us tha ghost-sor 
speaking about; it's daylight, and w won't be 
f'Oh, but I shall be tnrified," exclaimed  o
am  firm believer in ghosts Iit is averybadone,b
you mst allow me to hold your hand.
"Ghoesories-for an amateur magaine I
Mr. Hodder.   Well, you must be easily pleased II
yon I don't mind going on reading for another hour." 
"We would not think of allowing it," said Romilly
eager politeness. "You must not knock yourself u
know. Sophy, where is your future mgazine ?
"Well, at any rate, I'll just finish up to Lucknow,'
Mr. Hodder, with an imperious gesture of his hand. 
diary is divided into periods, as you may perceive." 
minutes he had closed the book, and complacently
his audience, blandly inquired if "they had any 
to make?"                                     .
"I should eliminate the meals, and the prices 
tickets, and gharry hire," said Bomilly. "Yo
well publish your account-book, while you are about it I
"- And there is rather too much about climate, and
quitoe, and dust, and hotels," continued Sophy.
Mr. Hodder's bland smile faded, and his brow grew 
"All very fine; but if I leave out these topics, what
be left? What seems commonplace to you, will be
interestingto readers at home; you don't appreiate 
and style. None of you are literary people 1 
" Except Sophy," said her husband, tossing a big 
mannucript into her lap. "Bead us something 
Sophia."
"That is easier said than done," she replied, openin
turning over the manscripts, and reading aloud the
" Here is a poem,' To Lucy's Eyelashes.'
"No, no, no," protested two masculine voices, i
,,idb.   of Al ender the Great on the Banks o
Indus.'"
"No; that sonds too dry. We are not literary,
would be wasted on Bobbie and me. Get hold of
rhodaetorv.s mid Romillv.



<pb n="177"/>
ie m   i 'The   Death-Card,' and is
Sido      h!anr. Would you like the
Gcld; "ever mind themyet. I
dit, e cmbear it. Mi     Oarwithen,
p*.-fo-r I am naturally of a very timid
oiuted a dissentient growl from Mr.
ml'himmlf far back into his chair-
-dfoyndlyclaSped on his breast, and an
ity on his natrally iII-tempered
I Petn  miad Sophy, briky "wun you
;i lm  anad  arranging youselvO, I am
:      [qe a .-s..  ~'~m],'~
4cftl y' dad m,,"
a       a! ti7e%, nor is there
_a ew  hory bushes
embarrs stray
within the
an
for a
a the ground;
ehe foar winds
_,and a lWft
and hg400
bi,.ti'      s
I'



<pb n="178"/>
178            A FAMILY LIKENSS.
of the cetury by som merchant prince, who looked
as his prmaent abode; and from the high-road
retains omewhat of the sir of its former grandeur;
ner  inspection,it is painfully apparent that "I
is written all over the lace in large characters. The
down shrbberies, the dry fish pond, the gras-grown 
the long green streaks which deface the walls, the
shutters hanging by broken hinges, rattling drearily in
gust of wind-all, all, proclaim that the glory of this 
has depted, whilst the sudden banging of a door i.
empty interior has a remarkably startling and
effect 1
For many years before it succumbed to its presenv
dition, the bungalow had ceased to be the reid
wealthy married people, but had risen, or fallen, i
hands of bachelors, and, thanks to its central position,
vicinity to the club, Mount Road, and beach, becom
most poplar " Chummery" in the whole of Madras.
It boasted capital stabling, and some renowned
courts  The stables are now roofless; vagrant syces
stolen the rafters to boil grain; the tenni-court are 
obliterated, and yet it is not so very long ago since
were in daily requisition. In India an establishment
into decay much more speedily than it does in En
Here the elements and insects assist old Father Time 
amazing zeal and sucoess. The blasting hot winds
blistering sun, the torrents of a tropical downpour,wi
visitation of an occasional cyclone, and the perpetualr
of legions of white ants, very soon occasion surprisng r
in an uninhabited house.
The last tenants of the Chummery were two young
named Kegan and Bassett, who were popularly kno
the Siamese twins, for they appeared to be almost as
abl,  They had been school-fellows, they came frou
saaegbrhood at home, had arrived m Madras
same stemr, were employed in the same great m
home, to wihch the same offce-gharry carried them
morning. In appearance they afforded a remarkable:
e-_. r"ran -ama mhnrt. faur and fmranilp.-lnokinn. 



<pb n="179"/>
Dr;"'"rn~cA.      179
Abd a Wm liMe t  voice, talftive,
_ ,  a sad d'isde' smidy. He was
_r/k W l,,b'mt  to sner from a dangrws
M at an ate, he never played ciet,
_~   ~asi t*, heauo's tbi, and was notoriosly nerrox
i fw._w   datrim   id and  y suer
_ _. w ,mtim othd' h!md, had nerves and 
:ima. e' toodri s feettwoin his toc
fqow ~.\; .-* a, ~ with promi-
_ b--b wo kj b,=   ..lAWS. Kndan
_...*as s~d e""     ous =batnoi ar
atm 4nn.ve the mli-
_      :   -' .  aratBait
_stieand bhe bad no diffict&
club without delay or demur,
uame vort  as his friend.
.ad in ia' 
nowr required
noon, and
.~ -~.:~ . Obmpne
I A     I lha two



<pb n="180"/>
180             A FAMILY LIKEBNSS.
"You ee," continued his companion, volubly, "  i
heaps of stables and servants' quartes, and loads of
below; they won't interfere wih us. Of course te
take'their meals with us, and will have to come up to b
fast and dinner. They must keep to their own qu
could not sand my books and things being knocked
or to have some heavy-handed booby thumping on my
piano."
Bassett nodded his head in sympathetic assent as hel
fresh cigarette.
" Can you suggest any one ? " continued Kegan.
' Yes; there is that chap Collier. I heard him f
he could not put up with his present quarters any
the feeding is filthy. Hewould come like a shot; and
lad Moore, who seems a pal of his, would jump at
chance."
He would jump at more than a chance " rej
egan, pettishly.  "We should have him    putting 
urdles all over the compound, and schooling over
gate and wall on that old waler of his."
"Oh, well, he is a good sort of boy, and he is a
man I As long as you are not asked to take the h
why should you care ?  ve suggested two; if you can
a better coupe, go ahead."
Kegan sat smoking for some time in meditative
evidently pasing all his acquaintanes in review order; 
then he said in a brisk tone--
"All right. Ill see Collier to-morrow, and I'll
point of sounding him."
In another week the lower rooms were occupied b
new chums; there were extra ponies in the stable;
several sharp fox terriers on guard in the porch.
Collier was accountant in a bank-a cheery young ri
eight and twenty, with an uncommonly hard head-f
his club, a notable whist player, and much sought
esteemed as a fellow who could tell a firstclass story,
keep a whole room in roars of laughter without a smile
his own cleans      visag   He did not affect
society; he never pat on his best coat in order to
calls. No; he openly declared that "he had not o



<pb n="181"/>
RIa
"_  .' '        toget
_ w w j _ med, he  B oon
Uoacanberiver.
m.noe wae not Tommy-was boa
rd the Bumenee police, full of life
delighted to find himodf
-    a   yhe wouid exclaim, with
a,;   inthis:  a riIppng  country I
i The port is AL Every
1 - Wa the clmae, I oall it finst-
-           B ' Iw' '"  ht  ,r, p oor lad I
_   _  dibesoating:  out Palavernm
'ti~i~o  pp ^ 01  o a Vwell-
p       uce d   lpt at auction for
1!"1 M!  Nrd remarkcably
_side~bzrU not clash with
7:i0  w    e  le6 to rehearse
They breakfasted
I_ jmP ina * cool room on the
$A4Z#,y h     ad  a g ame   of tennis
_f. , K an d Barnett were in too
muoh of their time at home.
quite sddenlyr, as they
q'   v; .e. night, "does it
._;: a .  , mm  as
a": head?"
oqsr day, and oid
: W~d. hi at Bma"t'a
_ _so toaa any burlesque,
_tie~~~~~~~~~~~~~hg



<pb n="182"/>
i8S             A FAMILY LIKBNESS.
note,and my voice goes into an excnciating squeal.
little man, if you could only ee the hideous faces y
yo'd never mg again "
.Thi wa a    facer for Kegan    I fancy it's
weather coming on, and beginning to affect their
or tepers," remarked Collier, throwing away his
a he stepped into the porch; "either that, or
laughed.
"Or what ?" 
"Or there is a lady in the case. Cierch  la f/
and he strolled off to his own quarters, whistling.
".Pv got to the bottom of it I" said Tommy, i
into his friend's bedroom, two days later. " A fellow
lub -told me the twins are in love with the same girl I 
what do you say to that? Is it not a splendid joke ?
" Don't be an ass, Tommy 1" protested his friend,
"I am not an as, Jack Collier; and she is a MissP
the jolly girl who acts and dances so scrumptiously
burlesque; you've seen her. She has round blue ey
rater a cooked nose; but she is a pretty girl, and
ddlyr fir."
"Oh, indeed I and as you hae settled it all to you
plte satisftn" said Collier, with a yawn, "erhapel
ill get out of my room, and let me go to sleep. 
" fthought it might interest you," said the boy,
geticUy.                                       '";
g"A] it does not-no more than last year's t
so clear."
I'd no idea you had gone to bed; good night, old'
and Tommy took his departure somewhat dolefully.
Mr. Moore's intelligence was perfectly correct. Nits
wa    e f the beauties of M r. She had a saucy
a pir of rather wicked blue eyes, and an insatiable
flirtation.  he acted and san, and had shocked a f
delighted mny, by her exquisite dancing in a re
lesaqe.  Ihe had ee  a great deal of the Siamese
they were now ald the rivals, for it was patent 
oth lost their heart to the same fair damsel; ;
intim    delared that it was really too abominable, 



<pb n="183"/>
193
soak othao,     ITidl
~Sri 4liar~ois thoughts and apparently
Art out three dances u'der the
4dP their heads barely visible
him. home in boisterous
arFD s   hee sat, beside his
~~brm. WGU and long as
Wlle.t~ their love, never
t buti their~ former liking
baked-a, h~e  atred whicN,
dap irrnaausly.
&ahL          161dl-  g  likee
A;~te amem   house, the
~P'kds~ the mmm dhoby I
odiitbfb  ter--of courae,
wo Pas this to be
?rrft   Ah, there was the
-,*AM   It, had come to be the
a bo reoeption, and every day
.rs  of beauty and fashion,
-NAMga nor Bassett,
of -Mnttaw "tisfac.
that they
hair Wits was
"wM TOWd to
Affew4Pa     and
down~~ ~n to the
.:Bhd Yes; but
: hdW~a~b  a the 0001
by dust
Plesan



<pb n="184"/>
14          XA FAMILY LIaN     St,
incessantly; each suspected every letter the ot
or sent; the strain of the dull, hot weather days, iii
rooms, wo  their scanty spply of mutual fo
threadbare. Innuendoes, seers, and gibes were 
served with mals; and Bassett, who had always
love for the horrible, took an immense delight in
made Kegan turn pale, and writhe in his chair; dof
murder, a shocking accident, or an execution, not
was spared.
It was too hot to go to the club after dinner;
room caught whatever sea-breeze there might be,
night the four chums played whist; and, in that 
occupation, forgot for the time, heat, dullness, 
jealousy.
One evening, as they sat in their shirt-lee
advanced in the second rubber, Bassett, who was 
turned up the ace of spades.
"Look at that, Began I" he exclaimed, slapping
his palm. "You are a superstitious beggar, In
put faith in omens and in fortune-telling; there
aeath-ord I "
"As if I believed in such old women's rubbish I n
the other, irritably. "I wish you would lipit yourr
to the game."
"It might be a warning, persisted Bassett.
were sixty deaths in Blaktown yesterday, and young
of the potoffice, went out this afternoon."
"What?" exclaimed Kegan, turning very w
laying down his cards; "impossible   I waspe
him last night."
"Very likely you were; but, all the same, he was
off in a few hours," now proceeding to retail the
stances in a few short and terrible sentences.
"There, cried Kegan, putting up his hands; "for
sake stop I Upon my word, you take a positive 
the disease. I wonder it does not get hold of you. I
serve youright if it did."
"Oh, woiud it? Wel, if it comes to that," now
his great tragi eye on his partner, "I swear I won't 
of this chummery aonM    You are my twin, and are 
..     .   . ..  ..   ..



<pb n="185"/>
_;                                     ~~~~~~~~~~~S
'baA      ,I ve a
_ tdKEim behind n&
OD Yoapa   need ujA be
_h" tabne it, rd
mm as no. I'm
AMX the epidemic,
His bedroom was
An the wzr floor,
_~~~~~~~~~톌 .he grave,
aross the
OWN~B~e  the
with
X1 ;aed -~~aboat eleven
relier had dWd,
ht . bad cessed, 4d joined
_   aol ein the glaeral datin
_bbmih  and after the feveril
_bt~ boors, a great stillnens
booming of the smr$,
_  rho wee sonring the
_ powP tak, y dif
appesrale he had
_ 1I  I bearing the low
#lad to be rid of him ? "
the somewhat Pdnched
oULt d tbe wy 7 No- 
and I an a k#Iute to
S.. !~"Cbme
*Vens Wsi



<pb n="186"/>
186            A FAMILZY LKENESS.
"Oh, I sa7, yo  fellows, you can't go away fI
K   '  ' " You onuld not be so mean as to leave
EMoore had alreay rien, he pashed him f
]B  ys  seat. "Sit up with me. Just for 
whimpered. "I know you are both a good so
lare me, for Heaven's sake, don't, don'tl" 
termified, unhinged creature, with desperate eyes
drawn face, the same self-confident, spruce little
darling of society I After this almost frenzied
continued, "How can I go to bed with thatth
next door," pointing to the opposite room. " And
it's too hot to sleep I" he urged piteously. 
Moore and Oollier exchanged significant gl
agreed to remain where they were; and as Moor"
the head of the stairs and shouted down to their
servants that they might go to bed, an expression
relief spread itself over Kegan's haggard conte
The three men settled into comfortable armchaires
furiously, and talking at distant intervals of the
good qualities, the awful suddenness of his s
relations at home, and finally of his money affair
odd ways.
"He was a queer chap always," explained K
oPeday lately, and he was always talking of 
Ehonrs   You remember what he said to me in
room, only three nights ago ?" and he shivered at
lection, though the air was that of a furnace. "O
it was only a joke; but somehow I shall not feel
he is out of the house  I remember,when we
he wanted me to agree that whoever died firstsh
back and visit the other; but I wouldn't 
wouldn't I" he reiterated almost fiercely.
of course, there is no such thing posible-h
Collier ?"
"No, of course not. I wonder you are so
Kegan    One would think you were off your chu
" I believe I am not myself to-day; the shock
me, and you know my heart is queer, and makes mo
but it's a hbrrie feeling, that I cannot get 
wmtang is going to happen to me."



<pb n="187"/>
00"d 01imatem or your Km,
hI be clamed irritably; "that b
'Ms -s - r   omthing to keep U all
li a ~  ,  m O cards."
t Cia ~ objw     oieo , with a shake
"In_ oftf, too. You need have
-d-     sl.  ! i_ ~  -aiw d be the first to get p
i  C7r S t   I I sift hee, I'll1 get the
i   ow~g  ervm. . Come
_isp fmaj tbfnring; and
bbe muigd I; for he asmred
~ Bi    So.. ".st ',*' raioon, he looked
.i i. .   . .. ,  d a iN  a few minutes a
tubbr with' "dammy," for the
_W t'iS'.i   ihis bac to the open
.~._        tr    '.'d oier faced him;
J _th absorbing interest of a
^.lmd'in           were soon forgotten;
*L the yed, merely pausing now and
_o ripo away the pepiration
.  .'   he late, full moon had
_and t  surf, and the
_  ,was still as death.
..  i- ffom his
_ib- gied acro at
s" b 1X     sighted pale
..._   the other cheerily.
...~Mm im an aa of trmpm
$   y,and I expect your liver is
aae3 so ie A aeligr had
_B~~~~~~~Esp                w  -fatdti na iD
_C~~~~~i               =XPQXd !~eanben



<pb n="188"/>
188             A FAMILY LIZXNSS       , 
near-sighted,did not notice this, nor how distrat
had become, until Collier suddenly sprang to his
"Excuse me. I1 be back directly I" went
the room-not through the door, but by the 
hurried below.                            '
"What on earth is keeping him?" inq
peevishly rapping his pine-nez on the table. "
been taken ill? There's nothing the matter, is
"I'll just go and see," stammered Moore, m
rather flurried, and who precipitately effected amJi
same verandah, and tore downstairs at such 
speed that he nearly fell over his friend, who wea i
the opposite direction. 
" Now then, young Moore " cried Collier,
forward into the moonlight. "What's up? Ha
something, too?" 
"Rather I" panted the boy, breathlessly. 
" I hoped it was an optical delusion, or some
that sort. I've slept very little lately, and one's
queer tricks. I thought I'd run down and have
and soda, and pull myself together. I sppose w
name thing. ESh Tom?" ?
"I dont know what you saw," rejoined To
shudder. "I saw the purdah across the door 
by a long, bony hand, and Bassett-"
"Yes, interrupted Collier, releasing his arm;
a beastly shame for us to funk, whatever it is
that miserable beggar up there alone. Come on."
"But he had his back to the door, and--'t 
At this moment there was the sound of a
and a heavy fall overhead, and the two men m
taneous dash for the stairs. When they reached
story they discovered Kegan lying on the   lf
psaehe was locked in the arms of the corpse,
dead I
People my that most things, however strange o
admit of exnation, and the doctors 
tragedy to the own complete satifction.



<pb n="189"/>
~     ~   mmofo         r_ _'ea asilnoen   The.
_  .. H .o~?~ ~  awhw riin up his
_KMUeeafdngiat al  about &th  Atase of heart
i half_ an hour," he persised; "and l an
ths ebt aoutg Benare aInd I athr wanty
ia^ di     d nonsiae   Bid dMr. Hodder.
fasno    te rnouble to read or write sfencls
_ ^^^^f~more producing the dreaded diary-" I see
_ b e~  more of my dway before dinner."
_^^^^BP^     My mach, Mr. Hodder," protested his
_   eptilg thB dresdsng-gong every moment."
_ r Hodder, who, next to writing up his
_6 S^Mtreading it aloud, was not thus to be pnt off
half an hour," he persisted ;" and I can
_^^^^^p the bit about Benares; and I rather want
_twa^^B^a no alternative for the two defenceless
compelled to sit down and listen with
_       V^^^*ItJae could muster; whilst the men, men-like,



<pb n="190"/>
190             A FRILEY   UIKENS       7J
OHAPTER XXV.
A FL5 ALARM.
BStand not pon the order of your gobQY,
DAY seemed to take wings and fly like hours 4a
and the precious moments of Gerald Romi i'
ebbing away like sand in an hor-glass. His
to his country; he was not his own master, 
blatant rival  Mr. Hodder more than s
admiration for Miss Carwithen; but what was
but a penniless officer in a Ghoorka regim
pleasantly alive to the fact that his leave 
expire, and was determined to figuratively "i
Yes, he meant to propose for the girl; indeed, 
he had been on the eve of a declaration, and 
always prevented him; was it Juliet Carwithe
Noi she had a stand-off manner, but she was;
young woman, and would never be so insane s
bimknowing that he could take her away from
savage life among the mountains, and give 1r
establishment in London, with horses, and
diamonds, and everything she could possibly d
all, wlat did he see in her ? he querulously asked
what, beyond her pretty face and pretty figre ?
nobody; she had not a rap.  She had no
the Cassons, and was a boarder in some low,
farmhouse. Still, there was an air, a charm, a
about her that he could not withstand; in spite
serge or white gowns, she always looked like 
pers    She would make a good ape
ladau m the park, or at the head of his 
he would oertainly marry her.
Gerald Romilly was by no means so sanguine
Miss Carwithen  ad talked and laughed with
tennis with him, ridden with him, and always
merry, and friendly; but he had a secret con



<pb n="191"/>
191
6 ~i       mandl glimpa      d 
,     hm"m   had not the smallest reason
cared one jot more for him than
NeV&    Oeless, he was not dis-
ud    lh e hwould talke a leaf out of
ba  vourite household rendes-
.M t, ed; it ontUined delight
+tq *a%&MWI on the garden,
WI  i n    orX Ge..   myviewR of the
w      Viewr wwe  habitual earl
sSi'aty       and reluctant
I           bre foar baret,
awaited
.1   3   b  ees with her han3
41n, dshe remarked to Mr.
i  j' pfilar lookinz at hersef.
... .. tionsf," ise continued.
!a-. fow, dam, and the clouds
' . IL. I would rather
wod; would not
,in oher objects
_o u wal most
walr "Whata
Mr hlma  Oss theoleuters
.*wipkertJ  b   "Mine,
more for



<pb n="193"/>
93
_a_.r rtooLk e    notice of no
w        1 .I man your father was first
to tbsd   ma-i, I should say, 
_^ ^p '. - we, having been all our lives 'in
_asgotten to a certin extent; and there
ow   ,      rsiting, or correspondence. Old
r fiytwoa had a son and grandson,
__r ryou; d  _they went on a yachting
2dier, ad both have died there of the
it notu   I  I ameorry for the poor old
*l  the end of his das  He sent for your
l       reatb nrprised to find that bh is the heir,
f     daty .  Threis a daughter-in-law and
but there ae no men relatns, and every-
male line. I'm  iting fearful nonsense,
I hope yo   can undestand   Of course this
gest difference in our affairs, and naturally
ing for your father to have a place to look
where he must live, without the bother
making up his mind; and I hall be thankffl
home of my own, and in the country. The
think  o much of; we have always had
ttes. Nor do I care for the title, which
Ie long. The person whom all this affects
You must come home to us-at any
wpoare a captain, and that will be in a few
hmne, and sd'e. How thankful I am now
arried, and that you would not listen to
_        it^m ?Rna great comfort to me to feel that there is
ng your heart out in India, and that in
_            ..,rword girls are extremely scar.  You
-_e            ,_7^ewho._ wil carn the family honours wel.
Ingnificant little creature, not fitted to
_^[1^^E       yak;-  the family diamonds would look
_ RXe must choose a tall, beautiful, aristo-
heoe head will become a ooronet I We
with oongratulationa    Such is the
_p pe      that I scarely knew have called
_     e     r,_e-i??', end asked when y  re comin.
.4d  te  ) s"to wlb     I anrwered
o



<pb n="194"/>
194             A FAMILY LIKENRSS.
'Very shortly' Among our first visitors was
withen; he has the peerage at his fingers' enda
awar of our rise in life as soon as we were o
hae had no less than three notes from him in
offring to put yon and your father up for his clubs,a
to find out about your ohances of promotion
advice.
"And that reminds me to tell you a very  r
about him; it is a secret, so keep it to yourself. 
Manders came home for three months, as you know9
told me that Mr. Carwithen was a widower when 
the second Mrs. Carwithen, and that he has a
daughter out in India. He keeps her existence
himself; but Theresa saw her at a school at O
and says she is quite the most lovely creature she
eyes upon I She would like to have shown her 
ness, but when she made inquiries later, the
broken up. I wonder what has become of the
Is not Dolly Carwithen a wrech? "
Gerald glanced involuntarily at "the poor 
was standing up, waving her hand to Robbie as 
fom the tes-etate, and was, as Mrs. Manders hea
most lovely creature. Yes; a coronet would look
advantage on that small, perfectly shaped head.
"Wel, Gerald, I hope you have had good n
Sophy, gathering up a lapful of letters.  "You 
grave as a mustard-pot. All right at home ? "
"Yes, thank you; all most flourishing.
"Im   sorry to say I have bad news this 
marked Bobbie, as they seated themselves at the
table. " I hear there is cholera, a serious outb
twenty miles."
"The pilgrims, as usual," muttered Gerald. !
bring it up from Hurdwar, and spread it all over
"It's amog ooolies, on Mr. Smithwick's t
'Cbolra' did you say?" echoed Mr. 
alarm.
" Yes, thee have been adozen deaths."
In that case, he would make himself scarce



<pb n="195"/>
393
^ ^ ^ Hthaii e would write,;
^^^    *       i*jih 'tllsr'irt  eamty ; it was b   one
A waSa        very well to pooh-pooh
armchair in Olapham, bu quite
in the risk of meeting gangs of infeted
i  akfub, and the  eeing news that there
ili.   hn twenty miles," somewhat reassured
b  revived-prhaps he need not move at
^e is aa      diestane," he remarked aloud.
geally traels at the rate of one march
a day--. the ntves. may," rejoined Gerald
was anxi os to weed the parting  uest.
I it comes in-n-this direction, stammered
F ( it will be here the day after to-morrow I "
e^ . ^ t  th was the alarming anxwer.
iget traveller became a pale, suet colour, and
otelay, "In that case, lam off at daybreak."
digo," id Bomilly, promptly; " you can ride back
will put you on your road."
evy sorry, PMrs. Cason," said Mr. Hodder, ignoring
his offer, "to break np this delightful party;
ngwas going, I'd be sure to catch it."
of course Iwill not press you to stay," said
with disappointing composure.
was dispted to find that he was not pressed
to remain; but he forgot that his present
8 were not the same as those at home. There
friends, who knew his monetary vale, or
d relations, who expected favours to come,
if he broached the subject of leave-taking.
had quartered himself on absolute strawners, had
if completely at home and intensely  i  ee
bullied, argued, patronized, and contradicted
Xht, and thought himself an immense aoquisition,
a only Bobbie's strong instinct of hsitality
dpplod temper that had saved him on several
fnum being thrust out summarily upon the cold



<pb n="196"/>
196            A FAMILY LIVNx S            I
" This is our day for the expedition to Kla
Sophy; "it is about seven mles away. Bobbie
shoof the hills, and we will explore the old 
can find them. We are going to startin an hour.
you wll come, Mr. Hodder ?"
"Oh yes, I'llcome, of course. I'm going to 
replied pompously.
"I hope e won't shoot me, as he nearly did
day," murmured Romilly, as he rose from table. 
It proved to be a beautiful morning, and 
excellent sport, though Mr. Hodder contributed
the bag. He sat on a stone and watched the y
scaling and scrambling, or panted after them, 
face. No looker-on would have recognized in
distressed gentleman, who never took his gun
coolie, the splendid hero of magniicent shooting 
as subsequently described to his friends, from
hearthrug at home.
It was indeed a sight to se him toiling up hills,
descending slopes, led hand-in-hand by scornful
supporting him on either side. His companions
him to one another with roars of laughter.
" What in the world brings the fellow out ? " sa
"I never came across such a specimen of a man I "
"Old woman, you mean I" corrected Gerald
"and my grandmother would be twice as plucky." 
" Yes; the only animal he ever shot was at
and that by mistake. He talks of game and deer.턙
"Don't you know the game and the deer "  l
companion, looking at him fixedly.
",es," rejoined obbie, with a loud laugh, ki
down the hill; "as if Miss Oarwithen would look at
the way, I see her and Sophy over on that hill; h
ingout tiffin. Comealong; I am nearly mad with
By the time that lunch had been discussed Mr
who lolled on a rug pioking his teeth, was in an
bland frame of mind.
"That's not bad claret, Oasson," he
observe. "How much a dozen, eh ?"
I really cannot tell yon. I'll look when I go 



<pb n="197"/>
-= -       :97
-  /v  l   ay.Ie cheap claM  at ra
  ~i{s  .lll'-tiaia w  mrder to give it
arii a       cUy a Pkp, "I never touch
i-b slbn   ng thai the Fe'hs ,  lik me,
_>~l                  ma* ~* m    ante        Mm m
C   iptefer their eafi CMnRatb," sad
aift l t  . .d twere was an angry flash in his
rH w you have  n so much, Mr. Hodder, that
thoght of goin into Thibet ?  interposed
desire to turn the conversation.
Geradi, "and tried theirbrew of ta. They
i   and buntter."
^joig there, Gerald,are yo not ? and can give
I can't say it has an  iing sonnd,"
_^^^    ' f^anot think that Romily is a fellow that drinls
_-d  Mr. Hodder, insolently.
_ b^^ ^^R    Imno  about that," he answered mildly. "I
~^^         i~:-omon cold tea; and according to my bearer's
three pounds a week." 
bachelors are robbed I" exclaimed Robbil
_ >     Y    71^life~ is apositive economy. And let me assure
^^,l^*tha_ _my friend is a model of steadiness; he is
I   know, who came back from a big night at
n reversing the usual order of things by
to bed I "
_nights at me  ar a crying scandal and
Mr. Hodder, and ought to be put down by
_^^'.^*f       ever present at one of them P" inquired
.as a guost ?"
_sl-             n aomt go if I was asked. I don't want
tipsy young asses making fools of them-
about to make some angry retort, when
owned at him, and said, Are you reall,
Geald ? "
to ttry my luck by the Aut Dasa Paw,



<pb n="198"/>
198            A FAMILY LIuENa
which is on lmndred and twent miles fron
eight fr       Chine fronyV. 
"Th Qhinm guard will nevr let you papss
iThen I halldigie melf, for I mean
and the grand lamn to boot. 
Boot, indeed I You will get the order 
exclaimed his friend. "What is there to e
uninteresting land-a land of monks and '
"A mystery hangs over it, and that is
If I come back alive, Sophy, I will bring-:
Carwithen each a beautiful gold prayer-wheel:
big turquoise.
"Under those circumstanoes, I shallce
to dissuade you from the expedition," said
laugh. "I am extremely fond of presents." 
" I'll tell you what," broke in Mr. Hodder, 
topic in which he took no interest, " rve
about my diary." 
At this dread word his listeners exchanged 
alarmed looks. Had he it with him, coneale
person? 
" I think I shall abandon the diary form, ^
realy solid work about this country, when I get
use the diary merely as a note-book."
"Shall you put us all in it ? " inquired Jliet
him a pair of smiling interrogative eyes. "Do
View.' 
"Oh, it.won't be that sort of book-nor 
rejoined, in his most pompous manner; "tho
give the Government a hit about the scandal
these hill roads-roads, indeed   Goat-t
courses I I mean to write a masterpiece, in a 
and give the world some new and valuable idea.
" Your own, or-other people's ? " asked om
of his mocking glances.
"My own I    with immense dignity. "O
ideas in this country are, as far as I can 
muh-dressing, and racing, and shooting, and
haven't a notion beyond that."            !



<pb n="199"/>
399
vim       esfa   of
with slgighl,
_  n bosh, e8p  for a lfew
_*^    d; saxd tdie idea that
e an army of martyrs is the
A Ue aW agSU eaM"
.eeoa~a    ~ffe -overpaid  the
be e       7mnou^ y  t down.  Of
ilqs excepted; but the people
is alled society, would be in the
Ob, Ill mh     up o good many
I a       thing of the 'l,-the dw
and fated them for months
one wat to know whoe you are-;
and aso the w     omen-.-- -"
_1Bmilly,  anl    springing to his
"Hornets I hornets I-
ranT-for your very lives I "
meced, the party was sattered in
me way, Mrsa Cason another.
.t nec     exhibited extre
Ibot him for a moment
.  and then deliberately
.... mowetou   people
... .u



<pb n="200"/>
sod             A FAMILY   LxnB    m
"No; it's all right," rejoined Gerald;
the future author of a  ret work on
running until about the middle of next week.l
"Wea theie a large neit " inquired the
haelf with her hat.
"I only saw-I tell you this in the strictest
on.es
"One nest I and quite enough. Pray, how 
you want ? " she demanded ininantly. 
"One hornet I And as one swallow dos
summer, perhaps one hornet does not signif a'
"Oh, what a shame I" cried Juliet, v
dared you play us such a trick P"
" Pray do not call it by such an ugly 
artless little stratgem, to rouse the i
he had sat there much longer, I know I shout
him with the tablecloth. He won't catch us
time, that's one comfort."
"And this is his last evening I" she
"Which is another and still greater comfoirt
to say that I take my departure to-morrow also,
Juliet made no remark, but seated herself 
stone, overlooking a shallow valley, and bando
the subtle charm of her surrondinga  It 
afternoon; the sun shone wide; the air was
the delicate perfumes drawn from wild thyme amd
and musical with the sound of half a dozen ll
trickling through the fresh plantations of
between great moss-grown boulder stones. Do
clanged a cattle-bell, on the neck of some 
"The scene and the sounds remind me of 
said Gerald, as he threw himself down on the
leant back against a rock, with his hands clase
head.
" Switzerland I" echoed Juliet. How I wish
mean that I-was there I "
" And why should you be so selfish as not to
too" ys 
" Oh, you must do your own wishing 1 " she
a laugh.



<pb n="201"/>
-'1
a p   " R  me.
F'heasgutired,
am     snsowed up at
s bared an involuntary
lg      to take you down with
juI what we out here call
411ebid   about that if not
iet tI olive withthose
to go home next qing-_
, moldlQ goeWneS yoU
cc~   pit,   Wmill I tmst,
it,,. tus, , my own way in
_9W a yoing man," he ex-
uiuds.y. The good old times,
and made jam and shirts and
hnaid, witha od of her head.
- tainking of as a future
ather with amsed, critical
she &amuud coolly.
to an ot sitting
1" n  aa lnimd, with a
1- !-ilP   Of Owald's,
'Fr~ I m not a Boman
and tab the veil, in
at her vet convat,
I td erl that I would
u  ,&s;a4 cdkp     id;
Amalsimed



<pb n="202"/>
aea               FAMZIY      Z
know it equres aining.  iLildp
rate ocT atoire, and workt ve  iard,
beoaaa conoert Bingm. Of ooue I l
S yon ould do       without goin G
remaked signicantly.  The observation
deaf ears.                           ^
He looked at the girl as she sat on tins
in an abstracted, castle-building game
snows. Her hat was pushed back, and thb
daintily with the soft rings of hair aboute 
hands were clasped round her kneee, a
shod foot was crossed over the other. hba 
day dreams, and did not seem to have
and, what was worse still, to have foot
"To go out and seek her fortune I 
have a chance of doing so, as long as he
Should he speak now ? No; it was anunp
Should he tell her about his mother's letter 
prospects P No; it would not weigh a 
if he won her at all, he would rather win;
believed him to be-a subalterini a Ghoorha
a modest income besides his pay. She had
lip to him about her family affairs since th
first met. Indeed, on that subject, she was q
able; and why should he thrust his concerns 
"Well, lMiss arwithen," he exclaimed, 
tive silence; "a penny for your thoughts."
"I was thinking, she said, rousing 
delightful things-of my favourite song, o
bouquets, and great audiences wild with 
having the power to make people laugh or 
"I dare say you could manage both, 
a gaing-stock for thousands, in a domestic i
an be de in either way." 
"Mr. Bamilly, it amuses me to hear 
should you object to my plan ? Once j
and that wil be in eighteen months-no one 
shall be my own mistress."
" Perhaps, by that time, you will have fo



<pb n="203"/>
-LS~~~~~~~~S
-7 tier  wa atd,
arollt -the
VW your
t give it
hauting
Gau Bld,
t te the
tare you
a complacent
_  -S.     We
"Clome I
4ShU  ant
~  id~ent
te.n"
of
_g                              ~~~~~~~~~:
she
hTad had
h    oermt
;Ito`~l
e~Lsi



<pb n="204"/>
2by  high wal  A FAMILY in on     SS 
by a high wall, which, in one place, a gigantic peepulI
had penetrated and rent in twain. Through this gap Jq
ented, by climbing over enormous roots and blocks
broken masonry, and found herself in a large, negl
ourtyard, scattered over with a number of small s
In the centre stood a great, deserted Jain temple. Its 
facade, entirely covered with a profusion of chiselled su
tured ornaments, was in a wonderful state of preservati
There were elaborate representations of gods and godd e
elephants, hores, monkeys, and peacocks; and conspicu
above all was a gigantic figure of Siva the Destroyer, w
his five faces, mounted on a bull, and weanng serpents ha
ing from his ear  The outlay of patience, art, and i
expended on this abandoned place of worship was marvello
What years and years it must have taken to complete eg
detail of the delicate tracery, cut so deeply into the fin
grained rock quartz  Juliet seated herself on an imm e
block in the centre of the enclosure and gazed at her leis
Her roving eyes took in the gloomy ancient entrance ga
the deep square tanks, whose well-worn steps led down
thick green ooze, covering dark, semi-putrid water.
flags of the courtyard were grass-grown, and prodigio
bunches of nettles and brambles choked up every coer
Yet, once upon a time, the place was doubtless a most hol
resort, and crowded with priests and pious worship
How ancient it must be I Judging from the intrusion
the venerable peepul tree, perhaps as old as Badrinath itself
and it bore, unnoticed and neglected, the summer's suns
winter's snows, century after century-yet, once upon
time, it had doubtless been an edifice of sanctity and impo
ance, judging by the number of priests' and pilgrims' ho
Now it was deserted for ever, rearing its old grey head 
melancholy silence among the hills. No bell to summo
womhippers, no loud swelling conch would ever again awa
their senitive echoes. She felt half sorry for this soli
and forgotten shrine. Why had it been abandoned ? 
was it abandoned? She recalled the red flag. And w
was that lying over there in te grass ?  Was it not
head of a ki. ut recently decapitated ?



<pb n="205"/>
*          t ^*M*Z  WZso
a  aeid ad dreadfuly lonely    pot--
ghostby.    Its dark frowning wall   its
geemed to weigh upon her senses; she would
As she raised her eyes, her heart seemed
from her breast. Silently as a shadow, a
out of the interior of the temple-a tall,
home fakdr. His hair,plateed with dirt,
not, like horns; his face and chest were
wood ashes and of a bluish-white colour. From
white face gleamed a pair of devilish eyes that
ibmnclnes. He was partly clothed in a anthers
hand he held the dripping carase of a head-
in the other the enormous sacrificial knife,
he Nepaulese and hill tribes; not a mere ghoorka
" but a wide, sharp blade, nearly two feet long,
curve at the end, where it fits the neck of the
to be slain. With one of these awful weapons,
arm can sweep off the animal's head at a single
failure to do this, at the yearly Dussera, entails
tioner disgrace and derision.
undoubtedly the mad fakir I He looked insane.
the terrible stories she had heard about him
gh Juliet's mind. Tales of how he haunted
shrines, and there, to make atonement,
haman sacrifices. True that these ghastly crimes
been brought home to him. He was far too
speedy, and too secret.
, people whispered that these tales were tr  I
aked, were Juma's two boys? When last
been herding goats near an abandoned temple
ackir was in the neighbourhood. Where was
old grandfather ? Where were Butchu and
daughters of Gulab Singh ? No one could
bones had never been discovered; but searchers
blood on the sacrificial altar of more than
iemnple. When children were reluctant to come
it needed but three words to cause them
illge-wards; and those three magical
t'f . Wmad /fa"ir I  At first sight of the stranger,
a low peal of demoniacal laughter.



<pb n="206"/>
so6             A FAMILY LIKENESS
"Behold," he yelled, as he dropped the kid, "the
on Kylas have heard me I and sent you, a whitewom
the frgotten altar of Jula Devi."
Juliet sprang to her feet. She had actually been sit
on the sacrificial stone I She stood erect, and confri
him trembling.
With the howl of a hungry wolf and a madman combi
the fanatio suddenly bounded towards her, sword in 
and, with a piercing shriek, in a frenzy of fear, the wret
girl dashed behind a neighbouring shrine, and in and 
through various buildings, along the edge of deep, slb
water-tanks, finally into the temple itself, round among
pillars-a very game of hide-and-seek with death  Fo
nately for her, the fakir was lame; but he would over
her ere long. She knew it. She felt it, as she heard 
laboriously panting after her. Her knees were failing. H
heart was choking her. It would soon be all over I
had lost her hat. Her hair had come down; and o
when she slipped upon some blood, the madman had snac
at her, and almost caught herl  With a final effort
sprang into the courtyard, and made for the entrance, 
nearly fell into the arms of Gerald Romilly. He had noth
to defend her with save a stick, and with this he parried
blow the fakir dealt at his head. The stick flew ito pie
as a candle sliced with a knife; but the fakir was breath
and exhausted. Before he could repeat his stroke, the ne
comer had closed with him, wrenched the sword from
hand, and thrown him to the ground. There the ma
lay gasping and glaring. His weapon was gone, and
was powerless, and could only gnash his teeth indefin
ferocity.
It was a good thing for Gerald Romilly that he was
accomplished athlete, and could hold his own with some
the best native wrestlers of Oudh. Hard and long traini
stern self-denial, and an admirable physique, made him
formidable antagonist. He was learned in every trick, a
hold, and fall; and knew one or two falls that kill;
could throw a man and break his neck; but he had n



<pb n="207"/>
A REAL ALARM.
f   "Son of a devil I she was sent to me by Siva himself. You
have robbed the gods I May your tongue be black, and your
feet, blue  May your children be accursed, and die the
death of dogs I 
"Are you hurt?" inquired the young man, turnnig
anxiously to Juliet, who leant against a wall hard by, her
face like death, and all her glorious hair covering her like
a mantle.
" No," she answered, with a convulsive gasp; "but only
for you, he would have killed me. You have saved my life.'
She closed her eyes, and made a strong effort to maintain
her self-control.
Meanwhile, the fakir ground his teeth, and moaned, and
gibbered; the fire had now died out of his veins and the
vigour from his limbs; he seemed to have suddenly dwindled
into a decrepit dotard, as he whined and put his hands up
appealingly, and made piteous signs for the restoration of
the sword.
" No, I think not," said Romilly, sternly; "we must have
you looked after, my dangerous lunatic. And to himself he
added, "I must see the commissioner immediately; it won't
do to have this fellow loose about the hills, offering human'
sacrifices."
" Clear out, chullo-chullo," he said in Hindustanee. "Be
gone quickly, or it will be worse for you."
For answer, the lunatic merely whined and grinned and
writhed.  At length he picked up the headless kid, and
presently crawled rather than walked away.
"The sooner you are out of this hole the better, Miss
Carwithen. Here is your hat," handing it to her. " Oome
along, there's no fear now; take my arm," he urged; but
this she refused with a shake of her head.
Once on the open hillside, Juliet stopped and began to
twist up her hair; her hands trembled so much she could
scarcely hold it. What a plucky girl she was,  omilly
thought admiringly; another would have fainted, or at
least made some desperate scene. Up to the present, she
had scarcely spoken, the fountain of her peeh seemed
paralyzed; but at last she said, with a violent shudder-
" Was it an awful nightmare ? or was it real "



<pb n="208"/>
soS             A FAMILY LIZENBS&
"Don't talk of it just now," he protested. 
"But I must"-hlting as she spoke. "Let me l
and think, and look at te hils, and thank God that I
alive. Yes; and I thank you too, Mr. Homilly. You 
imagine what I felt when the fakir came out of the
and chased me; it seemed for days. Oh, if you had
come I" 
If he had not come I
"I was behind you the whole way, and so was Soph
but I happened to be at the edge of the wood, wonderi
what had become of you. Fortunately I heard you 
when I saw that brute---"   He stopped. He could n
trust his voice further.
"Perhaps we had better not say anything to Bophy
suggested Juliet; "she is so nervous; she will never 
out alone again, after she hears of my experience."
" But she must be told, for I intend to report the mat
officially to the Deputy Commissioner; and besides, how
I to account for this knife, and your white face ? "
In five minutes the solitary grey temple was out of si
they had passed through the wood over the brow of the
ad came in sight of the curling smoke and a chee
tea-party.
"What has kept you ? Where are your sticks ?
did you leave me m the wood, Gerald ? were the questi
asked by Sophy, almost in a breath.
"We have had an adventure," rejoined Romilly, 
sins at her. "Give Miss Carwithen some tea, or, bet
still, some wine, and then you shall hear all about it."
" Hullo I what have you got there ? " cried Bobbie, poin
ing to the weapon in his friend's hand.
" Miss arwithen, your hair is all over the place," supp
mented Mr. Hodder; " you'd be a grand advertisement m
hair-dresser's window."
In a moment a curt sentence from Bomilly to  obb
made both men start, Bobbie to a sitting position, and
Hodder to his feet I
Meanwhile, Juliet had recovered somewhat; these e
day faces, and ordial, merry voices, had made that 
dread scene appear impossible-a sort of hideous halluc



<pb n="209"/>
!             "5 HASXS  R BO SING ." 
ion. Surely she had never recently stood alone within a
grim, dark, fear-inspiring courtyard  Such an experice
Wa   incompatible with these wide, breezy hillsides these
tinkling cattle-bells, and the brilliant afternoon sky.
In a very short time Mr. Hodder, the Cassons, and all
their retainers, were in full possesson of the whole story;
the very coolies and syces crowded round and whispered
with bated breath, " The Poggel-fakir "
After the details had been thoroughly discssed, after
fJophy had almost swooned at the bare recital, the Darty
started off homewards. Juliet herself did not look haf as
white as Mr. Hodder, who rode every inch of the way well
in the middle of the cortge, apparently expecting to see a'
mad fakir spring from behind every bush.
There is no fear of the fakir now; he is in the Jail Khana'
near Durano, and harmlesi  He maes little altars of mud
and dust, such as children build, and offers upon them live
flies, beetles, worms, and butterflies. This is better for the
community than when he haunted the hills armed with
homicidal instincts and the sacrifical sword-which sword
now hangs, innocently enough, among Gerald Romilly's
polo-ticks and fising-rods.
CHAPTER XXII.
"AKg BIER TO SING.
" Se wil enchant hine ear."
DuRwo, so repeatedly referred to, was a favourite, but not
a fashionable, hill station. It was too remote for the annual
incursion of refugees from the plains; yet its healthy climate,
sunny aspect, and (fictitious) reputation for economy made
it a popular haven for retired officers and civilians who had
no desire to revisit their native land, and wished to end
their days in India. Besides a score of these gentlemen and
their families, living simple Arcadian lives within a few
miles of church and post-office, there was a considerable
garrison, and a few steady yearly visitors, who preferred a
P



<pb n="210"/>
o10             A FAMILY LKNRS 't
peaceful emi-rural holiday among perfect scenery
moyatur    air, well aloof from the social treadmill
othr people were condemned in livelier hot-weather
ChiefSft of all the ladies in Durano, by reason of
of residence, length of puree, and length of years,
Barbara Bar, relict of a judge, who had erected a h
a beatiful site, about a mile from thecantonm
rounded it with gardens and orchards, and also ca
be built a nice double vault, and handsome monm
receive, in good time, the mortal remains of himself
spouse. This tomb actually kept him a prisoner at
for the space of thirty years ! He dared not absent
lest he should die, and be buried elsewhere, and his
catafalque would go for nothing. In due time, at
of eighty-five, and retaining al his faculties to the
Ambrose Bax expired, and was buried, and Bar
wife, reigned in his stead.
The word "reign" is used advisedly, for Mrs. Bax
power in the land. Besides her pension, and her hix
substantial savings, she had, as every one knew, nine
a year of her own (not rupees, but pounds sterling)
not money power ?' She was open-handed, hospitab
charitable, and did not lay by a farthing of her
"Why should I save?" she would inform    an in
audience. " There is no one to come after me but st
My grand-nephews and nieces, whom I have never'
they write enticing letters, and beg and implore me
home and live among them; but I know what that
They are uneasy about my money. I am far better
this is my home; here I shall stay until I die, and am
beside Ambrose"  Meanwhile she enjoyed existence
own fashion: headed subscriptions, assisted friends 
misnal crisis, entertained missionaries, maintain
loal lothing-club, and of pensioners a great
.a  aaie Mrs.m Bax was a pretty old woman of 
with mow-nhite hair, pale-blue eyes, and a somewhat
figure; h* dress was alwas rich and becoming;
doors Ash We a long, fur-lined cloak, and carried a
silver-moutd walking-stick. She was wonderfully
especially with tongue and pen; gave excellent, i



<pb n="211"/>
"ASSK    R 7   SING."             S i
dinners, was generous with apples, walnuts, money, and
advice. Every one said that "Mrs. Bax was such a sweet
old lady."  It was a stereotyped local phrase, and an the
world helped to swell the local fiction-none had the courage
to say otherwise, whatever they thought. To tell the truth,
the benevolent widow had become rather spoilt by years of
uncontradicted rule, and was now completely swathed in
complacent egoism. She was so accustomed to be consulted
on matters of religion, matters of the heart, the pocket, and
the household, that she now identified every one's affairs
with her own, and was perpetually engaged in laying the
moral groundwork of society. Many peole in Durano were
devoted to Mrs. Bax-her pensioners and servants adored
her; but there were a stiff-necked few who murmured
among themselves that she was a meddling, interfering old
woman, especially so the last two seasons since ash had fallen
under the influence of Mrs. Diokson.
No one could deny that Mrs. Bax had a soft, caressing
voice, soothing, purring manners, and an endearing way of
holding and stroking your hand, whilst engaged in con.
versation; but the discontents declared that she plastered
rather with mustard than with healing balms the smarts of
her friends; that she had a pleasant way of saying most
unpleasant things, and gave herself leave to utter speeches
to her acquaintances, her hand pressing theirs, her eyes
smiling up into their eyes, that made many a bold spirit
quail.
She had certainly been more actively and mischievously
meddlesome since she had made the acquaintance of Mrs.
Dickson, a lady who had come up from the plains the
previous season, with a letter of introduction to the chaplain,
and who, it was rumoured, had been at school with Sophy
Casson. A tall, big-boned, gushing person, with a reddish
skin, and very prominent teeth, Mrs. Dickson was not
young, fascinating, rich, or even good-natured. She had
met little Captain Dickson at a country house, where they
were snowed up together for weeks, and, much to the amaze-
r ent of the fnends of both parties, he had 'rposed for her,
married her, and carried her off to India. t-   bride was
i  intensely and beamingly triumphant, so proud of her new



<pb n="212"/>
Usi             A FPAILY _LIWCr'N  a
name and wedding-ring, that one wold
sh was the .only woman among her cirle
been invited  t en  the holy Hratte of
he made no secret of her reason for
Durano. She told it to every one when she
of calls.  Darling Norris (her husband)
two months' leave, and he would not dream 
to go to a gay hill station by hrelf. He 
stations were I and no matter how p
she would probably get 'talked' au
women were fair game and targets for notic*
The listeners could hardly command t
as they gased at this plain, middle-aged
reticule, her dowdy bonnet and gown, her 
ways, and contrasted her with the pretty,
belles of various other stations. Mr. Br
type of beauty, MrL Jones with a perfect
esmaer, Mrs Robinson with her i'
less horsewoman, and graceful Mrs. mh
in the province.
Realy, the vanity of this hard-fe
matron was quite too preposterous and 
Dickson had come to Durano, the first 
retired life, like a violet in the shade; she
the second season, to be near her own dar
and had that excellent woman's nephews 
nessed her attachment to this insidious
have had natural grounds for serious nea
their grand-aunt's wil. Her new friend 
Sunnyside most afternoons, taking in her
letter from "darling Norris," in order to
it to her more than mother. Together
paced the garden arm-in-arm, discussing
affairs and social politics, whilst "Lovey,"
waddled in their wake. In Mr. Bax's
son was a beautiful character, a true,
woman, ever working for other peopla and
never dawned on her somewhat narrow
people would be deeply grateful, if her



<pb n="213"/>
Ise, made up for the lack of
utestig herself heart and soul
te    oftent proved far more
otamwfHl   ap e partieL  She fattered
AB her inuence t with dearest Mrs. Bax,
and made her puppets dance rarely.
_             qS^^^H B of the question in the great quarrel
_p^^^^ ^^^         iread MHL Moank, two other visitors. It
_Sa  m^    gupeaNmnbulator, and she had read all the
had passed with extreme enjoyment.
ry in Mrs. King's confidence when the
and young Lloyd wbs  roke off;
advised against him, and dictated
that Mr   : King was sorry now that she
, and that Miss King always cut her
were a pair of silly, ungrateful women  In
uontry village, for years she had been the
d, and people said that he could have had
b. Here, in Durano, she enjoyed another
ing, and house to house visiting, among
moere entertaining class. She rarely came
er dandy, save on some special and urgent
one afternoon, Mrs. Bax descried the
so's jampannis, and heard her dandy
 hastBy dump, she was certain that she was
. some important intelligence. Yes, Mrs.
^^^^ ^^Bfnly primed with a great piece of news ;
heher face spoke volumes; she kissed her
i both cheeks, put down her little bag,
and keys, and removing her boa, said-
d to see me so early, dear. I've come
y  all to myself, and enjoy a good talk,
[  oni; there is something in which your
taioost urgently needed. Oh, I have such
_~         [~' I " she concluded unctuously.
NI 5ot about Mrs. Lumley's nurse ? "
quite different. Yesterday, you know, I
_            Atyilff  Oassmon, for although she is so odd and
used to be, I am one that never chang
&ahways my friend. I have told you that I



<pb n="214"/>
2i4            4 PAMLY, LES
them4a.....        ' > -..  -' ..           .
And what is the h      t hat?" 
bliadly.                        -"
'"uYol. deaeste, naspiio  weet ti
tdl me that old Mrsomilly eieated 
her boy?" 
" She asked me to be kind to him.  e
very well able to look after himself  F
snaded me that he went out shooting ot'
wrote him a nice faithful litle ltter-
yourself.  Well, master Jery has never
since I"
"Rude, ungratefd young man l jut HiM
have done yow duty, dear. However, to.
little adventures." 
"Yes, yes; how I hate a story told in 
Bax, peevishly.
"Very well, then, darling, I shall start a
to Snow View about four, and when I was 
uite taken aback, that little room looked 
aLeGregor, the chaplain, was there, and of c
Oassons and Gerald R-omilly, also an elderlyi
man, a Mr. Hodder, and a young lady, who 
to me as Miss aarwithen-I had heard of 
know, but I never saw her until yesterday. !
slight, and some might think her pretty;
that I ever admire red hair and a pasty
ever, she looked like a gentlewoman. ft f
was on a visit at Snow View, and -med
helped to make tea, and the Cassons call her 
name, and they all seem most intimate, qiu
very fond of her." 
u Ispoe she is one of Sophy's friends
"Ceylon   No. And you will never
comes from. She lives with those 
butter people-=s been with them for
she is a relatidn of their I n



<pb n="215"/>
R. y' .-           SUG.!:            y s
_  ~.f*~~- retin A     to atlhobrible virago who msod me
? Then she canno possibly be a 1a," aid
lie a ilady, I must admit."
why does she live with such common, vulgar
er one, that is just what we all want to know,"
M. Dickson, with a smile that displayed all her
I threw out some feeler to Sophy, bt she beame
frozen in her m  e, and sad that liss Oarwithen
friend, and evidently expected that this information
aose my mouth; but I had taken a fancy to the girl,
h  kow how I like to invetigate, and thrash out
mbject that intrest me. The young lady herself
disclosed that she lived near now View, and soon
cat was out of the bag."-
after that, what happel P   What was the cat
we had some wngm& and I was perfectly eletrified
MisL Oarwithen sat down to the piano. She sang
s Eyes,' and has a most lovely voice, so rich and
g, so different to poor Sophy's little squeak I I was
_to kee silent; but I made good use of my eyes,
can positively assure you that Gerald Romilly is madly
with this mysterious young woman I"
love with his grandmother I" exclaimed Mrs Bax,
tuousl.  "What nonsense I   You don't know
I hlow men, dearest" expostulated her visitor.
what they look like, when they are absolutely
; my own recent experience," with a smirk, "is a
o     m see. No I he never took his eyes off her face,
ie sang; and the rich, elderly, city man from town,
victim; he was sprawling over the piano,looking
Of course ophy see it all-it is gret amuse
fo her. No wonder she so rarely comes down to
vonder I" exclaimed Mrs. Ba
was a moon, and they all insisted on keeping me
,and, Gerald .Eomilly escorted me down I A  
~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="216"/>
si6            A FAMILY 
"Oh, fie, fiel" shaking a payful 
dear Norris say ?"                    .
"This   really a serious matter about
continued Mr. Dicon, in her most 
entirey ignoing her frivolous question. q
h  lways beenso plsan    when we 
know he has never called on me-which,
I think most stange, considering that 
mutual friends in the Cassons.  Indeed,
the young men have been to see me.    ;
because they know Norris won't allow me, 
dinner, and--" 
"Yes, yes," interrupted Mrs. Bax, i
tired of this old grievance, and anxious for o
"But, my dear, you are wandering from yol.
were telling me about--"                ,!,,
"Of course, about Gerald Romily e
He walked beside my dandy at first,  d 
silent and preoccupied; twice he called me 
Pray what do you think of that ? Afteraw
conversation very delicately round to the yog
know my way I When I said she was a nic
ind sung beautifully, he was ready enough
rature ; but the moment I wanted to know ^
and where she really came from, he shied off, so
once, and became quite haughty; actually said
son, why are you always so full of ardour for 
other people's lives ?  Most impertinent, was i
is the rudest man I ever met I You know the i
he has; and then he made some lame excuse m
his pony, and lagged behind purposely, I am 
came to my own gate." 
"But if the girl is a gentlewoman, n
aceomplished, why should you be in such a p
qured Mrs. Bax. " Why should not Gerald 
whe wil hve him   A pretty wedding willt 
and ive    omething to talk about." 
"(o t   abo, ind    ," repeated her rie
tone. " Such  ma    ge wold be out of the
the certain ruin of poor young Bomill. 



<pb n="217"/>
'"XASK AER -WSTssMl               s17
so very reserved, I discovered something from
lady herself."
k       0 11P " exclaimed Mrs Bax, now sitting more
ad rgrding her companion with still deeper
; ahe took me into her own room-to remove my
things, and lent me brushes and a white fichu, and
my hair, and I must Say was most good natured.
asimple creature, and answered my questions frankly.
never been home, has no relations m this country;
father is alive, and lives in England. She believes
ih; he allows the Nootes sixty pounds a year for her
add lodging. When I gently asked her why she did
at home, she became very confused, and red right
lher forehead. She made no answer-only stood and
at me. Now," pursued Ms Dickson, raising an
finger, speaking more emphatically, and leaning
till her nose nearly touched that of her listener's,
urse there is some screw loose. Why is she kept
society? why abandoned and pensioned by her
p l?  If you ask me for my opinion, I should
eis something very wrong somewhere. As an
lend of Mrs. Romilly's, it is your manifest duty to
Gerald is a young man that won't stand interference,"
the other, in an irritable voice. "Ever since he
bo, he has had a fine robust will of his own. I am
BJerry; he used often to walk out and see me, and
y so bright and cheery. He sent me quantities of
ad fish, too; but, somehow, this season he never
near me. Of course I should be terribly grieved if
to marry a girl who was queer in any way-unpre.
or orut of her mind. It would be the death of
omilly, who is wrapped up in her boy."
you are a dear friend of hers, and, as you say, fond
You must stretch out your kind hand, and save
destruction. Yes, my dearest, you know what
ence is, and how much every one here looks up to
I reies on your good opinion and your great expe-
Thisinfuence is a wonderful gift, and here is a



<pb n="218"/>
s218            A FAMILVY ^i
caseil uih you must pat^ &'N*,d
frierdo."               ''f.l" . I e"
ij wwoi   s we re paasingem in theAm
Mhsm& l  tu;diporbae She be9Hea8d d ball^
beaevoleut sovereign, holding the whole if
may odher fat haad,      IIm d i ra. Dicon m
and fostered this delusion, and traned -her.^
to her own account with admiraebl
"What do you suggest that I should de
old lady, after a long silence_.  - '
"I think the first thing you shold 
girl."
"Bles the woman l And how?" ?      - n  ;
' Ask her to sing at your oonoert oc t"
am sure she would draw a great house, 
three rupees a ticket, if she were down finL
-not counting the encores." 
Mra. Bax slowly removed her speotso]a4e!
armchair, with folded hand, and pondered.
She was getting up a concert or a lo i
her secret heart greatls desired to eclipse
another leading spirit m Durano, who w, 
theatrical performance for the same object. 
theatricals were more popular; but a woman 1t.
could not lend herselfto such frivolity, save 
If she could but produce some counter-tt
draw I She had actually lain awake at night-
puzzle in her mind.  Excellent, charitable
would make her supremely happy if she  ^
Mrs. Lumley with a larger audience and.
balance. Every one had heard the loosl
edly, and gratis; and there was no enU_
to the concert, though she happened to know
almost every seat for the theatricals was  _
if she produced this star that Jane Dicksol
this stange girl with a lovely voioe and  I
there wonM be a rush for places at once I 'l^0
Should shoe: k the girl to sing ? It 
of charity, and Charity does not too .a
helpers. 
*0 VMS 



<pb n="219"/>
F     uZLOVEM AT LAST SICHT."               19
do not know aut to iar," she observed, after a
xeflective silence. "What is your opinio, Jane ?"
OB t make up your mind until you as her. I know
m o  infor the theatricals. Sophy is bringing her."
v  ; that will be best."
while, without committing you, I will just sound
the conoert; but I am certain she will be only
for your notice."
; but I should like to have a little talk with Sophy
find out something more about the girL"
don't think you win discover much", rejoined Mrs.
o.  " Sophy can be very close, and I believe it is her
to take up all kinds of people."
, idee; and she is often most misguided and head-
One year she set up a school for the children of
lies; last season she was immensely interested in a
mnphI" exclaimed Mrs. Dicolon, firing her eyes
y on her hostess. "And for aSll w know, this girl
In a leper of another kind."
my dear, sweet Jane I that is a very uncharitable
^ and speech, and very, very unlike youe"
it is, you kind, unsuspicious darling," rising and
qher; "and I revoke it on the spot, and make you
in its stead. I can assure you tat, whatever Mis
men may be, she sings like an angel, and looks like a
And now shall I call for tea "
OHAPTER XXVIII.
"WOVE AT LAST SIGHT.9
HODDmE and Gerald Romilly departed, a the had
in company; and after a week had elased, ophy
permission from Mrs. Noote to take Jiet down to
for a few days, so that she might m  the station,
~ uete her present visit, in a fitting manner. She
inmvitations to stay with friendboth for herself
i~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="220"/>
tao             A FAMIL즎 LZKRNSt ...
and guest. She preferred to mend down her,
to thaedk bung o w, and to be quite inde
had been exciting rumours in Ddrano r
Osuon's beatiful visitor, and every one was 
with his own eys if she was all that seve
tongue had painted. Wa she really a lady
Mrs. Noote's niece?  Was it true that
admired her, and that she had rededued 
idiotcy ? People would soon know; she was
down, riding Robbie's dun pony, as full of e
anticipation as the most curous of the cor
way to Durano, the ladies found Mr.Bamilyl
them under a tree on his well-bred chestniu.
How smart he looked I thought Sophy, in a e i
and with a dear little sapphire pin m his white
He was always well got up and neat, but
surpassed himself to-day.
" I came to show you the way," he began,
"and I tell you, Sophy, that Durano is f
You will want an escort-police protection " ^/];
" Why ? "
" Because you are going to the dik b
myself it's beastly bad form; the Lumleys 
and Halpins are wild. I've been down, 
bungalow with Mrs. Lumley, and seen that
armchairs and lamps, and all those sort of:
course you are dining out every night."
" Are we ? Yo seem to know all about usl
"Why are you not showing off the
Carwithen? Look how we command a
valleys."
"Yes," said Sophy, reining up: "this 
favourite bits. Valles flowing with milk 
abounding with flocks and herds and c
stnd h   and here  d  aze on hills and plains an
nothing to dip  the idea that the last two 
of civfliation have not been a myth."  i
"That is tre," agreed Juliet, who had ;
scenery of all kind.  "Look at this 
creaking waggon, with round blocks of



<pb n="221"/>
2     LOIT AT LAST SGTnr.Y              AI
I US f actiil   that Joseph sent to caur  his
Egypt. And look at this herd of sheep and
ragged boy, with elf locks, might be the prodigal
is a gleaner with sheaves on er he head
so thae h is and she is not like Ruth," broke in
man.    Buth was tall and well favoured, and
idark   lmaoni has worked hard d all her days,
the Moabitish damsel only gathered one harvest;
she gleaned for a week I "
glad to see you are quite an authority on Scrip-
,Jerry," aid his cousin. "I suppose you saw
safel off these hills ? "
thas he not written what my mother profanely
board-and-lodging letter ' yet ? "
ad written, but not quite the class of effusion Gerald
He had dispathed a registered letter to Juliet,
an offer for her hand, nd setting forth his
in short, pompous paragraphs, and adding a kind of
-of his numerous attrations and poseeion. This
had received a polite reply, and his offer a polite
e, he has written," replied Mr. Oasson, with a
glanced sharply at Miss Carwithen's expression
indifference.  She had caught the glow of
on her face as she lagged conspicuously in the
got down all right, continued Sophy; "baggage,
m surprised to hear it. I shall never forget the
le he presented when I started him from the
nen a pulling pony; but he believed himself
een the devil and the deep sea, and he preferred a
to cholera. I'm sunre you will be Srprised to
he took quitea fancy tome when we parte.  Love
R     eht.   Hehas asked me to go and see him if I am
course he knew it was a perfectly afe invitation,"
SBophy, with a smile;  safe to be declined."
not s sure of that; he held out some very special



<pb n="222"/>
322            A FAMILY Lr     h^t
inducements, and told me" (wnow' d_
pompous voice, and acking hA  i           l
his waistcoat), tbab I tboo  l A_  bl
once in my life; no watery. (
that was a hit at you, 
" Take cae I your pony  wm b   e   nkdku d, l
"You make me sonVO." nv_ u                   '
" Oh, the pony is no fool," mid the yoing i
resuiing the reins; "he has been down a khand
" By te way, what about our tickets for the 
inquired Mrs. Casson.
" I hall go in search of them at cock-crow. I
Bobbie had taken them a week ago."
" Bobbie forgot all about it, as uual; his mind
the tea-market. I am dying to see the piece, and we
look exceedingly small if, after coming expressly 
the way from Snow View, we are unable to get in
doors."
I will do all in my power short of assasiating 
the present ticket-holders.
"Do whatever yo please, my dear cousin. Here w
at the bungalow, and we have not much time to drews'
are dining out, so I must send yon away; and r
that if we are not among the audienee to-morrow, we
never speak to.you again I"
"In the face of such a cruel threat, I am afraid
shall pass a very restless night I Well, I hope you
enioy your evening. Good-bye."
When Sophy and her young friend walked int
Standens' drawing-room, three-quarters of an hour
they found Mr. Bomilly among the assembled guest
ing unusually sedate, in his evening dress cloths,
flower in his button-hole.
Why, erry, who would have expected to see yo
whispered  r. oanol, as she passed him.
" You did not, at any rate I hopeitisnot 
able surprise; but, you see, I am socially indispensa
It was certainly not a disagreeable surrise to
Carwithen, who looked radiant in a soft white silk,
little necklace of tiny pearls clasped round her long



<pb n="223"/>
CARWIITH.                   2 s
_ ill       w ^^** iit on her left at dinner, and made 
/not among strangers; he was subse- 
_  I   I      [P^^^H 4 caerds, and on the whole his wish was  J
ak extremely pleasat evening 
4
_  CUAPTER XXI.
KISS OAEWITHUN.
o     rce, particulars of whioh he de.
y procured tickets for the thetrcals.
Juliet were somewhat late in arriving on
*. they had been making uplarge bouquets
ormers on the stae. They founi the
aclb brilliantly iluminted, and tho
dby a mnltitude of rikshaws, dandie,
lLtendants.  The room was full as they
*d the door, in the cheap eight-una
RkBozarios and their cousins, the girls in
at the neck for evening wear. How
with their very fine dark eyes I Juliet,
_             -! ^^^ Ilad nodded pleasantly. She had eaten
*ough she di not wish to partake of it
to ignore her first acquaintances in
..a Mrs. asson passed up the room,
and Gerald Homilly, there was a
and every gaze was fastened on the
girl who followed her.
;  rumour for once was right. What
a graceful throat I what an air of
to the Nootee  i     ble I There
H .breeding in every eature, in every        .
* once pt up her glasses, when her 
4ar   elbow in her plump side and 
iew piarty into their seats at the  R
o dher, d id   not fail to note how
Pk W pered     altercation wih a
himself into a chair next to
~~~~~~~~~~c 



<pb n="224"/>
324             A FAMILY LIONESS
uags aim bmbooe, and a       desely Acrodd  e
a7-.
outd  une  r old  whi   ch twinlded intlj
atain   Mackintosh was one of Gerald's'
who bad relinquished his place to Gerald's 
Misa Carwithen was actually occupying hi 
roamed about, sat in window-eeats and
surveying her from every point of view; 
her profile, and again her full face.  he 
by the set of her head and the delioate
features. Yes, her short upper lip, her 
all bore the stamp of race.  Who was
reviewing the crowded theatre with emiora
told him. She, too, had fastened her
in front of her, who, whatever Jane Dickalwi
a very lovely young creretur; and her hii
an abundant and beautiful dark auburn.
heart, she now depended on this 
this self-same room for her on the 
footlights and windowills as at present.
looked well-born, wherever she might live"
Gerald would make a handsome coule. Ye
was paying her most marked attention; he
to   a. OCasson, but she had a an q
hand to whom she addressed herself. EHe
cloak, and held her fan and coffee-cup, 
never once went out for a smoke, b 
incessantly. Jane was right; he was e
" She is a remarkably pretty girl, is ^
an old gentleman, who had been watb
Mrs. Baxs glasses and who, it being
the acts, now dropped into a vacant neatP
" Yes, she is. 
"And Jey Romilly seems to think aoi
so devoted. W   hall have toput a
" Do you know who she is ? " 
lady.
"Yes; she is a fried of MrM



<pb n="225"/>
IaSS CARWiTHSSr.                2s 
-5 heat she has five thousand a year of her own, and
" was the glib reply.
i't believe in these travelling heiresses I" sniffed
"Do you think Mr. Romilly really admire
y, ever one does that, I imagine; as for Romilly,
vidently paying her those small, quiet attentions
Sterne     has recommended to persons of sensibility "
oe?" echoed Mrs. Bar; "what Sterne?      You
mean the chemistin Lucknow ? Whatcan he know
it?"
t indeed I" repeated the old gentleman, with a
laugh, as he rose to return his chair to its rightful
while Juliet, the cynosure of so many eyes, was
herself immensely. The scene, not less than the
nament, was delightful-from the stars, the scent of
flowers, the soft strains of the band (all perceptible
[h the open windows), to the interior of the place
these numbers of interesting strangers, and Gerald
y on her left hand ready to tell her who they were.
was all very well for Mr. Romilly to indicate the local
ties to his pretty neighbour, but the audience, to a
and woman, were filled with a sound, legitimate curiosity
g  herself. Between two acts her companion said
After such an enforced silence, Mise Oarwithen, I am
you are ready for vigorous conversation; you may talk
much as you like now. What do you think of Durano
?       Y ou see it here an masse."
i  society is as nice as it looks, I like it extremely."
r- It   s nice as it looks, I can assure you," glancing
e  "You may think this a partial statement, and
I       belong to it myself, but hathe men in the room
my personal friends; many of them have done me a good
nd the ladies match the men."
"Gerald I I    had no idea you had sch a  liberal mind and
an lerge heat. I could name one or two ladies that you
Uct like," said Mrs. Oasson, expressively.
"Of course we must have a serpent m our Eden-one
Q



<pb n="226"/>
m y:
mexpioi y wove them              h i
heZdawiten ?         Shppoe is the
othing els. You shou; - e
Indianse     and     hold u Bii i
faino ose; and the women-but I s mps 
we   r, iv e under  soof  ic oph Gerld B 
ands snosedlth bi n  e. Yo  rd  m e
when cribblerS in the English pra    n
"IndTin  sociey, and  hold  p the m' 
fanatsh ; athe    women-bt I pae       i
Youes,   oow you agree with every woed g.H
broke in Soiphy, with animation. " An IJ  I_
fast; that is ;spposed to be her firrH
a reproach and a   by-word.   Every
sonvlsed by some horrible soandaL.
we live tnder a sort of micro ope; y
watch their neighbors. Every room
every wall has a native ear glaed to i lt.
waterinplace at home. lemove, so to u"
wal Ig-arantee you wil find more tob
take exception to, than in any avenage I
admit that we have our black heep, but
black." 
"There, you see," said Gerald, in a
"she is off now I "                   P           _^
"You know you agree with every word I
I really think you are extremely rude. I
some one to keep you in order."     '- -'
"I see Mrs. Lickson in the row behindiii
"And who is the handsome old lady with,
I turn I seem to catch her eye."      t
" Oh," said Bomilly, glancing round, " b
She live at that pretty white house ao
clock-tower. She and I used to be great 
is a very kind, generos, liberal old d
mother are   ui    " n. e-d.              !
"And pray why are you not friends A
happened ? "                           ; 9   -



<pb n="227"/>
MAISS CARrWIzwN.                 087
she has become the bosom friend of Mr. Dikson,
y, there is not room for us both ia her affec-
am   sorry to say that Mrs. Dickson does not
* of mi"
? What have you done ? 
,ii what I have left undone, I imagine; I have never
tthat omission is easily rectified."
o; I should be sory to deprive her of a highly
red grievance; moreover, the dislike happens to be
MrsB  . Dickson is the sort of person who would be
oourge of a little village at home. She is a narrow-
dsvping, envious woman; her name should be spelt
Oh I"
B Yes; you should hear her talking of her social
phs; see her watching a danoe,with an air of saintly
il; listen to her asking questions and criticizing
friends. Oh, I cannot stand her  she always makes
eurl up."
did his listener guess that these remarks were edged
recollection of the string of malicious inquiries  rs.
n had put to him respecting herself.
Imust say that I liked what I saw of her, although
met her once," said Juliet.
wish I had been so lucky as only to have met her
BHns-s-h I" was hissed by the lady in question, for the
was now rising slowly on the last act.
the piece was over, and the performers had made
final exit, loaded with bouquets and applause, the audi-
began to move and to crowd into the verandah, where
mes had provided refreshments, including hot soup and
There was quite a small mob round Mrs. Casson and
Oompanion, but Gerald contrived to,keep  is place,
Juiet was secretly pleased to notice how popular he
d; almost every man and woman who piseed had a&
or smile or a slap on the back for m. Mrs. Dick-
caime hurrying up, her long red face encased in
hood, and greeted Sophy with effusion; then turn-



<pb n="228"/>
ing to Jnlu  he _
see myob hea     A   ft.W
'-I hnlkitw    d       pli5>
over   n ^am 
Dnrano you mu    not A t ru awaSy. We 
concert on the twntieth; I hope you wi
for a penny in for a poiunL"        ,
"I'm afraid we must go baok the day
"Juliet," interrupted  s. Caas , "'
to know yo. Miss Orwithen--MB.
The latter, a pretty little woman
opera mantle, and flushed with her 
successes, was the central figure of an
congratulating friends. 
"I'm having a small garden-party
" and I shall be so very glad if you will" 
Cason."                     'YO
"Thank you; I shall be deighted,"
stranger.
"There will be tennis and Badminton, 
can manage a little music afterwards. I h
ingn   so please bring some songs."
"I have no musio with me, but I can m
if you wish."
"Wishl I should think I did wish"
wish I had your voie. Is this yor firstv
"No, not quite; I have been one or t
"Well, I hope we shall often se you, n
your way down here. We are not goin
Casson to horde yon up in Snow View,!
Lumley, who had fallen in love with  is 
eyes like stars.                    ;<i
" Have you had any soup or jelly? i
after ou P:
" Yes, thank you, Captain  omilly." 
"And looking after you, in more wAy
tales be true," was Mrs. Lumley's mend
turned to reoeive the somewhat formal:~
Mrs. Dickson and Mrs Bax.          ',



<pb n="229"/>
MZSS CARWIEaN.                   W
of people separated Juliet from Mrs. Oason, and
herself standing againt the wall near an open
and entirely surrounded by strangers  Olose to
Bhard a voice saying-
.  very well, but young Bomilly's people will never
him if e entanges himself with a girlof low birth"
turned her head quickly, and saw a pretty faded
talking impressively to a bald-headed old gentleman,
M n whose eyes met hers with a glance of cold im-
nt scrutiny. What did it mean ? She felt hot and
fortable. Why had they ceased speaking in such an
and conscious manner? Could it be possible that
ere alluding to her ? Oh no.
Here is your ice at last," said a pleasant familiar voice.
'is the matter ? you are looking quite scared. Do
feel lost in the crowd ? I suppose this is your first
Almost," she answered with re-assumed composure. "Can
ten me who that lady is there, in the yellow dress, with
ads in her hair ? "
She is a stranger in the land, like yourself-a Mr. De
,from Simla. Once upon a time she was a celebrated
*.I'm not acquainted with her, but I know who she
ou see, after one has been a good while in India one
to know every one-at any rate, in the same Presidency
er by name or otherwise, and people get to know you,
who you are, and all about you. 
Me I Oh no, that could not possibly apply to me,",
the girl.           -                       I
I was speaking in general terms. Why do you ask
Mr De Lacy? The good old days when every one
ked her are long a thing of the past."
I asked her name because I overheard her saying some-
about you."
mething complimentary of course ? " said the young
oo컇ly.
W ever it was, complimentary or otherwise, I mean
it to myself."
mnl, thank goodness, my curiosity is almost nil; and
pr the speech was spiteful, laudatory, or amusing, I



<pb n="230"/>
230             A FAVmILY IW
don't miW batting that Sp*  bmaft iiW
nig^ .   .ad that erwe a s-E i
onongm     it tofl   A 'diita d  kha
herelfY."           'A
'fotr will find that I   an eepi
Wht I have just overheard, I shall never 
"Yon are making me deel    tive 
is a long day. Look at Sop    g   i
ar nww going to mke a stat 
OHAPTER XXXit
TAdLKnIGT ABOUT LNAg:i
Lover' hours are long, though 
A GRoT round-faced harvest moon had
most of the ladies to abandon their
neatest shoes, and walk home. Captain
panied Me. Casson, and Juliet and Mr.
brogt  p the rear. The dk bmngalow
a mite from the club, just a pleasnt troll 
night  As they descended the graveled
an 1nglish lane-with overhanging trees
clothedin fern, Mr. omnily said-       :
"A pretty bit of road, i it not ? and-
where one can walk without fear of snalseY%
"I never think of them," returned th&i
rarely ever seen one, and then only h
a stone. I suppose yon have come acre a
"A good deal too many. Onoe I ne4
'wweti,'twas in a doorway '-- t wana
can tell you of another. We were all o
years go near Alighur, and some of  'i
trick on a young fellow just arrived fron 
a coil of rop, pdwe   about to arra
bed. Strange to  y, I was the ringead
the clothes to depoit the mock  tl
covered, comfortabl curled up un
!"?H------------



<pb n="231"/>
TAL7ING ABOUT SNAfES.               331
in possession. Our little joke saved the
did, indeed. And have you known any one who was
by a snakebite ? "
, I am sorry to say. The last was Mackintoh's
"nodding towards his comrade. "Mac and I were
a bungalow in Iluldwani, and 'one night he was
by this man, his hair streaming, his face convulsed
excitement, dancing round him, with a lighted candle
hand and a carv-knife in the other; he said a
in the verandah had just bitten him in the arm, and
dMackintosh to cut it off instantly. Mao is a nervous
and could not bring himself to do it; but he got out
u  and drove the man to the hospital at a gallop;
_en it was too late--the man died in an hour."
And yo I Why did you not perform the operation ? 
I was at a ball, and did not come home till it was all
I'd hiave done it like :a shot, since it wae the fellow's
_ chance of his life; though it would have been rather
as Mac pointed out, if it had proved to have been
bite of a harmless snake, after I had amputated the
arm I "
That would have been very unlikely. Why do you and
n  Mackintosh always live together ? "
Well, to tell the truth, because he won't live with any
else I He has tried half a dozen, and found them all
i g.  One swore at his serants, another played the
a third was too effeminate, a fourth was too polite."
And you are neither effeminate nor polite ? "
At any rate, I am the only one that suits him; and if
I marry, I expect he will give me a good 'chit '-a
domestic charaoter."
_ Why do you suit him, I wonder ?"
Because extremes meet."
I always thought it was the other way, like to like.
does he like and dislike ? "
He likes books-loves them, I should my; he likes
.aguages and scientific works; he likes photography.
_ es dangerous amusements and bodily eertion of all
; he never takes a gun in his hand, and rarely gets on



<pb n="232"/>
131            A FAMILY Zarnmr4
the bak of 'a hone. He is the mim   in
and blows ,p the servans, look after the
"nd pray what is your arlt"
"Nong usedl       oa    n     I am
al over the place, and upt the neat
macmmS in the drawing-room, and
leave eipr ahes and newspapers littere
times thk I shall get notice to quit I  o
methodical, his books must be placed t a
the chairs so many paces apart.".
I always thought you were very neat,
"Mackintosh does not think sol I hA
good deal of late, and my better half doe'
this is a great big rambling house, and wes
o0r own. "                           Y.,
"Nonsense I You are joking."      t
"I am not. There is something that
the verandah all night."
"A loose donkey.? " she suggested.  V
"No; it has two legs. Once Ma got p
and it varied the programme by stum
I was alone and in the dark, and I did not
"What did you do-soream? "
"No, I merely hurled boots at it"
"It was a dog, very likely."
"You can call it what you please; but
is the uneasy spirit of a man who
house yesrs ago. I wish he had done it
"And you have never seen him ?" 
"No, Miss Carwithen, not even after a 1
"What do you do at these big nights
conversation sounds rather like '
Chid's 'Guide to Knowledge.' But youa
remember."
"Yes; and no one need be ashamed ao
for information. As to guest nights, 
engaged, as Wr. Hodder suppoes, is
furniture and tearing tablecloths.'  e
billiards and sing."
.-



<pb n="233"/>
F TAWINvG ABOVT SNAlSS               33
Tdo.  s you are never likely to hear me, I
oTo. that I have a wonderful voice, and am always
i your style ? You see how you have infected
a a  ze for asking questions"
the sentimental, you may be sure, though nothing
el to Tommy Atkins. They like a dirge, a long
drone of twenty or thirty verses, such as, 'Lay
upon my grave,'" The moon behind the hill' 'Let
him for his mother.'"
aptain Mackintosh sing ? "
, thank goodness. He once attempted it, but the
was so painful, and he made such awMd faces, we shut
in double quick time."
am to sing at M     Lmnley's to-morrow. I wonder
one will wish to shut me up in double quick
ss Carwithen, have you ever heard of Schopenhauer ? "
o; who is he ?"
ross-grained old German philosopher who was rabid
women, but who wrote some excellent things. For
he said, with people of moderate ability, modesty
honesty, with those who possess great talent it is
Now, your singing is a great talent."
I. am a. hypocrite, she added, with a laugh.
else did this disagreeable old woman-hater say ?
was a pessimist; he looked upon the world as a
settlement, and thought the sooner one was out of it
r. He more than winked at suicide I"
t an abominable old wretch I "
had the worst opinion of your sex."
doubt he had been crossed in love. As to the world
A penal settlement, I think it is a very good place;
s.., I do-to-night."
caught the force and significance of the glance that
his remark, coloured, and looked away.
i just what we make it for ourselve, is it not ?" she
er gravely.



<pb n="234"/>
234              .4 FAMILY LJAI
"I   po6eso. Butlhow ano Judg4
seme~lt,]~mg /i t m yeti  ' _        v
 "l Zlro my own limttb oid" w d
"The    ootes I Well, Mis Carwithen,
'Uadmir y7or taste."
"I don't mean Captai and Mrs. Noote, I
and thoughts and wishes; and remember 
select my associates. Now, you chose
and I think you are a most curiously
"But I have already elained tht w
because we are so utterly diferent in our
'clash. The same holds good i mar   : 
that people generally like their oppoaites " 
" Do they ? "-very doubtfully.    ; ,^:
" Why, of course they do I A very
marries a little bit of a woman,a great 
partner, a lazy fellow takes an energetiil
choose fair. Now, for instance, I, beig
should marry a tall girl with dark eyes,
She ought to be a little visionary and 
ertremI y practial; reserved, as I am 
ness-with gracious, stately manners to i
spirits; not particularly strong-willed,see
enongh will to supply several people. Two
lately indispesble. She must have prebty
chestnutrcoloured hair. Do you ha   n m
one at all resembling her ? because, f w 
kind enough to put in a good word for
It appeared to Juliet that his hastily
bore a certain resemblance to herelf, 
about in her own mind for some eviv'
was suddenly confronted with her chA
Maokntoa
"What snais you are!" cried
actually come back to look for you. 
your pace."
Mrs. maa     nd her companion
bungalow, ad wited  for a few m     i
sign of the othsjSad, as they gasedI
other's faces, Captain Mackintosh had ^



<pb n="235"/>
TALKIANG ABOUT SNAES                935S
eif Bomilly and the young lady have loat their
we go and see ?"                     .     I
at the gate they had encountered them, and it itrck
that her pretty   otgye was looking somewhat
and embarrassed.
hasty mutual good nights, the partyparated, the
go up the hill, and the two ladies returned to the
m low. They sat for a few minutes in the centre
athe bare table, illuminated by a kerosene lamp, and
unfastened and threw back her mantle, she glanced
at her friend, who was picking a flower to pieces,
, was actually smiing to herself. She must share
ulit" she asked abruptly, "has Gerald Romilly said
to you ? "
anything I" instantly rousing herself from some
reflections. "What do you mean ? He has said
s of things."
) girl! how dense you are I or do you do it on
?protested Sophy, impatiently. "What were you
about to-night ? " 
o-night " looking dreamily at the lamp. "Let me
bout ghosts. Oh ye; chiefly about snakes."
nabout snakes " and Sophy the match-maker
almost certain that Gerald had proposed for her
friend.
felt highly and justly inensed against her cousin.
crawled home purposely, thinking that surely he
embrace his opportunity this glorious moonlight
t instead of which, he had been calmly dis sng
history I Well, later on, he need not come to her
l ne, much less sympathy I
While the two men were brisky walking homewards
rat in dead silence. At last Captain  acintosh
' o o that's it I Jerry, you r I "
do you mean ?" inquired his comrade, laly. "I
o d that the moon does affect you I "
I know one game you were after; not makor, a
or serow; quite another sort of dear I "



<pb n="236"/>
236            A FAMILY LIAENSS       ^
Mao I" exclaimed his friend, coming T
halt and confronting him ."if you
joke, I dll be obliged to fling you over h
"And now I understand many things,"
other, reflectively. 
"I am not surprised to hear that, Mac, 
always exceptionally intelligent."
"Yes; it requires no great skill to el
problem. I understand why the grey po
broken, why you never have a word to th
why you went to Snow View. 'Pon my wi
think you might have told an old friend 'I
was now his turn to halt in the path,
companion with an injured expression.  ,
"What is there to tell ?" inquired the
ash off his cigar, and putting his hands in
"I should say, who runs may read." 
" Then, by all means, run and read; 
possible that you may read nonsense."
"Very well then, romilly," in a huffyvoi
on; "I am not going to force myself into y
but whenever you require the whole house,
week's notice, that's all."
" My dear old Mac," said Gerald, tossing 
and seizing him by the arm, "what stuff
your head now ?"
"I have got it into my head that you
Miss Carwithen. Am I right or wrong i?
"Well, Mao, there are some things I
speaking in a totally changed tone. "I
fellow who used to read his love-letters 
and ask for suggestions; but, to an old
may say a word-you are right."    , .')
"Of course I am  " rejoined OaptSaf
entirely apeasd. "I must say I am 
for-myself. I shall never get
Jerry; you suit me to a hair. I can
and you know my little ways, and we Jmn
welL  I confess this change in your.
blow. However, I must also aknowl



<pb n="237"/>
TAMLING ABOUT SNAIRES               337
I have seen plenty of spins, in hills and plains;
sd that Miss arwithen was quite the prettiest
north of India. You never introduced me, so I
of her appearance; but I congratulate you
kyou Mac; but your congratulations are decidedly
I have no grounds for supposing that Mis
cares a button for me."
; and I have gone in head foremost; but a man
help himself. The good old expression,' hefalls in
touchingly appropriate."
do you mean to tell me she has never given you
?" ? 
t I cannot honestly say that she has. She does not
me, or snub me; and I have one advantage: I am
the only man she knows."
she might know a worse specimen, I dare say I
it will be all right," said Captain Mackintosh,
, as he surveyed Romilly's handsome, clear-
e, looking specially handsome in the brilliant
the sharp eye of an outsider, he had noticed Mias
's expression when she came up to the gate; an
half pleased and half shy. This was not the
that girls presented when indifferent to a lover,
such a lover as Gerald lomilly.
M me, Mac, you long-headed Scotchman, can a man
three hundred a year and his pay, and prospects?"
; a general can I " was the prompt answer.
you imbecile; you know what I mean."
mean yourself. A good deal depends upon the
dwhether her ideas are on a large or small scale.
aarwithen looks as if she had been accustomed
ae and four, with outriders, and, by the way,
is she ?"
had arrived outside their own bungalow.  As
Mackintosh put this question, he came to a dead
u Miss Oarwithen, now; and almost alone in the



<pb n="238"/>
.':
s33             A FAMILYI
world  B   s dmday, if I has any lek, I
a,     imUly, with uabia of fdrind s
Vi^' ad with a emilsin    hi ah
B     o- dd od nh    d    left him
OHAPTER iXX
A. OOOD-HfAT   N    ;OTNi:
And that letter hath she delilen lWt4
TH   next afternoon, the sun  taig.I
windows, beheld Juliet Oarwithen 
in a four-inch looking-glas. Her
limited, though her ten pounds per
supplemented by consignments from 
seoond thoughts, had turned the
money, and despatched to her young 
many coveted articles: gloves, a winter 
able gowns, a white evening dress, hat, 
chiefs, and such things a were not likely
small Parsee shop at Durano; veils, e4
stocings all the way from Bond Street. :
cream-colored dress, her best hat, a fe
her bodice, and carried n her   d a^^
(Sophy's property). All the same,:
discontented look in the glass as she
truth, if she had had the resources of  "
she oould not have looked better. S
impression at Mrs. Lumley's g
itrdoed to many new acqnint
the girl whom people called Mrs. 
been remarked, as presenting a
contrast to er associates in the
This young ady looked so modet
graceful yet so simple. Yes, she
of well-born, cltred people for  _



<pb n="239"/>
A COCRAD-HAT MOTm 
distinction. She was frankly accepted for what
to be-an extremely pretty, lady-like- ir, a
of 8phy Oasson's; and there were no 
or arrf pense      repecting her, like those se
by Mrs. Dickson. Mrs. Dickon, who had taken am
prtunity of seizing upon the stranger, and walking
in spite of all the young men who were so deter.
to be introduced to the new-comer. She presented
Oarwithen, with a an ir of almost reverential respect to
Bax, who was impressionable, and took a fancy to her
face on the spot. This did not please her dearest
The old lady was addicted to strange and unexpected
-    Sheherself had been one of them I Sup  she
to become interested in this Miss arithen  ?
that would never do I She would,take care of that
as surprised to see the immene attention the girl
Just because she was a novelty, she added bitterl.
was Colonel Lumley, who rarely spoke to a lads I 1r
C aptam Mackintosh, General  aegregor, andGeald
al hovering round her. To be sure, she was no
to Gerald I And what were these rumours that were
about his father coming into a fortune and a
Mrs. Bar had heard them, and she had mentioned
to Sophy Casson, who said she would wait to believe
Mtill she heard them from Gerald himself.-Wel, Mr.
the news, as a secret, from Gerald's mother I
there was anything in tat," looking with an air of
investigation at Mr. Romillyand Miss Oarwithen, who
tlking eagerly to each other, "it must be nippd in
at once.
Juliet was hurried away to join a game of Badmin.
Dickson seated herself among a group of matrons,
discussing her late companion. Their comments
hly favourable.
l so pretty, so elegant-looking; she walked so well,
such wonderfully sweet manners. This was the
to which Mrs. Dickson was compelled to listen
is perfectly self-po sed, I admit, she remarked,
ecold get a hearing_;  but, to me, thme is some.
Cst imnpertinent in the cool way she takes every-



<pb n="240"/>
ti    O   eO     she hda nesvr Aie i hecenA'li
eshine dM    nothing teodar se  o i o
.aem   i         hhaipiom t  thjno  ln  ll
ase u lebthe old ohe    aod    t shyet 
lively enough.  Look at her over there b
rally." :"
'Yes; she has never mixed in deoez
imagine, and no wonder she enjoys it.
for her; it is asuch a pity that no
about her beyond the fact that she is
People." 11
Mrs. Dickson watched the effect of 
with a toothy smile, and having lsi
her finger to her lips, for she saw Sophy a
She had, however, raised people's cnu
Grundy something to reflect upon. .
As dusk fell, there was a move made 
had been lit in the drawing-room, and thi
people assembled to hear well-known o
the hundredth time; but suddenly there
eyes were fixed on Mrs. Lumley and Miss
fonner lady was nodding her head and 
with an open song in her hand, and her
her lead.
Miss Carwithen sang. Her voice, her
her beauty took the audience by storm;
from the repeated clapping and applause
she was beset, and persuaded to play a[
from a native on the spot, and accomlj
hill air. This was the climax to ever
The girl's appearance, attitude, exq
novelty of the performance, made an
not forgotten in Durano for years; the 
ensuing were heard at the very mes- 1-
of extravagant delight. 
It   s the last day of her visit, said
she opened her eyes on the pine oein"
the dAk bungalow, and she was reso
Wa r VM



<pb n="241"/>
A COCKED-HAT NOTb.              .   41
hoar, and carry back a horde of happy recollections
her dreary life at Kala Dar. The morning
too rapidly; the afternoon was to be spent at
ootball-match, and the evening, alas I devoted to
and preparing for a start at daybreak. Just as they
to set out for the football, a note was handed to
for you, Juliet, and from Mrs. Dickson. I wonder
wants. She has not been so very sweet to you
,ome motive I "
wants me to sing at a concert on the twentieth,"
Juliet, looking up and handing the note to her friend.
r DEAR MISs CABwrIT  N,
"Every one is in raptures with your singin
g,and longing to hear you again. Mrs. Bax i
up a concert on the 20th, and desires me to say that
you will assist her. May we put you down in
mme for three songs ? Could you come and stay
in my little cot from the 20th to the 21st. Now,
refuse, my sweet girl.
Yours ever,
JANE DIOr80N."
am I to say ?" inquired Juliet, as her friend
ptuously flicked the note across the table.
no, my sweet girl," she rejoined with a laugh.
leave is up to-morrow, and I really dare not face
oote, alone and unprotected. If we are very good
l this time, she will lend you to me for months
ths later on. This is merely the thin end of the
h, Juliet ? I have great plans for the winter. As
Dickson and Mrs. Bax, they only want to makewuse
yOU think so ? " said Juliet, doubtfully; "but Mn.
has been very kind to me."
to your face. Oh, my dear child, you don't know
Weere at the same dancing-class, years ago. I was
o she grown up. She was very gushing, even then 
7 -



<pb n="242"/>
bdenogh. Do you always dislike t*
Not alway," with tw  ing eyes; a
Oh th ks me people, Isn't it 'strage
Juliet felt her face becoming hot -0 d
up paper and pens, and sat don and 
what she thought was a nice little note. *
were no envelopes to be found, so she tl
into a cocked hat, and despatched t,
messenger.
The football-mate h in the parade 
vos of all Durano, and proved to be n
was between the visitors and the Ghoor
shouldered, athletic little hill-men, with 
beaming above their green-and-black je
didly. There were many exciting tussles,
deserate y contested goal. Meanwhile tb
under a marquee, and sipped tea and ate
band discoursed the latest waltzes, and
latest news, until the match was over, an4
captain of the Ghoorka team (the winners
and muscular arms well displayed in th
jersey, came into the tent, with q
!heightened colour, and received the 
one, including Miss Carwithen.
"Juliet, my dear," said Sophy, comi
hair, " I am very sorry, but we must go
we want books, and I will leave you at t
some, whilst I ran down to see Mrs.
aid up with fever. I won't be more thsa
quarter of an hour."
The library formed a portion of the
when Juliet had been shown its wherea
selected a number of volumes This took,



<pb n="243"/>
A COCKED-HAT NOT. 
the books outside, and gave them to her jampane,
edin vain for Sophy. She did not know her friend's
"ten minutes." The reading-room was full, for the
mail was just in; the centre table was surrounded
pite her composed manners, she was much too shy
B such a formidable assembly, and, picking up a
e, she went outside, sauntered down the slope, and
herself on a bench overlooking the tenniscourts.
id not pay much attention to the publication in her
her own thoughts were far more delightful than any
What was it in the place that made her feel so
so exalted ont of her everyday self ? Was it the air ?
lovely the view was I What a kind welcome she had
from the Durano people. Mrs Lumley had invited
stay with her for a week, and for the annual club
a girl she had only seen three times was going to lend
new pattern of a jacket; Mr. Dickson had loaded her
affectionate attention. Yes; Durano was altogether
-a sort of earthly pradis   How could people
"life was worth living" ? How could Solomon say
"all was vanity " ? She did not for a moment realize
n of her exaltation of spirits, nor that it is very
to be nineteen, to be extremely pretty, and to have
she sat humming an air half under her breath, dreamily
g the prospect and her reflections, a jampanni
y stood before her, offering her a chit. It was her
note to Mrs. Dickson. What could it mean? "For
" she inquired, in amazement.
s," he grunted.
who sent it "
~ *kson-mem  sahib," he rejoined, and fearing an
journey, hastily decamped.
Mr. Dickson be so angry with her that she had
her note, thought Juliet, with rising colour. She
im her hand for some time. Could she have written
-to have given offence ? She slowly opened the
t. and glanced over it. No; the tone was most
l.g; but stay, what was that scrawled in pencil on
tepage ?



<pb n="244"/>
44              4 FPAMILY 
" Did yo ever know Dmything.like',,  
us righ, fpr stooping o as.k  little. ua
us. 1ihe ongh  to hve beam deiy g
sending that cam refusaL  'owever, on the
more pnwd   x not to be auociated wih'a m
and we will in future leave her unditur
The bandmaster has promised two solos an
send you a line, in ase you are not coming
" Your ever 
"J1
With haking fingers and a feeling of
Juliet turned over the missive, and saw
on the reverse, "Mrs. Bax" Mrs. Dikelona'
had given the note to the first person he f
in order to save  mself a journey out to
had not grasped he fact that the postscriptl
for her eyes until her eyes had devoured it.
sat, seeing herself as others saw her, and f
sick and cold with anger and disgust. 
do? Here came an immediate reply in the
Bax walking briskly up the path, with the 
stick. 
She rose on the impulse of the moment, 
meet the old lady, and holding out the 
Bax, I am most fortunate to meet you; this 
for you, and I am very sorry to say I have 
tionally.
Mrs. Bax halted, produced and delibe
glasses, and then said, "No, my love, it is for
"Yes, on one side; but turn it over, aii
your own name. I wrote it to Mrs. Dickson;
to you-and her messenger gave it to me by
"     Tut, tub, tt," now perusing it very
you won't singl   Tut, tut I  Ay, and I
ritten somiething.  Dear mel this is v
And so you have read it ? " gazing hard at 
glasses.
"Yes, I am sorry to say I have."
"Well, my love, perhaps it is for yom 
YOM



<pb n="245"/>
A COCRD.-BAT ROT .45
be more obliging another time, and take what she
taken it greatly to heart, Mrs. Bax. I thought
onwas friendly to me; she seemed so half an
long after she wrote that. Now I know her for
is, a slapderous, double-faced woman."
le, fie I What words to come out of a young girls
I   must say you might have sung for us, my ear;
e been gifted with a beautiful voice, and surely you
to use it in the cause of charity. Charity is a sweet
You really go to-morrow  "
ll, this meeting, in that case, is quite providential.
to have a few words with you, my dear," now taking
roking Juliet's reluctant hand. "A little bird has
w hispering something to me." Now, if there was one
that Juliet hated it was this talkative, meddling
; she had known it at school  " Something about you
erald Romilly. Indeed, I saw for myself that he paid
st marked attention."  Here Juliet endeavoured to
w her fingers, but it was of no use. "No, no, my
; you must listen to me patiently. I wish to speak to
Idndly and faithfully. I love young people; indeed, I
every one.  But it will never, never do for Gerald
to love you ! "
now wrenched her hand rudely away, and was
to speak, but the old lady silenced her by an imperious
I is highly unbecoming for a young eron of your age
pt to interrupt an old woman like me, especially
I am only speaking for your good.  Just turn and
with me as far as the gates of the cemetery. I will
ur arm," suiting the action to the word.
tturned and obeyed mechanically. She eemed to
g in a dream-to be under some terrible spell
know Mrs. Bomilly intimately," proceeded  rs. Bax,
monotonous voice. "She and I are old friends. She
up in Gerald, her only son, her only child. His
will be of vital importance to her. Her danghter-in-
be her daughter indeed; and, of course, a girl of



<pb n="246"/>
t   -
ove    ',
Ah I my sweet  '" p'     4
so many of these w  e 
man, who is a ge      and gwhtod
all owing to i dreadful.   Ife .lna
an hotel-keeper's daughter, =a .w
never sober. He was the son of a
my-husband's servioe. Yes, these
one end. Gerald is a promising,
that the general at Neemuch-I h
another squeese of Juliet's arm, " is 
for an A.D.o. Just imagine an A.D.O
could visit I"                     .',
She paused at last, oompletely brea
"Wfly do you say these things to
'uired Juliet, gently but firmlyreov
hand, and turning to confront her
"Why do you suppose that I am.;i
Romilly ?"                       :. ~:
"Now, my love, peas don't quibble, 
pee'vihl. "I don't merely Ulap-I
"And why do ou prensume that I am
and am under a cloud ? "            . ,
"My dear, I will answer your qaestil!
one or two little things. You have
England, a father and step-mother, well
Juliet nodded.
If Doll  withea could hear himself
to-do person I
" Then why am you not under their in
living in suoh an eqmivoal poaition, ad i
eon, with the ~ooftm ~ Mot dreadfl,-



<pb n="247"/>
A COCKED-HAT NOTE.                  247
who assure every one that you are a oon-
d theirs."
ould not answer, save with her changing cheeks
not find a word to utter. She was accustomed to
for herself, and there was a dead silence. She
one of the cold iron bars of the cemetery gate, and
to collect her wits and her self-possession. She
the words she had accidentally overheard: "The
will never forgive him if he entangles himself with
of low birth."  And was she not of low birth, on
her's side 
biMrs. Bax had put into such forcible words was
In her heart she believed that Gerald Romilly did
her, though it had scarcely dared to whisper it till
moonlight walk last night; and unequal marriages
al. She thought of her own parent, and how the
of their miserable match had fallen on herself. The
of her position arranged themselves, and stood out
for her inspection. They were as plain as the grave-
on which her eyes were resting.
ou spoke of charity just now, Mrs. Bax," she faltered
"' Charity thinketh no evil.'"
y dear love, you can scarcely suppose that any one
ept a quotation from Scripture as a proof of character I
sI know that this is not a gracious thing to say;
your own people refuse to receive you, how can you
Gerald's friends to do so ? If he is nothing to you,
is no harm done. I have just spoken a kind little
s I thought, in season; but if you do care for him,
y value his happiness, then the more firmly resolved
you will be to sacrifice your own feelings, and to
y out of his life."
Bax enjoyed hearing herself talk, and considered
e put her ideas into eloquent language-these ideas,
present instance, were chiefly the property of Mrs.
She paused, and looked at her companion ex-
ly. Hitherto the girl had said so lite. How tall
eared, standing with one hand clenched on the gate I
e now understood what people meant by saying she
Lately carriage; this white-faced yorng woman, with



<pb n="248"/>
24             AX FAMILY LZZIXN.o
angry, dark eyes, rather frightened her. It 
spirit that the maidens of Durano had
and rebmks   Generally they had been we
incoherent. There was nothing abject about l
not a trace of teams.
Mn. Bax, looking ver like the white 
and the Looking-glas," feeling sall, dm
now regretted she had brought her vioti:
afield, and awaited what she had to say,
that surprised herself.
" Mrs. Bax, you have jumped to some ver
sions. What do you wish me to do ? " she
a cold, clear voice.
" To imagine for one moment that I am
mother I"
A scornful smile, like the flicker of 
played round Juliet's lips.
"Yes, my precious love; and to give m
if he asks yon to be his wife you will say u
"And what do you offer me inr
promise ?"                                                 I
"My honour, friendship, and esteem."  .
Miss Oarwithen turned a pair of haughty q
lady as she inquired, "How can you honour
girI whoyo     , as you say, is under a cloud 
decline." Could Mrs. Bax have heard ri
me to imagine that you are Mr. omilly's 
be sorry to do her, even for a moment, i
justice I I do not wish to say all that I
you are an old woman, and if there isno
about you-I must respect your age,thog
no respect for my feeli ; and you ha
of sheltered, comfortable life, that you
it is to be without a home."  Here her
moment, and then she resumed, " I may
Mr. Romilly ever asks me to marry
are munnes       aldrmed 
" Well ? " buit out this meddleome
" I shall be gied ently by my ol
As she made this utatment  lood



<pb n="249"/>
"'TWIXT ' LOV AND DCTY"                 49
blue eyes, she gave her a slight bow, and turn-
unexpectedly away.
Bax stood gazing and gazing, her mouth slightly
the tall, upright figure turned an angle of the
disappeared. She then drew a long breath, and
aloud, in her most emphatic tone, "Well, I
CHAPTER XXI.L
9 ' TWIXT LOVE AND DUTY."
I I must be roe, only to be kind.
Juliet, looking unusually white and carrying herself
uy erect, was hurrying to the club from one direction,
Oumason, whose ten minutes had swelled into fifty, was
g it from another. Gerald Bomilly walked beside
wearing a surprisingly grave expression.  The mail
ried had brought him unexpected news, and he had
e nt-service telegram in his pocket, ordering him to
or Lucknow, on court-martial duty, within the next
h's face betrayed unwonted excitement as she said,
so they want you to go home at once ? "
e " he answered laconically.
d  do you intend to what is called 'chuck the
ppose I must."
^nd," in a lower key, " everything else "
itn  else. As to the service, I cannot help myself.
can I serve out here and live at home ? Of course I
go for a couple of months; one cannot sever all one's
in a few days."
And new ones you might take with 'you I" said the
1   ave a good try, at any rate. I mean to may|
&Prwithen, if I can persuade her to have me."
goes back to-morrow. I promised Mr. Noote most



<pb n="250"/>
2So            A FAMIUY LlfN&S       9
faithfully; but, of course, unmrde some
need never return to Kala Dan * all; and 
Ceranl th      diipatio  ar e bad for a
lie Zhit* -.as is lookng quite agged."
" YouL domb meal to my that you have be
the cemetery?  inquired Mi. Oni0on, inm
gstotshment. " No wonder you look so
not a pan; I never attempt them."     a
"I am glad you did not stroll into
said Gerald; "you require a
rocal guide to point out the views. Wil
look at them before it grows dusk ? " 
"I am rather tired, and I think I w
thank you," was the unexpected answer.
"Tired I" echoed Mrs. Cason; "my
have seareely walked a step; and the 
stone's throw.
"Very well then, thank you. I supp
all I can. Sophy, of course you are
appealingly at her friend.         l
"Not I," was the ruthless answer.
With respect to this expedition, Mtr
opinion that three was an awkward num
hand with a deprecating gesture, said, "  l
seen all the sights years ago. Iam muck
go in and see the newspapers" 
Thus abandoned, Juliet-followed by
ascended the worn grey steps, and
into the garden. It had not been ov
charming spot, that might have been'_
fashioned manor at home, and     A
Aladdin's palace, into this setting of
There was a green lawn smooth at
dark deodar ; the gravelled walks
gladioli, a   mmasl bushes of
plucked a     dspaf the latter, and
panioo adadt~W    ~epd it pad
complete ign n   X       a   mig
of frowers. h  tbist of X



<pb n="251"/>
" '   iXIT LOVE AND DUTY." '1
w, shaded by clumpe of feathery bamboos, and
or the use of the lord sahib and other Bra ahibe,
had occasion to pass throgh the district   The
en, like all Durano, was situated o a range
out into a valley, resembling an amphitheatre,
_  lmded by hills on all sides; east and west it commanded
view n opposite directions.
_   ?was the hour of sunset; sunset in the Himalayasl
old white peaks were bathed in gold, whilst the valleys
steeped in every shade of delicate amethyst and prply
R, omilly, as good as his promise, pointed out the
views to his companion, as they leant against a
:overhanging a precipice; but Miss Oarwithen seemed
a^nd irresponsive, so different to her usual air of anima-
and interest.
What is the matter ?" he inquired atlast, half-playfully.
ou seem to be saying to yourself-
Though every proet lease,
*^.  ~   And only manis vAle,'
I was scarcely thinking of the prospect," she returned,
a half-embarrassed smile; U and as to the rest of your
dotation, I-     Well, woman is sometimes vile also. The
is in, is it not ? " making an effort at conversation.
'ot that it interests me much; I have long given up
g forward to mail-day," she concluded with a half.
sigh.
iY es; it came in an hour ago, and it interests me a good
1 to-day, for it has brought me a great piece of news. I
_  uted t tell you about it, and that is why I made you
e here almost in spite of yourself. You do look tired.
ont you sit down on the wall ? "
Juliet accepted the suggestion, and then said, " And what
your great piece of news ? "
I am going home very shortly."
His listener made no reply, merely plucked off the head
a gaudy gladioli, and surveyed him with an prepmion of
e^ composnre. This was a bad omen; she did not care
St.raw. iHowever, he would persevere all the snme; he was
to see it out.
r'



<pb n="252"/>
252             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
" My father has come in for a large property and a 
most unexpectedly."  He felt actually shy and emb
as he added, "He is now Lord Egremont, and I am c
no one is half as much astonished as he is himself."
"Yes, this is indeed great news," with a determined s
on her pale lips, " and I congratulate you."
" The late Lord Egremont was my father's cousin,"
continued; "his son and grandson died of yellow fe
recently, in the West Indies, and my father is the 
succession; the estates and title go in the male line. I
very sorry for his people, though we don't know them.
see, we have always been out here; and there were so
good lives between my father and the title that I
more dreamt of coming in for it than the old
there in the bazar."
" Yes, but he has come [in for it all the same I
make a difference to you, won't it ? Have you a
I am so ignorant of anything connected with
grandeur."
"What a contrast to her own father "
panion; "how well he could pot hja
" No, I have no title," he aadd
cant one by courtes. I my cB
" But you have always dom t 
" Yes, I hope so, in one sea."
" And you are going home P "
(     Yes; my father wishes me to l  i      nk
he has an estate of his own, and tenants *
tie him down to one place, instead of
world. Now he has an object in life."
"And your mother ?" 
"Yes, she will have her ponies and her
Oh, and by the way, she comes in for some  l
diamonds, necklace, and tiara, and all sorts of
won't be much in her line, for she always ti
However, I dare say her daughter-in-law can 
wear them for her."
,, Her daughter-in-law ?" echoed Juliet,  i
Her future daughter-in-law, I mean," he r
a nervous laugh. Here was his opportunity, and 



<pb n="253"/>
"'s TWIXT LOVE AND DUTY."             253
:ilce, guarded from unwelcome intrusion and in-
listeners. His heart beat fearfully fast, his throat
was a brick in it. He had never experienced
when swarming up a hill-slope under a heavy
he would speak Inow. The words were almost
on his lips, when the young lady gave the con-
abrupt turn, by saying-
w of course all your plans are at an end. You
to explore Thibet, even if the Chinese guard
Uall not have time to make my way to L'Hassa,
fyou back that golden prayer-wheel that I promised
but-perhaps you would accept something else
d-also in gold ? "
paon, who had been listening intently, with her
oa the valley beneath her, was conscious of some-
iol n Mr. Romilly's tone, something that made
d look straight at him. In answer to her in-
e, he let fall the words--"a wedding ring."
so surprised, that she rose to her feet, and dropped
red gladioli.
e," he went on hurriedly, "that I can count the
known you by days; but whatever I am to you,
stranger to me. I fell in love with your picture
They used to chaff me about it at home. My
I tell you; and when she urged me to marry,
, 'Find me a girl like Lady Juliet.' But you
d you for myself here in these Kumaon wilds
nths ago. It was Kismet."
er spoke; her face was now turned toward the
8s if she was lost in contemplation, and had
him; but in truth not one precious syllable
ost. And she was also listening to two other
y, that of her own happy throbbing heart, which
d loves me; it is no dream."   But another
.ge one, said, "Romilly might just as well
at once    It means social ruin for the
a life of misery for both. If you really care
d value his happiness, you must sacrifice your
and pass out of his life."



<pb n="254"/>
254            A FAMILY LK'NE    S&   . :'
Yes, it would be the case of her own m
She could not escape from her parentage, nor
reputable old grandfather. She must crush 
stifle its appeals, and save Gerald. He would 
yes, but some day-oh, perhaps some day soon
be grateful to her, and say that she had been
the two. His mother would marry him as
spects to some lovely well-born English lady of
would soon forget all about the miserable 
had made love to among the Himalayas. Noi
been Kismet after all I
" I am afraid I have been too abrupt," he m
"I meant to have waited; but this sudden
my plans; still, they say, 'Happy is the wooing
long a doing.' Of course I know I am nothalf
for you, Juliet; and you have seen nothing 
it seems a shame to rush you like this. I am 
myself-I am afraid in this case I am abomi
but you are all the world to me. I would not a
that such feelings as I have experienced the ha
were possible, for I have never cared a rtsea
before. I used to laugh at love, and
has come and changed my whole liVf    B
word to me, Juliet?"         .    F
He waited for some seconds in i    _        <
he could distinctly hear the throbbingf  g d
And then she turned towards him; her HtWS
and by the tension of her clasped hands, he cot'
the strength of the emotion she controlled. Poeei
had experienced a mortal combat between lowve
she thought to be duty-and duty had conquered'
sake I
"Mr. Romilly," she began in a low, tremulo*I
am very, very sorry, but it can never be-never I
Then you do not care a straw for me ? I W
he returned bitterly.
"It is not that. I do. Why should I not.
whole truth? It was you who found me, anda
out of the wilds-you who saved my life I I 
you very much-oh," with a ring of anguish i_



<pb n="255"/>
"'TWIXT LOVE AND DUTY."               255
too much; and that is why what you wish can never
d :But you are giving me the strongest of all reasons why
sould be. Love is enough; what more do we want ? "
"I want you to forget that you have ever seen or
own me."
"You might as well ask me to forget to see or breathe I"
broke in impatiently.
"To forget me," she repeated in a clearer voice. " After
time it will be easy enough; your mind will be filled with 
ther things."
"It shows how little you understand me, when you say
i; but, then, you have only known me a few weeks. My
other, any of my brother officers, will tell you that once
make up my mind to gain an object I never give it up.
am often laughed at, for I carry this trait out in small
gs as well as great. My object now-my chief one in
f-is to gain you for my wife, Juliet. Nothing but death
turn me from my purpose. You will say yes," taking
rhand in his; " and before you stir from this spot."
^s they stood hand-in-hand-for Juliet made no effort
release herself-they formed a picture that would have
ed an artist.
Possibly a third of the love-scenes in the world have
l en place in gardens, and none in a more appropriate
ren than this, where so handsome a pair as the present
uple had never plucked its flowers or paced its paths-the
der, graceful girl, with her finely poised head, her deli-
features, her pathetic eyes, and the soldierly looking
g man, with his handsome, determined face.
The sun had now sunk, the last golden-tipped peak had
and the great range of snows had merged into the
lie ghosts. The deodars stood out in black outline;
evening breeze played sleepily with their branches,
g their needles to the ground. The passion flowers
closing; it was time to go.
"Juiet, said Romilly, " I have never loved another girl;
i always be you-you or no one. I am waiting for my
ier  f you have some idle chimera in your mind, dis-
it; do not trifle with my happiness and your own; it



<pb n="256"/>
256             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
is for you to decide. See all that lies in your poi
my future and yours. I appeal to you, for God'a
allow your heart to speak, and let your answer be y 'as.
he uttered the word "yes," he involuntarily tigh
grasp on her hand.
Juliet looked at him steadily, though her eyes 
swimming in tears. She was passing through the
tragic phase in her existence as she said in a lo
perfectly distinct voice-
"You lay a great responsibility on me, and there
answer must be no."
"And your reason ?" suddenly dropping her hand.
"You are honourable, and," with a quick indraw
her breath, " I am honourable too; there is my re
CHAPTER XXXIII.
MR. ROMTLLY REFUSES TO BE REFUSED.
"Let us consider the reason of the case I 
"THAT is no answer," he exclaimed passionately; iU
a woman's reason-it is a riddle. I can't imagine what
mean ? What is there to stand between us  It's
possible, that all this time you have been engaged to
one else ? "
"No," sharply, "not possible.  I could 
myself honourable in that case, could I ? "
" And do you think it right to have gained every 
and wish of my heart, to have made me absolutely 
to family, friends, regiment, to have turned my
down, and have changed me into a different man
to throw me over with the simple remark 
hIonourable ?" 
He paused. She made no answer, but stood lie'L
save that her white lips quivered visibly.
"You say you care for me; if you did, you
give me up. But I won't be given up.      a
hllhiAnn  na rnre as I stand here I"



<pb n="257"/>
1fR. ROMILLY REFUSES TO BE REFUSED.             257
Juliet laughed,-a queer little ghostly laugh that almost
frightened herself, and she slowly raised her beautiful dark
upon him as she answered-
And as far as I can see, Mr. Romilly, we shall never
meet again after to-day."
Time will tell, time will show, which of us is the true
prophet. Before we part for the present give me a sensible
answer-your real reason. I shall never rest until I know
it?"
He never guessed that Mrs. Bax's harangue had been
accepted as true worldly wisdom, and had burnt into a
young and smarting soul, and a most sensitive and innocent
nature; that his offer had come at an unfortunate moment,
before cool common sense had time to make itself heard;
and that Juliet's love had taken arms against herself to save,
as she believed, his career and happiness.
There was a sound of heavy crunching boots upon the
gravel, and two figures, portly and middle-aged, who had
outlived their love affairs by thirty years, came slowly upon
the scene.
"Juliet," said the young man, hastily, "this is not your
last word or mine, it cannot be. You have not done with
me-now or ever. I shall write-   "
"Do not," she rejoined emphatically.  " It will be of no
me; it will be only the same thing over again," and she
abruptly turned to depart.
To listen to further pleading was too much for her self-
control; her heart was too full to speak. She had done
right, and the actual moment of sacrifice was over I and oh,
how thankful she would be to creep away somewhere, and
hide herself and her misery I She walked in advance of her
companion, through the garden, and as she passed the gate,
it seemed to her as if she was quitting Paradise, and being
driven out into the stern, cold world by an angel, with a
two-edged sword, signifying honour and duty.
She must keep a brave front, and pretend to be merry and
happy for a few hours. Only a few hours more, and she
eturned to Snow View en route to Kala Dara, and there she
could be as miserable as she pleased; no one would notice
her. No one, seeing the slight figure come down the steps,



<pb n="258"/>
258             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
instinct with pride and grace, could dream of the a zo
feelings that the girl carried in her bosom, and that becas
she had been assured she was an outcast and "adventureg,
she had just refused the man she loved, and the most elgibi
match in the North-West Provinces. As she stepped  i
the full light of the verandah, with a smile on her lips,
a dozen pairs of eyes surveyed her expectantly. 
was young Romilly?"    They had gone into the gard
together, why did she return alone ? Had he proposed
not?  Had they quarrelled?  Oh, here he came, looki
grave to sternness-an unwonted expression on his ch
countenance.
Mrs. Casson, who was standing outside in the dark,
for whom her visitor was searching, beckoned him to 
side.
"'Well, is it all right, is it all settled ? " she whispered
a voice palpitating with sympathy and feeling. "Am I
congratulate you at last ? "
But he merely shook his head, and before he had time
open his lips to reply, one of Sophy's numerous
bustled up to her, saying- 
" So you are really off to-morrow, I hear. My
want particularly to speak to you."
And moving out of the circle of lamps, Romilly
into darkness.
Somehow, ere Sophy had said her last good-bye, them
a whisper, a sort of rumour in the air, that at lastt
her ears-" Young Romilly had proposed for Misa
and been refused."
How this got about no one could say. Such
to have no beginning and no ending. 
Sophy settled herself in her dandy in s
though repressed, indignation, for Mrs 
breathed in her ear, "I hear yourxpreit f
refused Gerald Bomilly. I am  so U  o
garden just now; some one overheard
Yes, Sophy was extremely angry  ilth
she been nourishing a young seArpen i
who had most unexpectedly turneld one
generous cousin Gerald ?
.. ',: j-c~  .,



<pb n="259"/>
I  ROMILLY REFUSES TO BE REFUSED.          259
tintned a silence-a hostile silence-all the way
Juliet was aware that her friend was deeply
During that most unpleasant evening her manners
ty, and Juliet's constrained. Sophy was too proud
e  companion any questions, much less for her con-
nd Juliet was naturally reserved, and such a scene
recently experienced seemed to her too sacred to
and therefore these two intimate friends conversed
journey and the weather in brief, jerky sentences.
did all in her power to conciliate Sophy,-short of
her heart to her,-and Sophy remained unappeased,
her to depart to Kala Dara with one cold kiss,
out the faintest hint at a future meeting. She felt
satisfaction in knowing that this abominable little
the globe-trotter she had no sympathy, but Gerald
another thing) was about to undergo a certain
of penance at the hands of the Nootes. It would
g and just punishment. It was:evident that she
d Gerald, for besides the whispers about the club,
one very strong piece of personal evidence-he had
eto wish them good-bye, much less to see them
y had the girl refused him ? Clever Mrs. Casson
over the matter for hours. It could not be possible
re was another Richmond in the field ? Gerald,
being a thorough gentleman, good-looking, young
lar, was now a magnificent match. The whole
was most mysterious; there was something queer
uliet Carwithcn after all I
i Juliet, with what different feelings did she retrace
l-known path towards home-and what a home!
a vital difference between herself and the girl who
ala Dara a month ago I Instead of rising, her
:ank lower and lower every yard of the way. She
Gerald; she had offended Sophy, her only friend
; and now she returned to the Noote's her last
If 4frs. Radford did not send for her soon, she
ishe must die; she never could support her old life
new misery together.
she approached her destination, it struck her that it
*  ever looked so mean and squalid, with its weedy



<pb n="260"/>
s60             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
garden, untidy outhouses, and littered verandah.
was no one to greet her. She entered the sitting-
there discovered a strange man seated at a late b
he wore carpet slippers, and soiled white socks, an
engrossed in a paper, whilst a whisky and soda stood 
elbow. Instinct assured her that she was in the re
the renowned William John. Hearing footsteps, e g
up. He was a big broad-shouldered individual, wit
dark brows, that looked as if they had been corked
light eyes, a shiny skin, and a coarse black moustache. 
was not actually ill-looking; some cook orparlo
might have considered him a splendid man. The
assistants thought him an Adonis, but to Juliet he f
surpassed her most gloomy anticipations; and he f
part was equally disappointed in her. Was this thin, 
faced chit, with her great dark eyes and scornful
mouth, the beauty his mother had vaunted? He 
plain; there was nothing of her-she looked as if yo
blow her away; she had reddish hair, and no 
Certainly she seemed a lady, and she had two tho
pounds, and was to be had for the asking. Well, he 
not afford to be particular, he was not too proepers 
now. He had been "haunked" out of his last beh
was over partial to the stimulant beside him, and
knack of being cheeky to his superiors; and a lady
with money would suit his hook well enough. He
laid down the paper, and, offering Juliet a huge red
embellished with several brass rings, exclaimed-
" At last I I thought you were never coming.
word, I began to be afraid you had picked up so 
over there I Delighted and happy to see you.
haven't left your heart behind you, eh?  Mol
bellowed, "here is Miss Judy, dying of h
some breakfast, and look slippy; and turning
to the young lady, said, "Don't be shy about 
the word-if you would like a peg ?"
.'t



<pb n="261"/>
I                         ( 261 )
CHAPTER XXXIV.
.E            4' "A WILD-GOOSE OHASE."
"The name of the Slough was Despair."
" Que le bonheur passe vite  Mon Dieu, qu'il passe vite I et qu'on
souffre en y pensant plus tard"
WnLMU    JOHN'S presence made a considerable difference in
'  the simple meage at Kala Dara, and many expensive addi-
tions in the shape of tinned provisions and European stores
were added to the usual frugal fare. He ruled the whole
establishment, everything gave way to him, for he was his
mother's idol. He rose late-was rarely in time for any
meal-but never condescended to tender an apology. He
smoked the rankest tobacco all over the house, sat with his
cumbersome slippered feet on a chair, and always appro-
priated the paper-now a daily arrival by special coolie-
and round which poor Captain Noote wandered with a sort
of hungry restlessness, meekly awaiting his step-son's good
pleasure. Rough and ready as were Mr. Pogson's manners,
he was transparently anxious to make an agreeable impres-
sion on Miss Carwithen; he bounced up and placed a seat
for her when she entered a room, paid her highly coloured
compliments, talked to her incessantly "of what we do
down on the plains," and last, but not least, insisted on
accompanying her in her walks.
He walked not because he liked it, as he frankly assured
her, but solely to enjoy the delights of her company-pre-
suming that the delight was mutual, with an air of ex-
asperating confidence-and the poor girl did not dare to
snub him too severely, for was she not wholly in his
mother's power ? Had she not cast away of her own accord
both lover and friend?    She was miserably unhappy.
Sometimes she feigned a headache, and remained in the
seclusion of her own room in order to avoid Mr. Pogson's
detestable attentions. Sometimes she slipped away secretly,
and enjoyed a long, solitary ramble; but she was ever
haunted by the fear that William John was stalking her. as



<pb n="262"/>
262             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
the hunter stalks his prey; and trembled lest, round';
corner or boulder, she should descry a certain odious 
coloured cap, and a big-checked suit, advancing jaun
her direction. More than once she had eluded her
mentor, and more than once "Pouchee " had basely bel
her. Mr. Pogson had been nearly ten days at home,
was becoming anxious to bring his wooing to a close.
hated Kala Dara, he hated old Noote, with his greed
bent on the ebbing whisky, and the long-withheld
paper. There was no bar-no billiards, nothing to
a fine young fellow-nothing to do, but make love
haughty little minx, with the airs of an empress.
ever, he would soon make her cut all that, once he
brought matters to a close, and once he had 
his lady wife and her two thousand pounds. 
wouldn't he make the rupees fly l and when they .
gone, he would put the screw on the old boy at home
he, thanks to inquiries, knew a thing or two about           l
Carwithen.
This sanguine suitor was enveloped in such a rhino
hide armour of self-approval, so blinded was he byt
mother's admiration, and her firm determination to
her lodger into her daughter-in-law, that it never 
dawned upon him that he was distasteful to the young
whose hand he sought. Her cold silence, her averte
her haughty monosyllables were simply "her littld
and so many games to draw him on. Yes I T
careful and early fostering, Mr. Pogson's vanity just
on the threshold of insanity.
How Juliet dreaded and shrank from those 
tete-a-tetes, when she sat with her knitting in the vr
compelled to endure the society of a man she loath
the ever-watchful eyes of Mrs. Noote contempl
from afar.
" Don't you find it infernally dull ? " inquired
John, one afternoon, as they sat under the
was knitting, and he was smoking, as usual.
"It is rather lonely," she assented.
"Scarcely ever seeing another white face. I caun
what the missus and the old man see in it, 



<pb n="263"/>
"A  WILD-GOOSE CHASE."              263
money I Of course they save a heap."  And with a wink,
"So much the better for W. J. Still, you are not saving
money, and it must be deadly for a girl; and not such a
thing as a beau, eh ?"
Juliet made no reply; possibly Mr. Pogson might
consider Gerald a beau I Odious word.
" Never mind," he continued cheerfully, " there is a good
time coming for you before long.  Buss, buss," to the
bearer who was pouring soda-water into a tumbler. " You
know that joke, eh ? " to Juliet.
"No," in a key devoid of all interest.
"Oh, you must hear it, then. A lady from India at
home, said, 'Buss, buss, John,' to the footman, when he
was filling her glass, and he said, ' Oh no, ma'am, not with
the master at table I' Haw, haw 1 don't you see it ? If
you will say, 'Buss, buss, John,' to me, I'll show you the
joke sharp enough I 'Buss' means a kiss."
"Oh, does it ? " in a very frosty tone.
"How scornful you look. I suppose no one has ever
kissed you ?  I'd like to, uncommonly--some day, I_-"
"I should like to see you I " she rashly rejoined, her eyes
sparkling with anger.
"Oh, then, by Jingo, you shall    No time like the
present," and he made a futile lurch in her direction,
thereby upsetting and smashing the soda-water tumbler,
whilst the victim escaped with a beating heart into her own
room.   After this disagreeable little scene, intercourse
between Miss Carwithen and Mr. Pogson became decidedly
strained. His compliments and hints were, as it were,
addressed to deaf ears; but she could not sit at table with
her eyes shut, and his vulgar, stolid stare was absolutely
insupportable. All the pleasures of her walks were gone,
for was not William John her too-frequent companion ? He
forced his society on her indoors and out-of-doors.  She
was his partner at whist against Captain Noote and dummy ;
this, at least, was one degree better than a t^te-&-tte over
the backgammon-board, including William John's amorous
whispers. Juliet was truly miserable; even Sophy's heart
would have been softened had she been a witness of her
daily penance. Shut up with these three uncongenial corn



<pb n="264"/>
264             A FAMILY LIKENESS. 
panions in a small, isolated bungalow, the mother
resolved that she should accept the son-the son d
to marry her-the old man stolidly quiescent and
The wretched girl imagined that it was impossible 
could be more unhappy, that Fate had exhausted 
arrows; but she was mistaken. Misfortunes are
visitors, and rarely come alone. One morning the
daily post brought her two letters from London. Her
sank as she received them. One was directed in Mr.
ford's writing, and the envelope had a black edgei
other was from Miss Dix.
Yes, Mrs. Radford was dead-had died suddenly of 
affection of the heart.  Her husband's letter end
half-written one to Juliet, begun by a hand now 
death. She was not a girl to give way to extra
demonstrative grief. She did not share her trouble
her fellow-inmates, but sat in her own room, with 
usually busy fingers locked idly in her lap, gazing '
face of white misery on the rain streaming down the 
the mountains rolled in grey mist., her thoughts as m
choly as the prospect. She had now lost her oldest,
best, her almost only friend. Of course she could not
permitted to indulge for hours in solitude. She was 
to come forth and join the Noote family at meals, to
socks, print butter, to play whist, and to listen, with
patience she could muster, to the rhapsodies of W
John.   He noticed that she was unusually silent
" choop," as he called it, and his mother remarked
tiously upon her small white face and most scanty a
and actually induced her preposterous son to interpret
as signs of love.
It had rained steadily for four days and nights, J
last it cleared, the sun shone again, the snows too
more brilliantly than ever, and heavy-footed crows 
menced their usual perambulations up and down tlI
roof of Kala Dara. Juliet hailed them as doves to tb
She had been pining for fresh air, and now, putting a
strongest shoes, and taking her alpenstock, crept fort
a thief, leaving traitorous Pouchee behind, made bae
with nervous speed to a favourite retreat that comm



<pb n="265"/>
r               "A  WILD-GOOSE CHASE."               265
view of Snow View and Durano. There she sat, with her
back against a rock, her hands clasped in a favourite attitude
round her knees, contemplating familiar surroundings. She
had lived all her life in the mountains, and loved them with
the passion peculiar to hill-people. After days spent in a
close, tobacco-laden atmosphere, how good it was to inhale
the sharp clear air; dear to her senses was the smell of the
nines and the wood smoke. Almost as dear as the far-away
tine of snowy white pinnacles which were blushing under
the sun's last kisses.
Juliet sat motionless, gazing towards Durano, her dark
eyes, beneath their delicate brows, bent on that scene of
so many new sensations with almost tragic intentness. She
was endeavouring to follow up a long line of thought. She
was slowly reviewing her whole past life, then she glanced
at her present lot, with its sordid surroundings and hope-
less outlook, and the hateful, ever-haunting presence of
William John.
Her recent and acute grief had almost driven Gerald
Romilly out of her thoughts-almost-but not quite. It
was not so easy to forget that evening in Durano, his eager,
broken words, the stars, the dim garden, and the breath of
the flowers. And that it had not been a dream, the bit of
heliotrope was an outward and visible token. She wondered
if it was wicked to keep it in her Bible, pressed between
two leaves.  She had refused Gerald abruptly, almost
roughly, because her heart was proud and sore. Had she
been right ? Fortune had opened her a door of escape from
her present life, and she had closed it with her own hands.
She had been offered a great gift, which she had impetu-
ously rejected for Gerald's good. Yes; but if he were to
come and seek her now, what would she say ? Would she
suffer him to judge for himself, whether an obscure, country-
born girl, unacknowledged by her relations, was a suitable
wife for him or not ? He had said he would write, and she
had protested. Had she really done right ? her heart urged
clamorously.
Yes, and the proof was ever with her. She was so miser-
ably unhappy and forlorn. Had she not always been taught
that to do wrong was delightfullv easy and Pleasant: to do



<pb n="266"/>
266             A FAMILY LIKENESS,
right a distasteful, uphill task, for which the sense
accomplished virtue was the sole reward ? 
Gerald's appearance, his character, his manners,
conspicuous contrast to her other suitor-this horror
flannel shirt and greasy collar, who winked at her
squeezed her hand when he bade her good night, so 
dreadful brass rings sank into her fragile fingers. 
Then her thoughts wandered away to Sophy. Sh
have told Sophy ? If Sophy had not looked so gri
severe, and been so painfully curt in her remarks i
last dismal meal in the dak bungalow, she might
screwed up her courage to utter one word, but
naturally shy in speaking of her own feelings and
To open her heart, to unburthen her mind to anote
an operation that almost rivalled keen physical 
And Sophy had looked utterly unapproachable; wh
carried her chin at a certain angle, it was tantamount:
declaration of war. So Bobbie had more than once jl
assured her during those happy days at Snow View.
that was years ago I  And she herself was res
nature. Mrs. Radford had frequently pointed out 
what she considered-grave defect in her character.
life of monotonous seclusion had blocked the natural o
of emotion, and her mind was prone, as in the
instance, to feed solely upon itself.
Suddenly her reverie was interrupted. She started,
curious expression dawned on her face and brought a
colour into her cheek.  This change was caused
sound of that simple tune, " Two jolly black eyes,"
by some one who was rather out of breath, some
proaching rapidly. Yes, here was William John
hillside, and yet she had been positive that she
away unseen, whilst he slept and snored in the 
But then she'was not aware that Mrs. Noote had set
to watch her, and that the same coolie had marked 
just as accurately as if she had been a jungle
minaUl pheasant.
Mr. Pogson was somewhat portly; neither his
his boots were built for mountaineering, and he was
the best of tempers when he flung himself hei



<pb n="267"/>
" STARVE YOU SHALL "                267
beside his quarry and panted out, "So I have found you,
after all. This is a fine wild-goose chase you have given
me I"
CHAPTER XXXV.
"STARVE YOU SHALL "
"WHICH of us is the wild goose?" she asked, with a
wretched attempt at gaiety.
" Why, you are 1 At any rate, you are a wild deer,"-
with a delighted laugh at his own wit.
"I am sure I am much obliged to you," picking up her
alpenstock. " It is getting rather late, and I am just going.
A case of 'welcome the coming, speed the parting guest,'"
and she nodded a farewell.
" No, no, by Jove I You are not off like that 1 You are
always giving me the slip; but I have you now, my wild
deer " holding her dress firmly in his hand.
" Well,"-feigning a nonchalance she was far from feel-
ing, " what do you want ?"
" I am a plain man," he said, scrambling to his feet (a
very plain man in Juliet's opinion), " and I am plain-spoken
-none of your humming and hawing chaps. I want you
to marry me, and be Mrs. William John Pogson; and let
me tell you that you are the first girl as has ever had an
offer from W. J. P."
A momentary silence, during which Juliet was searching
for some polite phrase in which to reject the third offer of
marriage she had received within the last month.
" My mother is set on it; and, of course, you've seen that
yourself. I know you are one of your stand-off ones; but,
blow me if I don't like it for a change. I am sick of girls
throwing themselves at fellows' heads.  There's one in
Allahabad very nearly landed yours truly. This will be a
facer for her I but I don't care ; let her rip I Well, Juliet,"
-attempting to take her hand-" now we have settled it,
When is it to be ? "



<pb n="268"/>
268            A FAMILY LIKENESS.
"Our wedding, to be sure I" now successfully seiin
hand.
" Never, as far as I am concerned," wrenching away
fingers. " I-I think you must be joking 1"
" Oh, come, you know I'm in dead earnest; and you
not be trying it on I What's the good ? "
" I am not going to many any one I" 
" And pray why not, miss " he demanded, with a
of wrath and astonishment.
"For several reasons."
"Because you are too swell a lady ? " he snorted.
"No, no; if I really cared for you, your positio
make no difference to me; but I am surprised t
have not seen quite plainly that I do not like you I" 
"Position " with an angry laugh. "Well, that's a
a one as I ever heard. Old Joe Smithson's grand
a young person as her family disowns, talking of
to me, Gentleman Pogson-do you hear that ?-b
Pogson; maybe," squaring himself as he spoke, and
his thumbs in the armholes of his waistcoat, "I'm 
sonally to your taste. I heard all about that offioer
I suppose you'd rather have him? but he didn't
That s why you came back so low in your mind.
"I have already said no," replied Juliet, endea
to 'be calm. "Please take your answer; is naob
enough ? "
" By Jingo it isn't," he retorted savagely. "Bk
it is I You said you'd like to see me kiss you, and
Jove you shall. I'll have the first kiss off your  o
mouth,-whoever was the last."
As he spoke, he laid hold of her arm; but she 
in twisting herself free, and leaning against the r
her alpenstock in a short firm grasp, said, with
teeth and throbbing pulses, " If you dare to come
I shall strike you."
"Pah I you and your knitting-needle 1" making
at the end of it.   "What I you won't, wont
endeavouring to wrench it out of her hands, but as
firmly, with a sort of silent, enraged tenacity.
The path on which they struggled was soft and



<pb n="269"/>
" STARVE YOU SHALL !"               269
with the recent rains, and Mr. Pogson's footing was none
too secure when the impetus of a sudden violent push upset
his equilibrium; he stumbled, scrambled, fell backwards,
and with a howl of mingled rage and terror, toppled over
the low bank, rolled rapidly down a considerable descent,
where his career was brought up by a boulder stone.
Meanwhile his victim had fled with the speed of a deer,
and ere he had recovered the perpendicular, his cap, and his
wits, she was completely out of sight.
"Well, what news ' inquired his eager parent, as she
hurried out to meet him at the gate. "She is in her room,
and has her door shut fast."
"I'll show you what she said," sullenly displaying his
muddy coat, his hands and face all scratched by bushes he
had snatched at as he rolled by. " She gave me a shove and
knocked me over the khud, and nigh killed me.  She had
the will to do it too, I saw it in her eyes. She would not
even listen to me, much less let me kiss her; she was just
like a mad jungle cat, and I riled her proper about that chap
Romilly I" with a laugh of vindictive complacency. " She's
a young devil, that's what she is ? I would not marry her
if she had the Bank of England at her back; and a nice
fool you've made of me," turning on his mother savagely.
"It's all your fault, telling me a pack of nonsense and lies,
and bringing me up to this beastly hole, and my railway
ticket alone twenty-eight rupees I"
*        *        *        *        *
"A pretty way you have treated my poor boy I" said
Mrs. Noote, bursting into Juliet's room. " Nearly knocked
him over the khud, a real grateful return for all our
kindness I"
"I gave him a plain answer to a plain question, Mrs.
Noote, and he insulted me."
"He asked you to marry him, the greatest compliment
he could pay you, miss; and he offered to kiss you, and you
call that an insult I"
"Most certainly I do," her voice shaking with passion,
and I must say-   "
"And I don't," storming down the interruption. "And
You gave him a shove, and sent him over the bank, and



<pb n="270"/>
270             A FAMILY LIKENESS. 
might have murdered him. It was all one to you
he fell ten feet or ten hundred. He is just a mass of
and his clothes destroyed; he ought, by rights, to 
law of you. You just come out this moment, and
pardon.
Juliet looked at the furious matron and laughed, a]
that drove Mrs. Noote wild.
"I will not; it is he who should beg mine,"
girl, scornfully. "As long as he remains here, 
to meet him."
" And drive the poor child out of his mother's
shrieked his parent. "Oh, I dare say, indeed 1"
unfailing storm  signal-Mrs. Noote's light eyebxo
hair looked almost white against her face, wh
crimson with passion.
"No, I need not do that; but whilst he remam
take my meals in my own room."
"And don't you wish you may get them?
one bite, unless you come to table for it; so
starve."
"So be it. I would much sooner starve than
society of Mr. Pogson."
" Starve you shall I ftl bring you to your
nasty, uppish, impudent, red-haired minx I "  '[
"That will do, Mrs. Noote," said the other, 
courage. "This is my room; will you be good
leave it ?"
Mrs. Noote stared-swallowed-and then fio
banging the door violently behind her.
Teatime came; no tea for Juliet. She re
cpartment, in the dark, and hungry-hungry, 
dark, she went to bed. The next day was wret
friend the ayah-a kindly, wizened old person, w1
a huka-brought her some chupatties, and these,
water, caught in a jug, were her food for that 
while, the mother and son conferred together, a
to the conclusion that "it was best to humour  W
She might write and make complaints to the  a
therefore Mrs. Noote proposed a truce through t
offered an apology through the window, and ti



<pb n="271"/>
"STARVE YOU SHALL I"                 271
under the door, to notify that if she would come forth, Mr.
pogson was prepared " to forgive and forget."
In answer to his mother's threat of starving Juliet out,
he had rejoined, in his own forcible way, "You will never
starve her into marrying me, and I would as soon marry
a young tigress I She has a pride and will that beat all.
She would sooner die than let you break her spirit; you
may see it in her eye."  To which Mrs. Noote vulgarly
retorted, " Very much in her eye."
Nevertheless, she was concerned that none of her arts
would lure the girl from her retreat. No; she refused to
appear, as long as Mr. Pogson was in the house. She wrote
this down in black and white, and gave it to her own
emissary, the ayah.
For two days it poured incessantly, and the rain brought
the cholera. The villagers awoke one morning and found
seven corpses in their midst. Ill news flies fast; at half-
past six it was at Kala Dara, and the awful word had been
whispered into Mrs. Noote's ear. When she carried the
announcement to her son, he was still in bed. He started
up, his face a pale lemon colour, his bold, light eyes seemed
to protrude from their sockets, the damp dew of a mortal
fear was on his brow.
" Then, in that case, my name is Walker 1" he exclaimed,
sitting up in bed. "I am off, sharp; tell them to saddle
the pony."
"But you will wait for your breakfast, lovey ?" pleaded
his mother. " It's downright dangerous to start fasting."
" Zi's far more dangerous to stop. Clear out while I stick
A some clothes; you can send my kit after me. You come
and tell me that the black cholera is in the village, and
press me to stop I No; not for Joe I"
Such was his panic that in five minutes Mr. Pogson was
equipped. True, he was unwashed, and unshaven, and
hardly spared a second to swallow a cup of coffee, and say
good-bye to his mother.
As he hastily saluted her, he pointed to Juliet's door and
laid, in a hoarse voice, and with his mouth full of toast-
"You'd better tell her, and let her clear out, too; mind
you, it's 7er7 close."



<pb n="272"/>
272             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
"Not closer for her than for me I " rejoined Mrs.
tartly. "I wonder you haven't more pride than to
your head about the hussy I Just wait five minutes,
dear, and the pony will be ready, and an egg."
"Pony and egg be botheredl  Not five seconds !
the black cholera, you say, and I'm in a devil of a 
hurrying down the garden as he spoke. "Put up my
and send them after me; and tell them to look 
the pony. By-by," and he banged the gate and fed.'
" You can come out I " screamed Mrs. Noote, as ^h
her eyes, and rapped with her knuckles on Juliet's
"Come out I Mr. Pogson has gone, and you need i
afraid; there is no one here now as cares a straw
you."
CHAPTER XXXVL
"THE PESTILENOE THAT WALKETH IN DNorIE
"Death calls ye to the crowd of common men.'
THE spirit was willing enough in Juliet's case, but the
was deplorably weak. A hungry girl of nineteen, who
been almost starved for two days, finds a strong ar
breakfast a very potent argument with which to
pride. Yes; the humbling truth must be confessed
was famishing, and could not resist the clattering 
cups and saucers. She came forth, and took her 
at table; as she sat she heard Captain and M
holding high converse through the open door of
room. Captain Noote was saying-
" I declare he went off as if the devil was at his 
never saw the match of it. A regular runaway. :
the sort that ketches it  And look here, Eliza, 
letter for Miss Judy. I found it in the botto
tobacco-jar; how the dickens did it come there ? n ;
" How do I know ? Drat her and her letters i
Oh"-to Juliet-" so you have made your way Q
hope you are better "



<pb n="273"/>
PESTILENCE.                    273
"Thank you. I never was ill," was the stiff rejoinder.
" Only a pain in your temper " returned the other, with
her most aggressive glare, and she seized the tea-pot as if
she would like to shake it. "I don't hold with girls as has
black dogs on their backs."
" See, Miss Judy, this is a letter for you," broke in Captain
Noote, as he threw it to her across the table.
Juliet coloured violently as she took it up. It was from
Gerald Romilly. She recognized his bold black writing.
Of course it was merely to say good-bye. She turned it
over; the postmark was Lucknow, the date ten days
previously.  He was no doubt already in the Indian
Ocean on his way home.     She felt a hard lump rise
in her throat; and she caught Mrs. Noote's pale eyes
fixed on her interrogatively. No; she was not going to
open it under their supervision.  She thrust it into her
ocket, intending to take it out and read it alone on the
Mrs. Noote was intensely disappointed, and exclaimed,
with a sneer-
" It's not very important, seeing as it's not worth opening.
A pity I did not keep it another week I"
Juliet made no reply. She felt that there was something
unusual in the domestic atmosphere. Why had William John
raised the siege and run away ? Why was Captain Noote
staring at her as if he would like to say something, and
dared not; and, above all, why, at ten o'clock in the morn-
ing, did he go boldly and openly to the whisky-bottle, pour
out nearly half a tumbler of raw spirits, and swallow it
without any remonstrance from Mrs. Noote ? But she had
no time to speculate. She was longing for some fresh air,
and to be out among the hills; and, putting on her hat
and calling Pouchee, she set forth for a long ramble. The
air and the motion were good for her. She walked steadily
on for nearly four miles before she ventured to open the
letter-it would only contain bad news, and she put off the
evil moment, and allowed sinking hope to utter its last
dying whispers.
At length she reached a well-known retreat, sat down,
and tore the envelope with tremulous fingers; the contents



<pb n="274"/>
274             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
were very short and very legible, in half a minute her
mastered them.
"DEmR MISs OARWITHN,
"Just as I left you on Tuesday, I was han
urgent telegram, ordering me on court-martial duty.
arrived here this morning, and hope to get away in a
May I go straight to Kala Dara on my return ? Youi
you care for me; you can never recall those words,
they are enough. If you do not answer this, I sha
silence for consent.
"Yours,
"G. BoymLr,"
This letter was now eleven days old I The hand of
had answered it. Gerald would take silence for co
he would come to Kala Dara. Juliet's heart beat fa
the thought. What was she to say to him now ? Had
the strength of mind to reject him twice ? She doubted 
as she sat engrossed in reflection time flew, minutes
into half-hours and hours, and she still remained motin
A goat and two little brown kids appeared to think she
a permanent portion of the landscape, and came and 
near her. A pair of noisy hill mnars fought out 
standing quarrel at her side.
At last she rose, feeling stiff and cramped; and,
come to no fixed decision, made her way slowly
Kala Dar. As she walked along the familiar 
thoughts miles away, she could not help noticing an
number of people travelling on the road below her,
rently bound for a long distance. Men driving
sheep, and ponies laden with women and children,
pots and bedding; they seemed in haste, too. Anot
she would have run down and questioned them; but
her mind was too full of her own affairs to have 
her neighbours' business.
As she passed through the village, she was
unusually dull and silent aspect. The Bunnie's
shut, and, strange spectacle I herds of patient 



<pb n="275"/>
PESTILENCE.                   275
cows waited at the closed doors of their owners' houses.
From one dwelling emerged a little group, bearing on a bier
a stark body covered with a thin muslin shroud. From
another hut came the piercing sounds of lamentation and
woe.
Juliet paused at the threshold and looked in; there was
the beaten mud floor, the unused grinding-stone and brass
cooking-vessels, though it was the evening hour. A still,
stiff form lay twisted up on a charpoy, half covered with
a rezai. A child was playing with the dead man's huka;
whilst a woman, with her hair down, sat on the floor,
screaming and beating her breast.
As Juliet stood irresolute, a withered old crone suddenly
rose, and darted to the door.
"Begone I" she shrieked.  "Breathe not in the place
of death! Miss Sahib, it is the 'Hyjah ka Bim-ar hai'
(the cholera). Fifteen people have died since yesterday's
dawn ! Why should you die too ? You are young and fair.
The gwala is dead; they carried him but now to the burn-
ing ghat, and also his sons, Punee and Krisna. There is
none of his race to light the pyre."
"The gwala dead I" repeated Juliet, in a tone of in-
credulous horror; "and the children.  Oh, this is too
dreadful I And their mother ? "
"She has escaped. She had gone down with corn to her
mother's house in Durano. Behold, her own house is empty
now; but Jangu, the father of all, went first. Well, he is
thrice blessed. Last year he made the great pilgrimage to
Gangoutri temple. Yes, old man as he was, he ascended to
the very cow's mouth itself. Mahadeo, therefore, took him
speedily; but Ganca Thapa, here," pointing to the distorted
corpse, "devils tore his body from his soul "
Juliet shuddered instinctively as she said, "Are any
sick now ? We will send to Durano for the doctor and
remedies      "
"No need," interrupted the hag; "those who were
stricken are gone. They died speedily, and in great tor-
ment, in spite of the hakim, who gave medicine, opium,
and ginger, and did poojah to the gods, and also magic.
We others wait now to see who will be called next. It is



<pb n="276"/>
276             A FAMILY LIKENESS. 
all as the gods will.  Go; you can do naught I
Sanduria-go I
Meanwhile the newly made widow sat wailing and
her hair, and beating her head upon the ground with all 
wild extravagance of Eastern grief. Juliet had heard
the cholera, and knew that its visits were periodical in 
hills, and that, when it came, it had been known to w
away whole villages. This was the same pestilence
walked in darkness, whose approaching steps had terrifi
Mr. Hodder. It had reached Kala Dara at last.
"You can give no help, Miss Sahib," continued the a4
woman. "Be warned by me, and flee. Do not return
the bungalow. It will surely take some one from there
See-it always spreads in this shape;" and she made 
mark of a rude triangle on the floor.  The bungao
represented one point, two rows of stricken homes 
others.
"I will go back, and tell Captain Noote," said Juliet
" and see if we cannot do something to help you all."
As she entered the house, the captain hurried out to m
her in a transport of excitement, crying-
"Keep away-keep away      She has got it   Took
three hours ago, and is nearly gone. Go-go-like the rest'
They have all run from us save the ayah, and she is almost
useless, and Ibraham, and he is dying. We have not a soul.
to help; but you must not stay. To keep you would b
murder."
"I am not afraid," said Juliet, firmly. "I will e
I will go to Mrs. Noote at once."
"I said she should have packed you off, and she refe
It has been raging these two days. The very air is poin
In the village below they are dying like flies."
"I know. But there are no cases now. Let me go
Mrs. Noote."
"Well, brace yourself up, my girl; for if you have ne'
seen cholera, you'll want a stout heart to face it.
take a little whisky; it's the best stuff to keep out 
and fear."  As he spoke, his red face faded to an
hue. 
But Juliet put the proffered whisky aside, and paus e



<pb n="277"/>
PESTILENCE.                    277
the sick-room. It was true that she had never seen cholera
before, and that she required all her nerve and self-command
for the present crisis. To all appearances, Mrs. Noote had
aged thirty years in three hours. She looked exactly like
a wizened old woman of eighty. She received Juliet with
signs of gratitude, and appeared much comforted by her
presence; and Juliet hastened to apply the most available
remedies. She got hot bottles, hot stupes; she inoculated
the shivering ayah with some of her own courage, confidence,
and energy, and ordered Captain Noote to and fro; but all
exertions to save Mrs. Noote failed. The fatal blue look
stole over her face, and round the eyes and lips; the mouth
sank in; the extremities became deathly cold. The final
collapse succeeded the acute stage, and Mrs. Noote was sink-
ing rapidly. She recognized Juliet more than once, and
pressed her hand, and struggled painfully to articulate; but
all that Juliet's straining ears could catch from this last
impulse of fading vitality was a murmur that sounded like
bank-book. She fell into a stupor, and about three o'clock
in the morning passed almost imperceptibly away.
Of course her burial must take place without delay-no
need, as among the natives, to wait five hours ere burning
the body, in order to give the soul time to reach the abode
of Yama. Captain Noote was amazed to discover that there
was a coffin in the house--" But then," as he sobbed, when
his first surprise had abated, "Eliza was always such a
wonderful woman for stores,"-and in the coffin which she
had purchased for her husband, was Eliza Noote laid.
Captain Noote began to dig her grave in the garden at
daybreak. Meanwhile, Juliet stood at the little gate, and
saw the sun rise over the snowy range, and flood the nearer
hills with opalescent tints, with a face worn with watching,
and haggard from the strain of a night of ghastly unfamiliar
horrors. Mrs. Noote was dead, the bearer was dead-who
was to be the next ? Must she wait for her fate to overtake
her, like the people in the village ?
But her fate, in another shape, was approaching rapidly;
her ear caught the clatter of galloping hoofs, and, lifting up
her tired eyes, she saw Gerald Romilly. In a second he
had jumped off his horse, and his hand was on the gate.



<pb n="278"/>
27S             A FAMILY LIKEA'F.SS.
"Do not come here!" she almost shrieked. "Go, f
this instant I Do not come near this house    Go,
lease I " she repeated hysterically, holding the gate faat
both hands.
He gazed in amazement at her pale, sharp face. 
had happened ?
"Why should I go?" he asked, with a smile. "
wrote--"
"Oh, please, please go away," she interrupted.  Ple
go, dear Gerald."
He laughed as he looked at her, with keen, dancing ey
and said-
" Do you think that is the way to get rid of me, by ca
me dear Gerald ? You are mistaken. I am coming
you don't suppose that I am afraid of Mrs. Noote ? "
"If you were, you need fear her no longer,"
endeavouring to speak calmly. "Mrs. Noote died t
hours ago."
"Cholera I" he ejaculated almost under his breath, 
his eager, happy face became grave. In a second, he
changed from the lover to the man of action-the so
who was familiar with all the horrors of a plague-s
camp.
"Open the gate, Juliet," he said, authoritatively; 
must get you away from this at once. I'll put the
saddle on my horse, and start you off in five minm
There's no fear of me, I'm used to this sort of thing;
you may rely on me to look after him, and do everyth
glancing expressively at the half-dug grave.
"So you have heard it," cried Captain Noote, hu
out of the house. "A strong, healthy woman-she t
yesterday at three o'clock. She was after feeding the fo
and she staggered in, and screeched out, 'I've got
cholera, and I'm a dead woman I' It's the black  holr
they've had it in the village this two days, and Eliza 
and held her tongue. The bearer took it and died, and
the servants ran away except the ayah, and left me and 
Judy alone. She has done everything. She's a
brave girl, but this is no place for her; she must not
here, take her away." 



<pb n="279"/>
REFERRED TO SOPIY.                  379
" Where am I to go ? " she asked, with serious eyes.
"' Here comes your answer," said Romilly, pointing to a
distant figure-Robbie Casson, at the top of his speed,
leading a pony with a side-saddle.
CHAPTER     XXXVII.
REFEREED TO SOPHY.
"Love took up the harp of life,
And smote on all the chords with might."
TENNYSON.
IT is notoriously trying to a clever, managing woman to
have her pet plans frustrated by a silly, wilful girl-and
Sophy Casson had neither forgiven nor forgotten her young
prothyge. She would have been down to Kala Dara to
upbraid her and see how she fared, but had been laid up for
two weeks with a very severe cold. And she honestly
believed that a little of the undiluted society of the Nootes
would do Juliet no harm, and bring her to her senses,-mean-
ing that it would enable her to see more clearly the error of
her ways in refusing Gerald Romilly, and thwarting her
best friend's most cherished schemes. But when she saw a
pale girl, with a tired, haggard face dismounting from her
pony (the Bandersnatch) all old scores were overlooked, she
even forgot her own dread of infection as she received her
prodigal with open arms. Juliet was completely prostrated,
and only too thankful to obey her hostess's commands to go
and lie down and sleep. She slept for fifteen hours, and
awoke entirely .revived and refreshed. As she and her
friend sat over a blazing log fire in the twilight, the next
evening, Sophy said, "Well, Juliet, I suppose you are aware
that I have been very, very angry with you ?"
"Have you, Sophy ? And why ?"
" Because, to me, your best friend, you refuse your con-
fidence. My dear, that is your greatest fault-reserve."
Silence, and then Sophy went on, "Your second offence
is, that for no reason that I can see, you have refused Gerald
Romilly-is not this true ? "



<pb n="280"/>
280             A FAMILY LIKENESS. 
Juliet shaded her eyes with her thin hand, and said,"
partly."
"What does the girl mean?" exclaimed Mrs. C
impatiently.
"I mean that I did refusehim, and for a very g
reason."
" Then please let me have your ,idea of a good reason
once."
No reply; but Sophy could see that a tear had sp
into her companion's lap.
"You don t mean to say you don't care for him ? "
"That is just lit," now boldly dashing away her 
"I do. To you I may say it, Sophy-only to you. I
care for him; and that is the very reason that I will
be his wife."
"The poor girl has lost her wits," said Sophy, ad
the fire.
"No, Sophy, I have not lost my wits; but I am not
to be his wife. You know I am not his equal. My o
father refuses to acknowledge me or receive me; how
I expect his father or mother to do so ? My mother 
not a lady-all these things would soon !be known
talked of among his friends. He would be ashamed of
and mine. I am not accustomed to society; I am m
an ignorant hill-girl, who does not even know how, 
receive visitors, [or to get into a carriage. A carriage
with a hysterical laugh. "Why, I have never even 
one I I should make him ashamed of me sooner or late_
"Juliet, I am ashamed of you-to hear you saying m
things. You are-I don't want to fatter you-a  m ich
a lady as any one I ever saw, and you have the real
air, which is given to so few. You might have the
of all the Howards in your veins, by the manner you 0
your head, the way in which you come into a room. :
very voice and laugh are those of a gentlewoman 
are legacies that are better than money. Be very
grateful;my dear, to your ancestors, who endowed you 
birth and breeding and beauty." 
"Sophy, you are fond of me; of course you are prej 
because you are my friend; but you should have heard



<pb n="281"/>
REFERRED TO SOPHY.                 281
mrs. Dickson said of me; she said I was a nobody and an
adventuress."
" I don't wish to hear anything she may say. Who cares
for Mrs. Dickson ? "
,"Mrs. Bax told me that if I married Gerald it would be
his social ruin, as I was a nobody, and worse-disowned by
my own relations."
' Apres ? "
" Apres. I went to the Sessions-house garden with Gerald,
and whilst my heart was hot within me he asked me to
marry him, and I refused him. What else could I do ?"
"Then all I can say is, that you were a little fool."
"Oh, dear, dear Sophy, do you honestly think so ? Do
you not think it would be very wrong and dishonourable of
me to marry him ? "
"What do you mean ? " inquired Mrs. Casson, impatiently.
"Listen to me, Sophy. I leave my fate in your hands;
you shall decide," said Juliet, raising a pale, tense face.
" Why should I decide, my dear ? What have I to say
to it ?"
" You know the world so well, and I do not. You know
his people and their position, you know me and my position.
You can see both sides impartially-but I am partial.  I
see too much of my own side, and my heart tempts me,
tempts me horribly I But now I put temptation out of its
power. I ask you, I beg of you, to think of him, not of
me. I only wish to do what is best for him. Yes, you
shall decide; yes, you must decide," and Juliet suddenly
knelt down, and laid her beautiful head in her friend's lap.
Mrs. Casson loved power, and she never had realized its
delights more thoroughly than at the present moment, when
she held the future lot of two people in her own hands.
She was by no means a perfect woman (but who is ?), and
it certainly gave her a tiny twinge of envy to think that
this forlorn girl, who had lived a homeless, insignificant
existence among these wilds, who had looked up to her-
Sophy Casson-as her only friend, had been invited to go
forth and take her place in the great world, whilst she,
Robbie Casson's clever wife, must remain on a remote tea-
plantation for the best Dart of her life: and vet at a word



<pb n="282"/>
282             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
from  her, this quixotic child would resign this bril
prospect 
But no, the struggle (if such it could be called) wuas
momentary.   Juliet was a dear, simple, honourable
and Gerald was a resolute man. Once his mind was
upon an object, he strove hard to attain it; and his 
soul was set upon this pretty creature, whose proud
head, with its mass of auburn locks, lay buried in
lap.
"I think, Juliet, you should have left it to him to dec
she said, after a long pause.
" Do you really, really ?" exclaimed the other. "I
times thought so myself when I was wretchedly unha
and then one is tempted to do things just to escape
one's misery."
"I do-really, really. Gerald will be here to-mo
and you will give him his answer."
"I don't know."
" Of course you know I Or else I shall begin to think
can't have any backbone. Naturally your father will a
to provide a new home for you, and where would you find
fitter one than sharing Gerald's ? Believe me, my de
that when Mr. Carwithen hears of your approach
marriage-   "
"Oh, don't, Sophy I It is no question of appro
marriage. I am not even engaged, and I---
"Well, well, that can remain an open question,
comes Robbie. Dry your eyes and give me a kiss, and
everything to me."
The next day as Gerald galloped out to Snow View,
was much surprised to find Sophy waiting for him near
tea-house. She was wrapped in a fur cloak, and alone. 4
" Get off," she cried, "and send on the pony. I 13%
great deal to say to you."
"About her, of course ? " springing to the gro.und
"Yes. Pray what else do you think would bring mOf
to waylay you this cold evening?"  And, s"   e
beside him, she volubly and emphatically
previous evening's conversation, and Juliet's  o
scruples.



<pb n="283"/>
REFERRED TO SOPITY.                283
" And is that all that stands between us ?" he cried.
;What nonsense I As if I would listen to it for a moment I
I'd marry her if her father was a sweep, and be proud to
call her wife I"
"No doubt," said Sophy, dryly. "But perhaps your
father and mother would not be equally proud of the
connection. However, she is not a sweep's daughter, as it
happens. Sweeps don't have daughters like Juliet Carwithen.
You must make a little allowance for her. I suppose you
are very fond of her, Jerry ? "
Mr. Romilly did not think it necessary to answer such
a preposterous question.
And I think she is fond of you."
Why ? " rather eagerly.
"Oh, I can tell I A woman can always tell I" nodding
her head significantly.
"But give me one reason."
"Well, when she speaks of you behind your back, she
calls you Gerald, and says it quite naturally I "
(Once she had called him dear Gerald to his face, and
said that quite naturally too.)
" What do you mean by making allowance ? " he inquired,
after a considerable silence.
" Make allowance for her pride. She does not know how
proud she is. Oh, if she could only be married like other
girls, from her father's house I"
"Look here," said Gerald, drawing a paper out of his
pocket. "I brought this to show you."   Handing her
a Pioneer, he said, as he pointed to a paragraph, "Just read
it. It's rather a curious coincidence."
"Passengers from Brindisi to Bombay, via ss. Arcadia:
the Marquis and Marchioness of Castle Blarney, Lord and
Lady Blankenburg, Sir Vincent Peerwith, Mr. and Mrs.
Adolphus Carwithen and maid."
"There, you see, we have the whole affair in a nutshell.
I heard from the mater to-day. She says Mrs. Carwithen
has never given dear Dolly a moment's peace till he joined
this noble party. She is a strong woman to bring him here
in spite of himself. I fancy they are at Ajmeer by this
time, beginning the sights."



<pb n="284"/>
284             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
" And I shall show him one sight that he does not 
to see," said Mrs. Casson, emphatically.
" And that is his daughter ? "
"Yes; and he has arrived most opportunely, has he 
Just in the nick of time 1 Juliet is much changed the
few weeks," said her friend. " She has felt Mrs. Radfl_
death acutely, and has quite lost her spirits. Poor 
she has so few friends; and then she has had this 
about you I"
" Worry about me ? " echoed her lover, indignantly.
am the last person in the world to give her worry. But
awful experience of the cholera is enough to shake any i
nerve. You must get her away from these hills, SophyY.
"Yes, down to Lucknow, where we will come across
and Mrs. Carwithen-naturally by the merest accident."
" I shall happen to be there, too; also by the most
ordinary coincidence I " he added, with a smile.
" Only if it is all right, and you are engaged to her. 
she has not accepted you yet, you know. She has left it
me to decide I "
"To you to decide ? " he echoed, with angry incred
Sophy saw that her love of importance had for o
carried her too far.
"I mean, she stated her scruples to me, and asked me
she was right or wrong.  I am not sure that I should h
told you all this."
" If you ask me," rejoined Gerald, sternly, " I am sure
ought not. But it was just like a woman I "
Poor Sophy I and this was her thanks I She was a
in tears, as she said-
"I meant it all for the best. At any rate, I said she 
wrong, and her ideas of honour strained; and that she
better leave it all to you."
"To me? Oh, that is a different thing! Then
settles it I " he exclaimed triumphantly.
" But I am not sure that she intends to take my 
added Sophy, a little maliciously. "You are not out o
wood yet. Here we are at home; you can arrange yonr
affairs your own way. She is in the drawing-room. I
go and see about tea."



<pb n="285"/>
REFERRED TO SOPHY.                  a85
" Sophy," he said penitently, " I am afraid I spoke very
rudely and ungratefully to you just now-forgive me, it
shall be the last time; but you cannot realize how it stings
a man, and cuts him to the quick, to hear that, when he
offers his love to a girl, she calmly refers the matter to
another woman."
"It'was not that-not that-not put in that way. She
was only afraid of her own feelings tempting her. She
offered to sacrifice herself," said her cousin, eagerly.
" And you were to be the executioner, Sophy, eh ? I see I
Well, Sophy, will you forgive me, and wish me luck ? "
"Of course I forgive you-of course I wish you luck,"
and she pointed to the drawing-room door.
Juliet was sitting over the fire, with a book in her lap,
and started up when she heard a familiar voice in the
passage; the door opened, and a familiar figure entered.
" How do you do, Mr. Romilly ? " she said, accosting him
calmly. Would he remember that she had called him dear
Gerald the last time they had met ?  She hoped not.
"Sophy has told me all your scruples, your ridiculous
reasons for not marrying me, Juliet," he began at once.
" Has she ? " slowly raising her eyes to his handsome face,
aglow with animation.
" Yes, you referred the matter to her. She has handed it
over to me, and this is your answer," and he drew her
towards him by both hands, and kissed her.
Juliet did not blush, protest, or tremble; she became
rather white, and said in a low voice-
"Please let go my hands, Mr. Romilly;" and then, to his
ixtreme consternation, once they were released, she turned
away, sat down, and covered her face with them and wept,
whilst he stood in the middle of the room overwhelmed with
lismay.
However, to his intense relief, she speedily recovered her
ielf-possession, dried her eyes, and said, with extraordinary
nomposure-
"Has Mrs. Casson told you everything ? How people say
'hat there is a mystery about me-which is true; that I am
I nobody-which is also true. Have you thought of my own



<pb n="286"/>
286            A FAMILY LIKENESS.
" I have thought of everything; I have heard every
As to my being like your father; you don't know h
you would not suggest such a thing."
"I can never marry as long as my father disowns
she continued gravely.
That his and Juliet's happiness should depend upon
will of Dolly Carwithen-whom he despised from theo
of his heart-that Dolly should have it in his power.
bestow such a rare and priceless treasure, a treasure he
scorned. The idea was monstrous.
" As you will, Juliet; but I must say that I think you
treating me very badly. I have waited more than a m
for your answer. You know that I love you. I can 
you that my father and mother will be only too delighted
call you their daughter; you know in your heart that I
make you happy, that I shall be wretched if you are not
wife, that as long as I live I will never love another w
and yet I am to be put off, and my fate remain depen
on the caprice of your father, a man who has neglecte
all your life, and whom you have never even seen.-
good-bye, Juliet; I suppose you will be able to give me
answer in a year's time," and he held out his hand as i
say farewell.
But when Sophy Casson entered the room five 
later this farewell had evidently been postponed. The ha
pair were standing at the fire, and Gerald turned to her
said, " Sophy, come here and kiss your future cousin."
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
TADY CASTLE BLARNEY REFUSES TO BELIEVE HER
"Can such things be ?"
Maabeth.
IN the verandah of the Royal Hotel, Lucknow, a long 
row of hawkers' goods are arranged as usual at this th'
season. Silver work, Japanese curios, shawls, phool
jewellery, photographs, and mud figures, are au 
_J:,;- ,,,;. -  - ni-haann and 



<pb n="287"/>
LADY CASTLE BLARNEY.                287
forming birds are choosingletters,and firing miniature cannon
to a select audience under the porch. A stout, impressive-
looking old lady, with a high nose and eye-glasses, is haughtily
bargaining with a silver merchant, who is only asking her four
times the usual price, for he knows that she is a Burra mem
Sahib, has three English servants, and that the best hotel
carriage is at her disposal. Next to her sits a pretty little
American lady with white hair, whose nimble fingers are
busy, whilst her sharp, dark eyes are similarly occupied;
nothing escapes them-the snowy-robed, insinuating hawkers,
the chaffering tourists, the guides, the prim, elderly couple,
the loud girl with the dyed hair, the French marquis. This
is a handsome young man who has just dashed up in a high
dog-cart with a fine, chestnut horse. Yes, on closer in-
spection, well-dressed, well set up, and very good-looking;
what brings him here ? who is he going to call on ? Ah,
the two ladies sitting outside No. 11; the blonde chaperon
and the pretty, elegant girl with the chestnut hair. She is
the most remarkable woman in the hotel   Yes, and she
has noticed a splendid ring on her engaged finger. This is
evidently the young man who has given it to her. She puts
down her knitting to watch their greeting; she dearly loves
a bit of romance. The girl blushes a little as the young man
approaches and says something, and she looks up at him,
every dimple full of mischievous laughter (yes, Juliet had
quite recovered her spirits). The American lady resumes
her sock with a half-stifled sigh.  She, too, has had her
day; nevertheless, she cannot help envying this happy girl,
who has youth and beauty, and a handsome and acknow-
ledged lover,-for the other lady beams on him too I What
a good-looking pair they will make l  She would like
to see their wedding. She means to find out their names,
and write them down in her diary. Meanwhile, Gerald's
glance fell upon Lady Castle Blarney, and she has her
eye-glass up, and is staring hard at him.
" I am sure I know your face," she drawled, as he doffed
his hat.
"Yes," he rejoined, "I had the pleasure of meeting you
in Dover. I am very glad to see you out here."
" WVylv Ahnilll arml ha r.ltl t.n or mo P9" chi ahc akP rnrdlv



<pb n="288"/>
288            A FAMILY LIKENESS. 
"Pray, what do you know about me ? By-the-by, I s
you can talk the language ?"                       ^
Yes, if you give me time, and there are not more tla!
two or three listeners," he answered good humouredly.
"Then just tell me what this creature is saying. 
you tell him I'll give him fifty rupees for the little
bowl, and no more ?"
"But you are perhaps not aware that you are offng
him double its value; the usual price is twenty-five rupees.
" And he began by asking one hundred I"         "
"Oh, he will ask anything. Shall I settle with him ? n
"Thanks so much, if you will."  Charmed at getti
a bargain. "And now you have been so useful, pray
me who are you ? "
"I am Gerald Romilly. I met you at home last year."      .
"To be sure, to be sure. I am good at faces, bat I caul
put names to them. Here comes my hired barouche an
pair; not a bad turn-out, is it ? Suppose you take a
tarn with me-I am only going as far as the shopa
explain who all the people are 1"
I shall be delighted," he rejoined, snatching at 
unexpected opportunity; and helping her ladyship into
carriage, he took a seat opposite her.
"Tell them where to drive to; you shall be my inte'
preter," said Lady Castle Blarney, who fully unde
the art of making use of people. "By the way, what
piece of luck that was for your father the other day
Redland is a lovely old place, and just the right di
from town."
" Is it ? I have never been there."
"How odd I but, of course, your father's chance X
succeeding was very remote. And now tell me the a
of the people at the hotel. All sorts and conditions of ma
and women; some rather smart, some scarcely human 
saw one wretch actually cutting the butter with his n
fishy knife."
" Oh, most of them are tourists, I fancy. The reden
don't go to hotels; so I dare say you know more 
them than I do."
"At any rate, you know the pretty girl in white, 



<pb n="289"/>
LADY CASTLE BLARNEY.                289
waved her hand to you as we drove off. Oh, I saw her,"--
wagging her head significantly-"she really is most dis-
tinguished-looking. I sat beside her at dinner last night,
and asked her to pass me things. I did it on purpose. I
declare I never saw such pretty hands. Who is she ?"
" She is Miss Carwithen."
"Oh, indeed; any relation to our friends ? They have
gone to Cawnpore for the day with Castle Blarney. Is she
any relation to Dolly ?"
"Yes"-he paused, and then      added-" she is his
daughter."
" His what ? " shrieked her ladyship. " Look here, young
gentleman, I did not bring you out to chaff me, or invent
scandal, or jokes."
"I swear to you that she is the only child of Mr. Carwithen
by his first marriage; as to her existence being a joke, it is
a joke he has kept to himself for nineteen years."
"Stop the horss I make them walk I " cried the old lady,
imperiously. " I can't hear properly, with the clatter of the
carriage. Now relate the whole story straight off; begin at
the very beginning."
Thus invited, Gerald Romilly began and told it not
grudgingly or of necessity, sparing no detail, laying bare
Dolly's secret before the eyes of one of his most influential
acquaintances-and a woman noted alike for her outspoken
tongue and nimble penmanship.
"Dolly married to a sergeant's daughter I Dolly, who is
specially severe on low marriagesI What a double-faced
rascal, hiding this charming girl at the very back of the
world; the heartless, unnatural monster I And it appears
that you discovered her, Mr. Romilly. What a clever
young man you are."
" I am exceedingly flattered to hear you say so; but I've
always understood that I was rather a duffer."
"You don't look stupid, and every one has his own
special gift. And so this girl is my cousin I Her grand-
mother and my grandfather-let me see-I forget-at any
rate, I claim the connection. I've not seen any one I
admired so much for years. She would be a credit to any
family. I shall take her home-yes, she shall represent my



<pb n="290"/>
290            A FAMILY LIKENESS.
Indian curiosity. I shall dress her, present her, and marr-i
her off to some good parti. I am an impulsive old Irish.. 
woman, and I never do things by halves. Eh, what do yoa _!
say ? "
"I beg that you will not attempt anything of the kind,'i
Lady Castle Blarney, for she is going to marry me." 
"Oh, ho I So you intend to keep your discovery."
"Finders are keepers," he retorted, with a smile.
"That is true. Does she know that her devoted and.
amiable father is here ? "
"No; nor is he aware that she is in Lucknow.   He
supposes her to be securely concealed in the fastnesse
beyond Durano. Mrs. Casson, her friend, and a cousin of.
mine, has brought her down on purpose. We wish to make,
her known to her father, and have her properly acknow-
ledged by him. She is as proud as Lucifer, and will not 
marry into any family as long as she is not received in her
own."
"Well, my dear young man, I'll receive her with open -
arms."
"Thank you. You are very kind."
"You must introduce me to her without delay; it's quite 
a delicious romance. Dolly Carwithen comes back to-nigh,
and I beg that you will allow me to present his daughter to
him. Now, don't say no. I am an' arrogant, wilful old
woman. Every one is afraid of me, and gives me my own,:
way."
"I never had the smallest intention of saying no. I
really don't think that the introduction could be in better
hands."
" What will Mrs. Carwithen say ? " exclaimed the countesf
"She goes in for being so girlish, and so fond of admiration.
How will she like a very pretty step-daughter suddenly:"
sprung upon her ?" 
" Her step-daughter will not trouble her. I do not think
that Juliet is anxious to be actually received into the bosom 
of the family; a mere formal acknowledgment will content
her-and be more than ample for me."
" And a formal acknowledgment she shall have, as sure 
as my name is Constantia. She is the image of an ancestre s



<pb n="291"/>
A BAD QUARTER OF AN HOUR.              29X
they are both so proud of. You know the picture of Lady
Juliet ?"
" Yes; I know it well."
" Actually that woman-I mean Mrs. Carwithen-carries
a large photograph of it everywhere. She has it out here in
her sitting-room; it is the family fetish, and here is the
double of Lady Juliet, Carwithen's own daughter, cast out
and neglected. If he had ever dreamt she was like the
picture, of course he would have had her home; he is a
slave to appearances. Now his despised daughter stamps
him as a man of birth."
CHAPTER XXXIX.
MR. OARWITHEN HAS A BAD QUARTER OF AN HOUR.
I own the soft impeachment,"
SHERIrN.
LADY CASTLE BLARNEY was charmed with Juliet (who had
a pleasant, bright way with elderly people). She insisted
on taking her out for a drive to the Wingfield Park in the
afternoon, and on her sitting beside her at dinner, and sub-
sequently accompanying her into her private room, to partake
of coffee.
"And so Gerald Romilly tells me that you are going to
marry him?" said Lady Castle Blarney, as she seated
herself.
"Yes," assented the girl, with a heightened colour;
" some day."
" Some day, you saucy puss I Considering that you have
lived in the wilderness, you have not done badly for your-
self. He is a very good-looking young man. I like his
laugh, and his nice white teeth, and in the natural course of
events he will be Lord Egremont, and you will be my lady."
"Oh, that is nothing l I don't think of that," said
Juliet, hastily.
" Oh no, of course not," ironically; "but it makes things
pleasanter when you have a fine fortune and a handle to
your name. My handle has got me many things in the way



<pb n="292"/>
292             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
of comfort and civility that, if I had been plain Mrs. Castle
Blarney, I must have gone without. And tell me, child--
just give me that cushion to my neck; these chairs were
surely made for deformed people-have you never seen your .
father ?"
"No, never," replied the girl, with a deep blush.
" How extraordinary I I never heard of such a case in
all my life."
"But I am going to England on purpose to make his
acquaintance. I have the certificates, and everything to
prove who I am, and I ask nothing, but that he will acknow-
ledge me, so that it may not be said that Gerald married an 
adventuress-a nameless nobody."
"Hoity, toity  How her eyes shine   There's a spirit
for you I Well, my dear, you may spare yourself the trouble
of going to England-though of course you must go home
to get your trousseau. Your father and your step-mother
are in this country."
"In this country ?" she repeated incredulously. "And 
I never knew I Where are they ? I shall go in search of
them immediately."
"You may spare yourself that trouble also. They are
actually staying in this hotel. They have gone to Cawn-
pore for the day. You shall see them to-morrow."       '
"Sophy must have known " exclaimed Juliet. "She 
was so bent on coming here. And to meet them so soon I
I feel dreadfully frightened, and yet it must be got over;
and the sooner the better."                            ;
"And better late than never. As for being nervous, it is 
not for you to be abashed. Now I understand Mr. Car-
withen's reluctance to come out, and his horror of India;
but she has a strong will, and rules the roost. By the way, Y
I don't fancy you will be allowed to do that, eh ? I imagine
your young friend has got a pretty strong will of his own."
"Yes, he has," said Juliet, with a smile. 
"And you have had some tussles already ?"
"No-no!     I always give in gracefully."
"As you do most things, my dear. But to return to your  i
father. In vain he pleaded for the south of France, the
south of Africa. Italy. Malta. Egvnt. He even clung to



<pb n="293"/>
A BAD QUARTER OF AN HOUR.                293
Suez like a drowning man; but she was firm, and would
not listen to his piteous appeals. Now we are here, he
seems happy enough. He has scarcely met any old friends,
except a Mrs. Manders, who lives here-and avoids him. I
wonder why ? I wonder what she knows ? " she concluded,
with a world of speculation in her eye.
"And I shall see them to-morrow     Oh, Lady Castle
Blarney, my heart goes pit-a-pat at the thought I I shall
never sleep all night."
"Oh yes, you will. Young people always sleep. And
you had better run away now, for there's a carriage under
the porch. I hear Mrs. Carwithen's laugh. You can always
tell an ill-bred woman by that. She has a voice like a pea-
hen I Well, good night, dear," holding up her face. " Kiss
me. I wish I was about to discover a pretty young daughter
like you."
In the verandah Juliet encountered a big, burly, elderly
man, in an ulster, a fashionably dressed woman in a smart
silk dust-cloak; finally, a good-looking, greatly bored gentle-
man. He must be her father. She glanced at him with
trepidation, and his eyes met hers with a look of sleepy
approval, and they passed by-strangers yet. Juliet's pre-
diction was fulfilled, in spite of Lady Castle Blarney's
disclaimer; her usually sound slumbers were fitful and
broken, and she rose very early, but she was restless and
nervous, and could not settle to anything. She took extra-
ordinary pains with her toilet; she tried on two dresses;
she took down her hair three times, and yet she was dis-
satisfied with her appearance. When she took her seat at
the breakfast-table between Gerald and Mrs. Casson, Lady
Castle Blarney gave her a friendly pat on the back as she
passed to her own place.
Mr. Carwithen came in late, and sat opposite. Juliet
knew that he was there, but scarcely ventured to raise her
eyes. She was deadly pale, and her two companions could
see how she was trembling. It was useless for Gerald to
whisper to her, and for Sophy to implore her "not to be a
goose ;" for very little, she would burst into tears.
" Hullo, Romilly," said a hearty voice across the table,
"how are you?'     (He was accosted by Mr. Carwithen,



<pb n="294"/>
294             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
with that degree of intimacy 'and warmth of manner to
which his position entitled him,-according to Mr. Car-
withen's scale of merit.)
" How are you ? " he rejoined, coldly.
So young Romily was going to put on side, was he, and  '.
give himself airs ?
"I need not say I am surprised to see you out here, for
this is your country," continued the other, in his most
genial manner.
" Yes, in these days, one never is much surprised at any-
thing," replied the younger man, in a cool tone.
"No, I can answer for myself; by Jove, it would take a
good deal to astonish me. I've seen most things, I fancy."
At this moment Mrs. Carwithen, in a faultless travelling-
gown, with her fringe curled to the last hair, sailed in and
sank into the vacant chair beside her husband. Presently 
she looked across, and cast a beaming smile at Gerald, and a 
sharp, inquisitive glance at the girl beside him.
"How do you do, Mr. Romilly ? " she called out in her
rather shrill voice. " I am so pleased to see a familiar face;
you must be sure and call on me; come to tea. My room   :
is number twenty, and we will have a grand talk over old
times."
Gerald muttered something, and she went on.
" You see "-nodding at Dolly-" I have dragged him     i
out to India, after all. I said I would," she concluded
triumphantly.
"Yes, I knew you would carry your point. I am glad
you have come out.   I hope you are pleased with your
trip."
"I am delighted, perfectly fascinated, and if Dolly is not
very, very good, I tell him that I shall take a house in the
hills, and settle out here for life I "
" Oh, I don't think you would care about that; you are
not an old Indian born and bred, with many friends and 
attractions."
" That is true; and, talking of attractions, have you for-
gotten how crazy you used to be about that picture, how
madly you were in love with Lady Juliet Carwithen, or has
another image effaced her from your heart ? "



<pb n="295"/>
A BAD QUARTER OF AN HOUR.                295
"No," he answered gravely; " nor ever will."
"Bravo I what a model of constancy I" cried the lady,
and then resumed her breakfast.
Juliet admired Gerald's entire self-command. What a
contrast to the irrepressive nervousness against which she
herself was struggling, and which it cost her a great effort
to conceal.
Young Romilly was'not nearly as cheery and talkative as
he used to be, thought Mrs. Carwithen; and the same idea
occurred to her as to her husband.
Was he going to give himself airs ? That was a very
nice-looking girl beside him; if she would only raise her
eyes, and not seem so pitiably shy. The other lady, too,
was good style; why was she smiling and biting her
lips ?
Mr. Carwithen stuck his glass in his eye, and looked at
young Romilly, and at the girl on his right hand. Her
face struck him as curiously familiar.
She was pale, but very handsome; and there was certainly
an understanding of some sort between her and Master
Jerry. (He would tell Master Jerry's mamma.) He was
speaking to her in a low voice; why did she not look up ?
he would like to see her eyes.
After breakfast, he strolled over to Lady Castle Blarney,
to talk to her about Cawnpore; but her ladyship was
short in her answers, and absolutely uninterested in his
adventures.
"By the way," he said, " who is that pretty girl you
spoke to just now ? So you have been making acquaint-
ances, after all. She sat opposite us at breakfast. I seem
to have seen her before. Who is she ? "
"I believe you have seen her before," rejoined the old
lady, laying down her knitting, and transfixing him with
her sharp eyes. "Shall I tell you who she is ? "
Dolly rushed upon his fate with a hearty, "By all means,"
and one of his most killing smiles.
"She is your own daughter I"
The killing smile faded at once, and left on his face a
grey, blank look, his lips closed, his nostrils twitched con-
vulsively. For once in his life he had not a word to say.



<pb n="296"/>
a"6             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
He made a half-articulate exclamation which died away in
his throat.
" I wonder you never told us you had a daughter," said
Lady Castle Blarney, sarcastically. "Was the fact too in- 
significant ? You have a daughter, and you have a-tongue-
speak I"                                                I
"Yes, I-I-have a daughter. I am afraid some things    ,
may appear a little strange; but I can explain." 
"You cannot explain her away, at any rate, and you had
better take an early opportunity of explaining matters to
your wife. You see, a grown-up daughter, like murder, will
out."
" Are you quite sure that she is my daughter ? " inquired
Dolly, who was rapidly recovering his sang-froid.
"Perfectly certain. She has all the legal proofs, and the
family likeness is unmistakable." 
" Yes, yes; I see it now, to the picture. I am afraid I i
have gone down in your good opinion."
"You could not possibly be lower than you are."
"Oh, my dear Lady Castle Blarney," in a tone of virtuous
amazement. " You are a woman of the world; do you make
no allowance for an unfortunate young fellow, just out of
his teens, inveigled into a low match ?"
"Teens I why, you must have been five-and-twenty, and
no doubt the inveigling was the other way. You have
treated the girl barbarously; however, she will have a firm
friend in me, and she is going to marry Gerald Romilly."
Here at least was one spark of comfort-a brilliant
match.
"You had better come to my sitting-room, and be
formally introduced, I think. Imagine being introduced
to your own child 1"
"Certainly, I shall be only too delighted; but really,
Lady Castle Blarney, you are awfully hard on me. You
have not heard the story; let me tell it to you."
"You have told enough stories," she answered indig-
nantly. "I know everything. All you have to do is to
make the best of the situation. Come with me, or go and ^
wait in my room, and I will fetch her."
As Mr. Carwithen stood in the middle of her ladyship's
/',7Il



<pb n="297"/>
A BAD QUARTER OF AN HOUR.                297
somewhat bare sitting-room, his feelings were decidedly
mixed-intense disgust at being found out, intense anxiety
as to the effect of the discovery on Lyddy, were tempered
by a certain amount of satisfaction at being the parent of
such an elegant, aristocratic-looking girl-a girl who would
one day be a peeress. What a sublime elevation for a
sergeant's granddaughter I  Presently the door-chick was
pushed aside, and Lady Castle Blarney entered, followed by
the very pale young lady who had sat opposite him at break-
fast. She raised her eyes and looked at him steadily, but
wistfully, and, with all his assumption of affection and bon-
homie, he felt indescribably small and sneaky; his knees were
shaky, and his backbone limp.
"This is your father, Juliet, my dear. Mr. Carwithen,
this is your daughter," said Lady Castle Blarney, in a clear
voice.
The girl offered a small, cold hand, and he brushed her
trembling lips with his moustache, and then they regarded
one another in silence.
" Now I shall leave you to make one another's acquaint-
ance," said the countess.  "I shall come back presently,
for I have letters to write;" and she departed and left them
alone.
It was one of the most embarrassing moments in Dolly's
existence-an existence in which critical interviews had not
been lacking-this enforced tete---tete with a strange and
rather dignified girl, whom he had systematically ignored,
but who was nevertheless his daughter.
How had she come by her piquant beauty, her stately
head and throat, her air of aristocratic calm ? She sat
silent, evidently waiting for him to break the ice-and what
was he to say ?
Bearing in mind the maxim " qui s'excuse s'accuse," he
plunged into his delight in thus unexpectedly meeting her,
and declared that he had always intended to have sought
her out at Durano. (This was a startling fiction,-they
both knew that.) He said he was charmed to find such a
beautiful daughter, but grieved to hear that he was to lose
her so soon.
To all his questions, Juliet replied in monosyllables. She



<pb n="298"/>
298             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
appeared perfectly composed and collected, but she was in.
wardly in a tumult of agitation, and was doing her very  j
utmost to restrain her feelings and her tears. She was at '
last in the presence of one she had idolized for years, and
she found him a shallow, elderly dandy, who was admiring
her hands and her hair, and complimenting her on the
excellent match she was about to make.
" Ah I you shy puss," he said, " if you had had a couple
of seasons in London, I doubt if you would have done better. 
And so you have lost Mrs. Radford ? " he continued. " I   l
saw her death-yes " with a flash of sublime audacity
suddenly pouncing on a scapegoat.  "She was a fraud l
How she deceived me about you I She led me to believe
you were like your mother's side, a girl of the people. She
threw dust in my eyes. She kept me and my darling child
apart all these years, and for her own ends I"
"What ends ? " inquired the darling child, in a sharp key.
"Why, sixty pounds a year."
"You are quite mistaken, quite," she rejoined, with
passionate decision.
" Ah, my sweet, innocent girl, you don't know the world," 
shaking his head mournfully.
"I have not had much opportunity of learning its ways, 
no doubt, but I knew Mrs. Radford. She was my best
and truest friend. I will never listen to a word against
her."
"Well, well, you shan't; we can each have our own
thoughts, can we not ?" with a playful air.
"I know that I have mine," she answered gravely.
"And I am sure they are all as sweet and kind and
beautiful as yourself. Now, shall we vacate this good lady's
room ? You will sit with us at table in future, and, in fact,
make yourself over to us altogether, eh ? By the way, you
naughty girl, you have given yourself away without my
leave I How was that, eh ?"
"Gerald said you would not mind."
"Oh, he said so, did he ? Well, remember you belong to
us now."
"I don't know. Perhaps you had better consult Mr.
Carwithen, and-I will speak to Mrs. Casson."
" S2I  I



<pb n="299"/>
BY SPECIAL LICENCE.                299
"Very well, my dear," preceding her out, and holding
back the purdah for her to pass, as if she were a duchess;
and there ensued the curious spectacle of Dolly Carwithen
walking all the length of the great verandah, a proudly
complacent man, escorting his beautiful, distinguished-
looking daughter-Dolly, who by rights should have ap-
peared, so to speak, in a white sheet I
CHAPTER XL.
BY SPECIAL LICENCE.
"Thus the whirligig of time brings in his revenges"
IF Dolly Carwithen had had an awkward quart d'heure with
his offspring, who shall depict the ensuing bad moment with
his wife ?
Fired with the rash courage of a coward at bay, he, with-
out the smallest preamble, abruptly plunged into the unex-
pected topic, and gave the whole unabridged history of his
first marriage and his daughter of nineteen, on the principle
that he might just as well be hanged for a sheep as a lamb;
nor did he spare to reveal the antecedents of his former
partner, the offspring of a barrack-sergeant. His grown-up
daughter I the girl who had sat opposite to him at breakfast I
It was incredible.
Mrs. Carwithen had an unusual command of language,
and for ten minutes she taxed her powers to their fullest
extent. " So, all the time, he had played the hypocrite and
liar ? (a nasty word, but true). He that was so fastidious,
so great on birth and alliance, rank and precedence I Oh,
what a fall was here I How could he, how dared he, face
his friends ?"  Apparently his treatment of the girl was
quite a secondary consideration, a mere bagatelle. What
preyed on Lyddy's mind was that vital question, "What
the world would say ? "
But well as she thought she knew him, she had not
plumbed the depths of her lord's resources. She had not
grasped the fact that he always contrived to find convenient



<pb n="300"/>
300             A FAMILY LIKENESS. 
shoulders on which to shift his sins. Now it was Mrs.   
Radford who was to bear the load. She was dumb,-for
she was dead; and he boldly declared, with a fine show of
righteous indignation, that she had purposely misled him;
had told him that the girl was common, vulgar, and stupid, 
and actually wanting in ordinary intelligence; and under
these painful circumstances, the kindest and best course for
all parties, Lyddy herself included, had been to pay the
yearly allowance, and to hold his tongue. How was he to
know that the girl, his darling, was like a princess of the
blood, and one of Nature's gentlewomen?  Lady Castle
Blarney had taken her up with all her might, and Gerald 
Romilly was her future husband. 
On hearing these two items of intelligence-artfully
reserved till the last-Lydia's face relaxed, and she became
calm. Lady Castle Blarney was a social power; Juliet, a
future peeress. Yes; the situation had its compensations,
and might be borne. They must receive her, be seen with
her, and take her about, and, for the present, "Miss    '
Carwithen" must be inserted on the hotel board list, under
the names of Adolphus and Mrs. Carwithen. They would, 
of course, pay all expenses, and make the best of it, and no
one could say but that she-Lyddy-had behaved mag-
nificently, and like a wife in a thousand. Yes; but the
question was, how she would have behaved if the newly
discovered step-daughter had been fat and vulgar-if she
had had a cast in her eye, or dropped her h's-and, above
all, if she had had no prospective coronet in the background ?
And the other side had called in counsel also. Mrs. Casson
decided to efface herself, and Juliet wept on her neck when
her adviser assured her that she must study appearance, and
travel about for a little while withher new-found relations-
carrying Gerald in her train as an alleviation. 
Mr. and Mrs. Carwithen determined to make Lucknow 
their head-quarters, and to take short trips therefrom to,
Agra, Delhi, and Benares. So that Juliet did not lose sight
of Sophy, who remained on at the hotel, having numerous
acquaintances in the neighbourhood.   Mrs. Carwithen
enacted her new part to perfection; was elaborately
amiable to her step-daughter, drove with her, sat beside



<pb n="301"/>
BY SPECIAL LICENCE.               301
her, embraced her-morning and evening-and always
called her "dear."
As to Mr. Carwithen, he dropped into the role of father to
a handsome girl quite easily, and seemed totally to ignore
his former attitude towards the same young lady. Fortune
had been indulgent to him. Who would have thought he
had such a trump in his hand as this picture-card so long
discarded?  He beamed; he boasted; he button-holed
Gerald, and patronized him, and seemed to take immense
credit to himself for giving him his peerless daughter. He
monopolized her society, and shouldered poor Gerald into
the cold. Alas I there were no more pleasant moonlight
pacings in the garden, no whisperings in the verandah, no
strolls together, whilst the band played at Mahomed BAgh.
No; these delights were all appropriated by Mr. Carwithen,
in the character of the proud and devoted parent. He
summoned Juliet to his side, and kept her there, utterly
insensible to her lover's claims. He took her arm, and
liked the other people in the hotel to witness the touching
sight as they strolled up and down in full view of the
community, whilst Romilly surveyed the spectacle with
angry eyes, and nearly chewed the ends off his moustache.
Yes; Romilly detested his future father-in-law, and resolved
to see nothing of him once Juliet was his wife; but just for
the present he must bear and forbear.
Dolly calmly ignored young Romilly's thinly veiled dislike,
his terrible politeness, and endeavoured to carry off matters
with a high hand-offering him cigarettes, and patting him
on the back and calling him "his dear boy "-but in more
than one small passage-at-arms he had been severely worsted;
and, after that notable little encounter across the table at
Benares, Mr. Carwithen shrank into himself, and left his
young friend alone. Dolly was bragging to the company of
his own wide experience, and drawing unfavourable com-
parisons between the young men of the present day and his
particular achievements in years gone by.
" I was not a lazy chap-like some I" and he glanced at
Romilly. "' I was up to every mortal dodge, and was always
well posted up in everything."
"I don't mind not being posted up, as you call it,"



<pb n="302"/>
302a              FAMILY LIKENESS.
rejoined Gerald, with complete equanimity, "so long as I'm
not posted, after a race "  And he looked straight at 
Mr. Oarwithen.
Mr. Carwithen evidently read something in his future  t
son-in-law's eyes. He became livid.  "Yes," he said to 
himself, "the Romillys were an old Indian family, and, ten
to one, young Romilly knew I" In fact, it was evident that
he was acquainted with the particulars of a certain unpleasant
episode in his own past.
He grinned a ghastly smile, and buried his face in a peg
tumbler; and for the remainder of the meal it was noticed
that old Carwithen was extraordinarily " choop I " This was
ever his demeanour in Gerald Romilly's presence from that 
day forth.                                             ;
Before the Carwithens and party left Lucknow, Juliet
received two visits. The first was a state call from Mrs.
Manders, in a splendid barouche drawn by a pair of valuable
walers.
Gerald was present during the early part of the visit, and 
he and his friend compared notes and news from home; but
presently he was called out, and Mrs. Manders turned to
Juliet and said- 
"Ah, my dear, I knew all about you-I knew of your
father's first marriage, and I heard that you were out here. 
My dear old friend Susan Romilly was most inquisitive about
your father's past. She pressed me very much, but I would
not tell her; and now his secret-and a very pretty secret-
is going to be her own daughter-in-law I Is it not odd ? "
Juliet coloured, and admitted that it was strange. 
" Gerald is a dear boy," continued her visitor, "and just
like my own son. Mind you make him a good wife."
Then, as she rose and said good-bye, she drew Juliet towards
her and whispered, " I must write to-morrow to Susan, and 
tell her I have seen you, and you must allow me to give you
a kiss for her; she and I are like sisters."
" It is evident that Mrs. Manders approves of you, Ju,"
said Gerald, as he re-entered the hotel drawing-room, after 
putting that lady into her carriage.
"I'll give something to see her letter to my motherI 
though. no doubt. the mater will show it to me when she  '    |



<pb n="303"/>
BY SPECIAL LICENCE.                303
goes home; but I don't think it would be good for you to
read."
Juliet's next visitor was not quite such a success as the
collector's lady, with her imposing turn-out and smart gown.
Mr. and Mrs. Carwithen, Lady Castle Blarney, the marquis,
and Sir Augustus, were all sitting at the shady end of the
verandah, lazily awaiting their afternoon tea, when " Some
one to see Miss Carwithen " was announced. Some one who
had no card. Visions of another imposing acquaintance
filled Mr. Carwithen's mental eye; but-but-who was this
square, squat person toddling towards them.
It was Captain Noote, who had arrived on foot (vide his
dusty boots), and who still clung fondly to his fur cap and
red shirt, and carried a cotton umbrella, and a gift of
walnuts, tied up in a towel.
As the ancient warrior waddled up the verandah, bundle
in hand, his eyes caught sight of Gerald Romilly, and he
pounced on him, greeting him as a long-lost friend, and
ignoring the cold glances and levelled eye-glasses with which
he was surrounded.
" Ay, last time I saw you, you and me was burying her.
I'll never forget all you did for me that time-never I
Where's Miss Judy ? " he inquired, after a pause, still shaking
Gerald's arm like a pump-handle.
" She will be here directly; we will send for her at once.
This is Mr. Carwithen, her father," presenting himself to
the horror-stricken Dolly.
"Proud and delighted, sir, to make your acquaintance,"
tendering a hairy paw. "I am the gentleman as your
daughter lived with in the hills. Noote-Captain Noote-
at your service; you and I ought to know one another pretty
well."
And all his friends were looking and listening. What a
story for the clubs I A damp dew of perspiration broke out
on Mr. Carwithen's brow, but there was no escape for him.
Gerald Romilly took excellent care of that-yes, the young
brute-and stood beside this horrible, hideous intruder, all
polite attention and animation.
"I kept her very retired, sir, according to your orders;
so did my Eliza; but, all the same, this 'ere gentleman found



<pb n="304"/>
304             A FAMILY LIKENESS. 
her out," and indicating Romilly with his thumb, he grinned 
and chuckled facetiously. 
"Yes, Captain Noote," admitted the young man; "I
rather pride myself on my discovery."
"Mrs. Noote didn't like it a bit, your discovery, as you
call it. She'd laid out her son William John for Miss Judy.
She was awful mad," he continued, in an explanatory tone,
now addressing himself principally to Lady Castle Blarney,
"when this young lady would not look at him, ay, and gave 
him his walking papers, and nigh sent him flying over a
khud. He is a fine, whacking young chap, and assistant
station-master at Kutchapore, drawing his hundred and
twenty a month; but no doubt Miss Judy has done
better I"
This imbecile remark seemed to call for no verbal reply,
and was answered by an icy affirmative silence. Lady,Castle
Blarney's face was a most amusing study, as she slowly
raised her long-handled glasses, and surveyed the speaker
with an air of pensive curiosity.-
The captain was in one of his garrulous moods, and
thoroughly enjoyed the attention he was receiving from an
unusually distinguished audience.
"That time we had the cholera," he proceeded, " and all
the servants ran, and the bearer was took, and Mrs. Noote,
both in the same hour, Miss Judy was just an angel-and
talk of an angel, here she comesI Hullo, my dear, I've
dropped in to say good-bye to you," seizing and wringing
her hand; "for you was very good to me, and her that's
gone-that you was; and I've come to wish you every luck
and happiness." 
"Perhaps, Juliet, you would like to take your friend into
my private sitting-room? " said Mrs. Carwithen, with a
determined smile upon her thin lips-Mrs. Carwithen, who 
was nearly as much upset as her husband.
"No, no " rejoined the visitor, hurriedly; "I've no
time for that. No; but I would not say anything against
a split whisky peg, with one of you gents," looking round
appealingly at Mr. Carwithen, the marquis, and Sir Augustus 
in turn. "I only came here to say a word with the young
lady," continued Captain Noote, who talked at the top of



<pb n="305"/>
BY SPECIAL LICENCE.                30S
his voice, and was standing close to the marchioness, and
smelt powerfully of raw spirits.
"I found her savings," he went on confidentially. " Lord I
how she got all that coin together beats me; but she was a
tight housekeeper, as you and I know," with a sly wink at
Juliet. "I mean to cut the farm, and go and live in some
big garrison, where I can hear the bugles, and be near the
canteen, and see the red-coats, and, maybe, some old pals."
"You will like that, I am sure," said his former inmate.
"Well, yes, the hills is lonely. Who'd a-thought of my
burying Eliza ?"  (Not Eliza, certainly 1) "She was a fine
figure of a woman, in her Sunday clothes. You remember
the green bonnet she had ? And what a manager I But
you were good in your way, too-a first-class hand at
turning my coats, and keeping the butter accounts."
"Oh, it was something to do, and I liked it," rejoined
Juliet, who actually began to pity her father.
Would the old man, with his awkward reminiscences,
never depart ? No, not yet,-not till he had had a special
word with Dolly.
," Mr. Carwithen, sir I" he said, " I've an explanation to
make. If you hear people talking, as you will, no doubt,
and saying that Miss here is a relation of mine" (pointing
a horny thumb at Juliet), "it wasn't me as started it, as
I told the captain there.  There ain't a word of truth
in it."
"You teed not tell me that I " exploded Dolly, almost
suffocated with rage.
" No, I know; but Mrs. Noote, you see-now she's gone,
I'm free to speak-thought it sounded better to give out as
Juliet was her niece, as she seemed to have no respectable
belongings, and she let on to Skippers the agents as Smith-
son and I was step-brothers. It made them keener about
sending the young lady to us, you see I Smithson and me
was brother sergeants, that was all; and Smithson was a
gentleman ranker. I mind his joining.  There was not
much of the gentleman about him when you saw him, Mr.
Carwithen," with a chuckle; "but drink is a terrible thing I
You quite understand, don't you, as I never gave out as you



<pb n="306"/>
306             A FAMILY LIKENESS.
Dolly could not trust himself to speak; but Gerald came 
forward and said, in his most genial manner-
" Yes, we thoroughly understand. You explained it to
me, you know, long ago, up at Kala Dara. You can make
your mind easy."
"Very well, then.  And now I must be going; and
wishing you and Miss Judy here every luck, and wishing
all this grand company good-bye."  He wrung Gerald's and
Juliet's and the marchioness's hands, and, with various
shakings and chucklings, so took leave.
s        *        s         s        s
Juliet and iher fiance, the Cassons, and Lord and Lady
Castle Blarney, went home early in March in the same
steamer; Lady Castle Blarney having shaken off the bride
elect's parents in some mysterious but efficient manner, the
details of which she kept entirely to herself. In these days
-indeed, in all his days-Dolly bore a great deal, with
meekness and long-suffering, from Constantia, Marchioness
of Castle Blarney.
The voyage home was smooth in every sense; there was
not even a breeze between the ladies, much less between
Miss Carwithen and her intended. And a sea-voyage, with
its long, idle days, often proves, in more ways than one, a
trial trip."
Lady Egremont was enchanted with her daughter-in-law,
and admired her immensely, even although she proved to be
the facsimile of the picture that had originally bewitched
Gerald.
The wedding took place, with great Aclat, early in July.
There was hardly standing-room in St. Paul's, Knightsbridge,
-notwithstanding that admission was by ticket; and the
list of presents filled two columns in the Morning Post, for 
Juliet's pretty face and brilliant prospects-not to speak of  .;
Lady Castle Blarney's and Lady Egremont's trumpet-
tongued praises-ensured her many friends.
Mr. Carwithen presented his daughter with a tiara of
diamonds, and gave her away as if he had ever been the best
and proudest of fathers. His emotion during the ceremony
was really touching, and his studied pose of dignified abne-
gation quite a sublime spectacle in its way I



<pb n="307"/>
BY SPECIAL LICENCE.                307
Mr. Hodder, who had asked for a ticket, was among the
crowd, and heaved an enormous sigh as he saw the bride and
bridegroom pass down the aisle. Well, every one said they
were a handsome couple, and that such a beautiful bride had
not been seen for three seasons ; he hoped she would never
repent her choice I As far as his experience went, the
Honourable Gerald Romilly had a sharp tongue and a hot
temper.
Mr. Hodder had contributed to the wedding gifts a
hideous but expensive clock, and received a pretty little note
of thanks in reply, which he displayed to all his acquaint-
ances with much pride, invariably adding, when they had
perused it, " She'll be Lady Egremont some day, you know."
And to his intimates, in expansive moments, on his own
hearthrug, with his coat-tails under his arms, he mysteriously
alluded to a "certain young lady who did all she could to
catch him when he was in India, but was now married to a
sprig of nobility in his stead I "
His friends the Honourable Gerald and Mrs. Romilly, are
well known to his circle by description; their names are
household words. The happy pair would no doubt be
astonished to hear how veryfond they had been of him out
in India, and how he had taught the young lady to play
tennis, and the young man to shoot big game (he had read
up the names and species of animals in a book of travels-
his own book is as yet unknown to fame.
The Romillys spent their honeymoon in Switzerland,
where, in Mont Blanc and Monte Rosa, Juliet endeavoured
to recall her old friends and confidants, Trisul and Nanda-
devi. Mr. Carwithen has now no reluctance to be seen in
company with Lord Egremont, no fault to find with his
boots and appearance. He is as anxious to pursue and
accost him as he was formerly eager to escape from his
society; he buttonholes him, and talks effusively of "our
young people," and secretly hugs himself with satisfaction
when he speculates upon the future, and thinks that in
the course of time-in his own lifetime, he trusts-his once
ignored and neglected daughter will be what he grandilo-
quently calls a peeress of the realm.
a        a         a        a        a



<pb n="308"/>
308             A FAMILY LIKENESS. 
" She certainly is very like me, or, rather, I am very like
her," said Juliet, complacently, as she and her husband
stood before the portrait of her double and namesake.
" However, picture or no picture, you would have discovered
me, all the same; it did not make much difference."
"All the difference in the world," he rejoined. "She
was my first love; it was your extraordinary resemblance to
her that attracted me. Only for Lady Juliet, I should never
have known who you were.     She introduced us to one
another, Mrs. Romilly; and, as far as I am concerned, I
must confess that I wish for no better introduction than a
speaking family likeness."
THE   D. ra
PINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, LONDON AND BECCLBS.



