soo	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
" Poor Geoffrey !" she said presently, with a quick upward glance at me,—" I am sorry for you ! With all my vagaries of disposition I am not a fool, and at anyrate I have learned how to analyze myself as well as others. I read you as easily as I read a book,—I see what a strange tumult your mind is in! You love me—and you loathe me !—and the contrast of emotion makes a wreck of you and' your ideals. Hush,—don't speak ; I know,—I know ! But what would you have me be ? An angel ? I cannot realize such a being for more than a fleeting moment of imagination. A saint? They were all martyred. A good woman ? I never met one. Innocent ?—ignorant ? I told you before we married that I was neither; there is nothing left for me to discover as far as the relations between men and women are concerned,—I have taken the measure of the inherent love of vice in both sexes. There is not a pin to choose between them—men are no worse than women,—women no worse than men. I have discovered everything—except God !—and I conclude no God could ever have designed such a crazy and mean business as human life."
While she thus spoke, I could have fallen at her feet and implored her to be silent. For she was, unknowingly, giving utterance to some of the many thoughts in which I myself had frequently indulged,—and yet, from her lips they sounded cruel, unnatural, and callous to a degree that made me shrink from her in fear and agony. We had reached a little grove of pines,—and here in the silence and shadow, I took her in my arms and stared disconsolately upon the beauty of her face.
"Sibyl!" I whispered,—" Sibyl, what is wrong with us both ? How is it that we do not seem to find the loveliest side of love ?—why is it that even in our kisses and em-braces, some impalpable darkness comes between us, so that we anger or weary each other when we should be glad and satisfied? What is it? Can you tell? For you know the darkness is there !"
A curious look came into her eyes,—a far-away strained
I
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	301
look of hungry yearning, mingled, as I thought, with compassion for me.
Yes, it is there!" she answered slowly. " And it is of our own mutual creation. I believe you have something nobler in your nature, Geoffrey, than I have in mine,—an nc finable something that recoils from me and my theories despite your wish and will. Perhaps if you had given way to that feeling in time, you would never have married me. You speak of the loveliest side of love,—to me there is no lovely side,—it is all coarse and horrible. You and I for instance,—cultured man and woman,—we cannot, in marriage, get a flight beyond the common emotions of Hodge and his girl !" She laughed violently, and shuddered in my arms. " What liars the poets are, Geoffrey ! They ought to be sentenced to life-long imprisonment for their perjuries ! They help to mould the credulous beliefs of a woman's heart ;—in her early youth she reads their delicious assurances, and imagines that love will be all they teach,—a thing divine and lasting beyond earthly countings !—then comes the coarse finger of prose on the butterfly-wing of poesy, and the bitterness and hideousness of complete disillusiDn !"
I held her still in my arms with the fierce grasp of a man clinging to a spar ere he drowns in mid-ocean.
But I love you, Sibyl !—my wife, I love you !" I said, with a passion that choked my utterance.
You love me,—yes, .: know, but how ? In a way that is abhorrent to yourself !" she replied. " It is not poetic love, —it is man's love, and man's love is brute love. So it is,—so it will be,—so it must be. Moreover, the brute-love soon tires,—and when it dies out from satiety there is nothing left. Nothing, Geoffrey, absolutely nothing but a blank and civil form of intercourse, which I do not doubt we shall be able to keep up for the admiration and comment of society."
She disengaged herself from my embrace, and moved to-wards the house.
" Come !" she added, turning her exquisite head back over
302	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
her shoulder with a feline caressing grace that she alone possessed. " You know there is a famous lady in London who advertises her salable charms to the outside public by means of her monogram worked into the lace of all her window-blinds, thinking it no doubt good for trade ! I am not quite so bad as that ! You have paid dearly for me I know ; but remember I as yet wear no jewels but yours, and crave no gifts beyond those you are generous enough to bestow,—and my dutiful desire is to give you as much full value as I can for your money."
" Sibyl, you kill me !" I cried, tortured beyond endurance. Do you think me so base	"
I broke off with almost a sob of despair.
You cannot help being base," she said, steadily regarding me,—" because you are a man. I am base because I am a woman. If we believed in a God, either of us, we might discover some different way of life and love,—who knows ? But neither you nor I have any remnant of faith in a Being whose existence all the scientists of the day are ever at work to disprove. We are persistently taught that we are animals and nothing more,—let us therefore not be ashamed of animalism. Animalism and atheism are approved by the scientists and applauded by the press,—and the clergy are powerless to enforce the faith they preach. Come, Geoffrey, don't stay mooning like a stricken Parsifal under those pines,—throw away that thing which troubles you, your conscience,—throw it away as you have thrown the book I was lately reading, and consider this,—that most men of your type take pride and rejoice in being the prey of a bad woman, so you should really congratulate yourself on having one for a wife,—one who is so broad-minded, too, that she will always let you have your own way in everything you do, provided you let her have hers. It is the way all marriages are arranged now-adays,—at any rate in our set,—otherwise the tie would be impossible of endurance. Come !"
" We cannot live together on such an understanding, Sibyl !"
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	303
I said hoarsely, as I walked slowly by her side towards the villa.
Oh, yes, we can !" she averred, a little malign smile playing round her lips. " We can do as others do,—there is no necessity for us to stand out from the rest like quixotic fools, and pose as models to other married people,—we should only be detested for our pains. It is surely better to be popular than virtuous,—virtue never pays. See, there is our interesting German waiter coming to inform us that dinner is ready; please don't look so utterly miserable, for we have not quarrelled, and it would be foolish to let the servants think we have."
I made no answer. We entered the house, and dined,—Sibyl keeping up a perfect fire of conversation, to which I replied in mere monosyllables,—and after dinner we went as usual to sit in the illuminated gardens of the adjacent hotel and hear the band. Sibyl was known and universally admired and flattered by many of the people staying there,—and, as she moved about among her acquaintances, chatting first with one group and then with another, I sat in moody silence watching her with increasing wonderment and horror. Her beauty seemed to me like the beauty of the poison-flower, which, brilliant in colour and perfect in shape, exhales death to those who pluck it from its stem. And that night, when I held her in my arms, and felt her heart beating against my own in the darkness, an awful dread arose in me,—a dread as to whether I might not at some time or other be tempted to strangle her as she lay on my breast,—strangle her as one would strangle a vampire that sucked one's blood and strength 'away !
XXVII
WE concluded our wedding-tour rather sooner than we had at first intended, and returned to England and Willowsmere Court about the middle of August. I had a vague notion
304	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
stirring in me that gave me a sort of dim indefinable consolation, and it was this,—I meant to bring my wife and Mavis Clare together, believing that the gentle influence of the gracious .and happy creature, who, like a contented bird in its nest, dwelt serene in the little domain so near my own, might have a softening and wholesome effect upon Sibyl's pitiless love of analysis and scorn of all noble ideals. The heat in Warwickshire was at this time intense,—the roses were out in their full beauty, and the thick foliage of the branching oaks and elms in my grounds afforded grateful shade and repose to the tired body, while the tranquil loveliness of the woodland and meadow scenery, comforted and soothed the equally tired mind. After all there is no country in the world so fair as England,—none so richly endowed with verdant forest and fragrant flowers,—none that can boast of sweeter nooks for seclusion and romance. In Italy, that land so over-praised by hysterical poseurs who foolishly deem it admirable to glorify any country save their own, the fields are arid and brown and parched by the too fervent sun,—there are no shady lanes such as England can boast of in all her shires,—and the mania among Italians for ruthlessly cutting down their finest trees has not only actually injured the climate, but has so spoilt the landscape that it is difficult to believe at all in its once renowned and still erroneously reported charm. Such a bower of beauty as ` Lily Cottage' was in that sultry August could never have been discovered in all the length and breadth of Italy. Mavis superintended the care of her gardens herself,—she had two gardeners, who under her directions kept the grass and trees continually watered,—and nothing could be imagined more lovely than the picturesque old-fashioned house, covered with roses and tufts of jessamine that seemed to tie up the roof in festal knots and garlands, while around the building spread the reaches of deep emerald lawn and bosky arbours of foliage where all the most musical song-birds apparently found refuge and delight, and where at evening a perfect colony of nightin-
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	305
gales kept up a bubbling fountain of delicious melody. I remember well the afternoon, warm, languid and still, when I took Sibyl to see the woman-author she had so long admired. The heat was so great that in our own grounds all the birds were silent, but when we approached ` Lily Cottage' the first thing we heard was the piping of a thrush up somewhere among the roses,—a mellow liquid warble expressing 'sweet con-tent,' and mingling with the subdued coo-cooings of the dove
reviewers' who were commenting on whatever pleased or displeased them in the distance.
" What a pretty place it is !" said my wife, as she peeped over the gate and through the odorous tangles of honeysuckle and jessamine. I really think it is prettier than Willows-mere. It has been wonderfully improved."
We were shown in, and Mavis, who had expected our visit, did not keep us waiting long. As she entered, clad in some gossamer white stuff that clung softly about her pretty figure and was belted in by a simple ribbon, an odd sickening pang went through my heart. The fair untroubled face, the joyous yet dreamy student eyes, the sensitive mouth,—and above all, the radiant look of happiness that made the whole expression of her features so bright and fascinating, taught me in one flash of conviction all that a woman might be, and all that she too frequently was not. And I had hated Mavis Clare !—I had even taken up my pen to deal her a wanton blow through the medium of anonymous criticism, . . . but this was before I knew her,—before I realized that there could be any difference between her and the female scarecrows who so frequently pose as ` novelists' without being able to write correct English, and who talk in public of their ' copy' with the glibness gained from Grub Street and the journalists' cheap restaurant. Yes—I had hated her,—and now—now, almost I loved her ! Sibyl, tall, queenly and beautiful, gazed upon her with eyes that expressed astonishment as well as admiration.
" To think that you are the famous Mavis Clare !" she said,
306	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
smiling as she held out her hand. " I always heard and knew that you did not look at all literary, but I never quite realized that you could be exactly what I see you are !"
" To look literary does not always imply that you are literary!" returned Mavis, laughing a little. " Too often I am afraid you will find that the women who take pains to look literary are ignorant of literature ! But how glad I am to see you, Lady Sibyl ! Do you know I used to watch you playing about on the lawns at Willowsmere when I was quite a little girl ?"
And I used to watch you," responded Sibyl. " You used to make daisy-chains and cowslip-balls in the fields opposite on the other side of the Avon. It is a great pleasure to me to know we are neighbours. You must come and see me often at Willowsmere."
Mavis did not answer immediately,—she busied herself in pouring out tea and dispensing it to both of us. Sibyl, who was always on the alert for glimpses of character, noticed that she did not answer, and repeated her words coaxingly.
You will come, will you not? As often as you like; the oftener the better. We must be friends, you know !"
Mavis looked up then, a frank sweet smile in her eyes.
" Do you really mean it ?" she asked.
" Mean it !" echoed Sibyl. " Why, of course I do !" " How can you doubt it !" I exclaimed.
" Well, you must both forgive me for asking such a question," said Mavis, still smiling. But you see you are now among what are called the ` county magnates,' and county magnates consider themselves infinitely above all authors." She laughed outright, and her blue eyes twinkled with fun. " I think many of them estimate writers of books as some sort of strange out-growth of humanity that is barely decent. It is deliciously funny and always amuses me ; nevertheless, among my many faults, the biggest one is, I fancy, pride, and a dreadfully obstinate spirit of independence. Now, to tell you the truth, I have been asked by many so-called ' great' people to their
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	307
houses, and when I have gone, I have generally been sorry for it afterwards."
Why?" I asked. "They honour themselves by inviting you."
" Oh, I don't think they take it in that way at all !" she replied, shaking her fair head demurely. " They fancy they have performed a great act of condescension,—whereas it is really I who condescend, for it is very good of me, you know, to leave the society of the Pallas Athene in my study for that of a flounced and frizzled lady of fashion." Her bright smile again irradiated her face and she went on—" Once I was asked to luncheon with a certain baron and baroness who invited a few guests ' to meet me,' so they said. I was not introduced to more than one or two of these people, —the rest sat and stared at me as if I were a new kind of fish or fowl. Then the baron showed me his house, and told me the prices of his pictures and his china,—he was even good enough to explain which was Dresden and which was Delft ware, though I believe, benighted author as I am, I could have instructed him equally on these and other matters. However, I managed to smile amicably through the whole programme, and professed myself charmed and delighted in the usual way ;—but they never asked me to visit them again, —and (unless indeed they wanted me to be impressed with their furniture-catalogue), I can never make out what I did to be asked at all, and what I have done never to be asked any more !"
They must have been parvenus," said Sibyl indignantly. No well-bred people would have priced their goods to you, unless they happened to be Jews."
Mavis laughed—a merry little laugh like a peal of bells,—then she continued
Well, I will not say who they were,—I must keep some-thing for my ' literary reminiscences' when I get old ! Then all these people will be named, and go down to posterity as Dante's enemies went down to Dante's hell ! I have only
308	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
told you the incident just to show you why I asked you if you meant it, when you invited me to visit you at Willows-mere. Because the baron and baroness I have spoken of ' gushed' over me and my poor books to such an extent that you would have fancied I was to be for evermore one of their dearest friends,—and they didn't mean it. Other people I know embrace me effusively and invite me to their houses, and they don't mean it. And when I find out these shams, I like to make it very clear on my own side that I do not seek to be embraced or invited, and that if certain great folks deem it a ' favour' to ask me to their houses, I do not so consider it, but rather think the ' favour' is entirely on my part if I accept the invitation. And I do not say this for my own self at all,—self has nothing to do with it,—but I do say it and strongly assert it for the sake of the dignity of Literature as an art and profession. If a few other authors would maintain this position, we might raise the standard of letters by degrees to what it was in the old days of Scott and Byron. I hope you do not think me too proud ?"
" On the contrary, I think you are quite right," said Sibyl earnestly. " And I admire you for your courage and independence. Some of the aristocracy are, I know, such utter snobs that often I feel ashamed to belong to them. But as far as we are concerned, I can only assure you that if you will honour us by becoming our friend as well as neighbour, you shall not regret it. Do try and like me if you can !"
She bent forward with a witching smile on her fair face. Mavis looked at her seriously and admiringly.
" How beautiful you are !" she said frankly. " Everybody tells you this of course,—still, I cannot help joining in the general chorus. To me, a lovely face is like a lovely flower, —I must admire it. Beauty is quite a divine thing, and though I am often told that the plain people are always the good people, I never can quite believe it. Nature is surely bound to give a beautiful face to a beautiful spirit."
Sibyl, who had smiled with pleasure at the first words of the
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	309
open compliment paid her by one of the most gifted of her own sex, now flushed deeply.
" Not always, Miss Clare," she said, veiling her brilliant eyes beneath the droop of her long lashes. One can imagine a fair fiend as easily as a fair angel."
True!" and Mavis looked at her musingly ; then suddenly laughing in her blithe bright way, she added, " Quite true ! Really I cannot picture an ugly fiend,—for the fiends are supposed to be immortal, and I am convinced that immortal ugliness has no part in the universe. Downright hideousness belongs to humanity alone,—and an ugly face is such a blot on creation that we can only console ourselves by the reflection that it is fortunately perishable, and that in course of time the soul behind it will be released from its ill-formed husk, and will be allowed to wear a fairer aspect. Yes, Lady Sibyl, I will come to Willowsmere ; I cannot re-fuse to look upon such loveliness as yours as often as I may !"
"You are a charming flatterer !" said Sibyl, rising and putting an arm round her in that affectionate coaxing way of hers which seemed so sincere and which so frequently meant nothing. But I confess I prefer to be flattered by a woman rather than by a man. Men say the same things to all women,—they have a very limited repertoire of compli. ments,—and they will tell a fright she is beautiful if it hap pens to serve their immediate purpose. But women them selves can so hardly be persuaded to admit that any good qualities exist either inward or outward in one another, that when they do say a kind or generous thing of their own sex it is a wonder worth remembering. May I see your study ?"
Mavis willingly assented, and we all three went into the peaceful sanctum where the marble Pallas presided, and where the dogs Tricksy and Emperor were both ensconced,—Emperor sitting up on his haunches and surveying the prospect from the window, and Tricksy with a most absurd air of importance, imitating the larger animal's attitude precisely, at a little distance off. Both creatures were friendly to my
310	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
wife and to me, and while Sibyl was stroking the St Bernard's massive head, Mavis said suddenly
Where is the friend who came with you here first, Prince Rimanez ?"
" He is in St Petersburg just now," I answered. " But he will be here in two or three weeks to stay with us on a visit for some time."
" He is surely a very singular man," said Mavis thought-fully. " Do you remember how strangely my dogs behaved to him ? Emperor was quite restless and troublesome for two or three hours after he had gone."
And in a few words, she told Sibyl the incident of the St Bernard's attack upon Lucio.
"Some people have a natural antipathy to dogs," said Sibyl, as she heard. " And the dogs always find it out and resent it. But I should not have thought Prince Rimanez had an antipathy to any creatures except—women !"
And she laughed, a trifle bitterly.
" Except women !" echoed Mavis surprisedly. " Does he hate women ? He must be a very good actor then, for to me he was wonderfully kind and gentle."
Sibyl looked at her intently, and was silent for a minute. Then she said
Perhaps it is because he knows you are unlike the ordinary run of women and have nothing in common with their usual trumpery aims. Of course he is always courteous to our sex,--but I think it is easy to see that his courtesy is often worn as a mere mask to cover a very different feeling."
" You have perceived that, then, Sibyl ?" I said with a slight smile.
" I should be blind if I had not perceived it," she replied. " I do not, however, blame him for his pet aversion,—I think it makes him all the more attractive and interesting."
" He is a great friend of yours?" inquired Mavis, looking at me as she put the question.
The very greatest friend 1 have," I replied quickly. " I
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	3"I
owe him more than I can ever repay,—indeed I have to thank him even for introducing me to my wife."
I said the words unthinkingly and playfully, but as I uttered them, a sudden shock affected my nerves,—a shock of painful memory. Yes, it was true !—I owed to him, to Lucio, the misery, fear, degradation and shame of having such a woman as Sibyl was, united to me till death should us part, I felt myself turning sick and giddy, and I sat down in one of the quaint oak chairs that helped to furnish Mavis Clare's study, allowing the two women to pass out of the open French window into the sunlit garden together, the dogs following at their heels. I watched them as they went,—my wife, tall and stately, attired in the newest and most fashionable mode; Mavis, small and slight, with her soft white gown and floating waist-ribbon,—the one sensual, the other spiritual,—the one base and vicious in desire, the other pure-souled and aspiring to noblest ends,—the one a physically magnificent .animal, the other merely sweet-faced and ideally fair like a sylph of the woodlands,—and looking, I clenched my hands as I thought with bitterness of spirit what a mistaken choice I had made. In the profound egotism which had always been part of my nature I now actually allowed myself to believe that I might, had I chosen, have wedded Mavis Clare,—never for one moment imagining that all my wealth would have been useless to me in such a quest, and that I might as well have proposed to pluck a star from the sky as to win a woman who was able to read my nature thoroughly, and who would never have come down to my money-level from her intellectual throne,—no, not though I had been a monarch of many nations. I stared at the large tranquil features of the Pallas Athene, and the blank eyeballs of the marble goddess appeared to regard me in turn with impassive scorn. I glanced round the room, and at the walls adorned with the wise sayings of poets and philosophers, —sayings that re-minded me of truths which I knew, yet never accepted as practicable ; and presently my eyes were attracted to a corner
312	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
near the writing-desk, which I had not noticed before, where there was a small dim lamp burning. Above this lamp an ivory crucifix gleamed white against draperies of dark purple velvet,—below it, on a silver bracket, was an hour-glass through which the sand was running in glistening grains, and round the entire little shrine was written in letters of gold, Now is the acceptable time !"—the word ' Now' being in larger characters than the rest. ' Now' was evidently Mavis's motto,—to lose no time, but to work, to pray, to love, to hope, to thank God and be glad for life, all in the ` Now'—and neither to regret the past"nor forebode the future, but simply do the best that could be done, and leave all else in child-like confidence to the Divine Will. I got up restlessly,—the sight of the crucifix curiously annoyed me ;—and I followed the path my wife and Mavis had taken through the garden. I found them looking in at the cage of the ' Athenaeum' owls,—the owl-in-chief being as usual puffed out with his own importance and swelling visibly with indignation and excess of feather. Sibyl turned as she saw me,—her face was bright and smiling.
Miss Clare has very strong opinions of her own, Geoffrey," she said. " She is not as much captivated by Prince Rimanez as most people are,—in fact, she has just confided to me that she does not quite like him."
Mavis blushed, but her eyes met mine with fearless candour.
It is wrong to say what one thinks, I know," she murmured in somewhat troubled accents. And it is a dreadful fault of mine. Please forgive me, Mr Tempest ! You tell me the prince is your greatest friend,—and I assure you I was immensely impressed by his appearance when I first saw him, . . . but afterwards, . . . after I had studied him a little, the conviction was borne in upon me that he was not altogether what he seemed."
" That is exactly what he says of himself," I answered, laughing a little. He has a mystery I believe,—and he has promised to clear it up for me some day. But I'm sorry you don't like him, Miss Clare,—for he likes you."
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	313
" Perhaps when I meet him again my ideas may be different," said Mavis gently. At present, . . . well—do not let us talk of it any more,—indeed I feel I have been very rude to express any opinion at all concerning one for whom you and Lady Sibyl have so great a regard. But somehow I seemed impelled, almost against my will, to say what I did just now.
Her soft eyes looked pained and puzzled, and to relieve her, and change the subject, I asked if she was writing anything new.
Oh, yes," she replied. " It would never do for me to be idle. The public are very kind to me,-and no sooner have they read one thing of mine than they clamour for another, so I am kept very busy."
And what of the critics ?" I asked, with a good deal of curiosity.
She laughed.
I never pay the least attention to them," she answered, " except when they are hasty and misguided enough to write lies about me,—then I very naturally take the liberty to contradict those lies, either through my own statement or that of my lawyers. Apart from refusing to allow the public to be led into a false notion of my work and aims, I have no grudge whatever against the critics. They are generally very poor, hard-working men, and have a frightful struggle to live. I have often, privately, done some of them a good turn without their knowledge. A publisher of mine sent me an MS. the other day by one of my deadliest enemies on the press, and stated that my opinion would decide its rejection or acceptance. I read it through, and though it was not very brilliant work it was good enough, so I praised it as warmly as I could, and urged its publication, with the stipulation that the author should never be told I had had the casting vote. It has just come out, I see,—and I'm sure I hope it will succeed." Here she paused to gather a few deep damask roses, which she handed to Sibyl. " Yes, critics are very badly, even cruelly
314	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
paid," she went on musingly. It is not to be expected that they should write eulogies of the successful author, while they continue unsuccessful,—such work could not be anything but gall and wormwood to them. I know the poor little wife of one of them,—and settled her dressmaker's bill for her because she was afraid to show it to her hu .band. The very week afterwards he slashed away at my last book in the most approved style in the paper on which he is employed and got, I suppose, about a guinea for his trouble. Of course he didn't know about his little wife and her dunning dressmaker ; and he never will know, because I have bound her over to secrecy."
But why do you do such things ?" asked Sibyl astonished.
I would have let his wife get into the County Court for her bill, if I had been you !"
Would you ?" and Mavis smiled gravely. Well, I could not. You know Who it was that said ' Bless them that curse you, and do good to them that hate you.' Besides, the poor little woman was frightened to death at her own expenditure. It is pitiful, you know, to see the helpless agonies of people who zuill live beyond their incomes,—they suffer much more than the beggars in the street who make frequently more than a pound a day by mere whining and snivelling. The critics are much more in evil case than the beggars—few of them make even a pound a day, and of course they regard as their natural enemies the authors who make thirty to fifty pounds a week. I assure you I am very sorry for critics all round,—they are the least-regarded and worst-rewarded of all the literary community. And I never bother myself at all about what they say of me, except as I before observed, when in their haste they tell lies,—then of course it becomes necessary for me to state the truth in simple self-defence as well as by way of duty to my public. But as a rule I hand over all my press-notices to Tricksy there,"—indicating the minute York-shire terrier who followed closely at the edge of her white gown,—" and he tears them to indistinguishable shreds in about three minutes !"
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	315
She laughed merrily, and Sibyl smiled, watching her with the same wonder and admiration that had been expressed in her looks more or less since the beginning of our interview with this light-hearted possessor of literary fame. We were now walking towards the gate preparatory to taking our departure.
May I come and talk to you sometimes?" my wife said suddenly, in her prettiest and most pleading voice. It would be such a privilege !"
You can come whenever you like in the afternoons," replied Mavis readily. " The mornings belong to a goddess more dominant even than Beauty,—Work !"
You never work at night ?" I asked.
Indeed no ! I never turn the ordinances of Nature up-side down, as I am sure I should get the worst of it if I made such an attempt. The night is for sleep, and I use it thank-fully for that blessed purpose."
" Some authors can only write at night though," I said.
" Then you may be sure they only produce blurred pictures and indistinct characterization," said Mavis. " Some I know there are, who invite inspiration through gin, or opium, as well as through the midnight influences, but I do not believe in such methods. Morning and a freshly rested brain are required for literary labour,—that is, if one wants to write a book that will last for more than one ` season.' "
She accompanied us to the gate, and stood under the porch, her big dog beside her and the roses waving high over her head.	1
"At anyrate, work agrees with you," said Sibyl, fixing upon her a long, intent, almost envious gaze. " You look perfectly happy."
" I am perfectly happy," she answered, smiling. I have nothing in all the world to wish for, except that I may die as peacefully as 1 have lived."
" May that day be far distant !" I said earnestly.
She raised her soft meditative eyes to mine.
316	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
"Thank you !" she responded gently. "But I do not mind when it comes, so long as it finds me ready."
She waved her hand to us as we left her and turned the corner of the lane,—and for some minutes we walked on slowly in absolute silence. Then at last Sibyl spoke
I quite understand the hatred there is in some quarters for Mavis Clare," she said. " I am afraid I begin to hate her myself !"
I stopped and stared at her, astonished and confounded. You begin to hate her—you ?—and why ?"
" Are you so blind that you cannot perceive why ?" she retorted, the little malign smile I knew so well playing round her lips. " Because she is happy ! Because she has no scandals in her life, and because she dares to be content ! One longs to make her miserable ! But how to do it? She believes in a God,—she thinks all He ordains is right and good. With such a firm faith as that, she would be happy in a garret earning but a few pence a day. I see now perfectly how she has won her public,—it is by the absolute conviction she has herself of the theories of life she tries to instil. What can be done against her? Nothing! But I understand why the critics would like to ` quash' her,—if I were a critic, fond of whisky-and-soda and music-hall women, I should like to quash her myself for being so different to the rest of her sex."
What an incomprehensible woman you are, Sibyl !" I exclaimed with real irritation. " You admire Miss Clare's books,—you have always admired them,—you have asked her to become your friend,—and almost in the same breath you aver you would like to ` quash' her or to make her miserable. I confess I cannot understand you !"
" Of course you cannot !" she responded tranquilly, her eyes resting upon me with a curious expression, as we paused for an instant under the deep shade of a chestnut tree before entering our own grounds. " I never supposed you could, and, unlike the ordinary femme incomprise, I have n ver
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	317
blamed you for your want of comprehension. It has taken me some time to understand myself, and even now I am not quite sure that I have gauged the depths or shallownesses of my own nature correctly. But on this matter of Mavis Clare, can you not imagine that badness may hate goodness ? That the confirmed drunkard may hate the sober citizen? That the outcast may hate the innocent maiden ? And that it is possible that I,—reading life as I do, and finding it loathsome in many of its aspects,—distrusting men and women utterly,—and being destitute of any faith in God,—may hate,—yes hate"—and she clenched her hand on a tuft of drooping leaves and scattered the green fragments at her feet—" a woman who finds life beautiful, and God existent,—who takes no part in our social shams and slanders, and who in place of my self-torturing spirit of analysis, has secured an enviable fame and the honour of thousands, allied to a serene content? Why, it would be something worth living for to make such a woman wretched for once in her life !—but as she is constituted it is impossible to do it."
She turned from me and walked slowly onward,—I following in a pained silence.
If you do not mean to be her friend, you should tell her so," I said presently. You heard what she said about pre-tended protestations of regard ?"
" I heard," she replied morosely. " She is a clever woman, Geoffrey, and you may trust her to find me out without any explanation !"
As she said this, I raised my eyes and looked full at her,—her exceeding beauty was becoming almost an agony to my sight, and in a sudden fool's paroxysm of despair I ex-claimed-
" Oh, Sibyl, Sibyl ! Why were you made as you are ?"
" Ah, why indeed ?" she rejoined, with a faint mocking smile. And why, being made as I am, was I born an Earl's daughter? If I had been an Arab of the street, I should have been in my proper place,—and novels would have been
318	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
written about me, and plays,—and I might have become such a heroine as should cause all good men to weep for joy be-cause of my generosity in encouraging their vices ! But as an Earl's daughter, respectably married to a millionaire, I am a mistake of nature. Yet nature does make mistakes some. times, Geoffrey, and when she does they are generally irremediable."
We had now reached our own grounds, and I walked, in miserable mood, beside her across the lawn towards the house.
" Sibyl," I said at last, " I had hoped you and Mavis Clare might be friends. . . ."
She laughed.
" So we shall be friends, I daresay,—for a little while," she replied. But the dove does not willingly consort with `the raven, and Mavis Clare's way of life and studious habits would be to me insufferably dull. Besides, as I said before, she, as a clever woman and a thinker, is too clear-sighted not to find me out in the course of time. But I will play hum-bug as long as I can. If I perform the part of ' county lady' or ' patron,' of course she won't stand me for a moment. I shall have to assume a much more difficult role,—that of an honest woman."
Again she laughed,—a cruel little laugh that chilled my blood, and paced slowly into the house through the open windows of the drawing-room. And I, left alone in the gar-den among the nodding roses and waving trees, felt that the beautiful domain of Willowsmere had suddenly grown hideous and bereft of all its former charm, and was nothing but a haunted house of desolation,—haunted by an all-dominant and ever victorious Spirit of Evil.
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	319 XXVIII
ONE of the strangest things in all the strange course of our human life is perhaps the suddenness of certain unlooked-for events, which, in a day or even an hour, may work utter devastation where there has been more or less peace, and hopeless ruin where there has been comparative safety. Like the shock of an earthquake, the clamorous incidents thunder in on the regular routine of ordinary life, crumbling down our hopes, breaking our hearts, and scattering our pleasures into the dust and ashes of despair. And this kind of destructive trouble generally happens in the midst of apparent prosperity without the least warning, and with all the abrupt fierceness of a desert-storm. It is constantly made manifest to us in the unexpected and almost instantaneous downfall of certain members of society who have held their heads proudly above their corn-peers and have presumed to pose as examples of light and leading to the whole community; we see it in the capricious fortunes of kings and statesmen who are in favour one day and disgraced the next, and vast changes are wrought with such inexplicable quickness that it is scarcely wonderful to hear of certain religious sects who, when everything is prospering more than usually well with them, make haste to put on garments of sackcloth and cast ashes on their heads, praying aloud, " Prepare us, 0 Lord, for the evil days which are at hand !" The moderation of the Stoics, who considered it impious to either rejoice or grieve, and strove to maintain an equable middle course between the opposing elements of sorrow and joy, without allowing themselves to be led away by over-much delight or over-much melancholy, was surely a wise habit of temperament. I, who lived miserably as far as my inner and better consciousness was concerned, was yet outwardly satisfied with the material things of life and the luxuries surrounding me,—and I began to take comfort in these things,
320	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
and with them endeavoured to quell and ignore my subtle griefs, succeeding so far in that I became more and more of a thorough materialist every day, loving bodily ease, appetizing food, costly wine and personal indulgence to a degree that robbed me gradually of even the desire for mental effort. I taught myself, moreover, almost insensibly to accept and tolerate what I knew of the wanton side of my wife's character, —true, I respected her less than the Turk respects the creature of his harem,—but like the Turk I took a certain savage satisfaction in being the possessor of her beauty; and with this feeling and the brute-passion it engendered, I was fain to be content. So that for a short time at least, the drowsy satisfaction of a well-fed, well-mated animal was mine,—I fancied that nothing short of a stupendous financial catastrophe to the country itself could exhaust my stock of cash,—and that therefore there was no necessity for me to exert myself in any particular branch of usefulness, but simply to `eat, drink and be merry' as Solomon advised. Intellectual activity was paralyzed in me,—to take up my pen and write, and make another and higher bid for fame, was an idea that now never entered my mind ; I spent my days in ordering about my servants and practising the petty pleasures of tyranny on gardeners and grooms, and in generally giving myself airs of importance mingled with an assumption of tole-ation and benevolence for the benefit of all those in my employ. I knew the proper thing to do, well enough !—I had not studied the ways of the over-wealthy for nothing. I was aware that the rich man never feels so thoroughly virtuous as when he has inquired after the health of his coachman's wife and has sent her a couple of pounds for the outfit of her new-born baby. The much-prated-of ' kindness of heart' and ` generosity' possessed by millionaires generally amounts to this kind of thing,—and when, if idly strolling about my park-lands, I happened to meet the small child of my lodge-keeper and then and there bestowed sixpence upon it, I almost felt as if I de-served a throne in Heaven at the right hand of the Almighty,
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	321
so great was my appreciation of my own good-nature. Sibyl, however, never affected this sort of county-magnate beneficence. She did nothing at all among our poor neighbours ;—the clergyman of the district unfortunately happened to let slip one day a few words to the effect that :' there was no great want of anything among his parishioners, owing to the continual kindness and attention of Miss Clare,"—and Sibyl never from that moment proffered any assistance. Now and then she took her graceful person into
Lily Cottage' and sat with its happy and studious occupant for an hour,—and occasionally the fair author herself came and dined with us, or had ' afternoon tea' under the branching elms on the lawn,—but even I, intense egotist as I was, could see that Mavis was scarcely herself on these occasions. She was always charming and bright of course,—indeed the only times in which I was able to partially forget myself and the absurdly increasing importance of my personality in my own esteem, were when she, with her sweet voice and animated manner, brought her wide knowledge of books, men, and things to bear on the conversation, thus raising it to a higher level than was ever reached by my wife or me. Yet I now and then noticed a certain vague constraint about her,—and her frank eyes had frequently a pained and questioning look of trouble when they rested f)r any length of time on the enchanting beauty of Sibyl's face and form. I, however, paid little heed to these trifling matters, my whole care being to lose myself more and more utterly in the enjoyment of purely 2hysical ease and comfort without troubling myself as to what such self-absorption might lead in the future. To be comoletely without a conscience, without a heart and without sentiment was, I perceived, the best way to keep one's appetite and preserve one's health ;—to go about worrying over the troubles of other people or put one's self out to do any good in the world, would involve such an expenditure of time and trouble as must inevitably spoil one's digestion,—and I saw that no millionaire or even moderately rich man cares to run
322	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
the risk of injuring his digestion for the sake of performing a kindness to a poorer fellow-creature. Profiting by the examples presented to me everywhere in society, I took care of my digestion, and was particular about the way in which my meals were cooked and served,—particular too, as to the fashion in which my wife dressed for those meals,—for it suited my supreme humour to see her beauty bedecked as suitably and richly as possible that I might have the satisfaction of considering her ' points' with the same epicurean fastidiousness as I considered a dish of truffles or specially prepared game. I never thought of the stern and absolute law—" Unto whom much is given, even from him should much be required ;"—I was scarcely aware of it in fact,—the New Testament was of all books in the world the most unfamiliar to me. And while I wilfully deafened myself to the voice of conscience,—that voice which ever and anon urged me in vain to a nobler existence,—the clouds were gathering, ready to burst above me with that terrific suddenness such as always seems to us who refuse to study the causes of our calamities, as astonishing and startling as death itself. For we are always more or less startled at death, notwithstanding that it is the commonest occurrence known.
Towards the middle of September my ` royal and distinguished' house-party arrived and stayed at Willowsmere Court for a week. Of course it is understood that whenever the Prince of Wales honours any private residence with a visit, he selects, if not all, at any rate the greater part of those persons who are to be invited to meet him. He did so in the present instance, and I was placed in the odd position of having to entertain certain people whom I had never met before, and who, with the questionable taste frequently exhibited among the ' upper ten,' looked upon me merely as " the man with the millions," the caterer for their provisions and no more,—directing their chief attention to Sibyl, who was by virtue of her birth and associations one of their `set,' and pushing me, their host, more or less into the background.
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	323
However, the glory of entertaining Royalty more than sufficed for my poor pride at that time, and with less self-respect than an honest cur I was content to be snubbed and harassed and worried a hundred times a day by one or the other of the ` great' personages who wandered at will all over my house and grounds, and accepted my lavish hospitality. Many people imagine that it must be an ` honour' to entertain a select party of aristocrats, but I, on the contrary, consider that it is not only a degradation to one's manlier and more independent instincts, but also a bore. These highly-bred, highly-connected individuals, are for the most part unintelligent and devoid of resources in their own minds,—they are not gifted as conversationalists or wits,—one gains no intellectual advantage from their society,—they are simply dull folk with an exaggerated sense of their own importance, who expect, wherever they go, to be amused without trouble to themselves. Out of all the visitors at Willowsmere the only one whom it was really a pleasure to entertain was the Prince of Wales himself,—and amid the many personal irritations I had to suffer from others, I found it a positive relief to render him any attention, however slight, because his manner was always marked by that tact and courtesy which are the best attributes of a true gentleman whether he be prince or peasant. In his own genial way, he went one afternoon to see Mavis Clare, and came back in high good-humour, talking for some time of nothing but the author of ` Differences,' and of the success she had achieved in literature. I had asked Mavis to join our party before the Prince came, as I felt pretty sure he would not have erased her name from the list of guests submitted to him,—but she would not accept, and begged me very earnestly not to press the point.
" I like the Prince," she had said. " Everyl,ody likes him who knows him,—but I do not always like the people who surround him,—pardon me for my frankness ! The Prince of Wales is a social magnet,—he draws after him all who by dint of wealth if not intelligence can contrive to ` push' into
32.E	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
his set. Now I am not an advocate of ' push'—moreover I do not care to be seen with ' everybody' ;—this is my sinful pride you will say, or as our American cousins would put it, my 'cussedness.' But I assure you, Mr Tempest, the best possession I have and one which I value a great deal more even than my literary success, is my absolute independence, and I would not have it thought, even erroneously, that I am anxious to mix with the crowd of sycophants and time-servers who are only too ready to take advantage of the Prince's good-nature."
And, acting upon her determination, she had remained more than ever secluded in her cottage-nest of foliage and flowers during the progress of the week's festivities,—the result being, as I have stated, that the Prince ' dropped in' upon her quite casually one day, accompanied by his equerry, and probably, for all I knew, had the pleasure of seeing the dove ` reviewers' being fed, and squabbling over their meal.
Much as we had desired the presence of Rimanez at our gathering he did not appear. He telegraphed his regrets from Paris, and followed the telegram by a characteristic letter which ran thus :

MY DEAR TEMPEST,
You are very kind to wish to include me, your old friend, in the party you have invited to meet His Royal Highness, and I only hope you will not think me churlish for refusing to come. I am sick to death of Royalties,—I have known so many of them in the course of my existence that I begin to find their society monotonous. Their positions are all so exactly alike too,—and moreover have always been alike from the dad of Solomon in all his glory, down to the present blessed era of Victoria, Queen and Empress. One thirsts for a change ; at least I do. The only monarch that ever fascinated my imagination particularly was Richard Cur e Lion ; there was something original and striking about that man, and I presume he would have been well worth talking to. And
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	325
Charlemagne was doubtless, as the slangey young man of the day would observe, ' not half bad.' But for the rest,—un fico ! Much talk is there made about Her Majesty Elizabeth, who was a shrew and a vixen and blood-thirsty withal,--the chief glory of her reign was Shakespeare, and he made kings and queens the dancing puppets of his thought. In this, though in nothing else, I resemble him. You will have enough to do in the entertainment of your distinguished guests, for I suppo-e there is no amusement they have not tried and found more or less unsatisractorv, and I am sorry I can suggest nothing particularly new for you to do. Her Grace the Duchess of Rapidryder is very fond of being tossed in a strong table-cloth between four able-bodied gentlemen of good birth and discretion, before going to bed o' nights,—she cannot very well appear on a music-hall stage you know, owing to her exalted rank,—and this is a child-like, pretty and harmless method of managing to show her legs, which she rightly considers, are too shapely to be hidden. Lady Bouncer, whose name I see in your list, always likes to cheat at cards,—I would aid and abet her in her aim if I were you, as if she can only clear her dressmaker's bill by her winnings at Willowsmere, she will bear it in mind and be a useful social friend to you. The Honourable. Miss Fitz-Gander, who has a great reputation for virtue, is anxious, for pressing and particular reasons, to marry Lord Noodles,—if you can move on matters between them into a definite engagement of marriage before her lady-mother returns from her duty-visits in Scotland, you will be doing her a good turn and saving society a scandal. To amuse the men I suggest plenty of shooting, gambling and unlimited smoking. To entertain the Prince, d-) little,—for he is clever enough to entertain himself privately with the folly and humbug of those he sees around him, without actually sharing in the petty comedy. He is a keen observer,—and must derive infinite gratification from his constant study of men and manners, which is sufficiently deep and searching to fit him for the occupation of even the throne of England. I say
326	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
even,' for at present, till 'rime's great hour-glass turns, it is the grandest throne in the world. The Prince reads, under-stands, and secretly laughs to scorn the table-cloth vagaries of the Duchess of Rapidryder, the humours of my Lady Bouncer and the nervous pruderies of the Honourable Miss Fitz-Gander. And there is nothing he will appreciate so much in his reception as a lack of toadyism, a sincere demeanour, an unostentatious hospitality, a simplicity of speech, and a total absence of affectation. Remember this, and take my advice for what it is worth. Of all the Royalties at present flourishing on this paltry planet, I have the greatest respect for the Prince of Wales, and it is by reason of this very respect that I do not intend, on this occasion, to thrust myself upon his notice. I shall arrive at 1Villowsmere when your ` royal' festivities are over. My homage to your fair spouse, the Lady Sibyl, and believe me,
Yours as long as you desire it,
Luclo RIMANEZ.

I laughed over this letter and showed it to my wife, who did not laugh. She read it through with a closeness of attention that somewhat surprised me, and when she laid it down there was s :'t.range look of pain in her eyes.
" How h° despises us all !" she said slowly.	What scorn underlies his words ! Do you not recognise it ?"
" He was always a cynic," I replied indifferently. " I never expect him to be anything else."
" He seems to know some of the ways of the women who are coming here," she went on in the same musing accents.
It is as if he read their thoughts, and perceived their intentions at a distance."
Her brows knitted frowningly, and she seemed for some time absorbed in gloomy meditation. But I did not pursue the subject,—I was too intent on my own fussy preparations for the Prince's arrival to care about anything else.
And, as I have said, Royalty, in the person of one of the
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	327
most affable of men, came and went gracefully through the whole programme devised for his entertainment, and then departed again with his usual courteous acknowledgments for the hospitality offered and accepted,—leaving us, as he very often leaves everybody, charmed with his good-humour, provided that nothing has ruffled it. When, with his exit from the scene, the whole party broke up, leaving my wife and me to our own two selves once more, there came a strange silence and desolation over the house that was like the stealthy sense of some approaching calamity. Sibyl seemed to feel it as much as I did, and though we said nothing to each other concerning our mutual sensations, I could see that she was under the same cloud of depression as myself. She went oftener to ` Lily Cottage,' and always from these visits to the fair-haired student among the roses, came back, I hopefully fancied in softer mood,—her very voice was gentler,—her eyes more thoughtful and tender. One evening she said
I have been thinking, Geoffrey, that perhaps there is some good in life after all, if I could only find it out and live it. But you are the last person to hell) me in such a matter."
I was sitting in an arm-chair near the open window, smoking, and I turned my eyes upon her with some astonishment and a touch of indignation.
What do you mean, Sibyl ?" I asked. " Surely you know that I have the greatest desire to see you always in your best aspect,—many of your ideas have been most repugnant to me . . ."
" Stop there !" she said quickly, her eyes flashing as she spoke. " My ideas have been repugnant to you, you say? What have you done, you as my husband, to change those ideas? Have you not the same base passions as I ?—and do you not give way to them as basely ? What have I seen in you from day to day that I should take you as an ex-ample? You are master here, and you rule with all the arrogance wealth can give,—you eat, drink and .sleep,—you entertain your acquaintances simply that you may astonish
328	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
them by the excess of luxury in which you indulge,—yot: read and smoke, shoot and ride, and there an end,—you are an ordinary, not an exceptional man. Do you trouble to ask what is wrong with me 7—do you try, with the patience of a great love, to set before me nobler aims than those I have consciously or unconsciously imbibed ?—do you try to lead me, an erring, passionate, misguided woman, into what I dream of as the light,—the light of faith and hope which alone gives peace ?"
And suddenly, burying her head in the pillows of the couch on which she leaned, she broke into a fit of smothered weeping.
I drew my cigar from my mouth and stared at her helplessly. It was about an hour after dinner, and a warm soft autumnal evening. I had eaten and drunk well, and I was drowsy and heavy-brained.
Dear me !" I murmured—" you seem very unreasonable, Sibyl ! I suppose you are hysterical . . ."
She sprang up from the couch, her tears dried on her cheeks as though by sheer heat of the crimson glow that flushed them, and she laughed wildly.
Yes, that is it !" she exclaimed. " Hysteria !—nothing else ! It is accountable for everything that moves a woman's nature. A woman has no right to have any emotions that cannot be cured by smelling-salts ! Heart-ache ?—pooh !—cut her stay-lace ! 'Despair and a sense of sin and misery ?—nonsense !—bathe her temples with vinegar ! An uneasy con-science ?—ah !—for an uneasy conscience there is nothing better than sal volatile ! Woman is a toy,—a breakable fool's toy ;—and when she is broken, throw her aside and have done with her,—don't try to piece together the fragile rubbish !"
She ceased abruptly, panting for breath, and before I could collect my thoughts or find any words wherewith to reply, a tall shadow suddenly darkened the embrasure of the window, and a familiar voice inquired—
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	329
" May I, with the privilege of friendship, enter unannounced ?"
I started up.
" Rimanez !" I cried, seizing him by the hand.
Nay, Geoffrey, my homage is due here first," he replied, shaking off my grasp, and advancing to Sibyl, who stood perfectly fectly still where she had risen up in her strange passion. " Lady Sibyl, am I welcome ?"
" Can you ask it !" she said, with an enchanting smile, and in a voice from which all harshness and excitement had fled. " More than welcome !" Here she gave him both her hands, which he respectfully kissed. " You cannot imagine how much I have longed to see you again !"
I must apologize for my sudden appearance, Geoffrey," he then observed, turning to me. " But as I walked here from the station and came up your fine avenue of trees, I was so struck with the loveliness of this place and the exquisite peace of its surroundings, that, knowing my way through the grounds, I thought I would just look about and see if you were anywhere within sight before I presented myself at the conventional door of entrance. And I was not disappointed, —I found you, as I expected, enjoying each other's society,—the happiest and most fortunate couple existent,—people whom, out of all the world, I should be disposed to envy, if I envied worldly happiness at all, which I do not."
I glanced at him quickly ;--he met my gaze with a perfectly unembarrassed air, and I concluded that he had not overheard Sibyl's sudden melodramatic outburst.
Have you dined ?" I asked, with my hand on the bell.
" Thanks, yes. The town of Leamington provided me with quite a sumptuous repast of bread and cheese and ale. I am tired of luxuries you know,—that is why I find plain fare delicious. You are looking wonderfully well, Geoffrey !—shall I offend you if I say you are growing—yes—positively stout ? —with the stoutness befitting a true county gentleman who
330	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
means to be as gouty in the future as his respectable ancestors?'
I smiled, but not altogether with pleasure; it is never agree-able to be called ` stout' in the presence of a beautiful woman to whom one has only been wedded a matter of three months.
You have not put on any extra flesh," I said, by way of feeble retort.
No," he admitted, as he disposed his slim elegant figure in an arm-chair near my own. The necessary quantity of flesh is a bore to me always,—extra flesh would be a positive infliction. I should like, as the irreverent though reverend Sidney Smith said on a hot day, ' to sit in my bones,' or rather, to become a spirit of fine essence like Shakespeare's Ariel, if such things were possible and permissible. How admirably married life agrees with you, Lady Sibyl !"
His fine eyes rested upon her with apparent admiration,—she flushed under his gaze I saw, and seemed confused.
When did you arrive in England ?" she inquired.
"Yesterday," he answered. "I ran over Channel from Honfleur in my yacht,—you did not know I had a yacht, did you, Tempest ?—oh, you must come for a trip in her some day. She is a quick vessel, and the weather was fair."
Is Amiel with you ?" I asked.
No. I left him on board the yacht. I can, as the common people say, ` valet myself ' for a day or two."
"A day or two?" echoed Sibyl. But you surely will not leave us so soon? You promised to make a long visit here."
" Did I ?" and he regarded her steadily, with the same languorous admiration in his eyes. " But, my dear Lady Sibyl, time alters our ideas, and I am not sure whether you and your excellent husband are of the same opinion as you were when you started on your wedding-tour. You may not want me now !"
He said this with a significance to which I paid no heed whatever.
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	331
Not want you !" I exclaimed. " I shall always want you, Lucio,—you are the best friend I ever had, and the only one I care to keep. Believe me !—there's my hand upon it !'
He looked at me curiously for a minute,—then turned his head towards my wife.
" And what does Lady Sibyl say?" he asked in a gentle, almost caressing tone.
Lady Sibyl says," she answered with a smile, and the colour coming and going in her cheeks, " that she will be proud and glad if you will consider Willowsmere your home as long as you have leisure to make it so,—and that she hopes,—though you are reputed to be a hater of women,"—here she raised her beautiful eyes and fixed them full upon him,—" you will relent a little in favour of your present chatelaine !"
With these words, and a playful salutation, she passed out of the room into the garden, and stood on the lawn at a little distance from us, her white robes shimmering in the mellow autumnal twilight,—and Lucio, springing up from his seat, looked after her, clapping his hand down heavily on my shoulder.
"By Heaven !" he said softly, "a perfect woman ! I should be a churl to withstand her,—or you, my good Geoffrey,"—and he regarded me earnestly. I have led a very devil of a life since I saw you last,—it's time I reformed,—upon my soul it is ! The peaceful contemplation of virtuous marriage will do me good ;—send for my luggage to the station, Geoffrey, and make the best of me,—I' ve come to stay !"
332	THE SORROWS OF SATAN XXIX
A TRANQUIL time now ensued ; a time which, though I knew it not, was just that singular pause so frequently observed in nature before a storm, and in human life before a crushing calamity. I put aside all troublesome and harassing thoughts, and became oblivious of everything save my own personal satisfaction in the renewal of the comradeship between myself and Lucio. We walked together, rode together, and passed most of our days in each other's company ; nevertheless, though I gave my friend much of my closest confidence I never spoke to him of the moral obliquities and per-versions I had discovered in Sibyl's character,—not out of any consideration for Sibyl, but simply because I knew by instinct what his reply would be. He would have no sympathy with my feelings. His keen sense of sarcasm would over-rule hia friendship, and he would retort upon me with the question, What business had I, being imperfect myself, to expect perfection in my wife? Like many others of my sex I had the notion that I, as man, could do all I pleased, when I pleased and how I pleased ; I could sink to a level lower than that of the beasts if I chose,—but all the same I had the right to demand from my wife the most flawless purity, to mate with my defilement. I was aware how Lucio would treat this form of arrogant egoism, and with what mocking laughter he would receive any expression of ideas from me on the subject of morality in woman. So I was careful to let no hint of my actual position escape me, and I comported myself on all occasions to Sibyl with special tenderness and consideration, though she, I thought, appeared rather to resent my playing the part of lover-husband too openly. She was herself, in Lucio's presence, strangely erratic of humour, by turns brilliant and mournful, sometimes merry, and anon depressed : yet never had she displayed a more captivating grace and charm of
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	333
manner. How foolish and blind I was all the while !—how dead to any perception of the formation and sequence of events ! Absorbed in gross material pleasures, I ignored all the hidden forces that make the history of an individual life no less than of a whole nation, and looked upon each day that dawned almost as if it had been my own creation and possession, to waste as I thought fit,—never considering that days are but so many white leaflets from God's chronicle of human life, whereon we place our mark, good or bad, for the just and exact summing-up of our thoughts and deeds here-after. Had any one dared to say this truth to me then, I should have bade him go and preach nonsense to children,—but now, when I recall those white leaves of days that were unrolled before me fresh and blank with every sunrise, and with which I did nothing save scrawl my own Ego in a foul smudge across each one, I tremble, and inwardly pray that I may never be forced to send back my self-written record. Yet of what use is it to pray against eternal Law ? It is eternal Law that we shall ourselves count up our own misdeeds at the final reckoning,—hence it is no wonder that many are found who prefer not to believe in a future after death. Rightly do such esteem it better to die utterly than be forced to live again and look back upon the wilful evil they have done !
October ripened slowly and almost imperceptibly towards its end, and the trees put on their gorgeous autumnal tints of burning crimson and gold. The weather remained fine and warm, and what the French Canadians poetically term the ` Summer of all Saints' gave us bright days and cloudless moonlit evenings. The air was so mild that we were always able to take our coffee after dinner on the terrace overlooking the lawn in front of the drawing-room,--and it was on one of these balmy nights that I was the interested spectator of a strange scene between Lucio and Mavis Clare,—a scene I should have thought impossible of occurrence had I not my-self witnessed it. Mavis had dined at Willowsmere ; she very
334	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
rarely so honoured us ; and there were a few other guests besides. We had lingered over the coffee longer than usual, for Mavis had given an extra charm to the conversation by her eloquent vivacity and bright humour, and all present were anxious to hear, see and know as much of the brilliant novelist as possible. But when a full golden moon rose in mellow splendour over the tree-tops, my wife suggested a stroll in the grounds, and everyone agreeing to the proposal with delight, we started,—more or less together,—some in couples, some in groups of three or four. After a little desultory rambling, however, the party got separated in the rose-gardens and adjacent shrubberies, and I found myself alone. I turned back to the house to get my cigar-case which I had left on a table in the library, and passing out again in another direction I strolled slowly across the grass, smoking as I went, towards the river, the silver gleam of which could clearly be discerned through the fast-thinning foliage overhanging its banks. I had almost reached the path that followed the course of the winding water when I was brought to a standstill by the sound of voices,—one a man's, low and persuasive,—the other a woman's, tender, grave and somewhat tremulous. Neither voice could be mistaken ; I recognised Lucio's rich penetrating tones, and the sweet vibrante accents of Mavis Clare. Out of sheer surprise I paused,—had Lucio fallen in love, I wondered, half-smiling ?—was I about to discover that the supposed ` woman-hater' had been tamed and caught at last ? By Mavis too !—little Mavis, who was not beautiful according to accepted standards, but who had something more than beauty to en-ravish a proud and unbelieving soul. Here, as my thoughts ran on, I was conscious of a foolish sense of jealousy,—why should he choose Mavis, I thought, out of all women in the world? Could he not leave her in peace with her dreams, her books and her flowers ?—safe under the pure, wise, impassive gaze of Pallas Athene, whose cool brows were never fevered by a touch of passion ? Something more than curiosity now impelled me to listen, and I cautiously advanced a
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	335
step or two towards the shadow of a broad elm where I could see without being seen. Yes, there was Rimanez, standing erect with folded arms, his dark, sad, inscrutable eyes fixed on Mavis, who stood opposite to him a few paces off, looking at him in her turn with an expression of mingled fascination and fear.
I have asked you, Mavis Clare," said Lucio slowly, " to let me serve you. You have genius,—a rare quality in a woman,—and I would advance your fortunes. I should not be what I am if I did not try to persuade you to let me help on your career. You are not rich,—I could show you how to become so. You have a great fame—that I grant ; but you have many enemies and slanderers who are for ever trying to pull you down from the throne you have won. I could bring these to your feet and make them your slaves. With your intellectual power, your personal grace and gifts of temperament, I could, if you would let me guide you, give you such far-reaching influence, as no woman has possessed in this century. I am no boaster,—I can do what I say and more ; and I ask nothing from you in return except that you should follow my advice implicitly. My advice, let me tell you, is not difficult to follow ; most people find it easy !"
His expression of face, I thought, was very singular as he spoke,—it was so haggard, dreary and woe-begone that one might have imagined he was making some proposal that was particularly repugnant to him, instead of offering to perform the benevolent action of helping a hard-working literary woman to achieve greater wealth and distinction. I waited expectantly for Mavis to reply.
You are very good, Prince Rimanez," she said, after a little pause, " to take any thought for me at all. I cannot imagine why you should do so ; for I am really nothing to you. I have of course heard from Mr Tempest of your great wealth and influence, and I have no doubt you mean kindly. But I have never owed anything to any one,—no one has ever helped me,—I have helped myself, and still prefer to do so.
336	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
And really I have nothing to wish for,—except—when the time comes—a happy death. It is true I am not rich,—but then I do not want to be rich. I would not be the possessor of wealth for all the world ! To be surrounded with sycophants and flatterers,—never to be able to distinguish false friends from true,—to be loved for what you have, and not for what you are !—oh no, it would be misery to me ! And I have never craved for power,—except perhaps the power to win love. And that I have,—many people love my books, and through my books love me,—I feel their love, though I may never see or know them personally. But I am so conscious of their sympathy that I love them in return without the necessity of personal acquaintance. They have hearts which respond to my heart,—that is all the power I care about."
You forget your numerous enemies!" said Lucio, still morosely regarding her.
" No, I do not forget them," she returned, " But I forgive them. They can do me no harm. As long as I do not lower myself, no one else can lower me. If my own conscience is clear, no reproaches can wound. My life is open to all,—people can see how I live and what I do. I try to do well,—but if there are those who think I do ill, I am sorry, and if my faults can be amended I shall be glad to amend them. One must have enemies in this world,—that is, if one makes any sort of position,—people without enemies are generally nonentities. All who succeed in winning some little place of independence must expect the grudging enmity of hundreds who cannot find even the smallest foothold, and are therefore failures in the battle of life,—I pity these sincerely, and when they say or write cruel things of me, I know it is only spleen and disappointment that moves both their tongues and pens, and I freely pardon them. They cannot hurt or hinder me,—in fact, no one can hurt or hinder me but myself."
I heard the trees rustle slightly,—a branch cracked,—and peering through the leaves I saw that Lucio had advanced a
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	337
step closer to where Mavis stood. A faint smile was on his face, softening it wonderfully and giving an almost supernatural light to his beautiful dark features.
Fair philosopher, you are almost a feminine Marcus Aurelius in your estimate of men and things," he said ; but—you are still a woman—and there is one thing lacking to your life of sublime and calm contentment—a thing at whose touch philosophy fails, and wisdom withers at its root. Love, Mavis Clare !—lover's love, devoted love, blindly passionate,—this ha.s not been yours as yet to win. No heart beats against your own,—no tender arms caress you,—you are alone ! Men are for the most part afraid of you,—being brute fools themselves, they like their women to be brute fools also,—and they grudge you your keen intellect,—your serene independence. Yet which is best ?—the adoration of a brute fool, or the loneliness pertaining to a spirit aloft on some snowy mountain-peak, with no companions but the stars ? Think of it !—the years will pass, and you must needs grow old,—and with the years will come that solitary neglect which makes age bitter. Now, you will doubtless wonder at my words—yet believe me I speak the truth when I say that I can give you love—not my love, for I love none,—but I can bring to your feet the proudest men in any country of the world as suitors for your hand. You shall have your choice of them and your own time lot choosing,—and whomsoever you love, him you shall wed, .. . why—what is wrong with you that you shrink from me thus ?"
For she had retreated, and was gazing at him in a kind of horror.
" You terrify me!" she faltered,—and as the moonlight fell upon her I could see that she was very pale. " Such promises are incredible—impossible ! You speak as if you were more than human ! I do not understand you, Prince Rimanez;—you are different to anyone I ever met, and . . . and . . . something in me stronger than myself warns me against you. What are you ?—why do you talk to me so strangely? Pardon me if I seem ungrateful . . . oh, let
338	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
us go in—it is getting quite late I am sure, and I an cold . . .
She trembled violently, and caught at the branch of a tree to steady herself,—Rimanez stood immovably still, regarding her with a fixed and almost mournful gaze.
You say my life is lonely, " she went on reluctantly, and with a note of pathos in her sweet voice, and you suggest love and marriage as the only joys that can make a woman happy. You may be right. I do not presume to assert that you are wrong. I have many married women friends—but I would not change my lot with any one of them. I have dreamed of love,—but because I have not realized my dream I am not the less content. If it is God's will that I should be alone all my days, I shall not murmur, for my solitude is not actual loneliness. Work is a good comrade,—then I have books, and flowers and birds,—I am never really lonely. And that I shall fully realize my dream of love one day I am sure,—if not here, then hereafter. I can wait !"
As she spoke she looked up to the placid heavens where one or two stars twinkled through the arching boughs,—her face expressed angelic confidence and perfect peace,—and Rimanez advancing a step or two, fully confronted her with a strange light of exultation in his eyes.
True,—you can wait, Mavis Clare !" he said in deep clear tones from which all sadness had fled. " You can afford to wait ! Tell me,—think for a moment,—can you remember me ? Is there a time on which you can look back, and looking, see my face, not here but elsewhere? Think ! Did you ever see me long ago—in a far sphere of beauty and light, when you were an Angel, Mavis,—and I was—not what I am now ! How you tremble ! You need not fear me,—I would not harm you for a thousand worlds ! I talk wildly at times, I know ;—I think of things that are past,—long, long past,—and I am filled with regrets that burn my soul with fiercer heat than fire. And so neither world's wealth, world's power, nor world's love will tempt you, Mavis !—and you,—a woman 1
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	339
You are a living miracle then,—as miraculous as the drop of undefiled dew which reflects in its tiny circumference all the colours of the sky, and sinks into the earth sweetly, carrying moisture and refreshment where it falls ! I can do nothing for you—you will not have my aid—you reject my service? Then as I may not help you, you must help me !"—and drop-ping before her, he reverently took her hand and kissed it.
I ask a very little thing of you ; pray for me ! I know you are accustomed to pray, so it will be no trouble to you, you believe God hears you,—and when I look at you, I believe it too. Only a pure woman can make faith possible to man. Pray for me then, as one who has fallen from his higher and better self,—who strives, but who may not attain,—who labours under heavy punishment,—who would fain reach Heaven, but who by the cursed will of man, and man alone, is kept in Hell. Pray for me, Mavis Clare ! promise it !—and so shall you lift me a step nearer the glory I have lost !"
I listened, petrified with amazement. Could this be Lucio? —the mocking, careless, cynical scoffer I knew, as I thought, so well ?—was it really he who knelt thus like a repentant sinner, abasing his proud head before a woman ? I saw Mavis release her hand from his, the while she stood looking down upon him in alarm and bewilderment. Presently she spoke in sweet yet tremulous accents
" Since you desire it so earnestly, I promise," she said.
I will pray that the strange and bitter sorrow which seems to consume you may be removed from your life	"
" Sorrow !" he echoed, interrupting her and springing to his feet with an impassioned gesture. Woman,—genius,—angel,—whatever you are, do not speak of one sorrow for me ! I have a thousand thousand sorrows !—aye a million million, that are as little flames about my heart, and as deeply seated as the centres of the universe ! 'The foul and filthy crimes of men,—the base deceits and cruelties of women,—the ruthless, murderous ingratitude of children,—the scorn of good, the martyrdom of intellect, the selfishness, the avarice, the sensu•
34o	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
ality of human life, the hideous blasphemy and sin of the creature to the Creator,—these are my endless sorrows !—these keep me wretched and in chains when I would fain be free. Tnese create hell around me, and endless torture, —these bind and crush me and pervert my being till I be-come what I dare not name to myself or to others. And yet, . . . as the eternal God is my witness, . . . I do not think I am as bad as the worst man living ! I may tempt, but I do not pursue,—I take the lead in many lives, yet I make the way I go so plain that those who follow me do so by their own choice and free will more than by my persuasion !" He paused,—then continued in a softer tone —" You look afraid of me,—but be assured you never had less cause for terror. You have truth and purity—I honour both. You will have none of my advice or assistance in the making of your life's history,—to-night therefore we part, to meet no more on earth. Never again, Mavis Clare !—no, not through all your quiet days of sweet and contented existence will I cross your path,—before Heaven I swear it !"
" But why?" asked Mavis gently, approaching him now as she spoke, with a soft grace of movement, and laying her hand on his arm—" why do you speak with such a passion of self-reproach? What dark cloud is on your mind? Surely you have a noble nature,—and I feel that I have wronged you in my thoughts, . . . you must forgive me—I have mistrusted you	"
" You do well to mistrust me !" he answered, and with these words he caught both her hands and held them in his own, looking at her full in the face with eyes that flashed like jewels. " Your instinct teaches you rightly. Would there were many more like you to doubt me and repel me ! One word,—if, when I am gone, you ever think of me, think that I am more to be pitied than the veriest paralyzed and starving wretch that ever crawled on earth,—for he, perchance, has hope—and I have none. And when you pray for me,—for I hold you to this promise,—pray for one who dares not
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	34'
pray for himself. You know the words, ' Lead us not into temptation but deliver us from evil' ? To-night you have been led into temptation, though you knew it not, but you have delivered yourself from evil as only a true soul can. And now farewell ! In life I shall see you no more :—in death,—well, I have attended many death-beds in response to the invitations of the moribund, but I shall not be present at yours ! Perhaps, when your parting spirit is on the verge between darkness and light, you may know who I was and am,—and you may thank God with your last breath that we parted to-night—as we do now —forever !"
He loosened his grasp of her,—she fell back from him, pale and terrified,—for there was something now in the dark beauty of his face that was unnatural and appalling. A sombre shadow clouded his brows,—his e) es had gleams in them as of fire,—and a smile was on his lips, half tender, half cruel. His strange expression moved even me to a sense of fear, and I shivered with sudden cold, though the air was warm and balmy. Slowly retreating, Mavis moved away, looking round at him now and then as she went, in wistful wonder and alarm,—till in a minute or two her slight figure, in its shimmering silken white robe, had vanished among the trees. I lingered, hesitating and uncertain what to do,—then finally determining to get back to the house if possib!e without being noticed, I made one step, when Lucio's voice, scarcely raised, addressed me
Well, eavesdropper ! Why did you not come out of the shadow of that elm-tree and see the play to better advantage ?"
Surprised and confused, I advanced, mumbling some unintelligible excuse.
You saw a pretty bit of acting here," he went on, striking a match and lighting a cigar the while he regarded me coolly, his eyes twinkling with their usual mockery. You know my theory, that all men and all women are purchasable for gold ? Well, I wanted to try Mavis Clare. She rejected all my advantageous offers, as you must have heard, and I could only
342	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
make matters smooth by asking her to pray for me. That I did this very melodramatically I hope you will admit? A woman of that dreamy idealistic temperament always likes to imagine that there is a man who is grateful for her prayers !"
" You seemed very much in earnest about it !" I said, vexed with myself that he had caught me spying.
" Why, of course !" he responded, thrusting his arm familiarly through mine. "I had an audience ! Two fastidious critics of dramatic art heard me rant my rantings,—I had to do my best !"
" Two critics ?" I repeated perplexedly.
" Yes. You on one side,—Lady Sibyl on the other. Iady Sibyl rose, after the custom of fashionable beauties at the opera, before the last scene, in order to get home in good time for supper !"
He laughed wildly and discordantly, and I felt desperately uncomfortable.
" You must be mistaken, Lucio," I said. "'That I listened I admit,—and it was wrong of me to do so,—but my wife would never condescend . . ."
" Ah, then it must have been a sylph of the woods that glided out of the shadow with a silken train behind her and diamonds in her hair," he retorted gaily. " Tut, Geoffrey ! —don't look so crestfallen. I have done with Mavis Clare and she with me. I have not been making love to her,—I have simply, just to amuse myself, tested her character,—and I find it stronger than I thought. The combat is over. She will never go my way,—nor, I fear, shall I ever go hers."
"Upon my word, Lucio," I said with some irritation, " your disposition seems to grow more and more erratic and singular every day !"
" Does it not !" he answered with a droll affectation of interested surprise in himself. " I am a curious creature altogether ! Wealth is mine and I care not a jot for it,—power is mine and I loathe its responsibility ;—in fact, I would rather be anything but what I am. Look at the lights of your ` home,
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	343
sweet home,' Geoffrey !" this he said as we emerged from among the trees on to the moonlit lawn, from whence could be seen the shining of the electric lamps in the drawing-room.
Lady Sibyl is there,—an enchanting and perfect woman, who lives but to welcome you to her embracing arms ! Fortunate man !—who would not envy you ! Love !—who would, who could exist without it—save me ! Who, in Europe at least, would forego the delights of kissing (which the Japanese bythe-bye consider a disgusting habit), without embraces,—and all those other endearments which are supposed to dignify the progress of true love ! One never tires of these things,—there is no satiety ! I wish I could love somebody !"
" So you can, if you like," I said, with a little uneasy laugh.
"I cannot. It is not in me. You heard me tell Mavis Clare as much. I have it in my power to make other people fall in love, somewhat after the dexterous fashion practised by match-making mothers,—but for myself, love on this planet is too low a thing—too brief in duration. Last night, in a dream, —I have strange dreams at times,—I saw one whom possibly I could love,—but she was a Spirit, with eyes more lustrous than the morning, and a form as transparent as flame ;—she could sing sweetly, and I watched her soaring upwards and listened to her song. It was a wild song, and to many mortal ears meaningless,—it was something like this . . ." and his rich baritone pealed lusciously forth in melodious tune

Into the Light,
Into the heart of the fire,
To the innermost core of the deathless flame I ascend,—I aspire !
Under me rolls the whirling Earth
With the noise of a myriad wheels that run Ever round and about the sun,
Over me circles the splendid heaven Strewn with the stars of morn and even, And I a queen
Of the air serene,
Float with my flag-like wings unfurled, Alone—alone—'tw•ixt God and the world !
1
344	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
Here he broke off with a laugh. " She was a strange Spirit," he said, " because she could see nothing but herself 'twist God and the world.' She was evidently quite unaware of the numerous existing barriers put up by mankind between themselves and their Maker. I wonder what unenlightened sphere she came from !"
I looked at him in mingled wonder and impatience.
" You talk wildly," I said. " And you sing wildly,—of things that mean nothing and are nothing."
He smiled, lifting his eyes to the moon, now shining her fullest and brightest.
Tie !" he replied. " Things which have meaning and are valuable, have all to do with money or appetite, Geoffrey ! There is no wider outlook evidently. But we were speaking of love, and I hold that love should be eternal as hate. Here you have the substance of my religious creed if I have any,—that there are two spiritual forces ruling the universe—love and hate,—and that their incessant quarrel creates the general con-fusion of life. Both contend one against the other,—and only at Judgment-Day will it be proved which is the strongest. I am on the side of Hate myself,—for at present Hate has scored all the victories worth winning, while Love has been so often martyred that there is only the poor ghost of it left on earth."
At that moment my wife's figure appeared at the drawing-room window, and Lucio threw away his half-smoked cigar.
" Your guardian-angel beckons !" he said, looking at me with an odd expression of something like pity mingled with disdain. " Let us go in."
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	345 X X X
Txr very next night but one after Lucio's strange inter-view with Mavis Cla:e, the thunderbolt destined to wreck my life and humiliate me to the dust fell with appalling suddenness. No warning given !—it came at a moment when I had dared to deem myself happy. All that day,—the last day I was ever to know of pride or self-gratulation,—I had enjoyed life to the full ; it was a day too in which Sibyl had seemed transformed to a sweeter gentler woman than I had hitherto known her,—when all her attractions of beauty and manner were apparently put forth to captivate and enthrall me as though she were yet to be wooed and won. Or,—did she mean to bewitch and subjugate Lucio ? Of this I never thought,—never dreamed :—I only saw in my wife an enchantress of the most voluptuous and delicate loveliness,—a woman whose very garments seemed to cling to her tenderly as though proud of clothing so exquisite a form,—a creature whose every glance was brilliant, whose every smile was a ravishment,—and whose voice, attuned to the softest and most caressing tones appeared in its every utterance to assure me of a deeper and more lasting love than I had yet enjoyed. The hours flew by on golden wings,—we all three,—Sibyl, myself and Lucio,—had attained, as I imagined, to a perfect unity of friendship and mutual understanding,—we had passed that last clay together in the outlying woods of Willowsmere, under a gorgeous canopy of autumn leaves, through which the sun shed mellow beams of rose and gold,—we had had an al fresco luncheon in the open air,—Lucio had sung for us wild old ballads and love-madrigals till the very foliage had seemed to tremble with joy at the sound of such entrancing melody,—and not a cloud had marred the perfect peace and pleasure of the time. Mavis Clare was not with us,—and I was glad. Somehow I felt that of late she had been more or less a discordant element
346	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
whenever she had joined our party. I admired her,—in a sort of fraternal half-patronizing way I even loved her,—nevertheless I was conscious that her ways were not as our ways,—her thoughts not as our thoughts. I placed the fault on her of course ; I concluded that it was because she had what I elected to call ' literary egoism,' instead of by its rightful name, the spirit of honourable independence. I never considered the inflated quality of my own egoism,—the poor pride of a ' cash and county position,' which is the pettiest sort of vain-glory anyone can indulge in,—and after turning the matter over in my mind, I decided that Mavis was a very charming young woman, with great literary gifts and an amazing pride which made it totally impossible for her to associate with many great' people, so-called,—as she would never descend to the necessary level of flunkeyish servility which they expected, and which I certainly demanded. I should almost have been inclined to relegate her to Grub Street, had not a faint sense of justice as well as shame held me back from doing her that in-dignity even in my thoughts. However, I was too much impressed with my own vast resources of unlimited wealth to realize the fact that anyone who, like Mavis, earns independence by intellectual work and worth alone, is entitled to feel a far greater pride than those who by mere chance of birth or heritage become the possessors of millions. Then again, Mavis Clare's literary position was, though I liked her person-ally, always a kind of reproach to me when I thought of my own abortive efforts to win the laurels of fame. So that on the whole I was glad she did not spend that day with us in the woods ;—of course, if I had paid any attention to the
trifles which make up the sum of life' I should have remembered that Lucio had told her he would " meet her no more on earth,"—but I judged this to be a mere trifle of hasty and melodramatic speech, without any intentional meaning.
So my last twenty-four hours of happiness passed away in halcyon serenity,—I felt a sense of deepening pleasure in existence, and I began to believe that the future had brighter
THE SORROWS OF SATAN	347
things in store for me than I had lately ventured to expect. Sibyl's new phase of gentleness and tenderness towards me, combined with her rare beauty, seemed to augur that the misunderstandings between us would be of short duration, and that her nature, too early rendered harsh and cynical by a ` society' education, would soften in time to that beautiful womanliness which is, after all, woman's best charm. Thus I thought, in blissful and contented reverie, reclining under the branching autumnal foliage, with my fair wife beside me, and listening to the rich tones of my friend Lucio's magnificent voice pealing forth sonorous, wild melodies, as the sunset deepened in the sky and the twilight shadows fell. Then came the night—the night which dropped only for a few hours over the quiet landscape, but for ever over me !
We had dined late, and, pleasantly fatigued with our day in the open air had retired early. I had latterly grown a heavy sleeper, and I suppose I must have slumbered some hours, when I was awakened suddenly as though by an imperative touch from some unseen hand. I started up in my bed,—the night-lamp was burning dimly, and by its glimmer I saw that Sibyl was no longer at my side. My heart gave one bound against my ribs and then almost stood still—a sense of some-thing unexpected and calamitous chilled my blood. I pushed aside the embroidered silken hangings of the bed and peered into the room,—it was empty. Then I rose hastily, put on my clothes and went to the door,—it was carefully shut, but not locked as it had been when we retired for the night. I opened it without the least noise, and looked out into the long passage,—no one there ! Immediately opposite the bed-room door there was a winding oak staircase leading down to a broad corridor which in former times had been used as a music-room or picture-gallery,—an ancient organ, still sweet of tone, occupied one end of it with dull golden pipes towering up to the carved and embossed ceiling,—the other end was lit by a large oriel window like that of a church, filled with rare old stained glass, representing in various niches the lives
348	THE SORROWS OF SATAN
of the saints, the centre subject being the martyrdom of St Stephen. Advancing with soft caution to the balustrade over-looking this gallery I gazed down into it, and for a moment could see nothing on the polished floor but the criss-cross pat-terns made by the moonlight falling through the great window, —but presently, as I watched breathlessly, wondering where Sibyl could have gone to at this time of night, I saw a dark tall shadow waver across the moonlit network of lines, and I heard the smothered sound of voices. With my pulses beating furiously, and a sensation of suffocation in my throat,—full of strange thoughts and suspicions which I dared not define, I crept slowly and stealthily down the stair, till as my foot touched the last step I saw—what nearly struck me to the ground with a shock of agony—and I had to draw back and bite my lips hard to repress the cry that nearly escaped them. There, —there before me in the full moonlight, with the colours of the red and blue robes of the painted saints on the window glowing blood-like and azure about her, knelt my wife,—arrayed in a diaphanous garment of filmy white which betrayed rather than concealed the outline of her form,—her wealth of hair falling about her in wild disorder,—her hands clasped in supplication,—her pale face upturned ; and above her towered the dark imposing figure of Lucio ! I stared at the twain with dry burning eyes,—what did this portend ? Was she—my wife—false ? Was he—my friend—a traitor ?
Patience !—patience !" I muttered to myself. "This is a piece of acting doubtless—such as chanced the other night with Mavis Clare !—patience !—let us hear this—this comedy !" And, drawing myself close up against the wall, I leaned there, scarcely drawing breath, waiting for her voice—for his ;—when they spoke I should know,—yes, I should know all ! And I fastened my looks on them as they stood there,—vaguely wondering even in my tense anguish, at the fearful light on Lucio's face,—a light which could scarcely be the reflection of the moon, as he backed the window,—and at the scorn of his frowning brows. What terrific humour swayed him ?—
TIE SORROWS OF SATAN	349
why did he, even to my stupefied thought appear more than human ?—why did his very beauty seem hideous at that moment, and his aspect fiendish ? Hush—hush ! She spoke, —my wife,—I heard her every word,—heard al and endured all without falling (lead at her feet in the extremity of my dis honour and despair
" I love you !" she wailed. Lucio, I love you, and my love s killing me ! Be merciful !—have pity on my passion ! Love me for one hour, one little hour !—it is not much to ask, a:1d afterwards,—do with me wh tt you will,—torture me, brand me an outcast in the public sight, curse me before Heaven —I care nothing—I am yours body and soul—1 love )ou!"
Her accents vibrated with mad, idolatrous pleading,—I listened infuriated, but dumb. " Flush,--hush !" I told myself. "'Phis is a comedy—not yet played out !" And I waited, with every nerve strained, for Lucio's reply. It came, accompanied by a laugh, iow and sarcastic.
You flatter me!" he said. " I regret I am unable to return the compliment !"
'\Iy heart gave a throb of relief and fierce joy,—almost I could have joinel in his ironical laughter. She—Sibyldragged herself nearer to him.
Lucio—Lucio !" she murmured. " Have you a heart? Can you reject me when I pray to you thus ?—when I offer you all myself,—all that I am, or ever hope to be ? Am I so repugnant to you ? Many men would give their lives if I would say to them what I say to you, —but they are nothing to me—you alone are my world,—the breath of my existence ! —ah, Lucio, can you not believe, Nvill you not realize how deeply I love you '"
He turned towards her with a sudden fierce movement that startled me,—and the cloud of scorn upon his brows grew darker.
" I know you love me !" he said, and from where I stood I saw the cold derisive smile flash from his lips to his eyes in
350	THE SORROWS OF' SATAN
lightning-like mockery. " I have always known it. Your vampire soul leaped to mine at the first glance I ever gave ou,—you were a false foul thing from the first, and you recognised your master ! Yes—your master !" for she had uttered a faint cry as i. in fear,—and he, stooping, snatched her two hands and grasped them hard in his own. " listen to the truth of yourself for once from one who is not afraid to'speak it !—you love me,—and truly your body and soul are mine to claim if 1 so choose ! You married with a lie upon your lips; you swore fidelity to your husband before God, with infidelity already in your thoughts, and by your own act made the mystical blessing a blasphemy and a curse ! Wonder not then that the curse has fallen ! I knew it all !—the kiss I gave you on your wedding-day put fire in your blood and sealed you mine !—why, you would have fled to me that very night, had I demanded it,—had I loved you as you love me,—that is, if you choose to call the disease of vanity and desire that riots in your veins by such a name as love ! But now hear me!" and as he held her two wrists he looked down upon her with such black wrath depicted in his face as seemed to create a darkness round him where he stood ;—" I hate you ! Yes—I hate you, and all such women as you ! For you corrupt the world,—you turn good to evil,—you deepen folly into crime,—with the seduction of your nude limbs and lying eyes, you make fools, cowards and beasts of men ! When you die, your bodies generate foulness,—things of the mould and slime are formed out of the flesh that was once fair for man's delight,—yon are no use in life—you be-come poison in death,—I hate you all ' I read your soul—it is an ope i book to me—and it is branded with a name given to those who are publicly vile, but which should, of strict right and justice, he equally bestowed on women of your position and type. who occupy pride and place .n this world's standing, and who have not the excuse of poverty for selling themselves to the devil !"
Iie ceased abruptly and with passion, making a movement
THE SORROW'S OF SATAN	35'
a; the^ugh to fling her from him,--hut she clung to his arm,—clung with all the pertinacity of the loa:hly insect he had taken from the bosom of the dead Egyptian woman and made a toy of to amuse his leisure! And 1, looking on and listening, honoured him for his plain speaking, for his courage in telling this shameless creat.ire what he was in the opinion of an hon St man, wi:hu..t glozing over her outrageous conduct for the :-.ake of civility or social observance. My friend, my more than friend I-le was true,—he was loyal,—he had neither desire nor intent to betray or dishonour me. My heart swelled with gratitude to him, and also with a curious sense of feeble self pity,--compassionating myself- intensely I could have sobbed aloud in nervous fury and pain, had not my de-sire to hear more repressed my personal excitement and emotion. I watched my wife wonderingly--what had become of her pride that she still knelt before the man who had taunted her with such words as should have been beyond all en-durance ?
" Lucio! . . . Lucio !" she whispered, and her whispers sounded through the long gallery like the hiss of a snake---" say what you will-- say all you will of me,—you can say nothing that is not true. I am vile--I own it. But is it of much avail to be virtuous ? What pleasure comes from goodness ?—what gratification from self-denial ? There is no God to care ! A few years, and we all die, and are forgotten even by those who loved US,—Why should we lose such joys as we may have for the mere asking ? Surely- it is not difficult to love even for an hour ?—am I not fair to look upon ?—and is all this beauty of my face and form worthless in your sight, and you no more than man ? Murder me as you may with all the cruelty of cruel words, I care nothing !—I love you—love you !" a-~d in a perfect passion of self-abandonment she sprang to her feet, tossing back her rich hair over her shoulders, and stood erect, a very bacchante of wild loveliness. " Look at me ! You shall not,—you dare not spurn such a love as mine !"

