<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
These files converted to text wonderfully. The confidence levels are high, and no clipping of either edge of the pages occurred with any frequency.<pb n="1"/>
THE RISING TIDE
CHAPTER I
<p>A SINGLE car-track ran through Payton Street, and over it, once in a while, a small car jogged along, drawn by two mules. Thirty years ago Payton Street had been shocked by the intrusion upon its gentility of a thing so noisy and vulgar as a street-car; but now, when the rest of the town was shuttled with trolleys and clamorous with speed, it seemed to itself an oasis of silence. Its gentility had ebbed long ago. The big houses, standing a little back from the sidewalk, were given over to lodgers or small businesses. Indeed, the Paytons were the only people left who belonged to Payton Street's past--and there was a barber shop next door to them, and a liverystable across the street.</p>
<p>"Rather different from the time when your dear father brought me here, a bride," Mrs. Payton used to say, sighing.</p>
<p>Her daughter agreed, dryly: "I hope so! Certainly nobody would live on Payton Street now, if they could afford to buy a lot in the cemetery."</p>
<p>Yet the Paytons, who could have bought several lots
<pb n="THE RISING TIDE 2"/>

in the cemetery (or over on the Hill, either, which was where they belonged!), did not leave the old house--a big, brownstone cube, with a belvedere on top of it that looked like a bird-cage. The yard in front of the house was so shaded by ailanthus-trees that grass refused to grow there, and an iron dog, guarding the patch of bare earth, was spotted with mold.</p>
<p>The street was very quiet,--except when the barber's children squabbled shrilly, or Baker's livery-stable sent out a few funeral hacks, or when, from a barred window in the ell of the Payton house, there came a noisy laugh. And always, on the half-hour, the two mules went tinkling along, their neat little feet cupping down over the cobblestones, and their trace-chains swinging and sagging about their heels. The conductor on the car had been on the route so long that he knew many of his patrons, and nodded to them in a friendly way, and said it was a good day, or too cold for the season; occasionally he imparted
information which he thought might be of interest to them.</p>
<p>On this October afternoon of brown fog and occasional dashes of rain he enlightened a lady with a vaguely sweet face, who signaled him to stop at No. 15.</p>
<p>"Miss Payton's out," he said, pulling the strap over his head and bringing his car to a standstill; "but her ma's at home. I brought the old lady back on my last trip, just as Miss Freddy was starting off with that pup of hers."</p>
<p>"It's the 'old lady' I've come to see," his fare said, smiling, and, gathering up her skirts, stepped down into
<pb n="THE RISING TIDE 3"/>

the Payton Street mud. The bell jangled and the mules went clattering off over the cobblestones.</p>
<p>Mrs. William Childs, picking her way to the sidewalk, said to herself that she almost wished Freddy and her dog were at home, instead of the "old lady."</p>
<p>"Poor dear Ellen," she thought, in amiable detachment from other people's troubles; "she's always asking me to sit in judgment on Fred--and there's nothing on earth I can do."</p>
<p>It occurred to her as she passed under the dripping ailanthus-trees and up the white marble door-steps that Payton Street was a gloommy place for a young creature like Frederica to live. "Even my Laura would kick," she thought; her thoughts were often in her Laura's vernacular. In the dark hall, clutching at the newelpost on which an Egyptian maiden held aloft a gasburner in a red globe, she extended a foot to a melancholy mulatto woman, who removed her rubbers and
then hung her water-proof on the rack beside a silk hat belonging to the late Mr. Payton--kept there, Mrs. Childs knew, to frighten perennially expected burglars.</p>
<p>"Thank you, Flora," she said. "Has Mr. Weston come yet?" When Flora explained that Mr. Weston was not expected until later, she started up-stairs--then
hesitated, her hand on the shoulder of the Egyptian maiden: "Mr. Mortimore--he's not about?"</p>
<p>"Land, no, Mis' Childs!" the woman reassured her; "he don't ever come down 'thout his ma or Miss Carter's along with him."</p>
<p>Mrs. Childs nodded in a relieved way, and went on up
<pb n="THE RISING TIDE 4"/>

to the sitting-room where, as she had been warned, she and Mr. Arthur Weston, one of the trustees of what was popularly known as "the old Andy Payton estate," were to "sit in judgment." "It is hard for Fred to have Mortimore in the house," she thought, kindly; "poor Freddy!"</p>
<p>The sitting-room was in the ell, and pausing on the landing at the steps that led up to it, she looked furtively beyond it, toward another room at the end of the hall. "I wonder if Ellen ever forgets to lock the door on her side?" she thought;--"well, Nelly dear, how are you?" she called out, cheerfully.</p>
<p>Mrs. Payton, bustling forward to meet her, overflowed with exclamations of gratitude for her visit. "And such unpleasant weather, too! I do hope you didn't get your feet damp? I always tell Freddy there is no surer way to take cold than to get your feet damp. Of course she doesn't believe me, but I'm used to that! Is William's cold better? I suppose he's glad of an excuse to stay indoors and read about Bacon and Shakespeare; which was which? I never can remember! Now sit right down here. No, take this chair!"</p>
<p>The caller, moving from one chair to another, was perfectly docile; it was Ellen's way, and Mrs. Childs had long ago discovered the secret of a peaceful life, namely, always, so far as possible, to let other people have their own way. She looked about the sitting-room, and thought that her sister-in-law was very comfortable. "Laura would have teased me to death if I had kept my old-
fashioned things," she reflected. The room was feminine as well as old-fashioned; the deeply upholstered chairs
<pb n="THE RISING TIDE 5"/>

and couches were covered with flounced and flowery chintz; on a green wire plant-stand, over-watered ferns grew daily more scraggy and anemic; the windows were smothered in lambrequins and curtains, and beadwork valances draped corer brackets holding Parian marble statuettes; of course there was the usual womanish clutter of photographs in silver frames. On the center-table a slowly evolving picture puzzle had pushed a few books to one side--pretty little books with pretty names, <hi rend="italic">Flowers of Peace</hi> and <hi rend="italic">Messages from Heaven</hi>, most of them with the leaves still uncut. It was an eminently comfortable room; indeed, next to her conception of duty, the most important thing in Mrs. Andrew Payton's life was comfort.</p>
<p>Just now, she was tenanciously solicitous for Mrs. Childs's ease; was she warm enough? Wasn't the footstool a little too high? And the fire--dear me! the fire <hi rend="italic">was</hi> too hot! She must put up the screen. She wouldn't make tea until Mr. Weston came; yes, he had promised to come; she had written him, frankly, that he had simply got to do something about Freddy. "He's her trustee, as well as mine, and I told him he simply <hi rend="italic">must</hi> do something about this last wild idea of hers. Now! isn't it better to have the screen in front of the fire?"</p>
<p>Mrs. Childs said the screen was most comfortable; then added, in uncertain reminiscence, "Wasn't Mr. Weston jilted ages ago by some Philadelphia girl?"</p>
<p>"Oh, dear, yes; so sad. Kate Morrison. She ran off with somebody else just a week before they were to be married. Horribly awkward for him; the invitations all
<pb n="THE RISING TIDE 6"/>

out! He went to Europe, and was agent for Payton's until dear Andrew died. You are quite sure you are not too warm?"</p>
<p>"No, indeed!" Mrs. Childs said. "How is Mortimore?" It was a perfunctory question, but its omission would have pained Mortimore's mother.</p>
<p>"Very well!" Mrs. Payton said; her voice challenging any one to suspect anything wrong with Mortimore's health. "He knew Freddy to-day; he was in the hall when she went out; he can't bear her dog, and he--he scolded a little. I'm sure I don't blame him! I hate dogs, myself. But he knew her; Miss Carter told me about it when I came in. I was so pleased."</p>
<p>"That was very nice," her visitor said, kindly. There was a moment's silence; then, glancing toward a closed door that connected the sitting-room with that room at the end of the ell, she said, hesitatingly: "Nelly dear, don't you think that perhaps Freddy wouldn't be so difficult, if poor Mortimore were not at home? William says he thinks--"</p>
<p>"My son shall never leave this house as long as I am in it myself!" Mrs. Payton interrupted, her face flushing darkly red.</p>
<p>"But it is unpleasant for Fred, and--"</p>
<p>"'Unpleasant' to have her poor afflicted brother in the house? Bessie, I wouldn't have thought such a thing of you! Let me tell you, once for all, as I've told you many, many times before--never, while I live, shall 
Mortimore be treated cruelly and turned out of his own home!"</p>
<pb n="THE RISING TIDE 7"/>

<p>"But William says they are not cruel, at--at those places; and Mortimore, poor boy! would never know the difference."</p>
<p>"He would! He would! Didn't I tell you he recognized his sister to-day? His sister, who cares more for her dog than she does for him! And he almost always knows me. Bessie, you don't understand how a mother feels--" she had risen and was walking about the room, her fat, worn face sharpening with a sort of animal
alertness into power and protection. The claws that hide in every maternal creature slipped out of the fur of good manners: "We've gone all over this a hundred times; I know that you think I am a fool; and <hi rend="italic">I</hi> think that you--well, never mind! The amount of it is, you are not a mother."</p>
<p>"My dear! What about my three children?"</p>
<p>"Three healthy children! What do you know of the real child, the afflicted child, like my Mortimore? Why, I'd see Freddy in her grave before I'd--" She stopped short. "I--I love both my children exactly the same,"
she ended, weakly. Then broke out again: "You and I were brought up to do our duty, and not talk about it whether it was pleasant or unpleasant. And let me tell you, if Freddy would do her duty to her brother, as old Aunt Adelaide did to her invalid brother, she'd be a thousand times happier than she is now, mixing up with perfectly common people, and talking about earning her own living! Yes, that's the last bee in her bonnet,--Working! a girl with a good home, and nothing on earth to do but amuse herself. She uses really vulgar words
<pb n="THE RISING TIDE 8"/>

about women who never worked for their living; you and me, for instance. 'Vermin'--no, 'parasites.' Disgusting! Yes; if Freddy was like her great-aunt Adelaide--" Mrs. Payton, sinking into a chair bubbly with springs and down, was calmer, but she wiped her eyes once or twice: "Aunt Adelaide gave up her life to poor Uncle Henry. Everybody says she had lots of beaux! I heard she had seven offers. But she never dreamed of getting married. She just lived for her brother. And they say he was dreadful, Bessie; whereas my poor
Mortimore is only--not quite like other people." Mrs. Childs gasped. "When Morty was six months old," Mrs. Payton said, in a tense voice, "and we began
to be anxious about him, Andrew said to the doctor, 'I suppose the brat' (you know men speak so frankly) 'has no brains?' and Dr. Davis said, 'The intellect is there, Mr. Payton, but it is veiled.' That has always been such a comfort to me; Morty's intellect is there! And besides, you must remember, Bessie, that even if he isn't--very intelligent, he's a man, so he's really the head of the family. As for Freddy, as I say, if she would follow her aunt Adelaide's example, instead of reading horrid books about things that when I was a young lady, girls didn't know existed, she'd be a good deal more comfortable to live with. Oh, dear! what am I going to do about her? As I wrote to Mr. Weston, when I asked him to come in this afternoon, what are we going to do about her?"</p>
<p>"What has poor Fred done now?" Fred's aunt asked, trying patiently to shut off the torrent of talk.</p>
<p>Mrs. Payton drew a long breath; her chin was still 
<pb n="THE RISING TIDE 9"/>

unsteady. "It isn't so much this last performance, because, of course, in spite of what Mama says, everybody who knows Freddy, knows that there was--nothing
wrong. But it's her ideas, and the way she talks. Really, Bessie--"</p>
<p>"My dear, they all talk most unpleasantly!"</p>
<p>Mrs. Payton shook her fair head. "Your Laura doesn't. I never heard Lolly say the sort of things Freddy does. She calls her father 'Billy-boy,' I know, but that's only fun--though in our day, imagine us calling our fathers by a
nickname! No, Bessie, it's Freddy's taste. It's positively low! There is a Mrs. McKenzie, a scrubwoman out at the Inn, and she is--<hi rend="italic">you</hi> know? It will be the seventh, and they really can hardly feed the six they have. And Freddy, <hi rend="italic">a young girl</hi>, actually told Mrs. McKenzie she ought not to have so many children!"</p>
<p>"Well, Ellen, if there are too many now, it does seem--"</p>
<p>"But, Bessie! A girl to speak of such things! Why, you and I, before we were married, didn't know--still, there's no use harking back to our girlhood. And as for the things she says!...Yesterday I was speaking of the Rev. Mr. Tait, and she said: 'I haven't any use for Tait; he has no guts to him.'"</p>
<p>Mrs. Childs was mildly horrified. "But it's only bad taste," she excused her niece. She was fond of this poor, troubled sister-in-law of hers--but really, what was the use of fussing so over mere bad taste? Over really serious things, such as keeping that dreadful Mortimore about, Ellen didn't fuss at all! "How queer she is," Mrs. Childs reflected, impersonal, but kindly; then murmured that if
<pb n="THE RISING TIDE 10"/>
THE RISING TIDE
she had been unhappy about her children's slang, she'd have been in her grave by this time; "You should hear my boys! And, after all, Ellen, Fred's a good child, in spite of this thing she's done (you haven't told me what it is yet). She's merely like all the rest of them--thinks she knows it all. Well, we did, too, at her age, only we didn't say so. Sometimes I think they are more straightforward than we were. But I made up my mind, years ago, that there was no use trying to run the children on my ideas. Criticism only provoked them, and made me wretched, and accomplished nothing. So, as William says, why fuss?"</p>
<p>"Fred is my daughter, so I have to 'fuss.'"</p>
<p>"Well," said Mrs. Childs, patiently, "what is it?"</p>
<p>"Hasn't Laura told you? Mama says everybody is talking about it."</p>
<p>"No; she hasn't said anything."</p>
<p>"My dear, Freddy spent the night at the Inn, with Howard Maitland."</p>
<p>"What!"</p>
<p>"His car broke down--"</p>
<p>"Oh, an accident? You can't blame Fred for that. But why didn't they take the trolley?"</p>
<p>"They just missed the last car."</p>
<p>"Well, they were two careless children, but you wouldn't have had them walk into town, twelve miles, at twelve o'clock at night?"</p>
<p>"I certainly would! Freddy is always telling me I ought to walk to keep my weight down--so why didn't she walk home? And as for their being children, she is twenty-five and I am sure he is twenty-seven."</p>
<pb n="THE RISING TIDE 11"/>

<p>She paused here to wonder about Mr. Maitland: curious that he liked to live alone in that big house on the hill! Pity he hadn't any relatives--a maiden aunt, or anybody who could keep house for him. His mother was a sweet little thing. Nice that he had money.</p>
<p>"He ought to marry," said Mrs. Childs.</p>
<p>"Of course," said Mrs. Payton; and dropped young Maitland to go back to the Inn escapade: "Mama was
so shocked when she heard about it that she thought William ought to go and see Mr. Maitland and tell him he must marry her. Of course, that is absurd--Mama
belongs to another generation. Freddy did take the trouble to telephone me; but Flora took the message--poor Flora! she's so dissatisfied and low-spirited. I wish she'd 'get religion'--that keeps servants contented. Miss Carter says she's in love with one of the men at the liverystable. But he isn't very devoted. Well, I was in bed with a headache (I've been dreadfully busy this week, and pretty tired, and besides, I had worked all the evening on a puzzle, and I was perfectly worn out); so Flora didn't tell me, and I didn't know Freddy hadn't come home until the next morning. It appears she was advising Mrs. McKenzie as to the size of her family, and when Mr. Maitland found he couldn't make his motor go, and told her they must take the trolley, she just kept on instructing Mrs. McKenzie! So they missed the car. She: admitted that it was her fault. Well, then--oh, here is Mr. Weston!"</p>
<p>He came into the room, dusky with the fog that was pressing against the windows, like a slender shadow; a
<pb n="THE RISING TIDE 12"/>

tall, rather delicate-looking man in the late forties, witha handsome, whimsical face, which endeavored, just now,to conceal its boredom."Criminal not present?" he said, shaking hands withthe two ladies and peering near-sightedly about."Oh, she's off with her dog, walking miles and miles,to keep from getting fat," Mrs. Payton said. She satdown at her tea-table, and tried, fussily, to light thelamp under the kettle. "It's wicked to be fat, you know,"she ended, with resentful sarcasm; "I wish you could hear Fred talk about it!""I wish I could," Frederica's man of business said,lifting a humorous eyebrow; "I always like to hear Fredtalk. Let me fix that lamp for you, Mrs. Payton. Ihope I'm thin enough to be moral?"The two ladies regarded him with maternal eyes, andMrs. Childs recommended a glass of milk at bedtime."Be sure it is pasteurized," she warned him; "my William always says it's perfect nonsense to fuss aboutthat-but I say it's only prudent.""Must I pasteurize my whisky, too?" he said, meekly;"I sometimes take that at bedtime." It occurred to himthat when he had the chance he would tell Freddy thatwhat with pasteurized milk, and all the other improve-ments upon Nature, her children would be supermen;"they'll say they were evolved from us," he reflected,sipping his tea, and listening to his hostess's outpouringsabout her daughter, "as we say we were evolved frommonkeys."Not that Mrs. Payton-telling him, with endless illus-12
<pb n="13"/>
THE RISING TIDEtrations, just how, "impossible" her Freddy was-lookedin the least like a monkey; she was a large, fair, dull lady,of fifty-seven or thereabouts, who never took any exercise,and credited the condition of her liver to Providence;but she was nearly as far removed from Miss FredericaPayton as she was from those arboreal ancestors, the verymention of whom would have shocked her religious prin-ciples, for Mrs. Payton was very truly and humbly re-ligious."And church-Freddy never goes to church," she com-plained. "She plays tennis all Sunday morning. Ratherdifferent from our day, isn't it, Bessie? We children werenever allowed even to read secular books on Sunday.Well, I think it was better than the laxity of the present.We always wore our best dresses to church, and-""May I have some more tea, Mrs. Payton?" her auditormurmured, and, the tide of reminiscence thus skilfullydammed, Freddy's offense was finally revealed to him."Well," he said,-"yes, cream please; a great deal! Ihope it's pasteurized?-they were stupid to lose the car.Fred told me all about it yesterday; it appears she wastalking to some poor woman about the size of her family"-the two ladies exchanged horrified glances;-" of course,Maitland ought to have broken in on eugenics and hustledher off. But an accident isn't one of the seven deadly sins,and-""Oh," Fred's mother interrupted, "of vurse there wasnothing wrong."Mr. Weston looked at her admiringly; she really con-ceived it necessary to say such a thing! Those deniedI3
<pb n="14"/>
THE RISING TIDEancestors of hers could hardly have been more direct.It occurred to him, reaching for another lump of sugar,that Frederica came by her talent for free speech honestly."With her mother, it is free thought. Fred goes one bet-ter, that's all," he reflected, dreamily. Once or twice,while the complaints flowed steadily on, he roused him-self from his amused abstraction to murmur sympatheticdisapproval: "Of course she ought not to say thingslike that-""She is impossible!" Mrs. Payton sighed. "Why, shesaid 'Damn,' right out, before the Rev. Mr. Tait!""Did she damn Tait? I know him, and really-" "Well, no; I think it was the weather. But that isnothing to the way she talks about old people.""About me, perhaps?""Oh no; really, no! About you?" Mrs. Payton stam-mered; "why-how could she say anything about you?"Arthur Weston's eyes twinkled. ("I'll make her tellme what it was," he promised himself.)"As for age," Mrs. Childs corroborated, "she seems tohave no respect for it. She spoke quite rudely to her uncleWilliam about Shakespeare and Bacon. She said thesubject 'bored' her."Mr. Weston shook his head, speechless."And she said," Mrs. Childs went on, her usual detach-ment'sharpening for a moment into personal displeasure,"she said the antis had no brains; and she knows I'm ananti !""Oh, my dear," Fred's mother condoled, "I'm an anti,and she says shocking things to me; once she said theI4
<pb n="15"/>
THE RISING TIDEantis were-I really can't say just what she said beforeMr. Weston; but she implied they were-merely mothers.And as for her language! I was saying how perfectlyshocked my dear old friend, Miss Maria Spenicer, wasover this Inn escapade; Miss Maria said that if it wereknown that Freddy had spent the night at the Inn withMr. Maitland her reputation would be gone."Mr. Weston's lips drew up for a whistle, but he frowned."I told Freddy, and what do you suppose she said?Really, I hesitate to repeat it.""But dear Ellen," Mrs. Childs broke in, "it was horridin Miss Spencer to say such a thing! I don't wonderFreddy was provoked.""She brought it on herself," Mrs. Payton retorted."Have another sandwich, Bessie? What she said is al-most too shocking to quote. She said of my dear oldfriend-Miss Spencer used to be my school-teacher, Mr.Weston-'What difference does it make what she saidabout me? Everybody knows Miss Spencer is a silly oldass.' 'A silly old ass.' What do you think of that?" Mrs.Payton's voice trembled so with indignation that she didnot hear Mr. Weston's gasp of laughter. But as shepaused, wounded and ashamed, he was quick to consoleher:"It was abominably disrespectful!""There is no such thing as reverence left in the world,"said Mrs. Childs; "my William says he doesn't knowwhat we are coming to.""Youth is very cruel," Mr. Weston said.Mrs. Payton's eyes filled. "Freddy is cruel," she said,I5
<pb n="16"/>
THE RISING TIDEsimply. The wounded look in her worn face was pitiful.They both tried to comfort her; they denounced Freddy,and wondered at her, and agreed with Mr. Childs that"nobody knew what we were coming to." In fact, theysaid every possible thing except the one thing which,with entire accuracy, they might have said, namely, thatMiss Spencer was a silly old ass."When I was a young lady," Mrs. Payton said, "re-spect for my elders would have made such words impos-sible.""Even if you didn't respect them, you would havebeen respectful?" Mr. Weston suggested."We reverenced age because it was age," she agreed."Yes; in those happy days respect was not dependentupon desert," he said, ruefully. (Mrs. Childs looked athim uneasily; just what did he mean by that?) " It musthave been very comfortable," he ruminated, "to be re- spected when you didn't deserve to be! This new stateof things I don't like at all; I find that they size me up asI am, these youngsters, not as what they ought to think I am. One of my nephews told me the other day that I didn't know what I was talking about.""Oh, my dear Mr. Weston, how shocking!" Mrs. Pay-ton sympathized."Well, as it happened, I didn't," he said, mildly; 'buthow outrageous for the cub to recognize the fact.""Perfectly outrageous!" said his hostess. "But it'sjust as Bessie says, they don't know the meaning of theword 'respect.' You should hear Freddy talk about her grandmother. The other day when I told her that my*      '                         16         !                 ' 'I
<pb n="17"/>
THE RISING TIDEdear mother said that if women had the ballot, chivalrywould die out and men wouldn't take off their hats inelevators when ladies were present,-she said, 'Grand-mother belongs to the generation of women who weresatisfied to have men retain their vices, if they removedtheir hats.' What do you think of that! I'm sure I don'tknow what Freddy's father would have said if he hadheard his daughter say such a thing about his mother-in-law."Mr. Weston, having known the late Andy Payton,thought it unwise to quote the probable comment of thedeceased.  Instead, he tried to change the subject:"Howard Maitland is a nice chap; I wonder if-" hepaused; there was a scuffle on the other side of the closeddoor, a bellowing laugh, then a whine. Mrs. Childs bither lip and shivered. Mr. Weston's face was inscrutable." I wonder," he continued, raising his voice-"if Fred willsmile on Maitland? By the way, I hear he is going in forconchology seriously.""Mortimore is nervous this afternoon," Mrs. Paytonsaid, hurriedly; "that horrid puppy worried him. Con-chology means shells, doesn't it? Freddy says he has agreat collection of shells. I was thinking of sending himthat old conch-shell I used to use to keep the parlor dooropen. Do you remember, Bessie? Yes, Mr. Maitland isattentive, but I don't know how serious it is. Of course,I'm the last person to know! Rather different from thetime when a young man asked the girl's parents if hemight pay his addresses, isn't it? Well, I want to tellyou what she said when I spoke to her about this plan ofI7
<pb n="18"/>
THE RISING TIDEearning her living (that's her latest fad, Mr. Weston), andtold her that, as Mama says, it isn't done; she-""Oh, dear! There's the car coming," Mrs. Childs brokein, as the tinkle of the mules' bells made itself heard. "Dohurry and tell us, Nelly; I've got to go.""But you mustn't! I want to know what you thinkabout it all," Mrs. Payton said, distractedly; "wait forthe next car."" I'm so sorry, dear Ellen, but I really can't," her sister-in-law declared, rising. "Cheer up! I'm sure she'll settledown if she cares about Mr. Maitland. (I'm out of it!"she was thinking.) But even as she was congratulatingherself, she was lost, for from the landing a fresh youngvoice called out:"May I come in, Aunt Nelly? How do you do, Mr.Weston! Mama, I came to catch you and make youwalk home. Mama has got to walk, she's getting so fat!Aunt Nelly, Howard Maitland is here; I met him on thedoor-step and brought him in."
<pb n="19"/>
CHAPTER IILAURA CHILDS came into the quiet, fire-lit roomlike a little whirl of fresh wind. The young man,looming up behind her in the doorway, clean-shaven,square-jawed, honest-eyed, gave a sunshiny grin of gen-eral friendliness and said he hoped Mrs. Payton wouldforgivehim for butting in, but Fred had told him to callfor some book she wanted him to read, and the maiddidn't know anything about it."I thought perhaps she had left it with you," he said.Mrs. Payton, conscious, as were the'other two, of havingtalked about the speaker only a minute before, expressedflurried and embarrassed concern. She was so sorry!She couldn't imagine where the book was! She got up,and fumbled among the Flowers of Peace. "You don'tremember the title?"He shook his head. "Awfully sorry. I'm so stupidabout all these deep books Fred's so keen on. Somethingabout birth-rate and the higher education, I think."Mrs. Payton stiffened visibly. "I don't know of anysuch book," she said; then murmured, perfunctorily, thathe must have a cup of tea.Again Mr. Maitland was sorry,-" dreadfully sorry,"-but he had to go. He went; and the two ladies looked ateach other.I9
<pb n="20"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Do you suppose he heard us?""I don't believe he did!""Nice chap," said Mr. Weston.On the way down-stairs the nice chap was telling Laurathat he had caught on, the minute he got into that room,that it wasn't any social whirl, so he thought he'd betterget out."They're sitting on Freddy, I'm afraid," Laura said,soberly; "poor old Fred!""Well, I put one over when I asked for that book!I bet even old Weston's never read it! Neither have I.But Fred can give us all cards and spades on sociology.""She's great," Laura agreed; "but the book isn't soawfully deep. Well, I'm going back to root for4her !"She ran up to the sitting-room again, and demanded tea.Her face, under her big black hat, was like a rose, and her  ;pleasant brown eyes glanced with all the sweet, good- natured indifference of kindly youth at the three troubled people about the tea-table. Somehow, quite unreason-ably, their depression lightened for a moment. .. ."No! No sugar, Aunt Nelly.""Do you want to be as thin as I am, Miss Laura?"Arthur Weston remonstrated, watching her rub her coolcheek against her mother's, and kiss her aunt, and " hook"a sandwich from the tea-table. One had to smile at Laura; her mother smiled, even while she thought of the walkhome, and realized, despairingly, that the car was coming -coming-and would be gone in a minute or two!"My dear, your father says all this fuss about exerciseis perfect nonsense. Really, I think we'd better ride,,"20:X; 
<pb n="21"/>
THE RISING TIDEshe pleaded with the pretty creature, who was asking,ruthlessly, for lemon, which meant another delay."I'll ring, Auntie; Flora will get it in a minute. Mama,I bet you haven't walked an inch this day! I knew you'dtake the car if I didn't come and drag you on to your legs,"she ended, maliciously; but it was such pretty malice,and her face was so gayly amiable that her mother sur-rendered. "The only thing that reconciles me to Billy-boy's being too poor to give us an auto," Laura said,gravely, "is that Mama would weigh a ton if she rodeeverywhere. I bet you've eaten six cream-cheese sand-wiches, Mama? You'll gain a pound for each oner'"You'll be the death of me, Lolly," her mother sighed."I only ate three. Well, I'll stay a little longer, Ellen, andwalk part way home with this child. She's a perfecttyrant," she added, with tender, scolding pride in thecharming young creature, whose arch impertinence wasirresistible."Take off your coat, my dear," Mrs. Payton said,patting her niece's hand, "and go and look at my puzzleover on the table. Five hundred pieces! I'm afraid itwill take me a week yet to work it out;"-then, in an aside:"Laura, I'm mortified that I should have asked Mr. Mait-land the title of that book before you,"-Laura openedquestioning eyes;-"so indelicate of Fred to tell him toread it! Oh, here's Flora with the lemon. Thank you,Flora. . .. Laura, do you know what Freddy is thinkingof doing now?""Yes, the real-estate business. It's perfectly corking!Howard Maitland says he thinks she's simply great to21
<pb n="22"/>
THE RISING TIDEdoit. I only wish I could go into business and earn somemoney!"'' My dear, if you will save some money in your ownhome, you will be just as well off," Mrs. Childs said, dryly."Better off," Mr. Weston ventured, "but you won't :II    Ehave so much fun. This idea of Fred's is a pretty expen-sive way of earning money.""You know about it?" Mrs. Payton said, surprised.;     "Oh, yes; she broke it to me yesterday.""Just what is her idea?" Mrs. Childs asked, with mildimpatience."Let me explain it," Frederica's man of business said; ti \    . . and proceeded to put the project into words of three;:f     letters, so to speak. Fred had hit on the fact that therett; 0   fare many ladies-lone females, Mr. Weston called them;who drift about looking for apartments;-" nice old maids.I know two of them at this minute, the Misses Graham, cousins of mine in Grafton. They are going to spend the winter in town, and they want a furnished apartment. Itmust be near a drug-store and far enough from an Epis-copal church to make a nice walk on Sundays-fair Sun-days. And it must be on the street-car line, so that they ,can go to concerts, with, of course, a messenger-boy toescort them; for they 'don't mean to be a burden to ayoung man'; that's me, I'll have you know! 'A youngman'! When a chap is forty-six that sounds very well.Fred proposes to find shelters for just such people."The two ladies were silent with dismay and ignorance.Laura, sucking a piece of lemon, and seeing a chance to22
<pb n="23"/>
THE RISING TIDE"root," said, "How bully to have an office! I'm going tomake her take me as office boy.""The Lord only knows how she got the idea," ArthurWeston went on, "but it isn't entirely bad. I confess Iwish her ambition would content itself with a post-officeaddress, but nothing short of a real office will satisfy her.She has her eye on one in the tenth story of the SturtevantBuilding; I am on the third, you know. But I think shecan do it all on her allowance, though rent and advertisingwill use up just about all her income.""I will never consent to it," Mrs. Payton said, angrily."It is absurd, anyhow! Freddy, to hunt up houses forelderly ladies-Freddy, of all people! She knows no moreabout houses, or housekeeping, than-than that fire-screen! Just as an instance, I happened to tell her that Icouldn't remember whether I had seventy-two best towelsand eighty-four ordinary towels, or the other way round;I was really ashamed to have forgotten which it was, andI said that as soon as I got time I must count them. (Ofcourse, I have the servants' towels, too; five dozen andfour, with red borders to distinguish them.) And Freddywas positively insulting! She said women whose mindshad stopped growing had to count towels for mental ex-ercise. When I was a girl, I should have offered to countthe towels for my mother! As for her finding apart-ments for elderly ladies, I would as soon trust a-ababy! Do you mean the Mason Grahams, Mr. Weston?Miss Eliza and Miss Mary? Mama knows them. You'vemet them, too, haven't you, Bessie? Well, I can only saythat I should be exceedingly mortified to have the Misses23
<pb n="24"/>
THE RISING TIDEGraham know that any Payton girl was behaving in suchan extraordinary manner The real-estate business! Shemight as well go out as a servant ""She would make more money as a cook," he admitted.But he could not divert the stream of hurt and angry ob-jections. Once Mrs. Childs said to tell Fred her uncleWilliam would say it was perfect nonsense; and onceLaura whispered to Mr. Weston that she thought it wouldbe great sport to hunt flats for flatlings; to which hewhispered back: "Shoal. 'Ware shoal, Laura."There were many shoals in the distressed argument thatfollowed, and even Arthur Weston's most careful steeringcould not save some bumps and crashes. In the midst ofthem the car came clattering down the street, and aftera while went clattering back; and still the three elderswrangled over the outlaw's project, and Laura, sitting onthe arm of her mother's chair, listened, giggling once in awhile, and saying to herself that Mr. Weston was a perfectlamb-for there was no doubt about it, he, too, was "rooting" for Fred. "I must go," Mrs. Childs said, at last, in a distressedvoice. "No, Lolly, we haven't time to walk; we musttake the car. Oh, Ellen, I meant to ask you: can't youjoinmy bridge club? There's going to be a vacancy, andI'm sure you can learn-""Oh, my dear, I couldn't possibly! I'm so busy; Ihaven't a minute-""Well, think it over," Mrs. Childs urged. "And, Nellydear, I know it will be all right about Fred. I'm sureWilliam would say so. Don't worry!"24
<pb n="25"/>
THE RISING TIDEBut when the door closed upon the escaping aunt andthe sympathizing cousin, poor Mrs. Payton's worry over-flowed into such endless details that at last her hearergave up trying to comfort her. When he, too, made hisescape, he was profoundly fatigued. His plea that Fred-erica should be allowed to burn her fingers so that shemight learn the meaning of fire had not produced theslightest effect. To everything he said Mrs. Payton hadopposed her outraged taste, her wounded love, her fixedbelief in the duty of youth to age. When he ventured toquote that".. . it was better youthShould strive, through acts uncouth,Towards making, than repose on aught found made,"she said poetry was all very well, but that, perhaps, ifthe poet or poetess who wrote that had had a daughter,they would think differently. When she was remindedthat she, too, had had different ideas from those of herparents, she said, emphatically, never!--except in thingswhere they had grown a little old-fashioned."I don't believe, when I was a girl, I ever crossed Mamain anything more important than in little matters of dressor furnishings. ... Oh, do look at my puzzle beforeyou go!"But Arthur Weston, almost dizzy with the endlesswords, had fled. Down-stairs, while he hunted for hishat and coat, he paused to draw a long breath and throwout his arms, as if he would stretch his cramped mind, aswell as his muscles, stiffened by long relaxing among thecushions of the big arm-chair.3                   25
<pb n="26"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Is there anything in this world duller than the pronun-ciamento of a dull woman!" he said to himself.  On thestreet, for sheer relief of feeling the cool air against hisface, instead of the warm stillness of Mrs. Payton's sitting-room, he did not hail the approaching car, but strolledaimlessly along the pavement, sticky with fog."I wonder if she talks in her sleep?" he said. "I don'tbelieve she ever stops! How can Fred stand it?" Heknew he couldn't stand it himself. "I'd sell pop-corn onthe street corer, to get away from it-and from Andy'sold stovepipe!" It occurred to him that the ideals setforth in Mrs. Payton's ceaseless conversation were of thesame era as the hat. "But the hat would fit Fred best,"he thought-"Hello!" he broke off, as, straining back onthe leash of an exasperated Scotch terrier, a girl cameswinging around the corer of the street and caromed intohim so violently that he nearly lost his balance."Grab him, will you?" she gasped; and when Mr.Weston had grabbed, and the terrier was sprawling ab-jectljl under the discipline of a friendly cuff on his nose,she got her breath, and said, panting, "Where do you spring from?"It was Frederica Payton, her short serge skirt splashedwith mud, and a lock of hair blown across her eyes. "He'sa wretch, that pup!" she said. "I'll give him to you fora present." "I wouldn't deprive you of him for the world!" he pro-tested, in alarm. "Here, let me have the leash." She relinquished it, and they walked back togethertoward Payton Street, Zip shambling meekly at their heels.26
<pb n="27"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Well," she said, thrusting a confiding arm in his,"were you able to move her? Or did she turn AuntBessie loose on you, too? I knew Aunt Bessie was to beasked to the funeral. I suppose she talked anti-suffrage,and quoted 'my William' every minute? Aunt Bessiehasn't had an idea of her own since the year one! Isn'tit queer what stodgy minds middle-aged women have?I suppose you are about dead?""I have felt more lively. Fred, why can't you seeyour mother's side of it?""Why can't she see my side of it?""But she thinks-""But I think! What I object to in Mother is that shewants me to think her thoughts. Apart from the ques-tion of hypocrisy, I prefer my own." As she spoke, thelight of a street lamp fell full on her face-a wolfish, un-humorous young face, pathetic with its hunger for life;he saw that her chin was twitching, and there was a wetgleam on one flushed cheek. "Besides," she said, "Isimply won't go on spending my days as well as my nightsin that house. You don't know what it means to live inthe same house with-with-""I wish you were married," he said, helplessly; "that'sthe best way to get out of that house."She laughed, and squeezed his arm. "You want toget off your job?" she said, maliciously; "well, you can't.I'm the Old Man of the Sea, and you'll have to carry meon your back for the rest of your life. No marriage inmine, thank you!"They were sauntering along now in the darkness, her27
<pb n="28"/>
THE RISING TIDE arm still in his, and her cheek, in her eagerness, almosttouching his shoulder; her voice was flippantly bitter: "I don't want a man; I want an occupation!" "But it isn't necessary, Fred. And besides, there are home duties."  :"In our house? Name 'em! Shall I make the soap, orwait on the table and put Flora out of a job? Wherepeople have any money at all, 'home duties,' so far asgirls are concerned, are played out. Machinery is the cuckoo that has pushed women out of the nest of domes-ticity. I made that up," she added, with frank vanity."I haven't a blessed thing to do in my good home-Isuppose you heard that I had a 'good home'? which meansa roof, and food, so far as I can make out. But as there is something besides eating and sleeping in this life, I amgoing to get busy outside of my 'good home'!"He thought of the towels, but only murmured vaguelythat there were things a girl could do which were notquite so-so--"'Unwomanly'?    That's Mother's word.   Grand-mother's is 'unladylike.' No, sir! I've done all thenice, 'womanly' things that girls who live at homehave to do to kill time. I've painted-can't paint          Iany more than Zip! And I've slummed. I hate poorpeople, they smell so. And I've taken singing lessons; I have about as much voice as a crow. My Suffrage League isn't work, it's fun. I might have tried nurs-ing, but Grandmother had a fit; that 'warm heart' she's always handing out couldn't stand the idea ofrelieving male suffering. 'What!' she said, 'see a gen-28
<pb n="29"/>
THE RISING TIDEtieman entirely undressed, in his bed!' I said, 'Itwould be much more alarming to see him entirelydressed in his bed'!" She paused, her eyes narrowingthoughtfully; "it's queer about Grandmother-I don'treally dislike her. She makes me mad, because she's suchan awful old liar; but she's no fool.""That's a concession. I hope you'll make as much forme.""They were poor when she was a girl, and she had todo things-household things, I mean; really had to. Soshe has stuff in her; and, in her way, she's a good sport.But she is narrow and coarse. 'See a gentleman in hisbed!' And she thinks she's modest! But poor dear Mothersimply died on the spot when I mentioned nursing. So Igave that up. Well, I have to admit I wasn't very keen forit; I don't like sick people, dressed or undressed.""They don't like themselves very much, Fred.""I suppose they don't," she said, absently. "Well,nursing really wasn't my bat, so I have nothing againstMother on that lay. But you see, I've tried all the con-ventional things, and I've made up my mind to cut 'emout. Business is the thing for me. Business!""But isn't there a question of duty?" he said."Do you mean to Mortimore? Poor wretch! That'swhat Mother harps on from morning to night. Whatduty have I to Mortimore? I'm not responsible for him.I didn't bring him here. Mother has a duty to him, Igrant you. She owes him-good Lord! how much sheowes him! Apologies, to begin with. What right hadshe and 'old Andy Payton' to bring him into the world?29
<pb n="30"/>
THE RISING TIDEI should think they would have been ashamed of them-selves. Father was old and dissipated; and there was anuncle of his, you know, like Mortimore, His 'intellectwas there,' too, but it was very decidedly 'veiled'! I suppose Mother worked the 'veiled intellect' off on you?"They had reached the Payton house by this time, and Frederica, her hand on the gate, paused in the rainydusk and looked into Arthur Weston's face, with angry,unabashed eyes. "Don't talk to me about a duty to-Mortimore !""I meant a duty to your mother. Think of what youowe your mother.""What do I owe her? Life! Did I ask for life? WasI consulted? Before I am grateful for life, you've gotto prove that I've liked living. So far, I haven't. Who would, with Mortimore in the house? When I was achild I couldn't have girls come and see me for fear hewould come shuffling about."  He saw her shoulders twitch with the horror of that shuffling. "It makes metired, this rot about a child's gratitude and duty to aparent! It's the other way round, as I look at it; theparent owes the child a lot more than the child owes theparent. Did 'old Andy' and Mama bring me into this world for my pleasure? You know they didn't. 'Dutyto parents'-that talk won't go down," she said, harshly,and snapped the gate shut between them.He looked at her helplessly. She was wrong, but much of what she had said was right,-or, rather, accurate.But when, in all the history of parenthood, had there beena time when children accused their fathers and mothers30
<pb n="31"/>
THE RISING TIDEof selfishness, and cited their own existence as a proof ofthat selfishness! "Your mother will be very lonely," hesaid.She shook her head. "Mother doesn't need me in theleast. A puzzle of a thousand pieces is a darned sightmore interesting than I am.""You are a puzzle in one piece," he said."I'm not as much use to Mother as Father's old silkhat down in the hall; I never scared a burglar yet.I tell you what, Mother and I have about as much incommon as-as Zip and that awful iron dog! Motherthinks she is terribly noble because she devotes herselfto Mortimore. Mr. Weston, she enjoys devoting herself She says she's doing her duty. I suppose she is, though Iwould call it instinct, not duty. Anyhow, there's nothingnoble about it. It's just nature. Mother is like a cat ora cow; they adore their offspring. And they have a per-fect right to lick 'em all over, or anything else that ex-presses cat-love. But you don't say they are 'noble' whenthey lick 'em! And cows don't insist that other cows shalllick calves that are not theirs. Mortimore isn't mine.Yes; that's where Mother isn't as sensible as a cow. Shecan give herself up all she wants to, but she sha'n't giveme up. I won't lick Mortimore!" She was quivering,and her eyes were tragic. "Why, Flora has more incommon with me than Mother, for Flora is at least dis-satisfied-poor old Flora! Whereas Mother is as satisfiedas a vegetable. That's why she's an anti. No; she isn'teven a vegetable; vegetables grow! Mother's mindstopped growing when her first baby was born. Mother31
<pb n="32"/>
THE RISING TIDE and I don't speak the same language. I don't suppose shemeans to be cruel," she ended, "but she is.""Did it ever occur to you that you are cruel?"She winced at that; he saw her bite her lip, and for amoment she did not speak. Then she burst out: "That's the worst of it. I am cruel. I say things-and then, after-ward, I could kicl myself. Yet they are true. What canI do? I tell the truth, and then I feel as if I had-had kicked Zip in the stomach!""Stop kicking Zip anywhere," he admonished her; "it'sbad taste." "But if I don't speak out, I'l bust!""Well, bust," he said, dryly; "that's better than kick-ing Zip." Her face broke into a grin, and she leaned over the gateto give his arm a squeeze. "I don't know how I'd get along without you," she told him. "Darn that pup!"she said, and dashed after Zip's trailing leash. Arthur Weston, looking after her, laughed, and wavedhis hand. "How young she is! Well, I'll put the officebusiness through for her.":                   : f~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
<pb n="33"/>
CHAPTER IIISOMEHOW      or other he did "put the office businessthrough"; but the'persuading of Mrs. Payton was ajob of many days. So far as opinions went, he had toconcede almost everything; of course Freddy's project,was "absurd"; of course "girls didn't do such things"when Mrs. Payton was a young lady ;-still, why not letFred find out by experience how foolish her scheme of self-support was?"It mortifies me to death," Mrs. Payton moaned."I don't like it myself," he admitted."What does Mr. Maitland say to it?""She says he saysit's 'corking,'" Arthur Weston quoted;"I wish they would talk English! The smallness of theirvocabulary is dreadfully stupid. They think it is smartto be laconic, but it's only boring. Do you think Fredcares about Maitland?""I wish she did, but she isn't-human! Rather differentfrom my girlhood days! Then, a girl liked to have beaux.One of my cousins had a set of spoons--she bought onewhenever she had a proposal. I don't think Freddy hashad a single offer. I tell her it's because she cheapensherself by being so familiar with the young men. Not anoffer! But I don't believe she's at all mortified. Well,33
<pb n="34"/>
THE RISING TIDE it's just part of the 'newness' of things. I dislike every- thing that is new! I wish Freddy would get married." ..."Why," Mr. Weston pondered, as, having wrung a re-luctant consent from Mrs. Payton, he closed the door ofNo. I5 behind him, "why do we consider marriage theuniversal panacea?" But whether he knew why or not,he believed it was a panacea, and even plotted awkwardlyto administer it to Frederica. Maitland was just the manfor her; a good fellow, straight and dean, and with moneybehind him. The worst of it was that he could not becounted on to discourage Fred's folly; indeed, he seemedimmensely taken by all her schemes; the more prepos-terous she was, the more, apparently, he admired her.He was as full of half-baked ideas as Fred herself! Butthere was this difference between them: Howard did notgive you the. sense of being abnormal; he was only asi- nine. And every first-rate boy has to be an ass beforehe amounts to anything as a man. But Fred was not normal.A week later, "F. Payton" had been painted on the in-dex of the Sturtevant Building, and Arthur Weston,pausing as he got out of the elevator, glanced at the giltletters with ironical eyes. He was about to let the panelsof the revolving door push him into the street when Mr.William Childs entered and hooked an umbrella on his arm."Hey! Weston! Most interesting thing: do you recallthe twenty-third Sonnet? You don't? Begins:"'As an imperfect actor on the stage';I've made a most interesting discovery!"34
<pb n="35"/>
THE RISING TIDEHis prisoner, saying despairingly, "Really?" looked fora Way of escape-but the crook of the umbrella heldhim."In a hurry? Hey? What? Well, I'll tell you someothartime." Then the umbrella was reversed and pointedto the index. "Perfec' nonsense! What?""Girls are very energetic nowadays," Mr. Weston mur-mured, rubbing his arm."She'd better put her energy into housekeeping!""Then Mrs. Payton would have nothing to do.""Well, then let her get married, and keep house forherself,-instead of laying down the law to her elders! Sheinstructed me who I should vote for, if you please! Smithis her man, because he believes in woman suffrage. Whatdo you think of that?""I think she's a good deal like you or me, when we wanta thing put through.""No such thing! Smith is the worst boss this stateever had. I told her so, and-  Hey, there! Stop-I'mgoing up !" he called, wildly; and skipped into the elevator."Tell her to get married!" he called down to Arthur Wes-ton, who watched his ascending spats, and then letthe revolving door urge him into the street. "There it isagain," he ruminated, "'get married.' But girls don'tmarry for homes nowadays, my dear William. There areno more 'Clinging Vines.' Mrs. Payton is one of thelast of them, and, Lord! what a blasted oak she clungto!" He had an unopened letter from Mrs. Payton in hispocket, and as he sauntered along he wondered whether,if it remained unopened for another hour or two, he could35
<pb n="36"/>
THE RISING TIDElie truthfully to her and say he had not received it "intime" to come and talk over Freddy. "For that's whatshe wants, of course," he thought, dolefully; "it's a nicepoint of conscience. I'll go and sit in the park and thinkit out. By the time I decide, it will be too late to go-)and then I'll open the letter! Why do women who havenothing to say, always write long letters?"-he touchedthe envelope with an appraising thumb and finger-" eightpages, all full of Freddy's sins!"Rambling toward the park in the warm November after-noon Arthur Weston wondered just what was the matterwith Fred. When, ten years before, he had gone abroadto represent the Payton interests in France (and, inci-dentally, to cure a heart which had been very roughlyhandled by a lady whose vocation was the collecting of   ihearts), Frederica had been a plain, boring, long-legged youngster, who disconcerted him by her silent and per-sistent stare. She was then apparently like any otherfourteen-year-old girl-gawky, dull, and, to a blightedbeing of thirty-six, entirely uninteresting. When he camehome, nine years later (heart-whole), to render an accountof his Payton stewardship, it was to find with dismay that"old Andy," just deceased, had expressed his appreciationof services rendered by naming him one of the executorsof the Payton estate, and to find, also, that the grubby, silent girl he had left when he went to Europe had shotup into a tall, rather angular woman, no longer silent,and most provokingly interesting. She was still plain,but she had one of those primitive faces which, whilesometimes actually ugly, are, under the stress of certain36
<pb n="37"/>
THE RISING TIDEemotions, extraordinarily handsome. She was neverpretty; there was too much thought in the jutting linesof her brow and chin, and her cheeks, smudged sometimeswith red, sometimes rigidly pale, had no dimpling sug-gestion of a smile. Her gray, unhumorous eyes still heldone by their nakedly direct gaze, even while a bludgeon-like truthfulness of speech made her hearers wince awayfrom her.Now, except for her rather tiresome slang, she neverbored Arthur Weston; she merely bothered him-becausehe was so powerless to help her. He found himself con-stantly wondering about her; but his wonder was alwaysgood-natured; it had none of the bitterness which markedthe bewilderment of her elderly relatives, or the very freelyexpressed contempt of her masculine cousins. Her manof business felt only amusement, and a pity which madehim, at moments, ready to abet her maddest notions, justto give the wild young creature a little comfort. Yet henever forgot Mrs. Payton's pain; for, no matter whethershe was reasonable or not, he knew that Freddy's mothersuffered."I'd like to shake Fred!" he said; "confound it, I runwith the hare and hunt with the hounds!"In the park, in his discouragement at the whole situ-ation, he sat down on one of the concrete benches by thelake, and looked at the children and nursery-maids, and attwo swans, snow-white on the dark water. He wished hecould feel that Fred was all right or her mother all wrong;but both were right, and both were wrong. Nevertheless,he realized that Fred's suffering moved him more than37
<pb n="38"/>
THE RISING TIDE-Mrs. Payton's. Think of having the "veiled intellect"in the ell, "shuffling round" all the time! "But that'slife," he reminded himself. Duty handcuffs all of us toour relations. Look at the historic Aunt Adelaide, whowouldn't take any of her beaux-there were more of themevery time Mrs. Payton talked of Fred's shortcomings!Aunt Adelaide had turned her beaux down because ofthis thing called Duty, a word which apparently conveyednothing whatever to the mind of her grandniece MissFrederica Payton, who, however, had her own word-Truth. A word which had once caused her to describeAunt Adelaide's self-immolation as "damned silly."Mr. Weston, looking idly at the swans curving theirnecks and thrusting their bills down into the black water,felt that though Fred's taste was vile, her judgment wassound-it was silly for Aunt Adelaide to sacrifice herselfon the altar of a being absolutely useless to society. Thenhe thought, uneasily, of the possible value to Aunt Ade-laide's character of self-sacrifice. "No," he decided,"self-sacrifice which denies common sense isn't virtue; it'sspiritual dissipation!"Then his mind drifted to Laura Childs; Laura wasnot so hideously truthful as Fred, and her conceit was notquite so obvious; yet she, too, was of the present-full ofpreposterous theories for reforming the universe! Heractivities overflowed the narrow boundaries of domesticity, just as Fred's did; she went to the School of Design, and perpetrated smudgy charcoal-sketches; she had her com-mittees, and her clubs, every other darned, tiresome thingthat a tired man, coming home from business, shrinks from38
<pb n="39"/>
THE RISING TIDEhearing discussed, as he would shrink from the noises ofhis shop or factory. "'The new wine's foaming flow'!--I should (think Billy-boy would spank her," Westonthought, sympathetically. Furthermore, Laura detected,with affectionate contempt, the weak places in her elder'sarmor of pompous authority. He had heard her take offher father's "perfec' nonsense"! Her comments upon hermother's lazy plumpness were as accurate as they weredisrespectful. Imagine girls back in the '70's, or even the'8o's, doing such things! Yet Laura differed, somehow,from Fred; she was-he couldn't formulate it. He lookedabsently at the babies, and the nursery-maids, and thenthe dim idea took shape: you could think of Laura andbabies together, but a baby in Frederica's arms was ananomaly. Why? After all, she was a female thing; youought to be able to picture her with a baby. But youcouldn't. "I wish," Arthur Weston began;-but beforehe could decide exactly what he wished, out of the brownhaze across the park came young Maitland, swingingalong, as attractive a chap as you would see in a day'swork. He hailed the older man joyously, and, standing upbefore him with his hands in his pockets, began to joshhim unmercifully."Is She late? I bet She's jealous of all these dameswith white caps on! You should choose a more secludedspot.""She is very late, Howard, and she will be later. Shehas got to have little curls in the back of her neck, and beafraid of sitting here without a chaperon. And she musthave rubbers on, because there is no surer way of taking39
<pb n="40"/>
THE RISING TIDEcold than by having damp feet. And she must do allthat all her great-aunts have done. I won't accept heron any other terms. So you see, I shall have to wait sometime for her. In fact, I have given her up. Sit down. Iwant to talk to you."Maitland sat down, and said he thought one of thosehoop-skirted, ringleted damsels would be a good deal of apeach. "You see the photographs of 'em in old albums,and they certainly were pretty things." "Howard, Freddy Payton's going into business. Didyou know it?""Yes; she's a wonder!""She is," the other man agreed, dryly."I was talking to Laura Childs about her last night,and she told me how tough it was for her at home,--youknow?"IMr. Weston nodded. "And her mother is an anti!" Howard said, sympa- thetically. "I've only seen Mrs. Payton once or twice,but it struck me she was the anti type. Not very excitingto live with.""She does show considerable cerebral quietude," Wes-ton admitted, chuckling."Did you ever make a call in the Payton house, and see old Andy Payton's silk hat on the hat-rack?""I have. But I'm not afraid of it;-there are nobrains in it now." "Well, I told Laura I thought she was the finest womanI knew," Maitland said, earnestly."Who? Lolly?"40
<pb n="41"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Heavens, no! Fred. She's no Victorian miss, I tellyou what!""The Victorians would send her to bed on bread andwater.""I heard her make a speech to those striking garment-women," Fred's defender said; "she told 'em to get thevote, and their wages would go up. It was fine.""Whether it was true is immaterial?"Howard did not go into that. "And then, about mor-als; she talks to you just like another man. There's noneof this business of pretending she doesn't know things.She knows as much about life as you or I.""Oh, I don't pretend to know as much as you," ArthurWeston deprecated, lifting a humorously modest eyebrow."She talks well, too, doesn't she?" Howard rambled on;"I don't know what she's talking about sometimes, she'sso confoundedly cultivated. The other day I said some-thing about that nasty uplift play that they tried to pulloff at the Penn Street Theater; and then I jerked myselfup, and sort of apologized. And Freddy said, 'Go ahead;what's eating you?' And I said, 'Oh, well, I didn't knowwhether I ought to speak of that sort of thing.' And shesaid, 'Only the truth shall make us free.' That's out ofthe Bible, I believe."Mr. Weston nodded. "I know the book. I've evenread it, which is probably more than either you or'-Fredhave done. I don't think it says the truth shall make youfree-and easy; does it?"Howard laughed, and got on his feet. "I'm going tobeat up business for her. I took her round in my car to4                   4
<pb n="42"/>
THE RISING TIDElook up apartments for those relations of yours. Whydoesn't Mrs. Payton have a car? Haven't'they moneyenough?""Oh, yes. But that poor creature, the brother, hasto go out in a carriage. An auto would excite him, Isuppose.""I see. I told Fred she ought to have a little motorof her own, just as a matter of business.""Hold on!" Frederica's trustee remonstrated, in alarm."Take her in your car, if you want to, but please don'tsuggest one for her. She'd have to put a mortgage on heroffice furniture to pay for a week's gasoline! Look here,Howard-don't stand there like the Colossus of Rhodes,looking down at me as if I only weighed as much as oneof your legs-tell me this: don't you see that this businessof Fred's earning her living is perfectly artificial? She hasa little income, and she can live on it; and when hermother dies, she'll have all the Payton money. So itis entirely unnecessary for her to go to work, to say nothingof the fact that she won't earn enough to buy her shoe-strings.""Oh, but," the young man burst out, "look at theprinciple involved! If you live on inherited money, you'rea parasite. I know I do it myself," he confessed, frankly,"but I'm going to work as soon as I can get a job. I'mgoing in for shells. And I believe in work for a womanjust as much as for a man. The trouble is that whena girl has money, there isn't any real work for her, so shehas to manufacture an occupation-like this social-servicestunt at the hospitals they're so hot on nowadays. Joe42
<pb n="43"/>
THE RISING TIDEGould-he's an interne-he told me the most of 'em werenuisances. But, oh, how they enjoy it! They just lapit up. It makes me a little fatigued to hear 'em talk aboutit," he said, yawning. "Laura Childs doesn't talk much,but Gould says the patients like to have her come round,because she's good to look at. But with most girls it isn'treal. And if a girl doesn't doreal things, if she just amusesherself, she'll go stale, just like a fellow. Fred put thatup to me," he explained, modestly. "I wouldn't havethought of it myself.""I bet you wouldn't!" Arthur Weston said; "but don'tyou see? Fred's own occupation isn't real.""She's rather down on me because I'm not in politics,"Howard said, drolly; "did you ever notice that reformersdon't take other people's stunts very seriously? Fred hasno use for shells. Laura thinks my collection is great.But Fred says that it's only an amusement.""You might do worse," the older man told him; "butnever mind that. What I want to know is, why don'tsome of you fellows brace up and ask Freddy to marryyou?""She wouldn't look at any of us. I don't know anyman who could keep up with her mentally! You oughtto hear her talk."Mr. Weston raised a protesting hand. "Please! I'veheard her."Maitland laughed and strode off into the dusk, leavingArthur Weston to sit and look at the swans. The nursery-maids and perambulators had gone; the Chinese pagodaon the artificial island showed a sudden spark of light, and43
<pb n="44"/>
THE RISING TIDEthe arc-lamps .across the park sputtered into the eveninghaze like lurching moons. The chill of the water and thenight made him shiver. That youngster was so big andup-standing and satisfied with life! And certainly he wasin love with Fred."Then she'll be off my hands," Fred's man of businesssaid; "what a relief!"And life looked as bleak and uninteresting as the colddusk of the deserted park.
<pb n="45"/>
CHAPTER IVI NEVER see her from morning till night," Mrs. Pay-ton said. "Rather different from my day! When Iwas a young lady, girls stayed indoors with their mothers."Mrs. Payton's mother, stroking her white gloves downover her knuckly fingers, shrugged her shoulders: "Youdidn't like 'those days' so very much yourself, my dear.But of course Freddy is shocking. It isn't that she hasbad taste-she has no taste! All I hope is that she won'tpublicly disgrace us. Bessie Childs says that her husbandsays this business idea is perfect nonsense."XThe two ladies were in the double parlor on the left ofthe wide hall of No 15. It was a gloomy place, evenwhen the ailanthus-trees had lost their leaves; the Frenchwindows were so smothered in plush and lace that thegleam of narrowmirrors between them could not lighten thecostly ugliness. In its day the room had been very costly.The carpet, with its scrolls and garlands, the ebony cab-inets, picked out in gilt-big and foolish and empty-theoil-paintings in vast, tarnished frames, must all havebeen very expensive. There was an ormolu clock on theblack marble mantelpiece holding Time stationary at 7.20o'clock of some forgotten morning or evening; the bronzeson either side of it-a fisher-maid with her string of fish,45
<pb n="46"/>
THE RISING TIDEand a hunter bearing an antelope on his shoulders-weredulled by the smoky years. Opposite the fireplace, againstthe chocolate-brown wall-paper, Andrew Payton, on ateakwood pedestal, glimmered in white marble blindness.Beside him, the key-board of a grand piano was yellowingin untouched silence. The room was so dim that Mrs.Holmes, coming in out of the sunshine, stumbled overa rug."You have such a clutter of things, Ellen," she com-plained, sharply."It's lighter up-stairs," Mrs. Payton defended herself."What did you say? Do speak more distinctly!""I said it was lighter up-stairs. Come up, and I'll showyou a puzzle I've just worked out. Dreadfully difficult!"But Mrs. Holmes never went up-stairs in the Paytonhouse; to be sure, the door between the sitting-room andthe room beyond it was always locked, but-you heardthings. So she said she couldn't climb the stairs. "I'mgetting old, I'm afraid," she said, archly."I suppose you are very rheumatic?" her daughter sym-pathized; "why don't you try-""Not at all!" the older lady interrupted; "just a littlestiff. Mrs. Dale said her cousin thought you were mysister," she added, maliciously.As far as clothes went, the cousin might have supposedMrs. Holmes was Mrs. Payton's daughter-the skirt inthe latest ugliness of style, the high heels, the white veilover the elaborate hair, were all far more youthful thanthe care-worn mother of Frederica (and Mortimore) wouldhave permitted herself.46
<pb n="47"/>
THE RISING TIDE"I've been so dreadfully busy," Mrs. Holmes declared;"I meant to come in yesterday, but I had a thousandthings to do! Bridge all afternoon at Bessie Childs's. Iplayed with young Mrs. Dale. She ought to get anotherdressmaker.""Did you know Mr. Dale's aunt was dying?" Mrs.Payton said.Mrs. Holmes frowned. She was, as she often said, avery busy woman; she kept house, made calls, had"fittings," shopped, and read the newspapers. She didthese things well and thoroughly, for, as her granddaughterhad once said, she "was no fool." She was shrewd, capa-ble, energetic, and entirely a woman of the world. Herdaughter's social seclusion and mental apathy amazedand irritated her. But intelligent and busy as she was, shehad leisure for one thing: Fear. She never said of what.Nor would she, if she could help it, allow the name of herFear to be mentioned. "I always run away if people talkof unpleasant things!" she used to say, sharply. Themere reference to Mr. Dale's aunt made her pull herstole about her shoulders, and clutch for bags and card-cases that were always sliding off a steep and slippery lap."Why, Mama, you mustn't go," Mrs. Payton remon-strated, "you've just-""I only stopped a minute to say that if you don't keepFreddy in order, she will disgrace us all," Mrs. Holmessaid, nervously; "but you keep talking about unpleasantthings! I am all heart, and I can't bear to hear aboutother people's troubles."Mrs. Payton understood; she gave her mother a piti-47
<pb n="48"/>
THE RISING TIDEful look. ("I believe she'd like to live to be a hundred!"she thought; "whereas, if it wasn't for poor MortimoreI'd be glad to go; I'm so-tired. And Freddy wouldn'tmiss me.") All the while she was talking in her kindvoice, of living, not dying; of her intention of starting inearly this year on her Christmas presents-" I get per-fectly worn out with them each Christmas!"  Of hercook's impertinence- "servants are really impossible!" Of Flora's low-spiritedness-"Miss Carter says she'ssimply wild to get married, but I can't think so; Florais so refined.""Human nature isn't very refined," Mrs. Holmes said."Miss Carter says she wants to take music lessons.""That's terribly refined," Mrs. Holmes said, satirically."It's absurd," her daughter declared, with annoyance;"music lessons! Rather different from the time I went to housekeeping-then, servants worked! I gave Floraa lovely embroidered collar the other day; and yet, thenext thing I knew, Anne told me she was crying her eyesout down in the coal-cellar. I went right down to thecellar, and said, 'You must tell me what's the matter.'But all I could get out of her was that she was tired ofliving. Miss Carter says Anne says that Flora's youngman has married somebody else, and she-""Don't mumble! It's almost impossible to hear you," her mother broke in; "as for servants, there are no such things nowadays. They have men callers, a thing mymother never tolerated! And they don't dream of being in at ten. My seventh cook in five months comes to- morrow."48$ 
<pb n="49"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Don't you think you are rather strict-I mean abouthours, and beaux, and all that sort of thing? My threeall have beaux-only poor Flora's don't seem very faith-ful. Mama, don't you think you ought to see an aurist?You really are a little-""Not at all! I hear perfectly;--except when peoplemumble. And I shall never change; my way of keepinghouse is the right way, so why should I change?""I couldn't keep my girls a week if I were as strict asyou," Mrs. Payton ventured."It wouldn't be much loss, my dear!" the older womansaid; she ran a white-gloved finger along the top of thepiano beside her, and held it up, with a dry laugh. "Youcould eat off the floor in my house; but you never weremuch of a housekeeper. However, I didn't come to talkabout servants; I came to tell you that I am going tocall on those cousins of Mr Weston's, and explain that atany rate I don't approve of my granddaughter's going intobusiness!""I'm sure I don't, either!" poor Mrs. Payton protested."I am dreadfully distr-""Why don't you tell her it isn't done? Why do youallow it?" Mrs. Holmes demanded.Mrs. Payton raised protesting hands:  "'Allow'Freddy?""If you'd stop her allowance, you'd stop her nonsense.That is what I would do if a daughter of mine cut suchdidos !""I can't-she's of age. You can't control girls nowa-days," Mrs. Payton sighed.49
<pb n="50"/>
THE RISING TIDE"She ought to be married," said Mrs. Holmes, clutch-ing at the back of a gilt chair as she got on to hershaking old legs; "though I can't imagine any nice manwanting to marry a girl who talks as she does. MariaSpencer told me she heard that Fred said that menought not to be allowed to marry unless they had ahealth certificate."Mrs. Payton gasped with horror. "Mama! are yousure? I can't believe-  What are we coming to?""It mortified me to death," said Mrs. Holmes. ("Oh,do pick up that card-case for me!) 'I wish Arthur Westonwould marry her, but I suppose he never got over thatMorrison girl's behavior? No; the real trouble is, youinsist on living in this out-of-the-way place! Oh, yes, Iknow; poor Mortimore. Still, the men won't come afterher here, because it looks as if she had no money-that,and her queerness. Really, you ought to try to get hersettled. You ought to move over to the Hill; but youlove that poor, brainless creature up-stairs more than youdo Fred!"Mrs. Payton stiffened. "I love both my children justthe same; and I can't discuss Mortimore, Mama, withanybody. As for being brainless, Doctor Davis alwayssaid, 'The intellect is there; but it is veiled.'" The tearsbrimmed over. "You don't understand a mother's feel-ings, Mama."Mrs. Holmes shrugged her shoulders and brushed apowdered cheek against her daughter's worn face. "Good-by. Of course, you never take any advice-I'm used tothat! If I wasn't the warmest-hearted creature in the50
<pb n="51"/>
THE RISING TIDEworld I should be very cross with you. I suppose youare terribly lonely without Freddy?""Oh, terribly," said Mrs. Payton.When Mrs. Holmes had gone, teetering uncertainlydown the front steps to her carriage, Freddy's mother,pausing a moment in the hall to make sure that Mr. An-drew Payton's silk hat had been dusted, went heavily up-stairs and sat down in her big cushioned chair. Shewished that she had something to do. Of course, therewas that new puzzle-but sometimes the thought of apuzzle gave her a qualm of repulsion, the sort of re-pulsion one feels at the sight of the drug that soothesand disgusts at the same moment. The householdmending was a more wholesome anodyne; but there wasvery little of that; she had gone all through Freddy'sstockings the day before, and found only one thin place.To-day there seemed nothing to do but sit in her softchair and think of Freddy's shocking talk and how unkindMrs. Holmes was about Mortimore. She knew, in thebottom of her heart, that her son's presence was pain-ful to everybody except herself; she knew that Freddydidn't like to have people call, for fear they might seehim, and that her reluctance dated back to her child-hood. "But suppose she doesn't like it, what has thatgot to do with it?" Morty's mother thought, angrily; "it'sa question of duty. Mama doesn't seem to rememberthat Freddy ought to do her duty!" It came over Mrs.Payton, with a thrill of pride, that she herself had al-ways done her duty. Here, alone, with everything silentbolted door, she could allow her-LLI~~C~~rav C5
<pb n="52"/>
THE RISING TIDE self to think how well she had done it! To Mortimore,first and foremost-she paused there, with a pang ofannoyance at her mother's words: "I do not love himbest!" she declared. She did her duty to Freddy, justas much as to Morty. When Fred had scarlet fever nomother could have been more devoted. She hadn't takenher clothes off for four days and nights! Her supremedutifulness, however, a dutifulness of which she hadalways been acutely conscious, was in enduring Andrew's behavior. "Some Women wouldn't have stood it," shethought, proudly. But what a good wife she had been!She had let him have his own way in everything. When hewas cross, she had been silent. When he was drunk, she had wept-silently, of course. When he had done otherthings, of which anonymous letters had informed her, shehad still been silent;-but she had been too angry to weep.She shivered involuntarily to think what would have hap-pened if she had not been silent-if she had dared toremonstrate with him! For Andrew Payton's temper hadbeen as celebrated as the brains which had once filled thenow empty hat. "Some wives would have left him,"she told herself; "but I always did my duty! Nobody ever supposed that I-knew." When Andrew died, andher friends were secretly rejoicing over her release, howcareful she had been to wear the very deepest crape! "Ididn't go out of the house, even to church, for three weeks, and I didn't use a plain white handkerchief for two years,"she thought-then flushed, for, side by side with her satis-faction at her exemplary conduct was a rankling memory -a memory which made her constantly tell herself, and52
<pb n="53"/>
THE RISING TIDEeverybody else, that she "loved both her children just thesame." The remorse-for it amounted to- that-began afew weeks after Mr. Payton's death, when Freddy, listeningto her mother's pride in the black-bordered handkerchief,had flung out: "If you told the truth, you'd use a flagfor a handkerchief, and you'd go to church to returnthanks!"There had been a dreadful scene between the motherand daughter that day."As for 'mourning' him," Andrew Payton's daughtersaid, "you don't. It's a lie to smother yourself in thathorrid, sticky veil. You are mighty glad to get rid ofhim! You were as afraid as death of him, and you didn'tlove him at all. All this talk about 'mourning' is rot."Mrs. Payton cowered as if her daughter had struck her:'"Oh, how can you be so wicked!""Is it wicked to tell the truth?"Mrs. Payton clasped and unclasped her hands: "I didmy duty! But do you suppose I've been happy?" Herbreath caught in a sob. " I've lived in hell all these years,just to make a home for you! I did my duty.""I should have thought 'duty' would have made youleave him," Frederica said; "hell isn't a very good homefor a child." She was triumphantly aware that she hadsaid something smart; her mother's wincing face admittedit. "I suppose you were afraid to make a break while hewas alive," she said, "but why not tell the truth now?"Already the consciousness of self-betrayal had sweptover Andy Payton's wife; her face flamed with anger."You had no business to make me say a thing like that!53
<pb n="54"/>
THE RISING TIDEYou only tell the truth to hurt my feelings. You arejust like Andrewz!" She looked straight at her daughter,her eyes fierce with candor. "I love Mortimore best,"she said, in a whisper.For a single instant they stared at each other like twostrangers. The mother was the first to come to herself."I-I didn't mean that, Freddy. I love you both alike.But it was wicked to speak so of your father.""I was a beast to hurt your feelings!" Frederica said;"and I don't in the least mind your loving Mortimorebest. But what I said about Father is true; his being myfather doesn't alter the fact that he was horrid. Mother,you know he was horrid! Don't let'fs pretend, at any rateto each other."Her face twitched with eagerness to be understood; shetried to put her arm around her mother; but Mrs. Paytonturned a rigid cheek to her lips; and instantly Fred lapsedback into contempt of unreality. The fact was, the deedwas done. Each had told the other the truth. Motherand daughter had both seen the flash of the blade of factas it cut pretense between them. Never again wouldMrs. Payton's vanity over duty done dare to raise itshead in her daughter's presence: Freddy knew that, sofar as her married life went, duty had been cowardly ac-quiescence. Never again would Frederica be able to flingat her mother her superior morality: Mrs. Payton knewshe was cruel, knew she was "just like her father." . ..Like Andy Payton! She ground her teeth with disgust, butshe could not deny it. She was so truthful that she saw the Truth; saw her father's intelligence in her own clear54
<pb n="55"/>
THE RISING TIDEmind; his ability in hers; his meanness in her ruthlesssmartness in proving a point. She hated him for thesethings-but she hated herself more.Mrs. Payton told Arthur Weston of this revealing scene;but her confession confined itself to her remorse for havingsaid she loved one child more than the other. "Of courseI love them just exactly the same, but Freddy was wickedto speak disrespectfully of her father."Then Frederica poured her contrition into his pityingears."I was a beast, but I was not a liar.""It isn't necessary to be a beast, to be truthful," hereminded her."I made her cry," she said. "Father used to do that.Do-do you think I'm like him?""Like your father? Good Lord, no!" he said, in hor-rified haste; then apologized. "I-I mean, Mr. Paytonwas a very able man, I had great respect for his brains;but he was-severe.""'Severe'? Well, I'm 'severe,' I suppose? No; thetrouble with me is, I'm hideously truthful-and I liketo be."
<pb n="56"/>
CHAPTER VTHE ridiculous part of Fred's dash for freedom wasthat she actually picked up a client or two! Of course,her commissions did not quite pay for the advertising thatbrought the clients-"But what difference does thatmake?" she demanded.Arthur Weston, who had come up to the "office" onthe tenth floor to check over a bill for her, said, "Oh, nodifference, of course. You remind me of the old lady,Fred, who bought eggs for twenty-four cents a dozen andsold them for twenty-three cents. And when asked howshe could afford to do that, said it was because she soldso many of them.""I don't care," she said, doggedly; "when you beginyou've got to put up something. I'm putting up my time.If I come out even-" "You won't," he prophesied."Your old dames are coming to-morrow," she said.She had fastened Zip to the umbrella-rack and was sittingon her office table, showing a candid and very pretty legin a thin silk stocking; she looked at him with the unself-conscious gaze of a child."They are to arrive at five, and I'm scared to death forfear that the walk to the Episcopal church is six feet short56
<pb n="57"/>
THE RISING TIDEof half a mile! I wish I had a motor to run around andlook at places. Don't you think, as an investment, Icould have a motor?""I do not!" he said. "Maitland made that alarmingsuggestion, and I told him not to put such ideas into yourhead.""He's on the track of three Ohio girls who want fiverooms and a bath, for light housekeeping, furnished.He's going to haul me round in his go-cart to look at someflats. Trouble is, I can't charge my full commission-they're poor. Students at the College of Elocution. Whydo girls always want to elocute?""Why do they want to run real-estate offices? It's thesame thing. Strikes me Howard hauls you round in hisgo-cart a good deal."She shrieked with laughter. " Nothing ding! Nothingdoing! I see your little hopeful thought. You've got meon your shoulders, like the aged Anchises, and you hopedthat Howard might come to the rescue. Mr. Weston, Isuppose your aunts, or cousins, or whatever they are,think I'm a freak?""Well, you are," he said; " I'll tell you what they think:they think (not having seen you) that you are a' sweet girlwho is doing something very kind for two old ladies."'"A 'sweet girl'! Me, a 'sweet girl'?""Don't worry. You're not.""I suppose they think I am doing it to please you?Very likely they think I'm trying to catch you," she said,chuckling.He looked at her drolly: "Well, you've caught me.5                  57
<pb n="58"/>
THE RISING TIDEYou are a perfect nuisance, Fred, but you do serve tokill time."She slipped down from the table, her high-heeled, low-cut shoes clicking sharply on the floor, and, going over tothe window, peered down into the cafion of the street.Zip scrabbled up, leaped the length of his leash, jumped, pounced, then put his nose on the floor between his pawsand wagged his hindquarters. "No, sir!" she told him,"not yet!" And he crouched down again, patiently curl-ing a furtive tongue over the toe of her shoe. "Howard was to come round for me in his car at four," she said."Zip! Stop licking my shine off! I hate unpunctual peo-ple." Coming back to her caller, she fumbled in the pocketof her coat for her cigarette-case. "Have one?"He helped himself and approved the quality.' I offered Mr. Tait one," she said, "and his hair beganto curl!""My hair is perfectly straight.""That's the beauty of you. Y et Te-a-tete couldn'thave given a reason for his horror, to save his life.""I could."She was plainly disappointed in him. "I thought betterof you than that! There's no 'right' or 'wrong' about it.""No, of course there isn't," he agreed; and she ap-plauded him. "But there is a very excellent reason, allthe same, why a girl shouldn't smoke.""What?" she demanded."Makes her less agreeable to kiss.""Well, I'll wait till somebody wants to kiss me," shesaid, gayly; "when they do, I'll give up cigarettes-and58
<pb n="59"/>
THE RISING TIDEtake to a pipe!" She pulled down the top of her desk andslipped the loop of the puppy's leash on her wrist. "Asfor smoking," she confessed, "I'm not awfully keen on it.Sometimes I forget to open my cigarette-case for days!But I have just as much right to do it as you have."The defiance made him laugh. "That's like your sex,insisting that, because we make fools of ourselves, youwill make fools of yourselves. That's your principle indemanding an unlimited suffrage."But Fred was not listening. "I'm afraid you mustclear out," she said; "Howard must be on hand by thistime.""I wonder when you'll earn the cost of that desk?" hemused, and looked about the office, with its one big win-dow that muffled the roar of the city ten stories below, andframed, black against a lowering sky, the far-off circle ofthe hills. It was a gaunt little room, with its desk andstraight chairs, and its walls hung with real-estate maps.A vision of Mrs. Payton's fire-lit upholstery flashed intohis mind, and made him smile. What a contrast! "Butthis interests Fred," he thought; "and the petticoatedeasy-chairs don't. And the only thing that makes lifeendurable is an interest." He wondered, vaguely, whatinterests he had himself. Certainly his trustee accountswere not very vital interests! It occurred to him, watchingFred thrust some long and vicious pins through a veryrakish hat, that when she settled down and married Mait-land he would lose a distinct interest. "I'll have to trans-fer it to her infants," he thought, cynically; "I supposeI'll be godfather to the lot of 'em, and she and Howard, in59.
<pb n="60"/>
THE RISING TIDEthe privacy of connubial bliss, will speculate as to howmuch I'll leave 'e-   Damned if I leave them any-thingl" he ended, with a flare of temper."Come on," said Fred.   XThey went down-stairs together, and waited in the cold for five minutes until Howard came, brakes on,against the curb, in a great hurry, but not in the leastapologetic."I stopped to look at some shells at Beasley's," hevouchsafed as Fred was climbing into the car; thenopened his throttle, and Mr. Weston, standing on the 'corner, watched them leap away down the crowded street."Look at him trying to cut in ahead of everybody!" hereflected; "but she thinks he's perfect."If Fred believed her cavalier perfect, that did not keepher from criticizing his driving. Howard, too, was entirelyfrank, and told her her nose was red. After that theytalked about the Ohio girls, and when they reached SouthG Street, leaving Zip on guard in the auto, he went allover the flat with her, and said the kitchenette was aslick place, but the bath-room was small-" and dark," heobjected, following her in, and peering about at the plumb-ing. Then they decided that they had just time to whiz around to the apartment she had arranged for ArthurWeston's cousins. "They are to come to-morrow," shesaid.If Mrs. Payton had seen her Freddy that afternoon, shewould hardly have known her. No girl of Mrs. Payton'syouth could have been more efficient as to dust; and cer-tainly few young ladies of that golden time would have 60
<pb n="61"/>
THE RISING TIDEmade better arrangements for storing away the kindling,nor would they have trampled a negligent plumber morecompletely underfoot than did Frederica Payton. Shehad sent Howard flying in his car to bring the man, andshe stood over him until he finished his job; then packedhim and his kit out of the apartment and washed hishorrid finger-marks off the white paint. In the parlor, shesat down on the sofa, drawing up her feet and snugglingback against the cushions."This is mighty nice," she said, looking around with asatisfaction as old as the cave-dweller's who hung skinson dripping walls and spread rushes over stone floors.Howard, sprawling luxuriously in an arm-chair, re-garded her with admiration. "It's funny that you cando this sort of thing," he waved an appreciative hand atthe details of curtains and table-covers.She shrugged her shoulders. "I'm in it for loot. IfI'd thought they'd wanted a silk hat in the hall, I wouldhave got it for 'em."Howard roared. "That's where a woman's instinctcomes in. I couldn't have fussed.""Cut out woman's instinct," she commanded; "there'sno such thing. To try to please a customer is only com-mon sense. As for me, I hate all this domestic drool oftidies." And they both believed that she did!They sat there-or, at least, Maitland sat, and Fred-erica reclined, for nearly an hour; the empty flat, thewintry dusk, the innumerable cigarettes, all fitted intotheir talk. ...At first Howard told her about the shells he had seen6I
<pb n="62"/>
THE RISING TIDEat Beasley's. "I bought a gloria-natis," he said; "cost like the devil!" : rederica frowned. "I don't see how you can botherwith shells when the world is just buzzing with realthings! For instance, Smith has come out for votes forwomen. Isn't that splendid?" "He'd come out for votes for Judas Iscariot if it would put him in office," he said, sharply; "and let me tell you, Fred, research work, in any department of sci-ence, helps the world, finally, a blamed-sight more thanmost of this hot air that the reformers turn on. It isn'tso showy, but one single man like Pasteur is of morepermanent value than all the Smiths in our very corruptlegislature, boiled down!""Peeved?" she said, good-naturedly. "Why don't yousay'one single woman like Madame Curie'? Well, buyyour old shells, if you want to;!""I will," he said, grinning. "How's business?"When she announced some small success, he said, won-deringly, "You are the limit!"  And added what he thought of her pluck and her intelligence: "I never knewa woman like you!""All women are like me-when you let 'em out.""No, they're not r" he contradicted, with admiring rudeness.The rudeness pleased her, as, no doubt, the male cave-dweller's candor of fist or foot pleased the female cave-dweller. His praise and wonder were like wine to her. She wanted more of it. Curled up on the sofa, she grewmore and more daring in her talk; her face, flushing with62.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
<pb n="63"/>
THE RISING TIDEexcitement, was vividly handsome, and her mind was asvivid as her face; he could hardly keep up with her mind!She was an Intelligence to him, rather than a woman;and that was why he was totally unaware of anythingunusual in the situation-the darkness and the solitude.There was absolutely no self-consciousness in him.With her it was different-she was acutely self-con-scious. Once a woman, bred in the tepid reticences ofpropriety, takes the plunge into free talk, the very tingleand exhilaration of the shock makes her strike out intostill deeper water.... She talked about herself; of herlife at home; of Mortimore-"He ought to have beenkilled when he was born," she said; "but, of course, heought never to have been born.""Of course," Howard said, gravely."It all came from ignorance on the part of women,"she explained. "In Mother's day, people confused inno-cence with ignorance-and as a result, Mortimores wereborn. What do you think? The day Mother was married,her father said to her (she told me this herself!), 'Remem-ber, Ellen, your husband's past life is none of your busi-ness.' Think of that! And poor Mother didn't knowenough to know that it was the one thing that was herbusiness!"Her hearer concealed his embarrassed knowledge ofthat "past life" by nodding and frowning."From Mother's point of view," Frederica went on,contemptuously, "every vital thing is indelicate-I meanindecent," she corrected herself, with the satisfaction offinding a more striking word; "according to people like63
<pb n="64"/>
THE RISING TIDEMother, a really refined baby would think it improper tobe born!"He laughed uproariously; he wished he could repeatthat to Laura Childs, but of course he couldn't. How-ever, the fellows would appreciate it. "As for babies,"Fred said, with a shrug, "there's going to be lots ofreform along that line. To merely rear children is apretty poor job for an intellectual being. Did I tell youwhat I pulled off in a speech at our club? . . . 'The childis the jailer that has kept woman in prison.' Don't youthink that's pretty well put?""Bully," he said.Then she told him that she had found a bungalow outon the north side of the lake-"the unfashionable side;that place they call Lakeville; all camps. You know?It's just beyond Laketon, where the nice, useless richpeople go." She was going to hire it for the summer, shesaid, and take occasional days off from business, and getup a rattling good speech on woman suffrage-" and sex-slavery. The abolishment of that is what we're reallyworking for, and it will come when we face Truth! Untilnow, women have been fed up on lies." She would live by herself: "I don't mean to have even a maid; I'm goingto be on my own bat. I suppose Grandmother will throwa fit; she'll say, 'It isn't done!' That's Grandmother's cli-max of horror. She'd have said it to every Reformerwho ever lived.""You don't mean to say you'll stay there at night, allalone?" he said, astonished. "Of course. Why not?"64                            i(hi
<pb n="65"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Won't you be frightened?""Frightened? What of? Would you be frightened?"When he was obliged to admit that he would not bewhat you'd call frightened, "but a girl-""Rot! Why should a girl be frightened? I shall take arevolver."After that, naturally, Feminism became the engrossingtheme, bringing with it, as usual, those shallow generaliza-tions that so often belittle this vital and terrible subject,even as creeds sometimes belittle Religion. To Fred'smind, as to many serious minds, Feminism had a religioussignificance; but she did not know-arrogance neverdoes know!-the stigma her conceit put upon her cause."Look at the unrest of women, everywhere. I don'tmean the agitation for suffrage;-that is just a symptomof it. It is yeast," she said, with passion; "yeast! Wecan't help it; something is fermenting; something ispushing us. All kinds of women feel it. I know, becauseI go round to the factories and talk to the girls at theirnoon hour, trying to get them to organize-that's theonly way we can get the men to do what we want. Or-ganization! Women have got to get together! I've madea door-to-door canvass for our league, and I came upagainst this-this, I don't know what to call it! thisstirring, among women. Every woman (except fat olddames whose minds stopped growing when they had theirfirst baby) is stirred, somehow. Twenty years from nowthe women who are girls to-day won't,be putting picturepuzzles together for want of something better to do."The contempt in her voice revealed nothing to Howard65
<pb n="66"/>
THE RISING TIDEMaitland, who scarcely knew the poor, dull lady in thesitting-room on Payton Street; but he wondered whyFred's face suddenly reddened. "No; girls are doingthings! When they get to middle age their brains won'tbe chubby. Look at the factories. and shops, and offices--all full of women! Girls don't have to knuckle downany more, and 'obey'; they can say 'Thank you fornothing!' and- break away, and support themselves Itell you what! this life servitude that men have imposedupon women of looking after the home, is done, done, forgood and all! That sweet creature, 'the devoted wife,' is being labeled 'kept woman,'-but the ballot is the key toher prison door!""Bully simile," he said."But isn't it all queer-the change in things?" she said,her voice suddenly vague and wondering; "it's a sort ofrace movement, with Truth as the motive power. It'sbigger than just-people. Even our parlor-maid, Flora,feels it! She wants to do something; she doesn't knowwhat. (I wish she'd put her energies into laundering the centerpieces better, but I regret to say she has a soul abovelaundry.) Yes, things are stirring! It's yeast."Such talk was new to Howard. Until now, his youngChivalry had concerned itself only with women's demandfor suffrage-which, as Frederica Payton had very trulysaid, is only a symptom, alarming, or amusing, or divine,as you may happen to look at it-of the world-unrest which she called "feminism." He was keenly interested."Gosh, Fred," he said, soberly, as she ended with the assertion that Feminism was the most interesting thing66
<pb n="67"/>
THE RISING TIDEthat had come into the Race Conscienceness since hu-manity began to stand on its hind legs-" gosh, I take offmy hat to you!" His admiration was not so much forthe thing she was trying to do, as for the fact that shewas trying! She was doing something-anything!-in-stead of sitting around, like most people, in observant anddisapproving idleness. He forgot her snub about hisshells; his eyes were ardent with admiring assent to ev-erything she said. " You are the limit!" he said, earnestly.And she, speaking passionately her poor, bare, uglyfacts-all true, but verging on lies, because no one of themwas the whole Truth-going deeper into her adventure ofcandor, felt, suddenly, a quickening of the blood. Shehad an impulse to put out her hand and touch him-thebig, sprawling, handsome fellow! His voice, agreeing toall she said, made her quiver into momentary silence, as aharp-string quivers under a twanging and muting thumb.That his assents, which gave her such acute satisfaction,were merely her own convictions, thrown back to her bythe sounding-board of his good nature, she did not realize.The intellectual attraction she felt in him was hers. Theother attraction, which was his, she did not analyze. Sherealized only that something seemed to swell in her throatand her breathing quickened. The newness of the sensa-tion threw her off the track of her argument, which wasto prove that women would save society by facing facts-"facts" being, apparently, the single one of sex."When I marry," Fred said, "nobody's going to pullthat devilish bromide on me, that the man's past isn'tmy business. There'll be no Mortimores in mine! I67
<pb n="68"/>
THE RISING TIDEmean to have children who will push the race along toperfection!""I bet they will!" he said.She sat up on the sofa, cross-legged, clasping an anklewith each hand, her eyes glowing in the dusk. "You'vegiven me a brace!" she said."You've given me one! I'd rather talk to you than anyman I know."She put out her hand impulsively, and he gripped ituntil the seal ring on her little finger cut into the fleshand made her wince with pain and break away; butwith the pain there was a curious pang of pleasure. Shegot on her feet with a spring, and, rubbing her bruisedfinger, gave a last look about the apartment."I hope the tabbies will like it. Heavens, Howard, doyou think they'll smell cigarette-smoke? I suppose they'dhave a fit if they discovered that the 'sweet girl' smokedcigarettes!""Do they call you a 'sweet girl'?" he said, and roaredat the idea. "Mr. Weston doesn't like me to smoke. It gave me quite a shock to find he was such a 'perfect lady.'""Oh, well, he's old. What can you expect? I like youto. You knock off your ashes like a kid boy." "Open the window a second, will you?" Fred said;"that smoke does hang around.-Howard, I believe they'llthink I'm trying to lasso Mr. Weston into marrying me! Poor old boy, you know when he was young, before the flood, some girl turned him down, and I understand he'snever got over it. The cousins will think I'm trying to68
<pb n="69"/>
THE RISING TIDEcatch him on the rebound! Funny, isn't it, how theelderly unmarried female is always trying to make otherpeople get married? I think it's a form of envy; sort ofgetting what you want by proxy. Men don't do it.""Men are not so altruistic," he said.Frederica's face bloomed in the darkness, rose-red.They went out to the elevator, and dropped down to theentrance in silence. Howard, cranking his car, and gettinga slap on the wrist that made him bite off a bad wordbetween his teeth, thought to himself that Fred Paytonwas a stunner!He said so that night to Laura Childs, when they weresitting out a dance at the Assembly. They had talkedabout his gloria-matis, and she had thrilled at its cost,and pleaded with. him to show it to her, " I'm crazy to seeit! Please!""Fred didn't care a copper about it," he told her, withsome amusement. "She's sort of woozy on reforms."Laura nodded. "Fred's great, perfectly great," shesaid, looking down at the toe of her slipper, poking outfrom her pink tulle skirt."She has a man's brain," he said."Now, why do men always say that sort of thing?"Laura objected, her eyes crinkling good - naturedly."Brain has no more sex than liver."Howard made haste to apologize: "'Course not! I onlymeant she's awfully clever, you know."Laura agreed, a little wistfully: "I admire Fred awfully.Do you know, she talked to the girls in the rubber-factoryout in Hazelton about the Minimum Wage? She wanted69
<pb n="70"/>
THE RISING TIDEme to go there with her, but I'd promised Jack McKnightto play tennis. Well, I'm afraid I wouldn't have gone,anyhow," she added, soberly; "those things botherFather, and it isn't as if I could accomplish anything, asFreddy can. If anybody asked me to make a speech, Ishould simply die. But Fred has no end of sand," Lauraended; her admiration was as honest as it was humble."Sand?" Howard said; "you bet she has sand! Why,she is going to take a bungalow out in Lakeville this sum-mer, and live there all by herself. She wants to read andstudy, and all that sort of thing.""By herself?" said Laura, really startled. "You don'tmean without even a maid?""So she says.""Aunt Nelly will never allow it! And, really, it wouldn'tbe safe. She ought to take Flora along, at least."Upon which Howard boldly tried Fred's own argu-ment: "Why shouldn't she be alone? She'll have arevolver.""I wouldn't do it for a million dollars!" said Laura."And, besides, nobody goes to Lakeville; it's awfullycommon.""Fred is above that sort of thing," Howard said. Foronce the good-natured Laura was affronted."I don't pretend to be like Fred-" she began, but heinterrupted her: "You? Of course you're not like Fred! You couldn't do the things she does!"Laura gave him a cool glance: "I promised this danceto Jack McKnight. Perhaps we'd better start in?"70
<pb n="71"/>
THE RISING TIDE"I'd like to wring his neck," Howard declared, risingreluctantly.When she and Jack were half-way down the room shetold him that there was a new engagement in the air."The girl's perfectly fine, but the man makes me tired,"said Lolly, lifting her pretty foot in the prettiest anddaintiest kick imaginable."Tell us," Jack entreated, one hand holding hers, andthe other spread over her young shoulder-blades."Oh, it isn't out yet," she said, "and I don't know thatit's-really on-but I bet it-will be-pretty soon!"And she tossed her head a little viciously.
<pb n="72"/>
CHAPTER VITHE two Misses Graham were very much interestedin their real-estate agent. "A girl, to be in business," said the younger sister,doubtfully."It's very nice in her," said the elder sister. " I supposethe Paytons have lost their money and she has to sup-port the family.""She is certainly capable," Miss Mary admitted. "Butit does seem strange for her to work in this way, whenshe could give music lessons, for instance.""Perhaps she's not musical," Miss Eliza objected. "Ihate to have a girl pounding the piano, when her talent lies in scrubbing floors."  Miss Eliza Graham looked likea frayed old eagle; perhaps because for seventy yearsshe had flapped unavailing wings against the Grahamtraditions.Those traditions had kept her from the serious studyof music, and later they had "saved" her from marriagewith a man who had very little money. The youngerMiss Graham looked, and was, as contented as a pouter-pigeon teetering about in a comfortable barn-yard. Itwas Miss Eliza, tall, thin, piercing-eyed, and sweet-hearted at seventy-two, who had, as she expressed it,7 2
<pb n="73"/>
THE RISING TIDE"dug Mary up," and brought her to town for the winter.Miss Eliza was for a hotel, but Miss Mary felt that un-married ladies should have the dignity of their own roof."We can always have the escort of a messenger-boy, if wego out in the evening," she told her sister, who agreed, hereyes twinkling."Excellent idea. We can spank him if he doesn't be-have properly!""Oh, my dear Eliza!" Miss Mary protested, but shesmiled indulgently. Eliza was the most precious thing inthe world to the little, plump lady who made endless ex-cuses to herself, and to everybody else, for dear Eliza'sways." It was a "way" of Eliza's to forgive Youth foralmost anything it did ...."Of course, Youth makes Age uncomfortable," shewould concede. "New wine is very hard on old bottles!But if the bottles burst, it isn't the fault of the wine,it is the fault of the bottles-for having been empty!" Thesignificance of those last words was quite lost on MissMary.As the two sisters went over their little apartment, anddiscovered its possibilities, old Miss Eliza's interest cen-tered in the youth as well as the sex of their real-estateagent. "Look at that wood-box!" she said;-" to thinkof a girl having so much gumption!" "Oh, dear!" said Miss Mary-and pointed a shrinkingfinger at the stub of a cigarette on the parlor window-sill, "I thought I smelt smoke; a workman must haveleft it."But the cigarette was the only flyin the ointment. The:6                   73
<pb n="74"/>
THE RISING TIDEapartment,with its "art" fnishings, electricity, and steam- heat, was to the country ladies and their one elderly maid-servant a miracle of beauty and convenience. "Arthur was wonderfully wise in asking Miss Paytonto attend to it for him," Miss Eliza said."I wonder if-it means anything ?" Miss Mary queried,with an arch look. "After all, he must know her verywell, to have told her just what we wanted-rooms andbath, and all that. It is rather intimate, you know.""I hope it means something! I hope he has got overthat wicked jilt, Kate Morrison!""Well, the Paytons are nice people," the younger sis-ter said; "she was a Holmes, you know."They were both eager to see dear Arthur and Miss Pay- ton, for they felt sure they would know the moment theysaw. them together whether he had "got over" Kate."When people are in love they always betray it," said Miss Eliza.But when Mr. Weston brought Miss Frederica Payton to call, no "love" was betrayed on either side. In fact,the call was such an astonishing experience to the twosisters that they quite forgot their sentimental wonderings. Frederica accepted their thanks and appreciation very pleasantly, but a little bluntly. Oh, yes, the sunshine in the dining-room was very nice; she was glad they liked it.But she hoped they'd survive the jig-saw over-mantel and the awful tiles in the parlor. "They made me prettysick," she said. "Why, I thought the mantelpiece very artistic," MissMary said, blankly.74
<pb n="75"/>
THE RISING TIDE"The porcelain bath-tub is dandy," Fred said, with realpride."Dandy?" murmured Miss Eliza."It made me feel as if I could hardly wait for Saturdaynight to take a bath," the Real Estate Agent said. Thetwo ladies looked startled-not at the antique joke,but to refer to bathing in Arthur's presence! "I meanthe tub is bully," Fred explained; "and the plumbing-"Here she became so specific that her modest old clientsgrew quite red. She had been obliged to get a plumberin to work on the trap the afternoon before they came,but she was sure everything was all right now.The door-bell rang at this moment, and while theMisses Graham, breathless under the shock of Miss Pay-ton's thoroughness, welcomed (of all people!) old Mrs.Holmes, Fred was able to groan to Arthur Weston,"Can't we get out?""We cannot," he said, decidedly; "now brace up andbe nice to your grandmother.""Oh, Lord!" said Fred; but she was really very nice.She pecked at Mrs. Holmes's cheek through its white laceveil, and said "Hello, Grandma! How is anti-sufrage?"as politely as possible.Of course, to make things pleasant for Mrs. Holmes, theMisses Graham repeated all their appreciation of MissFreddy's efficiency. "She will make an admirable house-keeper," Miss Mary said, in her gentle way."She ought to," said Frederica's grandmother. "I'msure I brought her mother up to know how to keep house!But it is just a fancy of Freddy's to do this sort of thing;"75
<pb n="76"/>
THE RISING TIDEshe waved a knuckly white glove at the apartment, whichcaused Frederica to roll her eyes at Mr. Weston. "Ofcourse, I know it isn't done, but it's an amusement for her,"Mrs. Holmes explained, "and I have so much sympathywith young people-my daughter says I am all heart!-that I love to have the child amuse herself."She was trying to preserve the Payton dignity, but shewas very nervous; she could have said it all so much bet-ter if that pert creature had not been sitting there, herknees crossed, and displaying a startling length of silkstocking. She knew that no sense of propriety wouldkeep Fred quiet if she took it into her head to contradictanybody, and she was glad when the two ladies changedthe subject, even though it was for the gunpowdery topicof suffrage, on which, .it appeared, the younger MissGraham had strong feelings."I am sure female influence is not only more refining,but more effective than the ballot could possibly be," she said. Of course Fred rushed in: "You're an anti?""Yes, my dear," Miss Mary said, smiling."To get things done by 'influence' is to revert, it seems to me, to the methods of the harem," said Fred, earnestly.Frederica was never flippant on this vital topic of suffrage, unless she was angry. Her grandmother's retort suppliedthe anger:"Woman's charm will always outweigh woman's bal-lot," said Mrs. Holmes, with smiling decision. (She,too, was getting hot inside.)"The antis," Fred flung back, "think that all that 76
<pb n="77"/>
THE RISING TIDEis necessary is to 'sit on the stile, and continue tosmile '!""What did you say?" said Mrs. Holmes, frowning."Young people speak so indistinctly nowadays) Wewere taught proper enunciation when I was young."'"Woman," said Miss Mary, raising her voice, "is aprincess, but her God-given lule lies in the gentle domainof the home.""Gosh!" said Fred-and two of her auditors laughedexplosively. But Frederica was red with wrath. "I'veseen the 'princess' exercising her God-i ;ven rule in clean-ing the floors of saloons on her hands E id knees, becauseshe had to support the children that her husband hadfoisted on her and then deserted. Do you think undersuch 'gentle circumstances' her charm would do as muchfor her as a vote?"One does not know just how much of an explosion therewould have been if the elder Miss Graham had not cometo the rescue: "Ah, well, there are so many good reasonson both sides, that I'm glad I don't have to decide it!"Then she began to talk of old friends in Grafton; but, alas,as a subject Grafton, too, was somewhat dangerous; oldMr. So-end-so died two years ago; and Mrs. Black-didMrs. Holmes remember Mrs. Black? "I am sorry to sayshe is very ill," Miss Mary said. The chatter of gossipwas-as it so often is with age-a rehearsal of sickness anddeath. In the midst of it Mrs. Holmes clutched at agold mesh-bag that was slipping from her steep lap, andtried to rise:"I think I must go. (Oh, do pick up that bag, Freddy77
<pb n="78"/>
THE RISING TIDEidear.) I am too tender-hearted," she confessed, "I can'tbear to hear unpleasant things!""Well let us talk of pleasant things," Miss Eliza said;but she looked at the frightened old face under the white veil;-" and 'the feet of the bearers' are coming nearer to:her every day!" she thought.IMrs. Holmes sat down again, reluctantly. Of course,from the Misses Graham's point of view, there could beinothing pleasanter for a grandmother to hear than plaud-its of Mis Freddy's efficiency; so they went back againto that. Dear Arthur had told them how hard she hadworked (again Freddy's eyes rolled toward dear Arthur);engaging tradesmen, and making the landlord do- the necessary repairing.-"Oh, my dear," Miss Mary inter- rupted herself, "I meant to warn you that one of your workmen left a half-smoked cigarette here. I knew youwould want to reprove him. Dear me! in these days,with all the new ideas, the working-people are very oare-:less. But I feel so strongly our responsibility to them,that I always tell them of their mistakes.""The working-people didn't make any mistake thistime," Fred said; "you mustn't blame the plumber,"-thetemptation to get back at her grandmother was too muchfor her-"it was my own cigarette." There was a stunnedsilence. "Howard Maitland and I were smoking here quite a while," she said, sweetly. "But I thought I'daired the room out. I'm awfully sorry,-cigarette-smokedoes hang about so." (" 'Amusement'!" she was saying to herself; "I'l 'amuse' her!") But Mrs. Holmes was equal to the occasion. She shook78                 -
<pb n="79"/>
THE RISING TIDEan arch and knobby finger at her granddaughter.'Naughty girl! But that's one of the things that is donenowadays," she said; "ladies smoke just as much asgentlemen, don't they, Mr. Weston?""More," he declared, gayly; but he watched his twocousins. Had they taken it in that Maitland and Fredhad been in the flat together? It had apparently notstruck Mrs. Holmes-or if it had, she chose to ignore it;she was talking, with a very red face, about all sorts ofthings. It seemed a favorable moment to drag his candidward away, and he did so, with effusive promises to comeagain soon-all the time looking out of the corner of hiseye at the Misses Graham's farewell to Fred. Alas, MissMary's were hardly visible.But Miss Eliza followed them into the hall, and put ahand on Fred's arm: "I don't mind the smell of smokein a room half as much as I do on a girl's lips," she said,smiling; "they ought to be likeroses." Thenshe gave theangular young arm a little pat and ran back."What a duck she is!" Fred said, honestly moved; "Iwish I hadn't let out at Grandmother!"Her repentance did not soothe Arthur Weston. "I'dlike to shake you," he said, as they got into the elevator."Me? What's your kick? I thought I behaved beauti-fully ! I kissed an inch of powder off Grandmother's cheek.There's no satisfying you. I supposed you'd give me abunch of violets, with 'For a good girl,' on the card. Don'tbe an old maid! Even Miss Graham isn't. She's a dear!""I may be an old maid, but you are an imp!" he said.In the taxi, as they rushed, with open windows, across the79
<pb n="80"/>
THE RISING TIDEcity back to Payton Street, he spoke more gravely. "You ought not to have gone wandering around in vacant apart-iments with Maitland."  He was really annoyed, andshowed it.Frederica was equally annoyed. "I am a businesswoman. Howard was obliging enough to take me aroundin his car. In the flat we talked for a while. Why shouldn't we? If he had been a girl, I suppose we couldhave sat there until midnight and you would have neverpeeped!""But may I call your attention to the fact that he's nota girl'?"'"May I call your attention to the fact that there issuch a thing, between men and women, as intellectualrelations?" She was getting angry, and her anger be-trayed her self-consciousness."You compel me," he retorted, "to remind you thatthere are other relations between men and women whichare not markedly intellectual.""There're none of that kind in mine, thank you! I-"But he interrupted her, dryly: "Of course you knowyou had no business to do it. You remind me, Fred, ofone of those dirty little boys who put a firecracker underyour chair to make you jump. Look here, it's unworthyof a 'business woman' to do unconventional thingssimply because they are unconventional.""I didn't!" "You are like all the rest of your sex-self-conscious ashens when they see an automobile coming! You knew itwas queer to shut yourself up there with that darned80
<pb n="81"/>
THE RISING TIDEfool, Maitland, and that's why you loved doing it," he flungat her. "That's the trouble with women nowadays; notthat they do unusual things, but they are so blamedpleased to be unusual! And if they only knew it, theydon't shock a man at all. They only bore him to death.""But I suppose you can't help it; you are so atro-ciously young," he ended, sighing.Frederica was almost too angry to speak. "I am oldenough to do as I choose!""Only Youth does as it chooses," he told her. "Reflectupon what I have said, my dear infant, and profit by it.. . Stop at the iron dog!" he called to the driver. Andthe next minute Frederica, buffeted by the high, keenwind, ran past the dog, whose back was ridged with grimysnow, and, holding on to her hat with one hand, let her-self into the hall with her latch-key."What's the matter with him?" she thought, slammingthe front door behind her; "it isn't his funeral!"
<pb n="82"/>
CHAPTER VIAT the jar of the banging door, Andy Payton's hat:r    moved slightly on the hat-rack, and somethingsnarled at the head of the stairs."It's nothing, Morty-only sister," a motherly voicesaid; and Miss Carter leaned over the baluster:"I'm just bringing him down to his supper; he's a littlenervous this evening.""Oh," Fred said, shortly; "well, wait till I get out ofthe way, please." She stepped into the unlighted parlor, and stood there in the darkness, between the piano and the bust of Mr. Andrew Payton; as she waited, her handfell on the open keyboard, and she struck a janglingchord. "Flora has been playing on the sly," she thought;"poor old Floral" Then for a moment her fingers wererigid on the keys-the scrabbling procession was passingthrough the hall down to the room where Mortimore'sfood was given to him. When the door closed behind himshe drew a breath of relief. She never looked at her brother when she could avoid it. As she went up-stairs she paused on the landing to call out, "Hello,Mother!"Mrs. Payton answered from the sitting-room: "Don'tyou want some tea, dear?"82
<pb n="83"/>
THE RISING TIDEFrederica hesitated; she didn't want any tea, but-" Isuppose it pleases her," she thought, resignedly; and wentinto the pleasant, fire-lit room, with its bubbling teakettleand fragrance of Roman hyacinths blooming on the win-dow-sills.  "Finished your puzzle?" she asked, good-naturedly.Mrs. Payton, grateful for a little interest, said: "No;I've been doing up Christmas presents most of the after-noon. I'm pretty tired! Tying all those ribbons is dread-fully hard work," she ended, with an air of achievementthat was pathetic or ridiculous, as one might happen tolook at it. Her daughter, glancing at the array of whitepackages tied with gay ribbons, did not see the pathos.That slightly supercilious droop ofthe lip which alwaysmade Mrs. Payton draw back into h  lf, showed Fred'sopinion of the "hard work"; but she only said, laconi-cally:"Mr. Weston took me to call on the old maids. No, Idon't want any tea, thank you.""You oughtn't to call them 'old maids'; it isn't re-spectful.""It's what they are-at least, the younger one is. Theother one is very nice. But they are both of 'em of thevintage of I830."Mrs. Payton was sufficiently acquainted with herdaughter's picturesque, bit limited, vocabulary to knowwhat "vintage"' meant, so she said: "Oh, no; they are notso old as that. I don't think Miss Graham is much overseventy.""I waked Miss Mary up!" Frederica said, joyfully.83
<pb n="84"/>
THE RISING TIDE"I am sorry for that," Mrs. Payton sighed.Fred shrugged her shoulders. "Grandmother will tattle, -yes, she was there; deaf as a post, and all dolled up likea plush horse;-so I suppose I might as well tell you justwhat happened."  She told it, lightly enough. "OldWeston threw fits in the taxi, coming home," she ended."I should think he might! Freddy, really-"Her daughter looked at her with narrowing but notunkind eyes. "I wish I knew why people fuss so overnothing," she said.Mrs. Payton put her empty cup back on the tray witha despairing sigh: "If you can't see the impropriety--""Oh, of course, I see what you call 'impropriety'; whatI don't see is why you call it 'improper.' What consti-tutes impropriety? The fact that, as Grandmother says,'it isn't done? I could mention a lot of things that aredone, that I would call improper! Wearing nasty falsefronts, as Grandmother does, and silly tight shoes. A thing is true, or it's a lie. That distinction is worth while. But what you call 'impropriety' isn't worth botheringabout.""Truth and falsehood are n6t the only distinctions inthe world. Things are fitting, or-not." "Howard and I talked, in an empty flat," Fred said;"I suppose if it had been in our parlor, with the Egyptian virgin out in the hall chaperoning us, it would have been'fitting' ?"Mrs. Payton wiped her eyes  "There's no use discuss- ing anything with you. When I was a young lady, if mymother had reproved-'"84
<pb n="85"/>
THE RISING TIDEFred made a discouraged gesture: "Oh, don't let's goback to the dark ages. As for Howard-I'll see him atmy office, if it makes you any happier.""Why can't he call on you in your own house? Youcheapen yourself by-""Mother, there's no use! I couldn't stand it. Mor-timore-""Frederica!"Mrs. Payton's gesture of command was inescapable.Involuntarily Fred's lips closed; when her mother spoketo her in that tone, the childish habit of obedience asserteditself. But it was only for a moment:"Of course you don't mind him," she said; "you arefond of him. But you can't expect me to feel as you do."She drew in her breath with a shiver of disgust."I love you both just the same! Mrs. Payton said,emphatically.Frederica was not listening. "Oh, by the way," shesaid, "I've heard of a little bungalow, at that camp place,Lakeville-you know?-that I can rent for twenty-fivedollars a month. I'm going to hire it for next summer-rather ahead of time, but somebody might grab it. I wantto have a place to go, when I have two or three days off.I hope you'll come out sometimes. And-and Miss Cartercan bring Morty," she ended, with generous intention.Mrs. Payton was silent. She was saying to herself, de-spairingly, "She's jealous!""Well, I must go and dress," Frederica said, and gotherself out of the room, acutely conscious of her mother'saverted face. "'Cheapening' myself-how silly!'" she85
<pb n="86"/>
THE RISING TIDEthought, as she closed her own door. When she took her cigarette-case out of her pocket, Miss Graham's wordscame into her mind and she smiled; but she lighteda cigarette and, standing before her mirror, practisedknocking off the ashes. Was it this way? Was it thatway? How does the "kid boy" do it? She tried a dozenways; but she could not remember the entirely uncon-scious gesture which had pleased Howard Maitland. "Howfunny and old-fashioned old Miss Graham was! But quitesweet," she thought. It occurred to her, as she took out her hair-pins, that Miss Graham's antiquated ideas didnot irritate her, and her mother's did. For a moment shepondered this old puzzle of humanity: "Why are mem-bers of your family more provoking than outsiders ?" Afterall, Miss Graham, with her "roses," was just as irrationalas Mrs. Payton with her fuss about propriety and "cheap-ness"-or Arthur Weston, gassing about "relations whichare not markedly intellectual." She was angry at him,but that phrase made her giggle. She sat down' on theedge of her bed, her brush in her hand, her hair hangingabout her shoulders; it had been very interesting, that"cheap" and entirely "intellectual" hour alone withHoward in the darkening flat....She put her elbow on her knee, her chin in her hand, and smiled. Of course she knew what her mother, andMr. Weston-" poor old boy!"-and her grandmother, andthe Misses Graham all had in the back of their minds. "Id-iots!" she said, good-naturedly. If they could have heard the plain, straight, man-to-man talk in the empty apart-ment, they would have discovered that nowadays men and86
<pb n="87"/>
THE RISING TIDEgirls are not interested in those uintellectual relations atwhich her man of business had hinted. She rememberedHoward's look when he said he would rather talk toher than to any man he knew-and she lifted her headproudly! No girly-girly compliment could have pleasedher as that did. It was just as she had always said,the right kind of man knows that a woman wants him totalk horse sense to her, not gush. If the tabbies, and Mr.Weston, and her mother had heard that talk, theywouldn't worry about sentiment! Suddenly, she re-called that strange feeling she had had below her breast-bone as she looked at Howard sprawling in the arm-chair. She remembered her curious impulse to touchhim, and the rosy warmth that seemed to go all over her,like a wave; she thought of that pang of pleasure whenhis hand crushed hers so that the seal ring had cut intothe flesh and hurt her. "I wonder-?" she said; and bither lip. Then her face reddened sharply; she flung herhead up like a wild creature who feels the grip of the trap.Love?For an instant she felt something like fright. "Of coursenot! He's just a bully fellow, and I like him. Nothingmore; I don't-" She caught a glimpse of herself in themirror, and the image held her eye. The vivid, smilingface, a little thin, with the color hot, just now, on the highcheek-bones; dark, wavy hair, falling back from a charm-ing brow which, pathetically enough (for she was onlytwenty-five), had lines in it  " Heavens!" she said, "I be-lieve I do!" She laughed, and, jumping to her feet, shookthe mane of hair over her eyes. But before she began to87
<pb n="88"/>
THE RISING TIDEbrush it she lifted the hand Howard Maitland had gripped,and kissed it hard, once-twice!"I do-care," she said; "I didn't know it was like this!"She glowed all over. "Iam in love," she repeated, amazed.While she tumbled the soft, dark hair into a loose knoton the top of her head she tried to whistle, but herlips were unsteady. She did not know herself with this quiver all through her, and the sudden stinging in hereyes, and something swelling and tightening in her throat.She forgot the shocked old maids, and the disgusted trus- tee. She was in love! She began to sing, but broke off ata faint knock."Dinner's ready, Miss Freddy.""Come in, Flora," Frederica called out; "and hook meup." She smiled so gaily at the silent creature, not evenscolding when the slim, cold finger-tips touched her warmshoulder, that the woman smiled a little, too. "I thoughtthis was your afternoon out?" Fred said, kindly."I 'ain't got no place in partic'lar to go. Anyway, Iknew your ma wasn't goin' to be in, and-""I bet you played on the piano," Frederica said, smiling at herself in the glass."Well, yes'm, I did," the woman confessed. "I pickedout the whole of 'Rock of Ages.'""Flora! Don't look so low-spirited; I believe you're inlove. Have you got a new beau? I've been told thatpeople are always low-spirited when they're in love."Flora simpered; "Ah, now, Miss Freddy!" "Come! Who is he? You've got to tell me!""Well, Mr. Baker's got a new man on. That there snide88                              !
<pb n="89"/>
THE RISING TIDEArnold's been bounced. Good riddance! He never did'mount to nothing. Me, I'm sorry for the girl he married;she'll just slave and git no wages. That's what marryin'Arnold 'l do for her!""That's what marrying any man does for a woman,"Miss Payton instructed her; "a wife is a slave."But Flora's face had softened into abject sentimentality."This here new man, Sam, he's something like. Light, heis; and freckled." Then her face fell: "Anne says he'sgot a girl on the Hill. Don't make no difference to me,anyhow. It's music I want. If I was young, I'd git aneducation, and go to one of them conservmatories andlearn to play on the piano.""I'll give you some lessons, one of these days," Fredpromised her, good-naturedly. "Poor old Flora," shesaid to herself, as the maid, like a fragile brown shadow,slipped out of the room. "'He's got a girl on the Hill'!I wonder how I'd feel if Howard had 'a girl on the Hill'?"Again the tremor ran through her; she could not havesaid whether it was pain or bliss. "I certainly must teachFlora her notes," she said, trying to get back to thecommonplace. Then she forgot Flora, and, bending for-ward, looked at herself in the glass for a long moment."I'll get that hat at Louise's," she said, turning out thegas; "it's the smartest thing I've struck in many moons."7
<pb n="90"/>
CHAPTER VIII                             |M   R. WESTON, riding home in the taxi, was notwithout some astonishment at himself. Why was he so keenly annoyed at Fred's bad taste? Why had hesuch an ardent desire to kick Maitland? He might havegone further in his self-analysis and discovered that,though he wanted to kick Howard, he did not want tohaul him over the coals, as a man of his years might wellhave done-merely to give a friendly tip as to proprietyto a youngster whom he had seen put into breeches. Hadhe discovered this reluctance in himself, Arthur Westonmight have decided that his indignation was based on a sense of personal injury-which has its own significance in a man of nearly fifty who concerns himself in the affairsof a woman under thirty. The fact was that, though he thought of himself only as her grandfatherly trustee, Frederica Payton was every day taking a larger place inhis life. She amused him, and provoked him, and inter-ested him; but, most of all, the pain of her passionate fu- tilities roused him to a pity that made him really suffer.He could not bear to see pain. Briefly, she gave him some-thing to think about. His displeasure evaporated overnight, and when hewent up to her office the next morning he was ready to9go0 
<pb n="91"/>
THE RISING TIDEapologize for his words in the taxi. But it was not neces-sary. Fred, in the excitement of receiving a letter askingher fee for hunting up rooms, had quite forgotten that shehad been scolded."I think I'd better advertise in all the daily papers!"she announced, eagerly."You're a good fellow," he said; "you take your medi-cine and don't make faces.""Make faces? Oh, you mean because you called medown last night? Bless you, if it amuses you, it doesn'thurt me!"The sense of her youth came over him in a pang of lone-liness, and with it, curiously enough, an impulse of flight,which made him say, abruptly: "I shall probably goabroad in January. Can I trust you not to advertise your-self into bankruptcy before I get back?""Oh, Mr. Weston," she said, blankly; "how awful!Don't go!""You don't need me," he assured her; but a faint pleas-ure stirred about his heart."Need you? Why, I simply couldn't live without you!In the first place, my business would go to pot, withoutyour advice; and then-well, you know how it is. Youare the only person who speaks my language. Grand-mother talks about my vulgarities, and Aunt Bessie talksabout my stomach, and the Childs cousins talk about myvices-but nobody talks about my interests, except you.Don't go and leave me," she pleaded with him.The glow of pleasure about his heart warmed into actualhappiness. "Please don't think I approve of you!"9I
<pb n="92"/>
THE RISING TIDE She looked at him with her gray, direct eyes, and nodded."I know you don't. But I don't mind;--you understand." "But," he said, raising a rueful eyebrow, "how shall Imake Cousin Mary 'understand' your performances?" "By staying at home and keeping me in order! Don'tgo away." It was the everlasting feminine: "I need you!" Therewas no "new woman" in it; no self-sufficiency; nothingbut the old, dependent arrogance that has charmed andheld the man by its flattering selfishness ever since theworld began.He was opening the office door, but she laid a franklyanxious hand on his arm. "Promise me you won't-go!"    :He would not commit himself. "It depends; if youget married, and shut up shop, you won't want a business adviser." "I sha'n't get married!" she said, and blushed to hertemples.Mr. Weston saw the color, and his face, as he closedher door and stood waiting for the elevator, dulled alittle. "She's head over ears in love with him. Well, he'sa very decent chap; it's an excellent match for her,-Oh,"he apologized to the elevator boy, on suddenly findinghimself on the street floor; "I forgot to get off! You'llhave to take me up again." In his own office he was dis-tinctly curt."I am very busy," he said, checking his stenographer'slanguid remark about a telephone call; "I am going towrite letters. Don't let any one interrupt me"-and thedoor of his private office closed in her face.92 
<pb n="93"/>
THE RIS-NG TIDE"What's the matter with himf" the young lady askedherself, idly; then took out her vanity glass and adjustedher marcel wave.Arthur Weston put his feet on his desk, and reflected.Why had he said what he did about going to Europe?When he went up to see Fred, nothing had been fartherfrom his mind than leaving America. Well, he knew whyhe had said it.... Flight! Self-preservation! "Prepos-terous," he said, "what am I thinking of? I'm fond ofher, and I'm confoundedly sorry for her, but that'sall. Anyhow, Maitland settles the question. And ifhe wasn't in it-she's twenty-five and I'm forty-six.'He got up and walked aimlessly about the room. "I'vecut my wisdom teeth," he thought, with a dry laugh, andwondered where the lady was who had superintended thatteething. For Kate's sake he had taken a broken heartto Europe. The remembrance of that heartbreak re-assured him; the feeling he had about Fred wasn't in theleast like his misery of that time. He gave a shrug of re-lief; it occurred to him that he would go and see someChinese rugs which had been advertised in the morningpaper; "might give her one for a wedding present?-oh,the devil! Haven't I anything else to think of than thatgirl?" He stood at the window for a long time, his handsin his pockets, looking at three pigeons strutting andbalancing on a cornice of the Chamber of Commerce."She interests me," he conceded; then he smiled,-" andshe wants me to stay at home and 'take care of her'!"Well, there was nothing he would like better than to takecare of Fred. The first thing he would do would be to93
<pb n="94"/>
THE RISING TIDEshut up that ridiculous plaything of an "office" on thetenth floor. Billy Childs put it just right: "perfec' non-sense!"  Then, having removed "F. Payton" from theindex of the Sturtevant Building, they-he and Fred--would go off, to Europe. He followed this vagrant thought for a moment, then reddened with impatience at his ownfolly: "What an idiot I am! I'm not the least in love with her, but I'll miss her like the devil when she marriesthat cub Maitland. She's a perpetual cocktail! She'dbe as mad as a hornet if she knew that I never took her seriously." He laughed, and found himself wishingthat he could take her in his arms, and tease her, andscold her, and make her "mad as a hornet." Again thecolor burned in his cheeks; he would do something elsethan tease her and scold her; he would most certainlykiss her. "Oh, confound it!" he said to himself, angrily;"I'm getting stale." He did not want to kiss her! Heonly wanted to make her happy, and be himself amused."That is the difference between now and ten years ago," he analyzed. "Kate never 'amused' me; oh, how deadlyserious it all was!" He speculated about Kate quite corn-fortably. She was married; very likely she had half adozen brats. Again he contrasted his feeling for Fredwith that brief madness of pain, and was cheered; it wasso obvious that he was merely fond of her. How couldhe help it--she was so honest, so unselfconscious! Besides,she was pathetic. Her harangues upon subjects of whichshe was (like most of mankind) profoundly ignorant, werefunny, but they were touching, too, for her complacentcertainties would so inevitably bring her into bruising94
<pb n="95"/>
THE RISING TIDEcontact with Life. "She thinks 'suffrage' a cure-all," hethought, amused and pitiful,-"and she's so desperatelyyoung!" In her efforts to reform the world, she was likesome small creature buffeting the air. In fact, all this rowthat women were making was lie beating the air. "What'sit about, anyhow?" he thought. "What on earth do theywant-the women?" It seemed to him, looking a littleresentfully at the ease and release from certain kinds oftoil that had come to women in the last two or threedecades, that they had everything that reasonable crea-tures could possibly want. " Think how their grandmothershad to work!" he said to himself. "Now, all that theseridiculous creatures have to do is to touch a button-and men's brains do the rest." Certainly there is anenormous difference in the collective ease of existence;women don't have to make their candles, or knit theirstockings, as their grandmothers did:-"yet, nowadays,they are making more fuss than all the women that everlived, put together What's the matter with 'em?"He grew quite hot over the ingratitude of the sex. Hisold Scotch housekeeper, reading her Bible, and sewingfrom morning to night, was far happier than these rest-less, dissatisfied creatures, who, in the upper classes, floodedinto schools of design and conservatories of music-notone in a hundred with talent enough to cover a five-centpiece!-and in the lower classes pulled down wages infactories and shops.  "Amateur Man," he said, sar-castically. "Suppose we tried to do their jobs?" Thenhe paused to think what Fred's job, for instance, would be.Not discovering it offhand, he told himself again that if95
<pb n="96"/>
THE RISING TIDEwomen would keep busy, like their grandmothers-his   ;contemptuous thought stopped, with a jerk; how could women do the things their grandmothers did? What wasit Fred had got off--something about machinery being the cuckoo which had pushed women out of the nest ofdomesticity? "Why," he was surprised into saying, "she'sright !"He came upon the deduction so abruptly that for amoment he forgot his sore feeling about Frederica's youth.Suppose the women should suddenly take it into their heads to be domestic, and flock out of the mechanical industries, back to the "Home"? Arthur Weston whistled. "Financially," said he, candidly, "we would bu'st inabout ten minutes.".."Do you want to give me those prices to Laughlin be-fore I go out to lunch?" a flat voice asked in the outer office;he slid into his desk-chair as the door opened."I haven't had time to look them up yet. Don't wait."He took up his pen, but only made aimless marks onhis blotting-paper; the interruption jarred him backinto irritated denial of possibilities: "She amuses me,that's all; I'm not in the least-in love."  Suddenly,with a spring of resolution, he took down the telephonereceiver and called up a number. The conversationwas brief: "Hello! Jim?... Yes; I'm Arthur. Lookhere, I want to break away for a week. ... Yes-breakaway. B-r-e-a-k. I'm stale. Can't you go down tothe marshes with me, for ducks? .. . What? Oh, comeon! You're not as important as you think ... What ... I'll do the work-you just come along!"96
<pb n="97"/>
THE RISING TIDEThere followed a colloquy of some urgency on his part,and then a final, satisfied "Good boyl Wednesday, then,on the seven-thirty."He had hardly secured his man before he regretted it;the mere prospect of the arrangements he must make forthe trip began to bore him. However, he sat there at hisdesk and made some memoranda, conscious all the timeof a nagging self-questioning in the back of his mind."I'm notl" he said, again and again. "I'll get some shoot-ing and clear my brain up."But by the time he had sent a despatch or two, andcalled Jim Jackson up a second time to decide some detail,he knew that shooting would not help him much. Thenag had settled itself: he had accepted the revelation thathe was "interested" in Freddy Payton. With the con-trast between the pain of the oldwound and the new, hewould not use the word "love," but "interest" committedhim to an affection, tender almost to poignancy. Of coursethere was nothing to do about it. He must just take hismedicine, as Fred took her, "without making faces."There was nothing to strive for, nothing to avoid, nothingto expect. She was as good as engaged to Howard Mait-land, and it would be a very sensible and desirable match;-to marry a man of forty-six would be neither sensiblenor desirable! No; the only thing left to her trustee wasto take every care of her that her eccentricities wouldpermit, guard her, play with her, and correct her appallingtaste. "Lord! what bad taste she has!" Also, while heand Jackson were wading about on the marshes for thenext week, kick some.sense into himself!97
<pb n="98"/>
THE RISING TIDEThat very evening, dropping in to the Misses Graham'sand partaking of a bleakly feminine meal, he laid hislance in rest for her.Miss Mary was full of flurried apologies at the meager-ness of the supper-table, but old Miss Eliza said, withspirit, that bread and milk would be good for him  "Now,tell us about that child, Arthur," she commanded."You mean Fred Payton, I suppose?" he said, raisingan annoyed eyebrow. "I don't call her a 'child."'"You are quite right," Miss Mary agreed, in her littleneutral voice; "she'is certainly old enough to know howto behave herself.""It's merely that she wants to reform the world,"Miss Eliza said, soothingly.  "Reformers have no hu-mor, and, of course, no taste;-or else they wouldn't bereformersl""Your dear cousin Eliza is too kind-hearted," MissMary said; but her own kind, if conventional, heart madeher listen sympathetically enough to the visitor's excusingrecital of the hardships of Fred's life.Once, she interrupted him by saying that it was, ofcourse, painful-the afflicted brother. And once she saidshe hoped that Miss Payton was a comfort to her mother-"though I don't see how she can be, off every day atwhat she calls her 'office'-a word only to be applied, itseems to me, to places where gentlemen conduct theirbusiness. When I was young, Arthur, a girl's first dutywas in her home.""Perhaps there is nothing for her to do at home," MissEliza said.98
<pb n="99"/>
THE RISING TIDE"There is always something to do, in every properlyconducted household. Let her dust the china-closet.""I'd as soon put a tornado into a china-closet as thatgirl! She ought to be turning a windmill," Miss Elizasaid.Her cousin gave her a grateful look, but the other ladywas very serious. "I thought her nanner to her grand-mother most unpleasant. Youth should respect Age-""Not unless Age deserves respect!" cried Miss Eliza,tossing her old head.Arthur Weston had seen that same flash in Fred's eyes.("How young she isl" he thought.) But her sister wasplainly shocked."Oh, my dear Eliza!" she expostulated. "I am notdrawn to Mrs. Holmes myself, but-""Neither is Fred drawn to her," Weston interrupted;"and she is so sincere that she shows her feelings. Therest of us don't. That's the only difference.""It is a very. large difference," Miss Graham said;"this matter of showing one's feelings is as apt to meancruelty as sincerity. It's the reason the child has nocharm.""I think she has charm," he said, frowning.There was a startled silence; then Miss Eliza said,heartily: "Don't worry about her! Just now she thinksit's smart to put her thumb to her nose and twiddle herfingers at Life-but she'll settle down and be a dear child!"Miss Mary shook her head. "If I were a friend of theyoung lady, I should worry very much. Maria Spencercalled on us yesterday,. and told us a most unpleasant99
<pb n="100"/>
THE RISING TIDEstory about her. She spent the night at an inn with thissame young man that she smoked with here   Oh, an accident, of course; but-"i"Miss Spencer is the town scavenger," Weston said,angrily.Miss Mary did not notice the interruption. "I cannothelp remarking that I do not think that such a youngwoman would make any man happy." ("It was difficultto bring the remark in," she told her sister, afterward;"but I felt it my duty.")"The man who gets Fred will be a lucky fellow," hercousin declared."You know her very well, I infer," Miss Mary mur-mured. "I observe you use her first name.""Oh, very welll And I knew her father before her.But the use of the first name is one of the new customs.Everybody calls everybody else by their first name.Queer custom."" Very queer," said Miss Mary."Very sensible!" said Miss Eliza."Ah, well, we must just accept the fact that girls arenot brought up as they were when-when we were young"-Arthur Weston paused, but no one corrected that "we."He sighed, and went on: "The tide of new ideas is sweep-ing away a lot of the old landmarks; myself, I think itis better for some of them to go. For instance, the free-dom nowadays in the relations of boys and girls makes fora straightforwardness that is rather fine.""Well," said Miss Mary, "I don't like what you call'new ideas.' 'New' things shock me very much."zoo
<pb n="101"/>
THE RISING TIDE"I'm rather shocked, myself, once in a while," heagreed, good-naturedly."What will you do, Mary, when the 'new' heaven andthe 'new' earth come along?" Miss Eliza demanded.The younger sister lifted disapproving hands."As for the girls smoking," Weston said, "I don'tlike it any better than you do. In fact, I dislike it. Butmy dislike is aesthetic, not ethicaL""I hope you don't think smoking is a sign of the 'new'heaven," Miss Mary said;-but her sister's aside-"theOther Place, more likelyl"-disconcerted her so muchthat for a moment she was silenced."I never could see," said Miss Eliza, "that it was anywickeder for a lady to smoke than for a gentleman; but,as I told the child, a girl's lips ought to be sweet.""Her smoking is far less serious than other things,"said the younger sister, sitting up very straight and rigid."I do not wish to believe ill of the girl, so I shall onlyrepeat that I do not think she will make any man happy.""She will," Miss Eliza said, "if he will beat her.""Oh, my dear Elizalt' Miss.Mary remonstrated. Thenshe tried to be charitable: "However, perhaps she is en-gaged to this Maitland person, in which case, though hertaste would be. just as bad, her meeting him here wouldbe less shocking.""If she isn't now, she will be very soon," Frederica'sdefender said."Well," said Miss Mary, grimly, "let us hope so, forher sake; although, as I say, I do not feel that she-"Miss Eliza looked at her cousin, and winked; he choked101
<pb n="102"/>
THE RISING TIDEwith laughter. Then, with the purpose of saving Freddy, he began to dissect Freddy's grandmother-her powderand false hair; her white veil, her dog-collar--"that's tokeep her double chin up," he said. "Yesl She is verylively for her age!" He wished he could say that old Mrs.Holmes was in the habit of meeting gentlemen in emptyapartments-anything to draw attention from his poorFredlWhen he left his cousins, promising to come again assoon as he got back from his shooting trip, and declaringthat he hadn't had such milk toast in years, he knew thathe had not rehabilitated Frederica. "But Cousin Maryfeels that she has done her duty in warning me. CousinEliza would gamble on it, and give her to me to-morrow,"he thought; "game old soul But even if Howard wasn'tahead of the game, the odds would be against me-forty-six to twenty-five-and, besides, what could I offer her?Ashesl Kate trampled out the fire."
<pb n="103"/>
CHAPTER IXN those next few weeks Fred Payton was a little vagueand preoccupied. The revelation which had come toher in that moment before the mirror when she hadkissed her own hand, remained as a sort of undercurrentin her thoughts, although she did not put it into wordsagain. Instead, she added Howard Maitland to her dailypossibilities: Would she meet him on the street?-and hereyes, careless and eager, raked the crowds on the pave-ments! Would he drop into her office to say he hadfished up a client for her?-and she held her breath for anexpectant moment when the elevator clanged on herfloor. Would he be at the dance at the Country Club?-and when he cut in, and they went down the floor together,something warm and satisfied brooded in her heart, like abird in its nest. Sometimes she rebuked herself forletting him know how pleased she was to see him; andthen rebuked herself again: Why not? Why shouldn'tshe be as straightforward as he? Hadn't he told her hewould rather talk to her than to any man he knew?She flung up her head when she thought of that; she wasnot vain, but she knew that he would not say that to anyother girl in their set. She was very contented now; noteven the ell room at I Payton Street seriously disturbedI03
<pb n="104"/>
THE RISING TIDE.her. The fact was, Life was so interesting she hadn't timeto think of the ell room-Howard, herself, her business,her league! Yet, busy as she was, she remembered Flora'sdesire for music lessons, and every two or three days, be-fore it was time to set the table for dinner, she stood bythe togaed bust of Andy Payton, trying to teach thepathetically eager creature her notes. But the lessons,begun with enthusiasm, dragged as the weeks passed;poor Flora's numb mind-a little more numb just nowbecause Mr. Baker's Sam had suddenly vanished fromher horizon-could not grasp the matter of time. Fred'shand, resting on her shoulder, could feel the tremor ofeffort through her whole body, as the thin, brown fingers.stumbled through the scales:"Now! Count: One-two--thr- ""One-two-oh, landl Miss Freddy, I cain't.""Yes, you can. Try again.""Why don't you jest show me a tune?""You have got to know your notes first; and you'vegot to count, or you never can learn.""I don't want to learn, Miss Freddy; I want to play!Oh," she said once, clutching her hands against her breast,"I want to play!" Her mournful eyes, black and opaque,gleamed suddenly; then a tear trembled, brimmed over,and dropped down on the work-worn fingers. "I cain'tlearn, Miss Freddy; I 'ain't got the 'rithmetic. I want tomake musicl"Alas, she never could make music! The clumsy hands,the dull brain, held her back from the singing heightsl"I cain't learn 'rithmetic," she said (sixteenth and thirty-Io4
<pb n="105"/>
THE RISING TIDEsecond notes drew this assertion from her); "and if Icain't play music without 'rithmetic, I might as well giveup now.""Well, you can't," Frederica said, helplessly. She hadcut out the last quarter of her league meeting to comehome and give Flora a music lesson. (Up-stairs, Mrs.Payton, listening to the thump of the scales, confided toMrs. Childs that she didn't approve of Flora's playing onthe piano. "The parlor is not the place for Flora," shesaid.) But, watched by Mr. Andrew Payton's marbleeyes, the slow fingers went on stumbling over the keys,until Frederica and her pupil were alike disconsolate."You poor dear!" Fred said, at last, putting an impul-sive arm over the thin shoulders; "try once morel And,Flora, Sam isn't the only man in the world. Come now,cheer upl You're well rid of Sam.""Sam?" said Flora, her face suddenly vindictive; "Iain't pinin' for no Sam! He was a low-down, no-account nigger-" The doorbell rang, and she jumpedto her feet. "I must git my clean apron!" she said; andvanished into the pantry.Frederica waited, frowning uneasily; callers were notwelcome at I5 Payton Street when Fred was at home-the consciousness of the viled intellect up-stairs made herinhospitable. But it was only Laura and Howard Mait-land, both of them tingling with the cold and overflowingwith absurd and puppy-like fun"Feed us! Feed usl" Laura demanded; "we've walkedsix miles, and we're perfectly deadl""Pigl" said Fred; "wait till I yell to Flora. Floral8                  1o$
<pb n="106"/>
THE RISING TIDETear' Her heart was pounding joyously, but with itwas the agonizing calculation as to how long it wouldbe before Miss Carter and her charge came clopping downthe front stairs on their way to the room where Mortimorehad his supper. "I don't mind Laura," Fred told herself,"but if Howard sees Morty, I'll simply diet""Don't you want me to light up?" Maitland was ask-ing; and without waiting for her answer he scratched amatch on the sole of his boot, and fumbled about the big,gilt chandelier to turn on the gas."I didn't know you played, nowadays," Laura said,looking at the open piano. "Gracious, Freddy, you doeverything !""Oh, I'm only teaching poor Flora. She has musicalaspirations. Howard, cheer up that firel"Tea came, and Laura said kind things to Flora aboutthe music lessons; and then they all three began to chat-ter, and to scream at each other's jokes, Frederica all thewhile tense with apprehension. .. ("Miss Carter won'thave the sense to hold on to him; he'll walk right in!")But, up-stairs, her mother, leaning over the balusters todiscover who had called, had the same thought, and wasquick to protect her."It's your Lolly," Mrs. Payton said, coming back to hersister-in-law; "and I think I hear Mr. Maitland's voice.I must tell Miss Carter to go down the back stairs withMorty." Having given the order, through the closed doorbetween the two rooms, she sat down and listened withreal happiness to the babel of young voices in the parlor."I do like to have Freddy enjoy herself, as a girl in herio6
<pb n="107"/>
THE RISING TIDEposition should," she told Mrs. Childs; "just hear themlaugh."The laughter was caused by Howard's displeasure atFred's story of some rudeness to which she had been sub-jected in canvassing for Smith-"The Woman's Candi-date.""If I'd been there, I'd have punched the cop's head!"he said, angrily.Fred shrieked.at his absurdity. "If he'd said it to you,you'd only think it was funny; and what's fun for thegander, is fun for-""No, it isn't," he said, bluntly."Howard," Laura broke in, "do tell Freddy thenewsr""It isn't much," he said, modestly; "I'm ordered off;that's all.""Ordered off?" Fdrerpeated; "where?""Philippines," Laura said. "Government expedition.Shells and things. Starts Wednesday.""I've wanted to'go ever since I was a kid," Howardexplained. "It's the Coast Survey, and I've beenpulling legs all winter for a' berth, and now I've gotit. I came in to see you pipe your eye with grief atmy departure.""Grief? Good riddance! You lost me a client, takingme out to see those fool flats in Dawsonville. Have an-other cigarette. Lolly, how about you?""No," Laura sighed. "Billy-boy would have a fit ifI smoked." She looked at Fred a little enviously. "I'mcrazy to," she confessed.107
<pb n="108"/>
THE RISING TIDE                          W"Oh, don't," Maitland said; "it isn't your style,Laura.""Howard, do you really start Wednesday?" Fred said,soberly.                    'He nodded. "It's great luck.""You'll have the time of your life," Laura assured him;"why do men have all the fun, Freddy?""Because we've been such fools to let 'em." "Ladies wouldn't find it much fun-wading round inthe mud," Howard protested."They ought to have the chance to wade round, if theywant to !" Fred said-and paused: (was that Miss Carter,bringing Mortimore? Her breath caught with horror. Shewas sure she heard the lurching footsteps. No; ail wassilent in the upper hall).Howard did not notice her preoccupation; he waspouring out his plans, Laura punctuating all he said withcries of admiration and envy. ("I'll die if Morty comesinl" Frederica was saying to herself.)"You've got to write to me, Fred," Maitland chargedher; "I haven't any relations--'no one to love me.' Dowrite me the news once in a while.""You're off day after to-morrow?" she repeated,vaguely; it came over her, in the midst of that tenselistening for the shuffling step on the stairs, that she wouldnot see him again-he would go away, and she would not  'have had a word alone with him! She felt, suddenly, thatshe could not bear it. For a moment she forgot Morti-more. "If you don't go up-stairs and say how-do-you-doto Mother, Laura," she said, abruptly, "you'll get your-0o8
<pb n="109"/>
THE RISING TIDEself disliked. And your mother is in the sitting-room, too."Even if Miss Carter and Morty appeared, she couldn'thave Howard leave her like this!Just for an instant, Laura's face changed; then sheflung her head up, and said, "Oh, yes; I want to see AuntNelly. I'll be right back. (I'll give 'em a chance," shetold herself, grimly.)Up-stairs, she roamed about the sitting-room, snifingat the hyacinths, and looking into the little, devout books,and even adding a piece or two to the picture puzzle onthe table. Then she sympathized with Mrs. Payton'sChristmas fatigue-"you oughtn't to give so manypresents, Aunt Nellyl""Oh, my dear, it gets worse each yearl People sendme things, and of course I have to pay my debts. Sotiresome.""It's awful," said Laura; and straightened her mother'stoque, and kissed her. "Darling, your hat is alwayscrooked," she scolded, cuddling her cheek against hermother's. " Mama, we're going to have a suffrage parade,in April; will you carry a banner?""Oh, my dear!" Mrs. Payton protested. "One of thosehorrid parades here? I thought we would escape that!""Your father won't think of letting you walk in it,Laura," Mrs. Childs warned her, with amiably impersonaldiscouragement.Laura's face sobered: "You make him let me, darling,"she entreated.Mrs. Payton looked at them enviously. Nobody hatedthose vulgar, muddy, unladylike parades more than sheog9
<pb n="110"/>
THE RISING TIDEdid, but she knew, in the bottom of her heart, that if Freddy had snuggled against her, as Laura snuggled up to Bessie, she would almost have walked in one herself!"Papa says those parades are perfect nonsense," Mrs.Childs said; "what good do they do, anyhow?""We stand up to be counted," Laura explained."Papa won't allow it," her mother repeated, placidly."I'm sure Mr. Weston will use his influence to preventFreddy's doing it," said Mrs. Payton.Then the two ladies exchanged their usual melancholycomments on the times, and Laura listened, making herown silent comments on one fallacy after another, butpreserving always her sweet and cheerful indifference totheir grievances. She looked at the clock once or twice-surely she had given Howard and Fred time enoughl Butshe waited for still another ten minutes, then, coughingcarefully on the staircase, went down to the parlor.Her consideration was unnecessary. Howard, standingwith his hands in his pockets, his back to the fire, hadbeen telling Frederica that he was going in for conchologyseriously. "I know you don't think shells are worthmuch," he ended, after giving her what he called a"spiel" as to why he was going and what he was goingto do. "But to me conchology is like searching forburied treasure! I've been pawing round for a realjob, and now I've got it. I don't have to earn money,so I can earn-work! And I think research work meansas much to the world as-as anything else. I wantedyou to know it was a real thing to me," he ended, gravely."Shells aren't awfully vital to civilization," she said.IIO
<pb n="111"/>
THE RISING TIDEHe made no effort to justify his choice; he had con-fessed the faith that was in him, but it was too intimate todiscuss, even with so good a fellow as old Freddy. ("Youcan't expect a woman to understand that sort of thing,"he told himself; "women don't catch on to science-except Laura. She sees the importance of it.") Then hebroke out about Laura's hat. "Isn't it dinky?""Yes," Fred said, impatiently; they were talking liketwo strangersl "Howard, I hate to have you away inApril. We're going to have our parade then, and Icounted on you.""What for?" he said, puzzled."To walk," she said, impatiently. His little start ofastonishment annoyed her. "Perhaps you are glad tomiss it?""I guess I am," he admitted, honestly. "I'm afraidI'd show the yellow streak."She was plainly disappointed in him."'Course I believe in suffrage," he said, "but I hate tosee a lot of ladies walking in the middle of the street.""We're not 'ladies'; we're women.""You're a lady, and you can't escape it. And I'd hateto see Laura do it," he added.Fred had not a mean fiber in her, and jealousy is allmeanness; but, somehow, she felt a stab of somethinglike pain. She did not connect it with Laura; it was onlybecause he was indifferent to what was so important toher-and to Laura, too. And because he was going away,and here they were, he and she, just being polite to eachother!III
<pb n="112"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Laura and I don't enjoy the middle of the street," she said; "but I hope we won't funk it." "You won't," he said; "you are the best sportgoing!"                                             :Her face reddened with pleasure. "Oh, I don't know," 'she disclaimed, modestly.It was at this moment that Laura's considerate delayended. "I'm off!" she called, gaily,,from the hall; "How-ard needn't come until he is good and ready!"He was ready in a flash. He gave Frederica's hand ahearty squeeze, then turned to help Laura down the frontsteps.Fred closed the door upon them, and went back into theparlor. "He is going away," she said to herself, blankly.Her knees felt queer, and she sat down. "Well, at anyrate, Morty didn't butt in; I couldn't have bornethat." .Out in the wintry dusk, the other two were silent for awhile. Then Maitland said, "How can she stand thathouse?""She's perfectly fine," Laura said, loyally."She's a stunner," the young man declared; "I neverknew anybody just like her. Big, you know. Straight-forward. I take off my hat to Fred in everything!"Laura gave him a swift look. ("Have they fixed it up?"she thought; "I gave 'em time enough!")"But I wish she wouldn't mix up with Smith," hesaid."Smith believes in votes for women.""What's that got to do with it? He's the worst kind112
<pb n="113"/>
THE RISING TIDEof a boss. As Arthur Weston says, to put Smith in topurify politics, is like casting out devils by Beelzebub, thePrince of Devils.""Oh, well, we stand by the people who stand by usl""She's dead wrong," Howard said, carelessly, "but Ihope she'll write to me when I'm away. I shall want tohear that Smith has been snowed under.""Of course she'll write to you," Laura encouraged him.("No, they can't have fixed it up. He wouldn't say that,if they were engaged.") "Say, Laura, I suppose you-it would bore you to sendme a postal once in a while? You might tell me howFred's business is getting along.""She can tell you herself. (Good gracious  She'sturned him downl Poor old Howard!) I'm not very keenon writing letters, but rU blow in a postal on you oncein a while, to tell you that Fred is still in the market.""I'd be awfully pleased if you would," he said, eagerly.They were crossing Penn Park, and Laura, lookingahead, said, nervously: "See this dreadful person comingalong the path! Is he drunk?""He certainly is," Howard said, laughing. She drew alittle nearer to him-and instantly he had a friendly feel-ing for the lurching pedestrianl"It frightens me to death to see a man like that," shesaid."He ought to be arrested," Howard said, joyfully-hershoulder was soft against hisl "Not that he would hurtanybody-he's just happy.""I'm not sandy, like Fred," she confessed.I3 
<pb n="114"/>
THE RISING TIDE."Oh, Fred would undertake to reform him," he agreed,laughing."Fred ia-ohl" she broke off with a little shriek; the man, stumbling, had caught at her arm.             I"Excuse me, lady, I-" Howard's instant grip on his collar spun him around so suddenly that the rest of thehiccoughing apologies were lost in astonishment; hestood still, swaying in his tracks, and gaping at the re-ceding pair. "The dude thought I was mashin' his girl,"he said, with a giggle."Did he touch you?" Howard said, angrily. He hadcaught her to im as he swung the man aside, and justfor an instant he felt the tremor al through her. "I oughtto have choked him!" But she was laughing - nervously, to be sure, but with gaiety: "Nonsense! poorfellow-he stumbled! Of coursehe caught at my arm. Only just for a minute it frightenedme-I'm such a goose!""You're not!" he said. But for the rest of the way tothe Childses' house, he was very much upset. Laura hadbeen scared, and it was his fault; he had taken the westpath through the park, because that was the longest wayhome, and then he had bowled her right into that old soak "I could kick myself for taking the west path," he re-proached himself, again and againHe hardly slept that night with worry over havingmade Laura Childs nervous. "She's the scariest littlething goingl" he thought; "but she has sense." She hadagreed with him in everything he said about the value ofresearch work, and when he declared that science wasI14
<pb n="115"/>
THE RISING TIDEthe religion of the man of intellect she had said, "Yes,indeed it is!" "That shows what kind of a mind she has,"he thought; "but wasn't she cute about not smoking!Her 'father wouldn't let her.' Of course he wouldn't! Agirl like that could no more smoke a cigarette than a-arose could," he ended. This flight of fancy moved him somuch that he made a memorandum to send Laura someroses the next day-"and old Fred, too; she's a stunningwoman," he said, with real enthusiasm.
<pb n="116"/>
CHAPTER XHOWARD      MAITLAND'S departure in January forthe Philippines surprised several people."Why should he take such a long journey?" Miss MaryGraham said to Miss Eliza-" unless it is that he discov-ered that Miss Payton is not the sort of girl to make anyman happy, and simply left the country.""I wager he carried a mitten with himl" Miss Eliza said."What! You think she refused him? Maria Spencersays she's only too anxious to get him. Meeting him inempty apartments! Perhaps that disgusted him. A gen-tleman does not like to be pursued." ..."Why has he gone away?" Mrs Childs asked Laura,mildly interested."Because he wants to hunt for shells.""But I thought he was so attentive to Freddy?""Maybe she turned him down.""She'll get a crooked stick at last, if she doesn't lookout," her father said, over the top of his newspaper.Laura came and sat on the arm of his chair. "Freddoesn't need a stick, Billy-boy; she can walk alone.""Every one of you needs a stick," Mr. William Childsassured her; "and I don't know that I would confine itiI6
<pb n="117"/>
THE RISING TIDEto the thickness of my thumb, either, as the English lawdoes." He reached up a plump hand and pulled her ear.Afterward he told his wife that Lolly was down by thehead: "What's the matter with her, Mother?" he said.His two sons might have failed in their various businesses,or taken to their beds with mumps or measles, and hewould not have looked as anxious as he did when he heardthe little flat note in Laura's voice. "Is she off her feedbecause I won't let her walk in that circus parade ofFred's?""Well, she's disappointed.""I won't have a girl of mine tramping through themud-""Perhaps it won't be muddy.""It will! It always is. Anyway, I hope it will be. Butif she is upset about it, I'll take her to St. Louis with methat week, so she won't feel she's backed out. Mother,you don't suppose she's missin that Maitland chap, doyou? Hey? What?""Oh, dear me, no! Why, Mr. Maitland has been pay-ing attention to Freddy for the last year.""Why doesn't she take him, and stop all her nonsense?I hear she told those poor, silly strikers in Dean's rubber-factory to support Smith, the 'Woman's Candidate'!Much 'supporting' they can do! And the joke of it is,Smith himself owns the controlling stock. She had betterbe at home, darning her stockings.""Oh, now, Father, you must remember it isn't as ifEllen didn't have plenty of servants to do things likethat."I17
<pb n="118"/>
THE RISING TIDE "I hear she's signed that petition to have certainkinds of diseases registered. I don't know what the world'scoming to, that girls know about such thingsl""Well, of course, girls are more intelligent than they used to be." "If she's so intelligent, I'll give her a book on Bacon-Shakespeare that will exercise her brains,-and she canstop concerning herself with matters that decent womenknow nothing about. Thank Heaven, our Laura is asignorant as a babyl Or, if Fred is so bent on reformingthings, let her have a Sunday-school class," said Mr. Childs, puffing and scowling. "Look here, Mother, if youhave any influence over her, try and get her to take youngMaitland. I should sleep more easily in my bed if I thought she had a man to keep her in order.""But he has gone away," Mrs. Childs objected."That's because she has turned him down. Maybe he'llnever think of her again; I wouldn't, if I were a youngfellowl I'd want a woman, not a man in petticoats. Butif he does get on her track again, tell her to take him; tellher I say she'll get a crooked stick if she waits too long.You're sure Laura isn't blueabout him?""Now, Fatherl You are the most foolish man aboutthat childl .. .""Why has Maitland gone on that expedition, Fred?"said Mr. Weston."You can search me," said Miss Payton.Arthur Weston's hands, concealed in his pockets, tight-ened. "She has refused him!" he said to himself. (Alas! ix8
<pb n="119"/>
THE RISING TIDEshooting ducks on the marshes had not helped him ) Hehad dropped in at 15 Payton Street, and Fred had takenhim up to the flounced and flowery sitting-room."Mother'l1 bein pretty soon," she said; "so let's talkbusiness, quickl" She was apparently absorbed in "busi-ness," which, as the winter thawed' and drizzled intospring, flagged very much. "And the office rent goes rightalong, just the same," she told her trustee, ruefully. "Ithink, if I could have a little car to run around and lookat places-""Maitland put that idea in your head!"Frederica did not defend her absent adorer. Instead,she wailed over the rapacity of her landlord."You ought to have made your rent contingent on yourcustomers," Mr. Weston teased her; and roared whenshe took it seriously and said she wished she had thoughtof it. "Give me some tea, Fred," he said; "these ques-tions of high finance exhaust me." Then he asked theusual question, and Fred gave the usual answer. "Butwhat do you hear from him?" Weston persisted. "I sup-pose you write to him occasionally? You mustn't be toocruel.""Well, I don't hear much," she said. She took a letterout of her pocket and handed it to him.When he had read it, he was silent for a while. ("Ifthis is the sort of letter a blighted being writes," he re-flected, "love has changed since my time.")"Dear Fred," the letter ran, "I'm hawing the time of mylife. Tell Laura Childs I saw a shell necklace that she'd beperfectly crasy about. The dredging . . .""19
<pb n="120"/>
THE RISING TIDE'Then followed two pages about shells, which Mr..l'Weston, raising a bored eyebrow, skipped."Those books you sent were bully. They look very inter: ;:esting. I haven't had time to read them yet. Tell Laura <they use boa-constrictors here instead of cats; and tell her,that the flowers are perfectly wonderful."Then came something about suffrage, ending with aribald suggestion that the suffragists should get a PFil-pino candidate-"He wouldn't cost so much as the chief of 'bosses, Mr. Smith; a Moro will root for 'votes for women':",if you promise him a bottle of whisky.""He is not losing sleep over being rejected," Arthur*Weston thought, as he handed the letter back to her. .. .l He had lost some sleep himself, lately: "And there's noexcuse for it," he told himself; "I didn't fall in love, Istrayed in-in spite of sign-posts on every comer! Andnow I'm in, I can't get out. Damn it, I will get outl"But each day it seemed as if he 'strayed' farther in. .."Why has H. M. gone off?" Laura asked Frederica."Why, you knowl Shells," Fred said, astonished atthe question."Tell that to the marines. Freddy, you bounced him!""I did not.""Well, then, if you didn't, what color are the brides-maids' dresses to be?" Laura retorted."Get out!" said Frederica."Why has Mr. Maitland left town?" Mrs. Payton askedher daughter.I20
<pb n="121"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Shells.""Oh," Mrs. Payton said; "but I thought he-you-  Imean, I supposed... Freddy, he's a nice fellow.  Iwish--""Oh, nice enough," Fred admitted, carelessly."She's refused him," Mrs. Payton thought; and sighed.Even Flora had to ask her question: "Mr. Maitland hasgone away, they say, Miss Freddy?""So I hear.""Men," said Flora, heavily, "is always going awaylWhy can't they stay in one place, same as ladies?""They are not so important as we are," Miss Freddyassured her."If they was all swep' out of the world, it would be justthe same to me," said Flora, viciously.Fred kept a severely straight face; all the householdknew poor Flora had had aother disappointment."Why?"'-"Why?"-everybody asked. But Fredericaonly thought "why." Her first feeling when he went awayhad been a sort of blank astonishment. Of course, it wasall right; there was no reason he shouldn't go, only-"Why?"Every day, as she worked at her desk, or took a trolley-car to the suburbs to inspect some apartment, or sat inabsorbed silence opposite her mother at the dinner-table,she was saying, why? She was certain that he was fond ofher. "Did he go because he thought I was so deep inbusiness that I wouldn't bother with him? Or because9                   I21
<pb n="122"/>
THE RISING TIDEbe wanted to show me he could put in really serious licks of work? Or because he was afraid I'd turn himdown? Of course, I am awfully matter-of-fact," she ad-mitted; "but all the same, he's blind if he think that "Sometimes, when her mother commented vaguely onthe weather, or on Flora's indelicacy in being so daftabout men, or Miss Carter's perfectly unreasonable wishto go to the theater once a week, besides her regular eve-ning out--" don't go once a year," Mrs. Payton said-Frederica would start and say, "Beg your pardon? Ididn't hear you."  Nor would she hear her mother'sdreary sigh."Freddy has nothing in common with me," Mrs. Paytonused to think, and sigh again. It did not occur to her tosay, "I have nothing in common with Freddy." Certainly,they had nothing of mutual interest to talk about... Mrs.Payton was wondering dully whether she had not bettertake a grain of calomel; why they would not eat coldmutton in the kitchen; whether Flora wouldn't be a littlemore cheerful now, for Miss Carter said that the Mc-Knights' chauffeur was making up toher.... Fred was won-dering how soon her last letter would reach Howard Mait-land; foreseeing his interest in its contents-the newsthat Smith had been beaten, but pledged to the supportof suffrage in his next campaign; calculating as to theearliest possible date of his reply. .... Mrs. Payton wasright; they had nothing in common. By and by, as theweeks passed, the mother and daughter, together only atmeals, lapsed into almost complete silence."I love both my children just the same, but Mortimorei22
<pb n="123"/>
THE RISING TIDEis more of a companion than she is," Mrs. Payton thought,bitterly.There was, however, one moment, in April, when Fred-erica did talk.... Mrs. Holmes had come in to dinner,and somehow things started badly. Mrs. Payton had said,sighing, that she was pretty tired; " I really haven'tgot over the Christmas rush, yet," she complained. AndFrederica, with a shrug, said that the Christmas debauchwas getting worse each year. Then the suffrage paradewas discussed. It had taken place the day before, inbrilliant sunshine, and on perfectly dry streets, whichgreatly provoked Mrs. Holmes, who had prayed for rain.Naturally, she made vicious thrusts at the women whotook their dry-shod part in it. She was thankful, she said,that William Childs had locked Laura up; anyhow, shehadn't disgraced the family!"Do you call taking her to St. Louis 'locdng her up'?"Fred inquired. "Laura gave in to Billy-boy, which wasrather sandless in her. She is a dear, but she hasn't muchsand.""She has decency, which is better. To show yourselvesoff to a lot of coarse men-""Mr. Weston watched the procession.""Only coarse women would do such a thingl AndArthur Weston might have had something better to do!"Frederica held on to herself; she even refrained fromquoting Mr. Weston's comment on the parade: "Nodoubt there were women in the procession who liked to beconspicuous; but there were others who marched with theconsecration of martyrs and patriotsl" But of course it123
<pb n="124"/>
THE RISING TIDEneeded only a word to bring an explosion. The word wasinnocent enough:"That Maitland boy," said Mrs. Holmes--"I'vedropped my napkin, Flora; pick it up-why did he sud-denly leave everything and go off?""Freddy says he's gone to dig shells," said Mrs. Payton."Dig what?" said Mrs. Holmes; "people mumble sonowadays, nobody can understand them! Oh, shells?Yes. Funny thing to do, but I believe it's quite the thingfor rich young men to amuse themselves in some scientificway. I suppose it doesn't need brains, as business does.""It isn't amusement," Frederica said; "it's work."Upon which her grandmother retorted, shrewdly: "Any-thing you do because you want to, not because you haveto, is an amusement, my dear. Like your real-estatebusiness."Frederica's lip hardened."However," Mrs. Holmes conceded, "to make his wayin the world, a rich man, fortunately, doesn't need to be in-tellient, any more than a pretty girl needs to be clever"-she gave her granddaughter a malicious glance; "all thesame, young Maitland had better settle down and getmarried, and spend some of the Maitland money. (Theregoes my napkin again, Flora!)""I'd have no respect for him, if he did," Fred said."He would be too much like this family-living on deadbrains."Her grandmother turned angry eyes on Mrs. Payton."You may know what your daughter means, Ellen; I'msure I don't!"I24
<pb n="125"/>
THE RISING TIDE"I'll tell you what I mean," Frederica said, "you andMother simply live on the money your husbands made and left you when they died  Since you were a girl, whenyou had to work because you were poor, you have neverdone a hand's turn to earn your living. Mother has neverdone anything. You are both parasites. Well, I am, too;but there's this difference between us: I am ashamed, andyou are not. I am trying to do something for myself. Butthe only thing you two will do for yourselves will be todie." She looked at her speechless grandmother, apprais-ingly. "Yes, death will be a real thing to you, Grand-mother. You can't get anybody else to do your dyingfor you.""Ellenl Really" Mrs. Holmes gasped out."Freddy, stopl" her mother said, hysterically."Well, what have either of you ever done to earn whatyou are at this moment eating?" Fred inquired, calmly.Mrs. Payton was speechless with displeasure, but Mrs.Holmes, shivering from the chil of that word Fred hadused, helped herself wildly from a dish Flora had beenholding, unnoticed, at her elbow. "Ellen, I simply willnot come here, if you allow that girl to speak in this way-before a servant, tool" she added, as Flora retreated tothe pantry."I merely told the truth," Fred said, with a bored look."Well," said her grandmother, "then I will tell youthe truthl You are a very unpleasant girl. And I don'twonder you are not married-no man would be such afool as to ask youl A girl who cheapens herself by lock-ing herself up in empty flats with any young man she12S
<pb n="126"/>
THE RISING TIDEhappens to meet, and signs indecent petitions, and rantsin the public streets to a lot of strikers-why, you are nota lady! You are as plain as a pike-staff; and you have nomanners, and no sense, and no heart-you've nothing butcleverness, which is about as attractive to a man as ahair shirt! Maria Spencer told me she expected.youwould be ruined; but I said I would think better of youif you were capable of being ruined, or if anybody wantedto ruin you. You are not a woman; you are a suffragist!That's why you haven't any charm; not a particlel""Thank Heaven!" Frederica murmured."Well, unless men have changed since my day," Mrs.Holmes said, shrilly, "a man wants charm in a woman,more than he wants brains.""It is a matter of indifference to me what men want,"Fred commented.Her grandmother did not notice the interruption-"Though when we were young, some of us had brainsand charm, too! Therel That's the truth, and how doyou like it? Ellen, why do you have your napkins starched so stiffly-they won't stay on your lap a minute!".i
<pb n="127"/>
CHAPTER XINEVER noticed her looks," Howard Maitland wassaying, as he and another member of the Survey Ex-pedition lounged against the railing of their tubby littlevessel and looked idly down on an oily sea. They hadbeen talking about women-or Woman, as Predefica Pay-ton would have expressed it; and, naturally, she herselfcame in for comment."Pretty?" Thomas Leighton had asked, sleepily. Itwas very hot, and the fats smelt abominably; both  enwere muddy and dripping with perspiration.Howard meditated: "I never noticed her looks. Shekeeps you hustling so to know what she's talking about,that looks don't count. She says things that make yousit up-but lots of girls do that.""They do. Boring after the first shock. But they en-joy it. It draws attentio to 'em. Our grandmothers usedto faint all over the lot, for the same purpose.""Sometimes," Howard said, grinning, "when they getgoing about sex, I don't know where to lookl""Look at them. That's what they want. And as mostof 'em don't know what they're talking about, you needn'tbe uncomfortable. When they orate on Man's injustice toWoman-capital M and capital W-I get a little weary."127
<pb n="128"/>
THE RISING TIDE"I'm with 'em, therel" Maitland said.The older man gave a grunt of impatience: "It isn'tmen who are unfair to women; it's Nature. But I don'tsee what can be done about it. Even the woman's votewon't be very successful in bucking Nature.""I don't agree with youl Nature is perfectly impartial.Brain has no sex!""Nature impartial?"  Leighton repeated, grimly;"Maitland, when the time comes for you to sit outsideyour wife's room, and wait for your first-born, you willnot call Nature impartial. Theories are all very pretty,but just try waiting outside that door-" his face twitched;and Howard, remembering vaguely that Mrs. Leightonhad been an invalid since the birth of their only child, changed the subject:"Miss Payton's just sent me a cartload of suffrage literature; came on the tug yesterday." "Suffragist?-you, I mean?" "Yes; aren't you? Let's get in the flap of that sail.""Do I look like a suffragist?" the other  deman ended. Howard surveyed him. "I don't know the earmarks,but you show traces of intellgence, so I suppose you are.""I'll tell you the earmarks-in the human male:amiable youth or doddering age.""You're not guilty on the amiability charge, and youdon't visibly dodder. So I suppose you're an anti.""Not on your lifel It's a case of a plague on both yourhouses."They were silent for a while, looking across the lagoonat a low reef where, all day long, the palms bent andx28
<pb n="129"/>
THE RISING TIDErustled in the hot wind; then Leighton broke out: "Forutter absence of logic I wouldn't know which party toput my money on.""Play the antis," Howard advised.But the other man demurred. "It's neck and neck.Some of the arguments of the antis indicate idiocy; butsome of the sufs' arguments indicate mania-homicidalmania! It's a dead heat. It's queer," he ruminated;"each side has sound reasons for the faith that is in it, yetthey both offer us such a lot of-truck  One of themysteries of the feminine mind, I suppose." He knockedthe ashes out of his pipe on the deck-rail, and yawned."As an example of 'truck,' I heard an anti say that fora woman to assume the functions of a man, and vote, wasto 'revert to the ameba.' Can you match that? But, onthe other hand, look at the suffsl My own sister-in-law(a mighty fine woman) told me that men 'were of nouse except to continue the race.""That's going somer'"But of course," the older man said, "it is ridiculousto make sex either a qualification or a disqalification forthe ballot; and it's absurd that my wife shouldn't have avote when that old Portuguese fool from Gloucester,Massachusetts, who guts our fish and can't speak Englishso that an American dog could understand him-has it.""That's just itl" Howard said, surprised at his fairness."Why multiply him by two?" Leighton said, dryly."We wouldn't be a democracy if we discriminatedagainst the uneducatedr'"I don't. I discriminate against the unintelligent.129
<pb n="130"/>
THE RISING TIDE You'll admit there's a difference? Also, allow me to re-mind you that democracy is not the ballot; it's a state.of mind.""Very well!" Maitland retorted. "Make intelligencethe qualifcation: the women put it over us every timel They are far more intelligent than men.""I'd like to hear you prove it.""That's easy! Girls can stay in school longer thanboys, so they are better educated.""But I'm not talling about schoolingl" Leighton brokein; "I mean just common sense as to functions of theballot. Let women ask for an intelligence qualification,and Ill be the biggest kind of a suffl But while they don'tknow any more about what the ballot can and can't do,than to gas about its raising woman's wages-oh, Lord!"be ended, hopelessly."Suffrage in itself is educating," Howard instructed him.Leighton nodded. "It ought to be. But I can't seethat it has perceptibly educated our fish-gutter. Still,you'd like to meet his wife at the polls?"The suffragist hesitated: "When women get the vote,they'll change the election laws, and weed out the unfit." Leighton lifted despairing hands: "When you say thingslike that, I feel like putting my money on the suffslMait, get out of the cradle! Our grandfathers made amess of it, by dealing out universal male suffrage; andour fathers made a worse mess in giving it to the malenegro; now the women want to make asses of themselves,just as we did. They are always yapping about being our'equals.' They are/ They are as big fools as we are.130
<pb n="131"/>
THE RISING TIDEBigger, for they have the benefit of observing our blundes,and being able to avoid them-and they won't do it!Because Mr. Portugee has the ballot, Mrs. Portugeemust have it, too. They say it wouldn't be 'fair' toleave her out. You'd think they were a parcel of school-girlsl If women would ask for a limited suffrage, ask forthe vote for my wife, so to speak-a vote for any intelli-'gent woman, cook or countess -I'd hold up both hands,and so would most men.""It isn't practical.""Practical enough,if wewanted to do it. And thinkwhatwe could accomplish-the intelligent men, and the intelli-gent women! The people who buy and sell Mr. Portugeewould be snowed under;-which is the reason the corruptelement in politics object to a limited suffrage for women!lThey need Mr. Portugee in their business, and rather thanlose him, they'll take Mrs. P., too. So what's the use oftaling? Votes for Women wil come, in spite of all the antisin the land, for in this woman's scrimmage, though the antishave the charm,the sufragists have the brains; and brainsalways win, no matter how bad the cause  They'll getit-I'm betting that they'll get it in five years.""You ought to hear Miss Payton talk about it," Mait-land said; "she'd floor you every time. She's got amighty pretty cousin," he rambled off; "she has charm.""Suffragist?""Laura Childs? You bet she is! And she has brains.Not like Miss Payton, of course. But-" he straightenedup, and his eyes began to shine; his description of Laurawas so explicit that his companion smiled.131
<pb n="132"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Oh, that's the lay of the land, is it?" he said.To which Howard responded by telling him to go tothunder. "Trouble with Miss Childs," he said, "is thatthe fellows are standing in a queue up to her father's door-steps, waiting to get a chance at her.""Why did you step out of line?""Ill tell you the kind of a girl she is," Howard said,ignoring the question. "Of course, a man never wouldget stuck with Laura at a dance, but she's the kind,if she thought he was stuck, would make some sort ofexcuse-say she wanted to speak to her mother-soas to shake him. No man ever wants to get clear ofLaura, but she's that kind of girl. That's why menhang round so.""You evidently didn't hang round?"Howard yawned. "Did I show you the pearl I foundyesterday?" he asked, and produced, after much rum-maging in his various pockets, a twist of paper. Leigh-ton inspected the pearl without enthusiasm."Good so far as it goes. Hardly big enough for the ring."Howard gave him a thrust in the rbs.' "I'm going downto the cabin."In his sweltering state-room he looked at his find, criti-cally. "No, it isn't big enough," he decided. "Well, may-be I'll never have a chance to produce a ring," he added,dolefully; then he dropped the pearl into his collar-box,and mopped the perspiration from his frowning forehead. "Wonder if I shall ever be cool enough in this life to weara collar?" he speculated. After all, why had he stepped 132
<pb n="133"/>
THE RISING TIDEout of the line? "I wish I'd prospected before I lefthome!"  Yet he realized that he had not known howmuch Laura counted in his life until he got away fromher. Out here, "digging for buried treasure" in the blaz-ing sun, lying on deck through velvet, starlit nights, therecollection of that "queue" lining up at Billy-boy's frontdoor-steps had become first an irritation, and by andby an uneasiness. He had had one card from her,-" 7 above. Don't you wish you were as cold as weare?" The photograph on the back revealed a snowymountain-side that was tantalizing to a man who hadnothing to look at but blazing, palm-fringed reefs, andwho, for weeks, had been sweating at zo04. And it wasnot only the temperature that tantalized him-in theforeground of the picture were half a dozen of his set onskis. Laura, in a sweater and a woolly white toque, wasputting a mittened hand into Jack McKnight's, to steadyherself. Howard had not liked that card. "McKnight'sgot on his Montreal rig, all right," he thought, contemntu-ously; "he always dresses for the part!"It was that postal which had aroused his uneasinessabout the queue, and set him to counting the weeks untilhe could get into the line again. Also, it made himwrite rather promptly to Frederica Payton:"Hasn't Jack McKnight got any job? He's a pretty suc-cessful loafer if he can go off skiing all around the clock.Why doesn't Laura put an extinguisher on him? How isLauraf I suppose she and Jack are having the time of theiryoung lives this winter."It was well on in July before Fred's reply to that par-133
<pb n="134"/>
THE RISING TIDEticular letter reached him, and it made him tell TomLeighto that Miss Payton-"You remember I told youabout her?"-was the finest woman he had ever known."No sentimental squash about Freddy Payton!" Thistribute was given because Fred had said:"Laura hasn't confided in me, but rm betting that she'llturn Jack McKnight down. He's not good enough to blackher boots, and nowadays women demand  at men-"At this point Howard folded the letter and put it inhis pocket. "Laura'll  bounce himl" he said to himself;and for the next hour he expatiated to Mr. Leighton uponthe charm of common sense in a woman-the womanbeing Miss Payton, of whom his hearer was getting justa little tired; but he was confused, too. At the end of anhour his gathering perplexity found words:"But I thought it was the pretty cousin you were goneon?""You did, did you?" Howard said. "Digging shells hasaffected your brain, Tommy."9}
<pb n="135"/>
CHAPTER XIISPRING had sauntered very slowly upthe Ohio Valleythat year. During a cold and slushy April, Fredericapaid her advertising bills, and was assured that the MissesGraham would want her to engage an apartment for themin the autumn. Also, she found a flat for a lady withstrikngly golden hair, who later departed without payingher rent. This created a disgruntled landlord and in-structed the real-estate agent in the range of adjectivesdisgruntled landlords can use  In May she was almostbusy in finding houses on the lake and in the mountainsfor summer residents; but her traveling expenses to andfrom the various localities were so large that she had toapply to her man of business for an advance from herallowance."Look here, Fred," he said, "you can't live on your-future commission from Cousin Eliza. Don't you thinkyou've had about enough of this kind of thing?""I do not!" she said. "You can sponge my head be-tween rounds, but you can't stop the mill. I don't pulloff the gloves till I see it through. And I'm twenty-twodollars ahead of last monthl"She had induced him to go with her and Zip to see thetiny furnished cottage she had hired for the summerI35
<pb n="136"/>
THE RISING TIDEin Lakeville-the cheerfully vulgar suburb of Laketonwhere persons of her own sort played at farming. Lake-vinle was only a handful of flimsy frame houses scat-tered along under the trees close to the sedgy edge of thelak. Wooden piers ran out into deep water, and, whenthe season opened, collected joggling fleets of skiffs and!canoes about their slimy piles. As yet, the houses wereunoccupied, but the spirit of previous tenants, as indi- cated by names painted above the doors-"Bide-a-Wee,"and "Herestoyou"-had been very social. Sentimentalminds were confessed in "Rippling Waves," and "SweetHomes" Fred's "bungalow," its shingled sides weatheredto an inoffensive gray, was labeled, over its tiny piazza,"Sunrise Cottage.r""I think that's why I took it," she told Mr. Weston,when, having inspected its shoddy interior and paused onthe porch to look at the far-off church spire of Laketon,they wandered down to a ledge of rock that jutted outinto the lake; "women are going to raise the sun of free.dom!l""I hope they won't, accidentally, raise Cain," he mur-mured. "Fred, the lamp on your center-table almost putmy eyes outl Do the Lakevillians really think that kindof junk beautiful?""They do. But don't be cocky; we thought it beauti-ful ourselves not so very long ago-if it was only expen-sive enoughl Look at the parlor in Payton Street.""That magenta shade with the autumn leaves on it is the most horrible thing I ever saw," he said, shud-dering.i36
<pb n="137"/>
THE RISING TIDE"I shall have lots of candles and a student's lamp tomitigate it," she comforted him.They had settled down on the rock, Zip dozing againstFred's knee. It was an exquisite May afternoon. Every-thing was very still; once a bird fluted in the distance, andonce, on the piazza of a boarded-up cottage, a chipmunkscurried through the drift of last year's leaves. A hazeof heat lay on the water that crinkled sometimes under acat's-paw of wind, and then lapped faintly in the sedges.The woods, crowding close to the shore, were showing thefurry grayness of young oak leaves, and here and there amaple smoldered into flame. Frederica, absently pokinga twig under patches of lichen and flakin them off intothe water, was saying to herself that in about six monthsHoward Maitland would be at home."Lakeville is so unnecessarily hideous," Mr. Westonmeditated; "I can't see why you should like it."" Because my friends come here-people who workl I'mgoing to start a suffrage cub for them.""How grateful they will be!" he said. His amiabilitywhen he was bored was very marked."But I had to cave," Fred said, "about having Florahere when I stay all night. The Childs family felt theywould be compromised if people in Laketon knew thatBilly-boy's niece flocked by herself in Lakeville. TheChildses are personages in Laketoni Aunt Bessie is thetreasrer of the antis, and runs a gambling-den on Thurs-day afternoons-she calls it her Bridge Club. And Billy-boy has a Baconian Club, Saturday nights. My, howuseful they are! As my unconventionality would injure1o                 I37
<pb n="138"/>
THE RISING TIDE their value to society, I said I would hold Flora's hand.How much use do you suppose Flora would be if thievesbroke in to steal?""She would be another scream. And you'll like to haveher wash the dishes for you.""Flora is too much in love to wash dishes well," Fredsaid. "Besides, I don't mind washing 'em, and I do itwell. The idea that women who thisk can't do things likethat is silly. We do housework, or any other work, in- fiitely better than slaves."" 'Slaves' being your mothers and grandmothers?"Frederica nodded, prying up a piece of moss and snap- ping the twig off short."Oh, Fred, you are very funny!""Glad I amuse you. Pitch me that little stick underyour foot.'"He handed it to her, and she began to dig industriouslyinto the cracks and crevices of the old gray rock. "The idea of calling Mrs. Holmes a slave is delightful," he said."She is a slave to her environment! Do you think she would have dared to do the things I do?""She wouldn't have wanted to." "You evade. Well, I suppose you belong to another generation." Arthur Weston winced. "Don't you think it's queer," she ruminated, "that a man like HowardMaitland is satisfied to fool around with shells?" When-ever she spoke of Howard, a dancing sense of happinessrose like a wave in her breast. "Why doesn't he get intopolitics, and do somethingl" she said. Her voice wasdisapproving, but her eyes smiled.138
<pb n="139"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Perhaps he likes to keep his hands cean.""Oh," she said, vehemently, "that's what I hate aboutmen. The good ones, the decent ones, are so afraid ofgetting a speck of dirt on themselvesl  That's wherewomen-not Grandmother's kind-are going to save theworld. They won't mind being smirched to save the race I""Frederica," her listener said, calmly, "when that timecomes, may God have mercy on the race. Your grand-mother (I speak generically) thought she saved the raceby keeping clean.""And letting men be-" she paused to find a suffidentlyvehement, word. "It's the double standard that haslanded us where we are; it has made men vile and keptwomen weak. We'll go to smash unless we have onestandard.""Which one?" he asked; "yours or ours?""You know perfectly well," she said, for once affronted."I only asked for information. There's no denying thatthere are members of your sex who rather incline to ourpoor way of doing things. Oh, not that we are not a badlot; only, to be our equals, it isn't necessary to sit in thegutter with us. Continue to be our sup-""Let's cut out bromides," she said. "You (I, also,speak generically)-""Thanks so muchl""-have pulled enough of your 'superiors' down to shareyour gutter. It's time now for men to get out of thegutter and come up to us.""You breathe such rarefied air," he objected. He reallywished that on a day of such limpid loveliness she wouldI39
<pb n="140"/>
THE RISING TIDEstop undressing life. He liked to be amused, but once ina while Frederica was just a little too amusing, and he was.in the faintest degree bored, as one is bored by a de-lightful and obstreperous child. He gazed dreamily into the spring haze, watched a ripple spread over the lake,and noted a leaning willow dip its flowing fingers into the water."Did you see that fish jump?" he asked.Frederica gave a disgusted grunt. "Men are all alike.You talk common sense to them and they go to sleep !""My dear Freddy," he confessed, "you have enunciateda deep truth. The average poor devil of a male creature,toiling and slaving and digging into common sense to makea living, isn't very keen on having it crammed down histhroat on his afternoon out. Not that I am that kind ofperson. I find your 'common sense' very diverting."A little patch of red burned inher cheeks. "That's what has kept women slaves-'diverting' men! I believe youprefer fools, every one of you.""We like our own kind," he teased her."Oh," she said, with sudden passion, "I am in earnest,and you won't be serious! This is a real thing to me, thisemancipation of women. It means-a new world!""Yet this world," he began-the world before them,with its blue serenity of a gentle sky, its vitality of burst-ing buds and warm mists and cool, lapping water; theworld of a woman's soul and body-was not this enoughfor any one? Why struggle for change? Why try toupset the existing order? And Frederica, speaking ofsuch ugly things, was so very upsettingl As she spokeI40
<pb n="141"/>
THE RISING TIDEshe looked at him with the naked innocence which marksthe mind of the reformer-that noble and ridiculous mindwhich, seeing but one thing, loses so completely its senseof proportion. The facts she flung at him he would havehidden from the eyes of girls. Yet he knew that theywere facts.... He had protested that women shouldtrust the chivalry of men, and she had burst out: "Thankyou, I prefer to trust the ballot! 'Chivalry,' and womenworking twelve hours a day in laundries 'Chivalry,' andwomen cleaning spittoons in beer-saloons! 'Chivalry,'and prostitutionl No, sir! unless his personal interestsare concerned, man's 'chivalry' is a pretty rotten reed forwomen to lean onl"The crude words in which she swept away his comfort-able evasions made him cringe, but he could not denytheir accuracy, nor avoid the deduction that one of thereasons there continued to be "ugly" things in the worldwas that until now the eyes of women had been holdenthat they should not see them. Men had done this. Menhad created a code which made it a point of honor anddecency to hide the truth from women; to shield them,not from the effect of facts, but from the knowledge offactslFrederica's knowledge was dismaying to Arthur Wes-ton, both from tenderness for her and from his ownesthetic sensitiveness; it was all so unlovely!l"How do other men take this sort of talk?" he asked;"the Childs boys, for instance?""Bobby and Payton? I would as soon talk to Zip as tothem! They are lke their father; they have chubbyi4I
<pb n="142"/>
THE RISING TIDEminds. Laura is the only intelligent person in thatfamily. She gave in to Billy-boy about the parade,"Fred said, regretfully, "but she did go with me last weekwhen I talked suffrage to the garment-workers. I tell youwhat-it took sand for Laura to do thatl Uncle Williamwas hopping-not at her, of course, but at wicked Freddy; .and Bobby and Payton cursed me out for leading Laurainto temptation.""How about Maitland?" he asked. He had taken Fred-erica's hand and was examining her seal ring. She let herfingers lie in his as lightly as though his hand had beenZip's head, and he found himself wishing that she wereless amiable."Howard?"-her eyes brimmed suddenly with sun-shine; "oh, Howard doesn't belong on the same benchwith the chubby Childses! He thinks,-and he entirelyagrees with me.""Which proves that he thinks?"She saw the malice'of his question, and rather sharplydrew her hand from his."When is he coming home?" Weston asked."November," she said, shortly, and gave a flake oflichen a vicious jab that tossed it out into the water. "How's he getting along with his shells?""All right, I guess. I don't hear from him very often.He's left the region of mails. I've sent him a good manypamphlets and an abstract of a paper I'm writing for the annual meeting of the league. One of these days he '1stop puddling round with shells and do something, I hope.I won't let up on him till he does." 142
<pb n="143"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Merely being a fairly decent fellow isn't enough foryou?""Not nearly enough!""Oh, Fred, how young you arel" he sighed; thenpulled Zip's tail and was snapped at.Suddenly he looked her straight in the face. "Are youengaged to him?" he demanded, harshly."Heavens, no!" she said, laughing.His hands tightened around his knees; he opened hislips, then closed them hard. "I almost made a fool ofmyself," he told himself, afterward. However, his pos-sibilities for folly were not visible to Frederica, who con-tinued to lay down the law as to the work a man ought todo in the world. "When we get the vote," she said,"we'll show you what a citizen's responsibilities are.""Thanks so much," he murmured. "You are going todo all the things we do, I suppose?""Of course," she said, joyfully; "everything-and a lotyou don't do because you are too lazyl""I suppose you will leave us the right to propose?""I'll share it with you," she said, and they both laughed."Oh, my dear Fred," he said, "I must come back tothe chestnut: you are our superiors, and we like you to be.I suppose that's because we are born hunters and are keenfor the unattainable. We won't bag the game if it roostson our fists.""Well," she reassured him, springing to her feet, "I'mnot going to roost on your fist; don't be afraidI""Try me," he said, under his breath. But she did nothear him.143
<pb n="144"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Come, Zippy, we must go home," she said, and ex-tended a careless hand to Arthur Weston, as if to helphim rise. He pretended not to see it.("The next thing will be a wheeled chairl" he told him-self, hotly.)
<pb n="145"/>
CHAPTER XIIION the first of June Frederica transferred herself anda somewhat reluctant Flora from Payton Street toLakeville."Flora think her beau won't go out there to see her,"Miss Carter explained."Nonsense!" Fred said. "If he wants to see her he'llcome, and if he doesn't want to see her she'd better findit out now." But she was not entirely unsympathetic, andtold Flora there would be a piano in the cottage so thatthe music lessons could be continued-which raised thecloud a little.A day or two later Mrs. Holmes called at No. 1s to bidMrs. Payton good-by for the summer, and the next weekthe Childses dropped in, in the evening, for the same pur-pose. They all made their annual remark: "How canyou stay in town in the hot weather?" And Mrs. Paytonmade her annual reply: "I hate summer resorts. I'mmuch more comfortable in my own house."   Nobodyasked the real question, "How can you stay here withMorty?" And Mrs. Payton never gave the real expla-nation: "My life is perfectly empty except for Mortimore;that's why I stay with him."When they had all left town Mrs. Payton, who changedI45
<pb n="146"/>
THE RISING TIDEher under-flannels and packed up her winter blankets bythe calendar, put the stuffed furniture into linen covers,and told Anne to keep the shutters bowed all over thehouse-except in the ell; the sun was never shut out ofthe room with the iron bars over the windows. Thensummer sleepiness took possession of the household. Noone disturbed the quiet except when, occasionally, ArthurWeston, bored and kindly, dropped in to ask for a cup oftea. He told himself once, after a dull hour of drinkingvery hot tea and listening to plaintive details of Freddy'sbehavior, that he was going to leave directions in his willto have inscribed upon his tombstone, "He seen his duty,and he done it." It occurred to him that he would notwait for the tombstone to suggest that same duty toFrederica.. ...As the Payton house fell into somnolence, Payton Streetwoke up. The air, stagnant between sun-baked brickwalls, was a medley of noises that sometimes sank to arumbling diapason, or sometimes stabbed the ear in singlediscords: the jangle of mule-bells, the bumping of the caron the switch, the jolt of milk-wagons over the cobble-stones. In the provision-store all day long a parrot vocif-erated;  from the livery-stable came the monotonouspounding of hoofs, or, when Mr. Baker sent out a hearse and some funeral hacks, the screech of grating wheels.Hand-organs came and'went.  Fruit-dealers cried theirwares-"Strawberries! Strawberriesl Strawb-" The ai-lanthus-shaded pavements swarmed with shrill-voicedchildren; they summoned one another to pull the parrot'stail or to look at the hearse; they assailed the ice-carts,I46
<pb n="147"/>
THE RISING TIDEreveling in the drip from the tail-boards and suckingwhat bits of ice they could scrape up. Sometimes theysquabbled raucously, sometimes wept; sometimes, hush-ing their betraying giggles, crept into Mrs. Payton's frontyard and climbed up on the iron dog "to play circus"-until Mrs. Payton, always on the watch, discovered themand sent Miss Carter down to drive them away.Except for skirmishes with the marauding children,Mrs. Payton's days were very placid. She worked outnew puzzles and dozed through stories in the magazines.She wrote twice a week dutiful letters to her mother,pausing occasionally to think of something to say or tolisten, absently, to the swish of the watering-cart along thestreet; she liked the wet smell of the watered cobble-stones mingling with the heavy odor of the blossomingailanthu. There never seemed to be anything to tellMrs Holmes, except that she had been dreadfully busy,andthat the "accommodating" waitress didn't keep her sinkclean, and that the barber's children were very trying.Every fine afternoon, sitting opposite Miss Carter andMorty, she drove out to the park and home again. Onceshe summoned up all her energy and went to Lakevilleto spend a day with Fred. She thought that if she didn'tgo, Freddy would believe she preferred to stay with Morty.("Oh, if I only hadn't told her I loved him bestl" she usedto reproach herself.) It was a bitter thing to Mrs. Paytonto pass through Laketon and see the place where a Paytongirl ought to be, "instead of living with all kinds of peoplein Lakevillel" When Fred met her at the station andbrought her to the ugly little cottage-its garish interiorI47
<pb n="148"/>
THE RISING TIDE'vivid, now, with yellow pennons-she tried, for the sakeof peace, to restrain her disapproval of everything shesaw, but she couldn't help saying she wondered how Fredcould stand the solferino lamp-shade."Hideous," Frederica said, carelessly, "so why look atit? I never look at our Iron Virgin.""There is some difference in value," Mrs. Payton re-proved her."No, only in cost," her daughter said; then saw thecolor mount into her mother's face, and gritted her teeth.("I needn't have said that-but it's true! Darn it, I amlike him!") After that she tried to think of somethingpleasant to say, but what was there to talk about?-onlythe waitress, and the heat, and the barber's dirty chil-dren. Indeed, it would have been difficult to decide whichfound that visit to the bungalow the most trying, themother or the daughter. Certainly it was a relief to bothof them when it was over."Mother came out to the camp and I wasn't a bit niceto her," Fred bemoaned herself, one day, to Arthur Wes-ton, when he met her entering No. 5 just as he was leavingit. He turned back and followed her into the parlor."And nobody can be so un-nice as you, when you put your mind on it," he said, genially.She laughed. "You never talk through your hat to me; jyou're straight. That's why I like you." "Then you'll like me more, for I'm going to be very straight," he warned her. He looked about for any kind of a cool seat, but subsided into a linen-covered feather-bed of a chair, close to the bust of Mr. Andrew Payton;x48
<pb n="149"/>
THE RISING TIDEhis eye-glasses on their black ribbon dangling in a threadof sunshine, sent faint lights back and forth on theceiling. "Life is very dull for your mother," he said,fanning himself with his hat; "why don't you come inoftener?"Frederica, on the piano-stool, struck a careless oc-tave. "Life dull? Why, I think it's wildly exciting! Asfor coming in, I'm too busy.""Reforming the world? You might begin the reforma-tion by making things happier here. Happiness is avaluable reformatory agent. You could cheer Mrs. Pay-ton up, but you prefer 'being busy."'Fred colored. He had spoken to her once before in thissame peremptory way, and she had been angry; now shewas embarrassed "I'm on my job. I've started a suf-frage league-""There are other people who can start leagues. Thereis only one person who can make your mother happy.""Mr. Weston, the relative value of picture puzzles andthe emancipation of women-"That made him really indignant; he stopped fanninghimself and looked at her with hard eyes. "The doing ofthe immediate duty by each individual woman will eman-cipate the sex a good deal quicker than talking! Youneedn't stop your suffrage work to do your duty as adaughter. Did you ever hear anything about bearing oneanother's burdens?""Sounds like the Bible," Fred said."It is. I commend the book as a course in sociology.""But," she defended herself, "I do come home quite149
<pb n="150"/>
THE RISING TIDEoften  I'm going to be here to-night. I'm going to a :dinner dance at the Country Club, and I'm coming backhere to stay all night.""Yes, you will come for your own convenience, notyour mother's pleasure. See here, Fredl You once askedme if you were like your father,"-involuntarily sheraised her hand, as if to fend off a blow-"I had greatrespect for Mr. Payton in many ways, but he had theselfishness of power. So have you. Whew!" he ended,rising, "I believe it's a hundred in the shadel"Fred was silent."I am coming out to Lakeville in a day or two. Gotmy new car yesterday, and I am burning to display it."Still she was silent. A watering-cart lumbered by andsome children squealed in a sudden cold splash."Until now," he said, "I have believed that you were agood sport.'"And now you think I'm not?""You don't seem to know what the word Duty means;-which is another way of saying that you don't play thegame.""If the game is to make things pleasant for Mortimore,'and put picture puzzles together, I don't care to play it,"she said, cockily. She followed him to the front door andstood there as he went down the steps. But when hereached the gate she darted after him and clapped a frankhand on his shoulder. "You're a dead game sport! Idon't know any other man who'd have biffed me right in the face like that.""I skinned my own knuckles," he admitted, with aISO
<pb n="151"/>
THE RISING TIDEdroll gesture of rubbing a bruised hand. "Still, I don'tmind, if it does you good.""Cheer up! Maybe it will," she said, and, laughing,threw a kiss to him and vanished into the house. Helaughed, to -then frowned. "She wouldn't have kissedher hand to Maitland. I don't count," he thought.As he walked off, hugging the shady side of the street,he added, "I am a fool!"Frederica had not the slightest intention of becomingimmediately domestic, but as she went up-stairs to dressshe happened to glance down the little corridor in theell, and there, outside Morty's door, was poor, faithfulMiss Carter. Her one night off a week, when Mrs.Baker, from the livery-stable, took her place, did notsuffice to lessen very much the burden of Morty's per-petual society, and that and the heat had obviously wornupon her."Miss Carter, why don't you go to the theater?" Fred-erica called to her, impulsively. "I'll stay with Morty to-night. I suppose we can't get Mrs. Baker on such shortnotice?""No, she can't come except on her regular night; andyou are going to a dance, Miss Freddy," the tired womanobjected, rather faintly."Nonsensel I don't care about dancing. Go ahead.Get a ticket for 'Heels and Toes.' It's corking."Her mother followed her into her room to thank her."That's very sweet of you, Freddy. Not that Mortyneeds anybody when he once gets to sleep; so far as thatgoes, I don't need to go to the expense of having Mrs.I51
<pb n="152"/>
THE RISING TIDE Baker here on Miss Carter's evenings out; but I like to feel there's some one near, you know."                    _"It's less lonely for you," Fred said, with unwonted in-sight."Yes," Mrs. Payton agreed, wistfully. "She's some-body to talk to. You needn't sit in Morty's room; out-side the door will do. And I'll sit with you.""I want to read, so I'll sit inside by the light.""Well, don't be nervous. He won't stir."  _"I'm not in the least nervous," Fred said; " I'm only-disgusted."Mrs. Payton's chin quivered. "You ought not to speakso about your brother. Remember, even if he isn't-bright, he's a man, and the head of the family." Fred looked at her with genuine curiosity; how could she saya thing like that! "Besides," Mrs. Payton added, "DoctorDavis always said his intellect was there; it isn't his faultthat it is veiled.""No, it isn't his fault," Frederica said, significantly.She took her book into the bare room, which could not becarpeted or curtained because of the poor, destroyinghands that sometimes had to be tied for fear they wouldclaw and snatch, even at Miss Carter's heavy chair or atthe table, screwed down to the floor. There was a drop-light over the table, and Frederica turned it on and  Iopened her book; but she did not read much; the snoringbreath from the bed disturbed her. Instead, she fell to thinking about Howard Maitland-sometimes she was im- 'patient with herself for thinkig of him so constantlylBut the warm satisfaction that took possession of herI~a 5 2                      ii
<pb n="153"/>
TH.E RISING TIDEwhenever he came into her mind, was an irresistibletemptation. She did not often speculate upon his feelingfor her. "He's fond of me," she told herself, once in awhile, contentedly. That some time he would tell her hewas fond of her was a matter of course. Just now, shefell to calculating how soon her last letter would reachhim. One from him, acknowledging the receipt of somesuffrage literature, had come that morning. "I don't be-lieve one woman in fifty has your brains," he had written.Fred smiled; when he came home in November she wouldshow him those "brains"! Apparently, Mr. Arthur Wes-ton did not take much stock in them-"He prefers thedomestic virtues," she thought, with a flash of amuse-ment. "I wonder if I'm domestic enough to suit him,to-night? I suppose he would think it was better to sitwith an idiot than to try to move the world along!" Butthe next minute she was contrite. "He can't help beingold. I suppose this is the sort of thing his generationcalls 'Duty' "She might have reflected further upon the foolishness ofthe past generation, if just then Mrs. Payton had not comestealthily along the hall. She stood in the doorway,raising a cautioning finger."Oh, you can't wake him," Frederica said, in her nat-ural voice. But Mrs. Payton spoke in a whisper."Freddy, isn't your cottage damp-so near the lake?There's no surer way to take cold than-""Not a bit dampl""Does Flora make good coffee for you?""Bully."I53
<pb n="154"/>
THE RISING TIDE"I hope she's more contented. Miss Carter says thewhole trouble with Flora is she wants to get married, but ''she makes herself so cheap the men won't look at her."  ;iFred frowned. That word "cheap" always irritatedher."Miss Carter is a good woman," Mrs. Payton went on,"but she's a little coarse once in a while.""I suppose Flora wants a home of her own," Fred said,yawning; "when women have no brains they have tomarry for homes.""All women want homes, whether they have brains or not," said Mrs. Payton; "where would they have their'babies if they didn't have homes? Freddy, it must be very lonely for you in Lakeville. Your Uncle William is  ,really shocked about it. He says there are no people of our class there.""Billy-boy is correct. I had two people of the better   Iclass in to supper last night-workers. Mother, one of the  ;things the women's vote is going to do, besides giving the Floras of the world a chance to be independent of men, is to obliterate class lines." "Then it will have to obliterate life," Mrs. Paytonwhispered. "Women need men to take care of 'them. And as for class, God makes a difference in people. You can't vote God down." It was so unusual for Mrs. Payton to set her opinion     -against her daughter's that Frederica laughed, in spite of  ,herself. Mrs. Payton laughed a little, too; then they  iboth looked at the bed, but the heavy breathing went .steadily on.I54                         4
<pb n="155"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Your grandmother thinks," Mrs. Payton said, im-pulsively, "that you would have more beaux if we livedup on the Hill.""That's like her.""Freddy dear, you know I have to stay here on accountof Morty? Not that I'd do more for him than for you-I love you both just the samel But I couldn't take himup on the Hill.""'Course you couldn'tl Mother, for the Lord's sake,don't listen to Grandmother! She's one of the type thatkeeps the world back.""She doesn't like change, that's all," Mrs. Payton ex-plained. She came in and sat down at the table."Yes; she doesn't like change," Fred agreed. "IfNature had listened to Grandmother we'd all be proto-plasm still. Probably the grandmother of the first wormthat sprouted legs, kicked. No, she couldn't kick," Fredsaid, chuckling, "because she didn't have the legs shedespised; she just said, 'It isn't donel'"Mrs. Payton looked perfectly blank."I'm going to use that idea in my paper," Fred said,with satisfaction."Do you think Howard Maitland likes you to writepapers, dear?""Likes me to? Why shouldn't he? It wouldn't makea bit of difference to me whether he did or not, but ashe has ordinary garden sense, I am sure he doesn't dis-like it.""Men," Mrs. Payton said, timidly, "don't like cleverwomen."s55
<pb n="156"/>
THE RISING TIDE                         '"Clever men do." "Your dear father was clever-but he married me.". alThe simplicity of that was touching, even to Frederica, '"You were a thousand times too good for himl"Mrs. Payton was pleased, but she made the proper pro-'test: "Oh, my dear I had a letter fromyour grandmother ;yesterday; she thinks it's shocking-your living in Lakeville alone.""Go onl" Frederica said, contemptuously."Hush-shl" Mrs. Payton cautioned her.Fred shrugged her shoulders. "You can't wake-That.Talk about being shocked,-I suppose it never occurred toUncle William or Grandmother that their ideas of what isand isn't shocking, produced That?"Mrs. Payton shrunk away as if her daughter had struck  iher; she murmured, chokingly, some wounded remon-'strance, then tiptoed through the shadowy hall into the sitting-room. At the table, spread with an unfinished game of Canfield, she sat down, drearily. This was what   i:always happened; they simply could not get along to-gether! Whenever she held out empty hands, begging forlove, they were slapped. She began to shuffle the cards,wondering painfully if it was because Freddy was stillbrooding over that thing she said about loving'Mortimorebest. "I'm afraid she's jealous," Mrs. Payton sighed.Frederica, alone, reflected upon her mother's assertionthat men disliked clever women. It annoyed her, not be- :''fcause there was any truth in it, but because it reminded'her of Woman's cowardly acquiescence in Man's esti-. '!mate of her intelligence. Of course it was all right abouti56
<pb n="157"/>
THE RISING TIDEHoward; Howard had sense! But men generally-didthey really dislike clever women? If so, it merely meantthat they were afraid of Truth. They wanted women tobe timid, and pretty, and useless: to be slaves and play-things--so they fooled them into the belief that sillinesswas attractive, and that slavery and virtue were the samething. It was men who had taught women to believe thatawful thing her mother had said about Morty's being " thehead of the family"; had taught them to believe that a man-not because he was good, or wise, or strong, but becausehe was a man-was the one to rule!"No wonder we are slaves; we've swallowed that liesince Adam. Well, there'll be none of it in mine" shesaid. What was going to be in "hers"? Business, to be-gin with. She was going to make a success of her business.Her books had shown a better month-they should showa still better month, if she wore her shoes out walkingabout town to please clients Yes, Success! It was not apersonal ambition: there was no self-seeking in Fred Pay-ton; she wanted to succeed because her success wouldshow what women could do; show that a woman was asable as a man-as wise, as good ("betterl better!" shetold herself); show that a woman could rule, could achieve,could be "the head of the family"l The thing that wasto be "in hers" was work to free women from the shacklesof the old ideals, from content in sex slavery, with all itsIgnorances and futilities, its slackness of purpose andshameful timidities, that a man-made world had called"duties." And Howard, who was not "afraid of cleverwomen," would help herl A passion of consecration toI57
<pb n="158"/>
THE RISING TIDEthe woman's cause rose in her heart like a wave. For thenext hour she walked up and down the dimly lightedroom, planning what she was going to do for women.It was nearly twelve when Miss Carter's ponderous steptold her she was free. She laughed good-naturedly at thethanks the refreshed woman was eager to give, but justas she was leaving the room Miss Carter's last wordcaught her ear:"I've had such a pleasant time, Miss Freddy. I'll do my work better for it."'Do her work better.' . . In her eagerness to do herown work Fred had never thought very much of otherpeople's; but what a different world it would be if every-body did their work better! "If every woman did herbest on her job, even if it were only taking care of Morti-mores, it would help things along," she told herself. "It'sslackness on the job that holds the world back." Lookedat from that angle, then-the bettering of Miss Carter'swork-perhaps it did count to make things pleasant atPayton Street? The idea put a new light on Mr. Weston'scall-down. Bearing other people's burdens had seemednot in the least worth while; but if cheering people uphelped them to do their work-work which, after all, hadto be done, somehow--why, then there was sense in it.She saw no sense in "cheering" her mother, for hermother did nothing at all. Frederica had no dutiful illu-sions; Mrs. Payton was an absolutely useless humanbeing--and her daughter was perfectly aware of it. "Shehas no burden to bear," Fred thought, carelessly. "Butto give old fat Carter a hand by just amusing her,-thati58
<pb n="159"/>
THE RISING TIDEhelps the doing of work; and that countslI 'll come inoftener," she decided.So, in her own fashion, by a back door, so to speak,Frederica Payton entered into the old idea of Duty.
<pb n="160"/>
CHAPTER XIVFRED was eager to impart to her man of business herwonderful discovery that visits to Payton Streetshould be made, not because of "duty," but because they were of value to the world."Your premises were wrong, but your deductions were correct," she instructed him, and he roared with laughter."Fred, you'll discover the Ten Commandments next.It's the same old result, only you call it by a differentname. But go ahead; run the universet I don't carewhat kind of oil you use, so long as the gears don't stick."Mr. Weston's metaphors confessed the fact that he hadachieved a motor so that he might go thirty miles for acup of tea. He used to come out to the camp two or threetimes a week, and, shading his eyes from the magenta lamp-shade, and the frieze of Japanese fans, and the yellow "Votes for Women" flags, listen dreamily to Fred'stheories for the running of the universe, and also to thatpaper on which she was so hard at work. She wanted hiscriticism, she said, but, of course, what she really wantedwas his praise. She got it-meagerly, and with so manyqualifications that, when all was said, it hardly seemed like praise at all. That he was doing his best to make hercarry her little torch so that it might shed its glimmer ofi6o
<pb n="161"/>
THE RISING TIDElight, yet not set things on fire, never occurred to her.If it h4d, she would have resented it hotly. As it was, histemperance never checked her vehemence, but neither didit irritate her. Her arrogant and shallow certainties, onthe contrary, did occasionally irritate him, and, of course,they never brought him any conviction; but they didoblige him to be intellectually candid with himself, andhis candor brought him to the point of telling her that hethought her generation better than his, because it was notafraid of Truth. "So, perhaps you women may save civ-ilization," he said."Hoorayl" said Fred"Hold on," he told her, dryly; "cheers are premature.What I mean is that feminism, with its hideously badtaste and its demand for Truth, is here, whether we like itor notl It may make the world over, or it may send usall on the rocks.""Nonsense 1""The hope in it is your brand-new sense of social re-sponsibility. The menace is your conceited individual-ism.""Of course you are not conceited yourself," she said,sweetly."I wish you wouldn't interrupt mel I concede thatyour sense of responsibility needs the tool of the ballot,just as a farmer needs a spade when he wants to raise acrop of potatoes. That is why I am compelled to callmyself a suffragist.""Hoorayl" she said againHe looked at her drolly. "It's queer about you-notI6i
<pb n="162"/>
THE RISING TIDE                      ,yo, but your sex; you are mentally, but not emotionally,interesting. You are not nearly as charming as the ladies of my youth; you have no sense of proportion, and youjolt the life out of a man. by trying to jump the track theminute you get tired of the scenery. Also you are occa.sionally boring. But you can't help that; you are re-formers."-"Are reformers bores?" she said. "Alwaysl" he declared."Why?" "Because," he said, dryly, "they never suffer from any impediment in their speech."Yet he was not so much bored that he stayed away fromLakeville. The place itself seemed to him entirely funny.Its very respectable population was made up of hard-working, good-naturedly vulgar folk, whose taste was painful or amusing, as you might happen to look at it. Once Fred made him stay to supper, and afterward go to a party with her and Laura-whose presence had been secured by judicious pressure upon Billy-boy. This es- pecial festivity was called a "can-can" because the guests' idea of humor consisted in wearing a string of empty tincans over their shoulders, with a resultant noise when they danced which gave, it seemed, a peculiar joy. Fred-erica's man of business, sitting on a bench with severalgentlemen who mopped themselves breathlessly after theirexertions and were obviously comfortable in their shirt- "  sleeves, laughed until, he said, his sides ached."You like it, Fred?" he asked, incredulously-she and Laura had taken him home with them to give him some- '.I6u 
<pb n="163"/>
THE RISING TIDE.thing cool to drink before he started on his midnight spininto town."Love it!" she said."Well," he said, "it seems to be a case of 'give meheaven for climate, but hell for company!' It would boreme to death."They were on the little front porch of Sunrise Cottage-Laura lounging on the lowest step, looking up at thestars, and Arthur Weston sitting on the railing, sippingginger-ale. Frederica, standing up, began to expatiateon the woman's club she had organized. After the firstmeeting she had turned it into a suffrage league, underthe admiring eyes of ladies who whispered to each otherthat she was the Miss Payton-"you know? Society girl.Why, my husband says the Paytons could buy up everyhouse in Lakeville and not know they'd put their handsin their pockets!" Fred had constant afternoon teas forthese ladies -which would have been pleasanter if Flora,when waiting upon them, had been less haughty."She calls allour neighbors 'common people,' "Fred said.Laura laughed: "Wait til we get the vote and wellhave equality, won't we, Fred?""You bet we will!""You won't," Weston assured them, "because thereain't no such thing. My dear infants, the Lord made usdifferent, and no vote can change His arrangements.""That's what Mother said; I was quite astonished tohave Mother pull off an opinion on me," Fred said."Your mother has a great many opinions, and mightysensible ones, too."163
<pb n="164"/>
THE RISING TIDE'She gave him a surprised look, like a child catching anolder person in a foolish statement. "Oh, well," she said, "of course, it's hard for people of your generation to keepup with the procession." If he flinched, nobody saw it. "You being the 'pro-cession,' I suppose?' he said, raising an amiable eye-brow-but he did not feel amiable. Then he looked athis watch and said he must start."Oh, don't go!" Fred entreated."You two girls ought to be in bed," he said. Theywent with him and watched him crank his machine; ashe threw in the clutch, he called back, a little anxiously,"Make her loaf, Laural She's tired."Indoors, while they were locking up, Laura giggled."He's daft about you, Freddyl""Mr. Weston? My dear, you're madl He looks on meas a granddaughter.""Those aunts or cousins, or whatever they are, of his,"Laura said, sleepily, "are at the hotel, and I went withMother to call on them. The old one, who looks like aneagle, is perfectly sweet; but the pouter-pigeon one saidthat she did not think the young woman of to-day, whowent into business, 'was calculated to make any manhappy.' 'Course, I knew she was afraid you would catch'dear Arthur'l But really--""Come on," Fred interrupted, starting up-stairs.Laura stumbled along behind her. "Really, I thinkhe is gone on you.""Goose!" The idea was too absurd to discuss; in-stead, when she was combing her hair Fred called throughx64
<pb n="165"/>
THE RISING TIDEthe partition that separated the tiny bedrooms and saidshe wanted to tell Laura something."Come inl" Laura called back; and Frederica, combin hand, came in, and sat on the edge of the bed. At firstshe talked about Flora, who didn't like to come out tothe camp, because it took her away from her beau. "TheMcKnight chauffeur is very attentive," Fred said; "for-tunately for me, Jack's going off with the car for all ofAugust, or I'm afraid she'd leave me, so as to get back totown. Isn't it funny how crazy women in the lowerclasses are to get married?"Laura nodded, sleepily."Want me to read you Howard's last letter?" Fredsaid, and took it out of the pocket of her kimono.Laura, curled up on the bed, listened. "He's right,"she said, when Frederica, with due carelessness, readHoward's panegyrios on .her brains; "you are terriblyclever, Freddy.""Go offl" Fred said. "Laura, he's awfully down onJack McKnight. You wouldn't look at him, would you?""At Jack? The ideal If there wasn't another man inthe world, I wouldn't look at Jack.""I want you to do something," Fred said."All right. What?""It will take nerve."Laura opened her eyes quickly. "If it's another pa-rade-""Nol No! Nothing like that. Parades are only toshow the strength of the attacking army. I want youto attack"I65
<pb n="166"/>
THE RISING TIDELaura sighed.  "But Father and Mother are so op- posed --"                                         ' "This is something personal I want you to do."Laura was obviously relieved. "It's about Jack McKnight. When he proposes toyou-""He won't.""Don't be silly! He will if you let him. And I wantyou to let him. Then, when you turn him down, tell himwhy.""Why? He'll know whyl Because I'm not in lovewith him.""I want you to tell him the reason you're not in lovewith him."Laura, flushing to her temples, sat up in bed. "It'snone of his business! Or,-or anybody'sl""It is his business-to know that a decent woman won'tlook at a fast man !""Oh," Laura said, tumbling back on her pillow, "Ididn't know you meant that. I thought you meant . . .something else.""Thats what I'm up to," Frederica said. "I'm going'to get all the girls I know to promise, not only that theywon't play with dissipated fellows, but that they'll tell 'emstraight out why they won'tl"Laura was silent."Truth!" Fred said, flinging up her head, her hair fall.ing back over her shoulders, and her eyes bold and inno- .cent. "Truth is what we wantl If we can get this bill through the Legislature-'no marriage without a clean ";I66
<pb n="167"/>
THE RISING TIDEbill of health'-we'll accomplish a lot for the sake ofTruth. I wish you'd signed the petition, Laura. Youbelieve in it?""Of course I believe in it. But imagine trying tomake Mama understand it-and Father would have hada fit.""That's the trouble with womenl" Fred said, passion-ately. "We've been too much afraid of men havingfits. Let 'em have fitsl It will be good for them.We've let them demand that we should be straight,and we've never had the sand to demand that theyshould be straight, too. But we're going to do it now.We are going to demand Truth  Oh," she said, tearssuddenly standing in her eyes, "just plain truth, be-tween men and women, nothing more than that,-wouldmake the world over!"Laura sighed and shook her head. "As for playingonly with the straight ones, I don't see how we canknow? It doesn't seem fair not to dance with a manjust because some other girl tells you she's heard some-thing-you'd always hear it from a girl.""General reputation," Fred began; but still Laurahesitated."Well, then, when we do know it of ourselves, let'shold together and turn 'em down. Everybody knowsJack drinks. I've seen him when he was pretty wellloaded," Fred said, her lip drooping with disgust. "He'scrazy about you, Laura; give him a leg up by telling himwhy you wouldn't look at himl""Oh, Freddy, really-"167
<pb n="168"/>
THE RISING TIDE"This is what I'm going to work for," Frederica said,"to teach women to teach men! It's our job, becausewomen are more intelligent than men.""I don't think Mother is more intelligent than Father,"Laura demurred.Fred swallowed her opinion of the collective Childses'intelligence; "I've thought it all out," she said; "I'mgoing to give my life up to urging women to set the pace!And we've both of us got to marry men who will join ourcrusade.""They won't," Laura prophesied; then added, with sud-den, frowning decision: "anyhow, so far as I'm concerned,it doesn't matter. I'm not going to marry anybody."Fred gave her a quick look. "Why?""Well, I don't want to.""Of course, marriage generally hampers a woman,"Frederica conceded. "Perhaps because most of us aretied down to the old idea that it's got to be permanent,-which might be a dreadful borel I suppose that's ahold-over from the time that we were chattels, and mentaught us to feel that marriage was permanent-for us!They didn't bother much with permanence for themselves IBut I admit that marriage-as men have made it, en- ;tirely for their own comfort and convenience, with itsdrudgery of looking after children-is stunting to women. Queer, though, how they don't mind itl Look at thegirls we know-Rose Marks and Mary Morton, and therest of our class who are married-they haven't a thoughtabove their babies and their owners-they call 'em hus- bands'l Did you know Rose has resigned from the x68
<pb n="169"/>
THE RISING TIDEleague? She says she hasn't time to attend the meetings;but I know better. It's beamse that perfectly pfflingMarks man (how could she marry him?-he has no nose,to speak of, and such a silly chinl) doesn't approve of us.I suppose you think it's better for a woman not to marryif she really wants to accomplish anything?""Well, no; not just that. Men marry, and yet they ac-complish things," Laura said.Frederica frowned. The suggestion of a fundamentaldifference in men and women annoyed her. "Of course, itdoesn't follow that a woman stands still when she marries.If she and the man are in absolute sympathy, intellectu-ally, she needn't vegetate. For my part, I expect tomarry,-I want children. But I shall go on with mywork. I consider my work of more importance than put-ting babies to sleep ""Everybody can't afford to have somebody put theirbabies to sleep for them," Laura objected."Fortunately I cant I shall have a trained nurse.When a child is well, a trained nurse is every bit as goodas a mother. And when it is ill, she's better.""Suppose your husband doesn't think so?""Then he won't be my husbandl But I sha'n't run anysuch risk! I shall marry a man who absolutely agreeswith me in everything.""Maybe he'd like you to agree with him.""I will, after I've pulled him up to my level," Fred said,grinning."I suppose Mr. Howard Ferguson Maitland doesn'tneed any pulling up?" her cousin said, softly.12                 I69
<pb n="170"/>
THE RISING TIDEFred's face burned red. "My dear, he is not the only pebble on the beach!l"I"He gets home in November," Laura said. "Freddy, '^it's nearly one, and I'm perfectly dead with sleep!"Frederica laughed and got up; then hesitated. Therewas a little droop in Laura's face that she didn't like."Lolly," she said, "you're bothered. Is it-Jack?""Darn Jack!" Laura said. "I loathe him.""Good girl!" Fred said, with a relieved look. "You scared the stuffing out of me for a minute I""You needn't be worried," Laura told her, dryly. "Jackhas not played with my young affections. Oh, no; I'm cut out for an old maidl I'm not clever like you."Frederica, in genuine relief from that moment of anxi-ety, was betrayed into reassuring truth-telling: "Mothersays men don't like clever women.""If Aunt Bessie could hear H. M. talk about you she'd change her mind."Fred threw an impulsive arm about her and kissed her."Oh, Laural" she said. Laura laughed, and kissed herback again, and said if she didn't get out she'd fall asleepin her arms.But when Fred, blushing like any ordinary girl, had 'left her to those deferred slumbers, Laura Childs lay awakea long time.....Frederica, alone in her tiny room, had a very sober  -minute. As she thought it over, Laura's "loathing" did  inot seem quite convincing. "She's got something on her chest," Fred said. Even when they were little girls shehad loved her cousin more than any one in the world, and i170'
<pb n="171"/>
THE RISING TIDEto have Laura depressed disturbed her sharply. "Can itbe Jack?" she asked herself. "I wish Payton or Bobbywould kick him!" That she should hand the inflictionof such chastisement over to a brother showed that Fredcould revert to the type she despised. But she was sotroubled about Lolly that she almost forgot her satis-faction in being told-what she already knew l-thatHoward appreciated her cleverness.
<pb n="172"/>
CHAPTER XVE XCEPT for the Lakeville ladies, so looked down upon.by Flora, Fred had very few visitors that summer.Even Laura did not come very often, though Lakevillewas only five miles from Laketon. Perhaps she was afraidof being asked questions. In September both girls wereinvited by a school friend to come to the seashore for twoor three weeks, but Laura waited to know that Fred haddeclined the invitation ("I can't fool with Society. I'mon my job!" said Fred) before she, Laura, accepted it.There was, however, one formal call which gave Fred-erica great joy; her grandmother and Miss Eliza Grahamcame over from the Laurels to see her-and she never be-haved more outrageously! She told Mr. Weston after-ward that she had had the time of her life joshing Mrs.Holmes. He assured her that she was an imp, but thathe would gladly have paid the price of admission if hehad only known that the circus was going to take place.He asked his cousin about it afterward, but her descrip-tion of the scene was not so funny as Fred's. Indeed, itwas rather pathetic-poor Freddy, fighting her grand-mother, while Miss Eliza stood outside the ring, so to speak, and watched, pityingly."For there's nothing one can do for her, Arthur," MissI72
<pb n="173"/>
THE RISING TIDEEliza told him; "she's got to get some very hard knocksbefore she'll give up advising the Creator how to manageHis world."She and Mr. Weston had found a deserted spot on theveranda at the Laurels, and she told him what she thoughtof Freddy. "It's a sort of violent righteousness that pos-sesses the child," she said. "Where does she come from,Arthur? That motherl That grandmother! She mustbe a foundling."" Her father had power. His righteousness was not veryviolent, but his temper was.""She must make her mother very unhappy.""Yeast makes dough uncomfortable, I suppose," headmitted"She's an unscrupulous truth-teller," Miss Graham said,and repeated some of the impertinently accurate thingsthat Frederica, sitting in her ugly little living-room, withthe Japanese fans on the wall, and yellow "Votes forWomen" pennons over the doors, had flung at Mrs.Holmes. "Her grandmother said the 'women of to-daycheapenedl themselves'; to which she replied that 'thewomen of yesterday were dear at any price' ""She told me she had merely been truthful," Mr. Wes-ton said. "Justifying herself on the ground of Truth isFred's form of repentance. But the girl suffers, CousinEliza!""She'll have to suffer a good deal before shell amountto anything," Miss Eliza said, dryly; "I wanted to shakeherl Arthur, if you had any missionary spirit, you wouldmarry her."I73
<pb n="174"/>
THE RISING TIDE"But Cousin Mary says she is 'not a young woman whois calculated'-"They both laughed. "Nonsensel If she gets a master,she'll make him happy. A good-natured boy won't do.The gray mare would be the better horse. Marry her andbeat her.""Maitland will have to do the beating," he said. Buthe could not evade her."Don't be a fooL Take her! I know you want her.""I do," he confessed. "But the little matter of her notwanting me seems to be an obstacle."Miss Eliza, her old eagle head silhouetted against thedazzle of the lake, meditated; then she said, "Is she en-gaged to Mr. Maitland?""No, but she's going to be. Besides, dear lady, I am forty-seven and she is twenty-six. Youth calls to Youth!Please don't suggest that she might prefer to be an 'oldman's darling.'""You're not an old man. But the average young man-if he fell in love with her-would be under her thumb.""Why do you say 'if'? Maitland has fallen in lovewith her, head over heels! He can't stop talking abouther brains for five minutes at a time!"Miss Eliza gave him a keen look. "Well, perhaps humannature has changed since my time. Then, a boy didn'tfall in love with a girl's brains, though a grown man some-times did. Cleverness in a girl is like playfulness in akitten; it amuses a middle-aged man. The next thing heknows, he's in love!""Amusesl" Arthur Weston broke in, cynically; "to174
<pb n="175"/>
THE RISING TIDE'amuse' a middle-aged man doesn't seem a very satisfy-ing occupation for a girl. Don't you think she'd ratherhave a boy's ridiculously solemn devotion?""But don't I tell you?-Love comes next! And I knowyou are in love, because you are so foolish. Arthur, I'mashamed of you! Do have some spunk. Get herl Gether! I don't believe she's in love with that boy."He gave a rather hopeless laugh. "Oh, yes, she is. Ihaven't the ghost of a chance; besides-" he paused, tookoff his glasses, and put them on again, with deliberation-"besides, if I had a chance, I'd be a cur to take it. As youknow, I had a blow below the belt. A man never quitegets his wind again, after a little affair like mine. It wouldbe great luck for me to have Fred, but what sort of luckwould it be for her to spend her life 'amusing' me?""Nonsensel I won't listen to such-" she paused, whilethree girls, romping along, arm in arm, swept past them,down the veranda. "Pretty things, aren't they?" shesaid, looking after them with tender old eyes; "how lovelyYouth is!--even when it does its best to be ugly as toclothes and manners, like two of those youngsters. Theydidn't even see us, they were so absorbed in being young,bless their heartsl The outside one who bowed is aWharton girl. She is a charming child, charmingl Anddoing wonderfully at college. But those others-l""Awful," he agreed. "Cousin Eliza, what's the matterwith women, nowadays?""Perfectly simple. They are drunkl"" Drunk?""With the sudden sense of freedom. My dear boy,I75
<pb n="176"/>
THE RISING TIDEreflect: When you were born-no, you're too young"-hewaved a deprecating hand, but he liked the phrase-" whenI was born-that's seventy-three years ago-women weredependent upon your delightful sex; so, of course, they were cowards and you were bullies. Oh, yes; there were exceptions! There were courageous women, and hen-pecked men.  And, of course, cowardice didn't alwaysknow it was cowardly, and bullying was often nothingbut kindness. But you can say what you please, womenwere not free! They had to do what their men wanted-or quarrel with their families, and strike out for them-selves! And. what was there for them to do to earntheir living? Outside of domestic service, nothing butteaching, sewing, and Sairey Gamp nursing! When Iwas a girl I did not know enough to teach and I hated sew-ing. So, if I had wanted to do anything my father andmother didn't approve of, I couldn't have kicked up myheels and said, 'I'll support myself!' Besides, I shouldn'thave dared. The Fifth Commandment was still in exist-ence when I was young. But now," she ended, "that's allchanged. Girls can kick up their heels whenever they feellike itl"He laughed, and said that Fred Payton had kickedentirely over the traces."She's not the only one," Miss Graham said; "thosethree girls who passed us have done it. That nice Whartonchild is going to study law, if you please! Yes, Freedom!It's gone to their heads; it's champagne on empty stom-achs. Empty only for the last two generations-beforethat there were endless occupations to fill our stomachs.I76
<pb n="177"/>
THE RISING TIDE(My metaphors are a little mixed!) When I was a girl,the daughters of a house, even when people were as welloff as Father, always had things to do-' Duties,' we calledthem. But nowadays there's not enough housework togo round; so if girls are rich, they play at work in-inanything, just to kill time! Like your Miss Freddy.""Fred is making a success, of her real-estate business,"he said; "I hadn't a particle of faith in it, but she's makingit go.""It doesn't matter whether you have faith or not; thechange has come: she had to have something to dot That'sthe secret of the situation, and there's no use kickingagainst it. You men have just got to accept the fact ofthe change. All you can do is to fall back on the thingthat hasn't changed, and never can change, and never willchange. Give girls that and they will get soberl"He looked puzzled."My dear boy, let them be women; be wives, be moth-ers! Then being suffragists, or real-estate agents, or any-thing else, won't do them the slightest harm. Marry them,Arthur, marry them!""All of them?" he protested, in alarm.She laughed, but held her own. "I always tell Marythat all that nice, bad child, your Freddy Payton, needs,is a husband. Which Mary thinks is very indelicate in me.But it's true. As for suffrage that the women are allcackling about, I don't care a-a-""Damn?" he suggested."Copper," she reproved him. "I don't care a copperabout itl I've always called myself an anti, but I neverI77
<pb n="178"/>
THE RISING TIDE really gave it much thought, one way or the other, untilI went to an anti-suffrage meeting last year; that mademe a suffragist! I declare, the foolishness of some of theirarguments against voting went a long ways toward prov-ing that perhaps they really haven't the brains to vote Somebody said-Bessie Childs, I believe it was-that theballot would take woman out of the Home. I reflectedthat Bridge took Bessie out of her home, for three or fourhours once a week, and voting would take her out forthree or four minutes, once a year. But I kept quiet untilsomebody intimated that the 'hand that rocks the cradle'is not competent, if you please, to deposit a ballot! ThenI stood right up in meeting, and said, 'I'm only a poor old maid, but to my way of thinking, if the hand is as incom-petent as that, it is far more dangerous to trust a cradleto it than a ballot!'" "What did they say to that?""They said a cradle was every woman's first duty.'But it would be most improper in me to have a cradler I said. I know they thought me coarse.""So you are a suffragist?""Indeed I'm not! I went to a sufrage meeting, andreally, Arthur, I was ashamed of my sex; such violencelsuch conceit!  such shallowness! such impropriety!One of them said that any married woman whose husband did not believe in suffrage should leave him or else havebranded on her forehead a word-I cannot repeat to youthe word she used. And another of them said that all theantis were 'idiotic droolers.' I thought of my dear sister,  iand I just couldn't stand that! I said, 'Well, ladies, if '178
<pb n="179"/>
THE RISING TIDEthe women who don't want the vote are idiots, is it wiseto thrust it upon them? Will idiots make good voters?"'"You had 'em there.""No; they just said 'the vote would educate women.'And as for women not wanting it-'why, we'll cram itdown their throats,' one of them said. Nice idea of democ-racy, wasn't it? She explained that some slaves hadn'twanted freedom, but that was no reason for not abolishingslavery! And, of course, she was right. The suffragistshave brains, you know, Arthur. Well, as a result of adose of each party, I'm nothing at all-very much.""You're agin' 'em both?" he suggested."Oh, I still call myself an anti, because the antis are,at least, harmless; but I really don't care much, one wayor the other. No; the thing that troubles me isn't suf-frage or non-sufrage; it's the fact that somehow womenseem to be fighting Nature. That worries me. I knowthat Nature can be depended upon to spank them intocommon sense when she gets hold of them, but, unfor-tunately, men won't help Nature out. They don't likegirls like Miss Payton-I mean, the young men don't.They don't like girls who are cleverer than they are; butno girl is cleverer than youl Do 'come out of the West,Lochinvar, come out of the West'!"He laughed and shook his head. "My dear cousin, Iam dead in love with you, so don't try to turn my affec-tions in another direction. Besides, Howard Maitland iscoming home the end of November."
<pb n="180"/>
CHAPTER XVI BUT it was the middle of October that saw HowardMaitland back again in town. In spite of Frederica'sfriendly assurance that Jack McKnight hadn't a ghost ofa chance, that "queue" lining up at Mr. William Childs'sfront door-steps bothered him. So, with many large casesof specimens, and a mahogany tan on his lean face, hearrived, one morning, on the Western express.  He hardly waited to remove the evidences of several nightsin the sleeping-car, before reconnoitering the Childshouse. The queue was not visible, but neither was Laura.She was in Philadelphia, a maid told him, and would notbe back for another week. He went off rather crest-fallen."I'll go and see Freddy," he consoled himself.As he shot up in an elevator in the Sturtevant Building,whom should he run across but old Weston! "I'm on myway to the real-estate office," he said, grinning like thecub he was, at Fred's plaything.Mr. Weston did not grin. "I believe she's in her office.Thought you weren't to get home until next month?""Wasn't. But-well, I got kind of stale on shells, andI thought I'd like some smoke and soot for a change. So I came home. Oh-you get off here?"80o
<pb n="181"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Yes," Mr. Weston said, briefly, and stepped out intothe echoing corridor. In his private office he sat down,and, with his hands in his pockets, his legs stretched outin front of him, regarded his boots."Well, he's back," he said to himself.After a long time he got up, put on his hat, and, heed-less of the questioning young lady at the typewriter,slammed his office door behind him. "I'm hard hit," hetold himself, roughly, as he stepped into the descendingelevator. "It appears that I am capable of feeling some-thing more than 'amusemet.' I'll go and buy the wed-ding-present. The application of a check that I can'tafford may be curative."The cure would have seemed still more necessary if hecould have seen how Howard was welcomed in the real-estate office. Frederica's astonished pleasure was as frankas a man's."Good work!" she said, and struck her hand into his."But I didn't expect you far a month!""I couldn't stand it any longer," he told her, joyously."How's business? How's Laura?""Well, clients are not exactly blocking the corridors,"she said; "but I'm bursting with pride; I came outahead last month!""Gee!" he said, admiringly. "Well, tell us the news!""I've finished my paper," she said. She pushed anopen map aside so that she could sit on the edge of herbig office table, and looked at him delightedly. "I'm crazyto read it to you. Sit down and light up!" She strucka match on the sole of her shoe, and handed it to him.iz8
<pb n="182"/>
THE RISING TIDE"I'm crazy to hear it! Laura's skiddooed. I went toBilly-boy's"-he blew the match out and dropped it onthe floor;-"and got thrown down on the front steps.""Yes, she's playing around with the Mortons. I wasasked, but-there are so many more interesting thingshere! Howard, they are talking about abolishing thered-light district, and we're going to get that bill I wroteyou about, through the Legislature, if we bust" "What bill?""Registration. Health certificate-or no marriage li-cense! You've got to roll up your sleeves and get busy.""All right," he agreed, promptly. "She's not engaged,is she?""Who? Laura? Heavens, no! She has something elseto think of than your sex. Look here: why don't you comeout to my bungalow and we'll talk things out?" She ex-plained that though she had moved back to Payton Streetshe still used the camp when she had what she called a"night out." "I take Flora along for propriety. Isn't thatrich? I tell you what, I've been a boon to the whole con-nection. I've given 'em something to talk about!""What's the matter with going out in my car this after-noon?" he asked. But she put him off until the next day.She was thinking that she must brace the house up andarrange for a rattling good supper! "We'll have a bigfire," she thought, cozily, "and we'll sit up and talk tillall's blue. ... You'll stay all night?" she said. "I've avery decent little guest-room."For once she startled him, but her frank gaze madehim almost ashamed of his instinctive sense of fitness.I82
<pb n="183"/>
THE RISING TIDEHe said no, he wouldn't stay all night; he had to be onhand very early the next morning to look after a consign-ment of freight. "But I'll turn up at Payton Street inthe car to-morrow afternoon, about four. Is that right?""Just right," she said. She had decided quickly thatshe would send Flora out Friday morning with provi-sions. "I bet he'll take notice when I feed himl" shethought. "What kind of a salad shall I have? Not oneof those footling 'ladies' luncheon' things, all nuts andapples and stuffed truck. Men want just lettuce ortomatoes. No fancy doingsl"She was anxious to get rid of him and go home and makeher plans. It occurred to her to ask her mother what kindof cheese a man would like. But no, that would involveher in a lot of talk about "propriety." She nodded to himover her shoulder as he left the office, and the next minuteshe heard the elevator door clang behind him. Then, witha furtive glance about the room, as if to make sure she wasalone, she stooped and picked up that half-burnt matchwhich had lighted his cigarette. ... For a minute sheheld it in her hand, then laughed, shamefacedly, and putit in her pocket-book. Her face was vivid with happiness.She pulled down the top of her desk, then flung it up again,and scrawled on one of her business cards: "Closed untilMonday morning."   "I'll stick that in the door," shesaid; "I sha'n't be able to spare a minute for the office to-morrow." But, despite her haste, she stood for a dreamymoment smiling into space. Then she sat down in herrevolving chair and sunk her chin on her fist.He couldn't stand it any longerlz83
<pb n="184"/>
THE RISING TIDEThe words sang themselves in her heart. "Goosel Whydid he 'stand it' as long as he did? Well, he didn't loseany time getting to the Sturtevant Building!" She feltquite confident that he wouldn't "stand it" longer thanthe next night, then, alone before the fire in her littlehouse, he would-ask her.  The thought was like wine!But instantly another thought made her quiver. Whyshould he "ask," when she was so ready to give? Shewished that instead of "asking" her he would take thingsfor granted. She wished he would just say: "When shallwe be married, Fred?" And she would say, just as non-chalantly, "Oh, any old time!" And he would say, "To-morrow?" And she would say, "Oh, well, the familywouldn't like it if we didn't let 'em celebrate getting meoff their hands!"  She thought of Laura's anxiety aboutthe bridesmaids' dresses, and smiled. "I hate that kind offuss as much as men do, but it would be a sham  to dis-appoint Lolly." So she would say, " Call it a month fromnow." Then he would urge-that brought the otherthought again. Why should he urge?-when all shewanted was to give! Oh, how much she wanted to give!Her heart seemed to rise in her throat, and she said, aloud,"Why not? Why not?" A pang of happiness brought thetears to her eyes. It was not only love that stirred her-the simple, human instinct-it was the realization thatlove was seconded by an intellectual conviction, and thatshe could show by her own act that women and men areequals, not only in all the things for which she had beenfighting (they seemed so little nowl)-opinions, rights,privileges; but equals also in this supreme business ofI84
<pb n="185"/>
THE RISING TIDEloving. Yes, there was no reason why she should not bethe one to ask. No reason why she should not be thebeggarl The generosity of it made her glad from head tofoot. She stood up, her lips parted, her breath catching inher throat; she would give, before he could ask! It wasa sacramental instant; for with- the purpose of giving-"herself, her soul and body"-was that exalted realizationthat an opinion of the mind can be merged with an im-pulse of the body. She was profoundly shaken and sol-emn. Suddenly she put herhands over herface, and stoodmotionless: there were no words, but the gesture was aprayer. When a little later she left her office her face waswhit. She was happier than she had ever been in her life.She walked home, stopping, on a sudden impulse, tobuy a bunch of violets for her mother. At her own frontdoorshe met the postman, who gave her a card from Laura:"irm going on to Boston-to stay wth the Browns. Homenext week." Under the little scrawling signature, "L. C.,"was another line: "Why not write H. M. and tell him tobring home some Fiiino gause for the bridesmaids"dresses?"Frederica bit a joyous lip. "Impl Well," she thought,with a queer little matronly air of amusement, "she'll gether dress sooner than she expects." Then she thrust herkey into the lock and let herself into the hall; the lightin the red globe flickered in the draught of fresh air, and.Andy Payton's hat moved slightly. The shut-up stillnessof the house was full of a sickly fragrance: "Bay rum!"Fred said, resignedly. "She has a headache, I suppose."She ran up-stairs, the violets in her hand. "Finished.13                  85 'I 
<pb n="186"/>
THE RISING TIDE your puzzle?" she called out at the sitting-room door. Butthe puzzle was still chaotic; Mrs. Payton was standingbefore a mirror, tying a handkerchief around her head."Too bad you have a headache!" Frederica said."Mother, I shall want Flora to-morrow. I'm going to thecamp for the night. Here are some violets for you."Mrs. Payton put out a languid hand and said, "Thankyou, dear."Then she sank into a pillowy chair and tried to dabsome more bay rum on her temples, but it ran down herface on to her dress, and had to be wiped off, feebly."I hope it won't stain my waist," she bemoaned her-self. "The violets are very nice, dear. I always used tosay when I was a young lady-'Give me violets!' As forFlora, she is simply impossible! She's been crying allday.""What on earth is the matter with her?""I'm sure I don't know. Some nonsense about notwanting to live. Rather different from the way servantstalked when I went to housekeeping. She said-" Mrs.Payton paused, and with closed eyes cautiously-tipped thebottle of bay rum on the bandage across her forehead,then hurriedly sopped her cheeks as it trickled down fromunder the handkerchief. "Oh, dear, it will stain my dresslShe said she had 'nothing to do.' I said, 'Nothing to do?I can find you enough to do.' She said she was tired ofhousework. I told her that was very wicked. I said, 'I'mbusy from morning till night, and what would you thinkof me if I said I was tired of doing my duty?' Miss Cartersays she is simply dead in love with one of the hack-drivers, i86                             ,i
<pb n="187"/>
THE RISING TIDEwho won't have anything to do with her. I can't think so;Flora has always seemed so refined. I don't believe she'dcheapen herself that way. I wish she was more religious.Religion is so good for servants. It makes them con-tented, and gives them an interest. Not but what Flora isa good girl, only I should be so much more comfortable ifshe was contented. I wish I didn't feel my girls' moodsas I do. When they are cross, I feel it in my knees. I'mtoo sensitive. Freddy, dear, ask Miss Carter to bring mea, hot-water bag. Oh, wait a minute! I want to speak toyou. I-"Something in the next room fell with a thud against thedoor; Frederica fled.  Mrs. Payton sighed and shut hereyes, pressing the fresh fragrance of the violets against herhot face."Why does she mind him?" she thought, with languidresentment. "If she was only like Aunt Adelaidel Iwonder if she'll remember to tell Miss Carter to get myhot-water bag."Frederica did remember, butshe did not tell MissCarter: she never went into that room in the ell whenshe could help it. She filled the hot-water bag herself,brought it to Mrs. Payton, suggested bed instead ofthe big chair, and vanished into the welcome silence ofher own room.Later, in the dining-room, as she dreamed over her soli-tary dinner, she roused herself to tell Flora that she wasto go out to the bungalow the next day. "You've got toget up a bully supper for me, Flora. Mr. Maitland iscoming."187
<pb n="188"/>
THE RISING TIDEThere was no reply, and Frederica looked up. "What'sthe matter? You got a headache, too?""I was expecting a friend o' mine would call on me to- morrow night," Flora said, sullenly.Frederica was genuinely concerned. "I'm awfully sorry,but Mr. Maitland is coming to see me and I really mustbe out there. Can't you put your friend off? Who is he?"Flora looked coy."Ah, now, Flora," Miss Payton said, good-naturedly,"what's all this? I must look into this!" The teasingbanished the gloom for a minute or two. "Send him alittle note and tell him you'll be home Saturday night,"Fred suggested. She wasn't quite sure of kitchen eti-quette on such matters; but, after all, why shouldn'tFlora do just what her young mistress was doing?"Maybe he will come to-night," she said, encouragingly,and Flora, with a flicker of hope, said, "Maybe he will;if he does, I guess I'll invite him to go to a movie with menext week.""Perhaps he'll invite you," Fred said.But Flora's hopes did not rise to such a height. "Ifhe doesn't come in to-night, I'll send him a reg'ler writteninvitation to a movie," she said, happily.'.1
<pb n="189"/>
CHAPTER XVIIA      things turned out, Flora might have seen her"friend" in Payton Street Friday night, had de-votion prompted him to call, for the festivity at the campwas postponed for three days. The moring mail broughtFrederica a brief line from Howard Maitland; he hadfound, he said, after he left her office, that he had to runon to Phladelphia Back Monday morning. If her invi-tation held good, he'd come out to Lakeville for supperMonday night. The letter ended with some scratched-outwords, which looked like, "I may have something to tellyou-" The obliterated line made her glow! But thedelay was disappointing. Three whole days before shecould hear that "something" he wanted to tell her-andshe wanted to hear! Well, it would give her more timeto fix things up in the cottage. With this in view, she andZip and Flora went out to Lakeville Sunday morning, andFred had a silent day to keep an eye on the dusting, andwork on her suffrage paper, and jolly Flora, whose plain-tive dullness was beginning to be rather trying."You must brace up, Flora," she said; "you haven'thalf dusted the legs of the table! I don't want Mr. Mait-land to think we are not good housekeepers, just becausewe are 'New Women,' you and II" But Flora did notI89
<pb n="190"/>
THE RISING TIDEbrighten. She had telephoned the "reg'ler invitation tothe movies " before leaving Payton Street, but the " friend"had only said (she told Frederica) "he'd see 'bout it. He'll write to me, and I'll git it Monday," she said. But it wasevident that she had very little hope of an acceptance.All that pleasant, hazy Sunday Frederica followed theold, old example of her grandmother, the cave-dweller,and decked her little shelter. She went into the woodsand brought back an armful of maple leaves and, withFlora's melancholy assistance, fastened them against thewalls and over the doors, hiding, to some extent, thefrieze of fans and the yellow pennons of the Cause. Sheeven took down the muslin curtains and washed and ironedthem herself, and put them up again, crisp and dainty.The little room bloomed with her joy. When she sat downto "polish" her article she kept jumping up every fewminutes to move a bowl of flowers, or put an extra bookon the mantelpiece."I wonder," she thought, "if he can read the titles fromthat morris chair?" She had decided in what chair he wasto sit. She tried the visual possibilities of the chair her-self and, by screwing up her eyes, found she could justmake out the appallingly learned names on the backs ofsome of the books. " That will show him what I'm up tol"she said.It was the old Life Purpose-the eternal invitationlThe bird preens itself, the flower pours its perfume, thegirl's cheek curves like a shell. A man can almost alwayssee the beckoning of that rosy curve, or of a little curlnestling at the back of a white neck, or of soft, shy eyes;190
<pb n="191"/>
THE RISING TIDEfor so, in all the ages, Life has invited. But it has neverbeckoned with a German treatise!Frederica, giving Zip a lump of sugar and making a soli-tary cup of tea for herself, did not know that she wasbeckoning. ...When, at five o'clock, a motor came chugging along theroad, and Arthur Weston opened the door and demandedtea, he, at least, felt the invitation-which was not forhim. The white curtains, the open piano; the warmth andfragrance and pleasantness, and, most of all, Frederica,sitting on a little stool by the fire, her face sparkling withwelcome. Everything was beckoninglStanding up, warming his hands at the fire while Fredran out to the kitchen to make fresh tea for him, the callerread the names of the books lined up in a row between thelighted candles on the mantelpiece, and whistled."Is this your light reading?" he said, as she came backwith the cream-pitcher. "For Heaven's sake, lay in somefunny papers for the simple male mind!" Then he pulledZip's ears, took his tea, and said he wished he could everget enough sugar."I saw Maitland on Thursday," he said, reaching foranother lump. "Yes, he is on deck," Fred said.Her man of business made a hopeless, laughing gesture,as if he gave up trying to solve a puzzle. "Are they en-gaged, or aren't they?" he said to himself. Her way ofspeaking of the cub was certainly as indifferent as it wellcould be! "But that doesn't prove anything," he thought,drearily.I9g
<pb n="192"/>
THE 'RISING TIDE He stayed a long time; he had a feeling that his call wasa sort of last chapter. "In about a week I'll get one ofthose confounded engagement letters," he told himself.He settled down in the morris chair-the chair in whichHoward was to sit the next evening-and started hertalking. He did not need to make any replies. OnceFrederica "got going" on her own affair he could watchher in lay, tender silence. ... How soon it would beover-this watching and listeningl How soon his play-thing would be transformed into a happy, self-absorbed,quite uninteresting wife and mother For Fred Maitland,he was cynically aware, would cease to interest him, be-cause she would cease to be preposterous; she would benormal   Of course Fred Payton would always be adarling memory; she would never leave his heart. Hisheart ached at the thought of its own emptiness if heshould try to turn Fred Payton out just because FredMaitland was another man's wife. No, he would noteven try to forget his wild, sweet, silly Freddyl Sheshould always remain as, back somewhere in his memory,Kate remained, dark-browed and cruel. The Kate of to-day, whose presence in his heart would be an impropriety,was not even an individual to him! But the old Kate washis. He wondered if Fred would ever become as vague tohim as Mrs. Kate-  . . . . "What is her name! Oh,yes-Bailey. When I heard she'd married him, I didn'tsleep for two nights; and now I can hardly remember hisnamel 'Men have died, and worms have eaten them-'. . . Fred, almost all the houses out here are boarded up.I only saw a light in one house."192
<pb n="193"/>
THE RISING TIDE"I was telling you of the woman's movement in Swe-den," she said, affronted."I'd like to see a woman's movement back to townfrom this cottage! You really ought not to be out hereat night, just you and Flora. That one house which isopen will be closed pretty soon, I suppose?""To-morrow," she teased him. "And Flora and Iare such fragile flowers, it's dreadful to think of ourlosing the protection of Mr. and Mrs. Monksl He isa paralytic, and she weighs two hundred and twenty-five pounds.""You'll move in town to-morrow, won't you?" he said,really disturbed.She had to adnit that she expected to. "Not that I'mnervous, but Howard Maitland is coming here to supperto-morrow night, and I'm going to make him take usback in his car because I've got such a lot of stuff tocarry home.""Oh," he said, blanldy. "He's coming out to supper?"He stared into the fire for a while; then he got on his feet."I must start," he said, and stood looking down at her."Fred," he said, suddenly-in the uncertain firelight hisface seemed to quiver-"you're a good fellow. And if yourhusband, when you get him, isn't the finest thing thatever happened, I'll punch his headl"His voice was so moved that she, sitting on her littlestool, close to the hearth, looked up at him, quickly."Why, he's fond of mel" she thought. Her own deepexperience made her heart open into generous acceptanceof any human affection. She jumped up and put bothI93
<pb n="194"/>
THE RISING TIDEimpulsive hands into his. "You are the dearest friend Ihavel" she said; then hesitated, laughed-and kissedhim.Her lips against his cheek were softly cool, like thetouch of flowers. Nothing that she had ever said or doneremoved her more completely from the possibility of pas-sion. He was able, however, to make a grandfatherly re-joinder to the effect that he had dandled her on his kneewhen she was a brat-which was not strictly true, for hehad had no inclination to dandle the gawky fourteen-year-old Freddy Payton on knees that were bent before thecruel Kate. He put a friendly-but shrinking-hand onher shoulder as she went with him to the front door, and aminute later waved good night from his car. As he drovehome in a bothering white fog from the lake, he was veryunhappy. "It hurts more than I supposed it could," hetold himself. "I don't like this kind of 'amusement!'Damn it, I wish she hadn't kissed me."As for Frederica, going back into the cottage, her eyeswere very kind. "He's an old dear to bother with me;I'm awfully fond of him." Then she forgot him. "Twenty-four hours more," she was thinking, "and Howard will behere!"  Twenty-four hours seemed a long time! She wasglad when the moment came to blow out the candles andlook into the other room to say good night; ("only twentyhours nowl").Flora, at the kitchen table, was listlessly shuffling apack of cards by the light of a little kerosene-lamp; asFred entered, she dropped her head in her hands and sighed. Frederica sighed, too. "I suppose I've got to I94
<pb n="195"/>
THE RISING TIDEcheer her up," she thought, resignedly. "What's thematter?" she said, kindly."Nothin'.""Come in the other room and I'll play for you."Flora shook a dreary head. Fred, with a shrug of im-patience, sat down at the other end of the table. The firein the stove was out and the kitchen was cold and damp;except for the lisping wash of the lake and the faint fallof Flora's cards, everything was very still. Fred watchedthe cards for a moment without speaking, then abruptlybrushed them all aside and clapped her warm young handon Flora's thin wrist The movement made the lampflicker, and on the opposite wall two shadowy headsnodded at each other."Now, Flora," she said, "we'll have this out! What isthe matter?""I tell you, Miss Freddy, there ain't nothin' thematter.""There isl You're awfully depressed."" I'm used to that.""But why? Come now, you've got to tell mel"Flora dropped her head on her arms and began to cry."Floral Flora! What shall I do with you? You areso silly!"The woman sat up and wiped her eyes. The little hys-terical outburst evidently relieved her; she smiled, thoughher lips still trembled. "I was tellin' my fortune to seewhat kind of a letter I'd git to-morrow mornin' from myfriend about goin' to the movies. I like 'em, but 'pearshe ain't stuck on 'em. An'-an', I'm bettin' he'll say heI95
<pb n="196"/>
THE RISING TIDEwon't go. The cards make out I ain't goin' to have noluck""Nonsensel You've got too much sense to believe incards.""Miss Freddy, Mr. Maitland '11 think the house real pretty the way you fixed up them leaves. Some of 'emis as handsome as if they was hand-painted!"Fred preserved a grave face, and said yes, the leaveswere lovely."An' he's comin' out to-morrow night?" Flora said,nodding her head. "Well, I guess you're happy." Heropaque black eyes gleamed with unshed tears. Frederica,rising, put an impulsive arm around her; Flora suddenlysobbed on her shoulder."Is it because your beau has been unkind?" Fred said.She used Flora's own vernacular."I 'ain't never had a real beau. Oh, well, I don't carelI'm glad you got a beau, anyhow.""I don't know that I have," Fred said, smil;ng. "Butyou'll get one some day." Under her friendly words wasa good-natured contempt-Flora was so anxious for a"beau"! "An'your gentleman '11 come out here to-morrow night,"Flora repeated,-itwas as if she turned the knife in her ownwound; "an' you and him '11 set in the living-room. Andyou'll talk. And he'll talk. An' he'll ... kiss you.""Oh," Fred said, laughing, "Mr. Maitland and I arenot interested in tat kind of thing! We are trying to givewomen the vote, and to make the world better-that'swhat we are going to talk about. And, Flora, remember,9g6
<pb n="197"/>
THE RISING TIDEyou've got to give us an awfully good supperl Come,nowl you're tired. You really must go to bed."She laid a gently compelling hand on the frail shoulder,and Flora, sighing miserably, took the lamp from itsbracket and followed Miss Freddy up-stairs to the cubby-hole under the roof where she slept.
<pb n="198"/>
CAPTER XVIIITHE next day i' rained and the little house was darkand damp. Across the sodden beach-grass Fred andFlora could see the fat woman in the next bungalowmoving her trunks and her paralyzed husband back totown; when they had gone, the owner of the bungalowcame to give a look around and see how much damage histenants had done. Then he closed the shutters andboarded up the front door. By noon the sound of hishammering ceased, and the shore, with its huddle of.cottages, was entirely deserted. The only human signwas the wisp of smoke from Fred's chimney. All themorning it rained heavily. At ten o'clock Flora put onher things and walked nearly a mile tothe post-office.She came back soaking-wet, and empty-handed."Didn't he write?" Fred asked, cheerfully.Flora shook a forlorn head. But when she had had acup of tea there was a rally of hope. "Them postmen!They're always losin' letters. I shouldn't wonder if myfriend's letter was stickin' in amail-box, somewheres.""Very likely!" Fred said. She really didn't know whatshe said; her joyous preoccupation was only aware ofTime--"six hours more, and he'll be here!" At noonthe rain ceased and the fog crept in.  Some yellowI'S
<pb n="199"/>
THE RISING TIDEleaves blew up on the porch; a squirrel ran down thechestnut-tree at the corn  of the cottage, lifted an alerttail, looked about, then ran up again. After that every-thing was still.The lake was smothered in a woolly whiteness thatmuffled even the lapping of the waves. It muffled one'smind, Frederica thought. She wished she had somethingto do-housework or anything! "I haven't the brains towork on my article; I'm only intelligent enough to bedomestic!" But there was nothing domestic to be done;everything was swept and garnished. She tried to read;she tried to write; said "dar it!" to both book and pen,then got up to walk about and stare out of the windowinto the wetness. At last, in desperation, she put on herthings, called Zip, and went out into the mist to tramp foran hour under the dripping branches. When they cameback, Zip horribly muddy, Fred was as fresh as a rain-wet rose, and full of the joy of living. "Only four hoursnow!"In the kitchen she wiped Zippy's reluctant paws, andtold Flora, who was sitting motionless, her hands idle inher lap, to hang her sou'wester up to dry. "Now, Flora,come to life!" she said. "If you come into the living-roomI'll play for you."Flora shook her head. "There ain't no use listenin' tomusic. There ain't no use in anything. You get up.inthe morning and button your boots. Well, you gotta doit the next day," Flora said, with staring eyes, "an' thenext. An' the next. What's the use? There's no use."But after serving her young lady with a somewhat sketchyI99
<pb n="200"/>
THE RISING TIDEluncheon, she did go into the other room, and after help-ing to start the dying fire, crouched on the floor, her headagainst the piano,and listened toFred's friendlydrumming."Trouble with you," said Frederica, looking down atthe crouching figure, "is that you've nothing to do thatyou care awfully about doing."Flora was silent, and by and by Fred forgot her, for,velvet-footed, through the fog, the hour when Howardshould arrive came nearer, and her own life grew so vividthat the moping brown woman ceased to exist for her-except, indeed, for momentary pangs of fear. that Florawould make some blunder-roast the duck a minute toolong, or forget to put pieces of orange on the sizzlingbreast just before serving itlHe had said he would come at five. But it was nearlysix before she heard the car panting in the road. Sheopened the door, and, holding a candle above her head,told him he needn't expect anything so swell as a garage."Just run her up under that big chestnutl" Then sheput the candle down on the porch, and went out to helphim lift the top, for the moisture was dripping like rainfrom the branches."But the fog is clearing," she said, with satisfaction.She did not add that she had been anxious at the idea ofhis poking back on the wood road in the thick mist. Suchconcern was an absolutely new sensation to Frederica.She had never in all her life felt anxious about anybodylThe top up, they. went into the fire-lit room, warm andfragrant and comfortable, with the candles burning on the 200
<pb n="201"/>
THE RISING TIDEmantelpiece on either side of the learned books. The sup-per was a great success. Flora had "come to life," andthe duck was perfect; indeed, she even brightened, for aninstant, under Mr. Maitland's appreciation: "Flora, Itake off my hat to that duck. You are a bully cookl""She isl" Fred said, heartily. But Floa's face gloomedagain."Bullyl" Howard repeated. His vocabulary was neververy large, and hunger made it smaller than usual. Hewas, however, able to tell Fred that he had missed Laurain Philadelphia."Strikes me she's gadding about a good deal; she'sgone to Boston What's the clue?""Just .a good time. Lolly is rather young still, youknow," Fred excused her. Howard made no comment,and she had an uncomfortable feeling that he did notappreciate Laura. "I pretty nearly went with her, my-selfl" she declared, boldly. She wasn't going to have evenHoward thin Laura was frivolousl "She's the sweetestthing going," she said."You bet she is," Howard agreed, and began to talkabout shells.When they had finished the last scrap of dessert, theyoung man put what was left of his beer on the mantel-piece, and, his pipe drawing well, stood up with his backto the fire, and told her about the pearl he had found."I want to show it to you," he said; and, digging itup out of his pocket, dropped it into her extended hand."I'm going to have it set in a-a ring," he explained, as itlay, round and shimmeing, in Fred's palm. "Of course,14                 20I
<pb n="202"/>
THE RISING TIDE.I could buy a bigger one, and more perfect. But there's akind of association in a pearl you pick up yourself-don'tyou think?""Of course there isl""Put it there, on your finger, and let's see how it looks,"he said, his head on one side, his eyes anxious. She bal-anced it as well as she could on the back of her hand, thenreturned it to him hurriedly. "Pretty good?" he said."Fine!" she assured him. Then, resolutely, changed thesubject; there must be no talk about rings-yet!Howard, a little disappointed at her indifference, putthe pearl, in its wisp of tissue-paper, into his pocket, andlistened to the outpouring of her plans for the winter workof the league. In the midst of it, he kicked the logs to-gether in the fireplace, and, sitting down, smoked com-fortably. Once he said that one of her arguments wasbully, and once he called her attention to the way thesparks marched and countermarched in the soot on thechimney back; "I used to call 'em 'soldiers' when I wasa kid.""I meant to read you my paper," Fred was saying,"but I guess it will keep. Let's talk. Howard, Lauraand I are going to get all the girls we know to take a stand-this is a pretty serious thing!-against playing aroundwith men we know are dissipated. The idea grew out ofthis bill we're trying to get before the Legislature.""Good workl" he said, lazily, and leaned forward toknock the ashes out of his pipe. Zip yawned and curledup on the skirt of Freddy's dress. It was a warm, domesticscene, full of peaceful certainties.o02
<pb n="203"/>
THE RISING TIDE"You see," she said, "women are facing facts, nowa-days. They believe in freedm, but they believe most ofall in Truth. There'll be no more hiding behind a lot ofconventionsl That is what has held us back. We haveas much right to say what we-feel, as men. Don't youthin so?" Her voice was a little breathless.Howard, looking dreamily at the "soldiers," said, a-sently, "You bet you havel""I want to tell you just what we're up to about turn-ing down the rotten fellows," Fred said. "I want to talkit out with you and get your advice. But not now, be-cause-because there are other things I want to say. Butsometime.""Any timel I've just been laying for a jaw with you,Fred. I don't know any other woman I can talk to justas I can to a man!"At that, she couldn't help a little proud movement ofher head, and to hide her pride she stooped down andstroked Zippy; as she did so the firelight fell on her face,smiling, and quivering a little. Her good gray eyesbrimmed with joy. "Yes, we are pretty good friends,"she said."You see," he said, "you mderstandl Why, those let-ters of yours-I can't tell you what they meant to me!"He paused and laughed: "That reminds me. I toldLeighton-you know the man I wrote to you about?""The anti man?""Yes; Tommy Leighton-""I'll send him a bunch of literature-if he hasany kindof mind?"203
<pb n="204"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Oh, well; so-so. He's an anti, so what can you expect?I told him that you had the finest mind of any woman Ihad ever met. I told him that mighty few men couldtalk back to you-" He paused to fumble about in hispocket for his tobacco-pouch. "Laura gave me that," heinterpolated; "Leighton said--"She leaned forward and laid her hand on his arm; thesuddenness of her grip made him drop the little pouch,and as he stooped to pick it up, she said:" I've missed you-awfully."He did not see that she was trembling. He put thepouch in his pocket and retorted, gaily:"I bet you haven't missed me as much as I've missedyou!""I've missed you," she said, in a whisper, "morel"Howard Maitland stopped midway in a breath. Butinstantly the thought that leaped into his mind vanishedin shame. He actually blushed with consternation at hisown caddishness. He tried to say, again, something abouther letters-but she was not listening; she was saying,calmly:"You see-I love you."He was dumb. His brain whirled. He said to himselfthat he hadn't understood her-of course he hadn't under-stood herl What had she said? Good Lord! what hadshe said? Of course she didn't mean-what you mightthink! She only meant-friendship. If he let her knowwhat, for just one gasping moment he had thought shemeant,. somebody ought to kick himl But the shock ofher words brought him to his feet. She rose, too, and204
<pb n="205"/>
THE RISING TIDEstood smiling at him. "Of course," he began, "we are-you are-I mean, I don't know what I would have donewithout your let-""I love you," she said. Sheheld out both her hands-"will you marry me, Howard?"He had it, then, between the eyes. His boyish stum-bling ceased. He caught her hands in his."Fred," he began-a door banged in the kitchen andthey both started, "Fred," he said, again-his throat wasdry, and he stopped to swallow. Instinctively she wasdrawing away from him; the smilin offer was still inher eyes, but a frightened look lay behind it. He did nottry to hold the withdrawing hands."Fred, I care for you so much-" He was white withpain. Frederica was silent. "I care for you so terribly,I-I have to be-straight. I never thought-" Shemade a gesture, and he stopped."It's all right. -I understand. You. needn't go on.""Fredl Look here-I care for you more than I cantell you. You are-you are simply stuning; but-"She laughed: "Cut it out, Howard; cut it outl Iunderstand.""You don'tl" he saKi, greatly agitated; "you can'tunderstand how-how I appreciate-I shall never for-get-"She motioned him back to his chair, and dropped intoher own. "You needn't worry about me. I've made amistake, that's all. Many a man has done the same thingand lived through it. I assure you I sha'n't pine!"She was very pale, but smiling finely. He sat down.'205
<pb n="206"/>
THE RISING TIDEHis confusion was agonizing. He was trying to thinkhow he could tell her what she meant to him; how herespected, admired-yes, loved her  Only not-not justin the way she meant. He tried to say this, then stopped,realizing, dazed as he was, that his explanations only madethings worse." I am not worthy of the friendship of a woman as nobleas you are!""Oh, nonsense! Let's talk of important thing.""No, but listen," he entreated, with emotion  "Youwon't turn me down? You're the best friend I have-wewon't stop being friends?""You'll 'be a brother to me'?" she quoted; it was heronly bitter word; and she covered it with a laugh."'Course we are pals, alwaysl Howard, I want to tellyou what I accomplished here this summer. And oh, bythe way, did you give 'Aunty Leighton' the pamphlet onthe New Zealand situation?" She pulled Zip up on herlap, and teased him, kissing him between his eyes, andsqueezing his little nose in her hand.Howard said, as casually as his breath permitted, thatTommy Leighton was a fine chap-"but no mind, youknow. One of those people you can't argue with on anyreally serious subject like suffrage. Opinions all run intomolds. Can't bend 'em."  Now that he had got startedtalking, he couldn't stop; he talked faster and faster; hetold her everything he had ever heard or surmised aboutMr. Leighton; "his ideas belong to the dark ages-""Believes in sex slavery, I suppose?" Fred interposed."Exactly! I-I guess I'd better be getting along," he206
<pb n="207"/>
THE RISING TIDEsaid, with a sort of gasp. Her instant acquiescence, inspringing to her feet, was at once a relief and a stab."Would you mind," she said, easily, "putting a basketinto your tonneau and leaving it at our house? Flora andI will have such a lot of things to carry in town to-morrow."As she spoke, she was listening with satisfaction to herown voice-calm, matter-of-fact, friendly.He said he would be delighted to take the basket-" oranything elsel Load me up, and I'll deliver the goods inPayton Street to-nightl""Oh, no; it's too late," she said, laughing; "but ifyoull take it around in the morning-""Of course I will; delighted!""I'l tell Flora to take it out to the car," she said; andwent into the kitchen: "Flo-" she began, and stopped.The kitchen was empty. "Floral" she called, looking atthe unwashed dishes in the sink, and at Flora's untastedsupper set out on the kitchen table in the midst of aclutter of cards. She said a sinle distracted word underher breath; went to the foot of the stairs and called upto the little cell under the eaves ... No answer. Sheran up and looked into each room ... No Flora."She seems to have vanished," she said, coming intothe living-room with a puzzled look. "She isn't in thehouse. Do you suppose she can be wandering about inthe woods at this time of the night?" In her own mind,frantic at Howard's delayed departure, she was saying toherself: "I'll die if I don't get rid of himl I could kilFloral" She sat down again by the fire, and said that207
<pb n="208"/>
THE RISING TIDE she was bothered about Zippy's eyes; that made a mo- mentary diversion. Howard examined the little dog'seyes and said they were all right; then made desultory re-marks about dogs in China. He was trying, wildly, to findsomething-anythingl-to say. Both were listening in-tently for Flora's step.  "I'll see if I can find her now,"Frederica said.He followed her into the empty kitchen. "Bird flown?"he said. He, too, was pleased to find he could speak socasually. Frederica opened the back door and strainedher eyes into the mist."It's awfully funny," slie said; "why should she goout into the fog? Floral" she called loudly-and theyheld their breaths for an answering voice. But there wasonly the muffled lapping of the waves and an occasionaldrop falling from the big tree. They went back to theliving-room, and looked at each other, blankly."Can she have started to walk into town?" he asked."Thirty miles? Howard, I am sort of worried aboutherl Do you remember? the door slammed, and-" shestopped short, remembering just when she had heard thatslamming door. "Do you think she can have been ill, andgone out to one of the other houses for help? No," shecorrected herself. "She knows every house in Lakevilleis closed!"Again she ran up-stairs, calling and looking; then theyboth went out on the back porch, and called.Again the lake answered them, lapping-lapping.
<pb n="209"/>
CHAPTER XID"Y OU can't stay here by yourself," he said."I can't go back to town aid leave Flora here byherself. We've got to find herl"He nodded; they were both of them entirely at ease.That tense consciousness of a few minutes before had dis-appeared."I'm worried," Fred said, again; "she was awfully low-spirited because-because somebody hadn't written toher.""Oh, she's all right. Shell be back in a few minutes.""But where has she gone?""Perhaps she walked into Laketon.""What for? Besides, it's nearly five milesl" They werestanding in the kitchen doorway;- Zip pushed past themand went out into the mist; smelled about, stretching firsthis front legs, then his hind legs. The motor loomed likea black monster under the tree. Zip gave a bored look atthe lingering guest."Flor-a-al/"No answer; just the lake, sighing and rippling in thesedge."Could she have gone down to the water?" Howard209
<pb n="210"/>
THE RISING TIDEsaid; "have you got such a thing as a lantern? I'll go out and look.""No; but light that lamp on the center-table-acandle might blow out."He went into the other room, and she heard himscratch a match and fumble with the lamp-chimney. Inthat minute, alone, listening all the while for Flora's re-turning step, her mind leaped back to that moment infront of the fire. His look-astounded, incredulous,shocked-was burned into her memory; his distressedwords rung in her ears. She was not conscious of anypain because he did not love her. She was simply stunnedby the jolt of suddenly and unexpectedly stepping downinto the old, irrational modesties.....Her face began to scorch. She went out on the porchand called again, mechanically; some water dripping fromthe eaves on her bare head ran down one blazing cheek;the coolness gave her an acute sense of relief that struggledthrough the medley of tearing emotions; she was sayingto herself: "Where can she be? She hasn't washed thedishesl (He refused me.)"Howard, holding the lamp over his head, came up be-hind her and went down the steps into the mist. Fredfollowed him, Zip lumbering along at her heels."She must have left the house this way; we knowthat," she said."Come down to the beach," he said."Yes; sometimes she used to sit on that big rock,"Frederica remembered.He walked ahead of her; the light, shining through the210
<pb n="211"/>
THE RISING TIDEsolferino lamp-shade, made a rosy nimbus about his barehead, but scarcely penetrated the fog. They went thus,all three, single file, along the path to the rickety woodenpier; at the end of it, they stood staring out into themist. Twice he called, loudly, "Florl" ..."Not a soundl" he said. "Is there any possible placein the house where she could have hidden herself? I mean,gone to sleep, or anything?""Not a place! I've looked everywhee. (He refusedme.)"They turned silently to go back. Just as they.reachedthe path again Howard stopped-so abruptly that thelamp sent a jarring gleam into the white darknem."Fred-?"She looked where he was looking, and caught her breath."No!" she said; "oh, no-nol It can't be"'"Hold the lamp. I'll go and see-"He climbed down the little bluff and waded into thesedge. The swaying mass that had looked like a stoneuntil a larger wave stirred it, came in nearer the shore,caught on the shoaling beach, rolled, and was still. Fred-erica saw him bend over it, then try, frantically, to lift itin his arms. She put the lamp on the wharf. ("Don'ttouch it, Zip "), slid, catching at tufts of grass, and bendingbranches-down the crumbling bank, plunged into thewater up to her knee, and together, half pulling, halfcarrying that sodden bundle, they stumbled over the oozybottom and through the sedges. The lifting it up thebluff was terrible; the dripping figure, sagging and bend-ing, was so heavyl211
<pb n="212"/>
THE RISING TIDE"We must get her into the house," Frederica panted.And, somehow or other, they did it, Howard taking theshoulders, and Fred the feet. They were gasping with thestrain of it when they laid her on the floor of the living-room."Is she dead?" he said.Frederica thrust her hand into the bosom of Flora'sdress-and held her breath."I can't tell; we mustn't stop to find outl You knowwhat to do? Pull her arms up, this wayl"They stood over her, Howard following Fred's short,sharp directions, and, even in the horror of the moment,conscious of a wondering admiration at her efficiency.But no quiver of life came into the still face."We ought to get a doctorl" Fred said, at last, panting."I'll go instantlyl""No, the quickest way will be to take her to a doctor,not bring a doctor to her I""But if she is dead we ought not to move herl That'sthe law.""Law? I don't care anything about the lawl Life iswhat I'm thinking of! We don't know whether she'sdead or not. Crank your carl I'll get some blankets--"He hurried out, and she rushed up-stairs for blankets.She was folding them about Flora when he came in,the car chugging loudly at the door. Again, lifting andstraining, they carried her out, and got her into the ton-neau. Then Frederica saw the lamp down on the wharf,burning steadily in the mist."Put it outl Put it outl Hurryl" she commanded;212
<pb n="213"/>
THE RISING TIDEand while he ran to do it she darted back to blow out thecandles in the living-room and snap the lock of the frontdoor-"never mind about taking the lamp into the house.Leave it on the porch!" she said. Then she got in thecar and, sitting down, put an arm about the crumpling,sodden form. Zip, fearful of being left, jumped on thefront seat, and glanced wonderingly back at his mistress."Fred," Howard said, agitatedly,"I think she's-dead.""So do I; but hurry! Don't lose a minutel" Then,through the noise of the clutch, she screamed at him:"Doctor Emma Holtl InLaketon!" And the cr jerkedforward."But that's a woman doctor," he called, over hisshoulder.Just for a moment the habit of revolt asserted itself:"Why. ot?"  Then, "Hurryl Hurryl"Dr. Emma Holt was five miles away. "I felt," HowardMaitland used to say, afterward, "as if she were fiftymiles away!"The fog was so thick it was impossible to speed withsafety, so they sped without it, and tore bumping alongthrough the white smother. Twice he looked around, andsaw Fred sitting there, rigid, with that face, open-mouthed,open-eyed, gray under its brown skin, wabbling, and drip-ping on her shoulder."She is magnificent!" he thought. "I couldn't do it."The second time he looked, some reflection from thelamps, gleaming in the fog, flickered on that set face, and5t seemed as if the eyes closed, then opened again. Thehorror of it made his hand jerk on the wheel, and there213
<pb n="214"/>
THE RISING TIDEwas a skid out of the ruts that frightened him into care-fulness.When he sprang out at the house of the "woman doc-tor," he dared not glance back into the tonneau. Ham-mering on the panels of the door, and keeping his thumbon the bell, he called up to an opening window on thesecond floor:"Doctor! Hurry! Awomanhasgot drowned! Hurryl""Where is she?" came a laconic voice from the window."Herel In my car! Hurry!"The window slammed down; a minute later the electriclights were snapped on in the sleeping house, and hurryingfeet came along the hall.
<pb n="215"/>
CHAPTER XX"0\F course," Dr. Holt said, when it was plain thatnothing more could be done, "you ought to haveleft her where she was.""But we didn't know whether she was alive-" they ex-cused themselves."Was there anything the matter with her?" the doctorsaid; she was beginning to think of the certificate shemust make out. "Was she low-spirited?""She was dreadfully disappointed because she didn'tget a letter she was expecting.""Love-letter?""I don't know," Frederica said.She and Howard had left the office, where the deadwoman lay on the doctor's lounge, and were standing inthe front hall, side by side, like two children who werebeing scolded. From above the hat-rack, a mountedstag's head watched them with faintly gleaming eyes.Dr. Holt, a woman with a strong, bad-tempered face,was plainly out of patience with them both."I've got to get the coroner," she said, frowning; "andit's nearly twelve o'clock." Then she asked a questionthat was like a little shock of electricity to the two who,in this last terrifying hour, had entirely forgotten them-selves. "Did she have any love-affair?"215
<pb n="216"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Yes," Frederica said, in a low voice. ("He refusedgtn.")"Tell me, please," Dr. Holt persisted."She was-in love.""I suppose she was all right? I mean, respectable?""Flora?" Fred said, with a recoil of anger, "of courseshe was respectable.""That's what I thought. Man desert her? You spokeof a letter-perhaps she was hoping to hear from him?""No, he didn't exactly desert her. I mean, she thoughtsomebody was in love with her, several times. But noneof the men seemed-" Frederica's hands clutched to-gether-"to want her. So she was unhappy.""Oh," said the doctor. "Yes. I understand. Quitefrequent in women of her age. She would have been allright if she hadn't been-respectable; or even if she'd gotreligion, good and hard. Religion," said Dr. Holt, writingrapidly in a memorandum-book, "is a safety-valve for theunmarried woman in the forties, whose work doesn't in-terest her.""Flora was as good as anybody could be!" Fred said,hotly."Oh, I didn't mean any reflection on her character,"said the doctor, kindly, "I merely meant that any womanwho hasn't either work, or religion, or marriage, generallygets out of kilter, mentally. Of course," she meditated,tapping her chin with her fountain-pen, "you two mustgo to the coroner's with me."In the next hour and a half, of driving about to find thecoroner, then the undertaker, then arranging what was216
<pb n="217"/>
THE RISING TIDEto be done with the body, the "two" had no time for theself-consciousness that the doctor's words had rekindled-except for just one moment: they had come back toDr. Holt's house, and again were standing in the entry,below the deer's head. In the office, the coroner was ques-tioning Dr. Holt. The office door was ajar."This man, Maitland; do you know anything abouthim? Is he all right? Of course, you never can tell-"At that, they couldn't help looking at each other, witha flash of what might have been, under other conditions,amusement."Why, he's Howard Maitlandl" they heard Dr. Holtsay; "you know? The Maitland Iron Worksl""Oh!" the coroner apologized, "I didn't get on to that!'Course he's all right."Then Dr. Holt: "It appears the poor woman triedto get married, but she couldn't find a husband. So shekilled herself."This time the two in the hall did not look at each other.Fred stared up at the stag's glistening eyes. Howardbuckled and unbuckled his driving-gauntlets. For therest of her life, Frederica never saw a mounted deer'shead without a stab of remembrance.It was nearly four o'clock in the morning when every-thing was attended to and Howard turned his car home-ward. "Do sit in front with me, Fred," he said; "youcan't sit back there in the tonneau.""All right," she said, absently, and, getting in, pulledZippy on to her lap. As she sat down, she suddenlyrealized that Howard's request implied that he felt an em-i5                  2I7
<pb n="218"/>
THE RISING TIDEbasrassment for her which she was not feeling for herself.She began to feel it soon enough! Embarrassment flowedin upon them both. Howard talked about Flora-thenfell silent: ("She 'tried to get married'!") Then Fredtalked about her-and fell silent. ("He needn't worry; Iwon't drown myself!")The ride into town was forever! The bleary Qctoberdawn had whitened in the mist like a dead face, beforethey drew up at I5 Payton Street, and for the last tenmiles they did not exchange a word. Fred was thinking,dazedly, of Flora; but every now and then would comethe stab: "He refused me."Howard was thinking only of Fred. "Stunningl" hewas saying to himself. "She's not a girl! She's a man-no, I don't know any man who would have done what shedid. I couldn't have, anyway. I take off my hat tocourage like that!"Not a girl? Fred, not a girl? . . .When at last that dreadful night was over, and he hadleft the terrified Payton household, Frederica-the wonder-ful, the superwoman (superman, even, compared withHoward himself!), Frederica had, in a flash, been somethingless than superwoman; she had been pitifully, stupidly,incredibly feminine.It was six o'clock in the morning when he closed Mrs.Payton's front door behind him and went out to get inhis car-giving a shuddering glance at that pool of wateron the floor of the tonneau. Just as he was throwing inhis clutch he heard the door open again, and Fred called218
<pb n="219"/>
THE RISING TIDEto him. He went back, quickly; she was standing on thetop step, haggard, ugly, dripping wet; a lock of hairhad blown across her cheek, which was twitching pain-fully. She put out her hand to him, in a blind sort ofgesture, but she did not look at him. -"I just wanted-to say," she said, and paused, for thejangle of the mules' bells and the clatter of a passing cardrowned her voice;--"I wanted to-to say," she beganagain, with a gasp, "don't-" she stopped, with a sobbinglaugh; "don't-tell Laura."Don't tell Oh, she was a girl all right f-so Howard's thoughts ranas he drove home in the mist that had thickened into rain;Fred was a girl-a trembling, ignorant, frightened femi-nine creature! Suppose she did support a dead woman inher arms during that dreadful ride in the fog; suppose shedid stand by, promptly obedient to the doctor's orders inthat frantic time of endeavor in the office; suppose shehad decided, quietly and wisely, exactly what was to bedone, when it was plain that Flora's poor, melancholylittle life had flown; suppose the coroner did say that hehad never seen such nerve; suppose all those things-yetshe had said those two pitiful words: "Don't tell." Yes,Fred Payton was a "girl"!"You can talk all you want to about the 'new woman,'"Howard said, "I guess human nature doesn't changemuch...."It changes so little, that at that revealing instant onthe Paytons' front steps, with the light of the Egyptian219
<pb n="220"/>
THE RISING TIDEmaid's globe streaming out into the rain, he had wantedto put his arms around Freddy and kiss her! Who knows ibut what, if there had not been all those weeks of rockingabout on the mud flats, listening to the eternal dry rustleof the blowing palms, dredging for shells, and botheringabout Jack McKnight, he might not, then and there, inspite of the wonderfulness of her, and because of the weak-ness of her, have fallen in love with old Freddy? As itwas, when she said that piteous, feminine thing, the tears had stung in his eyes; he wrung her hand, stammering out:"Newer! Why, I-you-"    But the door closed in hisface, and he went back to climb into his motor and go off to his own house.That was at six o'clock; it was nine before Mr. andMrs. Childs-summoned, to Billy-boy's great annoyance,  |while he was shaving-reached No. iS. They found Mrs.Holmes there ahead of them, and met Mr. Weston on thedoor-step.In the parlor, watched by Andy Payton's sightless eyes,the court sat upon Freddy-for, of course, the whole dis-tressing affair was her fault-she had dragged poor, crazyFlora out to that shocking camp! "I said last spring it was perfec' nonsense," Mr. Childs vociferated-"a girl,renting a bungalow! Why did you allow it, Ellen?" "My dear Williaml I was perfectly helpless. Girls doanything nowadays. When I was a young lady-""My girl doesn't do 'anything,"' Laura's father said;"as for Freddy, the newspapers will ring with itl Pleas-ant for me. My niece, alone with that Maitland fellowlI've always distrusted him. Going off to dig shells-a2Zo
<pb n="221"/>
THE RISING TIDEman with his income! That showed there's somethingqueer about him. And Fred alone with him in thatbungalow mixed up with a murderl"Mrs. Holmes screamed."Well, suicide. Same thing. It will all come out,"said Billy-boy, standing up with his back to the fire andpuffing; "Bessie is really sick at the scandal.""Oh, now, Father, I-""He's got to marry her," said Mrs. Holmes."She helped Mr. Maitland carry Flora out of thewater," Mrs. Payton was explainng; "he told me aboutit. He said she was very brave, but I know she got herfeet wet; and I always tell her there's no surer way totake cold than to get your feet wet. And poor FloralShe hasn't any relations, as far as I can find out; sowhom can I notify? When I went to housekeeping,servants always came from somewhere, and if they gotsick you knew where to send them. I don't want tobe unkind, but, really, it was very inconsiderate in Flora.I suppose she never thought how hard it would be forFreddy-""Where is Fred, at this moment?" Mr. Weston inter-rupted."Well, she means to be kind, I'm sure," Mrs. Paytonsaid, "but I do wish she wasn't so extremel She hasactually gone to the undertaking place-you know theysent Flora in this morning to Colby's-with some roces.American Beauties, and you know how much they costat this season! She wanted to put them on the coffin her-self, and-"22I
<pb n="222"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Oh, do stop talking about such unpleasant things!" Mrs. Holmes said."Well, I merely meant that it is unnecessary. As I say, Flora has no relatives, so no one will ever know ofthe attention. It's just another wild thing for Freddyto do.""Possibly Flora will know it," Mr. Weston said; "atleast, wouldn't the Reverend Tait say so?""Oh," Mrs. Holmes said, frowning, "we are not speak-ing of religion. Flora was just a servant." Even Mr.Childs winced at that, and for once Arthur Weston's facewas candid."I suppose that will get into the newspapers, too,"said Mrs. Holmes-" 'A young society girl puts roses'". .and all the rest of the horrid vulgarity of it.""I don't think human kindness is ever vulgar," Mr.Weston said, "and I am sure there will be no improperpublicity. Maitland and I have been to all the newspaperoffices.""Alone, at midnight, in an auto!" Mrs. Holmes la-mented."Death is an impeccable chaperon," Weston said.("That will shut her up!" he thought, and it did, for awhile.)"To think of such a thing happening to one of my ser-vants," Mrs. Payton bewailed herself; "and I was alwaysso considerate of them!"Mrs. Holmes said there was too much consideration forservants, anyhow. "Let them work! There isn't one ofthem that will dust the legs of a piano unless you stand222
<pb n="223"/>
THE RISING TIDEover herl Of course, I'm sorry for Flora; I only wish Iwasn't so sensitivel But she did starch her table linentoo much, Ellen; you can't deny that.""Who is going to pay the funeral expenses?" Mr. Childssaid. "Does the city do that, Weston, or is it up toEllen?""Oh, Mrs. Payton has no responm'bilities about Death-only Life," said Arthur Weston, grimly."Of course I will attend to all.thatl" Flora's employersaid; "anyhow, her wages for the last month are not dueuntil next week. But, of course, I shall do everything thatis proper.""Well," William Childs said, "I must be moving along.I was going to work out a new Baconian cipher this morn-ing, but, of course, this wretched business has knocked mymind into a cocked hat Come, Bessie. Bessie's perfectlysick over the whole thing. She has her Bridge Club thisafternoon, and this awful afair has completely upsether. Good-by, Nelly; let me know if there is anything Ican do," and he hustled Mrs. Childs-who kept insisting,mildly, that she was so sorry for poor, dear Freddy-outof the room. At the door, he paused to call back: "Thisnew cipher doesn't leave the Shakespearians a leg tostand onl"Mrs. Holmes and Mr. Weston lingered, Mrs. Holmesdeclaring that William Childs ought to learn to speak dis-tinctly-"he mumbles terribly"-and Weston, silent andrather wan, walking up and down, waiting for Frederica'sreturn.When they heard the key in the front door, the two223
<pb n="224"/>
THE RISING TIDEladies stopped talking; it was Arthur Weston who Aentinto the hall to take Fred's hand and help her off wih hercoat. She hung her hat up beside her father's and gaveher old friend a grim look."Has Billy-boy put on the black cap yet? Or doesgrandmother demand that Howard shall 'make an honestwoman' of me before the sun sets? I know what you'vebeen up againstl""You are perfectly ehausted" he said, tenderly; "goup-stairs; I'll fight it out.""No," she said, briefly.She went into the parlor, looked at her grandmother,shrugged her shoulders, and girded herself for battle: "I'lltell you the whole story. Poor Flora has been suffering,probably for a year or more, the doctor says, from somemental deterioration. She was restless and unhappy. Ofcourse, we knew that, because she did her work badly-which inconvenienced us. As far as she was concerned, itdidn't trouble us. She was restless, because she wanted tobe married and settle down. And nobody wanted her;which seemed to us just-funny. But when you come tothink of it, it isn't very funny not to be wanted....When she couldn't marry, she tried to get interested insomething-music, or anything. She wanted to do some-thing.""Do something? Well, I could have giv--""I tried to make things better for her," Fred went on,heavily, "but I suppose I didn't try hard enough. Well,anyhow, she saw I was in love with Howard-" a littleshock ran through her hearers; she paused, and looked at224i~'i
<pb n="225"/>
\THE RISING TIDEthe   faintly surprised; "why, you knew I was in lovewith uim, didn't you? He isn't with me; not in the least.And Flora's young man wasn't in love with her. He prom-ised to write to her, and he didn't. And that upset her agood deal. But I think the thing that really hit herhardest-was to see how I felt, and how happy I was. I-I sloped over, I suppose, a good deal  It was a sort oflast straw to Flora to see me so happy; it made her-well, enious, I suppose. Poor old Floral she needn'thave beet."She stopped and put her hand across her eyes, rubbingthem weasily.  "I tell you these details merely to ex-plain why I didn't get on to the fact sooner that she hadgone out of the house-I was so absorbed in Howard.The door did slam, but just at that moment I was ... say-ing something to him  So I didn't really notice. Then,afterward, he and I talked and talked, until it was timefor him to go home; and then we discovered--" Shecaught her breath and was silent for a moment.Her mother was quite overcome. "So distressing foryou, dearl"Mrs. Holmes began to collect her gloves and bags."Poor Floral" Fred said, unsteadily. "She was so un-happy. Oh-how unhappy women arel""That's because they are fools," said Mrs. Holmes."Oh, yes; we're fools, all right," Frederica said, som-berly. Then she told them of that ride in the fog withthe dead woman: "We had done everything we knewhow, and we couldn't make her breathe; so I told Howardwe must take her into Laketon. so we got her into the 
<pb n="226"/>
THE RISING TIDEauto, and I held her-" There was a shuddering gaspfrom Mrs. Holmes; she was trying to get away, taking abackward step toward the door, then pausing, thentaking another step. The horror of the thing gripped her.Weston saw her face growing gray under its powder/ Butstill she listened, straining forward to hear distinctly.Frederica was telling them of those terrible twentyminutes in the car, of the hour in the doctor's office, ofithe search for the coroner, of the drive to the under-taker's-then, suddenly, a curious thing happened: Mrs.Holmes, her face rigid, her false teeth faintly chattering,came up to her granddaughter and tapped her sharply onthe shoulder."I could have done it, too, when I was a girl," she said,harshly; "but"-her voice broke into a whisper-"notnow. I would be afraid, now." Then loudly, "I'm proudof you! You are no fool."Frederica gave her an astonished look: "Why, grand-motherl" It was as if a stranger had spoken to her--but a stranger who might be a friend.The nrxt instant Mrs. Holmes was herself again. "It'sall too horrid," she said."The body," Fred said, "will be brought here thismorning"-she glanced at her watch; "it ought to behere now."Mrs. Holmes instantly walked out of the room."The funeral will be here to-morrow. I suppose Annewill know some of her friends whom we can notify?" Shesighed, and again rubbed her hand over her eyes; thenlooked at Arthur Weston and smiled. "Howard is all226
<pb n="227"/>
THE RISING TIDEright," she said; "don't make any mistake about that/Mother, I'm going up-stairs to lie down."She went out into the hall, stopped to open the frontdoor for her departing grandmother, then whistled to Zip,and they heard her drag her tired young feet up-stairs.Arthur Weston's eyes were full of tears.
<pb n="228"/>
CHAPTER XXIIT was extraordinary how much better Mrs. Payton wasin the next few weeks. Every day she sat in the entryoutside Mortimore's door, and hour after hour she andMiss Carter talked about Flora. Sometimes Mortimorewas troublesome, and laughed or bellowed-and then hismother retreated; when he quieted down, she returned,and took up the story just where it had been interrupted.After each detail had been recited, and they had finallyburied poor Flora, rehearsing every incident of the funeral,they would reach the question of the disposition of herpossessions. Miss Carter had packed them up, and knewjust how valueless they were-"except that lovely collaryou gave her. Now I think that is too good for the Sal-vation Army!"At this point the discussion was apt to become heated,Miss Carter contending that Flora's things should be sentto one of the negro schools in the South, and Mrs. Paytonstanding firmly for the Salvation Army. Frederica, askedto decide between them, said, briefly, "Burn 'em.""Wouldn't that be wasteful?" Mrs. Payton objected, gently..She was very gentle to Fred now. Her daughter's     ;statement about being "in love" had been a very great  ,228
<pb n="229"/>
THE RISING TIDEshock to her, not because of its "indelicacy," painful asthat was, but because it awoke in her an entirely newidea: Freddy was unhappy It had never occurred toMrs. Payton that Freddy could be unhappy about any-thing-Freddy, who was always so strong and self-sufficientl That she should suffer, made her motherfeel nearer to her than she had since Frederica was lit-tle, and had scarlet fever, and Mrs. Payton hadn't takenoff her clothes for four days and four nights. So, whenher daughter's drooping lip expressed what she thoughtof that endless gossiping about Death outside Mortimore'sdoor, Mrs. Payton was very gentle, and only said that itwould be wasteful to burn Flora's things. Then shetried to explain that she sat near Morty to cheer MissCarter. (Freddy must not think it was on Morty's ac-count! It would be too dreadful if now, "on top of every-thing else," she should be brooding over those impatientwords, repented of the minute they were spoken!)But Fred displayed no signs of brooding over anything.She took up her interest in Life just where it had pausedfor a moment at the touch of Love. But before she set-tled down into the commonplaces, of real estate, anddances, and league work, she had that Pause out withherself....She told her mother that she was going to the bungalowto put things to rights. (This was about five days afterFlora's death.) "Everything is just as we left it. Shehadn't even washed the dishes. And I left a few thingsthere that I must bring home.""Take Anne to help you."Aft
<pb n="230"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Anne would have a fit-she's so superstitious! No;I don't need anybody.""I'll go with you," Mrs. Payton ventured.Fred was frankly amused at the suggestion. "YoulNo; much obliged, but I don't want any one."Mrs. Payton did not urge; back in her mind there wasa dim memory of a time when she, too, had been alive-and suffered, and wanted to be alone. She said some-thing, hesitatingly, to this effect to Arthur Weston,who dropped in that morning to know how they weregetting along. "Freddy has gone out to that awful place, to pack up,"she said; "I'm sure it's very damp, and I'm terriblyafraid she'll take cold. But she would go. Sometimes aperson likes to be by themselves," she ended.He was surprised at such understanding; but he onlysaid, quietly, that he would drive out late in the after-noon and bring her home in his car. "She can have eighthours to herself," he said. (He had had some hours tohimself in the last few days; hours of pacing up and downhis library-saying over and over, "If Maitland isn't inlove with her, why shouldn't I at least tell her that I--?Nol I have no chance. But if she should forget him?No, no. I mustn't think of it!")For the eight hours alone Frederica had been thirsting:Solitude.Lapping-lapping-lappaing waterWind in the branches.Shadows traveling across distant hills.And no human face! No human soundl 230
<pb n="231"/>
THE RISING TIDESo, with Zip under her arm, she took the early trainto Lakeville.From the station she walked along the sandy roadwhere dead leaves had begun to fill the wheel-ruts, downto the huddle of boarded-up cottages on the shore. Thelast time she had gone over that road, how thick the foghad been! Now, the lake was a placid white shimmeragainst the horizon's brooding haze, and the glimmeringOctober sunshine lay like gilt on the frosted ferns andbrakes. She did not meet a single soul. Except for Zip,dashing along in front of her, or an occasional crow cawing,and flapping from one tree-top to another, there was onlythe wide silence of the sky. The sense of getting awayfrom people gave her a feeling of relief that was almostphysical.When she reached Lakeville the sight of Sunrise Cot-tage was like a blow; she stopped short, and caught her.breath. The lamp Howard had left outside the househad fallen over-perhaps a squirrel had upset it; the sol-ferino shade was in fragments; leaves had blown up onthe porch. But the flinching was only for a moment-then she turned the key in the lock.The bungalow, with its shut-up smell, was just as theyhad left it, except that, in some indescribable way, ithad lost the air of human habitation. Perhaps becauseDeath had been there. In the faint draught from the opendoor a sheet of music slipped from the piano to thefloor and some ashes blew out of the fireplace. The cot-tage was absolutely silent.Frederica felt cold between her shoulders. She did not23I
<pb n="232"/>
THE RISING TIDEwant to go in, she did not want to have to turn her backon the stairs that led up to the vacant rooms-Flora'sroom! She shivered; set her lips and entered-but sheleft the door open behind her into the living world.The emptiness of the house clamored in her ears. Shefound herself looking, with a sort of fascination, at thedisorder of the chairs-which stood just as Howard hadpushed them aside when they brought Flora in. On thearm of the morris chair was a brass plate heaped with cigarette-ashes.  For some obscure reason those ashesseemed to her unendurable-how they had glowed, andfaded, and glowed again, fillin the room with warm|and lazy smoke, while she and Howard-  She lifted thelittle tray and threw the ashes, almost with violence, intothe fireplace. The movement broke the spell that hadheld her there looking at things-at the learned books,filmed with dust, at the half-burned candles, at the with-ered roses on the table. Zip nosed about at that water-soaked spot on the rug, and she spoke to him sharply;then went over and closed the piano.After that, it was easier to go out to the kitchen,though there was still a tremor at the thought of thoseempty rooms overhead.  Spread out on the table werethe cards, just as Flora had left them. In the sink wasthe clutter of unwashed dishes.... Fred drew a longbreath, opened all the windows, lighted a fire in the stove,and went to work.Of course the exertion of packing and cleaning was arelief. There was a great deal to do. So much that shefelt at first that she should need another day to get232
<pb n="233"/>
THE RISING TIDEthrough with it. But her capability was never moremarked-by noon she began to see the end. She ate herluncheon walking about, holding a sandwich in one handand padcing books with the other. She had arrangedwith her landlord to send a van to the cottage for thepiano, and it was also to carry her things back to town;she had thought of every detail. It was the way she didall her work-drawing up leases, or talking to women'sclubs, or, of late, "making things pleasant" at PaytonStreet. Even now, shrinking from the work that must bedone up-stairs, where it was all so empty-so full ofFlora-she was efficient, methodical, thorough. Shescanted nothing. Yet no amount of busyness dulled theache of misery which had goaded her out here to be alone-but she was impatient at herself for feeling the ache.It was so unreasonable to be miserable!When everything was done-the kitchen tidied, booksand clothing and personal odds and ends packed, even thelittle white curtains in the empty rooms up-stairs, alllimp and stringy from the creeping October fogs, pressedand folded and put away-it was still early afternoon.But there was no train into town until five; she wouldgive herself up to the silence.She went out on the porch and sat down on the loweststep in the sunshine. Zip ran about, chased a squirrel,then, curling up on her skirt, went to sleep. Sometimesshe rubbed his ears, sometimes stared out over the lake-She had been refused. "I am hard hit," she admitted,and her face quivered. However, she could stand beinghit! She could take ier medicine, and not make faces.16                 233
<pb n="234"/>
THE RISING TIDEArthur Weston had said that about her, and she liked toremember it.Suddenly her mind veered away into all sorts of unre-lated things. Queer that Howard cared so much forshells. He had found that pearl in a shell; the pearl thatshe had thought-ok, what a fool she had been!-wasmeant for her. That old seed-pearl set of her mothers',pin and ear-rings, would make a dandy pendant. Shebelieved she'd ask her mother for it. Except on this shell-digging business, how entirely Howard and she agreedabout everything  Few men and girls were so in accord,mentally. Imagine Howard trying to talk to any ofthe girls of her set-even to Laura-as he talked to her!  iWhy, Laura would be dumb when he got on the thingsthat were worth-while. He had once said that he wouldrather talk to her than any girl he knew; no-it was to"any man" he knew. For a moment the old pride rose-then fell. She almost wished he had said to "anygirl." Well; no girl-or man, either-could have donebetter than she did on that poster scheme. Howardwould say so when she would tell him about it, and she wasgoing to tell him; she was going to talk to him just asshe had always talked-about everything on earth! Shemust; or else he would think that she was ... hard hit;and that she simply couldn't bear! The poster schemereminded her of some league work she had neglected inthese five days of tingling emptiness, and she frowned."Gracious! I must attend to that," she said. She didnot know it, but her bruised mind was fleeing for shelterinto trivialities. Suddenly she took her purse out of 234
<pb n="235"/>
THE RISING TIDEher pocket, thrust a thumb and figer into the place where she kept her visiting-cards, and took out a burntmatch. She looked at it for a moment with a grunt ofbitter laughter; then, finding a little stick, dug a holein the path, laid the match in, covered it, and steppedon it, hard."That is the end," she said.After a while she realized that she was cold, and wentback into the house and kindled a fie. She sat down ona hassock, and stretched out her hands to the blaze.The sunsine came through the uncurtained window andlaid a finger on the soot on the chimney back; its faintiridescece caught her eye. Was it only Monday nightthat she and Howard had sat here by the fire, and hehad kicked the logs together on the andirons, and thesparks had caught in the soot and spread and spread inmarching rosettes? Why, it seemed yearsl It was thenthat she had-asked him.She wasn't ashamed of it She had proposed and beenrefused. "He thought it was stunning in me to do it;he said sol He feels as I do about the equality of men andwomen in this kind of thing, as well as everything else.Of course, he may have said so just to-to make it easierfor me? If I thought tai-"The blood rushed into her face. She would not thinkthatl It would be unendurable to think he had not beensincere. "He felt it was perfectly all right for me to bethe one to speak. And it wasl"Of course it was. There was nothing for her to beashamed of. She herself had once refused an offer of235
<pb n="236"/>
THE RISING TIDEmarriage, and certainly the rejected suitor had not seemedto suffer any pangs of shamel He had displayed a rather mean anger: "He wanted my money, and he was hoppingmad when he couldn't get it. I didn't want to get any- thing. I only wanted to give! So why don't I brace up?I had a right to 'give."'She was quite certain that she had a right, so why wasshe so miserable? So-ashamed.In spite of herself she said the word. She had shiedaway from it, and refused to utter it, a dozen times; butat last, here, alone, she had to tell herself the truth.She was ashamed.It is only when Truth speaks to us, as in the cool ofthe day the Voice of God spoke in the Garden, that thehuman creature knows he is ashamed. Not to feel Shameis to be deaf to that Voice. Frederica was not deaf; butthe Voice was very faint, very wandering and indirect.She could hardly hear it. It spoke first in her vague wishthat Howard had said he would rather talk to her thanany "girl" he knew; and then it spoke in the wonderwhether a man does like to be "asked.""If he doesn't, it's just idiotic tradition. It belongs tothe days of slavery!"But how did the tradition grow up that a womanmustn't ask a man to marry her? She tried to remembersomething Arthur Weston once said about men being"born hunters." Her lip drooped, angrily; "Rot!" shesaid; "when it comes to love, a woman has as much atstake as a man. No, she has more at stake! She has thechild.  Queer," she thought, "the woman is always the 236
<pb n="237"/>
THE RISING TIDEone who sticks to the child." She wondered if that wasbecause women pay such a price for children? It occurredto her, with a sense of having made a discovery, that allthrough nature, the mother cares for her offspring just inproportion to what it costs her to bring it into the world.She rolled Zip over on his back and pulled his ears, hermind dwelling, with the ancient resentment of her sex,upon the unfairness of nature-for the father pays nopricel "I wonder if that explains desertion? I wonderif men desert girls, after they've got them into trouble,simply because the child costs them nothing? But howthe girls stick to the babies, poor things  They hardlyever go off on their own bat. And yet" (thus the Voicewas speaking!), "the child needs a father to take care ofit, as much as a mother, so the man and the woman oughtto keep together.... But he's the one who goes off! Itought to be tit for tat Women ought to do the deserting,"she said, passionately; but a moment later came the cyni-cal admission: "Men wouldn't mind being 'deserted.'They'd probably like it. They ought to be made to beconstant. When we get the vote, we'll make laws to stoptheir 'deserting'!"Then she wavered; as far as laws go, there were enoughnow. The fact was, men were naturally faithless! "Ihate men," she said, between her set teeth. Arthur Wes-ton was right, they were "hunters." They are constant-in pursuit. "We ought to keep them on the hot-foot,then they'd be more keen to stay with us!" In a flashcame the rest of Weston's comment: "They won't bagthe game, if it perches on their fists." Her face reddened237
<pb n="238"/>
THE RISING TIDE"violently. She had come, head on, against a biologicalfact, namely, that reluctance in the woman makes forpermanence in the man.Reluctance! ..                .Her mother's tiresome talk about "cheapness" was sud-denly intelligible. How foolish the word had sounded! Yet,perhaps, under its foolishness lay a primitive fact: that thewelfare of the child demands a permanent relation betweenthe father and the mother. But in proportion as she is"cheap," he is temporary, and the relationship is jeopar-dized!She did not put it into words, but she realized, amazed,that woman, whether she knows it or not, acts upon thisold race knowledge. For the child's sake, she tries, byevery sort of lure, to hold man to permanence which shewill herself acquire by the fierce welding of agony. Thesurest "lure" is based upon the fact that man pursues thatwhich flees; but all the lures spring from Nature's purposeto safeguard the child by giving it the care of two insteadof one. For the "child" is the most important thing inthe world!Fred was thinking hard. Sometimes she put a stick onthe fire, and once she got up and paced about the room.It came over her, with a rush of surprise, that all the talkof what girls must and mustn't do, "all the drivel about'propriety'!" was based on this same Race instinct.She saw that for a girl to love a man, unasked, isneither ignoble nor immodest. It is divine to love-al-ways! Such love is a jewel, worn unseen above a girl'sheart; to offer it, is to take it out of its white shelter and238
<pb n="239"/>
THE RISING TIDEfling it into hands that, not having sought it, will soon letit drop between indifferent fingers. She saw how thisRace instinct has gradually-and oh, so painfully, oh, sofoolishly, with failure, and agony, and tragic absurditiesof convention, taught women the value of the reticenceof modesty.Taught them that they must not be "cheap"!It came to her that it was the business of women likeherself-the "new" women, who are going to set Womanfree!-it was their business to discard the absurdities, butkeep the beauties and dignities; for beiaty and dignityare "lures," too. "They aract. I suppose that is whatGrandmother means by 'cham,"' she reflected; "she saidI hadn't any." Her face suddenly scorched; to discovera temperamental deficiency made her wince; it was likediscovering a physical blemish. She undersood, now,what Arthur Weston meant when he "rowed" about herbeing in the apartment alone with Howard. She hadbeen "cheap." She had "perched on his fist." He hadhad no inclination to bag the game....It was all very loose and incoherent thinking; shecaught at one fact, only to find it contradicted by anotherfact. But in all her mental confusion one anguished wishstood fast:"Oh, if I only hadn't asked himr!In her futile shame, her head fell on her knees andshe caught her breath in a sort of sob-then sat upright,listening intently: amotorl Howardf In spite of reason,a leap of hope made her gasp.She rose quickly, and stood, her hand over her lips-239
<pb n="240"/>
THE RISING TIDE waiting. ... Then she saw the car, and her heart seemedto drop in her breast; it was only Arthur Weston.He came in, saying, cheerfully, he had heard she waspacking, and had come out to bring her back to town."We can load the tonneau with anything you want totake home," he said; "I suppose you haven't any tea fora wayfarer?" He was very matter-of-fact; he saw thetremor and heard the catch in the breath.There was some tea, she said-but no cream; she wouldboil some water.He sat down, and she waited on him, getting herself inhand, even to the extent of some pitiful little imperti-nences. Then, by and by, they carried her things out tothe auto. "My landlord is going to send for the piano," she said; "all I have to do is to close the shutters."He went about with her, helping her, teasing her, andscolding her because she was tired. When everything wasdone, and they were just leaving the house, she pausedabruptly, and her hands went up to her eyes."Poor Flora!"He was standing beside her, gentle and pitying, long-ing to draw those shaking hands down from her hiddenface: "You were always good to her," he said."No!" she said, in a smothered voice; "no." Then,suddenly, she turned toward him and sank against hisshoulder. He felt the sob that shook her from head tofoot. Instinctively, his arms went about her, and he heldher close to him; he was silent, but he trembled andthose passionate and sensitive eyebrows twitched withpain. It was only for a moment that he felt her sob-240
<pb n="241"/>
THE RISING TIDEbing weight-then she flung her head up, her face quiv-ering and smeared with tears.  "What a liar I amlI'm not crying about Flora at all. I'm just-unhappy.That's all."He took her hand and held it to his lips, silently."I'm tired," she said; "-no! no! I won't lie-I won'tlie! I'm not tired. I've been a fooll That's all. A fool.""We all have to be fools, Fred, before we can be wise."She had drawn away from him, with a broken laugh."You don't know anything about it! You don't knowwhat it's like to be a fool!""Don't I? I was a very big fool myself, once. ButI'm so wise now that I'm glad of all the blows my follygave me the. I'll tell you about it, one of these days."He told her as they drove back to town. "And," heended, "I can see that the best thing that ever happenedto me was to have Kate jilt me."
<pb n="242"/>
CHAPTER XXIIAFTER Fred had gone out into the wilderness, andlearned her lesson; after that long day in the cottage,when her mind had emptied itself of some of its own cer-tainties, so that deep, primitive knowledges could flowinto it, she took up life again in her own way. She wentto her office, she exercised Zip, she accepted every invi-tation that came to her; but she got thin. "Scrawny,"her grandmother called it. Also, she expended a good dealof money on a bridesmaid's dress-for something had hap-penedl Happened, curiously enough, on the very after-noon when she was studying that hard page of Nature'sbook, all alone, in the empty cottage by the lake. ...The very next morning Laura had burst into i5 Pay-ton Street. "Swear not to tell," she said; and whenFred had swar, the secret-glowing, wonderfull was toldin two words:"I'm engaged!"Then came an ecstatic recital, ending with "I've de-cided on daffodil yellow for your dresses. Rather farahead-for it isn't to be until the middle of December.But I think it's just as well to plan, don't you?""Of course it is," Fred agreed. ("Oh, if I only hadn'tasked him!")242
<pb n="243"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Billy-boy will juggle out enough money for the finestsatin going, for his only daughter; but you girls can haveperfectly sweet flowered voile, over yellow charmeuse.I've a corking idea far your hats." Then she lookedat Fred closely. "You're not a bit surprised; I believeyou knew what was going to happenI"Fred laughed noncommittally. Laura herself had beenso far from knowing what was going to happen, thatHoward Maitland had to fairly pound it into her that hewas in love with her! He had not meant to tell her sosoon  It wouldn't be decent, he thought, rememberingthat night in the cottage. He hadn't meant to speak forat least a month. He was going to mark time, and forgetthat there had ever been a minute when Fred Payton hadimagined she cared about him-"for, of course, that wasall it amounted to," he told himslf; "imagination!"There was more modesty than truth in his phrase, yet hisconviction was sincere enough-"A girl like Fred couldn'treally care for me. I'm not up to her !"It was characteristic of his simple soul, that he toldLaura the same thing, when he blundered into the pro-posal that he had meant to hold back for a month. It .was wrung from him by his despair at her misunder-standing his feeling about Fred. He was in full swingof haranguing her upon the wonderfulness of her cousin--"Of course; she's perfectly stunning," Laura had in-terrupted; "I know she's simply great. But why onearth you two don't announce your engagement I can'timagine! You make me a little tired," she said, good-naturedly, but rather obviously bored.243
<pb n="244"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Announce our whfa?""Engagement. Do you suppose we are all blind?"Howard Maitland actually whitened a little under hisPhilippine tan. "You are mistaken, Laura," he said,quietly. "If I have given you the impression that Fredhad the slightest feeling for me, I ought to be kicked."Laura turned an indignant face toward him: "Do youmean to tell me that Fred has only been flirting with you?I don't believe it! She's not that kind."They were in the Childses' parlor in the yellow dusk ofthe autumn afternoon. Laura had given her caller twocups of tea with four lumps of sugar in each cup, andHoward, between innumerable little cakes, had been tell-ing her again of Frederica's behavior that terrible nightat the camp. It was at least the third time that she hadheard the grim details, and each time she had shiveredand wished he would stop. To silence him, she hadcharged upon him for not announcing his engagement; itseemed flippant, but it would change the subject. Hisdismay made her forget Flora, in real bewilderment. Notengaged to Fredl Had Fred played with him?"If Fred's been just flirting, she ought to be ashamed,"'Laura said, hotly; "she knew you were perfectly goneon her.""Laura, you didn't suppose such a thing?""That you were gone on Fred? Of course I didl Iknew you were crazy about her, a year ago; and so didshe. Howard, I'm awfully sorry.""Sorry-for what?""For you."244
<pb n="245"/>
THE RISING TIDEHoward Maitland got on his feet, and walked the'length of the room, and back; he said something underhis breath. Then he drew up a chair beside her and tookher hand."I never thought of such a thing.""What !""You are the only girl I ever cared two cents for."She put her hand against her young breast, in astound-ed question: "I?""I should think you'd have seen it. You, and-andeverybody.""But Howard, it can't be-ne?" she protested, faintly."It's been you, always. When you accuse me of beingin -love with-with anybody else, and say everybodythought so, you just bowl me overt" His shocked aston-ishment left no doubt of his sincerity."But Freddy," Laura began-He broke in sharply: "Fred knows how tremendouslyI admire her. I've always said so, to you and to her, too.And I believe she likes me as much as she likes any of usfellows-but of course I'm not up to her, and she neverflirted with me in her life! She's not the kind of girlwho wants to collect scalps," he said, almost with anger."I never thought of-caring for her. Why, I-I couldn'tcare for Fredl""But you were always talking about her, and-""Of course I talked about her! Doesn't everybodytalk about her? But as for being in love with her-Laura,I tell you, you are the only girl in existence, so far as I'mconcerned. I suppose you don't care anything about me."245
<pb n="246"/>
THE RISING TIDELaura put her hands over her face, and laughed; thenstretched them out to him, and the tears brimmed over... ."Oh, Howard, you are such a goose!"There was a speechless moment; then he put his armsaround her, kissed the fluffy hair that brushed his lips,and said, "Oh, my little darling! my little love .. "After that they had to talk it all over, and there wereendless explanations. "You do believe I never thought of-anybody else?"he asked, again and again. And she said yes, she be-lieved it, but she didn't understand it. "Why, I was so sure you were in love with her, I usedto give you chances to be together. Do you rememberthat afternoon you went to say good-by to her, before youwent to the Philippines? I stayed up-stairs to give you achance to ask her.""Laural""I did.""How could you be so absurd?" "Everybody thought so."That silenced him. He was horribly ashamed. It washis fault, then, that night in the cottage? "Everybodythought so." So, naturally, Fred thought so-and shewas the noblest and most generous woman in the world!"It's my fault somehow, that she spoke," he told himself,in a passion of humiliationThat night he wrote to her. The engagement was notto "come out" for two or three weeks;-" only the familymust know," Laura said; but Howard had protested:"Fred-let's tell Fred?"246w 
<pb n="247"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Well," Laura consented, reluctantly,-"I' l go andsee her to-morrow morning and make her swear notto tell.""She can keep a secret," he said. He did not add thatFred should learn the secret before to-morrow morning."I'm the one to break it to her," he thought. Then men-tally kicked himself for saying "break it."When he sat down at his desk that night to write toher, his face was rigid at what was before him; it wasnearly dawn before the task was finished; letters-longletters, short letters, letters expressing his admiration forher, letters ignoring it, letters about Laura, about thePhilippines, about Flora-were written out, torn up,flung into the waste-basket. Then came the brief, blunttruth-telling: Laura had accepted him, and he knewthat she, his old pal, would wish them happiness. Ofcourse there was a postscript: she would be their verybest friend, because they both thought she was the finestwoman they knew.When the letter was addressed and sealed, he went outinto the four-o'clock-in-the-morning stillness, and walkedover to Payton Street to slip it into the letter-box of thesleeping house. He would not trust it to the mail; hewould run no risk of Laura's arriving before the first de-livery. Fred mustn't be caught off guard! Then hewalked home-glanced at a little suspiciously by an officeron his somnolent beat-about as uncomfortable a youngman as ever realized his own happiness in contrast tosome one else's unhappiness-for, in spite of his modestdisclaimer, he knew that Fred was unhappy: "How would247
<pb n="248"/>
THE RISING TIDEI feel if Laura had refused me? And, of course, Fred isharder hit than a man would be."But, no matter how hard hit she was, thanks to thatletter, the next morning, when Laura swore her to se-crecy, and said that the bridesmaids' hats would bedreamsl Fred's upper lip was smilingly stiff.It was just after that that Mrs. Holmes began to saythat her granddaughter was "scrawny."
<pb n="249"/>
CHAPTER XXIIIFTEN, in those weeks before Laura's wedding, Mrs.Payton, working out a puzzle, or playing Canfieldon the big rosewood table in the sitting-room, would stopand stare straight before her, with unseeing eyes....Like a needle working its way through nerveless fleshtoward some vital spot, a new emotion, anger, was pen-etrating the routine of her meaningless days.Laura had cut Freddy oudLove for Morty, the dam love, which is the habit ofthe body and has nothing to do with the intellect, waspushed aside by the new idea: Freddy was sufferingbecause Laura had stolen her lover."It was despicable in herI" Mrs. Payton said to her-self-and the needle-point of anger came a little nearerto that sleeping nerve of maternity, which, when it wasreached, would, in a pang of exquisite pain, make her loveFred as she had never loved anything in her life.Mrs. Payton put a black nine on a red eight; saw hermistake, frowned, and put out a mechanical hand to cor-rect it. "I wonder if she would drink a glass of maltedmilk at night, if I fixed it for her?" she thought; and un-covered an ace. "Laura hasn't half her brains!" she said,and put the card in the ace row; "how could Mr. Maitland17                 249
<pb n="250"/>
THE RISING TIDE                              |see anything to her-except looks? She is pretty. ButFreddy is worth a dozen of her, and he was head over earsin love with her! Yes; Laura simply took him from her!I shall never feel the same to Laura again;-and I supposeBessie and William expect me to give her a handsomewedding-present."  She wondered, with vague malice, whether there wasn't something in the house-the oldwonder of the reluctant giver of gifts!-that she could send Laura? Some family silver; the epergne, for in-stance, three silver squirrels holding a platter on theirheads. The question of the wedding-present was so irritatingto her, that in the afternoon, when Freddy came in, ratherlistlessly (this was in November-a month before thewedding), Mrs. Payton referred the matter to her-shift-ing her angry pain to Freddy's galled young shoulders.There was no wincing."What shall we give Laura?""Something bully! I was talking to her about it to-day, and asked her what she wanted. I think a rug isthe thing.""I wonder if some of the Payton silver-" Mrs. Paytonbegan-but Fred threw up horrified hands. "No! No second-hand goodsl And it's got to besomething first rate, too; (if it takes my last dollar!)" she added, under her breath.The rug did not take quite the last dollar, but it tookmore than she could afford, and Laura was perfectly de-lighted with it. Howard, standing on it, his hands in hispockets, dug an appreciative heel into its silky nap, and 
<pb n="251"/>
THE RISING TIDEmade his usual comment: "It's bullyl Fred's taste isgreat!"Sometimes, looking back on the night that Flora died,Howard wondered if it all (except the poor soul's suicide)was not a dream? For Fred was so "bully"! ... Enter-'ing into all Laura ecstasies and anxieties; crazy to knowwho would make the wedding-dress; perfectly wild overHoward's present to his bride; frantic because it was tooearly to get jonquils for the rope down each side of theaisle.... That astounding moment in the bungalowmust have been, Howard told himself, a dream! Twodreams-his and Fred's, for she evidently cared no morefor him than for old Weston.So the days passed (Howard thought they never wouldpass!) and the Day drew near. When it came, FredericaPayton's head was as high as any of the other youngheads. There were eight of them, in most marvelous andexpensive yellow hats, to follow the shimmering Lauraup the aisle. At the reception afterward, Frederica, in hervivid joyousness almost-so her Uncle William said-"took the shine off the bridel Remember Shakespeare(as you'd say)-"Bring in our daughterClothed like a bride . . See, where she comes,Appareled like the spring,"-Mr. Childs quoted, puffing happily--"but that frockyou've got on is spring-like, too-all yellow and white,like buttercups and daisies."251
<pb n="252"/>
THE RISING TIDE"I'm rather stuck on it, myself," Fred said, compla-cently; she was standing beside Arthur Weston, eatingice-cream with appetite."Well," her uncle said, chuckling, "I may tell you inconfidence- Hey, Howard!" he interrupted himself,clutching at the passing bridegroom, "I was just tellingFreddy that I was very much astonished when I learnedthat you were to be my son-in-law. I thought you weremaking up to her!""To mef" said Fred, incredulously; "he never knewI existed when Laura was around!""I'm just looking for Laura now," Howard said, with agasp; "she's deserted me!" he complained, laughing-and escaped."Oh," Mr. Childs said, clapping his niece on theshoulder so heartily that her ice-cream spilled over, "ofcourse I know, now, that it's always been Laural""Yes," Fred agreed, gaily, "he's been dead set forLolly for the last two years."So she got through with the Day.... When shereached home, and up in her own room took off the yellowhat, she took off that gallant smile, too; she had worn ituntil the muscles about her lips were stiff. She was pro-foundly fatigued; too fatigued to feel anything but reliefthat the wedding was over. Even the old ache of wishingshe "hadn't told him" was numbed. It was part of thegenerosity of her honest, sore young heart, that she felta faint satisfaction in the fact that, anyhow, he was happy;as for Laura-"how mean I am to-dislike herl Itwasn't her fault, and she's just the same old Lolly. I252
<pb n="253"/>
THE RISING TIDEwon't dislike her! I'll love her, just as I've always lovedher." When she went down to dinner that night she putthe smile on again, and was very airy and smart in hercomments to Mrs. Payton upon the Childs family, andthe company in general."Laura was perfectly sweetl But Aunt Bessie is toofat to wear such" tight clothes. Why do the fat fiftiesalways wear tight clothes? . . . Grandmother wasn'tshy on powder, was she? . . Billy-boy would talk aboutBacon at his own funeral . . . How many kinds of afool do you suppose that old hag, Maria Spencer, is? . . .I-I guess I'll go to bed. I was an idiot to eat icecream;it always makes my head ache."Perhaps her head ached too badly for sleep. At anyrate, hours later, when zS Payton Street had sunk intomidnight darkness, she heard a board creak under a care-ful step in the hall, and sat up in bed, saying, sharply,"Who's that?" "It's I, dear. Don't be frightened."  Mrs. Paytoncame feeling her way across the room to Fred's bedside."Is anything the matter? Is Mortimore-""No, no; nothingl Only, Freddy, my darling, I-I just want to tell you something." She sat down on theedge of the bed, and Frederica heard her draw in herbreath in a sob."Mother! Are you ill?""No-no. But Freddy, I-I didn't mean it when Isaid that about Mortimore.""Said what?" Fred said, frowning with anxiety; "here,let me light the gasl"53
<pb n="254"/>
THE RISING TIDE"No, don't!" Mrs. Payton put a restraining hand on her daughter's shoulder; "about-about loving him best.I don't, dear; truly I don't.""But, Motherl"-Fred put her arms about the soft,loose figure that tumbled into sobs against her-"I didn't know you said it, and if you did, I don't mind it in the .least!" She felt her mother's tears on her cheek, andgathered her up against her breast; "Why, Mother!   'It's all right-really it is. It's all right to love him best-""But I don't-I don'tl I love you best.""Why," Fred soothed her, "I didn't even rememberyou'd said it. You only told me I was like Father-andthat did me good.""No! I never said you were! And it isn't so. You'renot--not a bit! My little Freddy!"Frederica smiled grimly in the darkness, and she let thestatement pass; for suddenly something surged up in herbreast; something she had never felt in her life; some-thing that was actual pain; she had no name for it, butit made the tears sting in her eyes. "There, dear, there!"she comforted her cowering mother;  . .  . I understand,"she said, brokenly; "I understand!"It is a wonderful moment, this moment of "under-standing." It made Fred draw the foolish gray head downon her young breast, and caress and comfort it, as yearsago her own little head had been caressed and kissed.They were both "mothers" at that moment.So Laura's wedding-day was lived through. And byand by the weeks that followed were lived through. And254
<pb n="255"/>
THE RISING TIDEthen the months pushed in between Fred and that nightat the camp. She never spoke of Howard and Laura."I wonder if she's got over it," Mrs. Payton speculated,wistfully. She was glad, for her part, that the bride andbridegroom had gone abroad, and she did not have to seethem-"especially Laural" she used to say to herself, bit-terly. If Fred was bitter, she didn't show it; she wasabsorbed in league work, and a really growing real-estatebusiness; it was all she could dco to find time to listen whenher mother talked, and talked, and talked-or people, orpuzzles, or parlor-maids! But how could she fail to listen-no matter how dull and foolish the talk was-remember-ing that midnight of pity?"Freddy is getting very companionable," Mrs. Paytontold Arthur Weston. He had come upon Fred bendingover a puzzle spread out on the bigtable in the sitting-room, and trying to fit one wriggly piece of blue after an-other into a maliciously large expanse of unchartedsky; she had been obviously relieved at the chance to shiftthe entertainment of Mrs. Payton to his shoulders."I've got to go to a league meeting," she excused her-self. When she had gone and he was standing with hisback to the fire, sipping his tea and talking pleasantly ofthe weather, or the barber's children, or poor Flora's tend-ency to put too much starch in the table linen (raisinghis voice, in a matter-of-fact way, when there was a noisebehind the door of the other room), he agreed warmly withMrs. Payton's tribute to her daughter: "Freddy is gettingcompanionable.""Indeed she isl" he said, and added that she was remark-255
<pb n="256"/>
THE RISING TIDE ably clever about puzzleswhich pleased Mrs. Paytonvery much. This new sense of sympathy which held Freddown to picture puzzles, made her try to avoid topics onwhich she knew she and her mother could not agree. Asthe winter went on, the especial topic to be avoided was astrike among the rubber workers. Fred was passionately for the strikers, who were all girls. She went constantlyto Hazelton, where the factory was, to give what help shecould to the union women, and to admonish them thatthe way to cure industrial conditions, which all fair-minded people admitted were frightful, was by the ballot."Get the man's ballot, and you'll get the man's wages!"was her slogan-and she was quite fierce with her man ofbusiness when he pointed out the economic fallacy ofher words."The kingdom of God cometh not by the ballot," headmonished her. "I feel as if I were going to Sunday-schooll" "A little Sunday-school wouldn't hurt you. It neverseems to strike you," he ruminated, "that if 'laws,' whichyou are so anxious to have a hand in making, could settle supply and demand, the men, poor creatures, would havefeathered their own nests a little better."To which Miss Payton replied, concisely, "Rot!"-and continued to tell the strikers that suffrage was a cure-all.It was in March that one of the morning papers an-nounced, with snobbish detail, that Miss Freddy Payton,a "young society girl," had "patrolled" to keep off scabs.That evening, at dinner, Mrs. Payton, mortified to death256
<pb n="257"/>
THE RISING.TIDEat the notoriety, and encouraged by Arthur Weston'spresence at the table, ventured into controversy:"When I was a young lady-" she began, and instantlyFrederica's lance was in restl She did not mean to becruel-but she couldn't help being smart. Her mother'sinjured sense of propriety was batted back to her across thedinner-table, like a shuttlecock from a resounding battle-dore."You may say what you like," Mrs. Payton said, obsti-nately, "but I don't believe it would make a bit of dif-ference to give those perfectly uneducated Italian girls avote. It hasn't," she ended, with one of those flashes ofshrewdness so characteristic of dull women, "made anydifference in the men's wages. And, anyhow, I don'tunderstand why you like to mix vourself up with all sortsof persons.""The Founder of your religion mixed Himself with allsorts of persons," Frederica said, wickedly; "but, ofcourse, He would not be in societrto-day.""That is a very irreverent thing to say," Mrs. Paytonsaid, stiffly.("Now, why," Mr. Weston pondered, "why doesn't theatrocious taste of that sort of talk cure me? Because," heanswered himself, "it 'amuses' me! Oh, Cousin Eliza,you are a wise old woman!")As for Frederica, she was not conscious that her lackof taste was amusing; but she knew it was unkind, andfelt the instant stab of remorse. ("I'm just like Fatherl"she groaned to herself); then with resolution she began totalk about puzzles; she said she thought the reason her257
<pb n="258"/>
THE RISING TIDEmother couldn't work out that six-hundred-piece one wasbecause the people who made it had omitted some pieces,and it never could be got out."Try it a few days longer," Fred said, "and then, if youwant me to, I'll write to the people who manufactured itand ask them about it. Arthur Weston! I am going tostand by those girls in Hazelton until they win out!""When they do, their work will stop," he prophesied,mildly. "The factory hasn't paid a dividend for threeyears, and if wages go up, it will shut up. I happen toknow how they stand.""Laura's back," Fred said, abruptly; "they got homeyesterday. I asked her if she'd walk in the parade, andshe said, 'Howard wouldn't like itl' That sort of thingmakes me tired."
<pb n="259"/>
CHAPTER XXIVTHE invitation to walk in the parade had not beengiven easily. Fred had forced herself to ask Laura,for very shame at the ache of resentment which neitherreason, nor her old habit of affection for her cousin,could conquer. Laura's refusal gave her a sort of angrysatisfaction. "Of course! What could you expect? She'sa sweet little thing, but she has no mind to speak of. PoorHowardl She must bore him to death." As for Howard'snot liking parades,-well, that was queer. He never hadquite realized their value; probably because he hadn'treally thought about them. She would talk it over withhim sometime, and make him unerstand. She was notin the least annoyed with Howard, but it was all she coulddo to hide her contempt for Laura; "Why do women grovelso before men? It makes me perfectly sick!" Even whenLaura, with the old, puppy-like devotion, offered, onemorning, to go with her to Hazelton where Fred was toaddress the strikers, it was not easy to be cordial."I'll tag around after you, and clap," Laura said."Howard willing?" Fred said, sarcastically.Laura laughed: "I haven't asked him. He's in Cin-cinnati. Won't be home until this afternoon.""I suppose you wouldn't go if he wasn't?"259
<pb n="260"/>
THE RISING TIDE"I suppose I wouldn't," Laura said, simply.Fred's lip drooped. But she only said, good-naturedly,"Come along!" They went to Hazelton by trolley, Fredhaving vetoed Laura's limousine: "It's too much 'LadyBountiful.' Your gasolene for a week would pay a girl'sboard for a month."In the long ride, spinning and jouncing through thecountryside until they reached the squalid outskirts ofthe little town, Frederica listened to Laura's talk of Eu-rope-and Howard. Of Paris frocks-and Howard. Ofthe voyage home-and Howard."I won't be horrid, I won't I love her just exactly thesame-" Fred was saying to herself, staring out of thewindow at the flying landscape, at the woods where the leafless trees were showing the haze of swelling buds, atthe snow, melting in the frozen furrows. "Yes ....""No ...." "Really?" she would say, when sometimesLaura's chatter paused. ("Oh, how bored Howard mustbe by this sort of thing!" she thought. She couldn't helpremembering how differently she had talked to Howard-the big things, the real thingsl "Poor old Howard!")Once there was quite a long pause, and Fred stoppedwatching the racing landscape and looked at Laura. Itwas then that Laura softly told her a piece of news:  ,"Of course, Howard's awfully pleased. He wants agirl, but I want a boy."Frederica was silent for a moment: then, very gentle and tender, "I'm awfully glad," she said, and squeezedLaura's hand.Then the chatter began again, and Fred looked out of 26o
<pb n="261"/>
THE RISING TIDEthe window at the snow melting on slopes that faced thesun.The hall in Hazelton where the strikers were awaitingFrederica was terribly hot and stuffy, and packed withwomen crowding so closely about the melon-shaped ironstove that the air was stifling with the smell of scorchingclothes. It occurred to Laura, opening a window surrep-titiously, that the girls were here as much for the sake ofthe glowing stove as for the chance to hear Fred. Shewatched her cousin with shrinking admiration. What shesaid did not particularly interest her, but Frederica's in-timacy with the girls made her wonder. "She touchesthem!" Laura thought, with a quiver of disgust.When Fred had made her speech-which Laura vocif-erously applauded-they all trooped out into the street,but paused while Frederica (Laura skulking behind her)stood in the doorway for a further harangue. Unfortui-nately-because the knot of listening girls obstructed thesidewalk-a police officer, shoving them  out of theway, happened to show some rudeness to a little Italian,who, in return, jabbering shrilly, struck at the man'spatient and restraining arm, which caused him to gatherher two delicate wrists in one big, vise-like hand, and holdher, a little, kicking, struggling creature, who made aboutas much impression on his large blue bulk as a sparrowmight make upon a locomotive."There, now, keep quiet, sissy," he said, wearily.But Catalina kicked harder than ever, and the officer-shook her, gently. It was at that moment that Fred'seye fell upon him.261
<pb n="262"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Ill stop that!" she said, between shut teeth."Oh, Fred, don't do anything," Laura entreated,-butFred was at the man's side.Her anger disconcerted him. "It's against the law toobstruct the sidewalk," he explained."I had no hand in making the law, and therefore Ishall not obey itl"                                 ;"Better can that talk, and keep it for the Court," said :the man, beginning to get red in the face. To which Fred-erica retorted by telling him her opinion of men in generaland policemen in particular.A man can stand kicks from little feet, but "lip"--aftera certain point of forbearance has been reached, is anothermatter. Fred punctuated her remonstrances by puttingan abrupt hand on his arm, and instantly there was anunseemly scuffle, in which Laura, running out from theshelter of the doorway, tried to draw Fred away. Theresult was that before they really knew what had hap-pened, the little Italian, Miss Frederica Payton, and Mrs.Howard Maitland found themselves in a patrol-wagonrumbling and jouncing along over the icy Belgian blocks,a taciturn man in a blue coat sitting in the doorway ofthe van to prevent any possible leap to liberty.The whole thing was so sudden that the cousins wereperfectly bewildered. Even as they were being hustledinto the wagon, a crowd had gathered, springing up, ap-parently, out of the ground. There had been a sea of faces-good natured, amused, unoncerned faces; a medley ofvoices, jeering and hooting, or raucously sympathetic; avision of the striking girls-for whose cause they were262
<pb n="263"/>
THE RISING TIDEthere l-forsaking them, melting away, fleeing aroundcorers and up sidestreets; then, the jolting alongthrough the noon emptiness of the streets, toward thestation-house.Frederica, getting her breath, after the suddenness of itall, grew very much excited. She scented the fray-thecontest between man-made laws and unconsulted womanlIt occurred to her-though Laura said, in despairingtones, "Oh, Fred, please don't"-to fling some suffrageliterature into the street over the head of the officer; shedid it until he told her to "set still, you!" At whichCatalina, 'heaing her defender reproved, kicked him,causing him to turn around and grab her ankle; he heldit in one great paw, and whistled, absently.Fred was furious. "Don't touch that girl's anlrtde  shesaid."Shut up," he replied, calmly; and, oblivious of bothof them, still holding Catalina's little kicking feet, he be-gan to talk over his shoulder to the driver of the van aboutthe price of cucumber. "Here, you!" he interruptedhimself-"stop biting, sissy!  Gee! this chippy hasteeth-" and he poked Catalina, playfully, with his club.Frederica whitened with rage, but Catalina lapsed sud-denly into such abject fright that when they reached theirdestination she had to be lifted out of the wagon, andpushed-not too gently-up the steps into the station-house. Laura, who got out next, was shaking so that theofficer put a friendly han 4under her elbow to assist her.Frederica followed the other two, her head high withanger and interest.263
<pb n="264"/>
THE RISING TIDE                          iIn the station-house, the receiving-room, with its onedirt-incrusted window, was dark, even at one o'clock-per- .haps because, shoulder-high on the long-unwashed paint,was a dado of grime left by innumerable cringing backs.There was one back against it now; a drunken man, withwabbling head and glassy, half-shut eyes, was whining and 'sobbing, and trying to keep on his legs. When the ser-geant asked his name, he answered by a hiccough whichthe officer, as indifferent and efficient as a cog in someslowly revolving and crushing wheel, translated into"Thomas Coney." "Come, stop crying; be a perfect gentleman, Tommy, be a perfect gentleman!" he said,yawning. And, curiously enough, Tommy straightenedup and swallowed his sobs."Look at himl" Fred whispered to Laura; "he's get-ting hold of himselfl I suppose that's his idea of a perfectgentleman."Laura, rigid with misery, made no answer.  WhenThomas had been disposed of-watched by Frederica's in-tent eyes-she and Laura, whose knees were plainly shak-ing, and Catalina, who was sobbing and calling upon God,lined up in front of the sergeant's desk. Frederica an-swered the usual questions with brief directness; her atti-tude toward the big, bored officer was distinctly friendlyand confidential; as he closed the blotter, she began to tellhim that she had been urging the girls to demand the bal-Before she could finish the word, she found herself, to herangry amazement, being moved along toward the corridor."But-stop! I have not finished. And I want to tel- ephone, and-"264
<pb n="265"/>
THE RISING TIDE"What number?"Both girls spoke at aone, redeica giving Mr. Weston'snumber, and Laura, stamering with apprehension thatHoward might not go directly home from the train,naming her own house. "Ask Mr. Weston to hunt How-ard up," she implored her cousin. The telephoning wasfruitless, as neither gentleman could be found."You can try 'em again over at the House of Deten-tion,"themansaid, notunkindly. "Moveonl Moveon!"They moved on, in spite of themselves, assisted by theimpersonal pressure of an officer's hand on Fred's shoulder-Laura shivering all over, Fred's face red with displeasureat the affront of not being listened to, Catalina perfectlyhappy and inclined to giggle."You'll make Mr. Weston find Howard?" Laura said,in a frantic whisper, as they walked across the courtyardto the little jail back of the station-house. "Oh, I wasgoing to meet him,---and I am herel"Fred shrugged her shoulders: "Why did you come, ifyou mind it so? (Married women are awfully poor sports,"she thought.)"Do you think I'd funk and leave you?" Laura re-torted; and Fred's face softened."Howard will be so upset-" Laura said, quivering."Nonsense! He'll see the fun of it," Fred assured her.In matters of this kind, she understood Howard betterthan little Lolly ever could....Her face was glowing with excitement! This meantsomething to the Cause! An old phrase ran through hermind, "The blood of the martyrs is the seed,"-"I tellIs8                  65
<pb n="266"/>
THE RISING TIDEyou what, Laura," she said, under her breath, "this ridic-ulous business is the seed of a big thing; it has given mea great idea: let women refuse to obey the laws, until theyare allowed to make them""This way," said the officer, and herded them into thereceiving-room of the House of Detention. The next fewminutes stung even Fred's aplomb-they were searchedlThe indignity of hands passing down her figure-handsnot rough, not unkind, not insulting, merely mechanical,-made her unreasonably, but quite furiously, angry.Laura was a little shocked, but her dignity was simple and unshaken. Catalina, her dirty, streaky face puffedwith crying, laughed loudly with amusement."This is abominable!" Fred said, her voice shaking.The matron, making notes on a pad, paid no attention tothe protest. It was all in the day's work-human wreck-age washed up out of the gutter, rose in this bleak, stone-lined room every day; rose, flooded into the surroundingcells, where it vociferated, wept, pleaded, stood rigid withfury and shame, or else collapsed into sodden slumber.Then, by and by, it ebbed away. And the next day, andthe next, the same drift and ruin of humanity flooded inand drifted out.After further telephoning had been promised by thematron, the three girls were placed in a cell. Catalinaat once flung herself full length on the bench that ranalong two sides of it; Fred sat down and took out hernote-book. "I mustn't forget one incident," she told her-self. The experiene had penetrated below the theatricalconsciousness of martyrdom, and roused a primitive anger,266
<pb n="267"/>
THE RISING TIDEnot for herself, or the other two (of whom, to tell the truth,she thought very little), but against the wastefulness of asystem which permitted this wreckage to sweep in andsweep out-unchecked, unchnged, over and over. She Asaw, as she had never seen before, the righteousness of,woman's demand that she should have a hand in themaking and the administering of Law. She was impressed,not so much by the injustice of leaving the punishment ofwomen to men, as by the irrationality of it."There ought to have been a woman in that station-house," she said; "and there ought to be women policefficers and judges. Just wait till we get the vote, Laura-uw'i stop this idiocyl That's what it is: idiocy, notjustice ."Laura was not concerned about terms; she stood, tenseand trembling, gripping the iron bars of the door. "How-ard will be so upset, and Father will be dreadfully angryI"'Oh, yes," Fred agreed, carelessly, "Uncle William willhave a fit, of course. But I'11 bet on Howardl Motherwill almost die of it, I'm afraid," she said, her face sober-ing; "I'm sorry about that. But, of course, Laura, that'sthe penalty of progress. We-you and I and Howard-.are moving the world, and the old people have got to getout of the way or get run over!"Laura was silent."The thing that hits me hardest," sid Fredeica, "isthe way women won't stand together. Every one of thosegirs took to their heels.""Oh, when will Howard come?" said Laura, with asobbing breath. She was not sorry she had stood by Fred267
<pb n="268"/>
THE RISING TIDE when all the rest of them "took to their heels," only-"I1l die if he doesn't come soon!" she thought, shakingvery much. Once she glanced over her shoulder at Fred-erica, who was straining her eyes (the cell was lighted onlyfrom the hall) over her note-book, and she felt a faintthrill of admiration. Imagine, making notes at such amoment!The afternoon passed; hours-hours-hours."Oh, when will somebody come?" Laura said, in a whis-per. Frederica had put up her note-book, and seemed ab-sorbed in thought. Catalina was asleep.There came a sound of voices in the outer court, andagain Laura clutched at the iron bars. (She had beenat the grating ever since the lock was turned upon them.)"It's Howard!" Even Fred was moved to stand up and peer out intothe whitewashed corridor--then both girls shrank back;a drunken negress was being pulled along over the flag-stones of the passage to the receiving-room; a few min-utes later, she was pulled back again, and they heard theclang of a cell door; then yells, then evidently sickness;then cries upon God and the devil, and a torrent of un-speakably vile invective. Even Fred quailed before it,and Laura clung to her in such a paroxysm of fear thatthey neither of them heard the hurrying feet outside on the flagging-then the lock was flung out, and Howardcaught his wife in his arms."I just got word," he said, hoarsely; "Westo caughtme at the club. My darling!"The tears were in his eyes and his face was as white as268
<pb n="269"/>
THE RISING TIDELaura's. Behind him, Arthur Weston looked grimly overhis head at Prederica."I had to chase him all around town," he said, "or we'dhave been here before And it's taken time to bail youout.""I'm sorry to have bothered you," Fred said; "but it'sbeen an awfully valuable experience to Laura and me.I wouldn't have missed it for anything "The matron, faintly interested, was standing by to seethe end of it. "Them swells will learn something," shewhispered, to her assistant; "I guess that thin one ain'tbad. I thought she was. Well, good-by, ma'am," shesaid, listlessly; and went back to work on a piece of dingyembroidery until the next dumping of human rubbishshould claim her attention.Out in the courtyard Frederica made a little delay.Where was Catalina to go? What was she to do? "Outon bail? Does that mean she's got to come back hereagain?"" It means that she's got to report at the municipal crim-inal court," Mr. Weston instructed her; "and so haveyou and Laura, unless I can patch things up.""Good!" Fred said, eagerly, "I wanted to know the endof this silly businessl"She got into the limousine, where Laura, still very white;had been placed by Howard, who put an unabashed armabout her. His impatience at Fred's delay was obvious."Mr. Westonl for the Lord's sake, shut her up!" hesaid, angrily.Frederica, sitting down beside him, gave him an aston-269
<pb n="270"/>
THE RISING TIDE ished look. "It was I who was talking, not Cataina"she explained; "I was telling her what to do. Of courseI couldn't go away and leave her to shift for herself.Howard, this has been a great experience!"Howard's jaw set: "Laura, dear," he whispered, "it'sall right. Don't shake so, Kitty! It's all right. Mr.Weston will fix it up so you needn't go to court.""You see," Fred began, volubly, "it all happened be-cause of the policeman's rudeness to that poor littleCatalina; Laura and I had to protect her, and-""Look here"-Howard turned a fierce face upon her-"you can make a fool of yourself, all you want to, but I'llthank you not to drag my wife into your damned nonsense r' Frederica stared at him, open-mouthed."Maitland," the other man said, gravely, "I am sureyou will apologize for that." Howard's hand clenched over his little Laura's; heswalowed, and set his teeth. "If I have been rude, I apol-ogize  But the fact remains; Fred ought not to havedragged Laura into any such disgusting and indecentbusinessl" ,O4h, Howardl" Laura protested; "she didn't. I didit myself. It wasn't Fred's fault."Frederica was silent, but Weston saw her face fall intolines of haggard amazement. As they went spinning along back to town, Howard gave himself up to whisper- ing to Laura Arthur Weston asked one or two questions,and Frederica told him, briefly, just what had causedthe disturbance that ended in the "interesting experi-ence." For the most part no one spoke.270
<pb n="271"/>
THE RISING TIDEAt the Maitland house, Howard almost lifted his littlewife out of the car; he was quivering with pain at herpain-at the thought that her ears had heard the moansof Life, that her eyes had seen its filth and horror; hewas.so angry at Freerica that he could not trust himselfeven to look at her. Of course he made no farewells. Hedosed the door of the limousine with a bang, and said,through the open window:".Mr.Weston, do anything,anything! sothat Laura won'tbe dragged into it. Any amount of money, of course!And the newspapers-good Lordl Can we fix them?""Ill see what can be done," Weston said; and the carspun away.Frederica turned a bewildered face upon him. Shestammered a little:"He didn't"-her voice fell to an astonished whisper-" understand."They scarcely spoke until they reached the Paytonhouse; it was dusk when they went up the steps togetherand rung the frontdoor bell. ("I am coming in to ex-plain things to your mother," he said, quietly.) Butas they stood waiting for the door to be opened, Prederica,looking at him with miserable eyes, made a gesture offinality."I ever knew him," she said.As they heard the feet of the parlor-maid comingthrough the hall, she gripped his arm with her tremblinghand:"Arthur," she said, in a whisper; "just thinlk I asked-I asked him to marry me. And this is what he isr'271
<pb n="272"/>
CHAPTER XXVTHE whole connection seethedl The notoriety of Flora's death was nothing compared with this noto-riety. The police courtl The newspapers  The gossipof Mrs Childs's Bridge Club  And, on top of everythingelse, the shock to Laura.i"You see," Mrs. Payton explained to her daughter,"she's going to have a baby, and--""I know," Fred said, soberly; "she told me. Of courseI wouldn't have let her go, if I'd known there was goingto be rough-house.""It's absurd to blame you," her mother said. "As Itold your Aunt Bessie, 'It's absurd to blame Freddyl"'"I don't mind being blamed. I oughtn't to have takenher, anyhow. She doesn't really care for the things I care for. She's entirely under Howard's thumb, poor dearl"Mr. William Childs was almost sick with anger, and Mrs. Childs, with her calm interest in other people'stroubles, agreed with Miss Mary Graham, who said that,of course, Miss Freddy meant well; but sometimes the brain defect didn't show at once, as it did in her brother. "It comes on when they are about twenty-five," said 4Miss Mary. Mrs. Childs said that was the most charitable way to 272
<pb n="273"/>
THE RISING TIDE'look at it, and-amiably ready to tell anything to any-body-repeated the charitable opinion to Mrs. Payton. "What did the older one say?" Fred's mother asked,distractedly.Mrs. Childs hesitated: "Nothing very sensible; in-deed, I don't know just what she meant. Something out;of the Bible-that they said Christ had a devil, too.Quite profane, I thought.""Fred isn't a devil!" Mrs. Payton said, angrily, hermaternal claws ready to scratch the "older one," whoseprotection of Frederica was understood only by ArthurWeston, who loved her for it, but warned her that unlessIBacon was the author of the phrase she had quoted itwould not soothe the Childs family.Certainly it did not soothe Bobby and Payton, who|told their respective wives that Freddy ought to be shutup! "Allendale is the place for her," Bob said, mention-ing a well-known inlsanesylu. They told their brother-in-law that Laura ought to be ashamed of herself-which.led to an in-law coolness that never quite thawed out."Of course I don't approve of it any more than you.do," Howard said  "If I'd been at home, Laura wouldn't.have gone with Fred. Trouble is, she's so sweet-temperedshe does whatever anybody wants-and Fred insisted, youknow. And when Laura was there she felt she had to.stand by Fred--""Stand by your grandmother " Payton Childs retorted."If Fred was my sister, I'd stand by her-with a whip!""Well, there'll be no more speechifying in ours," Howardsaid, grimly. "But I won't have Laura blamed. What273
<pb n="274"/>
THE RISING TIDEshe did, she did out of loyalty to Fred. When it comes to standing by, Laura is as decent as a man!"Miss Spencer was of the opinion that Mrs. Payton hadbetter take the girl to Europe-"under another name,perhaps; then she can't disgrace you. After all, Ellen,I believe she's just like Mortmore-only she doesn'tjibberl""Miss Spencerl""I mean that though she has intellect, she-" "Morty has intellectl Doctor Davis always said the intellect was there, but it was veiledl""Fred had better veil something," Miss Spencer said,dryly. "Her face, for instance, when she goes to jail." "It wasn't a jail," Mrs. Payton protested, whimper-ingly.Mrs. Holmes had her opinion, too; all Fred's didos,she said, were due to the fact that Mrs. Payton had not brought her up properly. She said this just as she wasleaving the parlor, teetering along on her high-heeledshoes; then her voice suddenly roughened; she turned and glared at her daughter through her white veil."The amount of it is," she said, "Fred is worth all the rest of us put together! That's why we are so provoked at her. We know we're on the shelf, and useless old fools,every one of us! Especially William Childs."Mrs. Payton was so astounded that she let her mothergo out to her carriage unattended. But the words werea comfort to her, for, poor woman, she was struck fromevery side.As for Fred, she listened listlessly to the jangle of criti-274
<pb n="275"/>
THE RISING TIDEcism, looking at her critics with curious eyes. How sillythey all were! So long as the experience of being arrestedhad not injured Laura, what difference did it make? Withher conception of the values of life, the momentary un-pleasantness of newspaper notoriety was not worth think-ing of. Fred was very listless now. Something hadtouched the garment of life, and energy and hope had goneout of it.She ceased to be young.The rebuff of unaccepted love she had faced gallantly;its accompanying knowledge of shame and pity and sym-pathy, had only steadied her; even her own irrationalitin disliking Laura (she had recognized with chagrin thatdislike was irrational, and she lated, she told herself, to bean idiot!)-all these emotional experiences had merelydeepened and humaized her. But the discovery that theHoward Maitland she thought she knew, had never lived,was a staggering blow. The other Howard-the realHoward-honest, sweet-hearted, simple, who had foundher conversation no end amusing and interesting, who hadbeen a patient receptacle for her opinions and an amiableecho of her volubility, who had swallowed many yawnsout of kindness as well as courtesy-the Howard beneathwhose charm of good manners lurked the primitive fierce-ness of the male who protects his woman at any cost,tht Howard had never made the slightest apeal to her.The jar of stepping down from the ideal man to the realman racked her, body and soul. The old pain of not beingloved had ceased as suddenly as a pulled tooth ceases toache. The new pain was only a sense of nothingness.275
<pb n="276"/>
THE RISING TIDEBut, curiously enough, it was then that the old affectionfor Laura began to flow back. "Not that I get much outof her," she thought, dully; "dear little Lolly! She hasn'tan idea beyond-him. She's a perfect slave to him. Well!I'm glad I'm a free woman  But she's a dear little thing."The soreness had all gone; she loved Lolly again-as oneloves a kitten. She used to go to see her, and look at thebaby clothes, and speculate as to whether it would be agirl or a boy. The softness, and silliness, and sweetness ofit all was to her tired mind what cushions are to a tiredbody.              '*When the baby was born, early in September, the lastbarrier between the cousins was swept away-but Fredstill made a point of not going to Laura's house at an hourwhen she was likely to find Howard at home. Laura'shusband was an entire stranger to her. When, by acci-dent, she did meet him, she used to say to herself, wonder-ingly, "How could I-?"All summer Frederica went regularly to her office. " Butbusiness isn't what you'd call booming," she told ArthurWeston. In the blind fumbling about of her stunned mindto discover a reality, he was the one person to whom sheturned. His calls at z5 Payton Street, whenever Fredwas in town, stirred even Mrs. Payton to speculation-although it was Miss Carter who put the idea into herhead:                        ,"He always comes when Miss Freddy is here; I think  ,  Ihe's taken with her.""I wish I could think so! There is nothing I should like276
<pb n="277"/>
THE RISING TIDEbetter," said Mrs Payton, sighing. But the mere hopeof such a thing-roused her to ask Mr. Weston to dinnerwhenever she knew that Fed was coming home for thenight. Miss Gham, getting wind of those dinners, gavehim, one day, a cousnly thrust in the ribs:"Tortoise! I do really believe you have some sense,after all!""I have sense enough to know that the race is off forthe tortoise, when the hare decides not to run," he said,dryly; "but that's no reason why I shouldn't dine withMrs. Payton."            -.Miss Eliza was spending the summer at The Laurels,and she had Freddy on her mind. She went over to Lake-ville to see her several times, and always, with elaboratecarelessness, said something in Arthur Weston's favor.But she had to admit that Fred was blind to the pursuitof the faithful tortoise."I love the child," she told her sister; "but, I declare,I could spank her! Just think what a husband dearArthur would makel""What kind of a wife would she make?" Miss Mary re-torted. "I don't thin  she would insure any man'shappiness.""The pitiful thing about her is that she has aged so,"said Miss Graham.That sense of lost youth touched her so much that shewas quite out of patience with dear Arthur. "Haven'tyou any heart?" she scolded. "The girl is unhappylCarry her off, and make her happy.""I'm too old to turn kidnapper," he defended himself.277
<pb n="278"/>
THE RISING TIDE"She is brooding over something," Miss Eliza said; "itcon't be because that foolish young man took her cousinwhen he could have got her? She has too much backbone for that !"Mr. Weston agreed that Fred was not laking back-bone, but he could not deny the brooding. So it came about that the dear old matchmaker was moved, one day,to go to Sunrise Cottage and put her finger in the pie. After she had drunk a cup of tea, and listened for half anhour to Fred's ideas as to how Laura should bring upthe baby, and the "slavery of mothers"--"LoUy hasn'ttime to read a linel" Fred said;-Miss Eliza suddenlytouched her on the shoulder:"My dear," she said, "you've got to live, whether youlikeit ornot. Make thebestof it!"Fred gave a gasp of astonishment; then she said, in alow voice, "How did you know I didn't like living?""Because when I didn't, I was just as careless aboutmy back hair as you are."Involuntarily Fred put her hand up to her head. "Is it untidy?""It's indifferent. And when you think how fond Arthur is of you, it's very selfish in you not to look as pretty as ':you can."She went away greatly pleased with herself. "It will touch her vanity to think he likes her to look pretty; and when a girl tries to look pretty for a man, the next step is to fall in love with him."Alasl Fred's vanity was not in the slightest degreeflattered. But her pride had felt the roweling of the spur278,.
<pb n="279"/>
THE RISING TIDEof Truth. She must brace up-because she had got tolive! The words were like a trumpet. "I've got to live--uwther I like it or not. I must get action on something," she told herself, grimly.That night she sat down on the little stool in front ofher fire, and stared a long time into the flames. Yes, shemust get busy. "I've been a pig. I've had a grouch on,just because I didn't get a stick of candy when I wantedit-and wouldn't I have been sick of my candy by thistime, if I'd got it! How ca Lolly stand him? What afool I was." . . Yes, she must "get busy"; why nottry and do something for those poor, wretched womenwho are sent to the House of Detention? What she hadseen and heard in that stonelined room had left a scarupon her mind. "I'll make Arthur tell me how to getat them," she thought. Suddenly she remembered Miss-Eliza's thrust: "It's selfish in you--hen he's so fondof you"She gave a little start: "Oh, but that's impossibelThat sort of thing is over for him. But he's my bestfriend," she told herelf.
<pb n="280"/>
.CHAPTER XXVIIT was late in September, when she asked ArthurWeston to tell her how she could help "those awfulwomen,"-as she called the poor creatures she had seenin jail. He had motored out to Lakeville for a cup of tea,and while they waited for the kettle to boil, they wanderedoff along the shore of the lake, and found a little inletwalled with willows, where they could sit on the beach andsee nothing but the wrinkling flash of waves and a serenestretch of sky. They sat there, talking idly, and watchingthe willow leaves turn all their silvery backs to a hesitatingbreeze.Weston listened silently to her plans for "getting busy"with prison reform-when she suddenly broke off:" I don't see that the vote will do much."He gave her an astonished look. "What  This fromyou?"She nodded. "Of course I'm for suffrage, first, last, andall the time! But I'm sort of discouraged about whatwe can accomplish. Life is so big." The old cocksurenesswas gone. The pathos of common sense in Freddy madehim wince. "But I've got to do something," she ended."Miss Eliza told me I was elfish."280
<pb n="281"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Look here! I won't let Cousin Eliza call you names!I reserve that for myself."She laughed. "You've done it, often enough."Arthur Weston tickled the sleeping Zip and whistled."What do you suppose Laura told me the other day?"Fred said. "She said that 'no woman really knew whatlife meant unless she had a baby.' She said having ababy was like coming out of prison-because 'self' isa prison. Rather tall talk for little Laua, wasn't it?""Any of the great human experiences are keys to ourprison-house," he said."True enough," she agreed; then, abruptly, her owngreat experience spoke: "Isn't it queer? I rather dislikeHoward.""It's unreasonable. He's the same old Howard--amighty decent chap.""He's not-what I supposed he was.""Well, that's your fault, not his. You dressed him upin your ideas; when he got into his own clothes, youdidn't like him. Howard never pretended to be any-thing he wasn't.""Yes! Yes, he didl" she said, with sudden agitation."He used to-listen to me.""Good heavens, don't hold that up against himl Don'tI listen to you?""Oh, but you never let me think you agree with melI always know you don't.""He agrees far more than I do.""No," she said, with a somber look. "He just let metalk. He didn't care. The things that were real to meint
<pb n="282"/>
THE RISING TIDEweren't real to him. His real things were-what's happen-ing now. The baby, and Laura. Is it so with all of you?Don't you ever care with your minds?"He stopped tickling Zip, and looked out over the lakewith narrowing eyes; after a while he said, gently:"I think the caring with the mind comes second. Whena man falls in love, the mind has nothing to do with it.Sometimes it reinforces the heart, so to speak; when thathappens, you have the perfect marriage-which isn't aw-fully common. It's apt to be just the heart; which getspretty dull after a while. But just the head is arid.""He would have found just my head,-arid?" shepondered.He looked straight at her, and said, quietly: "I thinkhe would."There was a long pause."Was it head, or heart, with you?" she said."It's both," he said.She gave him a puzzled look: "Why, you don't meanthat you care for that horrid Kate, still?"He smiled, and looked off over the water."You are very stupid, Fred."She was plainly perplexed. "I don't understand?""That's why I say you are stupid."His face was turned away from her; he was breakinga dead twig into inch-long pieces, and carefully arrangingthem in a precise fagot on his knee; she saw, with alittle shock of surprise, that his fingers were trembling." Why, Arthur I"bhe began,-and stopped short, the colorrising slowly to her forehead. He gave her a quick look.282
<pb n="283"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Whyr' she said again, faintly, "you don't mean--you're not-?"He laughed, opening his hands in a gesture of amusedand hopeless assent "I am," he said, and flung the tinyfagot out on the water.Fred dropped her chin on her fists and watched thetwigs dancing off over the waves. They were both silent;then she said, frowning, and pausing a little between herwords as if trying to take in their full meaning:-"Youare in love with me.""Has it just struck you?""How could it strie me-that you would care for agirl like met""Considering your intelligene, you ae stonishinglyobtuse, at times. I couldn't care for any other kind ofgirl. Or for any girl, except your'"      Miss El  said someting that made me wonder if ..But I couldn't believe it. I thought that sort of thingwasover for you. I never dreamed of-""Oh, well! don't dream of it now. Of course it doesn'tmake a particle of difference. I didn't mean to speak ofit; it sort of broke loose," he ended, in rueful onfession.Fred was silent.Arthur Weston, hiding the tremor that was tingling allthrough him, began to talk easily, of anything-Zip, theweather, whether Miss Carter could be induced to recon-sider her annual resignation; "It would be very hard onMrs. Payton to lose her," he said."Well," Frederica said, slowly, "I don't see any reasonwhy I shouldn't marry you."283
<pb n="284"/>
THE RISING TIDEHe caught his breath; then struck his hand on hers."You're a good sport! I take back my accusation thatyou weren't. I could name several reasons why youshouldn't marry me.""Name them.""Fred, look here; thisis a serious business with me. Ican't talk about it."" I want to talk about it. I'd like to know your reasons.""To begin with-age."She nodded. "In years you are older. But I'm notyoung any more."The water stung in his eyes; she was right-she wasnot "young" now. "The next reason," he went on, with-out looking at her, "is that you are not in love with me."She thought that over: "But I am fond of you.""That won't do for marriage.""It's more than just fondness with you?" she asked,doubtfully.He caught her hand, kissed it, and flung it from him."Come!" he said, harshly, "let's go home!" He rose, butshe did not move."Do you love me?" she insisted, looking up at him.He was silent. When he spoke his voice was rough withsuffering. "I love you as much ... as I can. But it'snot worth the taking. I know that. I wouldn't ask youto take it. You ought to have-fire and gold! I spentmy gold ten years ago; and the fire burned itself out.Don't talk about it. I feel like lead, sometimes, com-pared with you. But I'm not adamant."She got on her feet, and stood looking out over the284
<pb n="285"/>
THE RISING TIDE*lake. For a long while neither of them spoke. Then shesaid: "Arthur, I'm not in love with anybody else. Ican't imagine, now, how I ever thought I wasl""You will be in love with somebody else one of thesedays."She shook her head. "No; that's all over. There isno fire and gold in me, either. Something-was killed,I think.""It will come to life."She gave a little gasp: "No. It's dead. But what isleft is-well, it isn't bad, what's left. Sometimes," shesaid, with sudden sweet gaiety, "sometimes I think it'sbetter than what Howard and Laura havel""No, it isn't," he said, sadly."I wonder," she pondered, "if I could have been...like Laura? She hasn't a thought except for the babyand Howard. They are the center of Life to her,--whichis all right, I suppose. But they are it's crcumferene,too; which seems to me dreadfully cramping. I nevercould be like that."He smiled, in spite of himself. "Nature is a prettybig thing, Fred; when you hold your own child in yourarms-" he stopped short. "Life is bigger than theories,"he said, in a low voice.She nodded: "I know what you mean. But I nevercould be a fool, Arthur.""I think," he said, and again something in his voicemade her catch her breath; "I think you could be,-atmoments.""Better not count on it," she said; "but if you want285
<pb n="286"/>
THE RISING TIDEme, in spite of my 'arid' head-you can take me!  Ofourse, just for a minute, when I wrung it from you thatyou-cared, I was rather stunned, because I didn't believeMiss Eliza knew. But on the whole, I think-I'd like it."She smiled at him, and her eyes brimmed with affection."You see, we're friends; and you never bore me. Howardwould have bored me awfully. So-I will marry you,Arthur."He was silent. "Rather hard," she said, misciievously,"to have to offer myself tw-""Stop!" he said; "don't say things like thatr'"Well, then-" she began; but he lifted a silencinghand:"My dear, my dear, I love you too much to marryyou."Why, then," she said, simply "you love me, it seemsto me, enough to marry me. Don't you see?"He looked at her with hungry eyes. "I think I amman enough to save you from myself," he said; "but don't-don't tempt me too far!" ...
<pb n="287"/>
CHAPTER XXVIITHAT was in September. It was the first of Decemberwhen Howard Maitland came leaping up-stairs, twosteps at a time, and burst into the nursery, so chock-fullof news that he could hardly wait to see the way Betty'stoes would grip your finger if you put it on the sole ofher pink foot."Who do you suppose is engaged?""Jack McKnight," Laura said; "Howard, kiss herlittle neck, right under her ear."He kissed it, and said, "Nol Not McKnight. Youwouldn't guess in a hundred years!""Well, then, you'd better tell me. See, Father, she'ssmiling! Howard, I think she's really a very distinguised-looking baby; don't you?""She looks like her ma, so of course she is!""Nonsense! She's the image of you. What do youthink? When I went down to luncheon, Sarah says sheturned her head right around to watch me go out of theroom.""Goshl She'll be reading Browning nextI Laura-whydon't you rise about the engagement? You'll screamwhen I tell you.""Well, tell me."287
<pb n="288"/>
THE RISING TIDE"Fred Payton and-""What!""Hold on. I've not begun to holler yet. And-oldWeston.""What!""I thought you'd sit up.""Howard! I don't believe it.""It's true. I met Mrs. Payton, and she told me. Shekept me standing on the corner for a quarter of an hourwhile she explained that she was going to do up herChristmas presents now, so she could get the house inorder for the wedding. It's to be in January. The en-gagement comes out to-morrow. It's been cooking sinceSeptember, but they didn't really tie up until last week.I'm pledged to secrecy, but your Aunt Nelly said I could tell you.""I never was so astonished in my life!" Laura gasped."I was-surprised, myself," Howard said."Well," said Laura, "I'm glad poor old Fred is going tobe married-but how can she! Of course I know he'sbeen gone on her for ages; but I don't see how he daredto propose to her-he's old enough to be her father!Maybe she took pity on him and proposed to him," Laura declared, giggling."The baby has a double chin," her husband said, hur-riedly."Fred converted him to suffrage last summer," Laurasaid; "that showed which way the wind was blowing."Howard stopped tickling his daughter's neck, and frowned, as if trying to remember something. "Westona288
<pb n="289"/>
THE RISING TIDEa suffragist? That's interesting  Leighton-you remem-ber?-the man who went to the Philippines with me?"Laura nodded abstractedly."Well, he said that if a man was a suffragist it wasbecause he was either in the cradle or the grave. He saidthe man of affairs was bored to extinction by the wholehullabaloo business. He considered me in the cradle; soI suppose he'd say that Weston-""Mr. Weston may be in the grave, but you're not in*the cradle," Laura interrupted, affronted; "you are thefather of a family!""Well, to be candid, I'm not crazy about suffrage,"Howard confessed, and was pummeled by his baby's fists,carefully directed by the maternal hand."I'm ashamed of youl Betty and I are going to walkin the parade, and you shall carry a banner.""Thanks so much; I fear business will call me to Phila-delphia that day. Too badl""Freddy and Mr. Westonl" Laura repeated; "well,I do't understand it!""Neither do I," said her husband. He walked over tothe window and stood with his hands in his pockets,looking out into the rain; behind him he heard the nurserydoor open, and Laura's contented voice:"No, Sarah, I don't need you. I'm going to put her tobed myself. You go down and have your supper. Justput her little nightie on the fender before you go, so itwill be nice and warm." Then the door dosed again, andhe could hear Laura mumbling in the baby's neck:"Sweetyl Mother lovesl Put little hanny into the289
<pb n="290"/>
THE RISING TIDEsleeve. ... Oh, Howard, look at her! Did you ever seeanything so killing? Howard, just think! Fred told meonce that she was going to have a trained nurse for herchildren. Well, she'll know better when she has 'emlOoo-oo-seetyl--don't pull mother's hair " The firelitwarmth, the little night-gown scorching on the fender,Laura in the low chair, his child's head on her breast-the young man, staring out into the rain and darkness,felt something tighten in his throat. Life was so perfect!There, behind him, by the hearth, in warm security, werehis two Treasures-to be cared for, and guarded, andmade happy. He lived only to stand between them andFate. His very flesh and blood were theirs! "I wouldn'tlet the wind blow on them!" he thought, fiercely. ButFred Payton wouldn't let anybody stand between herand the gales of life. He couldn't imagine Arthur Westonprotecting Fred. Imagine any man trying to take careof Fred! "She'd be taking care of him, the first thinghe'd know!. Still, I take off my hat to her, every time.She's big."Down in the bottom of his heart was a queer uneasiness:he was not "big," himself; "I am satisfied just to be happy;Fred wants something more than that. She's more worth-while than I am," he thought, humbly. He turned andlooked at the two by the fire, then came over, and, kneel-ing down, took his World into his arms."Oh, Laura!" he said; he rested his head on his wife's shoulder, and felt the baby's silky hair against his lips.l"Laura, how perfect life is! I'm so happy, I'm frightenedl-and I don't deserve it. Fred Payton isworth six of me*" 290
<pb n="291"/>
THE RISING TIDELaura gave a little squeal. "As if any girl was as goodas you! Besides, poor, dear Freddy-nobody appreciatesher more than I do, but Howard, you know perfectly wellthat she is-I mean she isn'--I mean, well, you know?Poor Fred, she's perfectly fine, but nobody except some-body like Mr. Weston would want to marry her, becauseshe is awfully bossy. And a man doesn't like a bossywoman, now does her'"You bet he doesn't' Howard said. "But I take myhat off to Fred.""Oh, of course," said Laura."Thank God, she's got a man to keep her in order"said Mr. William Childs."What shall we give her for a wedding-present?" Mrs.Childs ruminated."Give Weston a switch!" said Billy-boy."I shall miss her terribly," said Mrs. Payton; "I don'tknow how I'm going to get along without her." Her liptrembled and she looked at her mother, who was runinga furtive, white-gloved finger across Mr. Andrew Payton'smarble toga. "Oh, yes; it isn't dusted," Mrs. Paytonsighed; "you can't get servants to dust anything now-adays""Fred will make 'em dust " Mrs. Holmes said, with sat-isfaction. "All Fred needs is to be married. MissEliza Graham told me that she had gumption. I saidhe had gumption, to get her!"201
<pb n="292"/>
THE RISING TIDE"I wonder if he knows about her affair with Laura'shusband," Miss Spencer ruminated. "Some one ought'to tell him, just out of kindness." (And the very next day an anonymous letter did tell him, for which he wasduly grateful.) "I hope she will make you happy," Miss Mary Grahamtold her cousin, sighing."Well, Arthur will make her happy," Miss Eliza said, decidedly; "and that's what he cares about! As for her imaking him happy, it will be his own fault if she doesn't.She'll interest you, Arthur-that's what a man like youwants.""I'm to be 'amused,' am I?" Arthur Weston said,grimly. "But suppose I don't 'amuse' her?" And asthe older sister went out to the door with him to say good-by, he added: "Am I a thief? Of course, I've gotthe best of the bargain."She did not contradict him. "I think," she said, herface full of pain and pity, "that Fred has got the very best'bargain that, being Fred, she could possibly get.""No!" he said, "you're wrong! But pray God she^never finds it out."He did not mean to let her find it out But that afternoon when he went into No. r5 for htea and for a chance to look at Frederica, and tease her'and feel her frank arm over his shoulder, he was very siletThey were in the sitting-room, Mrs. Payton havingfully withdrawn to the entry outside of Morty's room"When I was a young lady," she told Miss Carter,"2ga92
<pb n="293"/>
THE RISING TIDEused to receive Mr. Payton in the back parlor, and Mamaalways sat in the front parlor. But Mama was very old-fashioned-I believe in the new ideasl And then, afterall, Mr. Weston is so much older than Freddy-oh, dearmef What a blessing it was to have him fall in love withher!""Mother is going round," Fred told her lover, as shehanded him his tea, "saying, 'Now lettest thou thy ser-vant... I' She's so ecstatic over our engagement.""I'm rather ecstatic myself," he said; "Fred-I am ahighway robber.""Be still" she said; and gave him'another lump ofsugar."I love you," he said. "But you-no, it isn't fair; itisn't fair."She took his teacup from him and snuggled down be-side him; "I'm satisfied," she said.The sense.of her content stabbed him. She ought tohave so much more than content. He had told her sooften enough, in those two months of standing out againsthis own heart; he told her so when, at last, he yielded.But when he said it now, she would not listen. "I tellyou,rm satisfiedI" She dropped her head on his shoulder,and hummed a little to herself.How was a man to break through such content!"But I will!" he told himslf.THB END
