<pb> <!-- could not determine page number --> These images produced excellent results. No garbling, and no clipping of the edges.23456<pb n="7 CHRISTMAS TALES"/><head>THE TRUTH, THE WHOLE TRUTH,<lb/><hi rend="smallcaps">AND</hi><lb/>NOTHING BUT THE TRUTH.</head><pb n="8 CHRISTMAS TALES"/><pb n="9 CHRISTMAS TALES"/><head>THE TRUTH, THE WHOLE TRUTH,<lb/><hi rend="smallcaps">AND</hi><lb/>NOTHING BUT THE TRUTH.</head><milestone unit="section" rend="line"/>MRS. DE WYNT TO MRS. MONTRESOR."18, ECCLESTON SQUARE,"May 5th."MY DEAREST CECILIA,"TALK of the friendships of Orestes and Pylades, of Julie and Claire, what are they to urs? Did Pylades ever go ventre d terre, half ver London on a day more broiling than any ut an dme damnie could even imagine, in order hat Orestes might be comfortably housed for the eason Did Claire ever hold sweet converse ith from fifty to one hundred house agents, in<pb n="10 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>rder that Julie might have three windows to her rawing-room and a pretty portz're? You see I m determined not to be done out of my full eed of gratitude."Well, my friend, I had no idea till yesterday how closely we were packed in this great moky bee-hive, as tightly as herrings in a arrel. Don't be frightened, however. By dint f squeezing and crowding, we have managed to ake room for two more herrings in our barrel, nd those two are yourself and your other self, .e. your husband. Let me begin at the beginning. After having looked over, I verily believe, every undesirable residence in West London; after having seen nothing intermediate etween what was suited to the means of a duke, nd what was suited to the needs of a chimneysweep; after having felt bed-ticking, and explored itchen-ranges till my brain reeled under my accumulated experience, I arrived at about half-<pb n="11 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ast five yesterday afternoon at 32,--Street, May Fair.\"'Failure No. 253, I don't doubt,' I said to yself, as I toiled up the steps with my soul thirst for afternoon tea, and feeling as ill-tempered as you please. So much for my spirit of rophecy. Fate, I have noticed, is often fond of ontradicting us flat, and giving the lie to our ittle predictions. Once inside, I thought I had ot into a small compartment of Heaven by istake. Fresh as a daisy, clean as a cherry, right as a seraph's face, it is all these, and a undred more, only that my limited stock of imiles is exhausted. Two drawing-rooms as retty as ever woman crammed with people she id not care two straws about; white curtains ith rose-coloured ones underneath, festooned n the sweetest way; marvellously, immorally ecoming, my dear, as I ascertained entirely for ou benefit, in the mirrors, of which there are<pb n="12 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>bout a dozen and a half; Persian mats, easy hairs, and lounges suited to every possible physical conformation, from the Apollo Belvedere o Miss Biffin; and a thousand of the important ittle trivialities that make up the sum of a oman's life: ormolu garden gates, handleless ups, naked boys and d6collet6 shepherdesses; ot to speak of a family of china pugs, with lue ribbons round their necks, which ought of hemselves to have added fifty pounds a year to he rent. Apropos, I asked, in fear and trembling hat the rent might be-'three hundred pounds  year.' A feather would have knocked me own. I could hardly believe my ears, and made he woman repeat it several times, that there ight be no mistake. To this hour it is a mys ery to me."With that suspiciousness which is so charac eristic of you, you will immediately begin t( int that there must be some terrible unaccount<pb n="13 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ble smell, or some odious inexplicable noise aunting the reception rooms. Nothing of the ind, the woman assured me, and she did not ook as if she were telling stories. You will next uggest-remembering the rose-coloured curtains -that its last occupant was a member of the emi-monde. Wrong again. Its last occupant as an elderly and unexceptionable Indian officer, ithout a liver, and with a most lawful wife. They did not stay long, it is true, but then, as he housekeeper told me, he was a deplorable old ypochondriac, who never could bear to stay a ortnight in any one place. So lay aside that cepticism, which is your besetting sin, and give nfeigned thanks to St. Brigitta, or St. Gengulpha, r St. Catherine of Sienna, or whoever is your utelar saint, for having provided you with a alace at the cost of a hovel, and fof having sent' ou such an invaluable friend as"Your attached T T'07 A Ou TTi'n> XT.r- ))<pb n="14 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"P.S.-I am so sorry I shall not be in town o witness your first raptures, but dear Artie ooks so pale and thin and tall after the hooping-cough, that I am sending him off at once o the sea, and as I cannot bear the child out f my sight, I am going into banishment likewise."<pb n="15 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>MRS. MONTRESOR TO MRS. DE WYNT."32,-STREET, MAY FAIR,"May i4th."DEAREST BESSY,"WHY did not dear little Artie defer his ooping-cough convalescence, &c., till Augustl It is very odd, to me, the perverse way in which hildren always fix upon the most inconvenient imes and seasons for their diseases. Here we re installed in our Paradise, and have searched igh and low, in every hole and corner, for the erpent, without succeeding in catching a glimpse f his spotted tail. Most things in this world are isappointing, but 32,--Street, May Fair, is not. The mystery of the rent is still a mystery. I have een for my first ride in the row this morning: y horse was a little fidgety; I am half afraid<pb n="16 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>hat my nerve is not what it was. I saw heaps f people I knew. Do you recollect Florence Watson? What a wealth of red hair she had last ear! Well, that same wealth is black as the aven's wing this year! I wonder how people can ake such walking impositions of themselves, on't you? Adela comes to us next week; I am o glad. It is dull driving by oneself of an afternoon; and I always think that one young woman lone in a brougham, or with only a dog beside er, does not look good. We sent round our ards a fortnight before we came up, and have een already deluged with callers. Considering hat we have been two years exiled from civilized ife, and that London memories are not generally f the longest, we shall do pretty well, I think. Ralph Gordon came to see me on Sunday; he is n the--th Hussars now. He has grown up such  dear fellow, and so good-looking! Just my tyle, large and fair and whiskerless! Most men<pb n="17 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>owadays make themselves as like monkeys, or Scotch terriers, as they possibly can. I intend to e quite a mother to him. Dresses are gored to s indecent an extent as ever; short skirts are ampant. I am so sorry; I hate them. They ake tall women look lank, and short ones insignificant. A knock! Peace is a word that ight as well be expunged from one's London ictionary."Yours affectionately,"CECILIA MONTRESOR." Tales for Chriistas Eve. 2<pb n="18 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>MRS. D)E Wl\'NT' ) TO RS. MONTR''SO.L"TH'IE IOR) WAI) NI), IO\VER, ' '_lay l8/A/."DEAREST CECI I A,"You will perceive that I am about to devote nly one small sheet of note-paper to you. This s from no dearth of time, Heaven knows! time s a drug in the market here, but from a total earth of ideas. Any ideas that I ever have, ome to me from without, from external objects; I am not clever enough to generate any within yself. My life here is not an eminently suggestive one. It is spent in digging with a wooden pade, and eating prawns. Those are my employments, at least; my relaxation is going down to he Pier, to see the Calais boat come in. When ne is miserable oneself, it is decidedly con-<pb n="19 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>olatory to see some one more miserable still; nd wretched and bored, and reluctant vegetable s I am, I am not sea-sick. I always feel my pirits rise after having seen that peevish, draggled rocession of blue, green and yellow fellowChristians file past me. There is a wind here lways, in comparison of which the 'wind that ehaved so violently to the corners of Job's house as a mere zephyr. There are heights to climb hich require more daring perseverance than ver Wolfe displayed, with his paltry heights of Abraham. There are glaring white houses, glaring hite roads, glaring white cliffs. If any one knew ow unpatriotically I dJeso e chalk-cliffs of Albion! Having grumbled through my two little ages-I have actually been reduced to writing ery large in order to fill even them-I will send ff my dreary little billet. How I wish I could et into the envelope myself too, and whirl up ith it to dear, beautiful, filthy London. Not 2*<pb n="20 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ore heavily could Madame de Sta;l have sighed or Paris from among the shades of Coppet."Your disconsolate BESSY." % qb *N %*<pb n="21 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>MRS. MONTRESOR TO MRS. DE WYNT."32, --STREET, MAY FAIR,"May 27th."OH, my dearest Bessy, how I wish we were ut of this dreadful, dreadful house! Please on't think me very ungrateful for saying this, fter your taking such pains to provide us with  Heaven upon earth, as you thought."What has happened could, of course, have een neither foretold, nor guarded against, by ny human being. About ten days ago, Benson (my maid) came to me with a very long face, nd said, 'If you please, 'm, did you know that his house was haunted?' I was so startled: you now what a coward I am. I said, 'Good Heavens! No! is it?' 'Well, 'm, I'm pretty nigh sure it is,' he said, and the expression of her countenance<pb n="22 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>as about as lively as an undertaker's; and then he told me that cook had been that morning to rder in groceries from a shop in the neighbourhood, and on her giving the man the direction here to send the things to, he had said, with a ery peculiar smile, 'No. 32,--Street, ehl h'm? I wonder how long you'll stand it; last lot held ut just a fortnight.' He looked so odd that she sked him what he meant, but he only said, 'Oh! othing; only that parties never did stay long at 32. He had known parties go in one day, and ut the next, and during the last four years he ad never known any remain over the month.' Feeling a good deal alarmed by this information, he naturally inquired the reason; but he declined o give it, saying that if she had not found it ut for herself, she had much better leave it lone, as it would only frighten her out of her its; and on her insisting and urging him, she ould only extract from him, that the house had<pb n="23 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>uch a villanously bad name, that the owners ere glad to let it for a mere song. You know ow firmly I believe in apparitions, and what an nutterable fear I have of them; anything material, tangible, that I can lay hold of-anything of he same fibre, blood, and bone as myself, I ould, I think, confront bravely enough; but the ere thought of being brought face to face with he 'bodiless dead,' makes my brain unsteady. The moment Henry came in, I ran to him, and old him; but he pooh-poohed the whole story, aughed at me, and asked whether we should urn out of the prettiest house in London, at the ery height of the season, because a grocer said t had a bad name. Most good things that had ver been in the world had had a bad name in heir day; and, moreover, the man had probably  motive for taking away the house's character, ome friend for whom he coveted the charming ituation and the low rent. He derided my<pb n="24 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>'babyish fears,' as he called them, to such an xtent that I felt half ashamed, and yet not quite omfortable, either; and then came the usual ush of London engagements, during which one as no time to think of anything but how to peak, and act, and look for the moment then resent. Adela was to arrive yesterday, and in he morning our weekly hamper of flowers, fruit, nd vegetables arrived from home. I always ress the flower-vases myself, servants are so asteless; and as I was arranging them, it occurred o me-you know Adela's passion for flowers-to arry up one particular cornucopia of roses and ignonette and set it on her toilet-table, as a leasant surprise for her. As I came downstairs, I had seen the housemaid-a fresh, round-faced ountry girl--go into the room, which was being repared for Adela, with a pair of sheets that he had been airing over her arm. I went upstairs very slowly, as my cornucopia was full of<pb n="25 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ater, and I was afraid of spilling some. I urned the handle of the bedroom-door and entered, keeping my eyes fixed on my flowers, to ee how they bore the transit, and whether any f them had fallen out. Suddenly a sort of hiver passed over me; and feeling frightened1 did not know why-I looked up quickly. The irl was standing by the bed, leaning forward a ittle with her hands clenched in each other, igid, every nerve tense; her eyes, wide open, tarting out of her head, and a look of unutterable stony horror in them; her cheeks and mouth ot pale, but livid as those of one that died while ago in mortal pain. As I looked at her, er lips moved a little, and an awful hoarse oice, not like hers in the least, said, 'Oh! my God, I have seen it!' and then she fell down uddenly, like a log, with a heavy noise. Hearing the noise, loudly audible all through the thin alls and floors of a London house, Benson came<pb n="26 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>unning in, and between us we managed to lift er on to the bed, and tried to bring her to herself by rubbing her feet and hands, and holding trong salts to her nostrils. And all the while e kept glancing over our shoulders, in a vague old terror of seeing some awful, shapeless apparition. Two long hours she lay in a state of tter unconsciousness. Meanwhile Harry, who ad been down to his club, returned. At the nd of the two hours we succeeded in bringing er back to sensation and life, but only to make he awful discovery that she was raving mad. She became so violent that it required all the ombined strength of Harry and Phillips (our utler) to hold her down in the bed. Of course, e sent off instantly for a doctor, who, on her rowing a little calmer towards evening, removed er in a cab to his own house. He has just een here to tell me that she is now pretty quiet, ot from any return to sanity, but from sheer<pb n="27 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>xhaustion. We are, of course, utterly in the ark as to what she saw, and her ravings are far oo disconnected and unintelligible to afford us he slightest clue. I feel so completely shattered nd upset by this awful occurrence, that you will xcuse me, dear, I'm sure, if I write incoherently. One thing, I need hardly tell you, and that is, hat no earthly consideration would induce me o allow Adela to occupy that terrible room. I hudder and run by quickly as I pass the door."Yours, in great agitation,"CECILIA."<pb n="28 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>MRS. DE WYNT TO MRS. MONTRESOR."THll. LORI) WARDEN, I)OVER,"A/I)y 28//1."DEAREST CECILIA,"YOURS just come; how very dreadful! But I am still unconvinced as to the house being in ault. You know I feel a sort of godmother to t, and responsible for its good behaviour. Don't ou think that what the girl had might have een a fit? Why not? I myself have a cousin ho is subject to seizures of the kind, and immediately on being attacked his whole body ecomes rigid, his eyes glassy and staring, his omplexion livid, exactly as in the case you escribe. Or, if not a fit, are you sure that she<pb n="29 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>as not been subject to fits of madness? Please e sure and ascertain whether there is not nsanity in her family. It is so common nowa-days, and so much on the increase, that othing is more likely. You know my utter isbelief in ghosts. I am' convinced that most f them, if run to earth, would turn out about s genuine as the famed Cock Lane one. But ven allowing the possibility, nay, the actual nquestioned existence of ghosts in the abstract, s it likely that there should be anything to be een so horribly fear-inspiring, as to send a erfectly sane person in one instant raving mad, hich you, after three weeks' residence in the ouse, have never caught a glimpse of? According to your hypothesis, your whole household ught, by this time, to be stark, staring mad. Let me implore you not to give way to a panic hich may, possibly, probably prove utterly roundless. Oh, how I wish I were with you, to<pb n="30 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ake you listen to reason! Artie ought to e the best prop ever womari's old age was urnished with, to indemnify me for all he and is hooping-cough have made me suffer. Write mmediately, please, and tell me how the poor atient progresses. Oh, had I the wings of a ove! I shall be on wires till I hear again."Yours,"BESSY."<pb n="31 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>MRS. MONTRESOR TO MRS. IE WYNT."No. 5, BOLTON STREET, PICCADILLY," J7me I2th."DEAREST BESSY,"You will see that we have left that terrible, ateful, fatal house. How I wish we had scaped from it sooner! Oh, my dear Bessy, I hall never be the same woman again if I live to e a hundred. Let me try to be coherent, and o tell you connectedly what has happened. And first, as to the housemaid, she has been emoved to a lunatic asylum, where she remains n much the same state. She has had several ucid intervals, and during them has been losely, pressingly questioned as to what it was<pb n="32 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>he saw; but she has maintained an absolute, opeless silence, and only shudders, moans, and ides her face in her hands when the subject is roached. Three days ago I went to see her, nd on my return was sitting resting in the rawing-room, before going to dress for dinner, alking to Adela about my visit, when Ralph Gordon walked in. He has always been walking n the last ten days, and Adela has always lushed up and looked happy, poor little cat, henever he made his appearance. He looked ery handsome, dear fellow, just come in from he park in a coat that fitted like a second skin, avender gloves, and a gardenia. He seemed in remendous spirits, and was as sceptical as even ou could be, as to the ghostly origin of Sarah's eizure. 'Let me come here to-night and sleep n that room; do, Mrs. Montresor,' he said, ooking very eager and excited, 'with the gas lit nd a poker, I'll engage to exorcise every demon<pb n="33 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>hat shows his ugly nose; even if I should indDEFINITENEWLINE"'Seven white ghostisses Sitting on seven white postisses.'"'You don't mean really ' I asked, incredulously. 'Don't I? that's all,' he answered emphatically. 'I should like nothing better. Well, is it a argain?' Adela turned quite pale. 'Oh, don't,'she aid, hurriedly, 'please, don't; why should you run uch a risk? How do you know that you might ot be sent mad tool' He laughed very heartily nd coloured a little with pleasure at seeing the nterest she took in his safety. 'Never fear,' he aid, 'it would take more than a whole squadron f departed ones, with the old gentleman at their ead, to send me crazy.' He was so eager, so ersistent, so thoroughly in earnest, that I yielded t last, though with a certain strong reluctance, tles for (Cl',isImas Eve. 3<pb n="34 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>o his entreaties. Adela's blue eyes filled with ears, and she walked away hastily to the conservatory, and stood picking bits of heliotrope to ide them. Nevertheless, Ralph got his own way; t was so difficult to refuse him anything. We ave up all our engagements for the evening, and e did the same with his. At about ten o'clock e arrived, accompanied by a friend and brother fficer, Captain Burton, who was anxious to see he result of the experiment. 'Let me go up at nce,' he said, looking very happy and animated. 'I don't know when I have felt in such good une; a new sensation is a luxury not to be had very day of one's life; turn the gas up as high s it will go; provide a good stout poker, and eave the issue to Providence and me.' We did s he bid. 'It's all ready now,' Henry said, coming downstairs after having obeyed his orders; 'the room is nearly as light as day. Well, good uck to you, old fellow!' 'Good-bye, Miss Bruce,'<pb n="35 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>Ralph said, going over to Adela, and taking her and with a look, half laughing, half sentimentalDEFINITENEWLINE" 'Fare thee well, and if for ever, Then for ever, fare thee well,' hat is my last dying speech and confession. Now ind,' he went on, standing by the table, and ddressing us all; 'if I ring once, don't come. I ay be flurried, and lay hold of the bell without hinking; if I ring twice, come.' Then he went, umping up the stairs three steps at a time, and umming a tune. As for us, we sat in different ttitudes of expectation and listening about the rawing-room. At first we tried to talk a little, ut it would not do; our whole souls seemed to ave passed into our ears. The clock's ticking ounded as loud as a great church bell close to ne's ear. Addy lay on the sofa, with her dear 3*<pb n="36 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ittle white face hidden in the cushions. So we at for exactly an hour; but it seemed like two' ears, and just as the clock began to strike eleven,  sharp ting, ting, ting, rang clear and shrill hrough the house. 'Let us go,' said Addy, tarting up and running to the door. 'Let us o,' I cried too, following her. But Captain Burton stood in the way, and intercepted our rogress. 'No,' he said, decisively, 'you must not o; remember Gordon told us distinctly, if he ang once not to come. I know the sort of ellow he is, and that nothing would annoy him ore than having his directions disregarded.'"'Oh, nonsense!' Addy cried, passionately, 'he would never have rung if he had not seen omething dreadful; do, do let us go!' she ended, lasping her hands. But she was overruled, and e all went back to our seats. Ten minutes ore of suspense, next door to unendurable, I elt a lump in my throat, a gasping for breath;<pb n="37 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>-ten minutes on the clock, but a thousand centuries on our hearts. Then again, loud, sudden, iolent the bell rang! We made a simultaneous ush to the door. I don't think we were one econd flying upstairs. Addy was first. Almost imultaneously she and I burst into the room. There he was, standing in the middle of the floor, igid, petrified, with that same look-that look hat is burnt into my heart in letters of fire-of wful, unspeakable, stony fear on his brave young ace. For one instant he stood thus; then tretching out his arms stiffly before him, he roaned in a terrible, husky voice, 'Oh, my God; I have seen it!' and fell down dead. Yes, dead. Not in a swoon or in a fit, but dead. Vainly we ried to bring back the life to that strong young eart; it will never come back again till that day hen the earth and the sea give up the dead hat are therein. I cannot see the page for the<pb n="38 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ears that are blinding me; he was such a dear ellow! I can't write any more to-day."Your broken-hearted" CECILIA." This is a true story.<pb n="39 CHRISTMAS TALES"/><pb n="40 CHRISTMAS TALES"/><pb n="41 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>[The details of this little story are of course imaginary, ut the main incidents are, to the best of my belief, facts. They happened twenty, or more than twenty years ago.] CHAPTER 1."LET us get a map and see what places look leasantest?" says she."As for that," reply I, "on a map most places ook equally pleasant.""Never mind; get one!" I obey."Do you like the seaside?" asks Elizabeth, ifting her little brown head and her small appy white face from the English sea-coast long which her forefinger is slowly travelling.<pb n="42 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"Since you ask me, distinctly no," reply I, for nce venturing to have a decided opinion of my wn, which during the last few weeks of imbecility I can be hardly said to have had. "I roke my last wooden spade five and twenty ears ago. I have but a poor opinion of cockles -sandy red-nosed things, are not they? and the ir always makes me bilious.""Then we certainly will not go there," says Elizabeth, laughing. "A bilious bridegroom! alliterative but horrible! None of our friends how the least eagerness to lend us their country ouse.""Oh that God would put it into the hearts f men to take their wives straight home, as their athers did," say I, with a cross groan."It is evident, therefore, that we must go omewhere," returns she, not heeding the aspiration contained in my last speech, making her<pb n="43 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>orefinger resume its employment, and reaching Torquay."I suppose so," say I, with a sort of sigh;"for once in our lives we must resign ourselves o having the finger of derision pointed at us by aiters and landlords.""You shall leave your new portmanteau at ome, and I will leave all my best clothes, and obody will guess that we are bride and bridegroom; they will think that we have been married -oh, ever since the world began" (opening her yes very wide). I shake my head. "With an old portmanteau nd in rags we shall still have the mark of the east upon us.""Do you mind much' do you hate being idiculousl" asks Elizabeth, meekly, rather depressed by my view of the case; "because if so, et us go somewhere out of the way, where there ill be very few people to laugh at us."<pb n="44 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"On the contrary," return I, stoutly, "we will etake ourselves to some spot where such as we o chiefly congregate--where we shall be swallowed up and lost in the multitude of our fellowsinners." A pause devoted to reflection. "What o you say to Killarney?" say I, cheerfully."There are a great many fleas there, I believe," replies Elizabeth, slowly; "ilea-bites make arge lumps on me; you would not like me if I ere covered with large lumps." At the hideous ideal picture thus presented o me by my little beloved I relapse into inarticulate idiocy; emerging from which by-and-by, I suggest "The Lakes?" My arm is round her, nd I feel her supple body shiver though it is id July, and the bees are booming about in the till and sleepy noon garden outside."Oh-no-no-not Ihiere!""Why such emphasis?" I ask gaily; "more<pb n="45 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>leas? At this rate, and with this sine qud non, ur choice will grow limited.""Something dreadful happened to me there," he says, with another shudder. "But indeed I id not think there was any harm in it-I never hought anything would come of it.""What the devil was it?" cry I, in a jealous eat and hurry; "what the mischief did you do, nd why have not you told me about it before?""I did not do much," she answers meekly, eeking for my hand, and when found kissing it n timid deprecation of my wrath; "but I was ill -very ill-there; I had a nervous fever. I was n a bed hung with a chintz with a red and reen fern-leaf pattern on it.' I have always ated red and green fern-leaf chintzes ever ince.""It would be possible to avoid the obnoxious ed, would not itl" say I, laughing a little.<pb n="46 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"Where does it lie? Windermere? Ulleswater? Wastwater? Where ""We were at Ulleswater," she says, speaking apidly, while a hot colour grows on her small hite cheeks-"Papa, mamma, and I; and there ame a mesmeriser to Penrith, and we went to ee him-everybody did-and he asked leave to esmerise me-he said I should be such a good edium-and-and-I did not know what it as like. I thought it would be quite good fun --and-and-I let him." She is trembling exceedingly; even the loving pressure of my arms cannot abate her shivering."Well?""And after that I do not remember anything -I believe I did all sorts of extraordinary things hat he told me-sang and danced, and made a ool of myself-but when I came home I was ery ill, very-I lay in bed for five whole weeks,<pb n="47 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>nd-and was off my head, and said odd and icked things that you would not have expected e to say-that dreadful bed! shall I ever orget it?""We will not go to the Lakes," I say, decisively, "and we will not talk any more about esmerism.""That is right," she says, with a sigh of elief, "I try to think about it as little as possible; but sometimes, in the dead black of the ight, when God seems a long way off, and the evil near, it comes back to me so strongly-I eel, do not you know, as if he were theresomewhere in the room, and I must get up and ollow him.""Why should not we go abroadl" suggest I, bruptly turning the conversation."Why, indeed?" cries Elizabeth, recovering er gaiety, while her pretty blue eyes begin to ance. "How stupid of us not to have thought<pb n="48 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>f it before; only :brovad is a big word. IVhla7 broad?""We must be content with something short of Central Africa," I say, gravely, "as 1 think our ne hundred and fifty pounds would hardly take s that far.""Wherever we go, we must buy a dialogue ook," suggests my little bride elect, "and I will earn some phrases before we start.""As for that, the Anglo-Saxon tongue ales one pretty well round the world," reply I, with a feeling of complacent British wagger, putting my hands in my breeches ockets."I)o you fanc) the Rhine?" says Elizabeth, ith a rather timid suggestion; "I know it is the ashion to run it down nowadays, and call it a ocktail river; but -but-after all it cannot be o very contemptible, or 1)yron could not have aid such noble things about it."<pb n="49 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"The casled crag of l)rachcnfels Frowns o'er the wide and winding Rhine, Whose breast of waters broadly swells Between the banks which bear the vine," ay I, spouting. "After all, that proves nothing, or Byron could have made a silk purse out of a ow's ear.""The Rhine will not do then?" says she, resignedly, suppressing a sigh."On the contrary, it will do admirably: it is  cocktail river, and I do not care who says it is ot," reply I, with illiberal positiveness; "but verybody should be able to say so from their wn experience, and not from hearsay: the Rhine et it be, by all means." So the Rhine it is. Tales for C(h ristmas Ere. 4<pb n="50 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>C(IAPTER II. I HAVE got over it; we have both got over it olerably, creditably; but after all, it is a much everer ordeal for a man than a woman, who, ith a bouquet to occupy her hands, and a veil o gently shroud her features, need merely be rettily passive. I am alluding, I need hardly ay, to the religious ceremony of marriage, which I flatter myself I have gone through with a stiff heepishness not unworthy of my country. It is  three-days-old event now, and we are getting sed to belonging to one another, though Elizabeth still takes off her ring twenty times a day o admire its bright thickness; still laughs when<pb n="51 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>he hears herself called "Madame." Three days go, we kissed all our friends, and left them to ake themselves ill on our cake, and criticise ur bridal behaviour, and now we are at Brussels, she and I, feeling oddly, joyfully free rom any chaperone. We have been mildly sightseeing-very mildly, most people would say, but e have resolved not to take our pleasure with he railway speed of Americans, or the hasty adness of our fellow Britons. Slowly and gaily e have been taking ours. To-day we have been o visit Wiertz's pictures. Have you ever seen hem, oh reader? They are known to comparatively few people, but if you have a taste for the nearthly terrible-if you wish to sup full of orrors, hasten thither. We have been peering hrough the appointed peep-hole at the horrible holera picture-the man buried alive by mistake, pushing up the lid of his coffin, and tretching a ghastly face and livid hands out of 4*<pb n="52 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>is winding sheet towards you, while awful greyblue coffins are piled around, and noisome toads nd giant spiders crawl damply about. On first eeing it, I have reproached myself for bringing ne of so nervous a temperament as Elizabeth to ee so haunting and hideous a spectacle; but she s less impressed than I expected-less impressed han I myself am."He is very lucky to be able to get his lid p," she says, with a half-laugh; "we should find t hard work to burst our brass nails, should not el When you bury me, dear, fasten me own very slightly, in case there may be some istake." And now all the long and quiet July evening e have been prowling together about the treets. Brussels is the town of towns for fldnering-have been flattening our noses against the hop windows, and making each other imaginary resents. Elizabeth has not confined herself to<pb n="53 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>magination, however; she has made me buy her  little bonnet with feathers-"in order to look arried," as she says, and the result is such a elicious picture of a child playing at being rown up, having practised a theft on its other's wardrobe, that for the last two hours I ave been in a foolish ecstasy of love and aughter over her and it. We are at the"Bellevue," and have a fine suite of rooms, u premier, evidently specially devoted to the English, to the gratification of whose well-known oyalty the Prince and Princess of Wales are impering from the walls. Is there any one in he three kingdoms who knows his own face as ell as he knows the faces of Albert Victor and Alexandra? The long evening has at last slidden nto night-night far advanced-night melting nto earliest day. All Brussels is asleep. One oment ago I also was asleep, soundly as any og. What is it that has made me take this sud-<pb n="54 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>en, headlong plunge out 6f sleep into wakefulness? Who is it that is clutching at and calling pon me? What is it that is making me struggle istily up into a sitting posture, and try to revive my sleep-numbed senses? A summer night s never wholly dark; by the half light that steals hrough the closed persientnes and open windows I see my wife standing beside my bed; the extremity of terror on her face, and her fingers igging themselves with painful tenacity into my rm."Tighter, tighter!" she is crying, wildly."What are you thinking of? You are letting e go!""Good heavens!" say I, rubbing my eyes, hile my muddy brain grows a trifle clearer. 'What is it? What has happened? Have you ad a nightmare?""You saw him," she says, with a sort of<pb n="55 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>obbing breathlessness; "you know you did! You saw him as well as I.""I!" cry I, incredulously-"not I. Till this econd I have been fast asleep. I saw nothing.""You did!" she cries, passionately. "You now you did. Why do you deny it? You were s frightened as I?""As I live," I answer, solemnly, "I know no ore than the dead what you are talking about; ill you woke me by calling me and catching old of me, I was as sound asleep as the seven leepers.""Is it possible that it can have been a dream?" he says, with a long sigh, for a moment loosing y arm, and covering her face with her hands."But no-in a dream I should have been omewhere else; but I was here-here-on that ed, and he stood there," pointing with her forefinger, "just there, between the foot of it 'and the indow!"<pb n="56 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>She stops, panting."It is all that brute Wiertz," say I, in a fury."I wish I had been buried alive myself, before I had been fool enough to take you' to see his eastly daubs.""Light a candle," she says, in the same reathless way, her teeth chattering with fright."Let us make sure that he is not hidden somewhere in the room.""How could he be?" say I, striking a match;"the door is locked.""He might have got in by the balcony," she nswers, still trembling violently."He would have had to have cut a very large ole in the persiennes," say I, half-mockingly."See, they are intact and well fastened on the nside." She sinks into an arm-chair, and pushes her oose soft hair from her white face."It was a dream then, I suppose?"<pb n="57 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>She is silent for a moment or two, while I ring her a glass of water, and throw a dressinggown round her cold and shrinking form."Now tell me, my little one," I say; coaxingly, sitting down at her feet, "what it waswhat you thought you sawl""Thought I saw!" echoes she, with indignant mphasis, sitting upright, while her eyes sparkle everishly. "I am as certain that I saw him tanding there as I am that I see that candle urning-that I see this chair-that I see ou.""Him! but who is him?" She falls forward on my neck, and buries her ace in my shoulder."That-dreadful-man!" she says, while her hole body is one tremor."What dreadful man?" cry I, impatiently. She is silent."Who was he?"<pb n="58 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"I do not know.""Did you ever see him before?""Oh, no-no, never! I hope to God I may ever see him again!""What was he like?""Come closer to me," she says, laying hold f my hand with her small and chilly fingers;"stay quite near me, and I will tell you,"-after  pause-"he had a nose!""My dear soul," cry I, bursting out with a oud laugh in the silence of the night, "do not ost people have noses? Would not he have een much more dreadful if he had had none?""But it was such a nose!" she says, with perfect trembling gravity."A bottle nose?" suggest I, still cackling."For heaven's sake, don't laugh!" she says, ervously; "if you had seen his face, you would ave been as little disposed to laugh as I.""But his nose?" return I, suppressing my<pb n="59 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>erriment; "what kind of nose was it? See, I am s grave as a judge.""It was very prominent," she answers, in a ort of awe-struck half-whisper, "and very sharply hiselled; the nostrils very much cut out." A ittle pause. "His eyebrows were one straight lack line across his face, and under them his yes burnt like dull coals of fire, that shone and et did. not shine; they looked like dead eyes, unken, half extinguished, and yet sinister.""And what did he do?" ask I, impressed, espite myself, by her passionate earnestness;"when did you first see him?""I was asleep," she said-"at least I thought o-and suddenly I opened my eyes, and he as there-there"-pointing again with trembling inger-"between the window and the bed.""What was he doing? Was he walking bout?""He was standing as still as stone-I never<pb n="60 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>aw any live thing so still-looking at me; he ever called or beckoned, or moved a finger, but is eyes commanded me to come to him, as the yes of the mesmeriser at Penrith did." She tops, breathing heavily. I can hear her heart's oud and rapid beats."And you?" I say, pressing her more closely o my side, and smoothing her troubled hair."I hated it," she cries, excitedly; "I loathed t-abhorred it. I was ice-cold with fear and orror, but-Ifelt myself going to him.""Yes?""And then I shrieked out to you, and you ame running, and caught fast hold of me, and eld me tight at first-quite tight-but presently I felt your hold slacken-slacken-and though I longed to stay with you, though I was mad with right, yet I felt myself pulling strongly away rom you-going to him; and he-he stood here always looking-looking-and then I gave<pb n="61 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ne last loud shriek, and I suppose I awokeand it was a dream!""I never heard of a clearer case of nightmare," say I, stoutly; "that vile Wiertz! I should ike to see his whole Musle burnt by the hands f the hangman to-morrow." She shakes her head. "It had nothing to say o Wiertz; what it meant I do not know, but--""It meant nothing," I answer, reassuringly,"except that for the future we will go and see one but good and pleasant sights, and steer clear f charnel-house fancies."<pb n="62 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>CIhAPTER III. ELIZABETH is now in a position to decide hether the Rhine is a cocktail river or no, for he is on it, and so am I. We are sitting, with n awning over our heads, and little wooden tools under our feet. Elizabeth has a small ailor's hat and blue ribbon on her head. The iver breeze has blown it rather awry; has tangled er plenteous hair; has made a faint pink stain n her pale cheeks. It is some fete day, and the oat is crowded. Tables, countless camp-stools, olumes of black smoke pouring from the funnel, s we steam along. "Nothing to the Caledonian Canal!" cries a burly Scotchman in leggings,<pb n="63 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>peaking with loud authority, and surveying with n air of contempt the eternal vine-clad slopes, hat sound so well, and look so sticky in reality."Cannot hold a candle to it!" A rival bride and ridegroom opposite, sitting together like lovebirds under an umbrella, looking into each other's yes instead of at the Rhine scenery."They might as well have stayed at home, ight not they?" says my wife, with a little air of uperiority. "Come, we are not so bad as that, re we " A storm comes on: hailstones beat slant-wise nd reach us-stone and sting us right under our wning. Everybody rushes down below, and akes the opportunity to feed ravenously. There re few actions more disgusting than eating can e made. A handsome girl close to us-her immaturity evidenced by the two long tails of black air down her back-is thrusting her knife half ay down her throat.<pb n="64 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"Come on deck again," says Elizabeth, disgusted and frightened at this last sight. "The ail was much better than this!" So we return to our camp-stools, and sit alone nder one mackintosh in the lashing storm, with appy hearts and empty stomachs."Is not this better than any luncheon?" asks Elizabeth, triumphantly, while the raindrops hang n her long and curled lashes."Infinitely better," reply I, madly struggling ith the umbrella to prevent its being blown inside out, and gallantly ignoring a species of gnawing sensation at my entrails. The squall clears off by and by, and we go teaming, steaming on past the unnumbered little illages by the water's edge with church spires nd pointed roof, past the countless rocks with heir little pert castles perched on the top of hem, past the tall, stiff poplar rows. The church ells are ringing gaily as we go by. A night-<pb n="65 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ngale is singing from a wood. The black eagle f Prussia droops on the stream behind us, swishswish through the dull green water. A fat woman ho is interested in it, leans over the back of the oat, and by some happy effect of crinoline, displays to her fellow-passengers two yards of thick hite cotton legs. She is, fortunately for herself, nconscious of her generosity. The day steals on; at every stopping place ore people come on. There is hardly elbow oom; and, what is worse, almost everybody is runk. Rocks, castles, villages, poplars, slide by, hile the paddles chur always the water, and he evening draws greyly on. At Bingen a party f big blue Prussian soldiers, very drunk, "glorious" as Tam o' Shanter, come and establish hemselves close to us. They call for Lager Beer; alk at the tip-top of their strong voices; two of hem begin to spar; all seem inclined' to sing. Elizabeth is frightened. We are two hours late Tales for Christmas Eve. 5<pb n="66 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>n arriving at Biebrich. It is half an hour more efore we can get ourselves and our luggage into  carriage and set off along the winding road to Wiesbaden. "The night is chilly, but not dark." There is only a little shabby bit of a moon, but t shines as hard as it can. Elizabeth is quite orn out, her tired head droops in uneasy sleep n my shoulder. Once she wakes up with a start."Are you sure that it meant nothing?" she sks, looking me eagerly in my face; "do people ften have such dreams?""Often, often," I answer, reassuringly."I am always afraid of falling asleep now," he says, trying to sit upright and keep her heavy yes open, "for fear of seeing him standing there gain. Tell me, do you think I shall? Is there ny chance, any probability of it?""None, none!" We reached Wiesbaden at last, and drive up<pb n="67 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>o the H6tel des Quatre Saisons. By this time t is full midnight. Two or three men are standing about the door. Morris, the maid, has got ut-so have I, and I am holding out my hand o Elizabeth, when I hear her give one piercing cream, and see her with ash-white face and starting eyes point with her fore-fingerDEFINITENEWLINE"There he is!-there!-there!" I look in the direction indicated, and just atch a glimpse of a tall figure, standing half in he shadow of the night, half in the gaslight rom the hotel. I have not time for more than ne cursory glance, as I am interrupted by a ry from the bystanders, and turning quickly ound, am just in time to catch my wife, who alls in utter insensibility into my arms. We arry her into a room on the ground floor; it is mall, noisy, and hot, but it is 'the nearest at and. In about an hour'she re-opens her eyes. 5*<pb n="68 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>A strong shudder makes her quiver from head to oot."Where is he?" she says, in a terrified hisper, as her senses come slowly back. "He s somewhere about somewhere near. I feel hat he is!""My dearest child, there is no one here but Morris and me," I answer, soothingly. "Look or yourself. See." I take one of the candles and light up each omer of the room in succession."You saw him!" she says, in trembling hurry, itting up and clenching her hands together. "I now you did-I pointed him out to you-you annot say that it was a dream tIls time.""I saw two or three ordinary looking men as e drove up," I answer, in a commonplace, atter-of-fact tone. "I did not notice anything emarkable about any of them; you know the<pb n="69 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>act is, darling, that you have had nothing to eat ll day, nothing but a biscuit, and you are overwrought, and fancy things.""Fancy!" echoes she, with strong irritation."How you talk! Was I ever one to fancy things? I tell you that as sure as I sit here-as sure as ou stand there-I saw him-him--the man I aw in my dream, if it was a dream. There was ot a hair's breadth of difference between them -and he was looking at me-looking--" She breaks off into hysterical sobbing."My dear child!" say I, thoroughly alarmed, nd yet half angry, "for God's sake do not work ourself up into a fever: wait till to-morrow, and e will find out who he is, and all about him; ou yourself will laugh when we discover that he s some harmless bagman.""Why not now?" she says, nervously; "why annot you find out now-this minute?"<pb n="70 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"Impossible! Everybody is in bed! Wait till o-morrow, and all will be cleared up." The morrow comes, and I go about the hotel, nquiring. The house is so full, and the data I ave to go upon are so small, that for some time I have great difficulty in making it understood to hom I am alluding. At length one waiter seems o comprehend."A tall and dark gentleman, with a pronounced and very peculiar nose? Yes; there has een such a one, certainly, in the hotel, but he eft at 'grand matin' this morning; he remained nly one night.""And his name?" The garcon shakes his head. "That is unknown, monsieur; he did not inscribe it in the isitor's book.""What countryman was he?" Another shake of the head. "He spoke German, but it was with a foreign accent."<pb n="71 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"Whither did he gol" That also is unknown. Nor can I arrive at ny more facts about him.<pb n="72 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>CHAPTER IV. A FORTNIGHT has passed; we have been hither nd thither; now we are at Lucerne. Peopled ith better inhabitants, Lucerne might well do or Heaven. It is drawing towards eventide, and Elizabeth and I are sitting hand in hand on a uiet bench, under the shady linden trees, on a igh hill up above the lake. There is nobody o see us, so we sit peaceably hand in hand. Up y the still and solemn monastery we came, with ts small and narrow windows, calculated to inder the holy fathers from promenading curious yes on the world, the flesh, and the devil, tripping past them in blue gauze veils: below us<pb n="73 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>rass and green trees, houses with high-pitched oofs, little dormer-windows, and shutters yet reener than the grass; below us the lake in its ippleless peace, calm, quiet, motionless as Bethesda's pool before the coming of the troubling ngel."I'said it was too good to last," say I, doggedly, "did not I, only yesterday? Perfect peace, erfect sympathy, perfect freedom from nagging orries-when did such a state of things last ore than two days?" Elizabeth's eyes are idly fixed on a little teamer, with a stripe of red along its side, and  tiny puff of smoke from its funnel, gliding long and cutting a narrow white track on Lucerne's sleepy surface."This is the fifth false alarm of the gout aving gone to his stomach within the last two ears," continue I, resentfully. "I declare to<pb n="74 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>Heaven, that if it has not really gone there this ime, I'll cut the whole concern." Let no one cast up their eyes in horror, magining that it is my father to whom I am hus alluding; it is only a great uncle by marriage, in consideration of whose wealth and ague promises I have dawdled professionless hrough twenty-eight years of my life."You must not go," says Elizabeth, giving my and an imploring squeeze. "The man in the Bible said, 'I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come;' why should it be a less valid xcuse now a daysl""If I recollect rightly, it was considered rather  poor one even then," reply I, dryly. Elizabeth is unable to contradict this, she herefore only lifts two pouted lips (Monsieur Taine objects to the redness of English women's ouths, but I do not) to be kissed, and says,"Stay." I am good enough to comply with her<pb n="75 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>nspoken request, though I remain firm with egard to her spoken one."My dearest child," I say, with an air of orldly experience and superior wisdom, "kisses re very good things-in fact there are few better -but one cannot live upon them.""Let us try," she says, coaxingly."I wonder which would get tired first?" I ay, laughing. But she only goes on pleading,"Stay, stay.""How can I stay?" I cry, impatiently; "you alk as if I wanted to go! Do you think it is ny pleasanter to me to leave you than to you to e left? But you know his disposition, his rancorous resentment of fancied neglects. For the ake of two days' indulgence, must I throw away hat will keep us in ease and plenty to the end f our days?""I do not care for plenty," she says, with a ittle petulant gesture. "I do not see that rich<pb n="76 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>eople are any happier than poor ones. Look t the St. Clairs; they have t4o,ooo a-year, and he is a miserable woman, perfectly miserable, ecause her face gets red after dinner.""There will be no fear of our faces getting ed after dinner," say I, grimly, "for we shall have o dinner for them to get red after." A pause. My eyes stray away to the mountains. Pilatus on the right, with his jagged peak nd slender snow-chains about his harsh neck; ill after hill rising silent, eternal, like guardian pirits standing hand in hand around their child, he lake. As I look, suddenly they have all lushed, as at some noblest thought, and over all heir sullen faces streams an ineffable rosy joy-- a olemn and wonderful effulgence, such as Israel aw reflected from the features of the Eternal in heir prophet's transfigured eyes. The unutterable eace and stainless beauty of earth and sky seem o lie softly on my soul. "Would God I could<pb n="77 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>tay! Would Gbd all life could be like this!" I ay, devoutly, and the aspiration has the reverent arnestness of a prayer."Why do you say,' Would God'"' she cries, assionately, "when it lies with yourselfl Oh y dear love," gently sliding her hand through y arm, and lifting wetly-beseeching eyes to my ace, "I do not know why I insist upon it so uch-I cannot tell you myself-I dare say I eem selfish and unreasonable-but I feel as if our going now would be the end of all things -as if--." She breaks off suddenly."My child," say I, thoroughly distressed, but till determined to have my own way, "you talk s if I were going for ever and a day; in a week, t the outside, I shall be back, and then you will hank me for the very thing for which you now hink me so hard and disobliging.""Shall I?" she answers, mournfully. "Well, I ope so."<pb n="78 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"You will not be alone, either; you will have Morris.""Yes.""And every day you will write me a long etter, telling me every single thing that you do, ay, and think.""Yes." She answers me gently and obediently; but I an see that she is still utterly unreconciled to he idea of my absence."What is it that you are afraid of?" I ask, ecoming rather irritated. "What do you suppose will happen to you?" She does not answer; only a large tear falls n my hand, which she hastily wipes away with er pocket handkerchief, as if afraid of exciting y wrath."Can you give me any good reason why I hould stay?" I ask, dictatorially.<pb n="79 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"None-none-only-stay-stay!" But I am resolved not to stay. Early the next orning I set off.<pb n="80 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>CIIAPTER V. 'l'Is time it is not a false alarm; this time it eally has gone to his stomach, and, declining to e dislodged thence, kills him. My return is herefore retarded until after the funeral and the eading of the will. The latter is so satisfactory, nd my time is so fully occupied with a multiplicity of attendant business, that I have no eisure to regret the delay. I write to Elizabeth, ut receive no letters from her. This surprises nd makes me rather angry, but does not alarm e. "If she had been ill, if anything had happened, Morris would have written. She never as great at writing, poor little soul. What dear<pb n="81 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ittle babyish notes she used to send me during ur engagement; perhaps she wishes to punish e for my disobedience to her wishes. Well, ow she will see who was in the right." I am rawing near her now; I am walking up from the ailway station at Lucerne. I am very joyful as I march along under an umbrella, in the grand road shining of the summer afternoon. I think ith pensive passion of the last glimpse I had of y beloved-her small and wistful face looking ut from among the thick fair fleece of her long air-winking away her tears and blowing kisses o me. It is a new sensation to me to have anyone looking tearfully wistful over my departure. I draw near the great glaring Schweizerhof, with ts colonnaded, tourist-crowded porch; here are ll the pomegranates as I left them, in their green ubs, with their scarlet blossoms, and the dusty leanders in a row. I look up at our windows; Taes for Christmas Ee. 6<pb n="82 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>obody is looking out from them; they are open, nd the curtains are alternately swelled out and rawn in by the softly-playful wind. I run quickly pstairs and burst noisily into the sitting-room. Empty, perfectly empty! I open the adjoining oor into the bedroom, crying "Elizabeth! Elizabeth!" but I receive no answer. Empty too. A eeling of indignation creeps over me as I think,"Knowing the time of my return, she might have anaged to be indoors." I have returned to the ilent sitting-room, where the only noise is the ind still playing hide-and-seek with the curtains. As I look vacantly round my eye catches ight of a letter lying on the table. I pick it up echanically and look at the address. Good eavens! what can this mean? It is my own, hat I sent her two days ago, unopened, with the eal unbroken. Does she carry her resentment o far as not even to open my letters? I spring t the bell and violently ring it. It is an-<pb n="83 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>wered by the waiter who has always specially ttended us."Is madame gone out?" The man opens his mouth and stares at e."Madame! Is monsieur then not aware that adame is no longer at the hotel?""What?""On the same day as monsieur, madame departed.""Departed! Good God! what are you talking bout?""A few hours after monsieur's departure-I ill not be positive as to the exact time, but it ust have been between one and two o'clock as he midday table d'h6te was in progress-a gentleman came and asked for madame--""Yes-be quick.""I demanded whether I should take up his card, ut he said 'No,' that was unnecessary, as he was 6*<pb n="84 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>erfectly well known to madame; and, in fact, a hort time afterwards, without saying anything to nyone, she departed with him.""And did not return in the evening?""No, monsieur; madame has not returned ince that day." I clench my hands in an agony of rage and rief. "So this is it! With that pure child-face, ith that divine ignorance-only three weeks arried-this is the trick she has played me!" I am recalled to myself by a compassionate suggestion from the garcon."Perhaps it was the brother of madame." Elizabeth has no brother, but the remark rings back to me the necessity of self-command."Very probably," I answer, speaking with infinite ifficulty. "What sort of looking gentleman was e?""He was a very tall and dark gentleman with  most peculiar nose-not quite like any nose<pb n="85 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>hat I ever saw before-and most singular eyes. Never have I seen a gentleman who at all resembled him." I sink into a chair, while a cold shudder creeps ver me as I think of my poor child's dream-of her fainting fit at Wiesbaden-of her unconquerable dread of and aversion from my departure. And this happened twelve days agol I catch up y hat, and prepare to rush like a madman in ursuit."How did they go?" I ask incoherently; "by rain ?-driving -walking?""They went in a carriage.""What direction did they takes Whither did hey go?" He shakes his head. "It is not known.""It must be known," I cry, driven to frenzy y every second's delay. "Of course the driver ould tell; where is he?-where can I find him?""He did not belong to Lucerne, neither did<pb n="86 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>he carriage; the gentleman brought them with im.""But madame's maid," say I, a gleam of ope flashing across my mind; "did she go with er?""No, monsieur, she is still here; she was as uch surprised as monsieur at madame's departure.""Send her at once," I cry eagerly; but when he comes I find that she can throw no light on he matter. She weeps noisily and says many rrelevant things, but I can obtain no information rom her beyond the fact that she was unaware f her mistress's departure until long after it had aken place, when, surprised at not being rung for t the usual time, she had gone to her room and ound it empty, and on inquiring in the hotel, ad heard of her sudden departure; that, expecting her to return at night, she had sat up waiting or her till two o'clock in the morning, but that,<pb n="87 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>s I knew, she had not returned, neither had anything since been heard of her. Not all my inquiries, not all my cross-questionings of the whole staff of the hotel, of the isitors, of the railway officials, of nearly all the nhabitants of Lucerne and its environs, procure e a jot more knowledge. On the next few weeks I look back as on a hellish and insane dream. I an neither eat nor sleep; I am unable to remain ne moment quiet; my whole existence, my nights nd my days, are spent in seeking, seeking. Everything that human despair and frenzied love an do is done by me. I advertise, I communicate with the police, I employ detectives; but that atal twelve days' start for ever baffles me. Only n one occasion do I obtain one tittle of information. In a village a few miles from Lucerne he peasants, on the day in question, saw a carriage driving rapidly through their little street. It was closed, but through the windows they could<pb n="88 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ee the occupants-a dark gentleman, with the eculiar physiognomy which has been so often described, and on the opposite seat a lady lying pparently in a state of utter insensibility. But ven this leads to nothing. Oh, reader, these things happened twenty ears ago; since then I have searched sea and and, but never have I seen my little Elizabeth gain.<pb n="89 CHRISTMAS TALES"/><pb n="90 CHRISTMAS TALES"/><pb n="91 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>CHAPTER I. YESTERDAY morning I received the following etter:"Weston House, Caulfield, --shire."MY DEAR DINAH,-You must come: I scorn ll your excuses, and see through their flimsiness. I have no doubt that you are much better amused n Dublin, frolicking round ball-rooms with a uccession of horse-soldiers, and watching her Majesty's household troops play Polo in the Phoenix Park, but no matter-you must come. We have no particular inducements to hold out.<pb n="92 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>We lead an exclusively bucolic, cow-milking, pigfattening, roast-mutton-eating and to-bed-at-teno'clock-going life; but no matter-you must ome. I want you to see how happy two dull lderly people may be, with no special brightness n their lot to make them so. My old man-he s surprisingly ugly at the first glance, but rows upon one afterwards-sends you his respects, and bids me say that he will meet you t any station on any day at any hour of the day r night. If you succeed in evading our persistence this time, you will be a cleverer woman han I take you for."Ever yours affectionately,"JANE WATSON."August 15th."P.S.-We will invite our little scarlet-headed urate to dinner to meet you, so as to soften our fall from the society of the Plungers."<pb n="93 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>This is my answer:"MY DEAR JANE,-Kill the fat calf in all aste, and put the bake meats into the oven, for I will come. Do not, however, imagine that I am oved thereunto by the prospect of the brightheaded curate. Believe me, my dear, I am as et at a distance of ten long good years from an ddiction to the minor clergy. If I survive the rossing of that seething, heaving, tumbling bomination, St. George's Channel, you may expect me on Tuesday next. I have been groping or hours in 'Bradshaw's', darkness that may be elt, and I have arrived at length at this twilight esult, that I may arrive at your station at 6'55 P.M. But the ways of 'Bradshaw' are not ur ways, and I may either rush violently past or ever attain it. If I do, and if on my arrival I ee some rustic vehicle, guided by a startlingly gly gentleman, awaiting me, I shall know from<pb n="94 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>our wifely description that it is your 'old man.' Till Tuesday, then,"Affectionately yours,"DINAH BELLAIRS."Augulst 1 7t/." I am as good as my word; on Tuesday I set  ff. For four mortal hours and a half I am disastrously, hideously, diabolically sick. For four ours and a half I curse the day on which I was orn, the day on which Jane Watson was born, he day on which her old man was born, and astly-but oh! not, not leastly-the day and the ock on which and in which the Leinsler's plunging, courtseying, throbbing body was born. On rriving at Holyhead, feeling convinced from my ensations that, as the French say, I touch my ast hour, I indistinctly request to be allowed to tay on board and die, then and there; but as he stewardess and my maid take a different view<pb n="95 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>f my situation, and insist upon forcing my loak and bonnet on my dying body and limp ead, I at length succeed in staggering on deck nd off the accursed boat. I am then well haken up for two or three hours in the Irish ail, and after crawling along a slow by-line for wo or three hours more, am at length, at 6'55, anded, battered, tired, dust-blacked, and qualmish, at the little roadside station of Caulfield. My maid and I are the only passengers who escend. The train snorts its slow way onwards, nd I am left gazing at the calm crimson death f the August sun, and smelling the sweet-peas n the station-master's garden border. I look ound in search of Jane's promised tax-cart, and teel my nerves for the contemplation of her old an's unlovely features. But the only vehicle hich I see is a tiny two-wheeled pony carriage, rawn by a small and tub-shaped bay pony and riven by a lady in a hat, whose face is turned<pb n="96 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>xpectantly towards me. I go up and recognise y friend, whom I have not seen for two yearsnot since before she fell in with her old man and spoused him."I thought it safest, after all, to come myself," she says with a bright laugh. "My old an looked so handsome this morning, that I hought you would never recognise him from my escription. Get in, dear, and let us trot home s quickly as we can." I comply, and for the next half hour sit (while the cool evening wind is blowing the dust ff my hot and jaded face) stealing amazed lances at my companion's cheery features. Cheery! That is the very last word that, excepting in an ironical sense, any one would have applied to my friend Jane two years ago. Two ears ago Jane was thirty-five, the elderly eldest aughter of a large family, hustled into obscurity, ostled, shelved, by half a dozen younger, fresher<pb n="97 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ister; an elderly girl addicted to lachrymose erse about the gone and the dead and the forever-lost. Apparently the gone has come back, he dead resuscitated, the for-ever-lost been found gain. The peaky sour virgin is transformed nto a gracious matron, with a kindly, comely ace, pleasure making and pleasure feeling. Oh, Happiness, what powder, or paste or milk of roses, an make old cheeks young again in the cunning ay that you do? If you would but bide steadily ith us we might live for ever, always young and lways handsome. My musings on Jane's metamorphosis, combined with a tired headache, make me somewhat ilent, and indeed there is mostly a slackness of onversation between the two dearest allies on irst meeting after absence-a sort of hesitating hiver before plunging into the sea of talk that oth know lie in readiness for them."Have you got your harvest in yet?" I ask, Tales for Christmas Eve. 7<pb n="98 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ore for the sake of not utterly holding my ongue than from any profound interest in the ubject, as we jog briskly along between the yellow cornfields, where the dry bound sheaves re standing in golden rows in the red sunset ight."Not yet," answers Jane; "we have only just egun to cut some of it. However, thank God, he weather looks as settled as possible; there is ot a streak of watery lilac in the west." My headache is almost gone and I am beginning to think kindly of dinner-a subject from hich all day until now my. mind has hastily urned with a sensation of hideous inward revolt -by the time that the fat pony pulls up before he old-world dark porch of a modest little house, hich has bashfully hidden its original face under  veil of crowded clematis flowers and stalwart vy. Set as in a picture-frame by the large rooped ivy-leaves, I see a tall and moderately<pb n="99 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ard-featured gentleman of middle age, perhaps, f the two, rather inclining towards elderly, smiling at us a little shyly."This is my old man," cries Jane, stepping aily out, and giving him a friendly introductory at on the shoulder. "Old man, this is Dinah." Having thus been made known to each other e shake hands, but neither of us can arrive at nything pretty to say. Then I follow Jane into er little house, the little house for which she has o happily exchanged her tenth part of the large nd noisy paternal mansion. It is an old house, nd everything about it has the moderate shabbiness of old age and long and careful wear. Little hickwalled rooms, dark and cool, with flowers and lower scents lying in wait for you everywherea silent, fragrant, childless house. To me, who ave had oily locomotives snorting and racing hrough my head all day, its dumb sweetness eems like heaven. 7*<pb n="100 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"And now that we have secured you, we do ot mean to let you go in a hurry," says Jane ospitably that night at bedtime, lighting the andles on my dressing-table."You are determined to make my mouth ater, I see," say I, interrupting a yawn to laugh."Lone lorn me, who have neither old man nor ear little house, nor any prospect of ultimately ttaining either.""But if you honestly are not bored you will tay with us a good bitl" she says, laying her and with kind entreaty on my sleeve. "St. George's Channel is not lightly to be faced gain.""Perhaps I shall stay until you are obliged o go away yourselves to get rid of me," return I, smiling. "Such things have happened. Yes, ithout joking, I will stay a month. Then, by he end of a month, if you have not found me ut thoroughly, I think I may pass among men<pb n="101 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>or a more amiable woman than I have ever yet ad the reputation of." A quarter of an hour later I am laying down y head among soft and snow-white pillows, and aying to myself that this delicious sensation of tter drowsy repose, of soft darkness and odorous uiet, is cheaply purchased even by the ridiculous nguish which my own sufferings, and-hardly ess than my own sufferings-the demoniac sights nd sounds afforded by my fellow passengers, aused me on board the accursed Leinster''Built in the eclipse, and rigged with curses dark."<pb n="102 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>CHAPTER II."WELL, I cannot say that you look much ested," says Jane next morning, coming in to reet me, smiling and fresh-(yes, sceptic of ighteen, even a woman of thirty-seven may look resh in a print gown on an August morning, hen she has a well of lasting quiet happiness nside her)-coming in with a bunch of creamy loire de Dljons in her hand for the breakfast able. "You look infinitely more fagged than ou did when I left you last night!""Do It" say I, rather faintly."I am afraid you did not sleep much?" suggests Jane, a little crestfallen at the insult to her eather beds implied by my wakefulness. "Some<pb n="103 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>eople never can sleep the first night in a strange ed, and I stupidly forgot to ask whether you iked the feather bed or mattress at the top.""Yes, I did sleep," I answer gloomily. "I ish to heaven I had not!""Wish -to -heaven -you- had- not " repeats Jane slowly, with a slight astonished pause etween each word. "My dear child, for what ther purpose did you go to bed?""I-I-had bad dreams," say I, shuddering  little and then taking her hand, roses and all, n mine. "Dear Jane, do not think me quite run ad, but-but-have you got a 'Bradshaw' in he house?""A 'Bradshawl' What on earth do you want ith 'Bradshaw"' says my hostess, her face lengthening considerably and a slight tincture of atural coldness coming into her tone."I know it seems rude-insultingly rude," say I, still holding her hand and speaking almost<pb n="104 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>achrymosely: "but do you know, my dear, I eally am afraid that-that-- shall have to leave ou-to-day?""To leave us?" repeats she, withdrawing her and and growing angrily red. "What! when ot twenty-four hours ago you settled to stay a onth with us? What have we done between hen and now to disgust you with us?""Nothing-nothing," cry 1, eagerly; "how can ou suggest such a thing? I never had a kinder elcome nor ever saw a place that charmed me ore; but-but--""But what?" asks Jane, her colour subsiding nd looking a little mollified."It is best to tell the truth, I suppose," say I, ighing, "even though I know that you will laugh t me-will call me vapourish-sottishly superstitious; but I had an awful and hideous dream ast night.""Is that all?" she says, looking relieved, and<pb n="105 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>eginning to arrange her roses in an old china owl. "And do you think that all dreams are onfined to this house? I never heard before of heir affecting any one special place more than nother. Perhaps no sooner are you back in Dublin, in your own room and your own bed, han you will have a still worse and uglier one." I shake my head. "But it was about this ouse-about yvou.""About me?" she says, with an accent of a ittle aroused interest."About you and your husband," I answer arnestly. "Shall I tell it you? Whether you ay 'Yes' or 'No' I must. Perhaps it came as a arning; such things have happened. Yes, say hat you will, I cannot believe that any vision o consistent-so tangibly real and utterly free rom the jumbled incongruities and unlikelinesses f ordinary dreams-could have meant nothing. Shall I begin?"<pb n="106 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"By all means," answers Mrs. Watson, sitting own in an arm-chair and smiling easily. I am uite prepared to listen-and disbelieve.""You know," say I, narratively, coming and tanding close before her, "how utterly tired out I was when you left me last night. I could ardly answer your questions for yawning. I do ot think that I was ten minutes in getting into ed, and it seemed like heaven when I laid my ead down on the pillow. I felt as if I should leep till the Day of Judgment. Well, you know, hen one is asleep one has of course no measure f time, and I have no idea what hour it was eall'; but at some time, in the blackest and arkest of the night, I seemed to wake. It appeared as if a noise had woke me-a noise hich at first neither frightened nor surprised me n the least, but which seemed quite natural, and hich I accounted for in the muddled drowsy ay in which one does account for things when<pb n="107 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>alf asleep. But as I gradually grew to fuller onsciousness I found out, with a cold shudder, hat the noise I heard was not one that belonged o the night; nothing that one could lay on wind n the chimney, or mice behind the wainscot, or ll-fitting boards. It was a sound of muffled truggling, and once I heard a sort of choked trangled cry. I sat up in bed, perfectly numbed ith fright, and for a moment could hear nothing or the singing of the blood in my head, and he loud battering of my heart against my side. Then I thought that if it were anything bad-if I were going to be murdered-I had at least ather be in the light than the dark, and see in hat sort of shape my fate was coming, so I slid ut of bed and threw my dressing-gown over y shoulders. I had stupidly forgotten, in my eariness, over night, to put the matches by the edside, and could not for the life of me recollect where they were. Also, my knowledge of<pb n="108 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>he geography of the room was so small that in he utter blackness, without even the palest, rayest ray from the window to help me, I was y no means sure in which direction the door ay. I can feel now the pain of the blow I gave his right side against the sharp corner of the able in passing; I was quite surprised this morning not to find the mark of a bruise there. At ast, in my groping, I came upon the handle and urned the key in the lock. It gave a little queak, and again I stopped for a moment, overcome by ungovernable fear. Then I silently pened the door and looked out. You know hat your door is exactly opposite mine. By the ine of red light underneath it, I could see that t all events some one was awake and astir ithin, for the light was brighter than that given y a night-light. By the broader band of red ight on the right side of it I could also perceive hat the door was ajar. I stood stock still and<pb n="109 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>istened. The two sounds of struggling and hokedly crying had both ceased. All the noise hat remained was that as of some person quietly oving about on unbodted feet. 'Perhaps Jane's og Smut is ill and she is sitting up with it; she as saying last night, I remember, that she was fraid it was beginning with the distemper. Perhaps either she or her old man have been taken ith some trifling temporary sickness. Perhaps he noise of crying out that I certainly heard was ne of them fighting with a nightmare.' Trying, y such like suggestions, to hearten myself up, I tole across the passage and peeped in--" I pause in my narrative."Wells" says Jane, a little impatiently. She has dropped her flowers. They lie in dorous dewy confusion in her lap. She is istening rather eagerly. I cover my face with y hands. "Oh! my dear," I cry, "I do not<pb n="110 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>hink I can go on. It was too dreadful! Now hat I am telling it I seem to be doing and hearing it over again--""I do not call it very kind to keep me on he rack," she says, with a rather forced laugh."Probably I am imagining something much worse han the reality. For heaven's sake speak up! What did you see?" I take hold of her hand and continue. "You now that in your room the bed exactly faces he door. Well, when I looked in, looked in ith eyes blinking at first, and dazzled by the ong darkness they had been in, it seemed to e as if that bed were only one horrible sheet f crimson; but as my sight grew clearer I saw hat it was that caused that frightful impression f universal red--" Again I pause with a asp and feeling of oppressed breathing."Go on! go on!" cries my companion, lean-<pb n="111 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ng forward, and speaking with some petulance."Are you never going to get to the point?""Jane," say I solemnly, "do not laugh at me, or pooh pooh me, for it is God's truth--as learly and vividly as I see you now, strong, lourishing, and alive, so clearly, so vividly, with o more of dream haziness nor of contradiction n details than there is in the view I now have f this room and of you-I saw you bothyou and your husband, lying dead-murdereddrowned in your own blood!""What, both of us?" she says, trying to laugh, ut her healthy cheek has rather paled."Both of you," I answer, with growing excitement. "You, Jane, had evidently been the ne first attacked-taken off in your sleep-for ou were lying just as you would have lain in lumber, only that across your throat from there o there" (touching first one ear and then the ther), "there was a huge and yawning gash."<pb n="112 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"Pleasant," replies she, with a slight shiver."I never saw any one dead," continue I arnestly, "never until last night. I had not the aintest idea how dead people looked, even people ho died quietly, nor has any picture ever given e at all a clear conception of death's dread ook. How then could I have imagined the hideous contraction and distortion of feature, the taring starting open eyes-glazed yet agonized --the tightly clenched teeth that go to make up he picture, that is now, this very minute, standing ut in ugly vividness before my mnind's eye?" I top, but she does not avail herself of the pause o make any remark, neither does she look any onger at all laughingly inclined."And yet," continue I, with a voice shaken y emotion, "it was you, very you, not partly you nd partly some one else, as is mostly the case n dreams, but as much you, as the you I am<pb n="113 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ouching now" (laying my finger on her arm as I speak)."And my old man, Robin," says poor Jane, ather tearfully, after a moment's silence, "what bout him? Did you see him? Was he dead oo ""It was evidently he whom I had heard truggling and crying," I answer with a strong hudder, which I cannot keep down, "for it was lear that he had fought for his life. He was ying half on the bed and half on the floor, and ne clenched hand was grasping a great piece of he sheet; he was lying head downwards, as if, fter his last struggle, he had fallen forwards. All his grey hair was reddened and stained, and I could see that the rift in his throat was as deep s that in yours.""I wish you would stop," cries Jane, pale as shes, and speaking with an accent of unwilling error; "you are making me quite sick!"<pb n="114 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"I must finish," I answer earnestly, "since it as come in time I am sure it has come for some urpose. Listen to me till the end; it is very ear." She does not speak, and I take her silence or assent. "I was staring at you both in a stony ay," I go on, "feeling-if I felt at all--that I as turning idiotic with horror--standing in exactly the same spot, with my neck craned to look ound the door, and my eyes unable to stir from hat hideous scarlet bed, when a slight noise, as f some one cautiously stepping on the carpet, urned my stony terror into a living quivering gony. I looked and saw a man with his back owards me walking across the room from the ed to the dressing-table. He was dressed in he dirty fustian of an ordinary workman, and in is hand he held a red wet sickle. When he eached the dressing-table he laid it down on he floor beside him, and began to collect all the ings, open the cases of the bracelets, and hurry<pb n="115 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>he trinkets of all sorts into his pockets. While e was thus busy I caught a full view of the reflection of the face in the glass--" I stop for reath, my heart is panting almost as hardly as it eemed to pant during the awful moments I am escribing."What was he like-what was he like?" cries Jane, greatly excited. "Did you see him distinctly enough to recollect his features again? Would you know him again if you saw him?'"Should I know my own face if I saw it in he glass?" I ask scornfully. "I see every line f it now more clearly than I do yours, though hat is before my eyes, and the other only before y memory--""Well, what was he like?-be quick, for eaven's sake.""The first moment that I caught sight of im," continue I, speaking quickly, "I felt certain hat he was Irish; to no other nationality could 8*<pb n="116 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>uch a type of face have belonged. His wild ough hair fell down over his forehead, reaching is shagged and overhanging brows. He had the ide grinning slit of a mouth-the long nose, he cunningly twinkling eyes-that one so often ees, in combination with a shambling gait and agged tail-coat, at the railway stations or in the arvest fields at this time of year." A pause."I do not know how it came to me," I go on resently; "but I felt as convinced as if I had een told-as if I had known it for a positive act--that he was one of your own labourersone of your own harvest men. Have you any Irishmen working for you?""Of course we have," answers Jane, rather harply, "but that proves nothing. Do not they, s you observed just now, come over in droves t this time of the year for the harvestl""I am sorry," say I, sighing. "I wish you ad not. Well, let me finish; I have just done<pb n="117 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>-I had been holding the door-handle mechanically in my hand; I suppose I pulled it unconsciously towards me, for the door hinge creaked  little, but quite audibly. To my unspeakable orror the man turned round and saw me. Good God! he would cut my throat too with that red, ed reaping hook! I tried to get into the passage nd lock the door, but the key was on the inside. I tried to scream, I tried to run; but voice and egs disobeyed me. The bed and room and an began to dance before me; a black earthquake seemed to swallow me up, and I suppose I fell down in a swoon. When I awoke really he blessed morning had come, and a robin was inging outside my window on an apple bough. There-you have it all, and now let me look for  'Bradshaw,' for I am so frightened and unhinged hat go I must."<pb n="118 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>CHAPTER III."I MUST own that it has taken away appetite," I say, with rather a sickly smile, as we sit round he breakfast table. "I assure you that I mean o insult to your fresh eggs and bread-and-butter, ut I simply cannot eat.""It certainly was an exceptionally dreadful ream," says Jane, whose colour has returned, nd who is a good deal fortified and reassured y the influences of breakfast and of her husband's scepticism; for a condensed and shortened ersion of my dream has been told to him, and e has easily laughed it to scorn. "Exceptionally readful, chiefly from its extreme consistency and<pb n="119 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>recision of detail. But still, you know, dear, ne has had hideous dreams oneself times out of ind and they never came to anything. I remember once I dreamt that all my teeth came ut in my mouth at once-double ones and all; ut that was ten years ago, and they still keep heir situations, nor did I about that time lose ny friend, which they say such a dream is a ign of.""You say that some unaccountable instinct old you that the hero of your dream was one f my own men," says Robin, turning towards me ith a covert smile of benevolent contempt for y superstitiousness; "did not I understand you o say so?""Yes," reply I, not in the least shaken by his ardly-veiled disbelief. "I do not know how it ame to me, but I was as much persuaded of hat, and am so still, as I am of my own dentity."<pb n="120 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"I will tell you of a plan then to prove the ruth of your vision," returns he, smiling. "I will ake you through the fields this morning and you hall see all my men at work, both the ordinary taff and the harvest casuals, Irish and all. If mongst them you find the counterpart of Jane's nd my murderer" (a smile) "I will promise then -no, not even then can I promise to believe you, or there is such a family likeness between all Irishmen, at all events, between all the Irishmen hat one sees out of Ireland.""Take me," I say, eagerly, jumping up; " now, his minute! You cannot be more anxious nor alf so anxious to prove me a false prophet as I m to be proved one.""I am quite at your service," he answers, "as soon s you please. Jenny, get your hat and come too.""And if we do not find him," says Jane, miling playfully-"I think I am growing pretty asy on that head-you will promise to eat a<pb n="121 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>great deal of luncheon and never mention 'Bradshaw' again?""I promise," reply I, gravely. "And if, on he other hand, we do find him, you will promise o put no more obstacles in the way of my going, ut will let me depart in peace without taking ny offence thereat?""It is a bargain," she says gaily. "Witness, Robin." So we set off in the bright dewiness of the orning on our walk over Robin's farm. It is a rand harvest day, and the whitened sheaves are verywhere drying, drying in the genial sun. We ave been walking for an hour and both Jane nd I are rather tired. The sun beats with all is late-summer strength on our heads and takes he force and spring out of our hot limbs."The hour of triumph is approaching," says Robin, with a quiet smile, as we draw near an pen gate through which a loaded wain, shedding<pb n="122 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ipe wheat ears from its abundance as it crawls long, is passing. "And time for it too; it is a uarter past twelve and you have been on your egs for fully an hour. Miss Bellairs, you must ake haste and find the murderer, for there is nly one more field to do it in.""Is not there?" I cry eagerly, "Oh, I am glad! Thank God, I begin to breathe again." We pass through the open gate and begin to read across the stubble, for almost the last load as gone."We must get nearer the hedge," says Robin,"or you will not see their faces; they are all at inner." We do as he suggests. In the shadow of the edge we walk close in front of the row of eated labourers, who, sitting or lying on the edge bank, are eating unattractive looking dinners. I scan one face after another-honest ovine English faces. I have seen a hundred<pb n="123 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>housand faces like each one of the faces now efore me-very like, but the exact counterpart f none. We are getting to the end of the row, I beginning to feel rather ashamed, though infinitely relieved, and to smile at my own expense. I look again, and my heart suddenly stands still nd turns to stone within me. He is therel-not  hand-breadth from me! Great God! how well I ave remembered his face, even to the unsightly mallpox seams, the shagged locks, the grinning lit mouth, the little sly base eyes. He is employed in no murderous occupation now; he is armlessly cutting hunks of coarse bread and fat old bacon with a clasp knife, but yet I have no ore doubt that it is he-he whom I saw with he crimsoned sickle in his stained hand-than I ave that it is I who am stonily, shiveringly, taring at him.""Well, Miss Bellairs, who was rightl" asks Robin's cheery voice at my elbow. "Perish<pb n="124 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>'Bradshaw' and all his labyrinths! Are you satisfied now? Good heavens!" (catching a sudden ight of my face) "How white you are! Do you ean to say that you have found him at last? Impossible!""Yes, I have found him," I answer in a low nd unsteady tone. "I knew I should. Look, here he is!-close to us, the third from the nd." I turn away my head, unable to bear the ideous recollections and associations that the ight of the man calls up, and I suppose that hey both look."Are you sure that you are not letting your magination carry you away?" asks he presently, n a tone of gentle kindly remonstrance. "As I aid before these fellows are all so much alike; hey have all the same look of debased squalid unning. Oblige me by looking once again, so s to be quite sure."<pb n="125 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>I obey. Reluctantly I look at him once again. Apparently, becoming aware that he is the object f our notice, he lifts his small dull eyes and ooks back at me. It is the same face-they are he same eyes that turned from the plundered ressing-table to catch sight of me last night."There is no mistake," I answer, shuddering from ead to foot. "Take me away, please-as quick s you can-out of the field-home!" They comply, and over the hot fields and hrough the hot noon air we step silently homewards. As we reach the cool and ivied porch of he house I speak for the first time. "You believe me now?" ' He hesitates. "I was staggered for a moment, I will own," he answers, with candid gravity;"but I have been thinking it over, and on reflection I have come to the conclusion that the ighly excited state of your imagination is answerable for the heightening of the resemblance<pb n="126 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>hich exists between all the Irish of that class nto an identity with the particular Irishman you reamed of, and whose face (by your own showing) you only saw dimly reflected in the glass.""AWl dimly," repeat I emphatically, "unless I ow see that sun dimly" (pointing to him, as he loriously, blindingly blazes from the sky). "You ill not be warned by me then?" I continue passionately, after an interval. "You will run the isk of my dream coming true---you will stay on ere in spite of it? Oh, if I could persuade you o go from home-anywhere-anywhere-for a ime, until the danger was past!""And leave the harvest to tself?" answers he, ith a smile of quiet sarcasm; "be a loser of two undred or three hundred pounds, probably, and  laughing-stock to my acquaintance into the argain, and all for-what? A dream-a fancya nightmare!""But do you know anything of the man?-<pb n="127 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>f his antecedents?-of his character?"-I persist agerly. He shrugs his shoulders."Nothing whatever; nothing to his disadvantage, certainly. He came over with a lot of thers a fortnight ago, and I engaged him for he harvesting. For anything I have heard to he contrary, he is a simple inoffensive fellow nough." I am silenced, but not convinced. I turn o Jane. "You remember your promise: you will ow put no more hindrances in the way of my oing?""You do not mean to say that you are going, eally?" says Jane, who is looking rather awed y what she calls the surprising coincidence, but s still a good deal heartened up by her husband's ant of faith."I do," reply I, emphatically. "I should go tark staring mad if I were to sleep another night<pb n="128 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>n that room. I shall go to Chester to-night, and ross to-morrow from Holyhead." I do as I say. I make my maid, to her extreme surprise, repack my just unpacked wardrobe nd take an afternoon train to Chester. As I rive away with bag and baggage down the leafy ane, I look back and see my two friends standing t their gate. Jane is leaning her head on her ld man's shoulder, and looking rather wistfully fter me: an expression of mingled regret for my eparture and vexation at my folly clouding their ind and happy faces. At least my last living ecollection of them is a pleasant one.<pb n="129 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>CHAPTER IV. THE joy with which my family welcome my eturn is largely mingled with surprise, but still ore largely with curiosity, as to the cause of y so sudden reappearance. But I keep my own ounsel. I have a reluctance to give the real eason, and possess no inventive faculty in the ay of lying, so I give none. I say, "I am back: s not that enough for you? Set your minds at est, for that is as much as you will ever know bout the matter." For one thing, I am occasionally rather ashamed f my conduct. It is not that the impression roduced by my dream is effaced, but that absence<pb n="130 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>nd distance from the scene and the persons of t have produced their natural weakening effect. Once or twice during the voyage, when writhing n laughable torments in the ladies' cabin of the teamboat, I said to myself, "Most likely you are  fool!" I therefore continually ward off the ross-questionings of my family with what defensive armour of silence and evasion I may."I feel convinced it was the husband," says ne of my sisters, after a long catechism, which, s usual, has resulted in nothing. "You are too oyal to your friend to own it, but I always felt ure that any man who could take compassion n that poor peevish old Jane must be some onderful freak of nature. Come, confess. Is ot he a cross between an ourang-outang and a Methodist parson?""He is nothing of the kind," reply I, in some :*' lat, r'.ecal1ip th.libeljed Robin's clean freshcoloured human ace" ' "You will be very lucky if<pb n="131 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ou ever secure any one half so kind, pleasant, nd gentleman-like." Three days after my return, I receive a letter rom Jane:"Weston House, Caulfield."MY DEAR DINAH,-I hope you are safe home gain, and that you have made up your mind hat two crossings of St. George's Channel within orty-eight hours are almost as bad as having our throat cut, according to the programme you aid out for us. I have good news for you. Our urderer elect is gone. After hearing of the onnection that there was to be between us, Robin naturally was rather interested in him, and ound out his name, which is the melodious one f Watty Doolan. After asking his name he sked other things about him, and finding that e never did a stroke of work and was inclined o be tipsy and quarrelsome, he paid and packed<pb n="132 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>im off at once. He is now, I hope, on his way ack to his native shores, and if he murder anybody it will be you, my dear. Good-bye, Dinah. Hardly yet have I forgiven you for the way in hich you frightened me with your graphic description of poor Robin and me, with our heads oose and waggling."Ever yours affectionately,"JANE WATSON." I fold up this note with a feeling of exceeding relief, and a thorough faith that I have been  superstitious hysterical fool. More resolved han ever am I to keep the reason for my return rofoundly secret from my family. The next orning but one we are all in the breakfastroom after breakfast, hanging about, and looking t the papers. My sister has just thrown down he Times, with a pettish exclamation that there s nothing in it, and that it really is not worth<pb n="133 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>hile paying threepence a day to see nothing but dvertisements and police reports. I pick it up s she throws it down, and look listlessly over its all columns from top to bottom. Suddenly my istlessness vanishes. What is this that I am eading?-this in staring capitals?"SHOCKING TRAGEDY AT CAULFIELD. DOUBLE MURDER." I am in the middle of the paragraph before I ealise what it is."From an early hour of the morning this illage has been the scene of deep and painful xcitement in consequence of the discovery of the trocious murder of Mr. and Mrs. Watson, of Weston House, two of its most respected inhabitants. It appears that the deceased had etired to rest on Tuesday night at their usual<pb n="134 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>our, and in their usual health and spirits. The ousemaid, on going to call them at the accustomed hour on Wednesday morning, received o answer, in spite of repeated knocking. She herefore at length opened the door and entered. The rest of the servants, attracted by her cries, ushed to the spot, and found the unfortunate entleman and lady lying on the bed with their hroats cut from ear to ear. Life must have been xtinct for some hours, as they were both perfectly cold. The room presented a hideous pectacle, being literally swimming in blood. A eaping hook, evidently the instrument with which he crime was perpetrated, was picked up near he door. An Irish labourer of the name of Watty Doolan, discharged by the lamented gentleman a few days ago on account of misconduct, as already been arrested on strong suspicion, s at an early hour on Wednesday morning he as seen by a farm labourer, who was going to<pb n="135 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>is work, washing his waistcoat at a retired spot n the stream which flows through the meadows elow the scene of the murder. On being apprehended and searched, several small articles of ewelry, identified as having belonged to Mr. Watson, were discovered in his possession." I drop the paper and sink into a chair, feel ng deadly sick. So you see that my dream came true, after ll. The facts narrated in the above story ccurred in Ireland. The only liberty I have aken with them is in transplanting them to England.<pb n="136 CHRISTMAS TALES"/><pb n="137 CHRISTMAS TALES"/><pb n="138 CHRISTMAS TALES"/><pb n="139 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>CHAPTER I."YES, my dear, you may not believe me, ut I can assure you that you cannot dislike ld women more, nor think them more contemptible supernumeraries, than I did when I as your age." This is what old Mrs. Wentworth says-the ld lady so incredibly tenacious of life (incredibly s it seems to me at eighteen) as to have buried  husband and five strong sons, and yet still to at her dinner with hearty relish, and laugh at ny such jokes as are spoken loudly enough to each her dulled ears. This is what she says,<pb n="140 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>haking the while her head, which-poor old oul-is already shaking a good deal involuntarily. I am sitting close beside her arm-chair, nd have been reading aloud to her; but as I annot succeed in pitching my voice so as to ake her hear satisfactorily, by mutual consent he book has been dropped in my lap, and we ave betaken ourselves to conversation."I never said I disliked old women, did II" reply I evasively, being too truthful altogether to deny the soft impeachment. "What akes you think I do? They are infinitely preferable to old men; I do distinctly dislike them.""A fat, bald, deaf old woman," continues he, not heeding me, and speaking with slow mphasis, while she raises one trembling hand to ark each unpleasant adjective; "if in the year '2 ny one had told me that I should have lived to e that, I think I should have killed them or yself! and yet now I am all three."<pb n="141 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"You are not very deaf," say I politely-(the atness and baldness admit of no civilities consistent with veracity)-but I raise my voice to ay the compliment."In the year '2 I was seventeen," she says, andering off into memory. "Yes, my dear, I am just fifteen years older than the century nd it is getting into its dotage, is not it! The year '2-ah! that was just about the time hat I first saw my poor Bobby! Poor pretty Bobby.""And who was Bobbyl" ask I, pricking up y ears, and scenting, with the keen nose of outh, a dead-love idyll; an idyll of which his poor old hill of unsteady flesh was the eroine."I must have told you the tale a hundred imes, have not IV" she asks, turning her old im eyes towards me. "A curious tale, say hat you will, and explain it how you will. I<pb n="142 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>hink I must have told you; but indeed I forgot o whom I tell my old stories and to whom I o not. Well, my love, you must promise to top me if you have heard it before, but to me, ou know, these old things are so much clearer han the things of yesterday.""You never told me, Mrs. Hamilton," I say, nd say truthfully; for being a new acquaintance I really have not been made acquainted with Bobby's history. "Would you mind telling it e now, if you are sure that it would not bore ou?""Bobby," she repeats softly to herself, "Bobby. I daresay you do not think it a very pretty ame?""N-not particularly," reply I honestly. "To ell you the truth, it rather reminds me of a oliceman.""I daresay," she answers quietly; "and yet n the year '2 I grew to think it the handsomest,<pb n="143 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>earest name on earth. Well, if you like, I will egin at the beginning and tell you how that ame about.""Do," say I, drawing a stocking out of my ocket, and thriftily beginning to knit to assist e in the process of listening."In the year '2 we were at war with France -you know that, of course. It seemed then as f war were our normal state; I could hardly emember a time when Europe had been at eace. In these days of stagnant quiet it ppears as if people's kith and kin always lived ut their full time and died in their beds. Then there was hardly a house where there was ot one dead, either in battle, or of his wounds fter battle, or of some dysentery or ugly parching fever. As for us, we had always been a oldier family-always; there was not one of us hat had ever worn a black gown or sat upon a igh stool with a pen behind his ear. I had lost<pb n="144 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ncles and cousins by the half-dozen and dozen, ut, for my part, I did not much mind, as I new very little about them, and black was more ecoming wear to a person with my bright olour than anything else." At the mention of her bright colour I unintentionally lift my eyes from my knitting, and ontemplate the yellow bagginess of the poor ld cheek nearest me. Oh, Time! Time! what bsurd and dirty turns you play us! What o you do with all our fair and goodly things hen you have stolen them from us? In hat far and hidden treasure-house do you store hem ?"But I did care very much-very exceedingly-for my dear old father-not so old either -younger than my eldest boy was when he ent; he would have been forty-two if he had ived three days longer. Well, well, child, you ust not let me wander; you must keep me<pb n="145 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>o it. He was not a soldier, was not my father; e was a sailor, a post-captain in his Majesty's avy and commanded the ship Thunderer in the Channel fleet."I had struck seventeen in the year '2, as I aid before, and had just come home from being inished at a boarding-school of repute in those ays, where I had learnt to talk the prettiest ncien rtgime French and to hate Bonaparte with nchristian violence from a little ruined emigre arichal; had also, with infinite expenditure of ime, labour, and Berlin wool, wrought out 'Abraham's Sacrifice of Isaac' and 'Jacob's First Kiss o Rachel,' in finest cross-stitch. Now I had bidden adieu to learning; had inly resolved never o disinter 'Telemaque' and Thompson's 'Seasons' from the bottom of my trunk; had taken a oliday from all my accomplishments with the xception of cross-stitch, to which I still faithfully adhered-and indeed, on the day I am Tales for Christmas E. 10<pb n="146 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>oing to mention, I recollect that I was hard at ork on Judas Iscariot's face in Leonardo da Vinci's 'Last Supper'-hard at work at it, sitting n the morning sunshine, on a straight-backed hair. We had flatter backs in those days; our houlders were not made round by lolling in asy-chairs; indeed, no then upholsterer made a hair that it was possible to loll in. My father ented a house near Plymouth at that time, an n-and-out nooky kind of old house-no doubt it as fallen to pieces long years ago--a house all et round with unnumbered flowers, and about hich the rooks clamoured all together from the indy elm tops. I was labouring in flesh-coloured ool on Judas's left cheek, when the door opened nd my mother entered. She looked as if something had freshly pleased her, and her eyes were miling. In her hand she held an open and vidently just-read letter."'A messenger has come from Plymouth,' she<pb n="147 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ays, advancing quickly and joyfully towards me. 'Your father will be here this afternoon.'"'Th/is afternoon/' cry I, at the top of my oice, pushing away my heavy work-frame. 'How elightful! But howl-how can that happen?'"'They have had a brush with a French rivateer,' she answers, sitting down on another traight-backed chair, and looking again over the arge square letter, destitute of envelope, for such hings were not in those days, 'and then they ucceeded in taking her. Yet they were a good eal knocked about in the process, and have had o put into Plymouth to refit, so he will be here his afternoon for a few hours.'"'Hurrah!' cry I, rising, holding out my canty skirts, and beginning to dance."'Bobby Gerard is coming with him,' continues my mother, again glancing at her despatch. 'Poor boy, he has had a shot through his right rm, which has broken the bone, so your father T'.$<pb n="148 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>s bringing him here for us to nurse him well gain.'"I stop in my dancing."'Hurrah again!' I say brutally. 'I do not ean about his arm; of course I am very sorry or that; but at all events, I shall see him at last. I shall see whether he is like his picture, and hether it is not as egregiously flattered as I have lways suspected.'"There were no photographs you know in hose days-not even hazy daguerreotypes-it as fifty good years too soon for them. The icture to which I allude is a miniature, at which I had stolen many a deeply longingly admiring lance in its velvet case. It is almost impossible or a miniature not to flatter. To the most oarse-skinned and mealy-potato-faced people it annot help giving cheeks of the texture of a ose-leaf and brows of the grain of finest marble."'Yes,' replies my mother, absently, 'so you<pb n="149 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ill. Well, I must be going to give orders about is room. He would like one looking on the arden best, do not you think, Phoebe?-one here he could smell the flowers and hear the irds?'"Mother goes, and I fall into a meditation. Bobby Gerard is an orphan. A few years ago is mother, who was an old friend of my father's -who knows! perhaps an old love-feeling her nd drawing nigh, had sent for father, and had sked him, with eager dying tears, to take as uch care of her pretty forlorn boy as he could, nd to shield him a little in his tender years rom the evils of this wicked world, and to be to im a wise and kindly guardian, in the place of hose natural ones that God had taken. And ather had promised, and when he promised here was small fear of his not keeping his .word."This was some years ago, and yet I had<pb n="150 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ever seen him nor he me; he had been almost lways at sea and I at school. I had heard lenty about him-about his sayings, his waggeries, his mischievousness, his soft-heartedness, nd his great and unusual comeliness; but his utward man, save as represented in that stealthily eeped-at miniature, had I never seen. They ere to arrive in the afternoon; but long before he hour at which they were due I was waiting ith expectant impatience to receive them. I had hanged my dress, and had (though rather ashamed f myself) put on everything of most becoming hat my wardrobe afforded. If you were to see e as I stood before the glass on that summer fternoon you would not be able to contain your aughter; the little boys in the street would run fter me throwing stones and hooting; but then -according to the then fashion and standard of entility-I was all that was most elegant and omme il faut. Lately it has been the mode to<pb n="151 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>uff oneself out with unnatural and improbable rotuberances; then one's great life-object was to ake oneself appear as scrimping as possible-to ake oneself look as flat as if one had been roned. Many people damped their clothes to ake them stick more closely to them, and to ake them define more distinctly the outline of orm and limbs. One's waist was under one's rms; the sole object of which seemed to be to utrage nature by pushing one's bust up into ne's chin, and one's legs were revealed through ne's scanty drapery with startling candour as ne walked or sat. I remember once standing ith my back to a bright fire in our long drawing-room, and seeing myself reflected in a big irror at the other end. I was so thinly clad hat I was transparent, and could see through yself. Well, in the afternoon in question I was ressed quite an hour ahd a half too soon. I ad a narrow little white gown, which clung suc-<pb n="152 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>essfully tight and close to my figure, and which as of so moderate a length as to leave visible y ankles and my neatly-shod and cross-sandled eet. I had long mittens on my arms, black, and mbroidered on the backs in coloured silks; and bove my hair, which at the back was scratched p to the top of my crown, towered a tremendous ortoise-shell comb; while on each side of my ace modestly drooped a bunch of curls, nearly eeting over my nose."My figure was full-ah! my dear, I have lways had a tendency to fat, and you see what t has come to-and my pink cheeks were more eeply brightly rosy than usual. I had looked ut at every upper window, so as to have the urthest possible view of the road."I had walked in my thin shoes half way own the drive, so as to command a turn, which, rom the house, impeded my vision, when, at ast, after many tantalising false alarms, and just<pb n="153 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ive minutes later than the time mentioned in the etter, the high-swung, yellow-bodied, post-chaise ove in sight, dragged-briskly jingling-along y a pair of galloping horses. Then, suddenly, hyness overcame me-much as I loved my ather, it was more as my personification of all nightly and noble qualities than from much personal acquaintance with him-and I fled."I remained in my room until I thought I ad given them ample time to get through the irst greetings and settle down into quiet talk. Then, having for one last time run my fingers hrough each ringlet of my two curl bunches, I tole diffidently downstairs."There was a noise of loud and gay voices ssuing from the parlour, but, as I entered, they ll stopped talking and turned to look at me,"'And so this is Phoebe ' cries my father's ovial voice, as he comes towards me, and heartily isses me. 'Good Lord, how time flies! It does<pb n="154 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ot seem more than three months since I saw he child, and yet then she was a bit of a brat n trousers, and long bare legs!'"At this allusion to my late mode of attire, I augh, but I also feel myself growing scarlet."'Here, Bobby!' continues my father, taking e by the hand, and leading me towards a sofa n which a young man is sitting beside my other; 'this is my little lass that you have so ften heard of. Not such a very little one, after ll, is she? Do not be shy, my boy; you will not ee such a pretty girl every day of your lifegive her a kiss.'"My eyes are on the ground, but I am aware hat the young man rises, advances (not unwillingly, as it seems to me), and bestows a kiss, omewhere or other on my face. I am not quite lear where, as I think the curls impede him a ood deal."Thus, before ever I saw Bobby, before ever<pb n="155 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>I knew what manner of man he was, I was issed by him. That was a good beginning, was ot itl"After these salutations are over, we subside gain into conversation-I sitting beside my ather, with his arm round my waist, sitting odestly silent, and peeping every now and then nder my eyes, as often as I think I may do so afely unobserved, at the young fellow opposite e. I am instituting an inward comparison between Nature and Art: between the real live man nd the miniature that undertakes to represent im. The first result of this inspection is disappointment, for where are the lovely smooth roses nd lilies that I have been wont to connect with Bobby Gerard's name? There are no roses in is cheek, certainly; they are paleish-from his ound, as I conjecture; but even before that ccident, if there were roses at all, they must ave been mahogany-coloured ones, for the salt<pb n="156 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ea winds and the high summer sun have tanned is fair face to a rich reddish, brownish, copperish ue. But in some things the picture lied not. There is the brow more broad than high; the traight fine nose; the brave and joyful blue yes, and the mouth with its pretty curling mile. On the whole, perhaps, I am not disappointed."By-and-by father rises, and steps out into he verandah, where the canary birds hung out n their cages are noisily praising God after their anner. Mother follows him. I should like to o the same; but a sense of good manners, and  conjecture that possibly my parents may have ome subjects to discuss, on which they would refer to be without the help of my advice, estrain me. I therefore remain, and so does the nvalid.<pb n="157 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>CHAPTER II."FOR some moments the silence threatens to emain unbroken between us; for some moments he subdued sound of father's and mother's talk rom among the rosebeds and the piercing lamour of the canaries-fish-wives among birds -are the only noises that salute our ears. Noise e make none ourselves. My eyes are reading he muddled' pattern of the Turkey carpet; I do ot know what his are doing. Small knowledge ave I had of men saving the dancing-master at ur school; a beautiful new youth is almost as reat a novelty to me as to Miranda, and I am  good deal gawkier than she was under the<pb n="158 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ew experience. I think he must have made a ow that he would not speak first. I feel myself welling to double my normal size with confusion and heat; at last, in desperation, I look up, nd say sententiously, 'You have been wounded, I believel'"'Yes, I have.'"He might have helped me by answering ore at large, might not he? But now that I m having a good look at him, I see that he is ather red too. Perhaps he also feels gawky and wollen; the idea encourages me."'Did it hurt very badly?'"'N-not so very much.'"'I should have thought that you ought to ave been in bed,' say I, with a motherly air of olicitude."'Should you, why?'"'I thought that when people broke their<pb n="159 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>imbs they had to stay in bed till they were ended again.'"'But mine was broken a week ago,' he answers, smiling and showing his straight white eeth-ah, the miniature was silent about them! 'You would not have had me stay in bed a whole eek like an old woman?'"'I expected.to have seen you much iller,' ay I, beginning to feel more at my ease, and ith a sensible diminution of that unpleasant welling sensation. 'Father said in his note that e were to nurse you well again; that sounded s if you were quite ill.'"'Your father always takes a great deal too uch care of me,' he says, with a slight frown nd darkening of his whole bright face. 'I might e sugar or salt.'"'And very kind of him, too,' I cry, firing p. 'What motive beside your own good can<pb n="160 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>e have for looking after you? I call you rather ngrateful.'"'Do you?' he says calmly, and without apparent resentment. 'But you are mistaken. I am ot ungrateful. However, naturally, you do not nderstand.'"'Oh, indeed!' reply I, speaking rather hortly, and feeling a little offended, 'I dare say ot.'"Our talk is taking a somewhat hostile tone; o what further amenities we might have proceeded is unknown; for at this point father and other reappear through the window, and the ecessity of conversing with each other at all eases."Father staid till evening, and we all supped ogether, and I was called upon to sit by Bobby, nd cut up his food for him, as he was disabled rom doing it for himself. Then, later still, hen the sun had set, and all his evening reds<pb n="161 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>nd purples had followed him, when the night lowers were scenting all the garden, and the hadows lay about, enormously long in the summer moonlight, father got into the post-chaise gain, and drove away through the black hadows and the faint clear shine, and Bobby tood at the hall door watching him, with his rm in a sling and a wistful smile on lips and yes."'Well, we are not left quite desolate this ime,' says mother, turning with rather tearful aughter to the young man. 'You wish that we ere, do not you, Bobby?'"'You would not believe me, if I answered"No," would you?' he asks, with the same still mile."'He is not very polite to us, is he, PhoebeS'"'You would not wish me to be polite in uch a case,' he replies, flushing. 'You would not Tas for Christmas ve. l I<pb n="162 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ish me to be glad at missing the chance of eeing any of the fun.'"But Mr. Gerard's eagerness to be back at is post delays the probability of his being able o return thither. The next day he has a feverish ttack, the day after he is worse; the day after hat worse still, and in fine, it is between a fortnight and three weeks before he also is able to et into a post-chaise and drive away to Plymouth. And meanwhile mother and I nurse him nd cosset him, and make him odd and cool rinks out of herbs and field-flowers, whose uses re now disdained or forgotten. I do not mean ny offence to you, my dear, but I think that oung girls in those days were less squeamish nd more truly delicate than they are nowadays. I emember once I read 'Humphrey Clinker' aloud o my father, and we both highly relished and aughed over its jokes; but I should not have nderstood one of the darkly unclean allusions<pb n="163 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>n that French book your brother left here one ay. You would think it very unseemly to enter he bedroom of a strange young man, sick or well; ut as for me, I spent whole nights in Bobby's, atching him and tending him with as little false hame as if he had been my brother. I can hear ow, more plainly than the song you sang me an our ago, the slumberous buzzing of the great rown-coated summer bees in his still room, as I at by his bedside watching his sleeping face, as e dreamt unquietly, and clenched, and again nclenched, his nervous hands. I think he was ack in the Thunderer. I can see now the little lose curls of his sunshiny hair straggling over he white pillow. And then there came a good nd blessed day, when he was out of danger, and hen another, a little further on, when he was up nd dressed, and he and I walked forth into the ayfield beyond the garden-reversing the order f things-he, leaning on my arm; and a good Ii*<pb n="164 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>lump solid arm it was. We walked out under he heavy-leaved horse-chestnut trees, and the old nd rough-barked elms. The sun was shining all his time, as it seems to me. I do not believe hat in those old days there were the same cold nseasonable rains as now; there were soft howers enough to keep the grass green and the lowers undrooped; but I have no association of vercast skies and untimely deluges with those ong and azure days. We sat under a haycock, n the shady side, and indolently watched the ot haymakers-the shirt-sleeved men, and burnt nd bare-armed women, tossing and raking; hile we breathed the blessed country air, full of dorable scents, and crowded with little happy nd pretty-winged insects."'In three days,' says Bobby, leaning his lbow in the hay, and speaking with an eager mile, 'three days at the furthest, I may go back gain; may not I, PhoebeF'<pb n="165 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"'Without doubt,' reply I, stiffly, pulling a dry nd faded ox-eye flower out of the odorous mound eside me; 'for my part, I do not see why you hould not go to-morrow, or indeed-if we could end into Plymouth for a chaise-this afternoon; ou are so thin that you look all mouth and yes, and you can hardly stand, without assistance, ut these, of course, are trifling drawbacks, and I daresay would be rather an advantage on board hip than otherwise.'"'You are angry!' he says, with a sort of augh in his deep eyes. 'You look even prettier when you are angry than when you are leased.'"'It is no question of my looks,' I say, still n some heat, though mollified by the irrelevant ompliment."'For the second time you are thinking me ngrateful,' he says, gravely; 'you do not tell me o in so many words, because it is towards your-<pb n="166 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>elf that my ingratitude is shown; the first time ou told me of it it was almost the first thing hat you ever said to me.'"'So it was,' I answer quickly; 'and if the ccasion were to come over again, I should say t again. I daresay you did not mean it, but it ounded exactly as if you were complaining of my ather for being too careful of you.'"'He is too careful of me!' cries the young an, with a hot flushing of cheek and brow. 'I annot help it if it make you angry again; I must ay it, he is more careful of me than he would be f his own son, if he had one.'"'Did not he promise your mother that he ould look after you?' ask I eagerly. 'When people ake promises to people on their deathbeds they re in no hurry to break them; at least, such eople as father are not.'"'You do not understand,' he says, a little mpatiently, while that hot flush still dwells on<pb n="167 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>is pale cheek; 'my mother was the last person n the world to wish him to take care of my body t the expense of my honour.'"'What are you talking aboutl' I say, looking at him with a lurking suspicion that, despite the steady light of reason in his blue yes, he is still labouring under some form of elirium."'Unless I tell you all my grievance, I see hat you will\never comprehend,' he says sighing. 'Well, isten to me and you shall hear t, and if you\do not agree with me, when I ave done, you re not the kind of girl I take ou for.'"'Then I am re I am not the kind of girl ou take me for,' eply I, with a laugh; 'for I m fully determiner to disagree with you entirely.'"'You know,' he sys, raising himself a little rom his hay couch nd speaking with clear<pb n="168 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>apidity, 'that whenever we take a French prize  lot of the French sailors are ironed, and the essel is sent into port, in the charge of one officer nd several men; there is some slight risk attending it-for my part, I think very slight-but I uppose that your father looks at it differently, or-- have never been sent.'"'It is accident,' say I, reassuringly; 'your urn will come in good time.'"'It is not accident!' he answers, firmly. 'Boys younger than I am-much l1s trustworthy, nd of whom he has not half the pinion that he as of me-have been sent, but i, never. I bore t as well as I could for a long time, but now I an bear it no longer; it is no/I assure you, my ancy; but I can see that r brother officers, nowing how partial your fa er is to me-what nfluence I have with him i many things-conclude that my not being se t is my own choice; s short, that I am-afr d.' (His voice sinks<pb n="169 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ith a disgusted and shamed intonation at the ast word.) 'Now-I have told you the sober acts-look me in the face' (putting his hand ith boyish familiarity under my chin, and turning round my curls, my features, and the front iew of my big comb towards him), 'and tell me hether you agree with me, as I said you would, r not-whether it is not cruel kindness on his art to make me keep a whole skin on such erms?'"I look him in the face for a moment, trying o say that I do not agree with him, but it is ore than I can manage. 'You were right,' I ay, turning my head away, 'I do agree with you; I wish to heaven that I could honestly say that I id not.'"'Since you do then,' he cries excitedly'Phoebe! I knew you would, I knew you better han you knew yourself-I have a favour to ask<pb n="170 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>f you, a great favour, and one that will keep me ll my life in debt to you.'"'What is it?' ask I, with a sinking heart."'Your father is very fond of you---'"'I know it,' I answer curtly."'Anything that you asked, and that was ithin the bounds of possibility, he would do,' e continues, with eager gravity. 'Well, this is hat I ask of you: to write him a line, and let e take it, when I go, asking him to send me ome in the next prize.'"Silence for a moment, only the hay-makers aughing over their rakes. 'And if,' say I, with  trembling voice, 'you lose your life in this ervice, you will have to thank me for it; I hall have your death on my head all through y life.'"'The danger is infinitesimal, as I told you efore,' he says, impatiently; 'and even if it were reater than it is--well, life is a good thing, very<pb n="171 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ood, but there are better things, and even if I ome to grief, which is most unlikely, there are lenty of men as good as-better than-I, to step nto my place.'"'It will be small consolation to the people ho are fond of you that someone better than ou is alive, though you are dead,' I say, tearfully."'But I do not mean to be dead,' he says, ith a cheery laugh. 'Why are you so determined on killing me? I mean to live to be an dmiral. Why should not I?'"'Why indeed?' say I, with a feeble echo of is cheerful mnirth, and feeling rather ashamed of y tears."'And meanwhile you will write?' he says, ith an eager return to the charge; 'and soon? Do not look angry and pouting, as you did just ow, but I must go! What is there to hinder e? I am getting up my strength as fast as it is<pb n="172 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ossible for any human creature to do, and just hink how I should feel if they were to come in or something really good while I am away.'"So I wrote.<pb n="173 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>CHAPTER III."I OFTEN wished afterwards that my right and had been cut off before its fingers had eld the pen that wrote that letter. You wonder o see me moved at what happened so long ago -before your parents were born-and certainly t rmakes not much difference now; for even if he ad prospered then, and come happily home to e, yet, in the course of nature he would have one long before now. I should not have been o cruel as to have wished him to have lasted to e as I am. I did not mean to hint at the end f my story before I have reached the middle. Well--and so he went, with the letter in his<pb n="174 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ocket, and I felt something like the king in the ale, who sent a messenger with a letter, and rote in the letter, 'Slay the bearer of this as oon as he arrives!' But before he went-the vening before, as we walked in the garden after upper, with our monstrously long shadows tretching before us in the moonlight-I do not hink he said in so many words, 'Will you marry et' but somehow, by some signs or words on oth our parts, it became clear to us that, byand-by, if God left him alive, and if the war ver came to an end, he and I should belong to ne another. And so, having understood this, hen he went he kissed me, as he had done hen he came, only this time no one bade him; e did it of his own accord, and a hundred imes instead of one; and for my part, this time, nstead of standing passive like a log or a post, I kissed him back again, most lovingly, with many ears.<pb n="175 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"Ah! parting in those days, when the last iss to one's beloved ones was not unlikely to e an adieu until the great Day of Judgment, as a different thing to the listless, unemotional ood-byes of these stagnant times of peace!"And so Bobby also got into a post-chaise nd drove away, and we watched him too, till e turned the corner out of our sight, as we had atched father; and then I hid my face among he jessamine flowers that clothed the wall of the ouse, and wept as one that would not be comforted. However, one cannot weep for ever, or, f one does, it makes one blind and blear, and I id not wish Bobby to have a wife with such defects; so in process of time I dried my tears."And the days passed by, and nature went lowly and evenly through her lovely changes. The hay was gathered in, and the fine new grass nd clover sprang up among the stalks of the rass that had gone; and the wild roses struggled<pb n="176 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>nto odorous bloom, and crowned the hedges, nd then their time came, and they shook down heir faint petals, and went."And now the corn harvest had come, and e had heard once or twice from our beloveds, ut not often. And the sun still shone with road power, and kept the rain in subjection. And all morning I sat at my big frame, and oiled on at the 'Last Supper.' I had finished Judas Iscariot's face and the other Apostles. I as engaged now upon the table-cloth, which as not interesting and required not much exercise of thought. And mother sat near me, ither working too or reading a good book, and aking snuff-every lady snuffed in those days: t least in trifles, if not in great things, the orld mends. And at night, when ten o'clock truck, I covered up my frame and stole listlessly pstairs to my room. There, I knelt at the open indow, facing Plymouth and the sea, and asked<pb n="177 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>God to .take good care of father and Bobby. I do not know that I asked for any spiritual lessings for them, I only begged that they might e alive."One night, one hot night, having prayed ven more heartily and tearfully than my wont or them both, I had lain down to sleep. The indows were left open, and the blinds up, that ll possible air might reach me from the still nd scented garden below. Thinking of Bobby, I had fallen asleep, and he is still mistily in my ead, when I seem to wake. The room is full f clear light, but it is not morning: it is only he moon looking right in and flooding every bject. I can see my own ghostly figure sitting p in bed, reflected in the looking-glass opposite. I listen: surely I heard some noise:-yes-certainly, there can be no doubt of it-someone is nocking loudly and perseveringly at the halldoor. At first I fall into a deadly fear; then my Tales for Clirismas Eve. 12<pb n="178 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>eason comes to my aid. If it were a robber, r person with any evil intent, would he knock o openly and clamorously as to arouse the inmates? Would not he rather go stealthily to ork, to force a silent entrance for himself? At orst it is some drunken sailor from Plymouth; t best, it is a messenger with news of our dear nes. At this thought I instantly spring out of ed, and hurrying on my stockings and shoes nd whatever garments come most quickly to and-with my hair spread all over my back, and tterly forgetful of my big comb, I open my door, nd fly down the passages, into which the moon s looking with her ghostly smile, and down the road and shallow stairs."As I near the hall-door I meet our old butler, lso rather dishevelled, and evidently on the same rrand as myself."'Who can it be, Stephens?' I ask, trembling ith excitement and fear.<pb n="179 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"'Indeed, ma'am, I cannot tell you,' replies he old man, shaking his head, 'it is a very odd ime of night to choose for making such a noise. We will ask them their business, whoever they re, before we unchain the door.'"It seems to me as if the endless bolts would ever be drawn-the key never be turned in the tiff lock; but at last the door opens slowly and autiously, only to the width of a few inches, as t is still confined by the strong chain. I peep ut eagerly, expecting I know not what."Good heavens! What do I seel No drunken ailor, no messenger, but, oh joy! oh blessedness! y Bobby himself-my beautiful boy-lover! Even ow, even after all these weary years, even fter the long bitterness that followed, I cannot forget the unutterable happiness of that oment."'Open the door, Stephens, quick!' I cry, I2*<pb n="180 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>tammering with eagerness. ')raw the chain; it s Mr. Gerard; do not keep him waiting.'"The chain rattles down, the door opens wide, nd there he stands before me. At once, ere ny one has said anything, ere anything has happened, a feeling of cold disappointment steals naccountably over me-a nameless sensation, hose nearest kin is chilly awe. He makes no ovement towards me; he does not catch me in is arms, nor even hold out his right hand to me. He stands there still and silent, and though the ight is dry, equally free from rain and dew, I ee that he is dripping wet; the water is running own from his clothes, from his drenched hair, nd even from his eyelashes, on to the dry ground t his feet."'What has happened?' I cry, hurriedly, 'How et you are!' and as I speak I stretch out my and and lay it on his coat sleeve. But even as I do it a sensation of intense cold runs up my<pb n="181 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ingers and my arm, even to the elbow. How is t that he is so chilled to the marrow of his bones n this sultry, breathless, August night? To my xtreme surprise he does not answer; he still tands there, dumb and dripping. 'Where have ou come from?' I ask, with that sense of awe eepening. 'Have you fallen into the river? How s it that you are so wet?'"'It was cold,' he says, shivering, and speaking in a slow and strangely altered voice, 'bitter old. I could not stay there.'"'Stay where?' I say, looking in amazement t his face, which, whether owing to &he ghastly ffect of moonlight or not, seems to me ash hite. "Where have you been? What is it you re talking about?'"But he does not reply."'He is really ill, I am afraid,.Stephens,' I ay, turning with a forlorn feeling towards the ld butler. 'He does not seem to hear what I<pb n="182 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ay to him. I am afraid he has had a thorough hill. What water can he have fallen into? You ad better help him up to bed, and get him warm etween the blankets. His room is quite ready or him, you know-come in,' I say, stretching ut my hand to him, 'you will' be better after a ight's rest.'"He does not take my offered hand, but he ollows me across the threshold and across the all. I hear the water drops falling drip, drip, n the echoing stone floor as he passes; then upstairs, and along the gallery to the door of his oom, where I leave him with Stephens. Then verything becomes blank and nil to me."I am awoke as usual in the morning by the ntrance of my maid with hot water."'Well, how is Mr. Gerard this morning?' I sk, springing into a sitting posture."She puts down the hot water tin and stares t her leisure at me.<pb n="183 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"'My dear Miss Phoebe, how should I know  Please God he is in good health and safe, and hat we shall have good news of him before ong.'"'Have not you asked how he is?' I ask impatiently. 'He did not seem quite himself last ight; there was something odd about him. I as afraid he was in for another touch of fever.'"'Last night-fever,' repeats she, slowly and '^i iscbnnectedly echoing some of my words. 'I eg your pardon, ma'am, I am sure, but I have ot the least idea in life what you are talking bout'"'How stupid you are!' I say, quite at the nd of ipy patience. 'Did not Mr. Gerard come ack uloxpectedly last night, and did not I hear im knocking, and run down to open the door, nd did not Stephens come too, and afterwards ake him up to bed?'<pb n="184 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"The stare of bewilderment gives way to a augh."'You have been dreaming, ma'am. Of course I cannot answer for what you did last night, but I am sure that Stephens knows no more of the oung gentleman than I do, for only just now, at reakfast, he was saying that he thought it was bout time for us to have some tidings of him nd master.'"'A dream!' cry I indignantly. 'Impossible! I was no more dreaming then than I am now.' But time convinces me that I am mistaken, nd that during all the time that I thought I was tanding at the open hall-door, talking to my beloved, in reality I was lying on my bed in the epths of sleep, with no other company than the cent of the flowers and the light of the moon. At this discovery a great and terrible depression alls on me. I go to my mother to tell her of y vision, and at the end of my narrative I say,<pb n="185 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"'Mother, I know well that Bobby is dead, nd that I shall never see him any more. I feel ssured that he died last night, and that he came imself to tell me of his going. I am sure that here is nothing left for me now but to go too.""I speak thus far with great calmness, but hen I have done I break out into loud and iolent weeping. Mother rebukes me gently, telling me that there is nothing more natural than hat I should dream of a person who constantly ccupies my waking thoughts, nor that, considering the gloomy nature of my apprehensions about im, my dream should be of a sad and ominous ind; but that, above all dreams and omens, God s good, that He has preserved him hitherto, and hat, for her part, no devil-sent apparition shall hake her confidence in His continued clemency. I go away a little comforted, though not very uch, and still every night I kneel at the open indow facing Plymouth and the sea, and pray<pb n="186 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>or my sailor boy. But it seems to me, despite ll my self-reasonings, despite all that mother ays, that my prayers for him are prayers for the ead.<pb n="187 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>CHAPTER IV."THREE more weeks pass away; the harvest s garnered, and the pears are growing soft and ellow. Mother's and my outward life goes on n its silent regularity, nor do we talk much to ach other of the tumult that rages-of the heartache that burns, within each of us. At the end f the three weeks, as we are sitting as usual, uietly employed, and buried each in our own houghts, in the parlour, towards evening we hear heels approaching the hall-door. We both run ut as in my dream I had run to the door, and rrive in time to receive my father as he steps ut of the carriage that has brought him. Welll<pb n="188 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>t least one of our wanderers has come home, ut where is the other?"Almost before he has heartily kissed us oth-wife and child-father cries out, 'But here is Bobby?'"'That is just what I was going to ask you,' eplies mother quickly."'Is not he here with youl' returns he anxiously."'Not he,' answers mother, 'we have neither een nor heard anything of him for more than ix weeks.'"'Great God!' exclaims he, while his face ssumes an expression of the deepest concern, 'what can have become of him? what can have appened to the poor fellow?'"'Has not he been with you, then?-has not e been in the Thunderer?' asks mother, running er words into one another in her eagerness to et them out.<pb n="189 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"'I sent him home three weeks ago in a rize, with a letter to you, and told him to stay ith you till I came home, and what can have ecome of him' since, God only knows!' he answers with a look of the profoundest sorrow and nxiety."There is a moment of forlorn and dreary ilence; then I speak. I have been standing umbly by, listening, and my heart growing older and colder at every dismal word."'It is all my doing!' I cry passionately, linging myself down in an agony of tears on he straight-backed old settle in the hall. 'It is y fault-no one else's! The very last time hat I saw him, I told him that he would have o thank me for his death, and he laughed at e, but it has come true. If I had not written ou, father, that accursed letter, we should have ad him here now, this minute, safe and sound,<pb n="190 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>tanding in the middle of us-as we never, zver, shall have him again!'"I stop, literally suffocated with emotion."Father comes over, and lays his kind brown and on my bent prone head. 'My child,' he ays, 'my dear child,' (and tears are dimming he clear grey of his own eyes), 'you are wrong o make up your mind to what is the worst at nce. I do not disguise from you that there is ause for grave anxiety about the dear fellow, ut still God is good; He has kept both him nd me hitherto; into His hands we must trust ur boy.'"I sit up, and shake away my tears."'It is no use,' I say. 'Why should I hope? There is no hope! I know it for a certainty! He s dead' (looking round at them both with a sort f calmness); 'he died on the night that I had hat dream-mother, I told you so at the time.<pb n="191 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>Oh, my Bobby! I knew that you could not eave me for ever without coming to tell me!'"And so speaking, I fall into strong hysterics nd am carried upstairs to bed. And so three r four more lagging days crawl by, and still we ear nothing, and remain in the same state of oubt and uncertainty; which to me, however, is ardly uncertainty; so convinced am I, in my wn mind, that my fair-haired lover is away in he land whence never letter or messenger comes -that he has reached the Great Silence. So I it at my frame, working my heart's agony into he tapestry, and feebly trying to say to God that He has done well, but I cannot. On the contrary, it seems to me, as my life trails on through he mellow mist of the autumn mornings, through he shortened autumn evenings, that, whoever as done it, it is most evilly done. One night e are sitting round the little crackling wood fire hat one does not need for warmth, but that<pb n="192 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ives a cheerfulness to the room and the furniture, when the butler Stephens enters, and going ver to father, whispers to him. I seem to understand in a moment what the purport of his hisper is."'Why does he whisper?' I cry, irritably. 'Why does not he speak out loudi Why should ou try to keep it from mel I know that it is omething about Bobby.'"Father has already risen, and is walking towards the door."'I will not let you go until you tell me,' I ry wildly, flying after him."'A sailor has come over from Plymouth,' he nswers hurriedly; 'he says he has news. My arling, I will not keep you in suspense a moment longer than I can help, and meanwhile pray -both of you pray for him!'"I sit rigidly still, with my cold hands tightly lasped, during the moments that next elapse.<pb n="193 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>Then father returns. His eyes are full of tears, nd there is small need to ask for his message; t is most plainly written on his features-death, nd not life."'You were right, Phoebe,' he says, brokenly, aking hold of my icy hands; 'you knew best. He is gone! God has taken him.'"My heart dies. I had thought that I had o hope, but I was wrong. 'I knew it!' I say, n a dry stiff voice. 'Did not I tell you sol But ou would not believe me-go on!-tell me how t was-do not think I cannot bear it-make aste !'"And so he tells me all that there is now eft for me to know-after what manner, and on hat day, my darling took his leave of this pretty nd cruel world. He had had his wish, as I already knew, and had set off blithely home in the ast prize they had captured. Father had taken Tales for Chrismas Eve. 13<pb n="194 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>he precaution of having a larger proportion than sual of the Frenchmen ironed, and had also ent a greater number of Englishmen. But to hat purpose? They were nearing port, sailing rosperously along on a smooth blue sea, with a air strong wind, thinking of no evil, when a reat and terrible misfortune overtook them. Some of the Frenchmen who were not ironed ot the sailors below and drugged their grog; roned them, and freed their countrymen. Then ne of the officers rushed on deck, and holding  pistol to my Bobby's head bade him surrender he vessel or die. Need I tell you which he hose? I think not-well" (with a sigh) "and so hey shot my boy-ah me! how many years ago -and threw him overboard! Yes-threw him verboard-it makes me angry and grieved even ow to think of it-into the great and greedy ea, and the vessel escaped to France." There is a silence between us: I will own<pb n="195 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>o you that I am crying, but the old lady's eyes re dry."Well," she says, after a pause, with a sort of riumph in her tone, "they never could say again hat Bobby Gerard was afraid!"The tears were running down my father's heeks, as he told me," she resumes presently,"but at the end he wiped them and said, 'It is ell! He was as pleasant in God's sight as he as in ours, and so He has taken him.'"And for me, I was glad that he had gone o God-none gladder. But you will not wonder hat, for myself, I was past speaking sorry. And o the years went by, and, as you know, I married Mr. Hamilton, and lived with him forty ears, and was happy in the main, as happiness oes; and when he died I wept much and long, nd so I did for each of my sons when in turn hey went. But looking back on all my long 13*<pb n="196 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ife, the event that I think stands out most clearly rom it is my dream and my boy-lover's deathday. It was an odd dream, was not itl"<pb n="197 CHRISTMAS TALES"/><pb n="198 CHRISTMAS TALES"/><pb n="199 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>IF there is a thing in the world that my soul ateth, it is a long night journey by rail. In the ld coaching days I do not think that I should ave minded it, passing swiftly through a summer ight on the top of a speedy coach with the star rch black-blue above one's head; the sweet smell f earth, and her numberless flowers and grasses n one's nostrils, and the pleasant trot, trot, trot, rot, of the four strong horses in one's ears. But y railway! in a little stuffy compartment, with othing to amuse you if you keep awake; with a im lamp hanging above you, tantalizing you ith the idea that you can read by its light, and hen you try, satisfactorily proving to you that<pb n="200 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ou cannot, and, if you sleep, breaking your eck, or at least stiffening it, by the brutal arrangement of the hard cushions. These thoughts ass sulkily and rebelliously through my head as I sit in my salon in the Ecu at Geneva on the fternoon of the fine autumn day on which, in n evil hour, I have settled to take my place in he night train for Paris. I have put off going s long as I can. I like Geneva, and am leaving some pleasant nd congenial friends, but now go I must. My usband is to meet me at the station in Paris at ix o'clock to-morrow morning. Six o'clock! hat a barbarous hour at which to arrive! I am utting on my bonnet and cloak; I look at myself in the glass with an air of anticipative disgust. Yes, I look trim and spruce enough now -a not disagreeable object perhaps-with sleek air, quick and alert eyes, and pink-tinted cheeks. Alas! at six o'clock to-morrow morning what a<pb n="201 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ifferent tale there will be to tell! dishevelled usty locks, half-open weary eyes, a disordered ress, and a green-coloured countenance. I turn away with a pettish gesture, and reflecting that at least there is no wisdom in living y miseries twice over, I go downstairs, and get nto the hired open carriage which awaits me. My maid and man follow with the luggage. I ive stricter injunctions than ordinary to my aid never for one moment to lose her hold of he dressing-case which contains, as it happens,  great many more valuable jewels than people re wont to travel in foreign parts with, nor of a ertain costly and beautiful Dresden china and old Louis Quatorze clock, which I am carrying ome as a present to my people. We reach the tation, and I straightway betake myself to the irst-class Salle d'Attente, there to remain penned p till the officials undo the gates of purgatory nd release us-an arrangement whose wisdom I<pb n="202 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ave yet to learn. There are ten minutes to pare, and the Salle is filling fuller and fuller very moment. Chiefly my countrymen, countrywomen, and country children, beginning to troop ome to their partridges. I look curiously round t them, speculating as to which of them will e my companion or companions through the ight. There are no very unusual types: girls in ailor hats and blonde hair-fringes; strong-minded ld maids in painstakingly ugly waterproofs; aldish fathers; fattish mothers; a German or two, ith prominent pale eyes and spectacles. I have ust decided on the companions I should prefer;  large young man, who belongs to nobody, and ooks as if he spent most of his life in laughing -(Alas! he is not likely! he is sure to want to moke!)-and a handsome and prosperous-looking young couple. They are more likely, as ery probably, in the man's case,' the bride-love<pb n="203 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ill overcome the cigar-love. The porter comes p. The key turns in the lock; the doors open. At first I am standing close to them, flattening y nose against the glass, and looking out on he pavement; but as the passengers became ore numerous, I withdrew from my prominent osition, anticipating a rush for carriages. I hate nd dread exceedingly a crowd, and would much refer at one time to miss my train rather than e squeezed and jostled by one. In consequence, y maid and I are almost the last people to merge, and have the last and worst choice of eats. We run along the train looking in; the ootman, my maid, and I-full-full everywhere!"Dames Seules?" asks the guard."Certainly not! neither 'Dames Seules,' nor 'Fumeurs,' but if it must be one or the other, ertainly 'Fumeurs." I am growing nervous, when I see the footman, who is a little ahead of us, standing with<pb n="204 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>n open carriage door in his hand, and signing o us to make haste. Ah! it is all right! it always omes right when one does not fuss oneself."Plenty of room here, 'm; only two gentlemen!" I put my foot on the high step and climb in. Rather uncivil of the two gentlemen! neither of hem offers to help me, but they are not looking his way I suppose. "Mind the dressing case!" I cry nervously, as I stretch out my hand to help he maid Watson up. The man pushes her from ehind; in she comes-dressing-case, clock and ll; here we are for the night! I am so busy and amused looking out of the indow, seeing the different parties bidding their riends good-bye, and watching with indignation he barbaric and malicious manner in which the orters hurl the luckless luggage about, that we ave steamed out of the station, and are fairly ff for Paris, before I have the curiosity to glance<pb n="205 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>t my fellow passengers. Well! when I'd take a ook at them, I'd not make much of it. Watson nd I occupy the two seats by one window, facing ne another, our fellow travellers have not taken he other two window seats; they occupy the iddle ones, next us. They are both reading ehind newspapers. Well! we shall not get much musement out of them. I give them up as a ad job. Ah! if I could have had my wish, and ad the laughing young man, and the pretty oung couple, for company, the night would not erhaps have seemed so long. However I should ave been mortified for them to have seen how reen I looked when the dawn came; and, as to hese commis voyageurs, I do not care if I look s green as grass in their eyes. Thus, all, no oubt, is for the best; and at all events it is a ood trite copy-book maxim to say so. So I forget all about them: fix my eyes on the landscape. acing by, and fall into a variety of thoughts.<pb n="206 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"Will my husband really get up in time to come nd meet me at the station to-morrow morning." He does so cordially hate getting up. My only hance is his not having gone to bed at all! How will he be looking? I have not seen him or four months. Will he have succeeded in urbing his tendency to fat, during his Norway ishing? Probably not. Fishing, on the contrary, s rather a fat-making occupation; sluggish and edentary. Shall we have a pleasant party at the ouse we are going to, for shooting? To whom n Paris shall I go for a gown? Worth? No, Worth is beyond me. 'here I leave the future, nd go back into past enjoyments; excursions to Lansmere; trips down the lake to Chilton; a undred and one pleasantnesses. The time slips y: the afternoon is drawing towards evening; a eginning of dusk is coming over the landscape. I look round. Good Heavens! what can those en find so interesting in the papers? I thought<pb n="207 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>hem hideously dull, when I looked over them his morning; and yet they are still persistently eading. What can they have got hold of? I annot well see what the man beside me has; is-a-vis is buried in an English Times. Just as I am thinking about him, he puts down his paper, nd I see his face. Nothing very remarkable! a ong black beard, and a hat tilted somewhat low ver his forehead. I turn away my eyes hastily, or fear of being caught inquisitively scanning him; ut still, out of their corners I see that he has aken a little bottle out of his travelling bag, has oured some of its contents into a glass, and is utting it to his lips. It appears as if-and, at he time it happens, I have no manner of doubt hat he is drinking. Then I feel that he is ddressing me. I look up and towards him: he s holding out the phial to me, and sayingDEFINITENEWLINE"May I take the liberty of offering Madame ome?"<pb n="208 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>"No thank you, Monsieur!" I answer, shaking y head hastily and speaking rather abruptly. Trhere is nothing that I dislike more than being ffered strange eatables or drinkables in a train, r a strange hymn book in church. He smiles politely, and then addsDEFINITENEWLINE"Perhaps the other lady might be persuaded o take a little.""No thank you, sir, I'm much obliged to you," eplies Watson briskly, in almost as ungrateful  tone as mine. Again he smiles, bows, and re-buries himself n his newspaper. The thread of my thoughts is roken, I feel an odd curiosity as to the nature f the contents of that bottle. Certainly it is not herry or spirit of any kind, for it has diffused no dour through the carriage. All this time the an beside me has said and done nothing. I ish he would move or speak, or do something. I peep covertly at him. Well! at all events, he<pb n="209 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>s well defended against the night chill. What  voluminous cloak he is wrapped !in; how entirely it shrouds his figure; trimmed with fur too! hy it might be January instead of September. d not know why, but that cloak makes me feel ather uncomfortable. I wish they would both ove to the window, instead of sitting next us. Bah! am I setting up to be a timid dovel I who ather pique myself on my bravery-on my indifference to tramps, bulls, ghosts. The clock as been deposited with the umbrellas, parasols, pare shawls, rugs, etc., in the netting above Watson's head. The dressing-case-a very large nd heavy one-is sitting on her lap. I lean forwards and say to herDEFINITENEWLINE"That box must rest very heavily on your nee, and I want a footstool--I should be more omfortable if I had one-let me put my feet n it." I have an idea that, somehow my sapphires Tales for Chrusmas Eve. 14<pb n="210 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ill be safer if I have them where I can always eel that they are there. We make the desired hange in our arrangements. Yes! both my feet re on it. The landscape outside is darkening quickly ow; our dim lamp is beginning to assert its importance. Still the men read. I feel a sensation f irritation. What can they mean by itl it is tterly impossible that they can decipher the mall print of the Times, by this feeble shaky limmer. As I am so thinking, the one who had before spoken lays down his paper, folds it up and eposits it on the seat beside him. Then, drawing his little bottle out of his bag a second time, rinks, or seems to drink, from it. Then he again urns to meDEFINITENEWLINE"Madame will pardon me; but if Madame ould be induced to try a little of this; it is a ordial of a most refreshing and invigorating de-<pb n="211 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>cription; and if she will have the amiability to llow me to say so, Madame looks faint." (What can he mean by his urgencyl Is it pure oliteness? I wish it were not growing so dark.) These thoughts run through my head as I hesitate or an instant what answer to make. Then an dea occurs to me, and I manufacture a civil mile and say, "Thank you very much, Monsieur! I am a little faint, as you observe. I think I will vail myself of your obliging offer." So saying, I take the glass, and touch it with my lips. I ive you my word of honour that I do not think I did more; I did not mean to swallow a drop, ut I suppose I must have done. He smiles with  gratified air."The other lady will now, perhaps, follow your xample " By this time I am beginning to feel thoroughly ncomfortable: why, I should be puzzled to ex14*<pb n="212 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>lain. What is this cordial that he is so eager o urge upon us? Though determined not to subject myself to its influence, I must see its effect pon another person. Rather brutal of me, perhaps; rather in the spirit of the anatomist, who, n the interest of science, tortures live dogs and ats; but I am telling youfacts-not what I ought o have done, but what I did. I make a sign to Watson to drink some. She obeys, nothing loath. She has been working hard all day; packing and etting under weigh, and she is tired. There is o feigning about her! She has emptied the glass. Now to see what comes of it! What happens to y live dog? The bottle is replaced in the bag; till we are racing, racing on, past the hills and fields nd villages. How indistinct they are all growing! I turn back from the contemplation of the outside view to the inside one. Why, the woman s asleep already! her chin buried in her chest; er mouth half open; looking exceedingly im-<pb n="213 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ecile and very plain, as most people, when sleep out of bed, do look. A nice invigorating otion, indeed! I wish to Heaven that I had gone ux fumeurs, or even with that cavalcade of nursery-maids and unwholesome-looking babies aux ames seules, next door. At all events, I am not t all sleepy myself: that is a blessing. I shall ee what happens. Yes, by-the-by, I must see hat he meant to happen: I must affect to fall. sleep too. I close my eyes, and gradually sinking my chin on my chest, try to droop my jaws nd hang my cheeks, with a semblance of bonafide slumber. Apparently I succeed pretty well. After the lapse of some minutes, I distinctly feel wo hands very cautiously and carefully lifting nd removing my feet from the dressing-box. A cold chill creeps over me, and then the lood rushes to my head and ears. What am I o do? what am I to dot I have always thought he better of myself ever since for it; but, strange<pb n="214 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>o say, I keep my presence of mind. Still affecting to sleep, I give a sort of kick, and instantly he hands are withdrawn and all is perfectly quiet gain. I now feign to wake gradually, with a awn and a stretch; and, on moving about my eet a little, find that, despite my kick, they have een too clever for me, and have dexterously removed my box and substituted another. The way n which I make this pleasant discovery is that, hereas mine was perfectly flat at the top, on the urface of the object that is now beneath my feet here is some sort of excrescence-a handle of ome sort or other. There is no denying it-brave I may be-I may laugh at people for*running rom bulls; for disliking to sleep in a room by hemselves, for fear of ghosts; for hurrying past ramps: but now I am most thoroughly frightened. I look cautiously, in a sideways manner, at the an beside me. How very still he is! Were they is hands, or the hands of the man opposite him?<pb n="215 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>I take a fuller look than I have yet ventured to o; turning slightly round for the purpose. He s still reading, or at least still holding the paper, cr the reading must be a farce. I look at his ands: they are in precisely the same position as hey were when I affected to go to sleep, although he pose of the rest of his body is slightly altered. Suddenly, I turn extremely cold, for it has dawned n me that they are not real hands-they are ertainly false ones. Yes though the carriage is haking xery much with our rapid motion, and he light is shaking, too, yet there is no mistake. I look inde'd more closely, so as to be quite sure. The one nearest me is ungloved; the other gloved. I look at the nearest one. Yes, it is of an opaque axen whitenes. I can plainly see the rouge put nder the finge-nails to represent the colouring f life. I try to give one glance at his face. The aper still partial hides it; and as he is leaning is head back against the cushion, where the<pb n="216 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>ight hardly penetrates, I am completely baffled n my efforts. Great Heavens! what is going to happen to e? what shall I do? how much of him is redl? here are his real hands? what is going on under hat awful cloak? The fur border touches me as I sit by him. I draw convulsively and shrinkingly away, and try to squeeze myself up as close s possible to the window. But alas! :o what ood: how absolutely and utterly powerless I am! ow entirely at their mercy! And thete is Watson still sleeping swinishly! breathihg heavily pposite me. Shall I try to wake lier? But to hat end? She, being under the inflience of that ile drug, my efforts will certainly e useless, and ill probably arouse the man to enploy violence gainst me. Sooner or later in t e course of the ight I suppose they are prett sure to murder e, but I had rather that it sh uld be later than ooner.<pb n="217 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>While I think these things, I am lying back uite still, for, as I philosophically reflect, not all he screaming in the world will help me: if I had wenty-lung power I could not drown the rush of n express train. Oh, if my dear boy were but ere,-my husband I mean,-fat or lean, how hankful I should be to see to him. Oh, that loak, and those horrid waxy handsl Of course I ee it now they remained stuck out, while the an's red ones were fumbling about my feet. In he midst of my agony of fright, a thought of Madame Tussaud flashes ludicrously across me. Then they begin to talk of me. It is plain that hey are not taken in by my feint of sleep: they peak in a clear, loud voice, evidently for my enefit. One of them begins by saying, "What a ood-looking woman she is-evidently in her premiere jeunesse too."-(Reader, I struck thirty last May)-"and also there can be no doubt as to er being of exalted rank--a duchess probably."<pb n="218 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>-(A dead duchess by morning, think I grimly). They go on to say how odd it is that people in y class of life never travel with their own jewels, ut always with paste ones, the real ones being eanwhile deposited at the bankers. My poor, oor sapphires! good-bye-a long good-bye to ou. But indeed I will willingly compound for he loss of you and the rest of my ornamentswill go bare-necked, and bare-armed, or clad in Salviati beads for the rest of my life, so that I do ut attain the next stopping place alive. As I am so thinking, one of the men looks, r I imagine that he looks, rather curiously owards me. In a paroxysm of fear lest they hould read on my face the signs of the agony f terror I am enduring, I throw my pocket andkerchief-a very fine cambric one-over y face. And now, oh reader, I am going to tell you omething which I am sure you will not believe;<pb n="219 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>I can hardly believe it myself, but, as I so lie, espite the tumult of my mind-despite the hilly terror which seems to be numbing my eelings-in the midst of it all a drowsiness eeps stealing over me. I am now convinced ither that vile potion must have been of extraordinary strength, or that I, through the shaking f the carriage, or the unsteadiness of my hand, arried more to my mouth, and swallowed more -I did not mean to swallow any-than I intended, for-you will hardly credit it, but-I fell sleep  When I awake,-awake with a bewildered ixed sense of having been a. long time asleep -of not knowing where I am-and of having ome great dread and horror on my mindawake and look round, the dawn is breaking. I shiver, with the chilly sensation, that the coming<pb n="220 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>f even a warm day brings, and look round, still alf unconsciously in a misty way. But what has appened? how empty the carriage is! the dressing-case is gone! the clock is gone! the man ho sat nearly opposite me is gone! Watson is one! but the' man in the cloak and the wax ands still sits beside me; still the hands are olding the paper; still the fur is touching me; Good God! I am tete-a-t&te with him! A feeling f the most appalling desolation and despair omes over me-vanquishes me utterly. I clasp y hands together frantically, and, still looking t the dim form beside me, groan out-"Well! I did not think that Watson would have forsaken e!" Instantly, a sort of movement and shiver uns through the figure: the newspaper drops rom the hands which however continue to be till held out in the same position as if still rasping it; and behind the newspaper, I see by he dim morning light, and the dim lamp-gleams<pb n="221 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>hat there is no real face but a mask. A sort of hoked sound is coming from behind the mask. Shivers of cold fear are running over me. Never o this day, shall I know what gave me the despairing courage to do it, but before I know what I am doing, I find myself tearing at the cloak,tearing away the mask-tearing away the hands. It would be better to find anything underneathSatan himself,-a horrible dead body-anything -sooner than submit any longer to this hideous ystery. And I am rewarded. When the cloak ies at the bottom of the carriage-when the ask, and the false hands and false feet(there are false feet too)-are also cast away, n different directions, what do you think I find nderneath? Watson! Yes: it appears that while I sleptI feel sure that they must have rubbed some ore of the drug on my lips while I was unconscious, or I never could have slept so<pb n="222 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>eavily or so long-they dressed up Watson in he mask, feet, hands, and cloak; set the hat n her head, gagged her, and placed her beside e in the attitude occupied by the man. They ad then, at the next station, got out, taking ith them dressing-case and clock, and had ade off in all security. When I arrive in Paris ou will not be surprised to hear that it does ot once occur to me whether I am looking reen or no. And this is the true history of my night ourney to Paris! You will be glad, I daresay, o learn that I ultimately recovered my sapphires, and a good many of my other ornaments. The police being promptly set on, the obbers were, after much trouble and time, at ength secured; and it turned out that the man n the cloak was an ex-valet of my husband's, ho was acquainted with my bad habit of ravelling in company with my trinkets -<pb n="223 CHRISTMAS TALES"/>bad habit which I have since seen fit to bandon. What I have written is literally true, though t did not happen to myself. THE END.