<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
A.



<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
CP
iI



<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
The Westof Love
Being 7hird and Last Part of
"The Trail of the Serpent"
By MRS. E. D. E, N. SOUTHWORTH
Author of Nearest and Dearest," LUttle Nea's Engagement,"
The Lost Lady of Lone," "s The Struggle of a Soul,"
"d Why Did He Wed Her," etc.
A. L. BURT COMPANY
PUBLISHERS     .:     *    NEW YORK



<pb n="3"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE
CHAPTER I
A GIBL'S TRAGEDY
ONCE more Hamilton Gower read the little pink note that
had come with the manuscript which his beloved, Seraph
Elfnstar, had given him to read:
"Before you begin to read my narrative you must know
this in explanation: Mr. Elfinstar is not my father, but my
grandfather, and I am Margaret Campbell."
He sat stupefied with amazement and sorrow.
One idea possessed and overwhelmed him-that Seraph
Elfinstar, the good and beautiful girl whom he loved and
worshiped for her angelic attributes of person and char-
acter, could be one and the same individual with Margaret
Campbell, the convict murderess, whom he had learned to
loathe and abhor for the cruelty of her nature and the
atrocity of her crime.
He could not understand this. He could not believe it.
The terrible revelation crushed, but did not convince him.
He sat there paralyzed by the stunning blow, utterly in-
capable of reasoning upon it.
Seraph Elfinstar and Margaret Campbell one and the
same woman    It was incredible it was impossible! even
though she herself had said it!
He felt a sudden sense of suffocation. Rising and stag-
gering like a drunken man, he tottered to one of the win-
dows and raised it, drew a deep inhalation of the fresh air,
and then sank down on a chair beside it and rested his
elbow on the sill.
Margaret Campbell and Seraph Elfinstar one I
8
186549
&.                                                                 J



<pb n="4"/>
4             THE TEST OF LOVE
Oh I this was a nightmare from which he would presently
be relieved I He had talked too much and thought too much
of this detestable Margaret Campbell, and her sinister influ-
enceoi.theJlife f Seraph Elfnstar, until at length he had
;blen^l ^   gn*~'.his dreams! He would pin h, himself se-
.   :     verely and wake up..
He did so, but without effecting any change in his sur-
Soundings.
Here was still the hotel room, with its whitewashed walls,
its straw matting on the floor, its white-curtained windows,
and its white-draped bed. There was the little pink note
that had stung him like an asp lying on the floor, and here
j was. the roll of manuscript in his hand 1
'  No, he had not been dreaming! He was wide awake, and
face to face with a hideous, a ghastly, reality. Seraph
Elfinstar was Margaret Campbell, and a convict for life! 
Seraph herself had written it! Seraph, whose word was
truth !
Since she was Margaret Campbell, of course, she was lost
to him forever and ever! There could be no thought of
marriage with her, a convict for life in the penal settlements
of Tasmania !
But was she guilty?
Impossible !
Seraph Elfinstar must be as innocent as an angel, even
thotgh Margaret Campbell had been convicted under over-
whelning evidence, and the two names represented but
one woman.
Yes, Seraph Elfinstar was innocent! He felt absolutely
certain of that  He could not have been intimately as-
sociated with her for six weeks without recognizing the
purity, tenderness and sincerity of Pntsre which would
have rendered such guilt as had been ascribed to Margaret
Campbell utterly impossible to her.
How, then, had such a net of cirumstantial evidence in'
volved her in its meshes? 
. Would her narrative explain tlmt?.
He was scarcely capable of  aiig the manuscript as
yet. The terrible excitement of !ie last half hour had al-
*most exhausted his strength. He felt as weak as a child.
He was very abstemious in the use of wine; yet now he
felt the need of some stimulus.



<pb n="5"/>
THE TEST OP LOVE 
'He stretched out his hand and rang the bell, whose pull
was within his reach, summoned a waiter and ordered a
glass of wine; and when he had drunk it he settled himself
in his large armchair, arolled the manuscript, and read:
"THE STORY OF MARGARET 0AMPBELL
"Dear friend, who have been so good to me, I feel that I
must be true with you.
"Now, standing in the shadow of death, I must tell you
the whole story.
"I preface my narrative by confessing that but for my
;  own fault I should never have been placed in the awful
position in which I stand to-day-doomed to die for a
crime that I never was capable of committing.
"Dearest of dear friends! you knew so little of me, of my
circumstances, before my dire extremity brought you to
my help, that I must recount something of my early life.
in order to explain what is to follow.
'   "I am the only child of Duncan Campbell, second son of
Duncan Campbell, of Rose Hill, and of Seraph Elfinstar,
only daughter of Theobald Elfinstar, of Thorcliff, York-
.  shire.
X "I have no memory of my parents, having lost them
fi    both in the first two years of my existence.
"My infancy and childhood were passed happily under
the guardianship of my father's elder brother, Mr. Stuart
Campbell, of Rose Hill.
"My uncle was without children, and I, in right of my
'father, was the recognized heir presumptive of the estate.
"I was the adopted daughter of the house, petted and
spoiled by both uncle and aunt.
"I loved my uncle, who was my uncle by blood; but I
' actually adored my aunt, though she was my aunt only
,  by marriage.
"She loved me with more than a mother's tenderness,
and I worshiped her with more than a daughter's devotion.
'"The bond of affectio between us was a perfect bond.
'"She was a most accomplished woman, and when, in the
.  eventh year of my age, the question of providing a gover-
_   ess for me arose in the house, and I-spoiled child that I
was-rebelled at the idea, with a storm of sobs, and tears,
.?



<pb n="6"/>
6            THE TEST OF LOVE
and protestations that I would never let a stranger take 'i
possession of me, and separate me for ever so many hours
a day from my dear auntie, she, in her self-sacrificing love, 
came to my rescue by declaring that she herself was per-
fectly competent and perfectly willing to take full charge
of my education, and would henceforth do so.
"Yes, the lady of the manor, in her love for the little
alien child who was not of her blood, readily assumed the
duties and responsibilities which are usually considered
very onerous and oppressive even by those who are trained
to undertake them as a profession.
"My uncle, with an incredulous smile, remarked that he
hoped that my aunt would not find cause to regret her un-
dertaking.
"If she ever had such cause she never expressed the
least regret.
"She was the most patient of teachers, and I was to her,
what I might not have been to any other human being,
the most docile of pupils.
"We were both much happier for this new and close
companionship established between us; she found in it
occupation and amusement, I employment and pleasure.
"In this way several happy years passed, when at length
my aunt's health began to droop. She was now about
forty-five years of age, my uncle being ten years her senior,
and I a well-grown girl of twelve.
"M5 dear aunt had no especial disease, nor do I think
she need have died, had not heart-break been added to
other causes of decline.
"Yes, heart-break I You shall know all about it now.
"About this time, when my dear aunt was failing in
health and beauty, there came to visit us a very distant
cousin of my uncle-an impecunious widow, aged about
thirty-two or thirty-three-in person beautiful and at-
tractive as an angel; in character selfish and subtle as a
demon.
"Using and abusing her privileges of relationship, she
gradually appropriated and absorbed all my uncle's time
and attention.
This was not all accomplished in a day, or a week, but
in the course of weeks running into months.
"She talked, read, or played cards with him in the house;



<pb n="7"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                     7
she walked, rode, or drove with him in the park; while my
aunt, confined to her own room by indisposition, was utterly
neglected, and left to pine in solitude, or with no other
company than myself, or her maid, Stockton.
"While these follies were going on under my eyes I
did not at first recognize them as improprieties. I was
too young. I knew too little of the world. I thought that
it was my uncle's duty, and a very hard duty, under the
circumstances, to entertain the lady guests, and I was
sorry for him and vexed with her, especially when my aunt,
looking at me with anxious, pathetic eyes, would ask:
;    "'Meg, darling, where is your uncle?'
"And I would be compelled to answer that he was with
Mrs. Mattox.
"Sometimes I would grow impatient at seeing how my
aunt was neglected, and how despondent she was becom-
ing, and then I would exclaim:
"'I wish that Mattox woman would go home, if she
has any home to go to! I should think she might see
that she is a nuisance, especially to poor uncle, who wants
to spend some time in the day with his wife !'
"But my aunt would only answer by the saddest smile,
that always ended in a sigh.
"One day I was suddenly enlightened. I happened to
be alone in my aunt's boudoir, arranging some of the first
wild violets of the spring in little vases on her table, when
Stockton entered with a silk quilt to lay on the sofa in
readiness for her mistress, who intended to lie down there
that day for a change. As she was arranging the silk quilt
and cushions she suddenly exclaimed:
" 'I hope my master will find time to-day to come and
sit a while with my mistress.'
" 'Why, he cannot, Stockton. He is going by rail to
Tynemouth to show Mrs. Mattox the ruins of the old abbey
she is so anxious to see,' I exclaimed.
" 'Humph!' muttered the maid, with a decided expres-
sion of scorn and detestation.
,     "Encouraged by this tacit sympathy, I cried out sharply:
t "'I wish to the Lord in heaven that woman would go
about her business-that I do!'
E:I*    " 'She is about her business, Miss Margaret! Never you
doubt that P



<pb n="8"/>
;-8           THE   TEST    OF LOVE
. ".What do. you mean by that, now, Stockton?' I de-
imned, feeling annoyed and made vaguely anxious by
.smething very peculiar in the woman's tone and manner.
" 'She knows her business pretty well, Miss Margaret,
and she has set herself about it in earnest. I am sure my
*poor mistress sees that as well as I do, although she says
:nothing.' 
" 'Stockton, why can't you speak out?  What is her
business, then?'
" To become the second wife of your uncle, and the
mistress of Rose Hill 1" curtly replied Stockton.
"At these words I fell into a perfect whirlwind of
fury. I uttered many wild, mad threats, which were aft-
erward produced against me on my trial.
"Yes, I did say the words reported of me. I did say:
"'That she shall never be! I will kill her first-the
snake! I will kill her with my own hands before she shall
succeed to my aunt's place in the house, even if she has
supplanted her in the heart of her husband! I will kill
the crawling, venomous reptile first  I will kill her with
my own hands!' I repeated many times, and in my blind
fury and passion I meant what I said.
"Two housemaids, who were passing the door on their
way to the upper chambers, paused and stood aghast at my
state of rage.
" 'For the love of the Lord be quiet, dear Miss Margaret,
or we shall have the house about our ears  Look at the
maids, how they stare  Go about your work, you minxes I
What are you loitering here for?'
"The two young women passed on, pale with dismay.
"I raged on, unheeding Stockton's prayers and remon-
strances, until at last she said:
" 'Now, there is your aunt's bell, and I should not wonder
if she had heard you and is frightened out of her senses.'
"That stopped me at once. I would not have hurt, or
in the least degree startled, my aunt on any account.
"I had never liked Mrs. Mattox; but from that hour I
hated her with a bitter hatred, and I pitied my aunt with
an intensity that nearly broke my heart. I would look at
her sweet, pale face and hollow eyes and gray hair, and
have to run out of the room to hide my tears. I would
then encounter the round, rosy cheeks and beaming, black



<pb n="9"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                     9
eyes and golden hair of Mrs. Mattox with a burning rage
that nearly consumed me. Oh I1 thought, if I could only
strike her dead with the glance of my eyes 1 Or if I could
breathe a pestilence over her and wither her freshness and
beauty with leprosy or smallpox, how gladly I would have
done it !
"The whole household saw the intensity of my hatred
and shuddered at it, and were compelled to testify to it
when they were forced to appear as witnesses against me
on my trial.
"But, now, was there no excuse for me?
"This woman Mattox had deliberately won my foolish
old uncle's affections from his invalid wife! She daily
flaunted her fresh and blooming beauty and elegant and
bewitching toilets, in contrast to the pale, gray, failing
lady whose heart was breaking even faster than her health i
"She was killing my sweet and gentle aunt I How could
I help hating her unto death?
"Once I ventured to ask my aunt:
"'Why does not Mrs. Mattox go home? She has been
here for four months now, and her children must want
to see her, if she does not.care to see them.'
"'Her children are at boarding school, dear, and can
only see their mother at stated intervals,' replied my aunt.
"'But, why, then, does not she go home?' I persisted.
"'I do not think she has any settled home. I think,
while her daughters are at boarding school, she visits
around among her friends.'
"'Then why in the world doesn't she go to some other
friend now? It must have been somebody else's turn at
least three months ago! She must be defrauding some
admiring friends out of their proper share of her pleasant
society!'
"'I suppose she finds her quarters here more agreeable
than elsewhere,' said my aunt, with a patient smile.
" 'I wish I could make them very disagreeable to her  I
wish    '
"'Hush, darling, 'said the gentle lady.
"'Auntie, dear, why do you not write her a note, and
say that it is not convenient to entertain her any longer?
Oh, auntie! do write that note, and I will take it to her
myself-with pleasure.'
A.                          .                        .~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="10"/>
10           THE TEST OF LOVE
"'No, dear, I cannot do that. It would do no good.
It would rather do harm, for it would displease your uncle,'
she patiently replied.
" Displease my uncle? Who cares if it would? You
have the right to send away the woman who takes up so 
much of his time that ought to be passed with you '
" 'Hush, hush, my love, and listen to me,' she said,'
impressively. I am going away from this earth, dear Mar- jA
garet; I am going away very soon; and I want to go-I
want to go to that love which never disappoints, or wounds, 
or fails; but I want to go in peace, dearest, in perfect
peace with all the world.'
"'Oh, auntie; oh, auntie, what do you mean? Do you
mean to let that woman kill you, and never say a word?'
I broke forth, in burning indignation.
"'  ush, my darling; hush! I mean only this-that the
few remaining days of my life on earth may be passed
in peace, so that in leaving it I may depart in peace. What,
my Margaret, shall I mar with discord this sacred time,
when earth is fading on my vision and heaven is bright-
ening? No, dear child; no.'
"I looked at her and made up my mind, if she would not
write that note to send Mrs. Mattox away, I would speak
to that woman myself.
"I was terribly excited. I did not dare to trust myself
in the creature's presence until I could command myself;
for I required perfect calmness in order to speak to her
as I intended to do. But how or when I should attain
such calmness I could not know.
"I went to Stockton, who was busy in my aunt's dressing
room, to consult her.
" 'Stockton,' I said, 'I am so very nervous. My heart is
throbbing up toward my throat, as if it would choke me;
my brain is beating as if it would burst; my limbs are
trembling so that I can scarcely stand; and you can per-
ceive for yourself that I cannot speak steadily.'
"'I can see you are in an awful way, Miss Margaret;
and now what has put you into it?' she inquired.
" 'That woman, of course 1' 
U 'Now, Miss Margaret, you must not think of her, or
you will be growing crazy I Just to see that state you are
in'
2 .:.
i. :^



<pb n="11"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   ,11
* 'Stockton, I know it  And I do not wish to betray
myself. I am going downstairs now. Give me something
to quiet me! You know what to give. I have seen you
give it to auntie when she has been very nervous. What
is it? Give me some '
" 'It is laudanum I gave my mistress, by the doctor's
directions, my dear Miss Margaret. 1 would not like to
fool with it without orders.'
" 'How much do you give auntie, then ?'
" 'Eh twenty-five drops; but she is used to it; twenty-
five drops might lay you out. No, Miss Margaret, I can't
even give you so much as one drop without the doctor's
orders. It might kill you, and I don't want to be hung
for poisoning, not at my time of life P
"I turned away from Stockton and went straight to
the little cabinet in which the medicine bottles were kept,
and I deliberately dropped ten drops of Jaudanum in a
teaspoon and swallowed it.
"I had never taken laudanum in my life before, and
the effect was prompt and potent. My turbulent blood
suddenly fell as calm as the stormy sea at the divine com-
mand.
"I went downstairs as firmly as if I had been fifty years
old instead of twelve; and I went into the library, where
Mrs. Mattox sat reading poetry aloud and making eyes at
my uncle, who listened, and leered, and sighed over the
traitress, in a way to have put me in a rage, if it had
not been for the laudanum.
"'Uncle,' I said, 'I have something to say to Mrs. Mat-
tox, if you will please excuse me, and leave us alone for
a few minutes.'
" Indeed   A message from your aunt, perhaps,' he
said, rising, while Mrs. Mattox closed her book, keeping
her thumb in her place.
"I did not reply to my uncle's theory, and he, taking
it for granted that he had guessed the truth, left the
library.
"We were alone together-the snake woman and myself.
' 'Have you a message from your aunt to me, my love?'
she sweetly inquired, bringing her black eyes to bear
caressingly on me.
" 'No, madam, I have no message from my aunt to you.



<pb n="12"/>
12           THE TEST OF LOVE'
It i scarcely likely that my aunt would send a message
to yoi,' I replied, with a calm dignity not at all natra,
but due entirely to the laudanum. 
: "But you have something to say to me, my dear? she
murmured in the most mellifluous of tones.
" Yes, madam, I have this to say: You have been
hete nearly five months; you have so completely engrossed
the attention of- my uncle that he has had no time, days
nor evenings, to give to his invalid wife. Everybody notices
this and blames you. The attendant physician, the serv-
ants in the house, all talk about it. Some ne ought to
tell you what is said. I do it. You should go away, and
leave the husband to his wife.'
"She did not lose her temper at those plain words, as
any one might have supposed she would have done. Oh,
not in the least. Her wonderful powers of dissimulation
served her as well as the opiate did me. So that what
might otherwise have been an unseemly war of words:
i'  ~    became a quiet discussion.
" But, my little Jove,' she said sweetly, 'I cannot go
away and leave the family at such a distressing time. I
would willingly have gone three months ago, or any time
since that. I came only to spend the Christmas holidays.
I had promised January to the Countess of Rockland;
February to the'Countess of Grassmere; March to the'
Marchioness of Widelands; April to the Duchess of Win-
caster; and to all these ladies I have had to send excuses
because my duties kept me here at Rose Hill, and I have
had to forego all their pleasant country parties for the
sake of staying here in this afflicted family, and doing
my little best to supply the place of its lonely invalid mis-
tress. I am sorry people are so absurd as to talk; but
that should not prevent me from doing my duty.'
"That I did not fall upon her, tooth and nail, for her
hypocrisy was due only to the calming influence of the
laudanum.
"'So you will not go?' I said.
"'No, sweet one, I must not.'
"'You will stay here as a guest until you are sure of
remaining here as the mistress of the house?
"'Is that what the wicked people say of me, my dear?
" It is just what observers think of you, madam.'
;                                               1~



<pb n="13"/>
TEW TEST OF LOVE                    18
:f      a 'How unjust they are! How little they know me!'
"This woman knew that she was not deceiving me. She
iid not even wish to do so. I saw through her. She wished
at the same time to avoid a scene which would have com-
promised her, and to defy and taunt me under the cover
of her sweet words and 19oks.
"I, a child of a dozen years, was powerless in the hands
of such a woman.
'You will not go, then I You will not go 1 Very well I
I shall pray day and night to the Lord to deliver us from
you, as from the greatest evil that afflicts us!'
"I spoke passionately, notwithstanding the opiate, and
I left the room.
"I never told my aunt of this conversation, nor did Mrs.
Mattox complain of me to my uncle. She would not have
done that. Her tactics were to avoid all disturbance; to
keep all in apparent harmony.
"My dear aunt faded gradually, and about three weeks
after my interview with Mrs. Mattox she passed quietly
away.
"Then I think my uncle was seized with a sudden re-
morse, for he'shut himself up in his room and refused to
see any visitor, leaving all necessary arrangements in the
hands of his solicitors and steward.
"On the day of my aunt's death, Mrs. Mattox came to
me, and said:
"'I must leave you, sweet lovet I grieve to do so;
but you must be aware that it would not be proper for,
me to remain in the house of a widower where there is no 
lady at the head of the establishment.'
"'Oh, go, go,' I answered passionately. 'Go you have
finished your work here! You have won the heart of the
husband and broken the heart of the wife  You have
killed her  Go, and may the Lord judge you !'
"'You are excited, dear love! You will be more just
to me when you are calmer,' she said, as she stooped to
kiss me; but I started and turned away, and she left the
room, and, a few hours later, the hb~   '



<pb n="14"/>
14           THE TEST OF LOVE
CHAPTBER II
AN OLD MAN'S FAT e
4Adpr  the funeral of my aunt, my uncle continued dis.
consolate for many days.
"All his fondness for myself was revived, and he kept
me much with him, and made me talk about my aunt.
He never dreamed that she had known of his devotion to
her rival, and that she had seretly broken her heart over 
it, for no word or look of hers had ever betrayed her feel-
ings on that subject; nor did I ever drop a hint to my
uncle that could have enlightened him.
"I had too much veneration for the delicacy and dig-
nity of my dear aunt's character to show the death wound
that she had covered.
"Nor was the name of Mattox ever mentioned between
us. Remorse, no doubt, kept my uncle silent, and pride
and hatred restrained me.
"I hoped and believed that we should never see or hear
any more of that woman. Ah I knew so little of human
nature 
"In a few more weeks my uncle grew restless, and took
a journey, telling me that he was going away on busi-
ness. He was absent a week, and returned in much better 
spirits.
"A month later he made another journey, and stayed
away another week, and came home accompanied by an
upholsterer and decorator, who was engaged to fit up and
refurnish the whole house.
"Still, I had no suspicion of what was soon to follow.
"If my aunt's maid had been with us she might have
enlightened me; but Stockton had left to take another 
service.
"The whole interior of the house seemed to be turned
topsy-turvy, and the utmost confusion prevailed for sev-
eral weeks; but, at the end of that period, the work was
complete, and the house was elegantly decorated and re-
furnished. 
"Then my uncle went on a third journey, without ex-
plaining his business to any of us.
: ~ ~   ~    ~   ~    m -ny



<pb n="15"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                     15
"When he had been gone four weeks he wrote from
Paris to our housekeeper, telling her to have everythin in
readiness to receive her new mistress, as Mrs. Campbe
and himself would arrive at Rose Hill at six o'clock on
the ensuing Saturday evening.
"This news was a terrible shock to met My ravings
on that occasion proved the malignant hatred I bore toward
the second Mrs. Campbell
"When the newly married couple arrived at the stated
time, I refused to meet them.
"While madam was in her dressing room, my uncle came
in search of me, and would have embraced me had I not
broke suddenly out upon him.
" 'You shall never kiss me again as long as you live 
You have brought that woman home here to take the place
of the lady whom you and she killed between you ! Yes 
You killed my dear aunt between you, and you know you
did, and I hate you both  I hope the Lord will punish
you both f'
"My uncle said if I could not behave myself he would
have to send me to school, and so he left me.
"Well, it turned out that I really could not behave my-
self, and so I was sent to school. I was very glad to go,
so as to be rid of the sight of the woman who had as
surely killed my aunt as if she had stabbed her through
the heart. -
"I entered the school early in January, and remained
until the end of the term early in June. Then my uncle
came in person to bring me home for the midsummer holi-
days; but I utterly refused to come, and spoke of the new
woman in such terms as to leave him no option but to
return to Bose Hill without me.
"I remained at the school another half year, which
ended with the Christmas holidays. Again my uncle came
for me, for he loved me as his child, and was always good
to me. He pressed me to return home with him. He told
me that I had a little baby cousin, a little boy, who, to be
sure, was born the heir of Bose Hill, so that I was no
longer the heiress, but that I should be so richly provided
for by his will that I should never be the worse for the loss
of the estate.
"I replied that I neither wanted the estate nor the



<pb n="16"/>
16           THE TEST OF LOVE 
money; that all I wanted was never to set foot within
limits of Rose Hill again, and never to set eyes on
murderess of my aunt, or on her son.
"Strong and bitter words these, yet they scarcely
pressed the strength and bitterness of my feelings.-
"My uncle replied, with some dignity, that he sh
certainly never ask me to come to Rose Hill again, or e
allow me to do so, and thus he left me.
"But we did not either of us keep our words. Circu
stances controlled us. I stayed another year at school, 
then I got a letter from my uncle, written in a faint 
feeble hand, and asking me to return with the end-
that school term and spend with him at Rose Hill the
Christmas he would ever see on earth, for that he was
his death-bed 1
"On reading this letter, every line of which revealed
dying hand, my long-cherished resentment melted a
like snow under the sun, and I wrote back, begging him
forgive my undutiful conduct to him; expressing the 
est sorrow for his illness; assuring him of my devoted 1
and gratitude for all his patient goodness to me, and pr
ising to return to him at once, and never leave him
long as he would permit me to stay with him.
"I sent off this letter, and as soon as the school b
up for the Christmas holidays I hurried off to Rose
"I found my poor uncle much nearer death than I
anticipated.
"I found also in the family three members that I
not left there-the infant heir, now aged about thi
months, and Lavinia and Malvina Mattox, the two da
ters of Mrs. Campbell's first marriage.
"I found, also, an entirely new set of servants, from.
butler and the housekeeper down to the youngest maid.
these had been engaged by the new mistress, and w
devoted to her. 
"The young heir was the idol of the whole househ
The two stepdaughters of my uncle were the    ogn
young ladies of the family, but with a difference: Lavi
the eldest girl, aged seventeen, was a youthful ima
her mother-a black-eyed, golden-haired blonde-and
was always elegantly dressed, and affectionately cares
"Malvina, the younger girl, aged about fifteen, was
'I



<pb n="17"/>
4IHE TEST OF LOVE                    17
plain, having a pale, sallow face, dull, flaxen hair, dim, blue
eyes, and a fragile figure, with one shoulder a little higher
than the other. She had, also, a very feeble mind, and a
very uncertain temper. She was dressed shabbily, and
snubbed constantly. For all these reasons I became at once
much interested in the poor girl.
"The new Mrs. Campbell was very devoted in her at-
tentions to her dying husband. She was, also, very sweet
in her manner. It was her cue to be so, and, therefore, I
did not appreciate her superficial amiability.
"I was my uncle's constant companion. It was his wish
that I should remain in his room and sit by his bed as
much as possible.
"He assured me that he had never ceased to love me as
a daughter, and that I was well provided for by his will,
and he hoped, he said, that I would try to get on with
my new aunt, who was really very amiable, and desired
to make me happy.
"I could not contradict or oppose my dying uncle. I
promised all he wished, and I even treated Mrs. Campbell
decently in his presence for his sake.
"My poor uncle lingered a few weeks longer, and then
died, with my hand clasped in his own.
"After my uncle's funeral his will was read. He had
made ample provision for me, but had constituted his
widow the guardian of my person and the trustee of my
property.
"Those were bitter pills 1
"And, ahl from that day how much changed for the
worse my life became !
"Mrs. Campbell threw off her mask forever!
"She no longer affected any kindness of feeling or con-
duct toward me. I, who had been brought up in the
house as the heiress presumptive of the estate, and treated
with the tenderest affection by the master and mistress,
and with the highest respect by all the servants of the es-
tablishment, was now made to feel as if I were a poor
dependent on the bounty of a widow, and a barely tolerated
intruder in the home of my ancestors. I was treated with
contempt by the new mistress, and with insolence by the
new servants, who were her creatures.
"My own beautiful suite of apartments, consisting of



<pb n="18"/>
18            THE TEST OF LOVE
boudoir, bedchamber and dressing room, was taken from
me and given to Miss Lavinia Mattox, and I was put in
a small apartment in the attic, with the poor, sickly, half-
witted Malvina for a roommate, and even for a bedfellow.
And I was ordered to watch over her and take care of
her, for it was not safe either to herself or to others that
she should be left unguarded.
"I told you that at first view this girl had excited my
compassion, but when I came to know her more thoroughly
she inspired me with fear and dislike. She was not quite
an idiot, but she was sly, cruel and vindictive, as idiots
often are. She was cowardly, also, and secretive to a
degree I have never seen equaled.
"She saw that I, equally with herself, was a butt for
the ill usage of the household, and she divined that, equally
with herself, I resented the bitter injustice.
"She confided to me, in secret, her hatred of the whole
family, and of her mother most of all.
"This shocked me so much that I felt compelled to tell
her how wicked it was in her to hate her own mother.
"Then she laughed in my face, and told me that she
gave hate for hate, that her mother was ashamed of her,
and would like to have her dead and out of the way, and
she knew it!
"Yet it was only to me this unfortunate girl confided
her real feelings. She had inherited her mother's powers
of dissimulation, and she openly fawned upon the relatives
whom she secretly hated.i
"This creature had, among her other infirmities, the
troublesome and dangerous habit of sleep-walking.
"Now, though I feared and disliked her, yet I pitied
her, and I was often anxious lest she should come to harm
during her fits of somnambulism; and whenever I awoke
in the night and missed her from my side I always rose,
lighted a candle, and went in search of her, usually finding
her loitering aimlessly about the upper corridors of the
house, when I would gently awake her and lead her back
to her bed.
"We two were almost inseparable companions; and we 
were so, not of choice, but of necessity. For such was the 
will of Mrs. Campbell. We slept together in the little attic .. 



<pb n="19"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    19
room, and we ate together at the second table. We wre
not allowed to sit down with the family at the fit.
"But the catastrophe was approaehing.
"It happened one long, dreary, drizzling season in mid
winter that Mrs. Campbell and Miss Mattox both lost their
spirits and their tempers; nothing could please them, and
they tormented each other.
"It was during this season that one day, in a climax of
insolence, Mrs. Campbell, who had been out walking in
the wet park, sent for me to her room, and ordered me
to take off her muddy boots.
'Of course, I flatly refused to do so, telling her that it
was the duty of her maid to perform that service.
"A disgraceful scene ensued, such as I cannot even rem
count here, but will merely say that she finished by de-
claring that she would use her power, as my guardian, to
punish and degrade me; and that the very next day she
would give me a mistress, by binding me out to a tailoress,
to learn the trade, even if she had to pay a high premium
with me.
"I flung myself out of her presence in a fury of passion,
and used the wild, mad words that have since been brought
up against me on my trial.
"My violent excitement continued so long that one of
the maids carried word to the housekeeper, who came to
me and brought a sedative draught, and coaxed me to go
to bed.
"I did so, and the last that I remember of that madden-
ing day is that I fell asleep in the arms of Malvina Mat-
tox, who had undressed herself and lain down beside me
to try to console me.
"Poor creature I I was the only one in the house whom
she did not hate, and whom, perhaps, she even loved a
little.
"The reaction from the extreme excitement and the
influence of the sedative combined to cause me to sleep
long and deeply.
"I was aroused in the morning by the tremendous con-
fusion that rolled through the house from cellar to attic.
I was still folded in the arms of Malvina, as if neither of
us had moved during the night
"It was one of the housemaids who had burst into the



<pb n="20"/>
20            THE TEST OF LOVE
room, with her eyes staring and her dress in disorder, andA 
with the news that the infant heir was missing from his
crib in the nursery, and could not be found anywhere, and
that the mistress was beside herself with grief and terror.
And did we know anything about it, she inquired, or had
we seen anything of the dear little master?
"We were both too much startled by the rude awaken-
ing to understand the full force of what was said; but I
answered that we had seen nothing of the child since the
preceding day; while Malvina, with the most stolid in-
difference, yawned, turned over, and closed her eyes as if
to go to sleep again.
"I arose at once; for, notwithstanding my hatred of
the mother, I had a really tender love for the poor baby,
who was an affectionate and winsome little laddie.
"You, my dear friend, as well as the public, know all
the hideous details of the domestic tragedy that followed.
I need not repeat them here.
"I' think I was suspected from the very first, though this
suspicion never got into the papers.
"It was not, however, until the remains of the poor,
dear baby were discovered at the bottom the dry well that
I was openly accused.
"And to my intense amazement, the first witness against
me at the coroner's inquest was my half-witted roommate,
Malvina Mattox, in whose arms I had slept the whole night
of the murder.
"Amid tears and sobs that seemed to prove her reluc-
tance to tell the story, which was dragged from her by
questions, she testified that about three o'clock on the
night, or rather on the morning of the murder, I arose
from our bed, drew the key from our chamber door, and
taking it with me, left the room and went downstairs; that
I was absent about an hour, and returned to the chamber
a few minutes after the clock in the tower struck four.
"This testimony, false and incomprehensible as it was
to me, was the first link in that fearful chain of circum-
stantial evidence which was forged for my destruction.
"You have seen how link after link was found and
fitted until the whole fatal sequence was complete I
"The coroner's jury brought in a verdict in accordance
with the evidence, and I was committed to prison on the 
I                                                              -t'i



<pb n="21"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    21
charge of having murdered my infant cousin, there to
await the action of the grand jury.
"That first night in my lonely cell I lay too stunned for
thought or feeling. I seemed to have not a friend in the
world, for no one came near me but the prison officials.
"But the next day, when the turnkey unlocked my door,
and the bright morning sun streamed into my cell, you
entered with that light, a fitting halo for the benignant
face that shone upon me there.
"You sat down on the cot beside me, and took my hand,
and told me that you were Theobald Elfinstar, of Thorn-
cliff, my grandfather and my mother's father, and that
you had come to help me, and, if possible, to save me.
"I had never seen your face before ! I had never heard
your name before! I had never even known of your ex-
istence before  Nor of the bitter feud-most bitter on
the part of the Campbells-which had kept my father's and
my mother's people apart, and had hidden from me'the
£!   knowledge of the Elfinstars.
"But I loved you from that moment with a. love that
filled my whole soul.
"You came to me like an angel from heaven. You told
me that in face and form, in voice and manner, I was the
counterpart of what my mother-your own, only child-
had been at the time when young Duncan Campbell fell
in love with her, against the will of his whole family.
"You believed my unsupported declaration of innocence
-you said it was impossible that I could ever have imag-
ined, much less perpetrated, such a crime.
"You said that you felt perfectly sure of my innocence,
and would move earth and heaven, if possible, to prove it.
"And, oh I my dearest dear, you kept your word !
"You have spent a fortune on my defense, and, though
you could not secure my acquittal in the face of the tre-
mendous falsehood of that circumstantial evidence which
has convicted me, yet you have paved the way to a com-
mutation of my sentence, and you say that if I am spared
from death and sent for life to the penal colonies, you will
spend another fortune to go out there and make me a
home!
"Was ever human love like yours?
"I know not what the end may be; but, if it should be
L'



<pb n="22"/>
R2            THE TEST OF LOVE                      j
death, it is due to you, dearest dar, that I should leave thisk' 
record of the truth behind me. 
"And whatever my fate may be, in living or dying, oh,
most beloved, my heart is bound to you by the strongest
bonds of love and gratitude and veneration. I have done,%
and I sign the name that never was sullied by a sinful
charge-the name that you say you will pive me when 
we shall have passed through this tia crucs and reached:
some home of peace-my angel mother's-your angel 
daughter's name,              SERAPH ELFINSTAL."'
"She is innocent!" exclaimed Hamilton Gower, when
he had finished this manuscript. "My martyred love is 
innocent! But she is none the less lost to the world, and
to me, unless I can prove her to be so! I will henceforth
devote my whole life and fortune, if necessary, to the one
sacred object of the vindication of her name and fame 1" 
CHAPTER III
"AS A SPIRIT",
"YES I here and now do I pledge my life and fortune and
'sacred honor' to this most sacred cause " earnestly re-
peated Hamilton Gower, as he once more lifted the manu-
script of Seraph Elfinstar from the sofa table on which
he had laid it.
There were a few supplementary pages added to the end. 
They were dated on the morning of that day, and were as
follows:
"You will see by the foregoing narrativly friend, that
it was written in those dark days that immediately fol-.
lowed the conviction of the writer.
"It is scarcely necessary to add now that my dear grand-
father, by almost superhuman efforts, succeeded in pro_
curing a commutation of the death penalty to that of 1
transportation for life to these penal colonies.
"He did all that man could do to ameliorate my condi-
tion in the prison where I was confined while waiting for 
lj



<pb n="23"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    28
the departure of the convict transport ship in which I
was to sail.
"He sent confidential agents in advance to select a site
and begin the building of a home here.
"He let his own patrimonial home and bought and
shipped furniture, books, pictures, statuary and all that
was required to fit up and embellish a comfortable and
refined home.
"He saw me every day, and kept up my spirits by tell-
ing me the progress that he had made in his preparations
for emigration, and picturing the quiet, peaceful. haven
we should reach after these storms, and the harmonious
life we two should lead in that far-off island of the southern
sea-which, though some parts of it had been given over
to demons and their drivers, was yet, in the beauty and
sublimity of its scenery and the salubrity and delightful-
ness of its climate, a paradise fit for the dwelling place
of angels and good spirits.
"And, meanwhile, so diligently did he work, that by
the time the prison ship was ready to sail his own arrange-
ments were all completed.
"He saw me off. He commended me to the care of the
ship's captain, and he did all the 'regulations' would per-
mit him to do to soften for me the hardships of that voy-
age in the convict ship. He urged me to keep up my
courage, to pray when my heart failed, and to believe
that he would be at Hobart Town ready to receive me, to
take me at once out of the penal station, in the only way
he could, as his 'assigned servant,' nominally, bq'really as
his dear and cherished daughter. And so he blessed me
and bade me good-by an hour before the ship sailed.
"I do not wish to speak of that sad voyage. The con-
vict transport ships are notorious for being the worst in
the service, and that in which I sailed was old, slow and
unseaworthy. Some unfortunate Irish patriots, whose only
crime had been love of national liberty, and whose death
sentence had, like mine, been commuted to transportation
to the penal colonies for life, went over in the same
ship.
-  "I have heard that they were penned with the worst
of the convicts, and suffered unimaginable tortures; but I
never saw one of them; for, by the intercession of my



<pb n="24"/>
24           THE TEST OF LOVE 
uncle, the influence of the chaplain, the fact that I w i
the only female prisoner on board, and, I :think, throug
the pity of the officers and their wives for my childish an[
harmless personality, I was treated with great kindnee.
I was taken out of the convict quarters of the ship an
appointed to assist the stewardess in waiting on the officersa
wives.
"When we reached Hobart Town, my dear grandfatheri
stood upon the dock. 
"I see him now as I saw him then-his tall, spare figure;i
clothed in black, with a white necktie, his venerable head
bare, his long, white hair waving in the wind, his broad-':
brimmed black hat held in his hand.
"I was allowed to land before the band of convicts didi
The chaplain and one other detailed officer were my cus-.
todians.
"When we stepped on the wharf my grandfather met,~t
me and took me in his arms and warmly embraced me.
"He had a carriage waiting. We four-my grandfather,,'
the chaplain, the sergeant and myself-entered it, and were'
driven immediately to the residency, and ushered into the'
presence of the superintendent of convicts.
"There the necessary forms were gone through and the 
documents signed, and Margaret Campbell, life prisoner of'
the crown, was transferred to the guardianship of Theobald.
Elfinstar, Esq., as his 'assigned servant.'
"The chaplain and the sergeant then left us, and my'
grandfather put me in the carriage and directed the coach-
man to drive to the Royal Victoria.
"While we were on our way he opened a bundle, in whichz
there was a large, handsome cloak, which he wrapped about 
me to hide my prison garb. Next he took from a box 
hat and veil, which he gave me to put on my head.
"Then he told me that he had sailed from London two
weeks after I did, and yet he had reached Hobart Town 
month before I arrived, and had been busily engaged i'
overseeing the completion of our house, which was nowj
habitable, if not finished.
"When the hack drew up before the Royal Victoria, mD
grandfather got out, paid the hackman first of all to 
rid of him at once, and then hurried me, closely veiled



<pb n="25"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                     2S
I was, into a private suite of apartments and rang and
ordered breakfast.
"When we were alone he said.to me:
'" 'Go into the adjoining room, my dear, where you will
find clothing suitable for a young gentlewoman. Dress
yourself in it. Then make up your present garb into a
parcel. We will throw it away when we get out of town,
as we will throw away the name of Margaret Campbell
forever! You are no longer a Campbell, my dear! You
are an Elfinstar in name as you certainly are in face. And
you are not my grandchild, but you are my daughter, my
dear Seraph, restored to me again. Go make your toilet,
Seraph Elfinstar. You are now all my own; for I have
plucked you out of the fire.'
"Was ever love like this? I asked myself again. I threw
myself into his arms and burst into a flood of tears, and
wept and kissed and embraced him until he gently led me
to the door of my chamber and put me through it with a
repetition of his words:
" 'Go and make your toilet, Seraph Elfinstar.'
"I went in and closed the door behind me, and found
myself in a clean, spacious, comfortable apartment, that
.seemed to me-after my prison and ship experiences of
the last seven months-to combine every imaginable laxury
--the greatest of which was the bathroom.
"I took a bath, and dressed myself in the black silk suit
that had been provided for me, and added the little white
linen collar and cuffs, and the blue silk necktie that came
with it. Nothing had been forgotten, not even the white
linen pocket handkerchiefs.
"I took one and passed into the parlor, where the table
was already set and my grandfather was waiting for me.
" 'Now, be at perfect peace, my love,' he said as we sat
down to the table. 'No one in this house knows anything
about you. The past ic past. In a few minutes 1 expect
my faithful servant, Jonas Stackpole, here with our private
carriage, wlch he is to bring to meet his master and his
master's daughter, who is just arrived from the old coun-
try.'
"I assured my grandfather that I was at perfect peace.
Every state is relative to other state&  After my terrible
peril and suffering, and the intermediate sea voyage, sad



<pb n="26"/>
26            THEI TEST OF LOVE
enough, but ameliorated by kindness and by hope, I 
I had now reached a fair haven of rest. I was in 
of calm delight.
"My grandfather recognized this, and smiled with
nignant pleasure.
"After breakfast he led me, closely veiled, out to
carriage, which was waiting for us before the door.
"The tallest, gauntest and reddest man I ever
was seated on the box. He got down, touched his hat
opened the door for us.
"My grandfather put me in, followed me, and we 
soon bowling along the New Town Road on our wa
the Hermitage.
"How well I remember that delicious ridel After
long, long confinement, and longer sea voyage, that 
was life and joy to me; deep, calm joy, for I was not
capable of jubilant exultation.
"But on that glorious morning the sun, which s
flooding the azure heavens and the green earth, the wa
forests, the undulating hills, the distant, towering m
tains, whose opal-hued tips blended with the golden
ruby-tinted clouds along the horizon-the exhilarat
fresh air, and even the rapid motion of our carriage,
combined to give me delight.
"After a few hours of this delicious drive we ent
upon a very rough, new road leading into the wilder
of jagged rocks and thorny trees that surrounded the 
of Mount Wellington, like the enchanted, impenetr
thicket of the fairy tale.
" I had this road opened, but it is not yet comple
said my grandfather, as the carriage was stopped for 
moment, while Jonas Stackpole got down from his 
and went to the horses' heads to lead them.
"In this manner we went on for a mile or two, win
up the mountain, until we came to a place beyond
we could go no farther in the carriage.
"Here several rude-looking men in yellow jackets 
at work on the extension of the road, and they stop
work, leaning on their picks and shovels to gaze at us.
"Here, also, was a rough building of boards, for
porary use as stable, carriage and tool shed.
"We left the carriage and mounted saddled horses,



<pb n="27"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                     27
were waiting for us, and so we ascended by a bridle path
that wound up the mountain, until we reached the plateau
where stands the Hermitage, with which you are now so
familiar.
9"It was not then complete. The grounds were still half
wilderness, and only the rooms on one side of the hall
had been finished.
"But when the horses stopped at the main entrance the
servants were all there waiting for us.
"My grandfather helped me to dismount, and led me
up the stairs, saying to the domestics:
"'This young lady is my daughter, and your mistress.
"The women courtesied and the men touched their hats
as we passed by them and entered the house.
"My grandfather called a rosy-faced young girl to us,
and said:
" 'This is Jones, your lady's maid, my dear. Now, Jones,
show your mistress to her own apartments. My dear, I
ordered dinner at six.'
* "I followed my new maid upstairs, and to an elegant
msuite of apartments that had been especially fitted up for
me, and that outshone every place I had ever seen before
in splendor and luxury.
"Such was my reception at the Mountain Hermitage.
"No one in the house knew any better than that I was
Miss Elfinstar, the daughter of their master.
"They had never been in any manner interested in Mar-
garet Campbell, and most likely they had never heard of
her or of her imputed crime; or, if they did, they had passed
it over and forgotten it in the multitude of more recent,
if not more sensational, newspaper items.
"My life at the Mountain Hermitage has been calmly
happy.
'My grandfather goes down to the residency once a
*month to make reports of his 'assigned servant,' Margaret
.Campbell, life prisoner of the crown, and his reports are
always so satisfactory as to the conduct of the girl that
there are faint, distant hopes that he may obtain for her a
conditional pardon, but never the slightest possibility that 
. he will be allowed to return to her native country.  [
"Now you know why I may not ever marry.



<pb n="28"/>
18          1THE TEST OF LOVE
"Go home to England, and take with you my life-l
gratitude and affection.
"I do not ask you to forget me, but to remember me
one who has passed away from this earth. Think of
only as a spirit, and of the Mountain Hermitage as a ho
of the spirit world which you have seen in a dream. Go
by. God bless you" 1
"Think of her 'only as a spirit, and the Mountain 
mitage as a home of the spirit world seen in a dream '
said Hamilton Gower to himself, as he folded the ma
script. "I shall do nothing of the sort! I have flesh
blood myself, and so has she, and we have half a cen
of material life on this planet yet to endure I No; it is
quixotic adventure to undertake, but I will do it! I I
vindicate her fame, and restore her to the world I"
He fell into deeper thought.
"Let me see what I have to do: It is now March-
first day of March, really. In six months it will be tl
first of September-my birthday-when I shall be of a
Why-I have not got more than time to rally my witnes
and return to England to claim my inheritance!
"Ha! ha! ha! What an unpleasant shock my appealt
ance will be to the worthy Mr. Lewis Manton, who steppe
into my shoes, assumed my rank, and married my sweet
heart   And what a sensation in the quiet village 
Hawkeville   Ah!
"But I must look after my witnesses. To be sure,
would never do for me to go to Hawkewood and claim
rights unsupported by witnesses! The excellent Mr. M
ton is quite capable of disputing my identity.
"Let me see. Delaplaine and Gow must accompany
to Hawkewood, or meet me there. They both prom
to meet me at the Hall on the first of the next Septebe
But that promise was given eighteen months ago, and
have been forgotten-at least by Delaplaine-for it is
likely to be so by Gow, from whom I parted only a
months ago.
"However, I must write to both. Gow, I know, is 
at Dead Maiden's Brook. But where is Delaplaine-
dandy I-where is he? Ah    In the hair-dressing lie
*,]



<pb n="29"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    29
business in the Rue du Rivoli, Paris; but I have lost my
memorandum and forgotten the number.
"But a letter will find the fellow, no doubt. I must
write to him at once. The Norfolk is expected to touch
here on her return voyage from Melbourne to London, to-
day or to-morrow. I wish I were ready to return by the
Norfolk; but I am not. I must see Seraph Elfinstar again,
and have a final understanding with her. And I must notify
Ham Gow. He must return with me by the Labrador a
month hence."
As Mr. Hamilton Gower formed this resolution he went
to his valise, unstrapped it, and took from it his writing
case, which he laid upon the table, opened and arranged.
Then he sat down and wrote two letters. The first was
directed as follows:
M. HBEmI DELAPLANE,
Barbier et Coiffeur,
Rue du Rivoli,
Paris, France.
The second one was addressed to:
MR. DUPLICATE HAWKE,
Gold Diggings, Dead Maiden Brook,
Via Melbourne, Victoria.
Having sealed these letters, he put them in his pocket,
took his hat, and went out to post them.
This was Hamilton Gower's first walk through Hobart
Town.
When he had first arrived in the city that morning he
had been too deeply absorbed by the mystery of Seraph
Elfinstar, and his curiosity and anxiety to read her manu-
, script and solve the enigma of her life in the wilderness,
to feel the slightest interest in his surroundings.
Now, however, he stepped out upon the clean and well-
kept street, flanked by its neat and tasteful dwellings, with
the bright, blue waters of the Derwent flashing in the
.morning sunlight on his right, and the vivid, greenrooded
hill, and the distant cloud-capped opal mountainsbn his
^ it, his mind was penetrated and exhilarated by the beauty



<pb n="30"/>
s0           THE TEST OF LOVE
and brilliancy of nature surrounding this quaint
city of the Antipodes.
He did not know the way to the post office, but he
to ask the first man he should meet.
"Good-morning, Mr. Gower. How do you do?"
This salutation came from Dr. Briggs, who 
joined him.
"Ah good-morning, doctor. I am glad to meet
returned the young man cordially.
"Fine morning. Glorious weather, this " 
"It is, indeed."
"When did you reach town?" 
"Only this morning."
"I hope you left our friends at the Hermitage well
"Quite so."
"By Georgel a strange household, that " remarked
doctor, as the two gentlemen walked on together.
Hamilton Gower said nothing.
"A very strange household," continued Briggs. 
idea of a man of his age coming out to this colony 
spending a mine of money to build a palace on a ix
tain I Why, sir, the cost of building that house on  '
Wellington was at least ten times what it would have
to have built it on the banks of the Derwent, or on
of Sullivan's Cove, where the villas of our wealthiest
nists are located 1 Why, sir, the engineering of that 
tain road leading up to the house cost a fortune, ch
onvict labor is 1"
"I have no doubt of it," said Mr. Hamilton Gowe
way of saying something.
"Do you know what people say about it?" inquired
surgeon, looking up suddenly. 
"No," replied Mr. Gower uneasily, for he feared
some suspicion or even knowledge of the identity of
garet Campbell, the convict servant, and ot Seraph
star, the daughter of the master of the Mountain
mitage, had got abroad.
"They say that no man but a man whose ecen
had reached the verge of insanity would have selected
a site for a home " explained the doctor.
"Yet it is a beautiful home," replied Mr. Goweri.'



<pb n="31"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    $1
a sense of relief in discovering that no knowledge or sue
picion of the truth had crept out.
"Oh, yes, a beautiful home in the wilderness; but no
society, or possibility of society," growled the doctor.
"I do not think he wants society," ventured Mr. Gower.
"Maybe he does not; but the young lady, sir, his daugh-
ter. Do you not suppose that it is natural she should want
society ?"
"Oh, well, she may marry some day, and then she will
get it."
"Marry? By Jove! I should like to know whom she
could be likely to marry up there, unless, indeed-oh!"
suddenly exclaimed the doctor, stopping short and staring
at the young man by his side.
"Or, at least," said the latter with an embarrassed smile,
"the old gentleman, who is turned three score and ten,
may die very soon-must die before very long, and then
his daughter will be at liberty to leave the Hermitage.
She will not grudge a few years of her early youth to him."
"A few years, quotha ? Why, if the man has only turned
seventy, he may live ten, twenty, or even thirty years
longer, until the young girl shall grow into an old woman.
Which way are you going?" suddenly inquired the doctor,
as they came to a crossing.
"To mail letters; but, really, I do not know but that I
am going away from the post office! I meant to inquire,
but your conversation interested me so much that I forgot
to do so," replied the young man.
"Well, I am going there myself. It is around this
corner."
The two gentlemen turned and walked to the post office
together, mailed their letters and came out.
"Which way now?" inquired the doctor.
"Well, I hardly know where to go, or what to do with
myself to-day," replied the young man frankly.
"Quite so, and so much the better. Come home with
me to a bachelor's early dinner, and afterward I will take
pYao 0around and show you the town-the government of.
loesa, military barracks, convicts' barraoks, county jail,
ineale house of correction, prisoners' hospital-such is the
aelivening program!  Oh, I assure you, life at HoblL
An.\   '                                     ~~/



<pb n="32"/>
a8*          THE TEST OF LOVE
Town is a criminal drama and a penal panorama 1
come?"
"Thank you I Willingly," replied the young man. 
They turned into Macquarrie Street, the surgeonii
ig the way.
"Hello " he exclaimed, "whom have we got hered
CHAPTER IV
AN EMBARRASSING ENCOUNTER
A SLENDER young girl, dressed in black, was fyi
meet them-a delicate, thin young girl, with a fair,
face, large, light blue eye&, and pale, yellow hair.
colorless countenance was radiant with surprise and
light as she flew on toward them, and-regardless of
presence of a third person-threw herself, sobbing
joy, into the arms of the astonished and horrified 
Hamilton Gower, and clung tightly around his neck.
"My good girl my good girl!" remonstrated the 
man, while the surgeon of convicts stood and laughed
"Oh, my dear Ham! Oh, my darling Ham 1 Do I 
you at last " cried the young woman, hugging for
life.
"But, my good girl  Really, now, you know! Ind
now! Really, now " cried Mr. Hamilton Gower, 
ing furiously and trying gently to release himself from
overpowering and embarrassing embrace.
"Oh, Haml Precious, precious love! I have come
far to see youl I have sailed so many thousands 
thousands of miles across the ocean, and was seasick,
got the quinsy among the icebergs, and was scared al
to death when Neptune came on board crossing the eq
you know-though he was nobody but the bo's'n, after
And when I got here and couldn't find you-oh, 
But it is all over now, Ham, my darling! And I a
happy 1 so happy!" she exclaimed, with another bear's
of her slender arms, to which excitement had lent
natural strength.
"But, young womanl you are-you are-this i



<pb n="33"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    31
ie--"- cried Mr. Hamilton Gower, crimson with confu-
sion, as he tried to unwind the clinging arms from about
his neck, while the doctor stood and laughed silently.
But Lona Pond was deaf and blind to everything except
the presence of her supposed betrothed, and she went on
with her hysterical exclamations:
1"Oh, Ham, dear, I was so disappointed when I first got
herel I came with Mrs. Belle Isle, as lady's maid, you
know! Mrs. Belle Isle, who was Miss Isoline Irvine, my
own young mistress, and she married Lieut. Belle Isle and
came out here with him, and brought me to wait on her;
but I never would have come, dear Ham, if it had not been
for your sake," she added, with a tighter rivet of her arms
around his neck.
"Young woman, this is really and truly--" he began;
but she went on without hearing him:
"Oh, I was so disappointed and heart-broken when I got
here and couldn't find you, and when my mistress told
me you must be three or four hundred miles away from me!
Oh, Ham! I didn't know that, you see, or maybe I might
not have had the courage to come out here ! Lord love you,
.dear Ham! I always had thought that Sydney and Mel-
bourne and Hobberton, and all these outlandish Bottomy
Bay places were close together, just like Hawkeville and
Demondike and Bowling Green, and so on, at home in
England."
*' j   ut see here I-I say  You are--"
But she only squeezed him tighter, and continued:
"Oh, Ham ! you'd have pitied me if you'd seen how done
* for I was when I couldn't find you I Oh, I like to have
diedl My mistress could tell you  And once, Ham, I
saw a convict in the chain gang working on the new road
that I took for you-and that almost didfor me too ! Not
that I believed that you had been guilty of any crime,
dearest Ham! but, then, I knew that innocent people
sometimes get convicted by the courts. And he was the
very image of you, dear Ham " she concluded, with an-
other squeeze.
Mr. Hamilton Gower found that he could not release
himself from those slender, clinging arms without hurt-
in them, and so he ceased to struggle and resigned hnelf



<pb n="34"/>
84 STHE TEST OF LOVE
to the situation, while the surgeon stood laughing ilen
and the girl continued her monologue:
"He was an awful man whom I mistook for you 
I beg your pardon for mistaking him for you, dear
But he was the very image of you  I---  Why don't
seak to me, Ham? You haven't-you don't seem to
glad to see me " said Lona Pond, suddenly coming to
lover's irresponsive mood, as she withdrew her arms
looked at him.
He stood before her cold and calm, for he had now
covered his self-possession, notwithstanding the surgeon
irritating, silent laugh.
"No, indeed, you don't seem a bit glad to see me!" sa
Lona Pond, in mournful resentment.
"Who are you, young woman?" quietly asked Mr. H
ilton Gower.
"Who am I? Is that the way you speak to me, H
Gow? Who am I, do you ask? You know very well 
I am! I am Leonora Pond I your promised wife! and t
is your engagement ring I wear upon my finger  W
am I, indeed! Oh I Oh    Oh, dear I Oh,dear " shee
claimed, beginning to groan and wring her hands.
"Here is some huge mistake, and I think I unders
it," murmured Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"I should think you might understand it! But the
take was all mine in thinking you would be faithful,
loving you, loving you in your absence as if you were
ready my-      Ah, me! Ah, me!" groaned the gi
wringing her hands.
"You are Leonora Pond, you say? Now, then, whom 
you take me for?" he inquired.
"Whom do I take you for? That is a pretty que
to ask me, Ham Gow. I don't take you for the Kin
France, nor yet for the Emperor of Russia. I take y
for Ham Gow, of Hawkeville, as have been engaged
be married to me for three years and more. But I
suppose you have made your fortune in the gold
and you are looking higher now I looking to marry a lady.
she added in bitter scorn.
"You take me for Ham Gow--" 
"I know you are Ham Gow! What do you mean?"
sentfully demanded the girl.
L~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~"
:~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~'                           '



<pb n="35"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   85
"You are utterly mistakenl My name is Hamilton
Gower I"
The girl gazed at the speaker, and burst into a weak,
contemptuous laugh, saying:
"Oh, indeed! Ham Gow wasn't a good enough name
for the grand gentleman that made his fortune in the gold
mines, so you must tack two or three more syllables on to
it! Mr. Ham-ilton Gower. But," she said, with a sud-
den effort at self-assertion, "you needn't be afraid, Mr.
Hamilton Gow-er ! I do not mean to force myself on you!
I'd die sooner than force myself on any man, even if he
was my lawful, wedded husband! much less only my en-
gaged one! I would have thrust both my hands into the
fire before I would have put them around-before I would
have touched you with them, if I had known that you had
changed to me  Yes, I would   I would, and you know
I would!" she passionately exclaimed, as she suddenly
turned and walked away.
"But you are mistaken, my good girl! You are indeed 
I am not Ham Gow, but I know who is, and I dare say he
is as true as steel to everything he ever promised you!
Come back and listen to reason!" said the young man,
stepping quickly after her.
She turned fiercely upon him, drew the betrothal ring
from her finger and threw it down on the ground, ex-
claiming:
"You want that back again, I supposel Take it " and
walked swiftly away.
He stopped and picked up the ring and put it in his vest
pocket to keep it from being lost, and then he would have
followed her; but the street was no longer private-a group
of officers coming out of the barracks walked slowly down
it.
The young man retreated and rejoined the surgeon, who
was still noislessly laughing.
"What amuses you so much, I should like to know?"
inquired the former gravely.
"Oh, Mr. Gower! Mr. Gower I" exclaimed the surgeon,
shaking his head.
"I)o you really think that I knew anything about that
young woman?" resentfullysemanded the young man.



<pb n="36"/>
86           THE TEST OF LOVE
"She thought so " replied. the surgeon, with h!'
lagh.l
"She was mistaken," said the first speaker.
"Oh, now, come, come I Come, come, my young
I am a graybeard and-a physician" 
"What in the deuce has that got to do with it ?"
"I know that young men will be young men! I 
expect them to be saints and angels! Mrs. Belle 
little maid really is a pretty creature! Only it is a,
-only it is a pity that she should have taken any nB
you may have talked to her in such dead earnest
have followed you out here-by Jovel" laughed the
geon.
"I never saw that girl in the whole course of my
until to-day  I never talked 'nonsense,' as you call
any girl at any time! and I never will!" exclaimed
Hamilton Gower, flushing with honest resentment.
"Eh " cried the surgeon, struck at last by his ea
ness, and stopping and staring at him.
"I am serious," said the young man.
"I see you are, and I believe you, of course but
in the mischief came that young person to make such"
absurd mistake?" inquired the doctor.
"She mistook me for another man to whom I
a wonderful resemblance. I know the man she mi
me for! I have known him from my boyhood. And
came from the same neighborhood, Hawkewood, in C
wall, England!  I could have explained to that yo
woman-if she would have stopped to hear me-that
lover was probably faithful and that he would be here
answer for himself in about a month from this; but
saw that she would not listen to reason !"
"Ha, ha, ha  No! she was too much confirmed in.
belief that you were her recreant lover! Very awkw
for you     I don't think anything would convince her
the truth but the visible presence of Ham Gow at y
side-and before her face i"
"Perhaps not! Well, the poor girl can have that evid
in a few weeks, if she does not choose to receive any ot
testimony sooner," said Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"Here we are at my quarters! Come in," said the d



<pb n="37"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    37
tor, leading the way into a small house adjoining the
prisoners' barracks.
About the same hour Mrs. Belle Isle was sitting alone
in her parlor, when the door opened and her maid entered
and dropped down at her feet in great agitation.
"What is the matter, Lona?" inquired the lady.
"Oh, madam, it is all over! all over!" cried the girl,
bursting into tears and weeping wildly.
"What is all over? What do you mean, Lona?"
"Oh, madam, it is all over between me and Ham Gow l
He has made his fortune in the gold mines, and he has
turned against me 1 I know just how it is! He is rich
and he wants to marry rich  and so he is false to me!"l
wildly wept the girl.
"I do not believe it, Lona. What makes you think
so?" inquired the lady.
"Oh, madam, I would never have believed it of him
either, if I had not heard it out of his own lips !"
"Have you seen him, then?" demanded Mrs. Belle Isle,
in surprise.
"Oh, yes, madam! He is in the colony I He is in the
town !"
"Where did you see him?"
"On Macquarrie Road, as I was coming home with the
Berlin wool yarn you sent me to buy for you. He was
walking with another gentleman. I think it was the sur-
geon of convicts, and I spoke to him. Oh 1 I was so over-
joyed, so crazy with delight when I saw him, that I'm
afraid-I'm afraid I behaved very improper! But he de-
nied that he was Ham Gow, and he pretended that he
did not know me! Oh     Oh! Oh, dear me! Oh, dear
me !" cried Lona, bursting again into a passion of tears.
"Try to be calm, my poor girl; and try to think now
whether you are quite, quite sure that this man was Ham
Gow," said her mistress kindly.
"Oh, madam! Oh, madam! as if it was possible for
mle to be mistaken in my own Ham Gow!" exclaimed the
girl. Then dropping her voice, she moaned: "My own
Ham Gow! Ah, me! Ah, me! My own Ham Gow no
longer! Never again! Never again "
"You were mistaken once, you remember, Lona, when



<pb n="38"/>
88           THE    TEST   OF LOVE             ' 
you mistook a convict in the chain gang on the
road for your betrothed," said the lady.       '
"Oh, my dear ma'am; but that was such a die
thing !" said Lona Pond illogically. "That man was a
vict, and couldn't have been Ham Gow at all; and this
looks respectable, and certainly is Ham Gow." i
"But you thought at the time that Hice was Ham Go
"Yes, ma'am; but Hice wasn't, you know, because it 
proved that he wasn't. But this man is. I know he 
replied Lona, with stupid persistency. 
"My poor girl, you are probably as much mistaken
this instance as you were in that. You are unsound
the subject of your lover. You have mistaken some ot
man for Gow. Really, Lona, you must not go about
town laying claim to every man who happens to bear so
resemblance to Gow! Consider, child, that Gow w
never have denied his own identity, or his knowledge
you. I could never believe that of him."
"Nor could I ever have believed it of him if my o
ears had not heard his own lips speak it I" sobbed the
"Mr. Belle Isle shall find out if Gow is in town, if
will satisfy you," said the young matron, who seemed re
at a loss how to comfort the "foolish virgin" at her feet.. 
"Oh, ma'am, he is in town, fast enough; there is A
doubt about that ! But I won't distress you any more w
my going on, ma'am. You are very good to me, any
-much better than I deserve," said Lona at length, ris
and wiping her eyes as she left the room.
Later in the day, as Mrs. Belle Isle sat alone in
parlor, an orderly entered with two cards on a waiter.
Mrs. Belle Isle took them, and read in succession:
"George Briggs, M.D."
"Mr. Hamilton Gower."
"Show these gentlemen in," said the lady.
The orderly saluted and threw open the door, and
Briggs and Mr. Hamilton Gower entered the room.
Mrs. Belle Isle arose to receive them.
"Good-morning, madamI I have taken the liberty
an intimate friend to bring you a visitor-a forlorn yo
man just arrived, a stranger in the town-Mr. Hami
Gower-of-Cornwall, England-Mrs. Belle Isle," said
murgeon, presenting his companion in an offhand man
i ,.



<pb n="39"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    89
"I am glad to see you, Mr. Gower. Doctor, you have
had a pleasant day for your usual walk," said the lady,
as the two callers seated themselves, and she resumed her
place on the sofa.
"Yes; and a rather amusing adventure-of which more
presently. You have been out to-day?"
"No, I have been lazy and remained indoors, and there-
fore 'I have lost a day,' as some sage or hero said, long
ago, when he had missed doing a good deed," said Mrs.
Belle Isle with a smile.
"I have been doing good deeds, then, and have not lost
a day! I think I have made two in one! After getting
through with my patients, I fell in with Mr. Gower, here,
wandering about like the Wandering Jew, and I took him
under my protection and have been showing him around
our town-into the cheerful and exhilarating jails, hos-
pitals, convict barracks and so on."
"Ah!-and what do you think of it all, Mr. Gower ?"
inquired the lady, turning to her younger visitor.
"I think of it, madam," said the young man with a
thoughtful smile-"under your ticket-of-leave system-
very much as some people think of purgatory, with this
difference, that its convicts are quite as likely to sink down
into utter perdition as to rise into the comparative heaven
of honesty and respectability."
"That is but too true," assented the surgeon. Then ad-
dressing his hostess, he said, quite suddenly: "Speaking
of convicts, ma'am, you remember that desperate fellow
Hice, in whom Mr. Belle Isle showed so much interest at
one time?"
"Oh, yes I It was because-because my maid, poor girl,
saw him in the chain gang on the new road, and imagined
that she recognized in him an old acquaintance of hers,"
replied the lady, speaking with some hesitation.
"He afterward bolted, you know."
"Yes, I know; and he threw the whole community of
women here in such a state of terror by his outbreak that
not one of us would dare to take a walk or ride beyond the
limits of the town."
"Ah! he was not half as black as he was painted! He
is gone, poor fellow, to render his account to the only just



<pb n="40"/>
40           THE TEST OF LOVE                  vi
Judge I Did you hear the particulars of his captu R
his death?"                                   *!
"No; I only heard that he had been taken and,
dangerously wounded, and lately that he had died at',
Mountain Hermitage."
"Our young friend here was his captor," said the 
gen, turning with a smile to Mr. Gower.         ,
"Ah, indeed !" exclaimed the lady, glancing at the y
man with a new interest.
"Yes it is rather a queer story altogether. Shall I 
you about it ?"
"Yes, if you please; I should like to hear it."
"That boy, there, is the hero of the adventure, you 
know-by the way, he is rather in that line of busin
think. He had a notable one this morning; but
about that presently. Now I am going to tell you a mo
tale about his rescue of a beautiful young lady from 
hands of a brutal ruffian in the wilderness, at the footl
Mount Wellington !"
"Doctor, I beg you to spare me," laughed the y
man.
"I am going to do so, my dear fellow ! I am going
to spare you and to laud you," persisted the surgeon.
And he told the whole story of Hamilton Gower's
venture in the wilderness, including the rescue of Sera
Elfinstar, the capture of John Hice, and all that follow
ending with the recovery of the wounded convict and
assignment, through the intercession of the chaplain,
the private service of the master of the Hermitage,
his subsequent sudden death from congestion of the br
"Poor soul! I am glad he had a few weeks of pI
at the last, and a quiet death in a Christian house," s
Mrs. Belle Isle with a sigh. 
"And such was the end of the man your maid rai
such a coil about because she took him to be an old nei
bor from her native village! But tell me, madam, is 
this girl rather"-the doctor touched his forehead 
nificantly-"on the subject of this old neighbor of hers
"I fear so," admitted the lady.
"Rather given to imagine this, that and the other 
to be the old neighbor in question?"
"I think so; but why do you ask?" 
if



<pb n="41"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   41
"Because this morning she met us on Macquarrie Street
and suddenly threw herself into the arms of this young
man, to his amazement and my entertainment," laughed
the doctor.
"How shocking    She told me of it. She took him to
be Ham Gow. She still believes him to be so," replied
Mrs. Belle Isle.
"Oh, she told you! Well, she made quite a scene. For-
tunately, at that time there was not a soul on the street
but ourselves-at least there was no one in sight or hear-
ing. Gower could not convince the girl that he was not
her own recreant lover, and she overwhelmed him, first
with caresses and afterward with reproaches. Finally she
left him in bitter anger."
"I know. I am very sorry, Mr. Gower, that you should
have been so annoyed," said the lady, turning with a vivid
blush toward the young man.
"Oh! I beg you will not disturb yourself, dear madam.
The incident was rather comic than otherwise, and as
soon as I discovered the precise nature of her misappre-
hension I could have explained it to her and satisfied her;
but she would not stay to listen."
"Flung Ham Gow's engagement ring at the feet of Mr.
Gower and fled away in a fury!" added the doctor.
"We could not but feel some compassion for the young
woman in the midst of all our amusement, and also some
responsibility for my resemblance to her lover, and some
obligation to give her satisfaction."
"That's why I dragged him here. He said he should be
intruding, but I made him come," put in the doctor.
"And I am very glad to have made your acquaintance,
Mr. Gower," added his hostess kindly.
"Thank you, madam. On my own part I am very
grateful to the circumstance that gives the privilege and
pleasure of knowing you," responded the guest with a
bow.
"And what my amiable young friend wishes further to
say is this-that he knows this Ham Gow, who is his per-
sonal double; that this is not the first, nor the second, nor
the third time that they have been mistaken for each
other, though let me add, on my own account, one is a
gentleman and the other is-not," explained the doctor.



<pb n="42"/>
42           THE TEST OF LOVE
"This Gow, however, was the favorite playmate of
childhood, and the companion of my boyhood. He is
betrothed husband, as I know from his own telling of 
girl. He is in Victoria at present, but I expect him
within the month, for we are to return to England'
company by the Labrador, and I think, from what Ila
of him, that when he finds his betrothed here he will 
to marry and take her with him. This is just wh
wanted to explain to the girl if she had given me
opportunity," concluded Mr. Gower.
"And it would be kind of you, ma'am, to let this
fool know how the case stands. It would save her
breaking her heart, or cracking her brain, and it
save Mr. Gower from being assaulted or embraced Ji
public streets," laughed the surgeon.
"I will tell her," said Mrs. Belle Isle.
Then the two gentlemen said good-by and went i
way. 
CHAPTER V
AT THE GOLD DIGGINGS
DEAD MAIDEN'S BRooK had changed very much
the first great "rush" to its newly discovered gold fie
Then it was but an extensive, disorderly encam
along the banks of the gully in the deep ravine th
which it ran.
Now the scene presented every appearance of a pr
ous settlement-a new, strange town such as may 
found in the Australian gold fields-a town of onlZ
street, if street it could be called, where a loosely 
chain of dwelling houses, shops and taverns ran
for miles, on the east and west side of the gully, 
each other across it, and having the mountains at
backs. 
These houses presented the most novel and curo
pect, being constructed of the most unusual and 
material-some of cedar logs set upright like pall
some of bark nailed on a framework of wood, a Id,
of canvas-lined green baize or red cloth.
!i~~~~~~~~~~~ *                              ^;



<pb n="43"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                     43
They were nearly all roofed with bark, or canvas, and
lighted by one or more glazed windows.
Behind many of these houses were gardens where cab-
bages and potatoes and other common table vegetables were
raised, and tended by the women and children.
Here and there was also a cow to be seen under a shed;
but that was a luxury.
And the shafts, windlasses, pans and cradles of the dig-
gers were to be seen everywhere-between the houses, along
the banks of the gully, behind the houses, under the moun-
tains, before the houses of the gully, and scattered up
and down through the great ravine as far as the eye could
reach in any direction.
The two principal hotels were-the "Queen's," on the
north end of the east bank, and the "Prince of Wales," at
the south end of the west bank. These were good-sized,
well constructed frame buildings.
Besides these there were several other smaller and less
reputable public houses, and more than a dozen "all sorts"
stores, where everything, or a little of everything, was sold,
from an ounce of tea to a pound of Epsom salts, and from
a straw hat to a canvas tent.
There was also a post office, and a weekly mail from Mel-
bourne.
Our friends, the numerous Joneses, had greatly pros-
pered, some of them still engaged in working out the in-
exhaustible treasures of their first lucky leads, some en-
gaged in the almost equally lucrative trade of the town,
and one, the head of that fortunate tribe, enjoying himself
in literally "taking his ease in his inn" as landlord of
the Queen's, with a good staff of assistants in his own
sons and daughters to take all the hard work off his hands.
Mr. Duplicate Hawke had also prospered in the begin-
ning qf his gold digging.
To sum up his fortune briefly, the first nine months had
brought him very nearly ten thousand pounds.
But after that his luck declined. His "lead" yielded
less and less, until at length it was worked entirely out.
He sunk other shafts, but found little or no gold. He
was still persevering, however, under discouragement and
a growing homesickness.



<pb n="44"/>
44            THE TEST OF LOVE
He had a little room on the second floor undel
of his friend, Mr. Jones, the landlord of the 
There he slept and took breakfast and supper
spent his day beside his shaft, where his parte 
hut, and where they took "turn and turn about"
at the windlass, or digging at the bottom; but as
had raised nothing from this shaft but "dirt." 
One afternoon he returned to his lodgings muc" i
and in a much more despondent mood than usual. 
After supper he sat smoking a pipe with the
on a bench in front of the house. 
Before them yawned the great, deep gully that 
the bed of the low brook.
Across the gully was the row of cedar post,
canvas houses.
At this hour the street was quiet but for an
miner sauntering home to his supper.
The young man sighed.
"Give it up, lad " said the landlord of the 
"give it up  Luck has turned! And when luck 
turned, be it for good or for bad, it seldom or nevei
back again! Give it up! Invest your money in s
business.  Take the place of barkeeper here. 
has a mind to set up for himself, on the 'all sorts' li
he is only waiting for me to get a good substitute
he starts off."
"Want to go home," murmured Mr. Duplicate
almost unconsciously.
"Oh, you do! What for? You could not invest'
capital to one hundredth part of the advantage at h
you can here. Don't you know that?"
"Yes-want to go home," muttered the young i
murely.
"Left a sweetheart there, maybe?"
"Yes-want to go home."
"Well, why in the deuce don't you go, my boy? '
are able to afford it now. You must be worth a
thousand pounds! Go home and marry your sw
and bring her out here with you, if you want to
a millionaire, or stay there with her if you decide t
tent yourself with a modest competency. Do an
rather than stay here and mope, mope, mope, 
L A .i  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~'



<pb n="45"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    45
are likely to be going mad instead of going home I" ex-
claimed Mr. Jones of the Queen's.
"How willingly, how gladly, would I have gone long
before this, if it had been possible; but I cannot go," the
young man mournfully replied.
"Oan't go? I should like to know why; you are rich
enough, as I said before."
"But for all that I cannot go back to England," sighed
Mr. Duplicate Hawke.
"Whe-e-ew     Is that it?" said Jones, with a long
whistle and a troubled look.
"No! that is not it " energetically responded the young
man. "It is not what you think! I never committed a
crime in all my life! I-I might almost say I never did
a wrong act in my life "
"You can say a great deal more than most sinners, or
saints either, for that jnatter, if you can say that; and
really you look as if it might be true," replied the land-
lord.
"Look here, Mr. Jones, I don't consider myself worthy
to be called a Christian! No, I don't, when I read my
Bible and see what the life and example of the Divine
Founder of Christianity was I But I'll tell you this: when
parson was reading over the Commandments at morning
service in your parlor last Sunday morning, I couldn't help
feeling that I had kept them all 'from my youth up'-
except the one about keeping holy the Sabbath day; but
I have been loose in that respect-not going to church as
I ought to have done. But as to my positive wrongdoing
-no, Mr. Jones! no! your first opinion of me was the
true one; I am not unworthy of your confidence."
"I know it, lad  I know it I did but waver one second
when you said that you could not go back to England!
But why, now, if you will satisfy a good friend-why can
you not go back to England?" affectionately inquired the
landlord.
"I would tell you, if the secret was only my own, but
it is not; however, my exile is not a lifelong one; but I
cannot show myself in England, or even in any civilized
part of these colonies, before the first of next September,"
said the young man.
"Ah! I begin to see  You are kept out of the way of



<pb n="46"/>
46           THE TEST OF LOVE
being a witness in some case in which some one d
want you to testify." 
"No, that is not the case. That would be wrons!i
I told you that I had done no wrong."
"Well, then, I give it up."
"And you believe in me?"
"Yes, I believe in you, chap! But see here! If it
be safe for you to appear in England on the first of
tember, you have not more than just time to get
if you start now P'
"I know that, but I cannot go until I hear from a 
of mine who is out here in the colonies. By George 1
are so confiding that I feel just as if I ought to give
an inkling of how the case standsl" suddenly excl
Mr. Duplicate Hawke.
"That is just as you please, lad " heartily rep
Mr. Jones, though it was easy to see that he was
curiosity.
"I will, then! It can do no harm, now and here
will just give you an idea. Well, you see, there 
young nobleman who was left an orphan in his chil
to the care of a crabbed, narrow-minded, tyrannica
tutor, who made his life a burden that grew heavier
heavier year after year, until the youth got to be
nineteen years of age, and had but two years more of
bondage to bear; but he felt that he could not en
any longer. So he planned to gather up all his mon
jewels, and cut and run for the uttermost parts 
earth, and stay two years, and then return home,
when he should be of age and could defy his tutor.
young nobleman is now in these colonies, and he 
of age on the first of next September."
"Oh    Oh, ho! I see! I perceive! I understand
claimed the landlord of the Queen's, beaming r
"You are the young nobleman in question, my 
beg your pardon for not recognizing your lordshi
nity at once, as I should have done intuitively i
not been one of the stupidest of menl" 
Mr. Duplicate Hawke burst into a peal of laught
when it had subsided said: 
"Mistaken again ! Did I not tell you that I ha
in my life done a wrong act?"



<pb n="47"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    47
t"Yes, my lord; your lordship did."
"And was it not very wrong in the young nobleman to
run away from his tutor P"
"Ah-hum-ha-         I do not know, my lord. Your
lordship is the best judge," replied the landlord of the
Queen's, in a noncommittal manner.
"Well, then, I judge that it was very wrong in a young
nobleman to run away from his tutor; and as I insist that
I never did any wrong, consequently I was not the young
nobleman who ran away from his tutor."
"I beg your lordship's pardon," said Jones of the
Queen's, in some little confusion.
"Nor am I a lordship, either. Come to your wits, my
friend, and understand that I am no more nor better than
the honest fortune-hunter you have hitherto known me
to be."
"Yes, sir," said the landlord, a little, but a very little,
resentfully. "And that being so, what has the young noble-
man's tantrums-which I must say are very unbecoming
of any young man, not to say a young nobleman-to do
with your exile to foreign countries until the first of next
September ?"
"Only this-that having been in his lordship's confi-
dence, and having been the last person known to be with
him before his disappearance, and having a net of circum-
stantial evidence thrown around me, I was accused of this
young nobleman's murder, and if I had not fled for my
life I should, doubtless, long ago have been hung for it."
"Whe-e-e-wl Couldn't you have told people that he
had run away?"
"Oh, yes; I could have told them that, easy enough, but
they would not have believed me, and I could not have
proved the fact, and so I should have been hung, all the
same. So I thought it best to follow the example of my
lord, and cut and run. We are both in the colonies now."
"Seen him since you have been out here?"
"Oh, yes. Do you remember the man we picked up at
the other side of the mountain the day before we reached
these diggings ?"
"And you introduced as your brother?"
"Yes; and I guess I didn't tell a story that time. I



<pb n="48"/>
48           THE TEST OF LOVE 
guess he was my brother, by a gypsy marriage; St
have been told so," laughed Mr. Duplicate HaUke;J
"I remember him. And he was the abscondingij
scamp, was he?"
"He was the absconding young scamp. I say
very wrong in a young nobleman to run away f
tutor, was it not?"
"Oh, very wrong I Quite unpardonable! And to.i
honest lad like you into such a mess, too! Now, w
you going to do about it ?"
"Wait here until I get a letter from him
day of our embarkation for England; for by our 
rangement we are to return home together-he to 
inheritance, on his majority; I-who have been
secrets from the first-to prove his identity in 
man who, since his supposed death, has held his tit
estates, should attempt to dispute it. And when I
them the young nobleman alive and well I hope th
stop calling me a murderer, and wanting to hang
"But, now, suppose this young lord should not
to you?  Suppose something should have happe
him-that he should have perished in the bush, or
been killed by the blacks? What would you do in.
case?" inquired Mr. Jones.
"I should have to stay here for the rest of my
\I.     life, I suppose."
"And give up your sweetheart?"
"And give up my sweetheart."
"That would be blamed hard."
"Yes, it would be hard; but I hope it will not
to me. It is true, I have not heard from my lord 
last two months; but then he was going to Van D
Land, which would account for my getting no lette
"There'll be a mail in to-night. Perhaps you may
letter."
"Perhaps I may; but there is no special reason
should," said the young man in a despondent tone.
But he did get a letter that very evening. 
Half an hour later the mail wagon came rn
the town, and past the Queen's, on its way to th
office.
I.



<pb n="49"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    49
In another moment the whole street, and that means
the whole town, was alive.
Men, women and children whirled out of the houses on
both sides of the gully, and surged up in the rear of the
wagon on its way to the post office.
Many of the impatient people did not wait for the open-
ing of the mails, but eagerly questioned the driver.
"Has there been a ship in from the ould country, Mick,
boy?" was the question put with but little variation from
more than a dozen different persons.
*"Ay, sure  The Labrador is in, with mails from England
and likewise from Hobbyton! My bag be nigh bursting
wi' 'em!" was the satisfactory answer that put new life
and lightness into the hearts and feet of the anxious
crowd.
Mr. Duplicate.Hawke and Jones of the Queen were by
no means the hindmost in the rush. They pushed their
way to the front, though once or twice they were very nearly
being forced over the bank and down into the gully.
Being. the most impetuous of the crowd, they were the
first to push themselves into the post office, and the first,
when the mail was opened, to get their letters.
The landlord of the Queen's hurried home, happy in the
possession of a joint letter from his own and his wife's
mother, and a bundle of London and Penzance newspapers.
Mr. Duplicate Hawke hastened after him, equally well
pleased with the solitary epistle postmarked Hobart Town,
and directed in the familiar hand of Mr. Hamilton Gower.
On reaching the inn he hurried to his little room on the
second floor, lighted his tallow candle, placed it in the
neck of an empty bottle on his little table, and sat down
to read his letter, which was this:
"ROYAL VIOTORIA HOTEL, HOBART TOWN,
"March 1, 18-.
"D~ba  Gow: If I have not written to you for some
time past it has been because I had rambled out of the
reach of mail route&s
"I arrived in this city only this morning.
"I write this letter for the Labrador, which arrived here
yesterday morning from London, and will sail for Mel-
bourne with the first tide to-morrow morning.



<pb n="50"/>
50           THIE TEST OF LOVE
"I suppose she will remain at Melbourne for a fewid
"She will touch here again on her homeWard-boun
age.
"Now, Ham, it is high time that you and I were 
way to England. If you can possibly make your
ments to do so, I beg that you will leave Melbourne 
Labrador, and I will join you on board from this port1!
we will return home together.
"If you should be at any pecuniary loss, dear friend, 
know that I will make it up to you, as in common j
I should be bound to do; for your company on the 
home, and your support when I shall present mys
one risen from the dead to claim an inheritance, wi
all important and most valuable to me.
"You need not feel the slightest uneasiness in the
pect of presenting yourself here under your real n
You will not be arrested for the murder of the late
of Hawkewood. Not-mind you-because it has been
covered that he never was murdered at all, for no 
discovery has yet been made; but because an unfo
convict, one John Hice, being dangerously wounded,
believing himself to be near death, made a full confes
of his crimes, acknowledging, among the rest, the m
of the Earl of Hawkewood, which homicide, he said,
heavier on his soul than all his other sins, though he n
meant to kill the earl, but only to strike him a 
blow in self-defense.
"(I so entirely believed that statement to be true that
afterward asked and obtained the privilege of a priva
interview with the convict, in which I explained to
that he had never had the opportunity of killing the 
earl, either intentionally or otherwise, and that he 
only stunned another man with a harder head, when
had intended to stun the earl. My explanation, when
had convinced him of its truth, made the poor wretch
tively happy. He is gone now, but not from the ef
of his wounds, thank Heaven!   However, this is a
from the purport of my letter.)
"The confession of Hice, duly taken. down in wri
from his lips, signed, witnessed and attested, is on reo
and fully exonerates you from the charge of murder. 



<pb n="51"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                     51
can come to Hobart Town a free man, under your own
name.
"Whether I shall assume mine before I reach England
I have not yet decided. But I will, for once, indulge my-
self in the luxury of signing it here as
"Your true friend,           HAWXEWOOD.
"P. S.-I have written to Delaplaine at Paris, to remind
him to keep tryst on the first of next September, at Hawke
Hall.                                          H."
"Well, well, well, well," slowly ruminated Mr. Dupli-
cate Hawke, or Ham Gow, as we may as well call him, now
that the ban is taken off from his name. "What a letter I
Here is food enough for thought to keep me awake all
night. My unknown assailant discovered in a Tasmanian
convict I Blest if I did not always believe it to have been
that fellow Lewis Manton who tried to murder the earl to
succeed to his estates -I am blest if I didn't -and now
it has turned out to be an ordinary sneak thief that dealt
me that stunning blow I Well, his confession is on record,
and I am cleared. Ah, I am glad to know that 
"By Jove l" he exclaimed with a laugh, as a new aspect
of the case struck his sense of humor. "It was I myself
who was assassinated and half murdered, and as if that
were not 'enough for the monkey,' it was I myself who
was charged and all but hanged for that same'assassination
and supposed murder   Now I wonder if the like of that
ever happened to mortal man before I
"Life's a conundrum, and I give it up I
"Well! We will keep the tryst at Hawke Hall on the
first of September, and have some fun there! But how
about the good Mr. Delaplaine? My lord says that he has
written to him to join us at Hawke Hall. Good gracious!
Has my lord forgotten that Mr. Delaplaine was accused
with me of being an accomplice in his murder, and that
therefore the worthy Mr. Delaplaine never could have
carried out his purpose of buying that little business? My
lord has forgotten that the excellent Mr. Delaplaine must
be in hiding somewhere, and unless the valet, or himself,
should re               to keep it at all risks, my lord
mu   st,-io         t!r      Well-I think we can do
wiFth i   And now .to      glad the heart of my kind
I.       ms      L-IBRAR8 R
186549



<pb n="52"/>
52           THE TEST OF LOVE
host, who will rejoice with me at this speedy pro
happiness," said Ham Gow, as he blew out his c
went downstairs in search of the landlord.     ; !
All the quietness that had prevailed throughout the
during the day was at an end now. The taproom an'
parlor were as full as they could be with the miners, 
were drinking, smoking, playing cards, singing songs, 
ing the newspapers that had come by the Labradoe;
exchanging private intelligence that had reached
in letters by the same ship.
The landlord was not among them; but the landl
son, young George Jones, who was tending bar, called'
to the newcomer, saying:
"If you wish to see father, Mr. Hawke, he is sitting W
mother in her little back parlor, and he will like to,
you, I know."
"Thank you, George, we'll find him," replied Ham
as, glad to escape from the noisy scene, he passed thr
the crowded taproom and public parlor to the little a
ment in the rear, to which the landlord retreated when
wished to enjoy a quiet hour with his family. 
He found Mr. and Mrs. Jones seated at a small, roI
table in the middle of the room, with its top covered 
letters, pamphlets and newspapers.
The faces of the man and the woman were beaming
happiness.
They both looked up at the same moment, and welco
him with smiles.
"It is easy to see that you have received good ne
so easy that I congratulate you before knowing what it 
said the young man, with a responsive smile.
"Oh, yes, lad; thank you kindly; the very best of 
Draw a chair up to the table here with us, and listen
it. You'd hardly believe it, but the two old lasses
really coming out to us 1" exclaimed Mr. Jones, with t
of joy in his honest blue eyes. 
"The two old lasses?" repeated Ham Gow in some
plexity, as he made himself comfortable by sitting
and leaning his arms upon the table.
"Oh, ay! Her mother and minel Our fathers
gone to their rest. Our mothers are widows; but
have always been fast friends, living near each other



<pb n="53"/>
LT' THE                TEST    OF LOVE               58
Market Street, Penzance. It was our mothers' close friend-
ship that brought Jane and me together in one of the
happiest marriages-though I say it-that ever was made 1
And now the two old folks are coming out to us to com-
plete our happiness-as why should they not, when they
have neither kith nor kin in the old country to keep them
there ?"
"It must be a great undertaking for them, however,"
said Ham Gow bluntly.
"Nol a bit of an undertaking for them! Lord love you,
lad! they are two hale old girls, a trifle rising sixty, and
have been at sea the best half of their lives-having both
been stewardesses on the coasting steamers until they had
saved money enough to set up shop-my mother kept a
thread and needle shop, and hers a pastrycook's."
"I am glad that they are coming out to you, then."
"Thank you, lad. So are we. They are coming by the
Golden Path, that will be due here in about a month from
this. So, you see, they are on the ocean, and three-quarters
through their voyage, even now."
"As near as you can calculate, keeping in mind the
great uncertainty of the time made by these sailing ships,"
put in Mrs. Jones.
"Ay, Jenny, and that is true, too. But I declare that
you and I must go to Melbourne by the first of the month,
and stay there until the ship does come, if we have to stay
for months. It would never do for the old lasses to arrive
and we not be on hand to meet 'em."
"But the house-the business? Hadn't one of us better
stay here to look after things, and the other go to meet the
old folks?" suggested Mrs. Jones.
"No, Jenny, lass, no! Let our boys and girls run the
house for a while, or let it run itself, or let it stand still-
I don't care! But your good mother shall not miss seeing
you when she first sets foot in this strange land; and I'll
be doggoned if my dear old mammy shall miss seeing my
face among the foremost on the wharf; so that is settled."
"When will we go?" inquired Mrs. Jones.
"A fortnight from this will be time enough for us to
start," said Mr. Jones.
And then turning to his guest, he said:
"Now we have been talking so much about our own
L



<pb n="54"/>
54           THE TEST OF LOVE 
affairs that I have forgotten to think abot yours, 
Hawke. You were anxiously looking for news from Ho 
Town. I hope you got it, and that it is good."
"Thank you. I got it, and it is good," answered HIi
Gow with a cordial smile. 
"And you go back to the old country soon ?"
"Yes, as soon as possible. I shall leave this place
the mailwagon that starts at daylight to-morrow mo
ing for Melbourne, and I shall take passage in the Labr       l
for London. She will stop at Hobart Town, as 
and there my friend will join me, and we will go to Eng
together."
"That will be very fine for you and your mate. But
is quite a sudden blow to us. I'm blest, if it wasn't
the thought of having the two old gals over so soon,
feel quite knocked over at the loss of you, lad 1" said 
Jones.
"I do thank you for feeling so much interest in such
vagabond as I am! But I do not think you will lose mI
altogether. "I think I shall come back here-that is---i
"If the 'girl you left behind you' consents to emg
eh?" put in the landlord of the Queen's, with a wink.
"Just so," frankly admitted Ham Gow. "If she
come out with me I shall return, and I don't see why
shouldn't do so, for she has really no one belonging to
in the old country except a crabbed stepmother whom
will be glad to get away from. And now, my friends,
must leave you for the present. I have got a great d
to do to-night. I must go back to my claim and m
some arrangement with my partner, Traverse, and get
pile and pack my valise."
"I should think you would have a great deal to do
get ready on so short a notice," said Mrs. Jones.
"And so I will bid you good-night," added Ham 
rising.
"We will see you again to-morrow morning," said
Jones kindly, rising and holding out his hand, which 
Gow took and pressed.
"And you shall have a good, hot, comforting 
before you start, be it ever so early," said Mrs. Jones
..*



<pb n="55"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    55 
she pushed her plump fingers into the hand of the young
man, who clasped them warmly. 
"And now get along with you, lad, for the night is pass-
ing, and seeing as you have so much to do, it would not be
kind in us to keep you," said Mr. Jones, with practical
good sense.
Ham Gow laughed and left the room, and quickly made
tracks for the claim over which his partner, George Tra-
verse, kept the night watch.
This claim was situated at the base of the mountains,
about a mile north of the Queen's Hotel, and there was
no other claim very near it.
There was no moon, and the sky was clouded over so
that when Ham Gow had left the lighted houses behind
him his way was very dark; but the low, distant light in
the hut, like a glowworm on the ground, was a beacon to
guide his steps
He found George Traverse seated in the door of the hut,
smoking a pipe, and not at all startled by the sudden an-
nouncement that his senior partner was going to leave
by the mail wagon for Melbourne the next morning; such
impulsive departures were too common in the mines.
The arrangements for the dissolution of partnership were
of the simplest kind. Ham Gow was to take his clothing
and his "pile," and leave George Traverse in possession
of the hut, the claim and the tools.  , 
He spent the night with Traverse, who walked back with
him to the Queen's the next morning to see him off by the
mail wagon.
The landlady of the Queen's kept her promise and had
ready the good, hot, comforting breakfast, in which George
Traverse joined Ham Gow.
At daybreak the mail wagon was ready to start, and
Gow, after taking an affectionate leave of his partner, of
the Joneses and of all friends and neighbors who were astir
at that early hour, mounted to his seat, and waving a final
adieu to all, started for Melbourne.
He reached that city in the highest health and spirits,
had time enough there to purchase a comfortible outfit
for his long sea voyage, and a week later he sailed in the
Labrador for Hobart Town and London.
L-A:



<pb n="56"/>
56           THE TEST OF LOVE                         , 
CHAPTER VI                       '
THE LOE VEBS
"HA~   Gow will answer that letter in person, if I knowr,,
the fellow " said Mr. Hamilton Gower, as he went home .! 
to his hotel that night, after having spent the day in sight- : i
seeing and the evening at the barracks. "In fact, he wi l
have to answer it in person and come with the first mail',
that leaves the diggings if he wants to be in time to secure ':  -
his passage in the Labrador. He will be here in two orl,
three weeks, and I must be ready to join him. To-morrow:r'i
I will go and have an understanding with the Elfinstars,"' l
he concluded, as he composed himself to sleep.       "
Early the next morning, in accordance with his resolu- |
tion, he arose, ordered his horse, took his breakfast in a :
hurry, threw himself into his saddle and started for the 
Mountain Hermitage.
It was but seven o'clock when he cantered briskly out 
upon the New Road, where the chain gang of convicts, in ,
their yellow jackets and ferocious or despondent aspect,
were already at work under their drivers and guards.
He rode rapidly past these with sinking spirits, until he
got out of sight and hearing of them and into the solitude
and freshness of the green and dewy country, where he
breathed more freely.
It was but nine o'clock when he reached the base of the 
mountain and began to wind up it by that wonderful
road engineered by Mr. Elfinstar's enterprise and the con-
vict labor.
It was ten o'clock when he reached the plateau on which
the beautiful house and grounds of the Mountain Hermi-
tage were situated.
He rode around by the foot of the lowest terrace and
up a graded road leading to the stables, where he found 
old Jonas Stackpole sitting down in his armchair outside
the door, smoking a short pipe.
"You didn't expect to see me back so soon, Stadipole,
eh?" gayly inquired the young man.
"No, sir; but I am all the happier in having the un-
A'"i' 



<pb n="57"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                     57
expected honor," replied the old coachman, taking the pipe
from his mouth and rising respectfully.
"I will leave my horse here and walk up to the house,"
said Mr. Hamilton Gower, as he dismounted and threw
the reins to one of the grooms.
"All right, sir! He shall be well looked after," said
old Stackpole, touching his forehead.
Mr. Hamilton Gower walked on toward the house.
As he drew near the upper terrace he saw Seraph Elfin-
star at a distance. She was coming from the rear of the
cultivated grounds, evidently from the rocky and thorny
wilderness infected by noxious weeds and infested with
venomous reptiles, that lay at the foot of the precipice, and
that she haunted in her hours of morbid despondency and
called her Gehenna.
She seemed, as she drew nearer, to be in one of her most
despairing moods. Her radiant light hair was all gathered
up in a dark net under a dark straw hat. She wore a dark-
brown dress and shawl. Her face was very pale, and her
eyes were fixed upon the ground as she slowly and languidly
approached.
She did not see her lover until they met face to face, and
he spoke to her.
"Seraph !"
She started as violently as if she had received a shock.
"You are back, then?" she said in a fainting voice as
she looked up at him and leaned against a tree for support.
"Yes, I am here! here to renew my pledge to love only
you of all women in the world ! to marry only you, if you
will be my wife, or-never to marry at all 1" he answered,
with earnest love and faith expressed in every tone of his
eager voice and in every look of his eloquent face.
"And-Margaret Campbell ?" she faltered.
"Was a child-martyr as good and pure as were the St.
Agnes and St. Rosalie worshiped of Christians 1" warmly
replied the young man.
"Ahl no, no, she was not! She did not commit any
crime, or break any human law; but she was jealous and
vindictive in temper. If she had not been so, don't you
see, this fearful chain of circumstantial evidence could
never have been woven around her for her destruction,"
said Seraph mournfully.



<pb n="58"/>
58           THE TEST OF LOVE
" 'Jeilous and vindictive,' do you call her? A h
and harmless child, goaded into cries of pain and i
wrongs that might have maddened older and mote
governed people I" earnestly responded the young ml
"You defend Margaret Campbell now as eloquen
you denounced her-once," said Seraph with a
smile.
"I know her now. I did not know her then;
would beg her pardon, at her feet, for the rash 
ment by which I so greatly wronged her," said the
reverently.
"Oh, you need not. It was so natural, so inevitable. :
was a misjudgment also which you shared with the
judges and the sharpest jurors; with the press, and
the public," murmured Seraph.
"By all my hopes of heaven I will make them all
their minds !" eagerly exclaimed the youth.
"Ah! I do not know how you will manage to work
miracle I"
"The truth must prevail, if it has but one earnest
vocate ! And it shall prevail, for I am such a one! I
return to England by the next ship. I shall devote all
time, fortune and energies to the vindication of 
name !"
"Would you indeed do all that for me?-for me-l
forlorn, despairing as I am- " Her voice broke do
in emotion.,
"Yes, all that, and more ! for your misfortunes are
and your unhappiness is mine; in serving you I serve
self. All that man or angel can do for you, I will do" 'I
"Ah! where can you ever begin? Your enterprise
be-a phantom hunt I"
"No, no!   I believe I have a clue l"
"A clue !"
"Yes!   I was too anxious in reading the narrative nD
to be on the-lookout for clues, and I believe I have founi.
one."
"You-suspect-some-one?" she inquired in a low,
hesitating, almost breathless voice.
"Yes, I suspect some one."
"Whom-whom ?"
:;!



<pb n="59"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   59
"That deformed, half-witted malignant who was your
roommate and your accuser."
"Great Heaven !" breathed Seraph, gazing at the speaker
in amazement.
"Seraph, is it possible that you never suspected this
girl?"
"Never."
"And yet you knew that she was half-witted, malicious
and a sleepwalker I"
Yes."
" And you knew that only she, besides yourself, had com-
mand of that key of your room, which was also the pass-
key to the nursery, and which was on the inside of your
locked door on the night or early morning of the child
murder I"
"Yes I"
"And you never suspected herl"
"Oh, no I I never even thought of her in that terrible
light. I should never have deemed it possible that she
could have perpetrated such an atrocious crime. I do not
believe i now 1"
"Who did, then?" significantly inquired the young man.
"You did not; that is certain to my mind. And there
was but one other who could possibly have done it-that
half-witted deformity who was your only companion in
the room, and who was your first accuser. I shall follow
up this clue. I shall set detectives privately to look up
her antecedents and watch her present conduct."
"Oh, do not, do not have another guiltless one accused
and punished," pleaded Seraph.
"She shall not be falsely accused or unjustly punished.
Even if I should be successful in vindicating you and fas-
tening the guilt where I believe it belongs-on her-still
she will not be punished. She is half-witted, and, there-
fore, legally irresponsible. She would, if convicted, only
be sent to the Hanwell Asylum for Criminal Lunatics,
where she would be much better off than in her mother's
house-judging from your narrative, Seraph; a fate much
better than she deserves. By Jove! it will seem like a
reward instead of a punishment for her guilt!"
"She is most unfortunate in her bodily deformity and
mental derangement," said Seraph.



<pb n="60"/>
60           THE TEST OF LOVE
"Why are you so tender in your feelings toward her? SLi :
was your first accuser."
"1 thought she believed the story that she told me, mauj
wept because she was compelled to tell it." 
"She probably wept because she was not altogether ^.
unmitigated devil, and felt the terrible wrong which, -it
order to shield herself, she was doing to one who had .al:' 
ways been kind to her. Seraph, I believe that I have gi!
the right clue, and I shall follow it up. If the girl' 
innocent, my investigation will not hurt her; if she i
guilty, it would vindicate you without really injuring rhe,
Will you let me lead you to the house? You look red!
faint."
"Thank you. I think we had better go in," assented 
young lady, as she took the proffered arm of her lover. 
When they reached the entrance they found Mr. ElSt
star sitting in his armchair on the piazza engaged ,'
reading.
"So you are back, young sir I" he said, rising to meet il
guest.
"Did you not expect to see me back?" inquired tI
latter with a smile, as he placed his companion in a set
and took another himself.                         i
"Well, frankly, I did; for I know well the persistence 
youth in such matters." 
Mr. Hamilton Gower then spoke earnestly of Marga
Campbell's unjust conviction and cruel fate, and unfold
his own theory of the murder and plans of detecting t
guilty and vindicating the innocent.
Mr. Elfinstar was penetrated by the fidelity and devotio
of the young advocate and impressed with the plausibilit
of his opinion. He said but little, however, until E
Hamilton Gower, having finished his explanation and del
dined an invitation to dinner, arose to depart. Then thB
old gentleman warmly grasped his hand, saying:
"You are an enthusiast in this cause, my dear young
friend, but-enthusiasts often succeed."



<pb n="61"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    61
CHAPTER VII
A LOVER' FAITH
MRs. BLLu ISLE was very glad of the power put into her
hands to relieve the mental distress of her foolish maid, but
not until after breakfast on the morning succeeding the
visit of the surgeon and the traveler did she get an op-
portunity of speaking privately to the girl.
When the lieutenant had gone on some business to the
commissariat and the lady sat alone in her parlor, she sum-
moned her maid to her presence.
Lona Pond came in, pale, red-eyed and dejected.
"Sit down; for you look as if you were about to sink
through the floor. How silly you are, child, to distress
yourself for nothing," said Mrs. Belle Isle kindly.
"For nothing 1 Oh, ma'am, do you call it nothing, after
I have followed him so many thousand miles out to this
dreadful country, to have my young man as I was en-
gaged to be married to ttrn his back on me?" said the
girl, bursting into tears at her own words and sinking
down on a hassock at her mistress' feet.
"But he has done nothing of the sort, you stupid child !"
"Oh, ma'am I but his own words and looks and my own
eyes and ears to prove it, ma'am," persisted the girl.
"Look here, Lona! You were equally credulous to the
testimony of your own eyes and ears when you mistook
the convict, John Hice, for your betrothed, Ham Glow !"
"Oh, ma'am, but that was very different."
"Very different, indeed, Lona I for whereas you mistook
a chain gang prisoner for Gow. on that occasion, you now
mistake a gentleman of wealth and position for him !"
"And this time I am right, ma'am! He may be 'a
gentleman of wealth and position' now, for aught I know
to the contrary. He looks it, and I'll not gainsay that he
is  'Wealth' is sometimes soon won in the gold mines,
ma'am, and 'position' always comes with it in these colo-
nies ! Yes, and the two together often turn men's heads,
and hearts, too, for that matter, as they have turned the
giddy head of my wild Ham and set his heart against his



<pb n="62"/>
e2           THE TEST OF LOVE
own true girl that crosed the big seas for his saket"
sobbed the girl.
"Oh! what a tiresome idiot you are, Lonal-I cannot 
help saying it  Now, listen to me and don't speak a word
until I get through. The gentleman whom you met and' ,
embraced yesterday   "              -                '
"Don't throw that up against me, please, ma'aml P11 ' 
never do it again !" sniffed Lona.
"I hope and trust and pray that you will not; but I :
can't feel sure about it," smiled her mistress.
"I'll never, never, never kiss Ham Gow again as long as ,:
I live in this world! No, not if it was to save his neck; i
from being stretched or his soul from being burned !"
"Hush! hush you must not say such shocking wordsl" '.
"Not when I have been scorned and cast off by my ;
young man who was engaged to be married to me, and for 
whose sake I crossed the seas! Beg pardon, ma'am, for. i
speaking so strong in your presence; but I said it and 
I meant it" "
"Lona, your lover has never scorned you or cast you
off-at least, to your knowledge, and you have no right to
say that he has! Now, then, listen to mel Did I not
tell you not to utter a word until I had finished?"
"Yes, ma'am, and I will be silent."
"Very well, then; now keep your promise and attend.
The gentleman you seized upon in the street was Mr.
Hamilton Gower," began Mrs. Belle Isle.
Lona Pond muttered something under her breath to the
effect that she knew that he had added two or three sylla- 
bles to his honest name since he had made his fortune; .
but Mrs. Belle Isle took no notice of her interruption, 
and went on to say:
"He is from Cornwall, and knew this Gow intimately 
from boyhood."
"I should rather think he did," mumbled Lona.
"It is not the first time, he says, by many that he has
been mistaken for Gow and Gow for him."
"Tell that to the horse marines," muttered Lona under
her breath.
"What are you saying, child?"
"Nothing much, ma'am."
"Mr. Gower, so far from resenting the mistake you made
:-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="63"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   68
in regard to him, actually feels a kindly interest in your
affairs--"
"I thank him for nothing, and wish he would let me
and my affairs alone."
"Eh ?"
"Nothing, ma'am."
"Mr. Gower wishes to relieve your mind from doubts
and misgivings. He has a very good heart."
"Ah, yes, 'a very good heart l'"
"What is that?"
"Not anything particular, ma'am.'
"He says that Ham Gow, his own old acquaintance, came
out to these colonies about the same time that he himself
did--" 
"Ah I guess he told the truth there, anyway."
"Lona I"
"I was only thinking something to myself, ma'am."
"They did not come out in the same ship, however."
"Didn't they?"
'But they met quite incidentally on the road of the
great rush to some new gold fields that were discovered
just before their arrival, and they spent a few weeks to-
gether."
"No doubt they have spent a good deal of time together
-have Ham Gow and Mr. Ham-ilton Gow-er 1"
"Lona, if you continue to interrupt me by such remarks
I cannot go on."
"I beg your pardon, ma'am."
"Mr. Gower left Gow at Dead Maiden's Brook-for that
is the name of the new diggings. Mr. Gower has been
traveling since that time, and has constantly corresponded
with Gow, who has remained at the diggings, where he
has made quite a large fortune already."
Lona gazed at her mistress in silence, seeming no longer
to have the slightest inclination to contradict her.
"By a long-understood arrangement Mr. lower and
Ham Gow will return to England together. Mr. Gower
has written to Gow to notify him of the time set for sail-
ing. Gow is expected to arrive here by the Labrador, which
will touch here on her voyage to London, when Mr. (lower
will take his passage back to England with Gow.".
I'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="64"/>
X64           THE TEST OF LOVE
"Dear me," said Lona Pond, putting her hand up to
her head in a helpless sort of way.
"You will then have an opportunity of seeing the two
men together, and knowing 'which is which,' concluded
the lady with a smile.
Lona Pond did not answer her, but slowly shook her
head, muttering to herself:
"Dear me dear me I I wonder if I am growing silly ?"
Mrs. Belle Isle could not reassure her by saying that
she was not going in that way.
"And is it really and truly the case, ma'am, that I have
mistaken a gentleman for Ham    Gow, after going and
mistaking a convict for him, too ?" sighed the girl.
"I thought I had convinced you that you had. But
when you see the real Ham Gow you will believe the evi-
dence of your own senses."
"No, ma'am, no! I never shall   I never can believe
my own eyes and ears and sense again as far as Ham Gow
is concerned-never! I am gone daft on that subject, I  .
know " persisted Lona.
Mrs. Belle Isle thought it very likely that the girl spoke  ?
the truth of herself, and said no more.
Mr. Hamilton Gower became rather a frequent visitor 
at Lieut. Belle Isle's quarters, where he was always cor- :'
dially welcomed; but he never encountered again the girl 
who had so vehemently embraced him, for Lona Pond, 
convinced at length that she had made a mistake, was so
thoroughly ashamed of having kissed the wrong man that
she kept carefully out of his sight.
Mr. Gower and Lieut. Belle Isle became great friends;
but the former often caught the eyes of the latter fixed on
him with a strange and wistful expression.
One evening when he was passing an hour in Mr. Belle
Isle's parlor the young lieutenant, being present, suddenly
said to him:
"By Jove! it is very strange !"
"What is strange, my dear fellow?" inquired Mr. Gower.
"The likeness."
"Oh! my close resemblance to the estimable Mr. Gow!"
laughed the guest.
"No, not at all. I never saw Mr. Gow, to my knowledge,
much as I have heard of that gentleman. No; I mean your



<pb n="65"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    65
likeness to the late unfortunate young Earl of Hawke-
wood. I knew the very first time I ever saw you that I
had seen your face, or one exactly like it, before-some-
where or other."
"Very likely you have," laughed the visitor; "for I
have been there or elsewhere-occasionally."
"At first," gravely continued the young lietenant, "I
could not locate the likeness-so to speak-but now I can
do so-with the late Earl of Hawkewood."
"Ah ! you knew the young earl, then ?" said Mr. Hamilton
Gower.
"No, not at all, except by sight. Few people knew him
in any other way, I fancy. He was kept very secluded from
all society by a dreadful old dragon of a doctor of divinity,
who was both his guardian and his tutor. No one ever
saw him except at church. It was at Hawkeville's old
church that I first saw his lugubrious lordship."
"Ah I"
"And I always thought his dark, sad face foreshadowed
a tragic end. I did not dream of a death by assassination,
however. I thought of-suicide. He looked like it."
"Humph I"
"You are from Cornwall, I understand?"
"From Cornwall, yes."
"Then perhaps you may have known the late young Earl
of Hawkewood ?" suggested the lieutenant.
"I think I knew him-slightly," replied Mr. Gower with
some hesitation.
" 'You think, my dear fellow? Are you not sure whether
you knew him or not?'" laughed Belle Isle.
"No, indeed, I am not sure; for though I was in his
company a great deal, I cannot say that I knew him well,
or that I ever addressed a word to him directly in my life;
or that he ever spoke to me," gravely replied Mr. Gower.
"Oh! Ah! I see! You met him in mixed compa-
nies-in churches or lyceums, or something of that sort-
for he never went into society at all."
"No."
"But did you not notice, as I did, the profound melan-
choly of the young man ?"
"A melancholy bordering on despair. Yes, indeed, I
did notice it, more than any one else, I think; and I was



<pb n="66"/>
66           THE TEST OF LOVE
mere impressed than others with the doubt whether it
would not end fatally," gravely responded Mr. Gower. 
"Well, you see, it would seem that 'every face is a his-
tor or a prophecy.' His face was a prophecy of his tragic
end."
The entrance of a servant with a tray of chocolate and
cream cakes changed the current of the conversation.
After these refreshments had been discussed, Mr. Gower
arose and bade good-night to his new friends.
Hamilton Gower was also a very frequent guest at the
Mountain Hermitage; usually on the occasions of his
visits le: ing the Royal Victoria as early as six o'clock in
the morning and reaching the Hermitage at nine, and there
spending the whole day, and sometimes the night as well.
There he was received by the venerable master as an
honored guest and as a beloved son, and welcomed by the
young lady of the house with the calm delight she had
come to feel and show in his presence.
He had inspired both the father and the daughter with
his own strong faith in "a happy issue out of all their
troubles."
So much of his time was passed at the Hermitage that
whenever he spent a day and night with the Elfinstars,  '
and left them after an early breakfast, it was always with
the promise to return the next morning, so that they knew
when to expect him, and on this expectancy Seraph Elfin-
star vegetated until she saw him again; for she seemed 
now really to live only in his presence.
One morning, after having spent a day and a night at
:,      the Hermitage, having taken leave of his beloved, with 
the promise to come again early the next day, he went
out and saw another saddled horse waiting beside his
own.
i'!:;   "I will ride with you a little way," said his host as he
mounted the second horse.
They cantered along slowly down the graded carriage
way leading from the house and sweeping half around the
foot of the lowest terrace.
When they had turned out of the grounds into the wind-
ing bride path that led down the mountain side, the old
gentleman spoke:
"I have been wanting to talk to you for a long time-
l~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
I~~~~~~~



<pb n="67"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    67
to talk privately, I mean-but I could not ask you for a
tite-d-tete without giving some explanation to Seraph, and
I did not wish even to hint to her the subject which I must
discuss with you."
"What subject?" uneasily inquired the young man.
"This. You see, I have not interfered with your con-
ditional engagement to my daughter, and have even warmly
welcomed your frequent visits and long stays, because all
these have made her happy, as well as given me pleasure;
and she has had so much woe, so little joy in this world,
that I cannot bear-I have not the heart or the moral
courage to deprive her of any enjoyment that comes in
her way, or to inflict upon her the pain that its deprivation
would cause," slowly answered Mr. Elfinstar.
"But why should yod deprive her of this natural pleas-
ure?" anxiously questioned Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"Because of the uncertainty of the future. You are, as
you have secretly confided to me, the Earl of Hawkewood;
your family one of the oldest and most honored in England;
your connections among the highest nobility in the king-
dom. And-     "  The old gentleman paused, and sighed
profoundly.
"Well! well 1 sir, what of all this?" impatiently inquired
the young man.
"I must put the subject in its plainest, and, therefore,
its most painful aspect. Xou wish to marry Seraph Elfin-
star, my adopted daughter, who appears to you as she
really is, a beautiful, amiable and cultured young girl-
but-whom you now know to be one and the same with
Margaret Campbell--"
"I beg you will cease!" exclaimed the young man,
wincing.
"No, I must go on I Margaret Campbell, a convict, a life
prisoner of the crown I Now, suppose that your most san-
guine expectations are fulfilled, and that you succeed in
vindicating the name and fame of this much-injured girl,
and that you restore her to freedom and to her native
land; I ask you, can you, a man of youf rank and posi-
tion, an earl, the grandson of a duke-can you marry Mar-
garet Campbell, in the face of all her hideous anteced-
ents? What would your relatives, say? What would your
world say?     The' Countess of Hawkewood an ex--"



<pb n="68"/>
68           THE TEST OF LOVE
"Silene, sir; in the name of Heaven " cried the young
man, stung by the wordLs
"I am answered," gravely murmured old Elfinstar, nod-
ding his gray head several times in affirmation; "I am
answered; and I think, my lord, and I say it without the
slightest surprise or resentment, that it is best you should
not come again to the Hermitage. You see that you can-
not marry my daughter-how much soever you may love
and esteem her-you cannot marry her, in view of her
horrible past."
t         "',You mistake me  You misjudge me! You wrong me
bitterlyl What have I ever said or done to lead you to 
suppose that I could be recreant to my plighted faith?
Yes, I do love Seraph Elfinstar-for by that name only
have I known her, and by that name only will I call her.
I do love her, I do honor her, and I will marry her, if she
will do me the honor to become my wife."
"But your rank?" mildly suggested the old gentleman.
"As to my rank, I am not at all indifferent to it, I as-
sure you, Mr. Elfinstar  I should rather be the Earl of
Hawkewood than to be a costermonger, or even a county
clerk; but I am not the slave of my 'rank'  I will not
bow down and worship my 'rank' as an idol  I will not
sacrifice on the altar of my 'rank' all my heart's holiest
affection! No sooner than do that I will continue dead 
to the world, which for nearly two years has supposed
me to be really so. I will leave my title and estate in the
possession of my heir presumptive, who now usurps them,
and I will live a true life here with the woman who is to .
be my mate forever. But it will not be necessary for me
to sacrifice my rank, and my love shall share it with me!
Come, Mr. Elfinstar, dear friend, we shall all be home in
England within one year from this time-a happy house-
hold in Hawke Hall."
"But your relatives?" meekly queried the old gentleman
Hamilton (ower broke into a soft and silvery laugh.
'Relatives'l" he echoed. "Bless you, I have none
whatever! I have not even aoquaintances  And if ever
I lamented the want of family and social ties, I now re-
joice in it! There is positively no one to interfere with
me! My only living kinsman is the man who now usurps
my title, and he is so very distant a cousin that no one



<pb n="69"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    69
on earth but Sir Bernard Burke, who runs The Peerage,'
could trace the connection. And the only humiliation he
will feel must attend his being turned out of Hawke Hall.
So you see my 'relatives' are as little likely as my 'rank'
to be an impediment to our happiness."
" Finally-your world ?"
"I haven't any, my good sir! I have lived so secluded
from society that I have no world, outside of this colony.
So much for my world. Have you anything else to urge?"
"In objection? No but I have this to suggest. It is
that, in case you succeed in vindicating the name and fame
of Margaret Campbell, and thus restoring her to liberty-
if you should still be determined to marry her, you marry
her privately by her name of Margaret Campbell, and then,
when we all get back to England, you receive her from
my hand as my daughter, and marry her publicly as Seraph
Elfinstar, and let this public marriage be attended with
all the ceremonies
" 'That wait on princes' nuptials.'
Will you do this?"
"I will do anything in my power to please you and
Seraph."
"I wish this plan adopted to save you and yours from
unmerited reproach. My granddaughter was but a child
when she was caught and crushed in this terrible machinery
of circumstantial evidence-a pale, thin, little girl of four-
teen. She is now a tall and handsome woman of nineteen.
You will marry her privately, under her first name, in
order to make your union legal beyond all possibility of
doubt. You will marry her publicly, under her second
name that I have given her by adoption, and do this to
throw a veil over misfortunes which the world must never
know; and no one will ever recognize in Seraph Elfinstar,
or the Countess of Hawkewood, the crushed and martyred
child who was sent out to these colonies four years ago. Do
you understand?"
"I understand."
"And now I will bid you good-by, and turn back home
with a somewhat lighter heart than I brought," said Mr.
Elfinstar.
L-



<pb n="70"/>
70           THE TEST OF LOVE
"And with more faith in me, I hope, sir," smiled the
young man.
"It is faith that has lightened my heart. Heaven bless
you, my boy," said the old gentleman, as he turned his
horse's head and rode slowly up the mountain path.
Hamilton Gower, smiling to himself, cantered briskly
on toward Hobart Town.
CHAPTER VIII
ANOTHER MAD MEETING
THE month of March drew to a close, and the arrival 
of the Labrador was daily expected.
This prospect did not prevent Mr. Hamilton Gower from
going as usual to spend a day and night at the Mountain
Hermitage. He was not afraid of being left behind by
the ship, in the event of her arrival during his absence.
He knew that she was expected to remain for a few days
in port.
And so it happened that, on the morning of the thirty-
first of March, Mr. Hamilton Gower rode out to the Moun- 
tain Hermitage to spend a day and night with the Elfin-
stars.
And that same afternoon the Labrador sailed up the
Derwent, and dropped anchor.
The news spread like wildfire through the town, causing
considerable excitement-the arrival of a ship was such an
important event at Hobart Town, even though it was a
ship from Melbourne on her voyage to England, instead of
a ship from "home," bringing news of friends and rela-
tives.
The Labrador had brought such news on her voyage out,
and now she would carry back answers to letters that had
come by her mails some five weeks previous.
These answers, which had been begun soon after the
reception of the letters and continued in the form of in-
stallments, had been waiting in many households to be
dosed up and sent "home" by the Labrador when she
should stop at Hobart Town on her way back to London.
.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ?



<pb n="71"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    71
Now she was in port, and the letters must be finished
in time for her next departure.
It happened that Mrs. Belle Isle was among the busiest
letter writers. She had written long epistles to the Rev.
Dr. Irvine, to Lady Victoria Belle Isle, and to Miss Olive
Ball, and she wished to add to each a postcript; but having
used up her stock of thin, foreign note paper, she sent her
maid, Lona Pond, out into the town to procure a new
supply.
Lona walked down Barracks Lane into Macquarrie
Street, and thence into Queen Street, where she intended
to make her purchase.
She walked with her eyes cast down upon the ground,
for she could not bear to look at or speak to any one since
her misadventure with Mr. Hamilton Gower.
Suddenly she heard her name called in a voice that ought
to have been familiar.
"Lona! Lona Pond! Isitpossiblel Youhere?"
She started in terror, and raised her eyes, to see stand-
ing before her, barring her way, a fine, stalwart-looking
man, with good features, dark, sunburned complexion, dark
eyes, dark hair and a full, heavy, dark beard.
He wore a sailors suit, and held in his hand a tarpaulin
hat.
She uttered a faint cry, and covered her face.with her
hands.
"Lona   Lona Pond   Is this really you? I can scarcely
believe my eyes! How came you out here? Speak to me!"
exclaimed the newcomer.
But she only held her hands before her eyes and trem-
bled.
"Are you Lona Pond? Speak to me! I cannot have
made a mistake! Speak to me! Are you Lona Pond?"
pleaded the stranger.
"Ay, I'm Lona Pond fast enough; miserable, demented
girl that I am !" muttered the young woman from behind
her trembling hands.
"You are Lona Pond      Of course, I knew it    I 
was sure of it! Dear, dearest Lona  It is such a surprise,
such a delight, to meet you so unexpectedly! When did you
come out here, and with whom ?"
"I came out about a year ago, as lady's maid to an offi.
L 



<pb n="72"/>
r7            THE TEST OF LOVE
cer's wife-Mrs Lieut. Belle Isle; but I wish you would
let me pass, and not bar my way 1" said the girl in a shaking
voice.
"But, Lona! Why, Lona! Why do you speak to me
in that manner? Don't you know me? Can it be possible 
that you don't know me?" demanded the young man in a
voice of surprise.
"No, I don't know you at all! Let me go by, if you
please," said the girl, trying to push past him.
He stopped her gently. 
"Perhaps it is because you don't want to know me," he
said in a tone of pain and displeasure.
"No, I don't want to know you, and, what is more, I
won't know you-so there, now  I have been fooled just
once too often, and I will never be fooled again  Stand
out of the way and let me pass 1" she exclaimed in a shaking
voice as she tried to push by him.
"One moment longer," he answered, breathing hard, as
he continued to bar her path; "just one moment longer,
and one question more. You don't want to know me, you
say  Perhaps you have another sweetheart? Perhaps you
have a husband ?"
"No!" vehemently exclaimed the girl, "I have no hus-
band and no sweetheart, and don't want any but my own ,
dear Ham Gow! My own dear Ham Gow as I crossed
the high seas to come to, but as I shall never find in this
world! No, never! I have found only his doubles and his 
fetches, as have deceived and fooled me until I'm almost
demented; but I'll never be fooled again! Let me go on, 
sir! I am out on an errand, and my mistress is waiting
for me," she persisted, trying to pass by him.
But he blocked her way with the most affectionate words.
"Dearest, dearest Lona, you have found your faithful 
lover at last! I am your own, true Ham Gow I"
"I don'tbelieveit! You can't fool me I Letmegobyl "
"But I am, indeed, Ham Gowl"
"You are nothing of the sort I"
"I am Ham Gow-- "-
"You are a fetch 1"
"Look at me, then! Look me straight in the face and
assure yourself that I am he."
"Oh, yes! I looked at the others! at the convict in the



<pb n="73"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    78
chain gang, and at the gentleman on Macquarrie Street,
and by looking at them I was fooled. They were neither
of them Ham Gow 1 They were his fetches 1"
"But I am no 'fetch'! I am he "
" You may be the Emperor of China, for aught I know!
but if you don't stand out of my way and let me pass I will
give you in charge  Herel Constable! Constable " she
cried, hailing an officer that was passing on the opposite
side of the way.
"You are certainly crazy!" exclaimed the stranger as
he stepped aside and let her pass.
Lona Pond hurried along Queen Street until she had
put a hundred yards or so between herself and the stranger,
and then she suddenly paused and put her hands up to
her head in a bewildered manner, muttering:
"He was wonderfully like Ham Gowl wonderfully! But
I know he wasn't Ham Gow! He was only another fetch,
the third fetch! and the proverb says, 'Beware of the third
time!' And I promised my mistress-solemnly promised
her-never, never, never to take another man for Ham
Gow! And I never will! And now I must hurry and
get what she sent me for "  !
She quickened her steps and walked rapidly on for a
few paces, and then paused again and put her hands up
to her temples with an expression of perplexity.
"Now, what was it my mistress sent me for? That man
has knocked it clean out of my head I Let me see! What
was it? Berlin wool? No! Cologne? No! Oh I can-
not remember to save my life! I shall have to go back
and ask her! Such a loss of time! And she in such a
hurry, too!"
Lona Pond turned and retraced her steps to the bar-
racks in a hurry, and presented herself before her mistress
in heat and agitation.
"You have walked too fast, Lona! You should not
have done so," said Mrs. Belle Isle. Then: "Have you
got the paper ?" she inquired.
"Oh, it was paper! So it was! Dear ma'am, please
forgive me; but-I had forgotten what you sent me for;
and-I had to turn back !" replied the panting girl.
"Forgot my errand, Lonal   That was very strange!
But sit down and recover your breath! You are not fit



<pb n="74"/>
74           THE TEST OF LOVE
to stand. How came you to forget?" gently inquired the
lady.
"Oh, ma'am," breathed the palpitating creature, as she
sank down on a footstool at her mistress' feet, "it was all
along of a great shock I got on Queen Street."
"What sort of a shock, Lona? I hope-"
"Oh, dear, ma'am, it was another Ham Gow l"
"Lona 1"
"I mean another fetch of his, ma'am 1"
"Oh, my poor girl! are you quite losing your senses?"
sighed the lady.
"Oh, no, dear ma'am, I am getting them back again,
sure! for 1 would not allow this fetch to be Ham Gow,
although he was the image of him-as perfect an image of
him as the other fetches were, and even although he him-
self owned up to being Ham Gow, which the other two
fetches didn't; but, on the contrary, denied that they were
so80."
"Lona!" suddenly exclaimed the lady. "You say that
this third man declared himself to be Gow?"
"Yes, ma'am, he did, the deceiver! And he was the
first to speak to me, calling me his dearest Lona, and ask-
ing me if I didn't know him, and a lot of other questions!
But I wasn't to be fooled by him  I wouldn't allow him
to be Ham Gow for one single minute!" said the girl, em-
phatically shaking her head.
"I think you have made another mistake, Lona," said
the lady.
,* ~       "Oh, no, please, ma'am, I haven't! No mistake this
time   I remembered my solemn promise to you, ma'am,
never to take another man for Ham Gow as long as I
should live in this world! And I didn't, ma'am! for
when this third fetch kept on trying to fool me, I just 
called a constable to him and come awayl"
"What! You had the man arrested?"
"Oh, no, ma'am, not that; for when I called the con- i
stable he got out of my way and let me pass. And then
I hurried down Queen Street to do your errand, and then
found out that I had forgotten what it was! Now, dear
ma'am, wasn't it enough to make me forget?" pleaded
Lona Pond.
"Yes, and I excuse your forgetfulness," laughed the
,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~'i



<pb n="75"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    75
lady. "But, Lona, I have reason for believing that this
last man was really your lover 1"
"Oh, ma'am !" cried Lona, catching her breath.
"Do you not remember that I told you Gow was ex-
pected to arrive by the Labrador, due here about the first
of April?"
"Yes, ma'am, I know, but-"
"Well, the Labrador has arrived."
"The Labrador arrived, ma'am!" exclaimed the girl,
staring.
"Yes, this afternoon, as I should have told you if I
had thought of it. The Labrador has arrived, and Gow
with her, no doubt  So it must have been he whom you
met and flouted in Queen Street just now."
"The Lord have mercy upon me!     Now I have it!"
exclaimed Lona Pond, with a look of utter despair.
Mrs. Belle Isle laughed, and said:
"Don't distress yourself, Lona. Mr. Hamilton Gower
promised to bring Gow here to see you as soon as the ship
should reach port, and he will certainly keep his word;
and when you meet your lover you can explain to him how.
you happened to deny him, and it will be all right." '
"Oh, ma'am; but to think that after taking two fetches
for him I should take him for a fetch !"
"Never mind, Lona! You are sure of seeing your be-
trothed now, and that should be a great consolation! Go,
take off your bonnet. I shall not send you out again to-
day. I can call at the stationer's myself, when I go out
for a drive," said the lady, gently dismissing her agitated
maid.
The next morning Mr. Hamilton Gower returned from
his visit to the Mountain Hermitage.
The first news that met him at the Royal Victoria was
that of the arrival of the Labrador.
"And there's a-an individual come by her, stopping
here and inquiring for you, sir," said the head waiter,
hesitating whether to designate said individual as "a man" 
or "a gentleman."
"Ah, yes, I expected him!  Where is he?" anxiously
inquired Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"He is in the coffee room at present, sir, taking his
luncheon." 



<pb n="76"/>
76           TITHE TEST OF LOVE 
"When he gets through, show him up here," said Mr. 
Gower, dismissing the waiter by a gesture,, and then going
''!  ~   into his bathroom to wash the dust of his ride from face
and hands.
He had just got through, and was standing before the
glass in his bedroom, brushing his hair, when the door
opened and Ham Gow entered the room, ushered in by
the waiter.
Mr. Hamilton Gower dropped the brush and wheeled
around, eagerly exclaiming:
"Ah I Ham Gow, old fellow, I am so glad to see you! If
I were a Frenchman I should embrace you," and he shook
his hand heartily.i
"Glad to see you looking so well, my 1--" began the 
visitor, but Mr. Gower stopped him with a:
"Hussh-sh-sh! Stow that until we get back to England I 
I would not have a rumor of my existence to reach Lewis
Manton before my arrival at Hawke Hall upon any con-
sideration. Come! Come with me into my snuggery here,. 
and let us have a good talk," said Mr. Hamilton Gower, i
as he hastily drew on his morning coat and led the way
into the front sitting room which overlooked the street.
When the two men were comfortably seated each in a'
resting-chair, Mr. Gower was the first to speak.
"Well, how have you prospered on Dead Maiden's '
Brook ?"
"Fairly. The first six months I thought I was going to
make an enormous fortune, hand over fistl But then my
lead began to give out, and yield less and less, until it 
failed altogether. And I never struck another lead that
did more than pay expenses. Luck had turned, and when
luck once turns for good or for evil it seldom turns back
again; so, upon the whole, I thought it was about time
to quit, when I got your letter."
"How much did you make in all ?"
"Stated in round numbers, about ten thousand pounds."
"I am glad that my summons occasioned you no loss" 
"Not a bit! I had made up my mind to go home. I
was only waiting to hear from you. I was aching all over
to get home. I wanted to see my girl. I had not heard
from her, sir, for more than a year," said Ham Gow with
a deep sigh, given more to the memory of his unlucky  '



<pb n="77"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    77
encounter with Lona Pond on Queen Street than to the
thought of their long and silent separation.
"Ah! Then I have a delightful surprise in store for
you. You did not know that your faithful sweetheart had
taken service with a lady, Mrs. Belle Isle, the wife of an
officer whose regiment was ordered to this place, and had
come out here for the hope of finding you?" said Mr.
Gower gayly.
But his communication was not met with the looks of
surprise and delight he had expected to see. On the con-
trary, Ham Gow sighed more deeply than before, and
answered:
"No, sir; I did not know it till yesterday afternoon,
when I met her on the street, and she pretended not to
know me."
"Impossible I"
"Yes, she did, sir. I suppose she has found another
sweetheart out in this place," sighed the lover.
"No, indeed; she has not! I know the poor girl well,
through knowing the family she is at service with, and
her fidelity to the lad she 'followed across the high aeas,'
as she puts it, is a subject of sympathy and some amuse-
ment to her mistress and master.
"But she wouldn't own me when she met me, sir. She
called me a fetch, an impostor, and an evil spirit, who
had taken the form of her lover to fool her."
Mr. Hamilton Gower laughed aloud, and said:
"I understand it all, Ham. There were two men in
this colony that bore so strong a resemblance to you that
either of the Nans who brought you up might have mis-
taken either of these men for yourself. One-the first
'fetch'-was a convict, John Hice-  "
"Oh-h-h! The very man who was arrested for me in
the old country!"
"Exactly. And this young girl saw him working in the
chain gang on the road, thought he was her own Ham--"
I'm much obliged to her, I am sure!"
"She thought her 'own Ham' had been unjustly and
cruelly convicted of some crime that he was incapable of
committing; went into hysterics over his fate; insisted on
her employer taking him out of the chain gang and into
their private service as an 'assigned servant,' and wen



<pb n="78"/>
78           THE TEST OF LOVE 
under the protection of the chaplain to visit him in jai,
i        wtwhen at length she was convinced of her mitake." 
"Poor Lona! What a terrible trial!"               ,
"The second 'fetch' was myself.  She met me on Mae.i
quarrie Street on the first day of my arrival in this towni,
and, poor innocent ! threw herself in my arms with a bur!
of joyful tears! And when I tried to convince her o't
J           her mistake she bitterly reproached me with infidelity,"
threw her betrothal ring in my face, and left me in boiling)
anger !"
"Poor Lona !"
"That very evening I happened to make acquaintance 
with the people where she was at service, and in the coura
of conversation my strange encounter with the girl came
to be spoken of, and an explanation ensued. Later on  '
heard that the mistress gave the maid a serious lecture and',,
warning against making such another mistake."
"Poor, dear Lona!" murmured Ham Gow.
"So, you see, you cannot blame her, when at last snej
met the real 'Simon Pure,' yourself, that she should have 
taken you for a third 'fetch' and repudiated your acquaint-:
ance !"
"No, indeed, I cannot. But who are those Belle Isles;!
with whom she came out? Any connections of the Duke,"
of Grand Manors?"
"Yes, of course; the lieutenant was a nephew and ward 
of the late duke, and used to be a good deal at the Castle
Belle Isle, I understand. And, by the way, he detected a
very wonderful likeness between myself and 'the late 
unfortunate young Earl of Hawkewood' whom he says
he used to see at the parish church at Hawkeville !"
"Ha! ha! ha! that must have amused you, sir. You 
have been staying here quite a good while, my lor-sir."
"Yes, quite a good while. I-have been interested in
!  the colony," replied Mr. Hamilton Gower. Then a sud-
den impulse came upon him to take Ham Gow, his old
playmate and companion, partly into his confidence, not in
regard to Seraph Elfinstar, but in regard to Margaret
Campbell.
"Gow," he said, "do you remember a celebrated trial
that occurred in England about four years ago, in which a



<pb n="79"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    79
young girl, scarcely past childhood, was convicted of the
murder of her infant cousin?"
"You mean the case of Margaret Campbell, of course,
sir ?"
"Yes," said the young gentleman, wincing a little at
the name, "I mean that case."
"I should think I did remember it, sir I I should think
I had good cause to remember it," so solemnly replied the
tramp that the young gentleman gazed wonderingly into
his face as he asked:
"What do you mean? What special cause have you,
more than any one else, to remember that case?"
"Because, sir," said the tramp, lowering his voice and
turning pale even under his dark, bronzed complexion,
"because I-I saw that deed done 1"
CHAPTER IX
WHAT TAl   GOW SAW ONE NIGHT
'  HAMIION GOWER sat back in his chair, and stared at
his visitor in blank amazement for a moment, and then
slowly repeated the words:
"You-saw-that-deed-done ?"
"Yes, I did, sir I to my great misfortune I for, though I
have been through a great deal of evil things, I never
witnessed anything so horrible, so heinous, as that night's
work !" said the tramp with a shudder.
"You saw that foul murder committed?" persisted Ham-
ilton Gower, still amazed and incredulous.
"Yes, sir, I did; I told you that I did-to my sorrow "
"Then, why, in the name of Heaven, did not you inter-
fere to prevent it?" sternly demanded Mr. Gower.
"Good Lord, sir, I could not! It was done in an in-
stant, before I knew what was going to happen I"
"Then, why did you not afterward give the alarm? The
child might possibly have been rescued 1"
"Because, sir, I did not understand what had occurred
until it was too late."
I- 



<pb n="80"/>
80           THE TEST OF LOVE
"When did you first discover the dreadful import of '
what you had seen?"
"Not until the day that the body of the murdered child 
was found at the bottom of the well. Then the scene that 
I had witnessed at Rose Hill in the dead of night came 
back to me like a nightmare with a new and horrible mean- t
ing. Ughl I see the night sky; the black mass of the 
stables, the dark trees, the well, and the wild-eyed girl,
and I hear again the deep, soft thud when that which)
she dropped in struck the bottom 1" shuddered the tramp.
"You saw the girl's eyes? You must have seen the 
girl's face very distinctly 1"                     !
"I did. I was right there-I saw her face right before
me as she turned, after having dropped something down
the well !" 
"Then you could have sworn to the murderess?" 
"Yes, indeed! Hers was a face never to be forgotten l"'
"Then, why, in the name of justice and mercy, did you.
not appear before the coroner's jury to testify to what you
had seen?"
"Because I could not bear to go and help to convict and.
hang a young girl; who, in fact, was but a child, and&
evidently a luny child at that" 1"
"And yet, by your morbid sentimentality in withhold-
ing your testimony, you have caused irreparable injustice,
unutterable sorrow to another and a most innocent young
girl, and to all who are interested in herl" bitterly ex-'
claimed Mr. Hamilton Gower.
Ham Gow stared at the speaker in dismay.
"I cause injustice and sorrow to an innocent girl l" hei
~, ~exclaimed.
"Yes! the most atrocious injustice, the most cruel sor-
row 1" bitterly repeated Mr. Gower.
"I do not understand you the least in the world I Please
tell me how I have done this, sir, if I have done it ?"
"Do you not already know? Can you not see what you,'
have done?"
"Indeed, I cannot, sir, in this case."
"You have, by your culpable reticence in withholding.
your testimony from the coroner's inquest and from the'
courts, shielded the guilty at the expense of the innocentsi
You have allowed the murderess to go free and Margare



<pb n="81"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    81
Campbell, the innocent victim of circumstantial evidence,
to be tried, convicted and only saved from a felon's death
for the sake of her childish Years, to be sent to this penal
colony for life I Oh, Gow I it was a cruel and wicked course."
"I swear, by all my hopes of salvation, that I don't know
what you are driving at, sir  I don't, indeed l" exclaimed
the tramp, with an utterly puzzled and helpless look.
"You acted at first, no doubt, under a good impulse.
It was merciful in you to withhold the testimony that
might have consigned so young a girl, however guilty, to a
felon's ignominous death 1"
"That was the only reason why I held my tongue, sir "
"And at first you might have been right. But when
you saw another girl, a most innocent young girl, accused
of this heinous deed-indicted, arraigned, tried, convicted,
condemned to death for a crime you knew she never com-
mitted-why, I ask, in the name of justice and mercy, did
you not, at some stage of these proceedings, go forward and
give the testimony that would have vindicated the inno-
cent, even if it had to convict the guilty?"
"I am all at sea, sir " exclaimed Ham Gow in utter
confusion. "Whom are you talking about, anyhow, if you
please, sir?"
"Why, Margaret Oampbell, of course I"
"Well, she was tried and convicted of the murder, wasn't
she, without my evidence, either ?"
"Yes, but-"
"And she was the one that did the murder, as they proved
without my help   So where is the innocent girl that I
allowed to be convicted?  I let an innocent girl be con-
victed? I, Ham Gow?     Surely, you don't know Ham
Gow I"
Mr. Hamilton Gower sank back in his chair, overwhelmed
and pale as death.
"There was no other girl tried for that crime except
Margaret Campbell, who was convicted, was there, sir?"
"No," breathed Mr. Gower in the tone of a sigh.
"Then what did you mean by saying that I let the inno-
cent suffer while I shielded the guilty? There must be
some great misunderstanding between us," said Ham Gow
in a perplexed manner.
"I think so, tool But tell me distinctly who was it



<pb n="82"/>
I;'       8-           THE    TEST    OF LOVE
that you saw drop the parcel-which afterward proved tW;
;i~ be the body of the murdered child-into the well?" P      ' 
.'li       "Margaret Campbell, of coursel I thought you kneVwJ
rI -that I" said Ham Gow, raising his eyebrows.                 i
*;          at"I know to the contraryl I know it was not Margaretm.
Campbell, and could never have been she I She was falselyd
foully accused I I am very glad that you did withhold yourz
testimony, since you believed her to have been the crimin,
,1j  ~    nail But what led you to believe such a falsity?" asked'
Mr. Gower in an agitated voice. 
Ham Gow shrugged his shoulders with a perfectly help-
less look, and said within himself: 
"One of us two must be demented! I wonder if therei.
be anything in the climate of Hobart Town to turn people's '
wits? There was my old sweetheart, a sensible enough girlf
when I left her in England, talking and acting like a.i
lunatic here in Hobart Town I And here is my old friend,
the earl, who used to be considered an intelligent youn
man in the old country, carrying on like an idiot here! I
must be the air of the place that don't agree with Corn-i
wall wits! I'm glad we shall leave it so soon 1"
"Gow, I asked what led you to believe that the girl
you saw at the well that night of the murder was Margaret )
Campbell," demanded Mr. Hamilton Gower in a troubled'
voice.
"Why, the witness of my eyesight."
"But you had never seen her before, and you never saw
her afterward, perhaps ?"
"No; but there were corroborating facts."
"Lying, circumstantial evidence !" exclaimed Mr. Gower.
"And there was the printed description of the girl,
which tallied exactly with her appearance at the well I"
"The printed descriptionI" repeated Mr. Gower.
"Yes-I'l tell you  The girl I saw at the well seemed
just at the turning point between child and woman-say
about thirteen or fourteen years of age, small and slight,
:~i ~    thin and pale, with delicate features, large eyes and a great
quantity of long, light yellow hair."
"Was that the true personal appearance of the girl you
saw?"
"Yes, it was! Under the circumstances is it likely that  I
I could ever forget her looks? I speak from memory of
,'
ii .A 



<pb n="83"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    88
what I saw   And now I will tell you the description I
read of her in the paper, as she appeared when arraigned
at the bar. It tallied so exactly with her looks at the well
that I can repeat it nearly word for word. You see, the
whole thing made such a deep impression on me."
"You need not repeat it. I am familiar with the de-
scription. I acknowledge that it does tally with what you
say you saw of the girl at the well 1 But I tell you again
that you are utterly mistaken in supposing that girl to
have been Margaret Campbell!"
The tramp shook his head dubiously.
"The agreement between the printed description of Mar-
garet Campbell and the personal appearance of the girl
you saw at the well is the most convincing proof to your
mind that they were one and the same person, is it not?"
"Yes, sir, it is ! It can't be got over, you know !"
"And yet consider how superficial that description was,
and how many young girls it would suit who might be very
dissimilar in minor features-'fourteen years of age, small
and slight, thin and pale, with delicate features, large eyes
and light hair ' Why, there might be a dozen young girls
whom that description would suit, and yet every one of
them have different shaped foreheads, noses, mouths and
chins, so that no two of them might be the least alike 
Don't you see that ?"
"Yes, sir, I see that; but I think the girl at the well
that night was Margaret Campbell, all the same "
"Will you tell me how you came to be on the premises
of Rose Hill Manor that particular night, Gow?" some-
what impatiently inquired the young gentleman.
"Of course, sir! Willinglyl I had been on the tramp
through the North Riding of Yorkshire, and had been
very unlucky, scarcely getting jobs enough to do to keep
body and soul together. Indeed, I was at my very lowest
ebb of luck-as near starving as a man could be-not to
starve."
"Those evil days are over forever now, Ham, if you
invest your money well."
i      "I hope they are, sir. Well, at the close of a dismal
winter day I found myself, footsore, cold, hungry and
half fainting, in the neighborhood of Rose Hill Manor.
In that wintry weather, and at that late hour, none of the
I'



<pb n="84"/>
84            THE TEST OF LOVE
outdoor servants seemed to be about, so I crawled into 
cow shed, where the
" Milky mothers of the herd'
were lying down in clean, warm straw. I lay down 
them, between a fat, comfortable old cow and a year
calf, who laid its innocent, velvety head against my 
face in the most affectionate manner, and consoled 
very much, I tell you." 
"Poor fellow " breathed Mr. Gower.
"Oh, I was happy then l I was under shelter,
warmed by the contact of my four-footed hostess,
cheered by the sympathy of her daughter, the calf,
so deliciously tired that I fell asleep to the music of
pattering rain on the shed roof."
"All happiness is comparative, Ham."
"Yes, I suppose it is. I know I slept deeply and wee
for several hours. It must have been near day when I
awakened by the movements of my bovine hostess, 
was struggling to her feet; the calf at the same time mol
its gentle, witless head from my face. I remembered wh
I was, and at the same time I felt the sharpest pangs 
"My poor lad I"
"A sudden impulse seized me-to milk the cow, if
would let mel I opened the door of the cow shed to
a little light from the stars, if possible, and I fum
through my pack and found the small tin pannikin th
had been my companion in my tramps over the four qu
ters of the globe. By the time I had found it my horne
and hoofed hostess had walked out of her house, intent
upon some business of her own. I followed her, and foung
her at a little pile of fodder, helping herself to an early----
But perhaps I am wearying you with these details, sir?
"No; I follow you. I wish to have a picture in myn
mind of the scene and circumstances of your discovery.'i
"I wish I could banish the picture forever from my!
mind 1" sighed the tramp.
"Go on 1" urged Mr. Gower.
"Well, I had some experience in the rural art and mys,,
tery of milking cows, and so I went to this milky mothe/!
' 0



<pb n="85"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                     85
and began to pat and coax and caress her. She was a very
gentle creature, and she allowed me to milk her and fill
my little pannikin and empty it until my hunger and
thirst were fully satisfied. When this was done I arose to
my feet, and then-"
"And then?" eagerly questioned Mr. Gower.
"I witnessed the scene that I have spoken of. The rain
had ceased even before I had left the shed; now the moon
was shining in the west, but was near her setting. As I
arose to my feet I saw over the back of the cow the old
well about three yards off, with the stables and a clump of
dark trees at some little distance behind it. And stooping
over the well I saw a white figure with a white bundle-
the figure of a young girl clothed in a white gown and
having long, fair hair hanging down her back. A super-
stitious thrill passed through me-the hour, the scene, the
form, were all so ghostly. She stooped over the well and
dropped something into it!  I heard the low, soft thud
as it struck the bottom! Then the girl turned and came
toward me. She was within three feet of me before she
saw me. Then we stood face to face with each other for
what seemed to me one dreadful moment, her pale, thin
face, white and wan in the moonlight, her large, wild eyes
blazing as from an inward fire I She seemed to scan me half
questioningly, half defiantly, as if she wished to know
whether I had seen or suspected anything wrong in her
errand to the well. But as she found neither suspicion
nor danger in my looks, she turned and limped away as
fast as her halting limb would permit her."
A great cry burst from the lips of Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"Now, what in the deuce is the matter with you?" ex-
claimed Ham Gow, forgetting his respects in his dismay.
Mr. Gower had started to his feet, and was shaking with
excessive emotion.
"Say that again !" he exclaimed in husky, guttural tones.
"Say what again?   Are we both gone daft together ?
demanded the sorely tried tramp.
"About the girl's limping  You said she limped  Did
she limp?"
"Why, of course she did  Her right leg seemed to be
shorter than her left, and her right shoulder lower than
the left one."



<pb n="86"/>
86           THE TEST OF LOVE 
"Heaven be praised !" exclaimed Mr. Hamilton Gower in '
great excitement.
"What for in this special instance ?" questioned the di- 
gusted tramp.
"For that which will now bring the truth to light, andI
vindicate the innocent. For if that child murderer was a
deformed cripple, we shall be able to prove that which I'i
knew before-that she was not Margaret Campbell!" ex.: i
claimed the young gentleman exultingly.
"How so, sir? How can you prove that?" inquired the.'
tramp, with the tone and manner of one humoring andi
drawing out a lunatic.
"Because Margaret Campbell was not a deformed crip.-
pie! Margaret Campbell was as straight as an arrow, with
a form as perfect as beautiful, and as well proportioned ass
that of the famous Medician Venus, with a step and moved.|
ment as graceful and stately as that of an antelope I Ahoy
Gow! if you had only given your evidence in regard to this 
deformed cripple before the coroner's jury, what unutter-e
able woe you would have saved Margaret Campbell and'
all who love her! But, thank Heaven! though the past'!.
cannot be recalled, the future may be redeemed! YourK
tardy testimony will even now restore her to liberty and i
to her native country. Thank Heaven I she will be saved I
Did you linger long in the neighborhood after your discov-s
cry?" rather suddenly inquired Mr. Gower. 
"I never lingered long anywhere, sir. And about the'
same time the girl limped away, I saw a man, who had come i
out of the stable with a lantern in his hand and wasi
looking about himself. I thought he had been awakened 
by the cow; and not wishing to be seen, I slunk away into&
the clump of trees. I left as soon as it was daylight, and i
without the slightest suspicion that there was anything
amiss about the place, or of the terrible tragedy that had
been enacted there! Why, sir, if I thought anything of
what I had seen I only thought it was a bundle of rubbish '
the girl had dropped into the dry well, and dismissed the '
subject from my mind until it was horribly recalled to ?
me by the publication of the tragedy at Rose Hill. I was '
then down near Liverpool, and a few weeks later I left
the country and was gone two years-after which I re"'--



<pb n="87"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    87
turned to England and went down to Cornwall, arriving
at Hawkewood on the day of your fete, sir."
"Thank Heaven, she is saved 1" exclaimed Mr. Gower,
whose thought seemed to have wandered off from the nar-
rative of Gow's travels to the subject of the unjustly
condemned girl.
"You are very much interested in this case, sir," said
the tramp.
"Profoundly interested in it," answered the young gen-
tleman.
"And you really think, sir," said Ham Gow gravely
and even sorrowfully, "that through my failure to reveal
what I had seen the guilty party escaped and an innocent
girl was condemned?"
"I am as sure of it as that I live 1 I have seen this gir)
in the colony," said the young gentleman cautiously, for
he did not intend to take the tramp into his confidence in
respect to Miss Elfinstar. "She has been assigned to pri-
vate service in a gentleman's family in the country, where
I am acquainted, and from all that I saw of the girl I
felt sure that she could not have committed that crime.
Your revelation has confirmed my faith in her."
"It is an awful reflection for me, sir, that by my silence
I suffered an innocent young girl to be convicted. But
I thought to a dead certainty that she was the one I saw-
and the printed description suited her so well I"
"But that description said nothing about a halting gait,
or a humpback, did it?" sarcastically inquired Mr. Gower.
"Well, no; but I did not think that omission of any
consequence; for, you see, I was already confirmed in my
belief that the accused girl was the same whom I had
seen. Besides, there was another witness-the stableman
who had been disturbed by the cow and had come out in
time to see the girl at the well-who testified that she was
Margaret Campbell."
"He saw the girl from a greater distance. He was mis-
taken in her as well as yourself."
"Yes, sir, I must believe that now. But, then, there
was the market gardener, who saw her near the house, you
know."
"He saw the figure of a young girl, clothed in white,



<pb n="88"/>
88           THE TEST OF LOVE
near the house at an unusual hour, but he did not pretend 
to identify the girl as Miss Campbell, I thinkl"
"And there was other testimony that went to confirm
me in my opinion."
"All the merest circumstantial evidence, that could have 
been blown away by a breath of the testimony you were-
able to give concerning that deformed cripple whom you
saw at the welL"
"Oh, if I had only knownl If I had only come for- 
ward and testified! But, sir,'who could that little mon-
ster have been?"
"One whom I strongly suspected of the crime before I
heard your story-a deformed, malignant idiot, who was a'
member of the Rose Hill household, but of whom it is not.
yet time to speak further. When we get back to England,
we will work up the case until we can fix the guilt where?
it belongs, and vindicate the innocent."
"Heaven knows I will be with you heart and hand is:
that, sir." 
"I am sure of that. When does the Labrador sail?" .
"The captain hopes to get away by Saturday."
"And this is Tuesday. There is something to be don
in the meantime. We must be busy. At least, I must;
And now about your faithful betrothed, Ham. What ai
you going to do ? Leave her here ?"
"Oh, no, sir! My greatest wish in returning to E
land was to rejoin her i It was an unlooked-for joy to f
her here; though that was soon turned into grief by h
conduct toward me."
"Which I hope I have explained to your satisfaction
Ham."
"Oh, yes, sir, I thank you; quite so."
"And you will take her back to England with youP" 
"Oh, yes, sir!" laughed Ham Gow. "Though I
tainly did not expect to find a wife out here and take
home, yet I shall rejoice to have Lona, if she will come wi
me. You see, I must take her on every account, for I don'
want to have to come back here after her. A six or eil
months' voyage is no light undertaking."
"Indeed, it is not. Well, since you have to arra
preliminaries with your sweetheart, I think you had
·r
i ~i~!



<pb n="89"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    89
see her at once. I will take you around to Lieut. Belle
Isle's quarters."
"Thank you, sir; I am ready," said Ham Gow.
And the two men walked out together.
CHAPTER X
REVIVING HOPE
As Mr. Hamilton Gower, accompanied by Ham Gow,
turned into Macquarrie Street on his way to the barracks,
a question of etiquette arose to perplex him.
How was he to dispose of his companion on reaching
the lieutenant's quarters?
Was he to take the tramp up into Mrs. Belle Isle's par-
lor?
Scarcely.
And that parlor and the dining room beyond were the
only apartments in the house with which he was ac-
quainted.
It is true, Mrs. Belle Isle had said to him:
"When this wonderful Ham Gow, with the innumerable
doubles, arrives at Hobart Town, bring him directly here."
But, then, did that lady mean that he was to take the
tramp upstairs into her presence?
"I wish," said Mr. Gower to himself, "that my worthy
tutor, in teaching me much Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew,
and mathematics, had given me some chance of learning
the ways of the world !"
'When he rang the bell at the lieutenant's quarters, an,
orderly opened the door.
"Is Mrs.-Belle Isle at home?" inquired Mr. Gower.
"'Yes, sir; walk upstairs, if you please," politely re-
sponded the man.
"Stay; you may take this card up first," said the young
gentleman, drawing his ordinary visiting card from its
case and writing one line:
"I have brought Gow with me, according to orders."
The man took the message upstairs, and in two min-
utes returned, saying:



<pb n="90"/>
90           THE TEST OF LOVE
"Madam's compliments, and you bring your friend4
if you please, sir."
"Come, Gow," said the young gentleman, going up
preceded by the orderly, and followed by the tramp. 
They found Mrs. Belle Isle seated alone in her pal
and engaged upon her favorite Berlin wool work, 
she laid aside as she arose and came forward to meet
visitors.
Hamilton Gower greeted her with warm respect, end
low over the hand that he held.
Then he presented his friend, whom the lady rece
with cordial kindness.
"You have had a pleasant voyage from Melbourne*i
hope," she said, turning to Ham Gow when they were
seated.
"Yes, madam, a very quick and pleasant voyage, I th
you," responded Ham Gow, whom all Mrs. Belle I
kindness failed to place at his ease.
At length she said to him: I..
"You wish to see some one who is in the house here%,
believe?"
"Yes, madam, if you please; a young girl whom
understand to be in your service at present, and to wh
I have been long engaged."
"Lona Pond ?"
"The same, madam, thank you."
"You shall see here at once," said the lady, rising
ringing the bell.
Ham Gow fidgeted, and felt more uneasy than ever.
did not certainly wish to meet his sweetheart in that par
in the presence of the lady and the gentleman.
When the orderly answered the bell, the lady said:
"Show Mr. Gow into the dining room, and send Lo
Pond up to see him."
The orderly saluted, and opened the door. 
Ham Gow, much relieved, blithely sprang up and bow
and followed his conductor to the adjoining apartmen
where he seated himself in a high-backed chair to a
the coming of Lona Pond, whom the orderly went to se
In a very few minutes the girl entered-more shy
than she had ever before come into the presence of
lover.



<pb n="91"/>
THE TEAT OF LOVE                    91
Siam Gow, seeing this hesitation and confusion on her
part, and attributing both to the right cause, sprang up,
hastened to meet her and fold her to his honest heart, mur-
muring in her ear:
"My loveI my dearest I I know all about it now, and so
do you. You will not take me for my 'fetch' now?"
"Oh, Ham, dear I took two other 'fetches' for you first;
and then I got so discouraged from disappointment, and
so mortified by-by-by-taking a gentleman for you, that
I couldn't believe it was you when I did see you at last 1"
"I understand how that could be, my dear l And so,
my true-hearted girl, you really crossed the seas and came
this long, long, long voyage for the sake of finding a poor,
good-for-nothing fugitive like me " he said, looking ten-
derly, penitently, into her pretty face.
"You are not good for nothing, Ham, and you shall
not call yourself so! You are good and true, Ham  Yes,
as good as gold, and as true as steel  If you had not been
so I should never have come so many thousand miles to
find you !" she gently replied.
"Ah, my dear! I wish, I wish that I were all you take
me to be I But I will try to be so! I will for your sake,
Lonal And you have crossed the sea once for love of
me   Will you cross it again for my, sake?"
",What do you mean, Ham ?"
"I came here to-day to ask you that question. Will you
cross the sea again for my sake? Ah! I see you don't un-
derstand I I am going back to England by the Labrador
that is to sail on Saturday. Will you marry me between
now and then, and go with me?"
They were by this time seated in two high-backed chairs
that were drawn as closely together as such uncompromising
seats could be persuaded to come, and as he asked this
question he stole his arm around her waist.
"Will you, Lona? Will you?" he repeated, seeing that
she hesitated to answer him.
"Oh, Ham, can you be in earnest? It is so sudden "
she said; but the light of joy beamed from her face.
"I am in dead earnest, of course, Lona. And as for
its being sudden-you can't call it that after such a long
engagement! Besides, we have no time to delay, Lona,
dear. The Labrador sails on Saturday, and I am obliged



<pb n="92"/>
92          rTHE TEST OF LOVE
to go with her on the most important business that
be put off! And the alternative is that we marry a
together, or that I go alone, and leave you here alone
may be for years, and it may be forever,' as the old'
says, and says truly. Now, can you doubt which al
tive to choose? Speak, Lona, dear 1"
"Well-then-Ham," she began, hesitating and bins
"since-such is the case-I suppose-'What can't be 
must be endured,' and I shall have to go with you."'
"My own true-hearted love, you shall never, never
cause to regret it 1" warmly responded Ham Gow, e
the promise on her lips.
"Mr. Hamilton Gower is going home, too, by the
dor, is he not?" uneasily inquired the girl.
"Yes, he is."
"You know I hugged that gentleman by mistake
you! I hugged him hard. Oh! I hope I won't see
on the ship !" aspirated Lona, with such a genuine di
that Ham Gow laughed aloud, saving:
"I think he forgave you, my dear! Indeed, I don't t
he minded it one bit! And no more do I, seeing thati
was all meant for me ! And so neither need you, you kn
Just try to forget all about it, Lona 1"
"I wish I could!"
They talked some time longer-so long, indeed,
Ham Gow's conscience began to accuse him of trespass
though he could not tear himself away from his so
cently recovered sweetheart, until a servant entered
dining room and began to lay the cloth for dinner.
"I think you had better go now, Ham, dear," said Lo
gently. "I hate to send you away, but I think you 
better go."                             '
"And when shall I see you again ?" he inquired, ri
and taking his tarpaulin hat from the floor where he 
dropped it.
"Any evening you please. I am engaged all day,
in the evening I am free."
"May I come this evening?"
"Yes, and take me to a concert at the Lyceum." 
"All right. What time?"                         '
"Half-past seven."
"I will be on time !" said Ham Gow, and-thee



<pb n="93"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    98
being busy at the cabinet, with his back toward the lovers
-they kissed and parted.
Ham (ow went into the parlor, where, on his appearance,
Mr. Hamilton Gower arose to take leave.
When they had left the house and found themselves. on
the street, Ham Gow, with boyish frankness and delight,
told his friend and patron of his reconciliation with Lona
and of their approaching marriage. Mr. Gower congratu-
lated him, and inquired on what day the auspicious cere-
mony was to be performed.
"Before we sail, of course, sir; but only just before,
Lona says. So, as the Labrador leaves on Saturday after-
noon, we'll get the knot tied on Saturday morning, quietly,
you know, sir, by the chaplain of the regiment. And I
hope you will be on hand, sir, to-to-to--"
"Give the bride away? Of course I shalll" laughed
Mr. Gower.
"To wish us good luck, I was going to say, sir. I hadn't
thought of such an honor as the other."
"Never mind    I have a fancy for giving the bride
away, and I shall do it."
"You are very kind, sir," said Ham Gow.
When they reached the Royal Victoria, Mr. Gower paused
before entering the house, and said:
"Gow, I am going to take a ride a few miles out into
the country to a house where I know I can make you
welcome for as long as you would like to stay; but we
cannot get back to-night. Will you go with me P"
"Well, no, sir, I thank you very much, if you will ex-
cuse me. I have an engagement to take Lona to the
Lyceum this evening."
"Ah, to be sure I Well, go in the house, there's a good
fellow, and order dinner to be served for us immediately
in my apartment. I am going around to the stables to
take a look at my horse."
They separated there, Mr. Gower turning off toward the
stable, and Ham Gow passing into the office of the hotel.
A quarter of an hour later the friends met at a tfte-4-
_ tte dinner in Mr. Gower's apartments.
"What are you going to do with yourself until it is time
to go to the Lyceum?" inquired Mr. Gower, when they
finally arose from the table.



<pb n="94"/>
94           THE TEST OF LOVE
"Saunter around the town and see the sights," 
Gow. 
"Well, you will not see me again until to-morrow 
ing. My horse is at the door."
"I will see you into your saddle, then, at all 
said Ham Gow.
Mr. Gower took his hat, gloves and whip, and ledli
way downstairs. 
A few minutes later the young gentleman was can
briskly out of town on his way to Mount Wellington. e
He had left the Hermitage only that morning, and 
tainly he was not expected back there that evening. 
Yet he could not resist the impulse to hurry to the
ence of Mr. Elfinstar and Seraph, and tell them the glo
news that a witness had providentially turned up w]
testimony would clear Margaret Campbell from every 
putation of guilt; and that the vindication of her
acter and the restoration of her liberty was no long
matter of anxious hope, but of positive certainty.
Never had Mr. Hamilton Gower ridden along so g
as on this bright afternoon.
The sun set before he reached the foot of Mount
lington and began to wind up the ascent to the plateau
the shorter bridle path.
The moon and stars were shining with the glorious 
they shed over the nights of the Southern hemisphere, w
he finally reached the Hermitage. The father and da
ter were sitting out under the veranda enjoying the bea
of the hour. As he rode up and threw himself from
saddle the old gentleman arose and hurried to meet 
in some trepidation. He was made anxious by the untin
visit.
"Oh I understand it too well! The Labrador arri
while he was here yesterday, or this morning, and she
to sail for England immediately  He has come to bid
good-by 1" said Seraph, turning pale and faint.
As he hastily shook hands with Mr. Elfinstar, his lo
ears caught the purport of her murmured words, and
hastened to reassure her.
"No, love, no!" he exclaimed, catching her hand 
carrying it to his lips. "I have not come to bid you g
by, but to bring you the most glorious news that
\-~~~~~~~~~~~ ..-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ;f~'



<pb n="95"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    95
possibly reach youl I could not keep such news until
to-morrow I"
Father and daughter gazed on his face in anxious,
vague expectancy.
"It is not-it cannot be-a full pardon from the queen !"
breathed the old gentleman in a sudden fever and ague of
hope and fear.
"Better than that  Oh, infinitely better than that! It
is a full vindication  What is a full pardon compared to
a full vindication?  Come, Mr. Elfinstar  Come, dear
Seraph I Let me sit between you, while I tell the glorious
news I" he exclaimed, as he seated himself on the bench,
with the old gentleman on his right and the young lady
on his left.
And there, in an eager, rapid, but distinct and graphic
manner, he related all the particulars of Ham Gow's ad-
venture at Rose Hill on the night of the murder.
"And now, you see," he said in conclusion, "that your
full vindication is no longer 'the fair illusive dream' that
you have called it, my Seraph; but it is the 'sober certainty
of waking bliss' I I shall sail with this witness for England
in the Labrador on Saturday. Be you as happy and as
hopeful as possible, my love, during my absence] As soon
as I reach London I shall lay the facts of this case before
the home secretary, and the next returning ship shall bring
out to you the order of your discharge."
" Oh, can this be possible ? Can this, indeed, be possible ?
Oh, my dear father, answer me!" pleaded Seraph, fearful
of believing too easily in the promised happiness.
"My dear, it is true, true " replied the old gentleman,
laying his hand caressingly on his daughter's head.
"And you, you who expatriated yourself to share your
child's exile; oh, my more than father I You will return
to England to spend the rest of your life in your own
home! Oh, that thought makes me happiest of all!" she
cried, throwing herself into the arms of the old gentleman
and fervently embracing him.
"Let us go in, my love; the night air grows chilly," he
said at length, gently disengaging his child's arms from
about his neck. "Come, Mr. Gower."
The three entered the house together.



<pb n="96"/>
96           THE TEST OF LOVE
Mr. Elfnstar rahg and ordered a tray of 
brought into the drawing room.
"You have had a long ride, Mr. Gower, and
have something before you retire," he said in
When these refreshments had been served and
and the evening prayers and thanksgivings had 
fered up, the small party bade each other go
separated and retired to rest.
The next morning, at the breakfast table, it
ranged that Mr. and Miss Elfinstar should accom
Gower back to Hobart Town, and remain at 
Victoria until the following Saturday night, in
see the voyagers off in the Labrador.
This had been done at the earnest solicitation o
Hamilton Gower, supported by the mute entreaty of
Elfinstar's soft blue eyes-influences to which the
spirited old man easily yielded.
"I think there can be no serious objection to this c
he explained, when his daughter had left them to 
for the journey, and he and his guest were walking up
down the front piazza. "No objection, because no    r
in the town-no soul on earth, except you and
Seraph-know her identity with Margaret Campb
not only in these three years and a half that she has 
here has she developed from the thin, pale, sallow, bl
hearted child into the beautiful woman that you see i
now, but every officer in the colony who was here wh
arrived has been changed. We have an entire new  ,
and military administration. Some of the offi
course, knew that Margaret Campbell is in my house
they think that she is there as a domestic, and every one,
has seen or heard of Seraph believes her to be my
ter. I shall be glad to give her this change. She has
left the Hermitage since her arival here."     J
"I thank you so much for giving us this happi
being together for these last few days, and I look 
with the deepest delight to the time when I may 
strumental in bringing you both the best change that
come to you-the change from exile back to your
land," said the young man earnestly.
The appearance of Seraph Elfinstar, dressed for
journey, interrupted the conversation.
:,                                                        ^^^^^^.



<pb n="97"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    97
"I have only had a e  articles put ih a couple of valises,
father, dear; but I hive ordered Jenny to pack a trunk to
send after us," said the young lady.
The carriage was coming up toward the house, and see-
ing it, the two gentlemen stepped back into the hall to
get their hats and gloves.
"Suppose you take a seat in the carriage with us and
allow one of the boys to ride your horse back," said Mr.
Elfinstar.
"With great pleasure," assented the young man.
And in a few minutes later the three friends, seated in-
side the coach, and having Jonas Stackpole on the box,
were driving slowly down the mountain road, attended by
Peter, the groom, mounted on Mr. Gower's horse.
Hamilton Gower, with Seraph Elfinstar by his side on
the front seat, and the kindly old gentleman opposite to
them, thought that this was about the most delightful drive
he had ever enjoyed in the whole course of his life.
They reached Hobart Town about noon, and were pro-
vided with a fine suit of apartments on the first floor front
of the Royal Victoria Hotel-immediately across the hall
and opposite to Mr. Hamilton Gower's room.
Ham Gow was nowhere visible about the house, but,might
be supposed to be in attendance on his bethothed.
After luncheon the three friends walked out into the
town together, and Seraph Elfinstar was as much delighted
as any child could have been at the gayety and variety of the
shops-the bookstores, the picture dealers, the fancy ba-
zaars-all had the attraction of novelty for the young girl
who had not been shopping for nearly five years.
It will be easily understood that the public buildings--
which consisted principally of the government offices, mili-
tary and convict barracks, jails and hospitals-objects of
interest to most strangers visiting Hobart Town, had no
attractions, but, on the contrary, a strong repulsion for
Seraph Elfinstar. She avoided them  with horror, and
kept away as much as possible even from the streets that
led to them.
In the evening she went to a concert with her father and
her lover, and enjoyed the music, the lights and the gay
crowd with the keen delight of one long deprived of such
pleasures.



<pb n="98"/>
98           THE TEST OF LOVE 
In the auditorium Mr. Gower caught sight of '
and Lona Pond, seated side by side.
He pointed out the tramp to the old gentleman,j
"That man is your witness I"
Mr. and Miss Elfinstar both gazed at the man
deepest interest.
"I never set eyes on him before," said the olde
man.
"He has a fine face-a very familiar one---
is like you I" whispered Seraph, turning suddenly
lover.
"Yes, very like you, Mr. Gowerl" added hei
who had overheard her remark.
He saw that Ham Gow was also regarding
his party with the greatest curiosity and interest. .
But the commencement of the music soon attr
their attention.
When the concert was over Mr. Hamilton Gower
Ham Gow in the crowd that was pouring out of the
but that night, after he had reached the hotel, 
friends at the door of their apartments and had
to his own room, the tramp came to him.
"I have been looking for you all day," said Mr. G
"I have been most of the day with Lona Pond,"
Ham Gow. 
"You saw the lady and gentleman who were with
said Gower.
"Oh, yes. The angel and the gentleman, you mean, 
How heavenly beautiful she is, sir I"           '
"Yes; did you never see her before?" inquired
Gower, with an affectation of carelessness. 
"Never in my life, sir! Where was I see her? I
was in Hobart Town before."                     .
"Did you ever see any one who looked like her?"
"Never, sir. I do not believe there is another lady
the world like her !" exclaimed Ham Gow enthusiasti
"Neither do I," frankly admitted Mr. Hamilton G
whose questions to the tramp had been dictated not by
faintest suspicion that the latter had seen her at the 
on the night of the murder, but by the desire tn hr'
out in the strongest manner the fact that Gow hul r.--



<pb n="99"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    99
set eyes on her anywhere before, and could not, therefore,
be mistaken in the person of the girl at the well.
"And now, if you plea~   sir, as 1 only dropped in to
pay my respects, and it is late, I will bid you good-night,"
said Ham Gow, moving to depart.
"Good-night, and much obliged," replied Mr. Gower, as
he closed the door after his visitor.
The next morning Mr. Hamilton Gower proposed to
take Miss Elfinstar for a drive along the beautiful banks
of the Derwent. Before the young couple left the hotel,
and while Seraph Efinstar was in her bedroom putting on
her bonnet, Mr. Hamilton Gower took Ham Gow into Mr.
Elfinstar's parlor and introduced him to the old gentle-
man, and then said:
"Now, Gow, I wish you to relate to my friend here the
particulars of your adventure at Rose Hill on the night of
the murder. But you need not begin until Miss Elfinstar
has left the house. You can entertain him with the story
during the absence of his daughter and myself."
"All right, sir; I will do it."
The lovers went for their drive, and were gone three
hours.
When they got back to the hotel and Seraph Elfinstar
had gone to her room to change her dress, leaving her father
and her lover alone together in the parlor, the old gentle-
man said:
"I have heard the whole story from Gow-and, if there
had been any doubt in my mind-which there was not-
his narrative must hav  dispelled it!  My daughter is
saved !"
"Undoubtedly! But here she comes! Let us change
the subject."
Seraph came in, looking fresh and blooming from her
drive, and the three friends sat down to luncheon.
On the following Saturday morning, Ham   Gow and
Lona Pond were quietly married in the little chapel of the
barracks, Mr. Hamilton Gower acting as groomsman, and
Lieut. Belle Isle giving away the bride.
The Elfinstars were not present at the wedding; for
though no one knew the identity of Margaret Campbell and
Seraph Elfinstar except the three friends, they deemed



<pb n="100"/>
100          THE TEST OF LOVE 
it best not to attract too much attention to the father ,
daughter.                                        i
The bridegroom  and the bride, after an afect
leavetaking of their friends, went immediately to the 
That afternoon Mr. Hamilton Gower, having li
to the last safe moment in the close carriage that.
brought his friends and himself down to the wharf, b
a mournful but a firm and hopeful good-by to his lovei
her father, and went on board the boat that was to ^
him to the ship just one second before the gangp'
was drawn in.
Half an hour later, before a fair wind and outgoing I
the good ship Labrador, with all her canvas spread, 
for England.
CHAPTER XI
ON THE TRAIL
THU Labrador made a rapid, prosperous, and, ther
uneventful voyage, leaving nothing for the narrator .
chronicle, unless it were the changes of the weather, of
seasons, and of the bill of fare, which would scarcely 
an interesting chapter of accidents.
She reached her landing at the East India Docks,
don, early on the mornning of the first of August.
"And now, Ham," said Mr. Gower, as they stepped
shore, "we will have a whole month before us, you see, for
would not do for me to go down to Cornwall and pr
myself at Hawke Hall until I shall be legally qualified
act for myself, which will not be the case until I shall h
attained my majority, which I shall not do, as you 
know, until my twenty-first birthday, which will come ro
on the first of next September."
"Yes, sir. I am aware of that," replied Ham, who
busily engaged in elbowing and pushing a way for
and Mrs. Gow through the crowd.
~*      "You know, of course, that I do not wish fo show
self at Hawke Hall until I can take command of af
there in my own proper person," continued Mr. Gower. 
44



<pb n="101"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   101
"Of course; quite so, sir; but what do you intend to do
in the meantime?" "
"Just what I have been talking about doing ever since
I began to suspect that we should make an early arrival, and
have some-,weeks on our hands before it would be time to
go down into Cornwall! I intend to stop in London and
work up the case of Margaret Campbell."
"You, you keep to that plan."
"Decidedly! See here! Here is a cab stand. We had
better take a cab and go at once to some good inn. Do you
know of one near?" inquired Mr. Gower.
"The Crown and Anchor is not far off, sir. It is clean
and quiet, or it used to be so when I knew it; but it might
not suit you, sir."
"We'll try it," said Mr. Gower, as he signaled a cabman,
who immediately touched his cap and turned his horse to-
ward the party.
"To the Crown and Anchor I" said Mr. Gower, when the
three were comfortably seated in the vehicle.
The cabman touched his hat again and started his horse,
and in about fifteen minutes they drew up before one of
the oldest inns in London.
It was a substantial building of dark-red brick, and small
twisted chimneys, and broad windows with iron sashes and
small, diamond-shaped panes, and with a high, brick arch-
way leading to the courtyard, at the back of which were
the substantial stone stables and coach houses.
From this "hostelry," in the good old times, a line of
mail coaches to or from Dover started or arrived twice
daily; and here, in still older times, knights and squires and
"lords of high degree," as well as farmers, teamsters and
men of low estate, fed their beasts and regaled themselves.
Mr. Gower paid and discharged the cab and led the way
in to an antiqpe taproom, presided over by a short, stout,
middle-aged man in a fustian suit, with a red waistcoat and
a redder face-a man who might have stepped out of one of
the old English comedies.
To this functionary Mr. Gower made known the wants
of his party-a suite of rooms with two chambers and a
parlor.
The man in the red waistcoat handed the mug of foam.



<pb n="102"/>
102          THE TEST OF LOVE
ing ale to the customer for whom he had been
and then called a waiter in a white apron, and sMid:
"Party wants two beds and one sitting." 
The waiter in the white apron touched the top of 
forehead and summoned a chambermaid in a cap mat
ribbons, and instructed her to show "this lady andi
into the Griffin and the Dragon and the Salamander.
Mrs. Ham's brows went up and her chin dropped
at this alarming command; but her husband calm
fears by whispering:
"It is only the names of the rooms, my dear, andi
cozy rooms they are, if I may judge of what I have 
the place before !"
And "nice, cozy rooms" they were truly found
when the friends had followed the chambermaid in th.l
trimmed with blue ribbons upstairs.
There were three rooms in a row on one side of a
passage.
The chambermaid unlocked the door of the middle 
which was labeled Salamander, and invited the gu
enter.
They did so, and found themselves in a large, 
antique parlor, whose floor, walls and low ceiling were
dark oak wood, and whose one wide window was g
with small, diamond-shaped panes, and whose broad
place was lined with Dutch tiles and adorned with b
brass andirons, shovel, tongs and fender, and decorated
a jar of paper flowers-for there was no fire at this
season. The furniture was upholstered in dark-red e
but the floor was bare except for two Turkey rugs, one
which lay before the fireplace and the other before the
sofa that stood below the red-curtained window.
A door on the right and one on the left led into the
joining bedrooms.
"This gives one the feeling of being in a large w
box, does it not?" said Ham Gow.
"It does so! And it smells so old !" answered Mrs. H
sitting down in the large red serge-covered easy-chair.
"The bedrooms open right and left from this, ma
Any orders, ma'am ?" inquired the chambermaid, addre
the "lady."



<pb n="103"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    10S
"I don't knowl Ham, dear-Mr. Gower, please, sir l"
said Mrs. Ham, helplessly appealing to her two companions.
" Yes, breakfast in this room as soon as it can be served,"
said Mr. Gower.
"What would you like, sir?" inquired the girl.
"Anything at all, so that it is cleanly and quickly
served I" said Mr. Gower.
The girl left the room, and the young man turned to his
fellow travelers, and added:
"You see, I am in a fever to get to Scotland Yard."
"I know you are, sir," replied Gow.
"You must go there with me, Ham !"
I  "Of course, sir! Little use your going without me, I
reckon."
"And you must get some papers for Mrs. Ham to read
while we are gone. By the way, let your wife take a look
at the bedrooms and select one for yourselves."
"Hadn't you better take your choice first, sir?"
"As if I had a preference I No, I will take the one that
shall be left."
"I dare say there isn't any diffeernce between them!
Lona, lass, take a look at the two rooms, will you?"
Mrs. Ham arose and went into the room on the right,
which seemed to satisfy her; and then, actuated by curiosity
rather than by fastidiousness, she went into the room on
the left, and came out looking so evidently disappointed
that Ham laughed and remarked:
"Not so good as the first one, eh?"
"They are both exactly alike, even to the ugly, old-
fashioned, four-post bedsteads, and heavy chintz curtains,
and the hideous china images on the mantelshelf. But, as
I have to take one or the other, though there is no 'choice.
I'll take this last one," said Mrs. Ham, as she turned and
re-entered the room to lay off her bonnet.
The waiter now entered the parlor to lay the cloth for
breakfast on the round oak table that stood in the center.
The meal was promptly served, and as soon as it had
been discussed Mr. Gower and witness went out and took
a cab and drove to Scotland Yard.
On arriving at the police headquarters Mr. Gower asked
to see the chief on important business.
He was shown at once into an inner office, where, beside



<pb n="104"/>
104           THE TEST OF LOVE 
a table covered with heavy books and bundles of doea
sat a tall, portly, gray-haired and gray-bearded man,
looked more like one's idea of an archbishop than a 
officer.
Recognizing a gentleman in the manner and app
of Mr. Gower, he arose and bowed, requesting his
to be seated.
"And I must beg you, sir, to dispatch your business
me as promptly as can be convenient, for time is valuab
he said, with more politeness in his tone than was expri
in his words.
"I will not trespass, sir. I want the services of the 
skillful and experienced detective officer on the force.
want to employ him in a case that I am perfectly willing 
explain, if you have leisure to listen to me-"
"That depends. If you have important informationi.
lodge I must make time to hear it-but, otherwis
said the chief.
"It is otherwise, at present. I am not quite prepa
for so decided a measure. I want your most skillful 
experienced detective officer. I am aware that there
men to be found who call themselves private detectives, b
they are not always to be relied upon; so I prefer to
one from yfou."
"You think ours are, then ?"
"I think they are more likely to be."
The chief smiled in a peculiar manner, and said:
"I will send you Hutchings. He can be relied upon 
least for sharpness, discretion and experience. What a
dress ?"
"Mr. Hamilton Gower, Crown and Anchor Inn, nea
East India Docks."
The chief took it down, and said:
"Hutchings will wait on you in the course of the mornz|
ing.
Mr. Gower thanked the chief, and left the office, atX
tended by his friend.
When they returned to the Crown and Anchor, Mr. Gower v
left word with the barkeeper that if anyone should call to 
inquire for him the person should be sent up to his apart. .
ment. 



<pb n="105"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   105
Then the two men went upstairs to while away the time
as best they could while waiting for the detective officer.
It was twelve o'clock before Hutchings made his appear-
ance.
He was a small, spare man, about forty years of age. He
had rather a large head, the back and sides of which were
covered with short, black hair. He had a large, bare, pro-
jecting forehead, and bushy eyebrows overhanging a pair
of deeply set, keen, black eyes; a thin, sharp, turned-up
nose, and a heavy, black mustache and beard that covered
his mouth and chin. He wore a black cloth suit and a white
necktie, and he looked like a dissenting clergyman.
"A natural born as well as a regularly ordained detec-
tive," whispered Ham Gow to himself as he took stock of
this physiognomy.
"I have the honor to speak to Mr. Gower," said the de-
tective, when he had shut the door and advanced into the
room, instinctively addressing himself to the right man.
"My name is Gower," said the latter. "And yours?"
"Hutchings, at your service, sir. The chief sent me to
this address."
"At my request. I have a very important case upon
which I wish to employ you."
"Quite so, sir. I am ready."
"It is understood that all which passes in this room is to
be held as private and confidential?"
"Just so, sir," assented the detective, with an inquiring
glance toward Ham Gow.
"Oh, that man is connected with the case," explained Mr.
Gower.
"Ah !" exclaimed Hutchings.
"But, Ham, where is Mrs. Ham?" inquired Mr. Gower,
in an aside to his companion.
"Oh, she has gone out in a cab, shopping. She didn't
come through the parlor, which is the reason why you
didn't see her," replied Mrs. Ham's lord and master.
"Then we can proceed to business," said Mr. Gower, and
the three men drew their chairs to the table.
"Mr. Hutchings," said the young gentleman, coming
directly to the point," do you remember the notorious Rose
Hill case?"
"Of the child mysteriously missing from its nursery for



<pb n="106"/>
106           THE TEST OF LOVE
several days, and then at last found dead at the bo
of a dry well? Yes, sir, I remember it. It occurred
tween four and five years ago."
"Yes, you were perhaps on that case."
"No, sir, I was not on it," replied the detective, with
emphasis of denial that seemed to indicate offense taken
the question.
Mr. Gower looked at him sharply, but discovered no
more from his guarded face.
"I was down at Liverpool, sir, looking up a bank 
bery," added Hutchings.
"Oh, excuse me; I had hoped that you had been on
case."
"I was not, sir."
"Then you know nothing about it?"
"Nothing but what I read in the newspapers and 
and saw at the trial; for I did attend the trial, sir."
"I had hoped that you had been on duty at Rose H
at the time of the search and investigation-which wo
have afforded you better opportunities of forming a 
opinion that either the reading of the newspapers or
tending the court would have done; for it is on this
case, observe, that I wish to employ you," said Mr. Gower. 
Hutchings looked up with awakened interest.
"Some new facts have come to my knowledge in re
to that child murder," added Mr. Gower.
"I am not at all surprised to hear it, sir."
"Howl You are not surprised to hear it?"
"No, sir, I am not."
"Why are you not, may I ask? Had you already fo
an opinion different from the verdicts rendered at the 
quest and at the trial? Remember, Mr. Hutchings, that
is this very case that has brought us together to-day,
that our relations are now confidential. Speak freely.
me! Did you differ in opinion from the judge and J
that tried that case ?"
"Well, sir, I can't say that I absolutely differed
them; but I have, and I had from the first, the stro
doubts as to the guilt of that child they transported 
life !"
"Ah I you had! You were right! We hope to be able
prove her innocence of that crime," said Mr. Gower.
I!'



<pb n="107"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   107
Hutchings looked up with more interest than before.
Mr. Gower continued:
"You say that you had the strongest doubts of the con-
demned girl's guilt. Had you, at the same time, any sus- /
picion as to the identity of the real criminal?"
"No, sir, I had not-unless-- But, indeed, I prefer
not to express my suspicion," said the detective, correcting
himself.
"Let me express it for you I Let me finish your sentence
'unless'-it was of the half-witted, deformed girl who was
Miss Campbell's roommate and first accuser " solemnly
added Mr. Gower.
"Sir! How came you to arrive at that conclusion ?" de-
manded the detective.
"Because that girl, Malvina Mattox, was really the guilty
party, as we shall soon be able to prove! There was an
eyewitness to the murder; but as, for certain reasons, that
shall be explained hereafter, he did not appear as a witness
at the time of the murder, his testimony might not be suffi-
cient to clear the innocent, unless it was supported by cor-
roborative evidence, and it is this evidence that we wish
you to discover."
"Tell me all the facts that have come to your knowledge,
sir, and produce your eyewitness, if you please," said Hutch-
ings.
"Here he is !-Mr. Gow. He will give you all the facts.
He was on a pedestrian tour at the time, and being caught
in the rain on the night of the murder he took shelter under
a shed near that old well where the body of the child was
found. Gow, tell the story as you told it to me."
The young "pedestrian" nodded, and began his narrative.
The detective was a most attentive listener. He drew a
capacious notebook from his pocket and took down in
shorthand the words of the narrator.
Sometimes he stopped to ask questions or to make a
comment.
When the story was finished he closed his notebook and
put it, with his pencil, into his pocket, remarking:
"It is a pity you had not given in this evidence at the
. time. But I appreciate your motive. Thinking that the
law had got hold of the right party, and that she was only



<pb n="108"/>
'I
108          THE TEST OF LOVE 
a half-witted child, you did not wish to help to put;
rope around her neck."
"That was it, of course," assented Gow; "but no
know that my holding back caused an innocent girl's '
viction, I do feel guilty of all her misfortunes, and I 
never feel easy until I have atoned for my fault. WB
not my testimony alone be sufficient to clear the y
lady, sir?"
"It might if you were a doctor of divinity; but as
are not, your testimony will be all the better for 
corroborated by other evidence."
"What is your advice in the premises?" inquired'
Gower.
"To put the suspected girl--"
"The 'suspected' girl, indeed! The criminal girl,
should say !" exclaimed Mr. Gower. 
"To put her under secret surveillance, then  It o'H
be, if she has committed this crime, that she has n
some time betrayed herself and does not continue to do
"To put her under secret surveillance! That is 
what I wish you to do!"
"Where is the girl now?"
"I do not know. You had best go to Rose Hill and 
secret investigations. When could you start for
shie ?" 
"To-night."                                 i
"Very well, then. Here are a hundred pounds to
with. Spare no expense in the quest, and write to me 
at this address," said Mr. Gower, putting a roll of 
bank notes into the hand of the detective.
"I will write a receipt for this money, sir, and k
exact account of its expenditure," said Hutchings, 
counted over the notes.
Pen, ink and paper being supplied to him, he wro
an acknowledgment for a hundred pounds, gave it X
Gower, and took his leave.
"Will you want to see us for any further purpose 
you start?" inquired Mr. Gower.
"Not again. Oh, no-not at all. You will next
from me at Rosedale, where I shall make my head
while investigating Rose Hill," answered the detective
walked out of the room.
dJ



<pb n="109"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   109
"Now what on earth shall we do with ourselves, while
waiting for news?" inquired Hamilton Gower, disconso-
lately.
"I propose that we just run down to Hawkeville and see
how the place looks. We need not discover ourselves pre-
maturely-at least you need not," suggested Ham Gow.
"Bnt our going seems incompatable with the business we
have taken up," replied Mr. Gower.
"Oh, I don't think so at all 1 We can go and return be-
fore we shall be wanted on this business. Listen: It is now
two o'clock. There is a train leaves Paddington at four,"
said Ham Gow, with all the eagerness of a confirmed vaga-
bond, who could not rest long in any one place, as he fixed
his eyes on a page in the Bradshaw he had been consulting
through the morning.
"Well, there's a train leaves Paddington at four-what
then?" inquired Mr. Gower.
"We can leave by that train, reach Hawkeville by day-
light, run down to Demondike and see the Nans, and learn
all the news at the Hall, and leave again by the afternoon
train, and reach London on the following morning in full
time to receive the first letter that Hutchings could possibly
write you from Rosedale. Don't you see?"
"Well-yes   the plan seems practicable enough! But
how about Mrs. Ham? Would you leave her here until our
return ?"
"Leave her here, sir? Not a bit of it  Why, she would
be sure to come to grief, if not to ruin, if she were to be
left here alone! I would not leave her any sooner than I
would leave a child five years old."
"So I supposedl But how are you going to take Mrs.
Ham, if she has not returned?" inquired Mr. Gower.
"Humph! I-         But she has returned!" exclaimed
Ham Gow, breaking off from his first answer as the door
opened and Mrs. Ham entered the room, radiant from her
ride.
She was immediately informed by her husband of the
proposed expedition to Hawkeville, and she was as pleased
as a child with the prospect.
She hurried into her room to pack a small valise for the
journey.



<pb n="110"/>
110          THE TEST OF LOVE
While she was thus engaged Mr. Gower rang and o
luncheon to be served as quickly as possible.
When she came out she found the table set, but as t
was no luncheon on it as yet, she proposed to go into
Gower's room and put up his necessaries for the journey, 
"I have packed a bag for Ham and me," she said, "f
now I would like to pack a bag for you, Mr. Gower." 
"My dear, I never take anything but a hair brush, a 
brush and a clean shirt when I go a journey-and thi
roll up in a newspaper. And here is luncheon, so thati
will have. no time to pack even if there was anything to
up!" said Mr. Gower, as the door opened and a 
appeared staggering under a large, heavily laden tray, 
he contrived to strike and jar at every favorable opp
nity of doing so as is the custom of awkward waiters.
* As soon as the luncheon was arranged upon the table, 
friends sat down to it with good appetites.
But they did not linger over the meal, and half an
later they were in a four-wheeler cab, bowling on 
Paddington.
CHAPTER XII
BACK TO HAWKEWOOD
THai reached Paddington Station just in time to 
their tickets and hurry into a first-class carriage onf
four o'clock express to Southampton en route for Pe
and Hawkeville.
They traveled all the afternoon and reached the first
of their journey at Southampton near sunset.
They had time to enjoy a comfortable tea at the S
western Hotel before taking the train for Penzance.
It was long after midnight when they reached this "
westerly town in England," where they were delayed
hour, and improved the time by taking a late supper or.
early breakfast of hot coffee, muffins and mutton chopsei
the railway restaurant.
After this refreshment they entered the train for HaE
ville, where they arrived at about daybreak.
l~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ )'~
i!,



<pb n="111"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   111
"Now, then," said Ham Gow, "if it was not for my wife,
you, sir, and I could walk on to Demondike; but we shall
either have to take a fly to convey her or leave her at the
Hawke Arms Inn. What do you think?"
They were standing on the platform of the station,
whence the few passenger who had left the train at this
point had already departed on their several ways, and the
train itself was puffing and blowing as it "slowed" out of
the station on its way to Land's End.
"I think you had better leave the matter to Mrs. Ham
herself," said Mr. Gower, with a laugh.
"What do you say, Lona?"
"I sav, Ham, and if you please, Mr. Gower, sir," began
the young woman, addressing her companions in turn, "that
if you leave it to me, I would rather not stop at the inn by
myself, nor get into a fly neither. I am that cramped up
with sitting so long in the train that I feel as if I would
like to begin to walk and keep on walking to the end of my
life !"
"Ha, ha, ha I Your life would be a very short one if that
were the case 1" laughed Ham Gow.
"Do you really think you will be able to walk the three
miles between this and Demondike?" considerately inquired
Mr. Gowelr.
"Yes, sir, indeed, please, I could so, with pleasure-but 
-I would like to wash the dust and cinders out of my eyes
first."
"Well, there's a ladies' dressing room in the station!
And I reckon we would all be better or the cleaner for a
little soap and water. Eh, Mr. Gower?"
"Decidedly," replied the young gentleman, leading the
way into the station, where they separated, Mrs. Ham going
into the ladies' dressing room, and the two men into the
gentlemen's.
As Mr. Gower stood before the looking-glass brushing
his hair, after having washed his face and head, he turned
toward Ham Gow-who was vigorously using a crash towel
upon his own neck and ears-and said:
"You remarked, when persuading me to this journey,
that 'we need not discover ourselves prematurely.' I would
like to know how we are to avoid doing so, if we walk
through the neighborhood."
m.~



<pb n="112"/>
112          THE TEST OF LOVE 
"I said so; but I added, on second thoughts, that y_
need not do so, at least. And you need not, sir. You 
never be recognized until you declare your identity a .
prove it! You are dead, sir, as dead as Julius COesar, w i
was killed near two thousand years ago  As dead as tb 
well-known 'door nail' that never lived at all l You wei
murdered in your bed, sir, two years ago come the first ot
next September. And your successor reigns in your ste4i
It would take a vast deal of ocular demonstration and
swearing to convince people to the contrary. Once in,:
fixed idea and malaria are the hardest things in nature 
get out of men's systems. And the people of Cornw
have a fixed idea that you are dead and-no, not buried, 
more completely done for-that is, dissected 1"
"Well, it may be that I pass unsuspected, especially as
have really grown since my nineteenth birthday-wheni
was murdered. I have grown, in these two years, ag
two inches in height and six in breadth, besides having 
complexion tanned some shades darker, and wearing a
and heavy beard, such as I never sported then. I fancy y
are right, Ham. I shall pass unchallenged!" laugh
replied Mr. Gower.
"But as for me, sir, it is difficult. I never was repor
dead, but only as absconded in three or four different dirt
tions; and, no doubt, people are still on the lookout for
to nab me and get the reward offered for my apprehensi
Nor have I changed so much as to elude detection. I ha
not grown a hair's breadth in any direction, having attain
my full stature about three or four years ago; and I ha
the same sunburned skin, and the same rough, black 
and beard, familiar from sight to all who knew me perso
ally, and from description to all who read the posters 
vertising me. It would be a funny thing if I were nabbe
and committed to jail on the old charge of having murderS
you, sir-wouldn't it?"
"Not to you, I should think !"
"Well, no, not to me; but you would not allow me to
main in prison until the first of September, would yo'
sir?"
"I am afraid I should have to do so, Ham, for you 
I cannot very well declare myself at Hawkewood until
first of September shall give me my majority and with '
*s
.42^



<pb n="113"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   11
the power of acting for myself. Therefore, my good fellow,
I advise you to be cautious and keep out of the way or
arrest!" laughed Mr. Gower.
"Humph I and if on the first of September, or afterward,
yon did not choos   come forward and show yourself, I
might chance to get hanged for the murder of a man who
had never been hurt l"
"You might so, Ham    Such things have happened be-
fore this. But I would not permit matters to proceed so.
far   On the first of September I shall declare myself, if
it is only for the pleasure of turning Mr. Lewis Manton out
of Hawke Hall and witness his astonishment and discom-
fiture  But I advise you to 'keep shady' until the first of
September."
"I'll try to 1 But all the same I expect to get nabbed and
spend the next four weeks in Hawkeville jail," said Ham
Gow.
"Well   It was your doings  You would come down into
this neighborhood, you restless tramp! I really do think
the only place where you could be kept quiet would be a
prison cell, or a strait-jacket " laughed Mr. Gower.
"I shouldn't be quiet there I There'd be broken bars and
broken bones, if not broken necks !" exclaimed Ham.
They were by this time ready to leave the dressing room.
As they entered the ladies waiting room, Mrs. Ham,
looking much refreshed, advanced toward them, saying:
"The ladies' maid tells me that we can get breakfast at
the restaurant here if we want it, and I would like a cup
of coffee and a roll before we start on that long walk 1"
"What do you say, sir ? Shall she be gratified ?" inquired
Ham 0ow of his friend.
"Why, of course ! Why do you refer the question to me?"
demanded the young gentleman.
"Because you are our chief, sir! It is all right, Lona!
We will go in to breakfast, since you wish it! Let alone a
delicate young woman for being a gormandizer! Now, we
could have fasted until we got to Demondike, and there we
could have breakfasted on Old Nan's coffee, tea, or choco-
late ! None better, in the three kingdoms, for a reason that
I suspect, but will not betray! So on, Lona, we follow !"
She led them into the ladies' division of the restaurant
and there they made a good breakfast.
L



<pb n="114"/>
114          THE TEST OF LOVE
A few minutes later they were on their way to
dike, following the line of the coast .
"Did you notice how hard the people looked at me in
waiting room?" inquired Ham Gow, on the first oppor
nity he had for private speaking, which occurred when 
strayed a little in advance of them to pick up bright l
of seaweed, or shells, or pebbles-after the manner of di
dren or young people walking on the seashore who gather i
these attractive little objects only to throw them away aZ
"Did you notice how the people stared at me, Mr. 
er?" repeated the tramp, seeing that his absent-n
companion had not answered his question. 
"Yes, I did notice I Ham, you are in danger!" 
"And yet I didn't know anybody there, except ouf
selves " !i
"But they evidently knew you by sight, or suspected yo
from the printed description I Ham, I repeat, you are i4
danger !"
"I shouldn't wonder! Look here, sir! I don't want v
rusticate in prison for a month; but if I thought there wi
a dead certainty of my being nabbed, I tell you what 
would do ! I would give myself up to poor old Proddy, tf
cobbler, and let him turn me over to the police and get hit
two hundred pounds reward  I would! It wouldn't hurt
me much, you know; only four weeks' retirement from the
world, and that retirement cheered by your frequent visits
solaced by all that money could buy, and supported by th
certainty of deliverance in the first week of September
For I do not think that even red tape could prolong my-i;
carceration for more than five or six days after you shal
have resurrected yourself, sir! That will not be so vet
much for me to endure, sir, and think what a fortune to ol',
Proddy! Why, the old fellow would be richly provide
for for the rest of his life, sir! and think-only think of!
the laugh we should have at the expense of the authoritiesi
Ah ! it is worth it! I declare the fun is worth the imprisoned
ment! I have a mind to give myself up to old Proddy,
sir I" concluded Ham Gow, with a laugh.
"I would not do anything of the sort rashly, if I were H
you I Remember Mrs. Ham !" suggested Mr. Gower.
"I do ! I would take her partly into my confidence, and ,'
let her enjoy the joke."
.                               .~~~~~



<pb n="115"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   115
"I don't think she could be persuaded to enjoy it I Be-
member, also, the cause of justice in another case in which
your testimony may be required any day."
"Now, that is a good argument, so I guess I will not be
over meddlesome in giving old man Proddy a fortune to
retire upon yet a while! Ah, old man  You don't know
what you have neared and what you have missed in the last
ten minutes !"
As he spoke they came up to Mrs. Ham sitting on a frag-
ment of rock, with her lap full of "ocean treasures."
She hastily tied them up in her handkerchief, and arose
to accompany them, so that there could be no more confi-
dential conversation between the two men.
The three walked on, talking on indifferent subjects,
until, in turning a point on the coast, they came in sight of
Demondike, about a quarter of a mile ahead of them.
"How natural it all looks 1 It seems to me as if it was
only yesterday that I left it 1" murmured Ham Gow, gazing
almost fondly on the old ruined tower.
"Old Nan is getting breakfast. See what a smoke is
coming out of the chimney 1" exclaimed Mrs. Ham.
"You don't want another breakfast, do you, little wom-
an?" demanded Gow.
"I shouldn't mind," responded. Mrs. Ham; "breakfasts
at railway restaurants are not so very satisfactory."
"Ah, sir, you see I had need to go to the gold mines l"
said Ham, with a look of comic appeal to his "chief."
As they drew near to the ruin they perceived that there
was no life stirring outside of the tower, but the sound of
voices came from within.
Ham Gow stepped before his companions, went up to
the door and knocked; but the earnestness of the discussion
within seemd to prevent the speakers from hearing the sum-
mons-and not only voices, but words, reached the visitors
without.
"I shouldn't wonder to hear of the earls arrest any day.
The whole neighborhood is talking of it. They say all that
is wanted to bring him to trial, ay, and to the gallows, too,
is some one bold enough to make the charge against him,"
said the voice of Young Nan.
"Ay, but wherell that bold man be found? It'll take a



<pb n="116"/>
i16          THE TEST OF LOVE 
bold one, I'm thinking, to bring the charge of murder aghf     I 
the Yarl of Hawkewood," replied the voice of Old Nan. 
"What in the de-octors is up now?" muttered Ham 
Glow, turning in amazement to his astonished companions.
Then, being too honorable to play the part of an eavess.- 
dropper, he knocked loudly-so loudly that he startled the .
inmates, one of whom was heard to rise and come forward 
to'open the door.
It was Old Nan, who started and looked aghast at the 
sight of her visitors. 
"Hello, mother I don't you know me ? I'm not a ghost I
I'm solid flesh and blood I Ain't you glad to see me?" exi  d
claimed the tramp, holding out his hand, and laughing at1|
the old woman's dismay.                                        [ 
"Ham    ow !" she exclaimed, staring at him, and chang, ! 
ing color. "You have no consideration-to come dropping A;
down upon one in this way! I'm that weak I must sij 
down !" she sighed, sinking into the nearest chair.. "Gimmy    i
a drop o' brandy, lass!" she said to Young Nan, who, a         I
tracted by the name of her beloved vagrant, had hurried ^
the door.
But Nan, instead of running for the brandy, suddenly :
threw up her arms in a burst of joy, exclaiming: 
"Ham! HamGow! Ohlmydearboy! Isityou? Isr 
it indeed you?" And she clasped her recovered treasure' 
to her bosom. 
"Yes, indeed, it is I, Nan! and ever so glad to see you,; 
old gal! And here is my wife. You remember Lona I*":*
said the tramp, gently extricating himself from the woman's. i
embrace, and presenting Mrs. Ham.
"Oh, yes, I remember Lona-Lona Pond    To be sure ir         L
do! She was lady's maid at Stony Fells and afterward at,     h
Hawke Hall. And she was your true and faithful sweet- 
heart! And she went out to the colonies with Mrs. Belle '
Isle on purpose to find you out there! And she did find        L
you, and she has brought you back, else you might never        n
have come! And I bless Lona !" exclaimed Young Nan,
warmly embracing Mrs. Ham, who blushingly returned her
caresses.
"And here is a dear friend and patron of mine, a gentle- 
man who came over in the same ship-Mr. Hamilton Gow- ' I1
er," said the tramp, turning to indicate his fellow traveler,
t                                                      L~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~I
-a



<pb n="117"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                  117
who had withdrawn a few paces from this family meeting;
but who, on hearing his name uttered, came up and per-
mitted himself to be presented in form.
"But come in, all of you, and make yourselves at home !
Don't stand out there a moment longer!  Take seats l"
said Young Nan, hospitably, bustling about, dusting chairs
and handing them to her visitors.
"Are you going to gimmy a drop o' brandy? Or are you
going to lemmy sink and die here for the want of it?"
querulously demanded Old Nan Crook of her daughter, as
she glared around upon her visitors.
"Ugh! she's a triall If she wasn't my own mother I
couldn't stand her! She gets queerer and queerer every
day, Ham, lad !" whispered Young Nan, confidentially, to
the tramp, as she dusted a chair for Mrs. Ham.
"But you must stand her, Nan, dear, because she is your
mother and because she is old. Stop! I will get the brandy
for her 1 I know the old hiding place of the bottle-or I
ought to know it 1" laughed Ham Gow, as he went to the
furthest end of the strong room, drew away a movable
wooden cupboard and displayed a deep black hole in the
thick wall of the tower, from which he took a bottle of
brandy; then from the cupboard he got a glass, and he
turned to cross the room, when Old Nan screamed at him:
"Push that cupboard back agin' the wall, you officiousing,
interfering interloper, you I"
Ham Gow laughed, replaced the cupboard, and carried
the brandy bottle and the glass to the old woman.
"How much shall I give you, granny?" inquired the
tramp, as he drew the cork with his teeth, while he held the
bottle in his right hand and the glass in his left.
"Fill it up full, you fool!" 
Now as the glass was a half-pint tumbler, the young man
naturally hesitated to obey the order.
"Fill it up full, you idiwut! Do you think as I'm a
babby to be hurt by a little likker? And there's good likker,
good brandy, made outen honest grape juice! None of
your mannerfactored pizens! None of your bensins, nor
kerosins, nor no other sort o  'sins, spiced up and sweetened
up to deceive the people 1 Gimmy a glass full, or lemmy
have the bottle myself" exclaimed the crone, fast losing
temper.



<pb n="118"/>
118          THE TEST OF LOVE 
"Oh, let her have it, Ham, for peace sake! It won't! i,
make her tipsy  If that is proof brandy, she is brandy Li
proof!" said Young Nan.
"Oh I Since when have you taken to punning?" laughed .'
Ham.
But he did not fill the tumbler for Old Nan; he was not 
very particular, but his conscience really would not allow 
him to administer half a pint of brandy, even to a fireproof
old crone. He placed the bottle and the glass on the table
near her, and was turning away, when Old Nan accosted 
him:
"Who is that with you ?"
"The young woman is my wife, Lona Pond that was. 
Let me bring her to you, granny. You knew her?"
"Oh, yes! I don't mean her so much, either  I heard  j
you interdooce her to Young Nan. I'll kiss her presently, ':!
because she went out yonder after you and brought yon ,
home to us," said Old Nan, speaking of Lona Pond's voy- :.i
age three-quarters around the globe as if she had only gone ' 
out of doors to call her lover in from an apple orchard or '
a turnip field. "I don't mean her; I mean the gentleman." ':
"Oh-he is-is a friend and benefactor of mine-came' i
over in the same ship," replied the tramp.         'i
Old Nan bent her beetle brows and brought her sharp ?I
blue eyes to bear upon the stranger, and then asked:  i
"His name?"                                       it
"Mr. Gower-Mr. Hamilton Gower," replied the young I'
man.
"'Mr. Gower-Mr. Hamilton       lower'-is that his 'J,
name ?" inquired Old Nan, sipping the brandy to which she 
had bountifully helped herself, while still sharply scrutinisz  i
ing the visitor.
"Yes, that is his name," replied Ham Gow.
"Humphl Well! Maybe he is Mr. Hamilton Gower!
Maybe he is; but-I don't believe it," said Old Nan, and
she swallowed the rest of her brandy at a gulp.
"What do you mean, granny?" inquired the tramp.
"Never you mind what I mean  Fetch your wife here 
Don't bother your brains about what I mean! It is none
of your business! Fetch your wife herel And after I
have kissed and done with her, you may fetch him to me-
out of politeness, you know."



<pb n="119"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                  119
Ham Gow went to Lona, who was sitting by the side of
Young Nan, with the woman's arms around her waist, and.
took her by the hand, and saying:
"Come, speak to the old woman," led her up to Old Nan.
"Well, my lass, you went and fetched him, didn't you? 
And you married him, out of hand I And now you'll steady
him, I know I Come, gimmy a kiss  So I that was as hearty
as if it had been gin' to Ham 1 Ath my lass if you knew
what you had married in him I If you knew his rale rank,
and yours as his wife 1" said Old Nan, as she warmly kissed
and embraced the young woman.
"There! Now fetch the other fellow to me-the im-
postor!-Mr. Gowilton Hammer, is it? Yes! fetch him."
The tramp went to the gentleman, and said:
"I beg pardon, but will you humor the old woman, sir?
She wants to speak to you. And will you please to excuse
her whatever she may say? She is very queer. I think
she is falling into her second childhood, and is going to be
a very bad child indeed."
"Why, of course I will go to herl What, my hostess?
Certainly ! I was only waiting her convenience and permis-
sion to pay my respects to her 1" said Mr. Gower, with a
smile, as he arose and followed his friend to the "presence."
"How do you do, Mr. Howilton Gammer? I am proud
to make your acquaintance," said Old Nan, without waiting
for the stranger to be formally introduced.
Mr. Hamilton Gower bowed with as much ceremony as if
he had been presented to a duchess.
"I think I have seen you before, Mr. Gammilton Hower,"
she added, looking sharply into his eyes. "Yes, I'm sure
I've seen you somewhere."
"Quite likely; I have often been there," solemnly replied
the visitor.
"And your father, alsol"
"Just as probable I I once rejoiced in an honored rela-
tive of that denomination who was in the habit of 'walking
to and fro on the earth, and going up and down in it,'"
coolly replied the young man.
"Humphmph    ph I humph 1" mumbled Old Nan, with a
nod at every "humph." "Eggsactlyl You couldn't have
hit it closer, Mr. Howilton Gammer ! You struck the pupil



<pb n="120"/>
110          THE TEST OF LOVE 
of the bull's-eye that time  And now I won't keep you any    |
longer, Mr. Howdoyou Gammon I"
"Then I will bid you good-by, ma'am," said the young 
gentleman, with another ceremonious bow.
"Good-by, Mr. Howdoyou Gammon I" responded the sar- ' 
castic and inhospitable Old Nan.'
"Why, you are not going to leave us, sir?" anxiously in-
quired Ham Gow, as they left the "presence."
"I shall take a walk over to Hawke Hall. I shall return.
here before night. Meantime, dear Ham, be cautious." 
"Oh, I am safe here. I have a sure hiding place. Nor
can I be taken by surprise !" 
"Well, but be very cautious," replied the young gentle- 
man, and then he bade good-by to the two women, explain- 
ing that he was going out for a stroll, but would return be-  C'
fore night.
And Mr. Hamilton Gower left Demondike and took his
way toward Hawke Hall, never dreaming of the strange
developments that awaited his discovery in the ancient seat
of the Earls of Hawkewood. 
CHAPTER XIII                        /
AT HAWKE H4LL
WREN Mr. Hamitlon Gower stepped forth from the
Ruined Tower upon the rocky beach, the vast expanse of the 
blue sea spread out before him, shining with dazzling radi-  I
ance in the sunlight of that bright August morning.
But he turned his back on the flashing and blinding 
scene, and, following the course of Demondike on its left or
west bank, walked in an inland and northerly direction to-
ward Hawkewood Park. 
He saw the Hall dimly outlined on the background of its 
woods in the extreme distance of the horizon before him.
But between him and the Hall lay three miles of rolling
downs, now covered thickly with the golden gorse and glis-
tening in the morning sun like veritable gold. 
Mr. Hamilton Gower paused for a moment to contem.
plate this scene.



<pb n="121"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   121
"To judge from appearances, these should be the 'gold
fields,' and the harvest should be reaped with scythe and
sickle, and not gatheerd with pickax and shovel," he said,
with a smile, as he resumed his walk along the rude path on
the brink of the chasm and pursued it until he came to the
bridge.
It was a safe bridge now, defended by strong walls.
He crossed it to the east side of the chasm and entered
upon the turnpike road leading from the village of Hawke-
ville to the manor of Hawkewood.
As he walked on, meditatively looking from right to left
and back again upon the familiar scenes of his childhood,
and whose pleasantest memories were associated, it must
be confessed, with Ham Gow, the boy tramp, he saw three
men before him in the distance on the road, walking slowly,
so slowly that without the slightest effort to do so, he soon
overtook them.
They were old acquaintances. He recognized them at
once-Phil. Penn, the locksmith; Jim Tree, the tanner;
and little gray old Tommy Proddy, the cobbler-the con-
stant cronies concerning whom Hawkeville made a bull by
saying that:
"Them three always hunted in couples."
"Good-morning," said the young gentleman, pleasantly,
as he overtook them.
The three men turned about and stared stupidly. Only
old Proddy returned the salutation by taking off his very
ragged old hat and bowing low, and saying, reverently:
"My sarvice to your honor."
"Do not let me detain you," said Mr. Hamilton Gower
to the two silent men, who thereupon gave their forelocks
a pull by way of an obeisance, and slouched on their way.
Old Proddy lingered respectfully, hat in hand, until the
young gentleman joined him, when they walked on, not
quite side by side, for the old cobbler kept meekly a step in
the rear.
"My mates there, sir," he said, nodding toward the two
men, "don't mean to be noways oncivil, sir, but they have
that on their minds as e'en a'most makes idiwuts of 'em,
and so naterally they forget their manners and wot's jew to
the honorable gentry," sold Old Proddy, partly recognizing
the rank of his chance companion.



<pb n="122"/>
n2a           THE TEST OF LOVE/
"Have they troubles?" inquired Mr. Hamilton Gower,    ,
ready enough to draw the old man into conversation. 
"Troubles, is it, sir? Ah, sir, your honor may well ask! t J
Look at 'em, sir; that long, dark man, all skin and bone, -
as looks as if he'd tanned hisself in his own bark vats and
dried hisself on his own stretchers, him is Jim Tree, the
tanner, the father of eleven children, the oldest a gal of
fourteen-a honest, hard-working man as ever lived, yet
they be all well-nigh starving."'
"I am very sorry to hear that l" said Mr. Hamilton
Gower.
"And look at t'other un, your worship; that little red-
haired feller, so thin and white and vapory as he minds me
of nothing so much as a crystyliss, arter the moth have .
gone outen it-half gone in a consumption hisself, sir, and a  :
sickly wife and seven little uns; yes, and an old, helpless  a?
feyther and mawther! Him's Philly Penn the locksmith,   '
as honest and hard-working as Tree, and his folks a-starving
as bad !" 
"This is terrible!  And how is it with yourself, my 
friend ?" inquired the young gentleman.
"Pretty bad, sir! Pretty bad, though all my children  *i
being growed and gone to do for themselves, me and the  '|
missus can manage to knock along somehow or another."
"What is the cause of this suffering?" inquired the   '
young gentleman, with growing interest. 
"Why, the new lord, sir, for certain I You be a stranger 
to these parts belike, sir, and you don't know but the new 
lord ain't one of the old anshunt r'yal nobility o' Hawke- 
wood, sir; not one of the r'yal Hawkes, sir; but a new man
wid a new name, a sort of a use-upper, sir, as we none of us 
don't have no reverence for."
"Is he a hard landlord?"
"Oh! hard, your honorable worship; flint, cast iron, 
neither millstones ain't no harder nor that use-uper's 
heart ! He riz on us all, sir, soon's ever he come inter the 
estate."
"How did he do that?"
"Oh, every way, sir, every way except the wages! He .
didn't riz on them I He riz on the rents and lowered on
the wages."
"That was certainly very unjust and crueL"



<pb n="123"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   128
It wa, sir; and he had the power to do it  The Aria
o' Hawkewood own the willage of Hawkeville, as well as
every inch on ground between the forest and seal But the
old, anshunt r'yal nobility never grinded the faces of the
poor like this use-upper does  You'll excuse me speaking
so free, your honor?" inquired the old man, with an hum-
ble, deprecating yet keen glance into the face of the young
gentleman.
"I am very willing to hear you speak. I am interested
in what you are saying," kindly replied the wayfarer.
"And, I don't know how it is, sir, but my heart seems
to warm to you like-I hope your honor'll excuse me say-
ing sol"
"I am very much pleased to hear you say so."
"Thanky, sir I Well, sir, as I was a-aying, the old, an-
shunt r'yal nobility of the Arls of Hawkewood never
grinded the faces of the poor, but cherished us wid good
wage and low rent, so that we wa'n't starved, but was com-
forted wid full and plenty, and able to lay by a penny for a
rainy day. Yes, your honor 1 Such was our happiness and
prosperity under the rule of the old, anshunt r'yal nobility
of the Arls o' Hawkewood !"
"And this new man, you say, cat down your wages and
raised your rent?"
"He did, your honor! He riz on us as soon as ever he
came inter the property. And for the first year, your honor,
we managed to keep from suffering, because our savings as
we had saved under the old, anshunt r'yal nobility eked out
our wage, and helped to pay our rent; but them savings
wouldn't last forever, and so, last winter, which it were an
uncommon hard winter, the most on us run behindhand in
our rents, and now we be t'reatened wid ejeetment !"
"This is a frightful injustice! But your friends there
cannot have suffered from having their wages cut down,
however they may have been injured in having their rents
raised. They are not laborers on the Hawkewood estate.
They are mechanics--I think you told me one was a lock-
smith and the other a tanner."
"That is so, your honor, and I, myself, am a cobbler, and
not one of the trree on us in the empl'y of the use-upper I
But we rent of him, and we have all had our rents riz to
a ruinous rate! And, besides, your honor, when wages on



<pb n="124"/>
14           THE, TEST OF LOVE 
he great Hawkewood estate goes down, while rent goes up,
-it do hurt all other sort o' work." 
"'In what manner? I wish to understand these matters,"
mid the young gentleman, showing much interest. 
"Well, this way, your honor! Take me, Tommy Proddy,  '
for an example. I'm a cobbler. I mend shoes and boats for  i'
a living! And Penn and Tree and dozens of other working-  i
men, both on and off the estate, used to give me their cns-
tom; but now that most on 'em have no more money than  '
enough to put bread in their children's mouths and keep a 
ruff for a little while over their heads, they can't afford to '
have their boots and shoes heeled and toed, you know, and
so the people go barefooted, and the cobbler doesn't get any  :'
work."
"I see; it is shameful to grind down the poor in such a  'i
way" 
"It is, sir! Now, there's Phil Penn  Look at the poor
fellow, sir! One foot in the grave and one out'n it! Last
winter, when the snow was on the ground, his shoes was so
far gone as his heels and toes were all out, as likewise was  :
all his children'. And I begged and prayed of him to let '
me put 'em all in order free, gracious, for nothing I But no, 
he would go barefooted before he'd go in debt or take a
sarvice as he couldn't pay for."
"But that was carrying an idea to extremity, wasn't it?"  '
"Well, sir, he calls hisself a Wesleyan Methody, but I  .
calls him a fanny tick! He says: 'Owe no man anything;  '
but love one another,' according to the Scriptures; but I
say, how can he love me, or how can I love him, when he
won't let me heel and toe his shoes nor his children's shoes,
though I should just enjoy doing it if I never got paid'
for it."
"You like your craft, then?"                         '
"Yes, your honor, I like my craft, and I like my friends !
Why, your honor, when I'm going 'long the road and sees a
man or a 'oman or a little chile wid a bad pair o' shoes on, '
I just longs to get hold of the shoes and heel and toe 'em, or 
do both, if the shoes 'quire of it, just for the satisfaction of 
seeing the broken shoes made whole again." 
"How long a time," inquired Mr. Hamilton Gower, re-  '
verting to the "previous question," "will your landlord give  .
you before proceeding to extremities?"



<pb n="125"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   125    l
'How long-why, sir, the order were for ejectment in ten
days if the rent wa'n't paidl Eight of the ten be gone,
your honor, and to-day is the ninth day, and to-morrow is
the last of grace I Me and my two neighbors be a reputation
from the tenants wot can't pay to ask a few days more."
"Do you think you will get it?"
"Lord knows, sir; I don't " replied the old man, in a
despondent tone.
"Or if you should get ten days more, do you think you
will be able to pay at the end of that term?"
"No, your honor, we know we won't be no more able to
pay then than we are now !"
"Then why do you ask for the extension ?"
"Well, your honor, let alone our being anxious to keep a
ruff over our heads and over the children's heads as long
as possible, we feel pretty sure that though we won't be able
to pay the rent by that time, our landlord won't be in a
sitteration to turn us out of our homes," solemnly replied
Old Proddy.
"Why, what do you mean?" demanded Mr. Hamilton
Gower, struck by the deep gravity of the old man's manner
"Is-the new earl threatened with illness?"
"The use-upper is t'reatened with worse than that, your
honor," whispered Old Proddy, with deep significance.
"What is he threatened with, then?" inquired the young
gentleman.
"With the loss of his liberty and life, your honor. 'Tis
said, here and there, that the sword of Damascus hangs
over his head,'" replied the old man, in a voice of deep sol-
emity.
"What do you mean?" inquired Mr. Hamilton Gower, as
his thoughts flew back to the words he had overheard ut.
tered by Old Nan Crook in the Ruined Tower.
"Well, sir, 'tis an awful thing to say; but 'tis said, here
and there-and you might be told of it anywhere-that"-
here the voice of the old man dropped to a hoarse whisper
-"that the present use-upper did felinishly make way wid
*the late arl 1"
Mr. Hamilton Gower started, and stard at the speaker.
"Who says that ?" he demanded.
"His own lady wife was the first to say it, your honor;
and there's been enough to say it after her."
'«~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="126"/>
126          THE TEST OF LOVE
"His own wife! What-the countess?"
aHer as was Lady Gaylante Belle Eyes, the duke's darter;
but she did not know what she was saying, poor lady, or
maybe she'd never 'a' said it. Ah! it was the day the heir ,
was born, and died, sir; and she was very ill and belirious
in her lunatics, and she raved about the innercent baby's 
death being of a judgment on its father for that night's
work when he slew the young Aarl of Hawkewood in his 
bed."                                                    :.f
"Lady Hawkewood said this when she was delirious?"
demanded the young gentleman, in amazement.
"Ay-she did, sir; and much more to the same purpose,
too. They tried to stop her, but they might as well ha' tried
to stop the rush of Demondike's torrent arter a heavy
rain! She raved about seeing him come out of the arl's.
room the very hour of the murder, and of his pale and white
face, and his guilty looks, and suspicious conduct afterward.
And the doctors heard her, and the nurses, and the serv-
ants; and 'tis said my lard tried to get everybody out'n the
room, but didn't get to do it until they had all heern too
much. And the next day she died; and 'tis said that before
she died she lay for an hour or more like one stone dead, 
'cept that the breath hadn't quite left her body, when all of 
a sudden she riz right up out'n that, and fixing her eyes on 
the arl, as stood at the foot of the bed, and stretching out  '
her arm and pointing to him, she said:                   .
"'There stands the man that murdered Horace Hawke, 
Earl of Hawkewood '                                     ,
"And with the words on her lips she fell back on her  :'
pillow and died."                                        i
"Is it possible! Can that be true? What could have put
such a horrible thought in the poor lady's head?" inquired 
Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"No knowing, your honor, unless it was true wot she said
in her belirious lunacy-that she saw the use-upper come 
out'n the young arl's room the very hour when 'tis said the
murder was done." 
"And has this story obtained much credence in the neigh- 
borhood ?" inquired the young gentleman.                :
"Beg pardon, sir," said the cobbler, with a look of per-



<pb n="127"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   12l
"Do people believe it?" inquired Mr. Hamilton Gowsr,
simplifying his question.
"Believe what, sir?"
"That the late countess spoke the truth of her husband "
"Yes, sir; they do. More believes it nor disbelieves it;
and 'tis said, now and then, that it only wants a man bold
enough to bring an ackessation agin' the use-upper before
one of the honorable nobility of the magisters of the peace
to have him 'rested for the murder."
"How long has it been since Lady Hawkewood died?"
inquired the young gentleman.
"Well, it must 'a' been a matter of eight months, sir."
"And this affair has been talked about ever since, with-
out any steps having been taken to investigate it ?"
"Yes, your honor, and it is a-going to continny to be
talked about till that use-upper is 'rested and dealt with ac-
cording to lawyers."
"You people of Hawkewood seem to be a slow com-
munity."
"That we are, your honor! Slow and sure, and sartin "
exclaimed the cobbler, as if accepting a just tribute to his
native town.
"But how do you know that it may not be eight more
months before anything is done in the case?"
"I shouldn't know at all, sir, 'cept that it is said here and
there that something new have turned up wot will compel
the noble magisters of the peace to look inter this matter,
and as how the use-upper must be 'rested before many days,
and some say before many hours."
"And what is this that is said to have turned up ?"
"I don't know, sir. It is a dead secret among them as
knows, it seems, and will never be telled 'til the trial.
Here we are at the park gate, your honor I Tree and Penn
have gone in. Beg pardon, your honor," said the old cob-
bler, stopping and glancing furtively into the face of his
companion.
"Beg pardon for what, my friend?" smiled the young
man.
"For saying as I never did ia ll tbe days of my life1"
exclaimed the old fellow.
"You never did-what?" laughed Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"See sich a likeness as your honor do bear to the late
L.,
, :, 



<pb n="128"/>
1X8          THE TEST OF LOVE
demented young Arl of Hawkewood! Why, sir, your hon-
or face, from the top of the forrid down to the bottom of
the nbe, is a perfect similar to hizzen! I don't know r
about the mouth and chin, because it is hidden under a
heavy beard, which he never wore, sir. His lordship's chin
was as bare as a peeled potato  Beg pardon for my free-
dom, your honor I Be your honor coming in to take a look
at the park?"
"I think T will  There is no objection, I hope?" said
Mr. Gower.
"Not as I knows on, your honor! There didn't used to
be when the place was under the rule of the r'yal nobility
of the Hawkes; but I don't know how it is under the use-
upper," cautiously replied the cobbler.
"I think I will take the risk. I will stroll around the
grounds for an hour, and then wait for you at the gate
here. I feel rather anxious to hear the result of your inter- 
view with the usurper, as you call him," replied Mr. Ham-
ilton Gower.
"Very well, sir  It may not take a hour, but if I get
back here before you do, I will jest wait here for you," said
Old Proddy, as he trotted off after his two companions,
who were some little distance in advance of him.             !
Mr. Gower turned into a winding walk, deeply shaded
with forest trees, and followed it through all its turnings 
around the park.
He did not wish to go near the house, or expose himself 
to the view of any of the servants.
Like a ghost returned to the scene of its early life, he
wandered about his own park, not daring to show himself,
for an hour, and then returned to the gate, where Old 
Proddy stood waiting for him.
It required only a glance at the old man's distressed coun-
tenance to discover that his mission to his landlord had
failed. 
"I see how it is, Proddy; but take heart, my friend," 
said the young gentleman, as he joined the cobbler, and 
tbey walked to the gate together.
"Ah ! your honor, how can I take heart, when to-morrow     l
· .r Trees houseful of little children will be turned out
into the street, and Penn's sick wife and old feyther and
I



<pb n="129"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   129
mawther, and the babies, too, without a ruff to cover them ?"
said the old man, ready to weep.
"And yourself, Proddy ?" kindly inquired the young man.
"Oh! sir, as for me and the missus, we can pay for our
lodgings in some of the cottages for a day or two while
we turn ourselves around. No fear of us. It's the children
I'm thinking on, and the old aged, and the sick, wot will
all be withouten a ruff to cover them to-morrow night !"
"You don't mean to say that that man up there will push
matters to such extremity as this ?"
"I do mean to say that we will all be put out'n our house
to-morrow, in default of the rent I"
"How much is this rent, Proddy?" inquired the young
gentleman, after a little while, as they walked together along
the highroad leading to Hawkeville.
"I owes two quarters, sir, which comes to three pun ster-
ling. Tree owes for three, sir, which comes to seven pun
ten, and Penn for two, sir, which comes to one pun ten.
Twelve pun sterling altogether, sir."
"And for this three families, burdened with old age, sick-
ness and infancy, are to be turned into the street ?"
"Yes, sir; there's no help for it."
"You couldn't raise twelve pounds among your friends ?"
"No more'n we could raise twelve hunder, sir," sighed
the old man. "Oh 1 sich a thing never could have happened
in the time of the r'yal nobility of the Hawkes "
"And it shall not happen now if I can help it I Who else
are to be ejected to-morrow besides yourself and your two
friends ?"
"No one as I knows on, sir. The other tenants in the
willage and the farmers have managed to scrape together the
rent, by hook or by crook, and paid it. The poor laborers
are to be 'lowed until the first of September to pay, but if
they ain't ready with the money by that time, they go."
"What does Traverse, the steward, say to all this? He is
a humane man-or used to be. It must go very hard with
him to enforce all these harsh measures."
"Mr. Traverse, sir! Your honor knowed him, then.!"
exclaimed the cobbler, in surprise.
i          "Oh, yes. I have been in this neighborhood before,"
[r      laughed Hamilton Gower.
"To be surel Has your hoonr. really?"
.;'



<pb n="130"/>
180          THE TEST OF LOVE
"Really! But about Traverse, the steward. Is he zealous
in carrying out the new lord's policy?".
"Mr. Traverse, sir! Lord bless your honor, Mr. Traverse
ain't the steward any longer! He was give his walking pao
pers soon arter the use-uppe come into the estate."
"What! that faithful manager of the property dis-
charged; the tenantry abused and oppressed I Oh I my folly
is prolific in evil results that I never dreamed of  But it
can last but a month longer I Scarcely a month longer l"
exclaimed Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"Anan ?" questioned Old Proddy, with a look of helpless
and hopeless idiocy on his face, for he could by no means
understand the drift of the young gentleman's words.
"What was the pretext for Traverse's discharge?" de-
manded Hamilton Gower.
"Beg pardon, sir?"
"What was Traverse turned off for, then?'"
"Oh because my lard chose to be his own steward, your
honor, which was a pretty thing, wasn't it, for one who
pretended to stand in the shoes of the r'yal nobility I No,
your honor, if Mr. Traverse had not been turned off, he
would ha' gone off hisself, rather than grind the faces of
the poor, or do sich ha'sh deeds as is to be done to-morrow."
"Come here, Proddy! Let us sit down on this bank of
gorse for a little while. You are not in a hurry?" inquired
the young gentleman, leading the way to a grassy and gorsy
ridge on the right-hand side of the road.
"Me in a hurry I Ah, your honor I Why should I be in a
hurry to go home with bad news to the poor missus ? News 
that will keep her awake the whole night I No, your honor,  :
I am in no hurry," sadly replied Old Proddy, as he fol-
lowed.
They sat down on the ridge, and then the young gentle-
man looked up and down the road, and seeing no one in
shight, he unbuttoned his coat and drew from his breast
pocket a thick morocco wallet.
Old Proddy watched the operation with curiosity and in-
terest, wondering whether this pleasant-spoken young gen-
tleman was going to give him a half crown, a crown, or a
half sovereign.
"You said twelve pounds would settle the rent and save
the ejectment of three of the Hawkewood tenants-your-



<pb n="131"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                  181
self, Tree and Penn?" inquired the young gentleman, as he
opened the note folder and displayed a pile of Bank of Eng-
land notes.
"Yes, sir, I did," answered the old man, in a voice trem-
bling with a newly awakened hope that seemed so extrava-
gant he was afraid to entertain it.
"Here, then, Proddy, are two five-pound notes," con-
tinued Mr. Gower, drawing the slips from the pile, "and
here are two sovereigns," he added, taking a couple of gold
coins from a compartment and handing them, with the
notes, over to the old man, who stared at them in his open
hand, without daring to close his fingers upon the treasure.
"Put up the money, Proddy, or you will lose it. And go
back this afternoon with your friends, Tree and Penn, to
that self-appointed bailiff of Hawkewood estates, called
Lewis Manton, and pay your rent and secure your homes.
Don't fail to ask for a receipt, and don't trouble yourself to
be civil to the brute. He shall not hurt you. I say it-
Why, what is the matter now?"
Poor old Proddy was crying quietly.
"You don't understand! This money is not a gift to
you and your friends. It is a debt paid. And every shilling
that has been extorted from the tenants on the Hawkeville
estate, over and above the rent they have been accustomed
to pay, shall be refunded to them again with compound
interest. That is only just. So you need not feel under any
obligation," continued Mr. Hamilton Gower.
The old man took his hand and kissed it, while tears
dropped fast upon it.
"No, I don't understand, sir. I don't see how you has
the power to do it; but I believe in you, sir; and I love you,
the Lord knows I do, though I never saw you before this
day, sir-I love you like my own son, sir, if your honor will
excuse me for taking the liberty," sobbed old Proddy.
"'Excuse,' my old friend? Why, my heart accepts and
rejoices in your affection 1 And now let us go on," said Mr.
Hamilton Gower, rising.
Old Proddy helped himself up by means of his staff and
followed his benefactor.
They walked on together until they came to the stone
bridge across Demondike.
Then the young gentleman paused, and said:
. 



<pb n="132"/>
181           THE TEST OF LOVE 
"You are going to the village, I suppose, Proddy." 
"Yes, your honor. Yes, dear sir, I be going straight to
the willage to make glad the hearts of Tree and Penn and
their poor, scared families! And, oh, I wish your honor 
could look upon them and see their faces of joy as I shall
tell them I bring them glad tidings! Couldn't your honor 
manage it? It would be better than the circus, sir!" 
pleaded old Proddy.
"No, I couldn't manage it; I have something else to do.
But you shall tell me about it, for I shall see you again,"
said Mr. Gower, with a smile.
"Oh, I hope so, sir! I hope so, your honor !"
"Well, now, good-morning.   My way lies over the
bridge."
He shook hands with old Proddy, who detained his hand
to kiss it and to cry over it a little longer, and then they
parted.
Old Proddy trudged off toward the village with wonderful 
speed for one of his years-his feet being winged with the  )
delight of giving delight. 
Mr. Hamilton Gower crossed the bridge, and, following 
the course of Demondike, walked toward the sea. 
When he reached the Ruined Tower he found the two
Nans, Ham and Lona waiting for him.
Dinner was ready-an excellent dinner, beginning with a
bit of fine turbot, followed by a haunch of South Down
mutton, with the proper sauces and vegetables, roast pheas-
ant with guava jelly and celery, and, finally, tropical fruits
and nuts, and champagne, and port wine, and mocha coffee.
Mr. Hamilton Gower was truly amazed to see such a din-
ner set forth amid such rude surroundings.
Ham Gow laughed at him, and whispered:
"You needn't have any qualms of conscience on the sub-
ject of your bill of fare ! The fish came honestly out of the
sea  The mutton, without a doubt, from the Hawkeville
market; and the pheasant-a little out of season, to be sure
-from the Hawkewood preserves! As for the fruits and
wine, the worst that can be said of them is that they never
paid duty !"
"A repast provided by poaching and smuggling  Hardly
meat to say grace over; eh, Ham?  However, 'travelers



<pb n="133"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   188
must be content,' as Shakespeare, or some one else, said, or
might have said," laughed Mr. Hamilton Gower.
The party sat down to dinner and enjoyed themselves
greatly. Even Old Nan, who presided in a blue cotton
gown and a red bandanna head kerchief, was mollified and
gracious under the benign influence of the viands set before
her.
It was while they were still at table that Ham Gow said:
"We have heard it all from Mrs. Crook, sir! There is
no longer a doubt on anyone's mind that the present Earl of
Hawkewood 'made away with' his predecessor, as they
put it."
"Indeed! Is that true?" inquired Mr. Hamilton Gower,
slyly.
" True as-true! The late countess knew all about it, and
either confessed it on her deathbed or else betrayed it in
her delirium-it is hard to tell which, for both these state-
ments are afloat."
"Why is the present earl not arrested, then?" inquired
Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"Ah! there's just where it is! Nobody seems to have
the pluck to go before a magistrate and openly accuse him.
Why, thev say that from the bold way in which his lordship
carries himself he cannot have any suspicion of the dreadful
rumors that are abroad concerning him 1"
"No, that he has not," put in Young Nan, who was tack-
ling the wing of a pheasant with her hands and teeth.
"But they say summat has come out lately that aggra-
vates the case so it'll fetch things to a head and the false
yarl may be took up any hour now !" added Old Nan.
"What is this 'snmmat, then?" inquired the young gen-
tleman.
~i      "I don't rightly know. Nobody seems to. If so be he be
!       brought to trial for the murder of the late yarl, be you
coming forward to save his neck, sir?" demanded Old Nan,
turning suddenly upon her guest.
"I-what do you mean, maam ?" inquired Mr. Hamilton
Gower, in some cnfusion.
"Oh, nothing much! You are Mr. Howilton Gammer.
Well, maybe you are I Gimmy the breast o' that other pheas-
ant, wi' a-plenty o' white sauce and -guava jelly, Ham!"



<pb n="134"/>
18           THE TEST OF LOVE
said Old Nan, rising and stretching her arm quite across the
board to hand her plate to the carver.
No more was said on the subject of the possible trial.
When dinner was over, Mr. Hamilton Gower and Mr. 
Ham Gow lighted their pipes and strolled out upon the
beach, leaving the women to "clear up."
The beach was deserted. If it had not been so, the two
men would have turned their steps up along the banks of
Demondike.
"We must start for town to-night, Ham," said Mr. Gow-
er, as they sauntered along, "for you know it is absolutely
necessary that we should be in London to-morrow morning,
ready to receive the first possible news from our detective."
"Yes, of course, I see that," assented Ham Gow.
"Besides, it is not safe for our plans for us to stay here
a day longer. Old Mrs. Crook already suspects me," can-
tinued Mr. Gower.
"Oh, she is a witch! She is even more of a real witch
than she pretends to be," said Ham Gow, as he stuffed some
fresh tobacco into his pipe, drew a match on his boot and
lighted it-the match, not the boot.
"Ham," gravely inquired Mr. Gower, "what are those
two women to you ?" 
Ham Gow lighted his pipe, drew a whiff, slowly expelled
the smoke, removed the pipe from his lips for a moment,
and replied:
"You asked me that question years ago, when we used to
rob orchards-your own orchards-together."
"I know I did, but you could not give me any satisfac- 
tion then." 
"And I cannot now ! I knew nothing then, I know noth-
ing now, about the matter. I was taught to call the elder
woman granny and the youuger one mammy, in my in-
fancy; but later in my boyhood I came to learn, though I do
not know by what means, that these terms really mean noth-
ing, and that I had no claims of kindred on the women
that brought me up."
" Have they never spoken to you of your parentage ?"
"Never directly. Some extravagant hints have been
dropped by Old Nan, but I consider them nothing more
than vague surmises that had better not be entertained."
"Did you never question them on the subject?"



<pb n="135"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   185
"Yes, but never got anything in reply but what I have
told you-hints, surmises, absurd and extravagant  Only
one thing is certain: the two women have always loved and
cherished me as devotedly as if the elder had really been
my grandmother and the younger my mother, and I owe
them the duty and affection of a son," warmly added the
young man.
"A debt that I feel sure you will faithfully discharge,"
earnestly declared Mr. Gower.
"I mean to do so henceforth, sir, if I have never done so
before," said Ham Gow.
They strolled on, smoking, in silence for a little while,
and then the ex-tramp, taking the pipe from his mouth,
burst into a loud laugh.
"What is up now?" inquired his companion.
"I was thinking of the 'yarl,' as granny calls him; and
how if he were arrested for this supposed murder, it would
cap the climax of absurdity!"
Mfr. Gower echoed the laugh in which Ham Oow's words
began and ended.
"If now such should be the case, and the 'yarl' should
be arrested, and cast in prison, charged with your murder,
would you put in an appearance to save him ?"
"Not one day sooner than I shall do so under any cir-
cumstances. In fact, I should feel tempted to lie perdue a
little longer, to give 'my lord' full opportunity of enjoying
his new postion, before going forward to save his neck and
take his title!" said Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"Ha! ha! ha! I fancy he would be glad to have his
neck saved, even at that price! That remainds me of what
Granny Crook asked you-whether in the event of the 'yarl'
being brought to trial for the murder, you would come
forward to save his neck 1 Strange she should have asked
you that question."
"She either recognized me or strongly suspected my iden-
tity. I don't know which. She would not explain her
meaning when I asked her for it, nor, indeed, did I wish to
push the inquiry too closely. I am glad we are to leave the
neighborhood so soon."
"You don't want a premature discovery, sir."
"By no means!"
They sauntered on, smoking, for an hour longer, and
L



<pb n="136"/>
186           THE TEST OF LOVE
then, as the sun was sinking beneath the western waves, they
returned to the Ruined Tower, and enteerd the strong ;
room, which the women had now restored to order, and
where the neat tea table was set.
After tea, the three visitors took leave of the two women
at the Ruined Tower, and set out by starlight to walk to
Hawkeville to take the evening train to Penzance en route
for Southampton.
As the night was fine, the road good, and their spirits
were light, they stepped on briskly, talking cheerfully and
laughing gayly, so that the time and distance seemed short:
when they etnered the village of Hawkeville.
They would have to pass entirely through and beyond the 
village to the railway station that was half a mile out of
town.
As they passed down Market Street, which would have 
been dark but for the lights in the shops that were still open,
they saw groups of villagers here and there, and caught
fragments of conversation, sweet enough to the ears of Mr.
Hamilton Gower, but quite unintelligible to his companions.
"Ah, yes, sonnies," said the wheezing voice of a very old
man, who was holding forth to a little group of men, women
and children that stopped the way before a locksmith's
little, dingy shop. "Ah, yes, sonnies, a perfect gentleman  i
he was, as well as a perfect stranger, who didn't give his
name to Mr. Proddy, but telled him he had come down from
Lunnun town a purpose to see us righted. And it's my
opinion as he is the prince hisself, or some o' the r'yal fam-
ily of England as has heern of our wrongs."
"Wan't yer s'prised, Granddady Penn ?" inquired a voice
from the little group.
"S'prised? Ay, lad. When Mr. Proddy come inter the
shop where Phil was a-sitting wid his head in his hand
looking like a man gone crazy, and the women a-crying
and the children scared to death at they didn't know what, 
and I trying to comfort 'em all by telling on 'em as they'd
be sure to like t'rough it all, in comes old Mr. Proddy look-
ing like a angel, with his face all shining, and a gloriole
round his head, and says he:
" 'Peace be unto this house, and unto all that are in it,'
same as if he had been the parson come to pray over the



<pb n="137"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   187
sick. And then he holds out his hand with bright gold
money in it, and says:
"'Cheer up, Philly Penn   Here's money to pay your
rent, and Jim Tree's and mine, and all our troubles is over !'
"Then, sonnies, I was proper scared, for I t'ought as poor
old Mr. Proddy had been so left to his own devices as he
had committed highway burglary in his desperation, and
we'd all be sent to Bottommy Bay for it. But when I
looked at him ag'in, and saw his face shining like a angel's,
I knowed he couldn't ha' committed no crime, and then I
t'ought-"
But what old Grandfather Penn thought was lost to the
three travelers, who by this time with difficulty pushed their
way through the crowd and passed out of hearing.
A little further down the street a woman sat on the sill
of her front door, expatiating on the same subject to several
of her neighbors, who were standing before her.
"I had e'en a'most lost my faith in everythink, and was
ready to give up and die, when down comes this relief as
suddenly and as unexpectedly as if it had dropped out'n
the clouds  What I say is-"
But what she further said never reached the ears of the
travelers, who had again passed out of hearing.
At the end of the town they came upon a crowd of chil-
dren before a long, rambling house, with a tan-yard in the
rear.
One of the little girls was telling a story with much
vehemence, and evidently with great exaggeration.
She was saying:
"How he didn't wonder as men went raving mad and
burned ricks and housen, and mother cried, and cried, and
cried, and cried tubsful! And just then Daddy Proddy
come in with his pockets crammed full of golden guineas 1!
Oh, I tell you all what-"
What she had to tell them all was never heard by the
wayfarers, who hurried on beyond the sound of her voice.
"What on earth are they all-men, women and children
-talking of so excitedly?" inquired Ham Gow of the uni-
verse at large.
"Of some one who seems to have paid their rent and
I,       saved them from ejectment," said Mr. Hamilton Gower.
L



<pb n="138"/>
188          THE TEST OF LOVE
"Oh, that is it-is it? Well, I suppose it is I Come! we t
must hurry, or we shall miss our train."
The three walked rapidly on, and reached the station
just in time.
"Take a whole compartment for ourselves, Ham. We
don't want company," said Mr. Hamilton Gower.
The compartment was engaged, and the travelers en-
tered it.
It had three seats behind, and a sofa in front. The sofa
was given up to Lona, who gladly stretched herself upon
it to rest and sleep, while the two men, her traveling com-
panions, occupied the seats in the opposite corners.
They had scarcely got comfortably settled before the train
started.
Twice only during that night's journey were they dis-
turbed-to change train at Penzance for Southampton, and
to change at Southampton for London.
They reached Paddington Station at sunrise, stopped to
take breakfast at the Grand Southwestern Hotel, and then
took a carriage to go to their lodgings at the Crown and
Anchor, at the opposite end of London.
As soon as they reached the inn, Mr. Hamilton Gower   '
went to the office to inquire for letters.
"No letters, sir, but a telegram came about five minutes
ago. Here it is," said the clerk, handing the sealed en-  (
velope.
Mr. Hamilton Gower tore it open, and read:
"Benjamin Hutchings, Rosedale, Yorkshire, to Mr. Ham-
ilton Gower, Crown and Anchor Inn, Gaunt Street, Lon-  'I
don: Most important discoveries, only to be communicated
in a personal interview. Leave this within an hour. Ex- 
pect to reach London by the 10:30 P. M. train. Meet me."
CHAPTER XIV
THE HAUNTED WELL
Ma. HUTC[INGO, the most skillful of the secret detec-
tives on the force, had other and more ostensible ways of



<pb n="139"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    1S3
making a living than his hidden calling of tracking crim-
inals.
Outside of the "Force" he was not known as a detective,
or even suspected as one.
But his name in white letters on a black signboard over
the door of a small shop in the Borough, informed all and
sundry that he was a "Fancy Stationery and Newsdealer."
And here behind the counter he was generally to be
found when the secret service of the "Force" did not re-
quire' his presence elsewhere, on which occasions his wife,
son or daughter supplied his place in the shop.
Mr. Hutchings was also the agent for the sale of the
patent needle threader, an ingenious little instrument for
enabling the oldest eyes and fingers to thread the finest
needles with perfect ease; and for the patent knife sharp-
ener, which would put the keenest edge on any piece of
cutlery, from a razor to a woodman's ax.
These two agencies were of great service to Mr. Hutch-
ings in his calling as a detective.
They introduced him into families, schools, stores and
workshops, and put him on the most confidential terms with
men and women, boys and girls.
What woman or girl could resist the patent needle thread-
er, price only one penny, and such an invaluable assistant
to weak eves or clumsy fingers ?
What man or boy could resist the patent knife sharpener,
price only twopence?  Why, its saving in profanity alone
was inestimable !
Then, again, these specimens were very light and port-
able. The agent could carry in his pocket a dozen gross of
each without inconvenience.
Armed with these useful articles, "which no family
should be without," this detective could go anywhere un-
suspected, and, while teaching some old woman the perfect,
simple and easy method of threading her needle with the
patent threader, he could, if he wished, turn her mind inside
out and shake it free of any information she might be able
to give him upon any subject in which he might be inter-
ested.
On the termination of Mr. Hutchings' first interview with
his new employers at the Crown and Anchor, he hurried off
to his shop in the Borough and startled Mrs. Hutchings, as



<pb n="140"/>
140           THE TEST OF LOVE
that worthy stood waiting for customers behind the coua-
ter, by saying that it was necessary for him to raise a cer-
tain sum of money by the first of the ensuing month, and
that he should take a quantity of the patented articles for 
which he was agent and try to sell them wholesale to the
country dealers through Yorkshire, a locality through which
he had never traveled with them before.
Mrs. Ben was accustomed to these sudden and unexpected
departures, so she only said:
"As I have often remarked before, it is very strange you
can't foresee these things so as to give me time enough to
get you up comfortably for your journey. All your best
shirts are in the wash, and-- ""
"Never mind, my dear. Common shirts are best for a
journey, anyway. Put me up a couple; I shall not want ;I
more. Only be quick about it. I want to catch the four-
thirty express," said the agent for the patent needle threader
and patent knife sharpener, as he went behind the counter
and proceeded to take down from the shelves grosses of
these articles, and to pack them into a japanned tin box
with a handle in the top.
In twenty minutes he was off to catch his train, leaving
his wife to mind the shop, and without a suspicion that
her husband had gone to Yorkshire on any more serious
business than the one he had given as the object of his
journey.
He caught his train, and was soon speeding by express
toward the city of York.
He arrived there early in the morning, and had time to
get breakfast before leaving by another train for a certain 
village about forty miles west of the city.
Short as the distance was, he had to change trains twice, 
and at each change there was a delay of two or three hours,
so that it was afternoon before he reached his destination,
and then he had a ride of three miles by stage to the hamlet
of Rosedale, which was to be the scene of his operations.
He finally reached the quaint little place just as the sun:
was sinking to its setting in the western horizon, and the
shadows of isolated houses and trees were lengthening over
the broad moor in a dent of which the little hamlet nestled.
The stagecoach by which he had traveled from the last
railway station drew up before "Campbell Arms"--a pic-



<pb n="141"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   141
turesque little inn built of dark-red bricks, with a very
steep roof of many gables, and very large windows with
very small panes, and very high twisted chimneys with
hoods on their heads to prevent them from smoking the in-
mates of the house.
There was a swinging sign in front, on which was painted
the "Campbell Arms"-hieroglyphics which no one but a
professor of heraldry could have understood. And there
were large trees, under which stood benches, where the rus-
tic customers often sat while regaling themselves with
pipes and beer.
Behind the house were stables with red roofs, and there
were brown hayricks, and a few apple trees in an old-
fashioned garden; all of which made a pleasant rural pic-
ture fully appreciated by the Londoner.
As the stagecoach drew up before the door the landlady
herself came out to welcome any chance guests.
But besides Mr. Hutchings there were only three other
passengers, countrymen, who got out and went into the tap-
room to call for mugs of beer, and who, after drinking,
went off to their homes.
Hutchings walked into the parlor of the inn, and asked if
he could have a room and tea.
The landlady, a brisk little body, with black eyes, black
ringlets, a black alpaca gown and a cap trimmed with red
ribbons, answered that he could be promptly served with
all that he should be pleased to call for, and anything else.
Could he have his tea in that parlor ? he wanted to know.
Certainly; there were no other stopping guests, and he
could have his tea in that parlor.
And would the landlady pour it out for him?
The landlady would pour it out for him with pleasure;
but first she would send the chambermaid to show him his
bedroom.
Exit the landlady and enter the chambermaid-a stout,
high-comple'ioned country girl, in a blue dress and white
bib apron, and a white cap with blue ribbons.
She stood and courtesied silently, and then turned and
opened a back door and looked around at the guest.
The latter understanding by this pantomime that he was
expected to follow, arose and followed his conductress
through a labyrinth of narrow passages and up a corkscrew
L



<pb n="142"/>
142           THE TEST OF LOVE 
of winding stairs to a quaint little room, ending in a gable, 
with one white-curtained window and a small, white-cur-
tained bed, with a rug laid down beside it, and a three-
cornered washstand, with a towel rack on one side and a  i
looking-glass on the other. Plain, neat and clean was all
that could be said of it. 
Having shown the guest into this room, the silent girl
retreated.
There was at least plenty of pure water and fresh towels. 
The traveled treated himself to a good wash and a change
of linen, and went down into the parlor, where the landlady
stood presiding over a neatly spread little tea table.
"Hope you feel refreshed, sir," said the landlady, blithe-'i
ly, as she lifted and rang a little hand bell that stood upon 
the table.
A waiter in a white apron brought in, in answer to the
bell, a tray on which stood the teapot, a stack of dry toast, 
a rack of boiled eggs, and a covered dish, from which
emanated an aroma of mutton chops.
These were all neatly arranged on the table, and the land-
lady sat down to pour out the tea. 
"Much travel in this direction?" inquired the guest, as
he received a full cup from his landlady.
"Dear me, no, sir! The house depends mostly on the
neighborhood. If it had depended on travelers it would 'a' V
gone into bankruptcy long ago, sir. You see, the place is i
out o' line o' travel, sir."
"But tourists? Don't they come around in the summer 
and autumn?"
"Hardly one in a year, sir ! Why, there is nothing to at-
tract them in these moors, sir."
"Nor artists?"
"Lor', no, sir! What should fetch 'em ?"
"Why, have you no picturesque ruins, or interesting old
houses ?"
"No, sir; naught of the sort-though, now I think of it,"
added the landlady, after a thoughtful pause.
"Well-now you think of it?" questioned the traveler,
waiting for an explanation.
"I was a-going to say our own manor house, sir-".
"Well-your own manor house?"
"Rose Hill, sir."



<pb n="143"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    145
"Rose Hill? Is that your manor house?"
"Of course it is, sir. The seat of the Campbells, sir.
They owned all the hamlet of Rosedale, sir, which this house
is the Campbell Arms, sir."
"Yes; so I observed! What were you going to tell me
about Rose Hill ?"
"Why, sir, I thought if you were on the lookout for in-
teresting places, I should think that would be an interesting
place to visit. At least, so it had been considered ever since
it happened," said the landlady, with grave significance.
" 'It happened?' What happened?" inquired the guest,
pausing, with a bit of mutton chop on his fork.
The landlady looked at him with surprise and incredulity,
as who should say, "Is there a living man who has not
heard what happened ?"
"Was it a fire? Was it a flood? Was it a riot? Or-
what was it?" pursued the traveler, as he put the bit of
mutton chop in his mouth.
"Can it be possible, sir, as you haven't heard what hap-
pened at Rose Hill Manor House five years ago?" inquired
the astonished landlady.
"Let me see," said the guest, putting his right fore-
finger on his right eyebrow with the air of a man trying
to recall a circumstances vaguely remembered to full mem-
ory. "rt appears to me that I do recollect hearing of some
tragedy connected with the name of Rose Hill? What was
it, again, now? Oh! A man poisoned his wife there,
didn't he ?"
"Dear me, no, sir! naught of the sort I It was a young
girl, sir, who strangled her infant cousin, the heir, partly
in revenge for the cruel treatment of herself by his mother,
and partly in covetousness of his estates, to which she was
the next heiress. Surely, sir, you must have heard of the
trial of Margaret Campbell I"
"Oh, ay, ves I to be sure! I remember all about it now.
What a dreadful thing that was 1"
"Oh, I tell you, sir! And we had crowds down here
then. It was in my late husband's time, rest his soul, for
he was a good man. No complaint of want of custom then,
sir. Why, while the search and the inquest were going on at
the manor house it took all the hamlet to wait on the cus.
tomers here, sir. And for days and weeks afterward."



<pb n="144"/>
144          THE TEST OF LOVE
"It must have been an exciting time," said the traveler,
cracking one of the boiled eggs.
"It was, sir 1 And while it lasted the house here was as
full as it could cram both day and night. But when it was
over the custom fell off again, and the house got to depend
on the neighborhood for its support."
"There were three other travelers, besides myself, came
by the coach."
"All from the neighborhood here, sir! Went to Stock-
stone this morning by the stage, and came back this after- 
noon. No, sir! No stranger ever comes here but a commer- 
cial traveler, or bagman, as we call them here. You'll be 
something in that line yourself, sir ?" inquired the landlady,
dubiously.
"Yes, something in that line! I am traveling for the
sale of the patent needle threader, price one penny, in-
valuable aid to dim eyes or awkward hands, enabling an old 
woman of ninety, or a child of three years, to thread a;
needle 'with neatness and dispatch,'" quoted the traveler.
"A needle threader! For pit-tee's sake! What will they
be getting up next, I wonder I I thought, when the sewin
machine and the baby jumper were invented, they could not
go beyond that unless they had invented a boy spakner,
which might 'a' been useful. But a needle threader! Foi
pit-tee's sake! I'd like to see the instrument 1" said t
landlady.
"I am pleased with your interest in this inventi
ma'am, and you shall see it, and learn how to use it 
moment I have done tea, if you can spare me the timed
said the traveler.
"Oh! I can spare the time well enough. One barm
and waiter can attend to all the customers we have, and pl
half the time, as they do, the lazy things "       ;:
The traveler soon finished his tea, and the landlady
for a waiter to take away the service.
When the table was cleared and covered with a neat 
cloth, and the landlady and triaeler were seated at it, 
latter drew from his pocket a small pasteboard box, cont
ing about a gross of the new instrument.
Drawing one out, he handed it to the landlady, say'
"You see it is as simple as the needle itself! And y
can tell by merely looking at it how to use it."



<pb n="145"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   145
"Why, so it is  Why, so I can! Now, ain't it strange
that no one ever thought of inventing such a simple thing
before, as long as needles have been in use, and wimming
have been worritting their eyes out of their heads, trying to
thread fine ones?" exclaimed the landlady, in delight.
And the needle threader was, in fact, the very simplest
and most obvious of instruments.
It looked like a coarse number one needle, with a large,
funnel-shaped eye, but it was in reality a hollow tube, and
the needle to be threaded was to be shoved up the tube, until
its eye was even with the eye of the funnel, and then no
matter how fine the needle might be, or how dim the eyes,
or awkward the fingers that guided the thread, the end
could be easily passed into the funnel and was bound to go
right through the eye of the needle, for it could go nowhere
else.
All this Mrs. Keene saw at a glance, and she quickly
whipped a housewife from her capacious pocket, unfolded
it and selected the finest needle she could find and threaded
it in an instant with the needle threader.
"Well, there! I might ha' been five minutes trying to do
that with my own eyes and wouldn't ha' done it  Sir, I'll
take a shilling's worth o' these patent needle threaders; so if
I should happen to lose one I would have others to fall back
upon, for I'll never be without one-never I" she exclaimed.
"Madam, allow me to present you with a dozen. And if
you can recommend the article to your neighbors I shall be
more than repaid," said the gallant traveler, offering to the
landlady a paper of the instruments marked one dozen.
"Oh, thank you, sir! Recommend   I should think so!
Why, I don't believe there's a woman in the village that
won't buy as many of them as she can afford, for fear she
should get out of them and couldn't get any more! Yes,
sir, I shall recommend them everywhere !"
"Do you think the family at Rose Hill would patronize
me ?" inquired the traveler.
The landlady paused thoughtfully.
"The family at Rose Hill, sir," she said at length, "live in
the strictest retirement, and have lived so ever since it hap-
pened. There is no one there but the widow and her two
daughters, and one of 'em is afflicted."
"Ahl you mean the one who gave the most important
·



<pb n="146"/>
146           THE TEST OF LOVE
testimony against the accused young lady? You see, I be.
gin to recall the circumstances of the trial, now, since yoW
have mentioned it."                                '
"As why shouldn't you, sir, being face to face, as one
might say, with an eye-witness of the tragedy; leastways, o
the great fuss that was made about it! Yes, sir, the sam
poor, afflicted girl lives there still with her mother and si
ters. Some do say they haven't got any right to live the'
at all; because when the poor baby was murdered Margar
Campbell was the next heir; but as she is a conwick f
life, her estates perverted to the crown, which means to t
queen, I suppose! But, anyways, it seems her majesty m
be too good-hearted to turn 'em out, for there they be stl
living all to theirselves and keeping no company. A needi
threader, for pit-tee's sake 1" exclaimed the landlady, su
denly breaking off in her discourse to contemplate her ne
treasures.
The traveler recalled her wandering attention.
"Perhaps some of the old domestics there might patr
ize my wares."
"I beg pardon, sir?"
"Maybe the old servants might buy my needle threaders;
"Oh, yes! to be sure! Now I think of it, Granny Kee
-my late husband's sister-in-law, she was, sir, and s
keeps the gate lodge at Rose Hill now-she might like t
have some of them! You could tell her I recommended yo
to her, and she would show you over the place, sir! Ov
the grounds, I mean, of course, not over the house, tho
that is a fine show place, too, with the picture gallery 
the room Queen Mary Stuart slept in one night, and oth
interesting places; but the family being there, you can't
the inside of the house now, sir. But you can see 
grounds, and the well where the child was found. Oh, 
listen !" And here the landlady dropped her voice to a my
terious whisper. "They say it's haunted !"
"Haunted !" exclaimed the traveler.
"Yes, sir."
"What, the house?"
"No, sir; the well !"
"What, or who, haunts it?"  v
"The ghost of Margaret Campbell carrying the murder
child in her arms."



<pb n="147"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   147
The deep solemnity with which the woman spoke drove
the incipient smile from the lips of the traveler.
"How can they say the ghost of the murderess haunts the
well, when she is a convict several thousand miles away?"
he inquired.
"Oh, sir, they say she must have died out in them foreign
parts! She must have died, else how could her ghost haunt
the well, carrying the murdered child in her arms?" sol-
emnly inquired the landlady.
"But how do you know her ghost does haunt the well?
Who says it does ? Who has seen her ?" demanded the trav-
eler, with natural incredulity.
"Oh, sir 1 Plenty of people have seen it  Why, the old
coachman as has been in the family forty years, man and
boy, he seen it so often that he couldn't stand it, and he has
given warning, sir! he has, indeed, after forty years' serv-
ice ! And one of the young grooms run away without giving
any warning, and lost half a month's wages I You see, the
dry well is near the stable yard, sir, and the stablemen see
the most of the ghost! And there was my own dear de-
parted husband's own dear sister-in-law, sir-Granny
Keene, as keeps the gate-she was sitting along of the
coachman's wife in the stable cottage one night and stayed
late, and, as she was going home, with one of the stableboys
carrying a lantern to light her way, she came face to face
with the ghost, in a long, white sheet, and carrying the
child, all swathed in-'witej And Granny Keene fell down
in a fit, and the boy dropped the lantern and ran, yelling,
back to the cottage, and told the tale in such a wild, wan-
dering way that nobody could understand it; and the coach-
man and all the stableboys ran out to the dry well, but they
didn't see any ghost there, only Granny Keene lying down
among the damp weeds in a dead faint. And they lifted of
her up and toted of her to the coachman's cottage, and laid
her on the bed, and burned feathers underneath her nose,
and poured rum down her throat, and worked on her ever
so long before they could fetch her to! And then they had
to get out the pony chaise to take her back to the gate house.
Oh, sir, you see, there can't be any mistake about it! The
ghost of the murderess haunts the well with the murdered
child in her arms."



<pb n="148"/>
148           THE TEST OF LOVE 
"Do the family tolerate such a report among their:
mestics ?"
"I beg pardon, sir?"
"Sho! What do the widow and her daughters say to, 
this ?"
"There ain't but one of her daughters capable of sy
anything to it, sir I The other one is afflicted, as I told
And I don't know what they say to it. Granny Keene
the coachman's'wife don't see much of the ladies, and
they don't know how they take this dreadful thing, and
course, they can't tell me," continued the landlady.
"How far is Rose Hill from here?" inquired the trav
"Why, sir, not more than a mile. This is a part of
estate; this whole village is. I rent from the steward
my husband did before me, and his forefathers did bel
him."
"Which road should I take to go there?" 
"Why, sir, when you walk right straight out of
house, you turn to the left and keep right straight on, 
the mill and past the church, and the parsonage, and
patch of wood, and then you come to the park gate and
lodge. Granny Keene keeps the lodge, as I told you bef
and if you mention my name, I am sure she will be glad
see you, and if you show her the patent needle threader,
am sure she will be glad to buy a lot of them. Goodne
why, every time I go to see her she makes me thread do
of needles and stick 'em into a big, round pincushion re
for use. She will be glad enough of the needle threader
ways at hand !"
"I will be sure to submit them to her approval."
"I beg pardon?"
"I'll show her the instrument."
"Yes, sir; do."
The traveler arose and took his hat.
"You don't mean to walk, sir?" inquired the landlady.
"Certainly. It is only a mile. I may stay late--l
enough to see the ghost. How long do you keep open ?"'
"Oh, we close at eleven, but you can get in at any h
by knocking."
"Thank you," said the traveler, as he left the room.



<pb n="149"/>
THIE TEST OF LOVE                   149
CHAPTER XV
THE SPECTER
WHEN Mr. Ben Hutchings, secret detective from Scot-
land Yard, ostensible agent for the sale of the patent needle
threader and the royal knife sharpener, and best known as
stationer and newsman in the Borough, stepped out of the
Campbell Arms, he paused for a moment to look up and
down the quaint little village street-if street it could be
called, which seemed only a country road, grass-grown on
the sides and flanked by scattering little shops and houses
of various sizes, built of stone, brick, or wood, or a mixture
of all three, and all except the shops, which were even with
the sidewalk, standing back from the street, and having
little vegetable and flower gardens before them.
But the last faint glow of the long twilight was fast
fading on the western horizon, and the full moon was rising
in the east, and Mr. Hutchings, seeing that he had no time
to lose, turned to the left, as he had been directed, and
walked rapidly down the street, with the twilight glow be-
hind him and the rising moon before him.
He passed the blacksmith's forge, the wheelwright's shed,
the saddle and harness maker's shop, seeing on the opposite
side the village doctor's office and surgery, and the grocer's
store, where also the post office was kept.
He passed the mill, and the rustic bridge that spanned
the mill race, and he passed the old Gothic church of St
Asaph's, which had a long, romantic history of its own, and
the picturesque rectory, seeing on the opposite side rustic
huts and gardens, with long shadows thrown toward him
by the rising moon.
And finally he passed on until there was nothing but the
vast rolling moor on the right and left, with its boundaries
lost in the obscurity of the distant horizon.
At length, as the road began to ascend one of the swells
of the moor, he saw before him on the height, crossing
the scene, the high stone wall of a park, with an iron gate
and a lodge on its right, to which this road directly led.
He walked slowly up the gradual ascent until he reached
the great iron gate of the walled park.
i                                                                        2



<pb n="150"/>
150           THE TEST OF LOVE 
The place looked solitary and deserted. Above the
wall could be seen the tops of stunted evergreen trees.
the right of the iron gate was the little Gothic lodge, wi
a solitary light gleaming from a tiny window in the ga
end of the roof. 
The traveler found the gate fastened, though it was as yf
quite early in the evening.
He rang, and waited, but received no response to his f
summons.
He rang again, a louder and a louder peal. 
Then a window on the ground floor was cautiousl
opened, letting out a little stream of light, and a trembli
voice inquired:
"Who's there?"
"A friend from the Campbell Arms, with a message fro
Mrs. Keene," replied the traveler, in cheery tones.
"Eh! then wait till I send the lad to open the gate,'
said the voice within, and the window was closed, and th
door of the lodge was opened, letting out a stream of ligh
upon the shrubbery, and a boy came forth and unlocked t
small side door of the gateway that was used by passenge
As the lad opened the gate and stood in the line of ligh
from the cottage door, the traveler saw that he was a sandy
haired and freckled-faced little fellow of about twelve yea
of age.
Mr. Hutchings passed through, leaving the boy to faste
the gate, and walked up to the lodge door, where he was m
by a little, thin, old woman with a fair, pale face, and sca
gray hair, surmounted by a high-crowned, white muslin ca
She wore a dark calico dress, with a white handkerch
crossed over her bosom, and a white apron tied around h
waist.
She welcomed the visitor in a friendly manner.
"You come from Peggy Keene, do you, my man? Now
whal do Peggy Keene want of me at this time o' the ev
ing ?" she inquired, bending rather sharp blue eyes upon th
speaker.
Then, seeing that he was not one of the servants fro
the inn, and that he might be a gentleman, she hastened
say:
"I beg your pardon, sir. Please walk in. Any friend
Mrs. Keene is very welcome to me."
. .I



<pb n="151"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   151
The traveler bowed to the old dame with as much respect
as if she had been a duchess, and stepped into a neat room
with sanded floor, whitewashed walls, white-curtained win-
dows, clean, oaken chairs and tables, a tall corner cupboard,
a tall corner clock, and between the two last a red chimney-
place, in which burned a little fire, and over which sang a
little copper kettle.
A little table stood in the middle of the floor, and on it
was arranged the frugal supper of bread, cheese and cold
corned beef.
The old woman drew forward her own armchair, and
begged her visitor to be seated.
"Do not let me interrupt your supper," said Mr. Hutch-
ings, as he took possession of the chair.
"Eh, sir! that can wait. The lad, Zach, helps in the
stable up at the great house, and he have just come in to
his supper; but he can wait. He is my grandson, sir, and
a great trial, too. And he lives with me, in course. Now,
please-if it be no offense-what did Peggy Keene want?"
"She wished me to show you a curious little instrument
called a needle threader, by which the poorest eyes can
thread the finest needle," replied the traveler, taking the
little box from his pocket, selecting an instrument, and
handing it to the dame, who looked at it curiously, under-
stood the way of using it at sight, and exclaimed:
"A needle threader! Well, well! I thought when kerry-
sene' and lucifers was inwented, we had got to the werry end
f inwentions! But-needle threaders! Well, well! They
must cost a sight of money!" she said, longingly contem-
plating the little instrument that she held between her
finger and her thumb.
"No, indeed! They cost only a penny apiece !" exclaimed
the agent.
"Only a penny apiece! Bless and save the man! does he
think a penny is not a sight o' money for the likes o' me?"
sharply inquired the dame, who had lost half her reverence
for the visitor on discovering that, after all, he was only a
traveling agent for the sale of a patented article.
"If you think the price too high, madam-   " com-
menced the agent, in a conciliatory tone; but she inter-
rupted him:
"I'm not saying the price is too high for other folks!



<pb n="152"/>
1,5          THE TEST OF LOVE 
for Peggy Keene, now, who makes lots of money from b heri
public! But for me, now! Why, how much do you thina ~/
I have got to live upon, anyhow ?"                 ; i:
"I am sure I don't know, madam. I hope it is enough.']
"Well, it ain't, then. I get the free use of this house for
tending the gate, and that's all I get 1 And the boy, theran.
gets three shillings a. week for helping in the stables, and
that's all he gets! And out o' them three shillings a wek':
we have got to buy meat and bread, and tea and sugar, ibei
sides hats and shoes and trowsies for him, and everything l
else in the world."
"Your lines are hard, ma'am," said the detective, in afj
sympathetic tone.
"Ay, they just are, then I" assented the dame.
"In that case, pray permit me to present you with a box
containing a dozen of my best needle threaders," said thei
agent, in an insinuating tone, offering her a small packet,'
"Ah, sir, you are too good !" exclaimed the old dame, withi.
all her respect for the vendor reviving.
"Nay, do not hesitate to accept my little offering, which I
make with great pleasure I Ah ! I was once blessed with an;
aged mother myself !" added the detective, with a sigh.
"Was you, indeed, sir? Just see that, now!" exclaimed,
the old dame, in a tone of great surprise at such a strange
coincidence. "An aged mother yourself! Well, there! Yesj
sir, I'll take the thread needlers, and thank you, too, seeing
as you had an aged mother yourself."
"And perhaps this young gentleman here would like to-
possess a patent knife sharpener, warranted to put the sharp?
est edge upon any piece of cutlery, from a razor or a pens
knife to a spade or an ax," suggested the agent.
"Oh, just wouldn't I, though! Oh, my eyes !" exclaimed
the youth in question, who was not troubled with bashful'
ness. "But I haven't got no knife to sharpen," he added;
with rueful remembrance. 
"That is a pity; but perhaps that misfortune may bei
remedied! Perhaps I may be able to find a knife, as well,
as a knife sharpener, to reward a smart young chap whoi
works to help his grandmother." 
"And round a haunted old well as is enough to curdle
your blood and make your hair stand up straight on yer?
ead!" put in the "young man," to augment his merits.



<pb n="153"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   153
"'Haunted ?' "repeated the detective, catching at the one
word with an air of curiosity and interest that was not alto-
gether assumed.
"Yes! haunted! haunted awful   Arks granny, if you
don't believe me," returned Master Zach.
"Oh, my dear sir! Far be it from me the sacrilege of
casting incredulity upon the statements of a pious youth
who supports his aged grandparent," solemnly replied the
detective.
"Well, then, you just arks granny, if you can't believe
me ! Just arks her. Ah I she knows! She just does!" ex-
claimed the youth, resentfully, misunderstanding the words
of the detective, and imagining himself to be doubted and
reproached.
The detective turned an inquiring glance toward the old
dame.
He was very anxious to get to the bottom of this ghost
story, for he saw in it the means of elucidating the mystery
of that murder for which Margaret Campbell had been
condemned to transportation and penal servitude for life.
"Oh, yes, sir," said the old dame, with a deep sigh, "it is
too true ! the boy tells the truth I The well is haunted, sir !
it is horribly haunted 1 There's a-many people as don't be-
lieve in ghosts, but if they had seen what I saw at the well
one dark night last month, they'd never again misdoubt as
he dead do walk!"
\I never misdoubted itl I have heard too much and
seen too much to misdoubt it I" solemnly replied the detec-
tive.
"Ah, sir, but I'm glad to hear you say that ! It is good
to meet a sensible gentleman sometimes  So many don't be-
lieve ! There's our minister, though he is a learned man and
a good Christian, he don't believe in the ghost I saw that
night. what turned my blood to water and my bones to jelly,
so that I fell down for dead! But if he'd seen it! Ahl
if he'd seen it " sighed the old dame, clasping her hands
and raising her dim, blue eyes.
"Has anyone else seen it besides yourself?" sympathetic-
ally inquired the traveler.
"Oh, yes, sir! This boy here, he was with me at the
time, carrying a lantern to light me through the yard. 



<pb n="154"/>
154           THE TEST OF LOVE
had been sitting with the coachman's wife, sir"-andii
the dame told the story of her fright at the well just al
traveler had already heard it from the landlady of
Campbell Arms.
"Has the apparition been visible since that night?"
quired the traveler.
"Anan?" questioned the dame. 
"Has the ghost been seen since ?"
"Oh, yes, sir  Yes  Every night between midnight
morning that ghost has been seen by anybody that 
pened to be about at that hour; and always wrapped i
long white sheet that trailed upon the ground, and alw
carrying the murdered baby in its arms and weeping o
it-oh! weeping as if its heart was broken, and fit to br
anybody else's heart, as well as to scare 'em to death!
"I didn't tell you before, sir! I didn't like to! but
course we all on us knows whose ghost it is! It's as p
as daylight !" said the old dame, in an awful whisper.
"Whose?" inquired the detective, in the same hu
tone.
"Why, of course, hers, sir! Margaret Campbell's!
must have died out there on Bottommy Bay, and now
spirit is condemned to come back here and wander e
night and go through the motions of her bloody deed, all,
dumb show! And no wonder her spirit can't rest!
course, you have heerd of Margaret Campbell, sir?"
"Oh, yes! I think most people have heard of her
these realms !"
"Yes, sir, to be sure they must have! Well, sir, it's 
garet Campbell's ghost as haunts the dry well, carrying
murdered baby in her arms and weeping over it fit to bre
your heart."
"I have no doubt of it in the world! And I should l
to see it above all things."
"Oh, sir, wouldn't you be affeard?"
"Why, no; why should I be? What harm could the gh
do me?"
"But the sight of it, sir, would turn your blood to water
"The sight wouldn't affect me in that way! You say 
can be seen every night between midnight and morning
inquired the traveler.
"I say it has been so seen whenever anybody has 
9~            ^



<pb n="155"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   155
near the old dry well at that hour to see it," explained the
old dame.
"Look here, ma'am ! I have the very greatest curiosity
and desire to see that wonder, with my own eyes! Now, if
you could manage it for me so that I would not be consid-
ered a trespasser, I would make it worth your while to the
tune of two guineas," said the traveler, placing two gol? -
sovereigns and two silver shillings on the table before her.
"Two pun-two? Great Heaven!" gasped the old dame;
"more than Zach could yarn in two months! What is it
you want me to do, sir? I would do anything in the world
-honest-for two guineas."
"I only want you to guide me, or to send some one else
to guide me to the dry well, or to some spot from which I
can have a view of the well between midnight and day,"
said the traveler.
"To-night, sir?" gasped the old woman, turning pale.
"To-night," answered the traveler; "I wish to test this
matter for myself."
"And-would you want-anybody-to stay there till they
saw the ghost?" faltered the old dame, who was powerfully
shaken by the conflict between her fears of the ghost and
her desire for the guineas.
"No, I only want some one belonging to the place to go
with me to the spot to quiet the dogs, who would bark at
e as a stranger, and to prevent me from being mistaken for
a\trespasser, who am only an inquisitive commercial trav-
eleC. My companion might then leave me to watch alone
for he apparition."
"There, now! that's what I call fair and above board!
Zach, my son, you will go with the gentleman, like a good
boy," said the old dame, in persuasive tones.
"No! I wunnot   I dunnot want to see the ghost again,"
answered the boy, with his hair on end.
"But if I give you one of the shillings, Zach, to spend
as you like."
"No I"
"If I give ver both shillings, Zach ! Come, now," coaxed
the dame.
"No! I wunnot! I dunnot want to see the ghost, not
at no price !" answered the boy, intrenching himself behind
a mulish obstinacy.
L.



<pb n="156"/>
156           THE TEST OF LOVE
"But if I give you a four-bladed knife, with a 
knife sharpener, such as no boy or man in the whole ne
borhood has got-if I give you these in addition to the
shillings your grandmother has promised you, how the
inquired the traveler.
The boy hesitated. The battle between his terror and
cupidity was wonderful to behold.
"I'll-I'll take you to the withered pear tree and
till the dogs stop barking; but I won't take you no ni
nor I won't stay no longer," he said.
"But where is the withered pear tree ? inquired the
tective.
"It is right outside the stable yard. The stable gat
locked, so you couldn't get in there, anyway, but you
have a full view of the old dry well and the fir wood w
the ghost walks from the pear tree."
"It is a bargain, then. You shall take me to the wit
pear tree, introduce me to the dogs as a friend of your
that they won't eat me, or even object to me, and then
may leave me there alone to watch for the ghost."
"All right, and you'll give me the four-bladed knife
the pattink sharpener, and granny'll give me the two 
"Yes, assuredly," replied the traveler.
"But we needn't go till nigh midnight, nohow. It
arter midnight when me and granny seen it, that time
had been a-sittin' up long of the coachman's 'oman,
was ill," said the boy.
"Very well! We will not go until near midnight
Mrs. Keene will give me houseroom until that time," 
the traveler.
"That I will, sir, and welcome! And now, as you 
stay, won't you take a bit of supper with us ?" inquired 
Keene.
The traveler declined, but begged that Dame Keene 
her grandson might sit down and sup without ceremony.
They followed his advice.
After they had finished their meal and the dame
cleared the table, and set the two tall tallow candles in
candlesticks upon it, she said:
"Now, sir, if you will excuse me, I will go upstairs
bed, on account o' my rheumatics; and you and Zach
....



<pb n="157"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   157
sit here until it is time to go to the haunted ground. You'll
excuse me, sir?"
"Certainly, ma'am I Pray do not stand on ceremony with
me," said the traveler.
"Thank y', sir. And mind, Zach, when you go, lock the
front door and take the key with you," she added, turning
to the boy.
"And leave you locked up here? 'Spose there was a fire
or anything, and you wanted to get out?"
"I could unbolt the back door, of course!"
"Oh, so you could! I forgot that!"
The old dame courtesied to the traveler and went upstairs
to the little room above, where, for about five minutes, she
could be heard walking, and then she was heard to get into
a bed that creaked under her light weight. And finally all
was silent.
The traveler and the boy sat at the oaken table, opposite
each other, with the two tallow candles in the brass candle-
sticks between them.
The clock struck ten.
The boy opened his mouth and yawned fearfully, super-
naturally, and said:
"Yer wunnot mind if I go to sleep, master, will yer ? I
am so"-another phenomenal yawn-"awfully dead beat!"
"Certainly not. Go to sleep. I. will wake you when it's
time to start," said the traveler.
But the permission was superfluous; the boy heard not a
wordof it; he was snoring with his head upon his folded
arms o the table, before the sentence was completed.
The raveler sat for a little while thinking over what he
had heard, and drawing certain conclusions from the story,
and then he began to feel bored, and to wonder how he
should pass the two hours before it would be time to start
for the haunted well.
He got up and looked around the room. He discovered a
few books on a hanging shelf against the wall, and he went
to them and examined them one by one-the Book of books,
the Holy Bible, a common prayer book, a volume of relig-
ious tracts, the "Pilgrim's Progress."  Such was the col-
lection.
lIutchings had not seen the "Pilgrim's Progress" since
he was a Sunday-school boy, thirty years before.
L                                                                   I



<pb n="158"/>
158           THE TEST OF LOVE
He now felt some curiosity to look into it. He took
the table, sat down, opened and began to read it.
He was soon so absorbed in the adventures of
as to become deaf to the snores of Master Zach-who,
ing in an uneasy position, with his arms and head on.
table, blew his trumpet with unusual force and vol
and oblivious to the passage of time until the loud 
of the clock startled him.
It tolled eleven.
He then closed his book and restored it to its place
the shelf.
"I shall not wait here until twelve," he said to hi
"for it may be just possible that the 'ghost' may t
into its head to 'walk' before midnight, in which ev
should miss it by delay ! I will, therefore, rouse our h
friend here, and proceed to the withered pear tree at l
Heavens I how weird and unearthly all this seems to be I"
CHAPTER XVI
THE HAUNTED WELL AT MIDNIGHT
ALL was still as death within and around the l
lodge. The boy still slept soundly, with his head laid
his arms on the table.
The detective went to his side to arouse him. T
him by the shoulder, he shook him gently.
It was no easy matter to awaken this sleeper, how
for if he was shaken up one instant he was down again
next.
At length, by repeated efforts, the detective succeede
arousing him and restoring him to some sense of the s
tion.
"Now, then! Do you know where you are?" deman
the traveler, as he stood the boy up on his feet and 
him fast to keep him from falling.
"Yezzur," drowsily replied the lad, reeling.
"Do you know who I am?" inquired the man, stead
the boy.
.~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="159"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   159
"Yezznr," gaped the latter, rubbing his knuckles into his
eyes.
"Attend to me! Do you know what you promised to do?"
"Yezzur," yawned Zach, coming slowly to his senses, "yer
promised to gimmy a four-blade knife and a pattink sharp-
ener and two bob."
"Oh, ay, to be sure ! But that is not the question I What
did you promise to do to earn them?" demanded the de-
tective.
The boy yawned fearfully and shuddered; but that might
have been caused by his having been so rudely aroused from
his sleep.
"Come, come! Do you know what you promised to do
to earn the four-bladed knife, the patent sharpener and the
two bob?" impatiently demanded Hutchings.
"Yezzur," gaped the boy.
"What was it, then? Come, speak up!"
"Yer promised-I promised to go with yer and-to go
with yer to the withered pear tree and-and show yer the
haunted well-where the ghost walks-Ur-r-r-rr-r !" shud-
dered the boy.
"All right! That is what you promised to do," assented
Hutchings; "and now it is time to be off !"
"But, mind you, I ain't a-gwine no nigher nor the dead
pear tree; and I ain't a-gwine to stay no longer nor to still
them dogs-no, not at any price," said Zach, as he reeled
off toward the corner cupboard and took his old hat from
a hook at its side.
"All right I You shall not be required to do more than
you have agreed upon," laughed Hutchings.
"And ye're to gimmy the four-blade knife and pattink
harpener and the two bob, true and faithful," added the
la, who was now at length fully awake.
rue and faithful," agreed the detective, as they left the
house   ether.
Hutchings locked the lodge door on the outside and with-
drew the key, as Zach had been ordered, but had forgotten
to do.
Th'e full moon was at the zenith and shining brightly
dc wn upon the grass-grown avenue, along which they
^ 'l:d with stealthy steps, and upon the old trees that
Iz- .Il'.^ it.



<pb n="160"/>
160           THE TEST OF LOVE
The two went on in perfect silence, the man befora
boy close at his heels, shuddering, stealthily loo1king
his own shoulders and starting fearfully at every deadl
or crooked tree that happened to be more grotesque
usual.
So they went on for about half a mile, and then thb'
stopped abruptly.
"What now ?" inquired the man, also pausing.
"This here path leads to the corner of the stable,
where the old gateway used to be; but it is walled up i
said the boy, pointing to a blind path on the right
struck into a thicket so dense as scarcely to admit a 
the bright moonlight which was flooding the atmosphe
"Well?" inquired Hutchings.
"Well," repeated the lad, "the dead pear tree is
agin' the wall at the other end o' this here path."
"Very good! Let us turn into it, then. Why do
stop?" inquired the detective, seeing that the boy di!
budge.
"Yer go fust. I'll foller," cried the boy, with chat
teeth.
"All right! Come on!" cheerily exclaimed Hut
striking into the narrow, tangled thicket, now damp
dark with the dews of an August night.
"Ur-r-r-r-r-r!" shivered the boy, as he followed. "
I ain't a-gwine no nigher nor the dead pear tree, ?
ain't a-gwine to stay no longer nor to still them dogs !'.
"Of course. I understand that," replied his employ
"Not at no price!" added the boy.
"No, 'not at no price, " assented Hutchings.
"And ye're gwine to gimmy the four-bladed knife.
the pattink sharpener and the two bob, as yer promise
"Upon my sacred honor, I will."
"True and faithfurl?"
" 'True and faithfurl,'" solemnly replied the d
as he pushed on through the dark and dense thicket,
ing aside the mingled branches of the trees to the right
left, and crushing the brushwood under his feet.
They went on so for about an eighth of a mile, when
denly they emerged from the thicket and came out
open space, like a disused road, that ran along on the
side of an old, dilapidated stone wall that stood before
*.  '                                         jH~~~~~~~~~~~i



<pb n="161"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   161
Apparently a row of fruit trees had once grown there;
but now nothing remained but one dead tree, whose skele-
ton branches stood out as if traced in ink upon the gray
surface of the stone.
"There! Ur-r-r-r-r-r! There's the dead pear tree  Ef
yer'll go to it and climb upon the rubbish, yer kin see the
paddock 'tween the stable yard and the fir wood, and the
old haunted well in the paddock where the ghost walks,"
said the boy, with his teeth chattering like a pair of cas-
tanets.
Here the dogs began to bark vociferously, and the boy
plucked up a little courage, for there is something very anti-
ghostly in the hearty bark of watchdogs.
"Down, Fly! Hush yer tongue, Tip! Shut up, Buck!
Hold yer jaw, Wool! Be quiet, can't yer?" he called, first
to one, then to others in turn, finally to all; and so, as they
recognized his voice and his presence, he succeeded in quiet-
ing them.
"Now yer kin go up to the wall," said the lad.
But Mr. Hutchings had his doubts whether the watch-
dogs would keep quiet after the boy should have gone and
only himself be left, and so he said:
"You-what are you going to do?"
" Oh, now, master, don't go to try to do me ! Yer know I
told yer I wurn't gwine no nigher 'an the dead pear tree,
nor stay no longer 'an to still the dogs! No, not fur no
price    And yer 'greed I And now them dogs is quiet as
lambs, and here's the dead pear tree, where yer kin stand
and see the ghost when it comes to the haunted well.
Ur-r-r-r-r-r-r ! And I'm gwine home right off now !" cried
the boy, turning to run.
But Hutchings laid hold on him.
"Lemmy go! Lemmy go      I wunnot stop for no price!"
criedthe boy, struggling.
"Ohe moment! I want to ask you a question."
'"Lery go!"
"Are ybu going home through that dark thicket?"
"Yes! Lemmv go!"
"By yourself?";
"Yes! Lemmy go! Lemmy go !"
"Suppose you were to meet the ghost in the path ?"
"Ah-h-h-h-h-h-h-h 1" yelled the boy, dropping on the



<pb n="162"/>
162          THE TEST OF LOVE
ground, appalled by a possibility that had not before 
curred to him.
"You can go if you like, you know," said Hutchi
kindly.
"I darn't! Oh, I darn't  I darn't stay herel I 
go away   Oh, wot wull I do? wot wull I do?" cried
boy, rolling over and over on the wet ground, and kic
in his impotent excitement.
"I tell you what I would do if I were you."
"Wot? Oh, master, wot ?"
"I would go and stay with the dogs. It is well kn
to all men that ghosts never go near dogs ! Now, I w
go and stay with the dogs if I were you. Hear! they
beginning to growl ! They'll burst out barking again if
don't go to them."
"I jes' believe I will, marster. It'll be the best w
Ye're sure ghosts don't 'pear to dogs?" inquired the
somewhat recovering from his abject terror.
"Sure and certain! I would take my affidavit to
fact! There, now, go! or they will be in full blast agai
The boy gathered himself up and crept off to the kenn
which were at the end of the wall-on the right hand.
The dogs then became perfectly quiet, and the boy  i
must have calmed himself in their company, for no so
was heard from the kennels.
Ben Hutchinge went up to the withered pear tree, clim
upon a pile of broken stones and thence up into the 
Seating himself in the fork between two strong limbs
looked over the stable wall.
A weird scene met his view.
The full moon, shining broadly down, revealed every 
ject with clearest distinctness.
And this was the picture:
On his extreme right stood the dark, massive stone bu
ing of the stables, the carriage houses, the coachman i
grooms' quarters, and the kennels. Nearer, but still
the right hand, was the stable yard. Just below him 
straight before him was a hurdle fence dividing the stE
yard from a small paddock that lay immediately to the l
In the midst of this paddock stood an old dry well, of whi
nothing above ground remained but a moss-covered circu
brick wall about breast high. On the extreme left of
?i5 
. e'_



<pb n="163"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    163
paddock stood the dark fir wood, and behind it arose the
white chimneys of the manor house.
In the background, straight before him, past the stable
yard and paddock, were fields and barns and hayricks.
But it was upon the paddock wvth the old well that the
attention of the detective was directed.
The paddock, lying between the stable and the old fir
wood, was bathed in moonlight.
Hutchings, from his perch in the dead tree, watched it
closely.
What aid the detective expect to see?
A ghost ? A spirit? A thing of air?
Not he. He claimed to be a realistic man of the nine-
teenth century, and he lived a very real life, and followed
two or three very matter-of-fact callings.
He expected to find in this so-called "ghost" a material
being, a guilty creature pursued by an avenging conscience,
and driven in her sleep to haunt the scene of her crime, and
nightly react its horrors.
Such were his expectations. And he resolved that his
conduct in the premises should be guided by circumstances.
He might feel constrained to awaken the somnamubulist,
and to surprise her into a confession of her crime, or he
might only observe and remember, and leave the denoue-
ment to another day.
While debating this matter in his mind, a faint, glimmer-
ing light from the body of the dark fir wood drew his at-
tention. It was as if a moonbeam were breaking from the
deep green thicket.
But as he gazed the soft light arose to the height of about
five feet, and gradually condensed and crjstallized into the
form of a woman, wondrous white, with pale, yellow hair
treaming over her bare shoulders and over her white and
owing drapery.
As the detective gazed on this marvel, strange, powerful
ele ric thrills shook his whole strong frame.
T form advanced slowly, without a step, but with a
gliding motion, and her wild, bright eyes had a wondrous
shining light that seemed to send rays before them.
Hutchings gazed spellbound, awe-stricken.
The spirit glided nearer and nearer, and now it could be
seen that she carried in her arms-not a mimic child, a
L.



<pb n="164"/>
¢164         THE TEST OF LOVE 
puppet of rags and paper, such as the detective had exp
to see in the possession of the somnambulist, but-a 
as beautiful as one of the cherubim of heaven, with a
of light around its form; and now, also, it was evident
it was this light only that illumined the woman's formn
Yet still the detective could not move a limb or utt
word, nor even withdraw his gaze from the radiant fornmz
the spirit-woman and babe.
The vision had now advanced to the well, and with
back to the entranced spectator, and with the babe 
to her bosom, and her head bent until all her shining
fell forward over the form of the child, she leaned
looked down into the deep, dark shaft below them.
'By all that is most holy!" cried the detective, by
mighty effort breaking from the spell that bound him-
all that is most holy I spirit or flesh, she shall not throw
child into the well 1"
And so saying he swung himself over the wall b
branch of the tree, and let himself drop into the padd
below.
The fall was a shock to his frame, but he quickly pic
himself up and ran reeling on toward the well, where 
stood the radiant form of the woman, with the beau
babe clasped to her bosom, her shining hair veiling it as
head was bent and her eyes were fixed on the pit below.
Hutchings ran impetuously forward, intending to
her from behind and whirl her with the child from
brink of the well. But-- 
She swayed around as on a pivot, and fixed upon him
pair of wild, bright eyes that glowed from a cavern
white face half veiled with flaming yellow hair.
He cast his arms around her, and clasped-an el
shock that threw him violently back upon the ground,
left him in a state of unconsciousness.
CHAPTER XVII
WITHIN THE MANOR HOUSE 
WHEN the detective recovered his consciousness, the m
was sinking toward the west, and the dawn was rising 
the east.



<pb n="165"/>
TkE TEST OF LOVE                   165
His clothing was damp with the dews of that antumn
night; his limbs were stif, and his head was heavy.
He gathered himself up with a groan, and began to collect
his faculties.
The scene aided his memory; there was the paddock with
the old dry well in the midst, and with the stable yard and
the stable on its right, the dark fir wood on its left, and the
fields, hayricks and barns beyond. The only difference was
the lengthened shadow of the stable cast half across the
yard by the descending moon on the right and the white
light of the dawn tipping the dark fir wood on the left.
"What have I seen ? What have I discovered ? Was it a
dream? Was it a reality? or was it a trick? It seems I
have been worsted in this quest, and caught-nothing but
the rheumatism, probably I How strange all this is! Noth-
ing like it ever happened in my experience before  Let me
think," said Hutchings to himself, as he stood by the broken
wall of the old well, and, with his hand to his head, tried
to clearly recall the adventures of the night that were but
dimly present to his mind.
"Let me see  I came down here to investigate the facts
of that five-year-old murder of a child at Rose Hill, for
which Margaret Campbell was condemned-unjustly, as
her friends say-to transportation and penal servitude for
life!
"I reach this place and hear the story of a ghost-the
ghost of a woman with a child in her arms-who haunts the
well and has been seen by too many people to leave a doubt,
even on my practical mind, as to there being some solid
foundation for the story.
"I draw my own conclusions, however   I believe the
ghost to be no other than a material wonain-the same
woman seen by the traveler at the well witli the child on
the night of the murder-a guilty creature tortured by re-
motse, driven by conscience and compelled to walk in her
slep, haunting the scene of her crime, and re-enacting it
in er dreams !
.I resolve to go at midnight to the 'haunted' well and
watch for the 'ghost,' or somnambulist, as I am convinced
she is.
"I go and watch, and what do I see?   An unearthly
vision-yes, my soul!-an unearthly vision l-a vision of a
i.                                                                   I



<pb n="166"/>
166          THE TEST OF LOVE
woman, carrying in her arms a child, emerges from the
wood and glides across the paddock.
"Spellbound, I gaze upon the vision until it reaches tJ
well Then-to prevent a catastrophe-- make a supren
effort, break from my trance, and rush forward to clasp 
and whirl her away from the brink of destruction.
"I clasp-thin air, and receive a shock that annihila
sense and reason for hours! I come at length to my
and here I stand in the paddock, and there is the haunt
well before me. But where is the haunter?" 
Here Hutchings walked up to the circular wall aroun
the well and looked down into its depths. He saw nothi
but a bottomless, black pit.
Then he turned and walked to the fir wood. It was
tangled, impenetrable, pathless thicket, through whi
scarcely a hare could have found its way.
"And yet from its depths the vision of the woman 
the child came !" said Hutchings to himself, as he retra
his steps.
He was now anxious to get out of the paddocks and to
turn to his lodgings, to think over all that had occurred
his leisure.
Unfortunately he could not jump from the ground to t
top of the wall as easily as he had dropped from the top 
the wall to the ground.
He looked around for other means of exit, for he did n
wish to be found trespassing on private premises by any
the stablemen, who might now soon be astir.
Finally he climbed over the hurdle fence that divided 
paddock from the stable wall, and seeing a gate bolted
the inside, he went and unbolted it and passed through.
He found himself now on the road outside the stable w
where he had parted from his boy guide a few hours befo
Even if he had not recollected the circumstance,
would have been reminded of it now, for all the dogs be
to bark.
"That will arouse the stablemen, anyhow; and I won
what has become of my heroic young friend? Has he
mained all night with the dogs, or has he found courage 
go home?" Hutchings mentally inquired.
His question was practically answered by a fai
voice:
?ii



<pb n="167"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                  167
" 'Old yer tongue, Buck I Hush yer jaw, Tip I Stop yer
noise, Fly! Down, Wool! Will yer then, yer idiwuts?"
It was the voice of little Zach "stilling" the dogs, whose
vociferous barking at the approaching intruder had roused
the boy from his sound sleep.
Zach now came out of the kennels, with straws in his
hair and his knuckles in his eyes.
"Hello !" exclaimed Mr. Hutchings. "Did you stay all
night with the dogs?"
-[    "Yezzur," drowsily answered the lad.
"How came you to do that?"
"I dunno. Yes, I does, too. I wur waiting for you, and
yer never come for me," answered Zach, who was waking up
faster in the fresh outer air of this morning than he had
been able to do in the close atmosphere of the lodge on the
previous night.
"Well, I came for you as soon as ever I waked up. I
liave been asleep-or something, myself," said Hutchings,
good-humoredly.
' Us hed better get along back to the lodge. Mr. Merry-
winkle, the coachman, or some on um, will be coming out
'ere to see wot hev been the matter of the dogs," advised
the boy.
"True. Come along; let us hurry," assented Hutchings,
leading the way to the entrance of the blind path that led
through the plantation thicket to the main park avenue.
"Did yer-did yer-see it?" inquired the boy, in hushed
tones, as they passed in.
"See what?" demanded the detective, pretending not to
understand the question.
"Oh, yer know-the ghost-but I recking yer didn't see
it, or yer wuddn't arks--Wot?"
"No, I did not see it," coolly replied Hutchings.
"Not!" exclaimed the boy, stopping and staring.
"No. Come along. We have got the key of the lodge,
you know, and your granny may be wanting to open the
front door. See, the sky is getting red in the east, and the
sun will soon be up."
i        "-- sAnd so wull granny soon be up, and hur w ill wop me
ef I ain't thar to 'elp 'url And yer didn't see it?" again.
inquired the boy.
No.



<pb n="168"/>
168          THE TEST OF LOVE
"Well, I thought yer didn't, or yer wouldn't arks--W
But it's mons'us queer yer didn't see nothink."
"Oh, I went to sleep on my post. I reckon that was,
reason why," Hutchings explained.
"I reckon so, too. Yer wouldn't do fur a sojer, 
yer, now? And mind, yer hev got to gimmy that 
bladed knife and pattink sharpener, and them two bob'
yer 'didn't see nothink! Yer hev got to give um to'
whether or no !" said the boy, with the air of one upon w
it would be no use to try any tricks.
"Oh, of course, of course," readily assented the travy
"Yes, but when are yer gwine to give um to me?"
"Just as soon as we get back to the lodge."
"Well, come along, then!  Le's hurry!  Granny'll
wanting of the keys, yer know!" exclaimed the boy, st
lated by the prospect of winning his reward at the en4
his walk.
They soon emerged from the thicket out into the br
avenue, where both breathed more freely.
A rapid walk of twenty minutes brought them to
lodge.
"Oh, granny'a up ! See the smoke comin' out'n chimb
said the boy.
Mr. Hutchings drew the key from his pocket and gave 
to Zach, saying:
"Run around the back way and hand this key to 
grandmother, that she may let me in, if she likes." 
"Why can't yer unlock the door and let yerself in, 1
as yer hed got the key?" inquired the boy.
"Because that would not have been quite polite to y
grandmother," replied Hutchings. 
"But nobody don't think it no use to be perlite to t
likes of old granny," said Zach, as he ran off with the
Two minutes later the front door was opened by the o
woman, who confronted the visitor with a face full of '
terest and curiosity.
"Zach says as yer never saw nothink, sir!" she said,        l
an incredulous tone.
"No, I never did," replied the detective, who had his o
reasons for keeping his secret and his own method of qui
ing his conscience.
"Now that there is werry strange I But, Lord save ux
,   . . .   .   ..   .  .  .  ..  ..   .   .  .   .  ..~ ~~~~~~~~~~~.7



<pb n="169"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    169
sir, how bad yer do look, tew be sure  W'y, ye're pale as
a corpse and wet tew the skin 1" exclaimed Granny Keene,
as she looked more closely at the traveler.
"Well, not quite wet to the skin, but damp on the sur-
face. The dews were very heavy last night," smilingly re-
plied Hutchings.
"As the jews are apt to be on August nights," assented
the old woman; "but come in! come in, sir ! Bless us, ye're
not gwine any farder this morning until yer hev dried yer
clothes and got a good hot cup o' coffee!" she added, stretch-
ing the door wide open and placing her armchair forward
for the guest.
Hutchings, well pleased at the prospect of rest and re-
freshment, entered and seated himself.
Granny Keene added a bundle of faggots to the little fire,
and then filled a small copper kettle and hung it over the
blaze, and drew out an oaken table and spread a white cloth
over it preparatory to breakfast.
Zach sidled up to the visitor and whispered:
"Yer know wot yer promised me, master."
"Oh, yes," said Hutchings, putting his hand deep in the
pocket of his coat and drawing out a handful of its con-
tents. "Here is your four-bladed knife with a buckhorn
handle." (It was the man's own familiar pocketknife; but
he gave it up for the sake of peace, promising himself an.
other and a better one in its place.)
"Oh!-ain't this just the bulliest knife as ever was!"
cried the boy, in an ecstasy of delight over his new posses-
sion.
"And here is the patent sharpener," added the agent,
producing the instrument.
"Oh! Ah! Eh! Gimmy·the thing! I know how to
use it! I see how to use it-look !" exclaimed the boy, seiz-
ing the tool and beginning to test its powers upon the
largest blade of his knife.
"And here are two 'bob'! And now we are quits!" said
Hutchings, laying a couple of bright new shillings down
on the table before the boy.
"Yes! now we's quits " admitted Zach, pocketing the
coins.
"And don't yer never get in debt to a boy ag'in, as long
as yer live, sir! for yer'll never have no peace of yer life
.



<pb n="170"/>
170           THE TEST OF LOVE
till ye're outen it," said the old woman, as she placed
large loaf of brown bread on the table.
"No, I never will!" solemnly replied the visitor.
"And I think, Zach, yer might be taking the gemp
upstairs where he'll find soap and water and towels to w
hisself before breakfast. Wouldn't you like to, sir?"i
inquired, turning to her guest. 
"Yes, indeed, very much!" replied the man, rising
follow the boy, who led the way upstairs and probably
dered that anyone should want to wash his face when:i
had the option of leaving it alone.
While the two were upstairs the old woman made the
fee and fried rashers of bacon and fresh eggs.
When the traveler returned he found breakfast ready. 
"This is really very kind of you, Mrs. Keene, to pr
so liberally for a poor wayfarer," said Hutchings,
hearty and sincere appreciation, as he seated himself at
table.
"Lawk, sir, ye're kindly welcome! And sure this is
much to do after yer liberalality to the boy and me 1" re
the dame, as she handed him a large cup of coffee.
"Ah! that is nothing to what I hope to do to show
sense of your worthiness, ma'am !" politely replied the
as he received a cup from her hands; "but tell me, do
not think the ladies up in the manor house might like
look at my needle threaders?"
"Well, sir, I don't think as yer'll get to see the ladies
how   But still there's nothing like trying, and there 
be no offense in trying. I might go up to the house 
you, sir, and go in first, as they'll not object to seeing
and I might talk 'em into takin' a look at yer thread n
lers," suggested the dame.
"Oh, I wish you would! It would be very kind of yo
eagerly exclaimed the agent.
"Then we will go directly after breakfast, sir; but,
me, sir, it do seem to me, as selling them things at a pe
apiece, or a shilling a dozen, yer'll make very little profit
'em I Hardly enough to make it worth yer while to
down in these yere parts with 'em," said Granny Keene.;
"Oh! my dear ma'am, it is not for what we make n
We are only introducing them. No, it is not now we ex
to make money; but when every man, woman and child



<pb n="171"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    171
the civilized world-every human being-either in the fam-
ily or in business, as milliners, dressmakers, embroiderers,
book stitchers, glovers, saddlers, harnessmakers, shoemakers,
and all who use needles, will require needle threaders, and
we sell them by hundreds of millions of packages-then we
will make a profit-then we will make colossal fortunes I"
said the agent, with enthusiasm.
"Oh, lor'! how I wish I could 'went somethinkl" ex-
claimed Zach, staring with great, round eyes.
"If you don't "went' your way to the stable, Mr. Merry-
winkle will 'went a way to make yer sorry for it!" sharply
replied the dame, as she arose from the breakfast table,
which her guest bad already left.
"Well, I'm gwine as soon as I get my grub," replied the
boy.
"Sit down there and get it, then," ordered the old wom-
an. "And now, sir," she said, turning to the visitor, "I will
just go and put on my bonnet and shawl, and wait on yer
up to the great house."
She went upstairs, and took rather more time with her
toilet than was expected; but when she came down she ap-
peared in her best black alpaca gown and shepherd's plaid
shawl and black silk bonnet.
Zach, meanwhile, had bolted his breakfast, and filled his
pockets with all the bread and bacon that he could not eat;
and he was ready to go with his granny and her guest.
The three left the house together, the old woman locking
the door after them, and putting the key in her pocket.
They walked on silently until they reached the spot where
the blind path branched off from the avenue through the
thicket toward the stables; there the boy left them and
turned into the path on his way to the scene of his daily
work.
Mr. Hutchings and Mrs. Keene continued their way along
the avenue.
"I always understood that this property was entailed
upon the heirs-the males taking precedence-and on the
failure of the males the females inheriting. How is it now?
There seems to be no heir or heiress of the Campbell family
in possession; only the widow is there, with her children by
a former husband. Has she any right to be there?" in-
quired the traveler.



<pb n="172"/>
172          THE TEST OF LOVE 
"Well, sir, I dunnot know about any right. They do 
as the poor creature, Margaret Caippbell, as was sent acr
the seas, was the next heiress after her little cousin, as 
was accused of killing. And then ag'in some do say as'
conwick for life can't own no property, which if they do,
goes back to the crown, which means to the queen ? But
do reckon ef it is so, as her majersty be too kind-hearted
mislest this poor widow and turn her out'n doors! HcR
s'ever, one says one thing, and one says another, and I don'
know nothing about it, for sartain."
"Ahl" muttered the traveler, and they walked on
silence a little further. Then-
"Do the ladies attend the parish church?" inquif
Hutchings. 
"Eh! no, sir; they be Romans and go to St. Domini
chapel, up by Huxton, a score o' miles from here, when
go anywhere," repeated the dame.
A turn in the avenue now brought them in sight of 
house-an old, oblong, redstone building, with many l
ticed windows, gable roofs and twisted chimneys.
walls were partly overgrown with ivy, and the whole ho
heavily shaded by large forest trees.
The avenue led them up before the front door, a doub
leaved portal of black oak, which was reached by half
dozen large, moss-grown stone steps.
"I'll go round to the servants' door if yer'll wait h
sir," said Mrs. Keene, turning off toward the right.
"Very well! I'll go with you! Being only a sort 
peddler, the ladies might take it as a liberty if I was to t
at the other door," said the traveler.
"As yer please, good sir," assented the dame, who
not able, in her own mind, to fix the social status of 
stranger.
She led him around to a small door in the rear of.
building, and rang the bell.
A grave-looking woman, in a black stuff gown and a whi
cap and apron, opened the door.
';Eh, how do yer do, Sairy?" exclaimed Granny Keen
"And how is the madam    and the young ladees? 
wench, let me come in and sit down, for I'm that spent i
walking from the lodge to the house here that I can har
stand !" 
,  .                                        ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~, 



<pb n="173"/>
rI            ]THE    TEST    OF LOVE             178
"Come in, then I" sid the woman, in a very inhospitable
tone as she moved aside to let the old woman pass.
Hutchings followed without an invitation.
They found themselves in a back passage, or hall, fur-
nished with a fewr chairs.
The two visitors sat down without waiting to be asked to
do so.
" Who is that you've got along with yer? You know very
well as strangers ain't allowed into this house!" said the
servant woman.
"Eh, then, let me sit down and get my breath a minute
before I'm called to answer questions," panted the old
woman, as she settled herself in her chair and untied her
bonnet strings.
"This gentleman," she resumed at last, "have got the
most wonderfullest inwentions for threading all sorts of
needles and sharpening all sorts of razors and knives and
things as ever was seen or heerd tell on in this world! And
as I hev tried the thread-a-needler and found it good, I
thought, Sairy Ann, as it 'ould be a godsend to you to gin
yer a chance to get one for yourself. Only a penny apiece,
and yer might never hev another opportunity as long as yer
lived."
"Well, I don't mind if I look at the thing-though I
know it's a humbug 1 I don't believe in new-fangled things,
nor likewise take no stock in 'wentions  But I'll just take
a look at the cantrip I" said the woman, surlily.
"Certainly, ma'amI Look at it! We are only intro-
ducing the article now, and if you will oblige me by accept-
ing a couple and giving them a trial, I would be very
grateful," said the agent, with extreme politeness, as he
produced a packet, selected from it two needle-threaders
and handed them to the woman.
Curiosity prompted the latter to look at the little tool,
and she, like others, saw at a glance how easily it could be
used, and what a great convenience it would be.
She pocketed the needle threaders and thanked the donor
-though with an ill grace, for politeness did not come
naturally to her.
"And now, if you would'be kind enough to take this
packet to the ladies of the house," he added, proffering the
little parcel.



<pb n="174"/>
174           THE TEST OF LOVE 
"Yes, I will take it, and maybe the mistress will
with you, for they be great needlewomen, be our la
said the woman, as she received the paper and disap
through a door on the right.
"Oh, dear! Sairy Ann Johnson is a crusty piece P
Mrs. Keene, half to herself.
Hutchings made no reply.
In a few minutes the woman returned, saying:
"You are to go up to the ladies with your needle
ers. They want to see all the varieties you have got."
Hutchings arose to follow the servant who was w
to conduct him.
Mrs. Keene also arose to accompany them, but Sairy
arrested her intention by saying:
"Granny Keene, you are to stay just where you ar
to go home, just as you please; but you are not wanted
stairs."
"Eh, dear, the imperance o' 'pampered' mediums!"
tered the old woman, sinking back in her seat.
Mr. Hutchings followed his conductress through the
on the right, and thence down a long, narrow passage 
led to the great hall, thence up the grand staircase tq
upper hall, from whence many doors opened into suit
rooms.
The woman opened one of these doors on the right 
admitted the visitor into a small, oak-paneled parlor
which were seated three women-all in mourning, or
mourning.
The elder was tall and handsome, though somewhat
her prime; she wore a black dress and a widow's cap.
The second in age, a girl of about twenty-five, 
beautiful brunette, and wore a white Swiss muslin
with blue ribbon sash and bows.
The third was a pale blonde, with dim blue eyes and
straw-colored hair, and wore a sort of loose white wra
carelessly fastened about the waist with strings of the
material as the dress.
These three women were gathered around their worklt
The two beauties. evidently mother and daughter, were.
gaged in embroidery. The invalid was sitting in 
idleness, with her hands laid straight on her lap and
eyes fixed upon them.



<pb n="175"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   175
As the visitor entered he was at once struck by the
strange expressions on these women's faces.
That of the mother betrayed a depth of anguish and de.
spair that caused the spectator to turn shuddering away
from its contemplation, wondering the while that its ownei
could suffer so much and live!
That of the dark-eyed daughter displayed an excess of
discontent and irritability.
That of the pale blonde expressed a depth of gloom and
terror bordering on the horror of insanity.
Surely these were three strange-looking women to find in
this oak-paneled parlor of the quaint old manor house ! Any
visitor, unacquainted with their antecedents, might natur-
ally ask what fearful tragedy had happened there to impress
upon the faces of two, at least, this indelible expression of
anguish, horror and despair!
For a moment Hutchings glanced from face to face, and
then his gaze became riveted on the face and form of the
cold, deadly pale blonde girl!
And well it might, for she was the perfect counterpart
of the woman he had seen in the midnight vision at the
haunted well-wanting only the beautiful child and the su-
pernal illumination 
CHAPTER XVIII
"'WEIRD WOMEN"
"CoiMB here," said the elder lady-who wore a widow's
dress and cap-speaking in a strange, hollow, unnatural
tone, as she beckoned the stranger to approach the table
at which she anJ the two girls were seated.
But the detective scarcely heard her-his attention being
still riveted upon the pallid, silent, motionless creature
whose phantom he had seen in his midnight vision at the
haunted well.
Excepting the addition of the beautiful child she had
carried in her arms, and the supernal illumination of her
whole form of air as seen in the vision, it was the perfect
image of this pale, stony, immovable girL



<pb n="176"/>
176          THE TEST OF LOVE 
"Come here," repeated the lady, in a sterner tone.
"I beg your pardon i" exclaimed the man, with a 
as he recovered himself and obeyed the summons by ste
ping up to the table. 
"Sit down," said the widow, in the same perempt
tone, pointing to a vacant chair. 
The detective dropped into the seat and tried to reco
from the unprecedented panic into which the sight of tl
girl had thrown him.
He had discreetly withdrawn his eyes, but his thoug
still dwelt on her, or circled wildly around her.
"This form of flesh," he said to himself, as his gaze 
more furtively sought the girl-"this form of fleshee
like a body from which the soul has fled, and that form {
air seemed like a disembodied spirit."
Then suddenly pulling himself together, as he wou
have expressed it, he took himself to task, mentally sayi
"Come, come, Hutchings, it is all queer enough, but 
you go mooning over things you don't understand; but j
attend to the lady."
The widow was, in fact, speaking to him.
"I asked you to sit down; for Keene has told me th
you came on foot all the way from Rosedale-a long  a
and all uphill," she said, in the same strange, hollow b
now not unkindly tone.
"I thank you, madam. Yes, I walked from the villag
said Hutchings, respectfully.
"And you have something new in the appointments of
workbox to show us, I understand?"
"Yes, madam, if you will allow me; a needle thread
that will enable anyone, no matter how weak the sight, 
how nervous the fingers, to thread the finest needle in o
instant, without the least trouble," said the quasi pat
agent, taking a little box from his pocket and opening 
to display his wares.
He handed one specimen to the elder lady and one
the pretty brunette girl, and a third to the pallid, sto
creature who had not once lifted her eyes from the cros
hands upon her lap, or in any other way given any si
of life.
The widow and the elder daughter received the little
".



<pb n="177"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   177
and examined them with interest; but the cadaverous
blonde took not the slightest notice of the offering.
"Will you not honor me by trying one of these little in-
struments, miss?" inquired the agent, bending toward her
and pressing the article upon her acceptance.
But his words and acts had no more effect on her than
if he had been a dressmaker's dummy.
"Do not disturb that young lady. She is not in good
health," said the widow, in a stern voice.
"I beg pardon, madam," respectfully answered Hutch-
ings, recoiling into his place.
"You may leave a dozen of these, and I will recommend
them to our friends," said the lady, laying down a shilling
on the table before the agent.
"I thank you, madam," said Hutchings, with a bow, as
he handed over a packet of needle threaders and pocketed
the shilling.
"That is all, I think. We will not detain you longer,"
said the lady, with an unmistakable manner of dismissing
her visitor.
The detective arose and bowed; but he could not go with-
out another look at the death-like form in the low chair,
and another effort to attract her attention, to make her
raise her eyes to his eyes, as her phantom had done in the
midnight vision by the haunted well.
As he passed her he stooped and laid a little parcel on
her motionless hands, and said:
"I wish you would kindly favor me by examining these."
She started, and looked up, and then, with a sharp cry,
covered her face with her hands, exclaiming, in agonized
tones:
"Oh, no, no, no, no, no I Oh, no! it was not so! It was
never, never so! Oh, great Heaven, why didn't I die?
Why didn't I die?"
The elder lady was at her side in an instant, with her
arms around the excited girl, expostulating with her.
"Malvina   Malvina! Behave yourself directly! Do you
want me to-     Behave yourself, I say !"
But the poor creature fell to the floor in a fit, and began
to foam at the mouth.
The detective sprang forward to assist in raising her;
&I



<pb n="178"/>
178          THE TEST OF LOVE
but the lady stretched out her arms to repel him, saying,
sternly: 
"Leave the room, sir! and leave the house instantly! ';;
How dared you to speak to this young lady again, after my' 
having told you that she was out of health? Lavinia, my 
dear, help me to lead your sister to the sofa," she added,"
turning to the beautiful brunette, who had dropped her:
embroidery and was already standing over the Iallen girl.':
The two ladies raised the fragile creature to her feet, and 
supporting her on each side, guided her to the sofa and. 
laid her carefully upon it.
The detective lingered at the door until he saw this feat 
successfully accomplished, and then he went downstairs by ,
the way he had come up, and reached the back hall leading
to the servants' entry.
The same woman who had admitted him first, now hear. ;
ing his footsteps, came out of the kitchen to open the door 
for him.
"Granny Keene have gone around to visit the coach- '.
man's wife, and says how, if yer would look in at the stable ,
quarters, yer might sell some o' yer needle threaders there," 
said the woman, as she opened the door.
"Thank you," replied the man, in a noncommittal man.
ner, as he passed out. 
He did not care to sell any more of his wares. He hadlt
accomplished all that he had intended in coming down int$l
the neighborhood, and more than he had expected. He had
nothing to do but to return to London and report to hisil
employer.
And yet he was not fully satisfied, and, as he walked ?'
along the deserted old avenue that led from the house to
the lodge, he anxiously communed with himself. 
"That pallid, stony, death-like girl is the guilty party, 
but how deeply is a question. She is guilty, and suffers in 
her conscience. And her mother knows that she is so. and '
suffers with her. Great Heaven! how that mother suffers! '
To know that her daughter is guilty of the murder of her 
little brother-of that mother's own infant child-a crime I
for which the girl should suffer death on the gallows-and
to know that another, and a most innocent young creature, 
is now suffering punishment in her stead, by transportation '`
to the penal colonies for life! To know all this, and to 



<pb n="179"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   179
have the hideous alternative of harboring this most guilty
secret, or else of denouncing her own daughter to the law
and its terrible penalty  No wonder that look of anguish
and despair is indelibly impressed upon that woman's
face !"
Here Hutchings reached a rustic seat on one side of the
avenue, and he sat down on it, drew his handkerchief from
his pocket, and wiped his forehead.
"And the stupor of that girl during the whole of my
interview with her mother. She seemed to me-ay, and
she was, totally unconscious of my presence in the room
until I went up close to her, spoke in her ear, and touched
her hand to make her look up at me, as the phantom had
looked in the midnight vision by the haunted well.
"And her sudden, overwhelming terror as she met my
eyes. What could that mean? Did she recognize me as
anyone she had ever seen before? Was it she whom I saw
at midnight by the well? Was she sleepwalking? Did she
awaken and see me, and having seen me at the well, did she
recognize me again this morning?"
"It seems likely. It seems absolutely certain. But-
but-the form I saw carried in its arms a babe! Not a doll,
not a puppet, but a babe as beautiful as one of the cheru-
bim, and it was illumined with a supernal light that shone
like the sun, though in a limited sphere. And when I went
to throw my arms around this image, and clasp it, I clasped
only empty air, and at the same time received an electric
shock that hurled me to the ground, and left me unconscious
for more hours than I care to count.
"No, if that form I saw at the haunted well was this
'Malvina Mattox in the flesh, where did she get that beauti-
ful cherub ? Where did she get that radiant, supernal light?
And why, when I threw my arms around her form, did I
clasp nothing but thin air? And why did I receive an
electric shock that hurled me to the ground as if I had been
struck by lightning? Who can answer these questions?
And, on the other hand, if this image was not Malvina Mat-
tox in the flesh, how came it to resemble her so closely,
and why should she have been overwhelmed with terror on
meeting my eyes this morning?
And, finally, if that form seen in the midnight vision by



<pb n="180"/>
180           THE TEST OF LOVE 
the haunted well was not Malvina Mattox in the flesh, .
what was it?
"Ben Hutchings! Ben Hutchings you are out of your 
depths now, if ever you were in all your life; and I advise 
you, Ben, not to tell this story of the ghost in Scotland
Yard. It would not be good for your reputation, Ben.
"It is enough for you that-setting the ghost aside--. 
you have seen and heard sufficient to corroborate the testi-
mony of Mr. Ham Gow as to the really guilty party in that
Rose Hill murder."
With these, sage reflections the detective arose and walked
on toward the lodge.
The cottage was shut up as he passed it, but he easily 
unbolted the gate and let himself out of the park, and then
walked along the turnpike road leading down the hill to-.
ward Rosedale.
He soon reached the Campbell Arms, before the door of
which he saw the stagecoach for the Stockstone railway :''
station standing, and several passengers getting out and
passing into the barroom. It had apparently just arrived
with travelers by the early train.
"How soon do you go back to the station?" inquired  i
Hutchings of the driver.                              '
"In half an hour, sir," answered the latter. 
Hutchings passed into the barroom, where the landlady  '
herself was behind the counter helping the barmaid to wait
on the customers brought by the stagecoach, and who 
seemed to belong to the neighborhood, for as soon as they
had drunk their beer they went their way.
"Eh-bless us !" exclaimed the Widow Keene, as soon as 
she saw her guest. "Sure, I was feared some ill had come
to you, sir, by your not getting back last night."
"Not at all. Nothing but good came to me, I am thank-
ful to say," blithely replied the detective.
"Oh! I am glad to hear you say so, sir, though I did
expect you back last night, and told Jim Sims to sleep with
one ear open so he could hear you if you came back late," 'i
replied the landlady, with a shade of resentment in her
Volce.
"But I found such favor in the eyes of your relative at
the gate, for both myself and my wares, that I spent the
.                            . a        .~~~~~~



<pb n="181"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    181
night on the estate, and breakfasted at the lodge this morn-
ing," good-humoredly explained Hutchings.
"Eh then if so be. Granny Keene has took to entertain-
ing travelers, she had better get the madam's consent, and
hang a sign out," sharply commented the landlady.
As Hutchings did not know what to reply to this out-
burst, he contented himself by asking for his bill, adding:
"And you make it out up to the present hour, for though
I did not occupy a bedroom, I certainly engaged one, and
shall pay for it."
"Yes, sir, certainly; that is as it should be," said the
landlady, who, finding that her bill was not to be disputed,
became mollified at once.,
The last of the stagecoach passengers had just received
his mug of beer from the barmaid's hands. When he had
quaffed it and left the house, the landlady stooped toward
the detective, dropped her voice to a confidential, low key,
and inquired:
"Did you have the good luck to show any of your wares
to the ladies, sir, if one might ask?"
"Oh, yesl Old Mrs. Keene was so kind as to go with
me to the house this morning, and get me an interview with
the ladies. They were pleased with my patent needle thread-
ers, and bought a dozen."
The landlady stared in astonishment for a moment, and
then exclaimed:
"Well! though I asked you the question, I didn't expect
you to answer it in that way ! I could hardly have believed
that you would have got in where no one is ever allowed to
go l But I suppose it was.just because you were a stranger
from a distance!  No one from this neighborhood would
ever be allowed to enter into that house, now, I can tell
you."
"I do not see why," said the detective.
"Neither do I; but it is just so! And so it has been
ever since the house was cleared of the police and law offi-
cers after the verdict of the coroner's jury and the committal
of Margaret Campbell for the murder. I'll dare to say as
you are the first man, barring the doctor, and the priest, as
has been received into that house these five years past."
"Welll I had no trouble to get in."
"It must have been because you was a stranger from a



<pb n="182"/>
1U2          THE TEST OF LOVE
long distance, and couldn't be thought to know or to re.; i
member what had happened there five years ago."     '
"Perhaps so."'
"And did you really see the madam, now, sir?" 
"Of course I did."
"And-her oldest daughter, the beauty, Miss Mattox?"  .
"Yes."
"Ah, poor girl, I pity her!-for it is not likely as any
man will ever venture to marry her " sighed the landlady.
"Why not?" demanded the inquisitive detective.
"Oh, sir! And insanity and epilepsy and what not in  i
the family !" exclaimed Mrs. Keene.
"'Insanity !'-'epilepsy !'-I don't understand you !" said 
Hutchings.
"Did you see-the youngest girl, sir? the afflicted one?'?
inquired the landlady, lowering her voice to an almost in-
audible key.
"The one that has fits? Yes, I saw her," answered thi
detective, in as careless a tone as he could assume.
"They say she never was quite right in her head, and e d'.A,
since that terrible tragedy she has been altogether wrong,'
quite crazy."
"Yet, if I remember rightly, she was the principal wit. 
ness against Margaret Campbell?"':
"That she was, sir! and, therefore, one might think she
couldn't be quite as crazy then as she was cracked up to'
be, else the judges wouldn't have listened to her. I say, sir*,
-did you-did you-see or hear anything about the ghost ,!
of the haunted well when you were at the place last night ?"
inquired the landlady, in a low whisper. -
"I heard a good deal about it from old Mrs. Keene and
the boy," replied Hutchings, evasively.
"Beg pardon, master; but if so be you expect to go to
the train by this coach, you'd better look sharp! She starts
in about two minutes " said the stage-driver, putting his
head into the barroom.
"One moment!" exclaimed Hutchings, and he hastily
paid his bill, caught his valise from a porter, bade good-by 
to the landlady, and ran out and took his place in the '
coach.
An hour later he had caught the train at Stockstone.,



<pb n="183"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    185
and, seated in a second-class carriage, was being whirled on
toward York.
He reached that ancient cathedral city early in the after-
noon, and had only time to send a telegraphic dispatch to
his employers before he had to rush on board the express
train just starting for London.
He had telegraphed to Mr. Hamilton Gower that he
should arrive by the ten-thirty express, and requested that
gentleman to meet him at the station.
CHAPTER XIX
THE DETECTIVE AND THE WITNESS
THE train was five minutes ahead of its time. It was
just twenty-five minutes past ten when it "slowed" into
the White Cross Station.
Nevertheless, Mr. Hamilton Gower and his shadow, Ham
Gow, were already on the spot, and were the first two men
the detective saw on leaving his seat.
"What is your news?" impetuously demanded Mr. Gower,
taking Hutchings' arm and drawing it within his own.
"But I forget, you cannot tell me here. Let us go immedi-
ately to some quiet inn and take a room where we can talk.
You must know of one somewhere near at hand?" he
added, on reflection.
"Yes, sir, the Mitre, within a short walk. How do you
do, Mr. Gow?"
Ham Cow replied by lifting his hat lightly, and the three
men walkead out of the station and across the street, and
turned a corner into another street that led them a few paces
to the Mitre.
Here Mr. Hamilton Gower took the lead by walking into
the barroom and asking for a private parlor and ordering a
supper for three.
The bartender beckoned a waiter, who ushered the guests
into a snug private parlor, and then went out to attend to
their supper.
"Now, then." exclaimed Hamilton Gower, "is your news
of vital interest to our case? Have you succeeded in gather-



<pb n="184"/>
184          THE TEST OF LOVE
inganyevidenceof sufficient weight to support the testi. 
mony of Mr. Gow as to the guilt of this girl, Malvina  l
Mattox?"                      :
"I think I have. I may say that I feel sure that I have.
I have seen and studied the girl. She is still with her' 
mother, the widow of Duncan Campbell, of Rose Hill, who  '
is still living in the manor house on sufferance. The girl 
Malvina appears to me as one who is crazed by remorse, or'
some other deeply concealed trouble. I think it is remorse.
I also think that she might be surprised or frightened into 
a confession of her crime. She suffers fearfully. So does 
her mother, who evidently now knows as much about the 
matter as the girl herself. Another view of the case is that
if Malvina could be withdrawn from the influence of her
mother, she would-without being surprised or frightened       |
into the measure-confess her crime, from sheer inability 
to bear the burden of the secret. But I do not think sheW
would ever have to suffer the extreme penalty of the law.
She is evidently too much of an imbecile for that." 
"What, then, would be her fate ?" inquired Ham Gow, in 
a grave and compassionate voice.
"Seclusion 'during her majesty's pleasure' in the Asylum  ii
for Criminal Lunatics, at Hanwell," replied the detective.
"The conviction of this guilty woman is absolutely neces-
sary to the vindication of the innocent young girl who is
now bearing the penalty of this woman's crime! The charge 
of murder should be brought against Malvina Mattox at
once! With the testimony of Gow, here, supported by the
evidence that you may be able to gather, she can be brought
to trial I And every hour's delay in bringing the guilty to 
justice is a heinous wrong to the innocent I Let us lose no
time in this matter, but go to Yorkshire by the next train,"
said Mr. Hamilton Gower, in a stem, relentless, determined
manner.
"I beg your pardon, sir," interposed Detective Hutchings.
"But such haste would ruin our cause. Or it might do so.
If we should succeed in bringing this woman to trial on  ,
the evidence that we have got, it is very doubtful whether
we could convict her on it. Mr. Gow is ready to swear that
he saw Malvina Mattox at the well on the night and at
the hour of the murder. Very well! But, on the other
hand, the old groom who was awakened by a noise that same



<pb n="185"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   184
night and hour, swears that he saw Margaret Campbell at
the well 1 There, you see, is oath for oath!"
"Yes," impatiently interrupted Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"But don't you know that the groom was old, purblind and
at some distance from the well, whereas Ham Gow, a young,
sharp-eyed man, was on the spot ?"
"Still there would be contradictory testimony, and with-
out stronger evidence than we have got to support Mr.
Gow's, it would not be advisable to bring the charge against
Malvina Mattox; for if she should be arraigned on that
charge and not convicted. our cause would be finally lost.
Malvina Mattox would go free, and Margaret Campbell,
with the stigma of a crime upon her name, must remain in
penal servitude for the term of her natural life."
"What, then, would you advise us to do?" demanded Mr.
Gower, in a voice of despair.
"For the present wait and watch for an opportunity to
surprise or terrify the girl into a confession of her crime."
"But-would that be lawful?"
"By some means, no; by others, yes."
"But what reason have you, Mr. Hutchings, for suppos-
ing it to be possible that this most guilty woman could be
either surprised or frightened into confession?" demanded
Mr. Gower.
"My own experiences and observations, while investi-
gating the case at Rose Hill. I had better give you the full
particulars of my visit, and then you will be able to judge
for yourself, and I am sure you will agree with me! But
here comes the waiter to lay the supper. After we have
got rid of him I will tell you the whole story, and one part
of it will astonish you!" said Hutchings, nodding with a
peculiar gravity.
The entrance of a man, bearing a great tray on his head,
imposed silence on the three guests until he had placed the
supper on the table and stood waiting orders.
"You may go. If we should want anything, I will ring,"
said Mr. Gower.
The waiter withdrew, and Ham Gow arose and locked the
door after him.
"There! Now we are alone, I will just dispose of a slice
of bread and beef and a glass of ale, and then tell you all
about it! I can't before, because I am famished and must



<pb n="186"/>
186          THE TEST OF LOVE 
feed, and I never would talk and eat at the same time," said 
DetecWive Hutchings, as the three sat down to the table.
"Pay take your own time," observed Mr. Gower, some.
what coldly. 
Hutchings made haste and ate and drank fast, however;
and when he had satisfied his hunger he drew a little away 
from the table, settled himself comfortably in his chair
and began his report. 
He told his attentive listeners of the ostensible businessa
that he traveled upon, as agent for the patent needle thread-.
er and knife sharpener, and how easily it introduced him  !
into all houses.                                       it
He related his gossiping interview with the landlady of  '
the "Campbell Arms," at Rosedale, and of her account of i
the murder at Rose Hill and the sensation and excitement
that had drawn such crowds to her inn and put so much
money in her till.
He told them that the impression of the neighborhood  if
seemed to have been then, and certainly was now, that there  .''
had been no mistake at all made in the person of the con-
victed criminal and that Margaret Campbell had been justly 
condemned.
He told them, further, of the strange reports in the neigh-  H
borhood as to the strict seclusion in which the widow and
her family had lived since the tragedy, and of the rumored 
illness and insanity of the younger daughter, who had been  ;'
the principal witness against Margaret Campbell.
He told them of his evening visit to the old lodge keeper
of Rose Hill, and of his passing the greater part of the  ':
night in her little parlor, where he heard, subsequently, the  ;!
same account of the secluded family at the manor house '
that he had already heard from the landlady of the Camp-  ;
bell Arms.
He purposely omitted all mention of the ghost story, or  ',
of his own strange adventure at midnight near the haunted "
well, leaving that episode for the last; and he went on to i
tell of his morning visit to "the three weird women" in the  '!
seclusion of their own private sitting room.,
"The 'needle threader' was the talisman that procured i
my admittance 'behind the scenes,'" he remarked, in pass- ^
ing, "though I have reason to believe that even that talis- .
man would have failed had it not bete presented by a



<pb n="187"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    187
stranger from a long distance, who was supposed to know
nothing, or to have forgotten everything, about the tragedy
which had been enacted there five years before," he added.
And then he went on to describe from personal observa-
tion that indelible expression of intense pain and hopeless
sorrow on the face of the widow, and of the chronic stupor
of despair in which the younger daughter seemed so deeply
plunged as to render her unmindful, if not absolutely un-
conscious, of all.
"From all these circumstances, added to what we had
both heard from Mr. Gow, and also from what I heard in
the village, I drew the same conclusions that you will now
draw-namely, that Malvina Mattox, however irresponsible
by reason of her insanity, was the consciously guilty party
in this child murder, and that she was suffering deep and
dull remorse in semi-idiocy which had stupefied her for the
last five years; and that she must have long since unbur-
dened her soul by confession had she not been closely
watched, and perhaps constantly drugged with opiates, by
the mother, who had discovered her secret, and who was
grimly determined that that secret should not be made pub-
lic," said the detective.
"But what a cruel, what a criminal course for that wom-
an to pursue, knowing her daughter to be guilty and allow-
ing an innocent girl to suffer in that daughters place "
exclaimed Mr. Gower, indignantly.
"Cruel and criminal indeed. No doubt she feels it to be
so, and shc. too, suffers acutely; her face shows her suffer-
ing; but her conduct is not unnatural-for the criminal is
her own daughter and the innocent girl is nothing to her,
and she has not the Roman courage to give her own child up
to justice to vindicate an alien. I am afraid few women,
or even men, would have," said the detective.
"I burn at the stake until justice can be done!" vehe-
mently exclaimed Mr. Gower.
"We must surprise or frighten this woman into self-
betrayal or confession. I tried a little experiment on her
when I was about to withdraw from the room, after having
had the interview I have just related. She had been sitting
on a low chair, with her hands clasped on her lap, her head
bowed and her eyes fixed. She had never once spoken,
looked up, or moved in the slightest degree. She was as pale



<pb n="188"/>
188          THE TEST OF LOVE
u death, and might have been dead for any sign of life  ' i'
there was about her. I went up to her as I was leaving,  I
and laid a packet of my needle threaders on her hands and
spoke close to her ears to insure her attention. I only said:
"'I wish you would be so good as to look at these ar- 
ticles,' or words to that effect.
"But she sprang up as if suddenly stung and began to ,
wring her hands, and to cry out incoherently:
" 'It is not so ! It is not so ' over and over again, as fast 
as she could speak, and then: 'Why didn't I die? Why
didn't I die ?' until she fell into convulsions.
"I stooped to raise her from the floor where she had
fallen; but the mother, who had darted to her assistance,
dismissed me with sharp words, and I left them-to draw
my own conclusions, as you will now draw yours," said the
detective.
Mr. Hamilton Gower reflected for a moment, and then
said:
"But did not that wretched girl's incoherent words--
what were they ?--'It is not so! It is not so !'-savor more
of denial, of passionate, obstinate denial, than of confes-
sion ?"
"No; for no one had ever accused her. No, indeed-not  '^
as I understand them, from her manner. It was the sud-
den utterance of brooding remorse. 'It is not so!' meant, to  '
my apprehension, that Margaret Campbell never committed  i
the crime for which she is suffering the penalty."'
"Good heavens I Yes! that must have been the meaning
of the outburst !" said Mr. Gower.
"And yet the words would certainly bear two meanings
-zither a denial of her own guilt, or of Margaret Camp- '
bell's," put in Ham Gow.
"You would not think so if you had heard and seen her. '
And now I come to the strangest, the most incomprehen-
sible of my adventures at Rose Hill," said the detective,
solemnly; and then he paused and looked gravely from one
to the other of his hearers.
"Go on. We are all attention. Let us hear your adven-
ture, if it has any bearing on the case in question," said
Mr. Gower.
"It has a very important bearing on the case," replied
the detective; "but, mind, I intend to give you the facts in
.,



<pb n="189"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   189
all their supernatural seeming, but I do not intend to try
to account for the unaccountable mystery. I may, indeed,
advance a theory, but I certainly will not insist upon it."
By this time Hutchings had thoroughly aroused the curi-
osity of his two hearers.
And now he began by telling them of the strange rumor
that had met him on the very day of his arrival at Rosedale
-a rumor that had gained credence throughout the neigh-
borhood-that Margaret Campbell, the convict murderess,
had died out in the penal settlements of Van Dieman's
Land, and that her lost spirit haunted the scene of her
crime, and might be seen every night at midnight standing
over the old dry well, or walking around it, with the shape
of the murdered child in her arms.
"A mere vulgar ghost story, such as would be likely to
be invented by the lower classes in a neighborhood where
such a tragedy had been enacted," said Mr. Hamilton
Gower, contemptuously.
The detective looked at the speaker with a quizzical ex-
pression for a moment, and then said:
"Ah that is your opinion, is it? So was it mine when
I first heard the story from the landlady of the Campbell
Arms. But I had soon good reason to change my mind,
and to confess that there must be a material foundation for
the general fright."
"A material one, perhaps, but scarcely a spiritual one.
But, however, tell us your modified opinion," said Mr.
Gower, with an incredulous smile.
"My opinion was, that the supposed ghost-the haunting
spirit of the old dry well-which had frightened away every
midnight prowler more effectually than the fiercest watch-
dog could have done, was no other than the material person
of Malvina Mattox, who, pursued day and night by remorse,
epileptic, somnambulic, was driven each night to walk in
sleep around the scene of her terrible crime."
"That may have been likely, you know," put in Ham
Gow.
Mr. Gower said nothing, but became more attentive.
"This story, I must remind you, came to my ears before
I had actually seen the girl, but not before I had heard
sufficiently of her disturbed mental condition to be enabled
to suspect her of sleepwalking. With this suspicion on my



<pb n="190"/>
190          THE TEST OF LOVE
mind I determined to gain admittance to the premises that
night, and to watch beside the haunted well, and if the 
sleepwalker should appear, to seize and awaken her, at all 
hazards to her own safety, for the purpose of surprising her
into self-betrayal and confession." 
"Well, well," eagerly demanded Mr. Gower.
"I got the confidence of the old portress at the lodge,
where I passed the early portion of the night, and guided
by her grandson, I went a mile or so through the old wooded
park to the rear of the manor house, where the stables, ken- 
nels, paddock and so forth, were situated."
"Yes; go on," said Ham Gow.
"The scene of my adventure lies as plainly before my
mind's eyes to-night as it lay before my bodily eyes last
night. My path through a dense thicket had brought me
up to an old stone wall and under the branches of a dead
tree. It was midnight, and the full moon was shining
broadly down from the zenith. It was almost as bright as
day. I climbed the dead tree and looked over the wall."
The detective paused for a moment to drink a draught of  il
ale, and then continued:
"And this is what I saw under the broad, bright moon-^
light: On my right, the large, dark group of stone build- 
ings, comprising stables, coach houses, grooms' quarters
and kennels, surrounded by the stable yard. Just before
me an open paddock, with an old well in the midst, and
hayricks and barns beyond. On my left an obscure, dense' 
fir wood, from far behind which the chimneys of the manor
house arose."
The narrator paused to take another drink, and con-        l
tinued:
"Now, my dear sirs, you need not think, though it was 
midnight, that I dreamed what I am about to tell you; for
remember, that I was up in the fork of an old dead tree,
and I was even uncommonly wide awake, both from a sense
of the danger of my position, should I forget myself for an 
instant, and also from a vivid anticipation of an immediate 
encounter with a sleepwalker."
"We understand the situation," said Mr. Gower.
"Well, then, as I sat, with my eyes roving over the whole
scene-the stable yards and buildings, the paddock. with
the old dry well, and the dark fir wood-suddenly out of
.1



<pb n="191"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   191
that dark wood streamed a ray of vivid white light, like
nothing that I ever saw in the natural world. This light
arose and condensed into the form of a woman-a fair,
fragile woman, who steadily advanced-not step by step,
but gliding as light glides-into the paddock. I was so
much amazed by what I saw that 1 became spellbound and
unable to withdraw my eyes from the vision. She continued
to advance, and I saw that she carried in her arms the
form of a fair and beautiful child, and that it was the halo
which emanated from the radiant child that illuminate. 
the woman's form as by a borrowed light.
"I remained spellbound, to gaze upon the vision until it
approached the old dry well and bent over its brink.
"Then, in the sudden feeling that the woman was about
to drop the child into that perdition, I broke from the spell
that bound me, swung myself over the wall by the limb of
the tree in which I sat, and dropped into the paddock below.
"It took me a moment to recover from the shock of the
fall, and then I arose and ran toward the woman, who was
clasping the form of the child to her bosom and gazing
down into the well.
"As I approached she raised her head and turned around
and met my gaze with a pair of strangely blue, blazing eyes
that seemed less human eyes than inward fire flaming
through their sockets.
"Thinking only to save the child, awaken the sleepwalker
and surprise the criminal into self-betrayal, I threw my
arms around her and clasped-  "
"What, what?" demanded Ham Gow, while Mr. Gower
only listened in silent wonder.
"Empty air! And at the same instant received a shock
as if a thunderbolt had struck me to the earth where I fell
and remained in a state of unconsciousness for several
hours.
"It was daylight when I recovered and found myself ly-
ing under the wall of the old well. As soon as I collected
my scattered faculties I examined the ground, but found no
signs remaining of my nocturnal visitant or vision 1 There,
gentlemen, I have given you the facts! Make of them what
you please !" concluded the detective.
"How very extraordinary," commented Ham Gow.
"You have given us the facts, you say, and inexplicaal



<pb n="192"/>
l1B0         THE TEST OF LOVE 
enough they seem I But you promised us theories I What
ae they?" inquired Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"None that are satisfactory. The most plausible is the
one to which I have frequently alluded in the course of my
narrative."
"And that was?"
"That the midnight apparition at the haunted well was
no other than the conscience-tortured, sleepwalking crim-
inal, Malvina Mattox. And I tell you also that there was
a circumstance that singularly favored this theory."
"Ah! and that--  "
"It was this strange coincidence, that when I saw Mal-
vina Mattox, the same day, I found in her an exact counter-
part of the woman seen in the midnight vision-excepting
only the presence of the radiant child and the supernal
light."
"Well, but is not that the most likely of all theories in
regard to the apparition ?"
"It would be, but for some objection! If the vision at
the well had been that girl in the flesh, I should have
clasped a material body, and not a form of empty air! I
should have awakened a sleepwalker, and not have received
an electric shock that struck me as by lightning to the
earth, and left me there in a state of unconsciousness for
hours! Besides, if the vision were only the girl herself,
whence came the radiant child and the supernal light ?"
"From your own overheated imagination, possibly!"
"I have no imagination."
"Then you abandon the theory of the sleepwalker?"
"No, I don't; it may be the true one  I am only puzzled  i
and in doubt."
"Oh! well, I have another theory to offer!" said Mr.
Hamilton Gower.
"What is that, sir?" inquired the detective, with a look  i
of interest.
"My theory of the apparition is this-that while you were
perched up in that tree with your mind brooding over the
expected meeting with the somnambulist, you fell asleep
and dreamed the whole affair straight on to the moment 
when you attempted to start forward and seize the form of
the apparition, when you say that you clasped empty air
and received an electric shock that struck you as by a thun-
..~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ I,



<pb n="193"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   198
derbolt to the ground, where you lay in a state of uncon-
sciousness for several hours; but-when I say that in start-
ing ont in your sleep to catch the form of your dream, you
simply lost your balance and fell from the tree to the
ground with a shock that stunned you into insensibility,
from which you were very fortunate to recover at all.
There! that is my theory."
"A very likely one, too !" admitted Ham Gow.
"With only one objection, gentlemen, that it is not, and
cannot be, the true one. I was not asleep. I was not even
the least sleepy. I was wider awake, more vividly alive to
my surroundings, more keenly expectant of events than I
am at this present moment; and of this I assure you by
my word of honor and by all my hopes of happiness in this
world and the world to come," said Hutchings, with so
much solemnity that his two hearers found nothing more
to say on the subject.
"Well, what is our next move?" inquired Ham Gow, at
length.
"To take the early train to-morrow morning to York-
shire, and go down to Rose Hill," replied Mr. Gower.
CHAPTER XX
FLIGHT AND PURSUIT
"OUR next move will be to take the first train to York-
shire, eh? Is that your decision, sir?" inquired the detec-
tive, dryly.
"It is," answered Mr. Gower.
"Then let us see when that train goes," murmured the
detective, drawing a Bradshaw from his breast pocket, and
referring to the London and North Western Railway route.
"Ahl here it is. The York express leaves London at 1
A. M.-reaching York at 8 A. M. There you are, sir!
Will you take that?" asked Hutchings, as he marked the
line and passed the guidebook over to his employer.
"Certainly we will take this one! I did not know that
there would be one before daylight, but I am glad there is 
te^                                                      "~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="194"/>
.19           THE TEST OF LOVE
The sooner we are off the better," replied Mr. Gower, as he
examined the route.
"Do you wish me to go with you, sir?" inquired Hutch-
i  (Of course ! Why not? Why do you ask the question?"
demanded Gower.
"Because it would not be polite for me to reappear in the
neighborhood so soon after my departure from it," replied
Hutchings
"You mean at Boaedale ?
"Yes, sir."
"Well, I see the objection! Your immediate return with
two strangers in your wake might excite suspicions and lead
to precautions which would baffle us 1 And yet we should
need your presence, too," ruminated the young gentleman.
"There's where it is, sir  But I will suggest this-that
we all go together to Yorkshire as far as Stockstone, which
is the last terminus of our railway journey; and that you,
eir, and myself remain at Stockstone, while Mr. Gow goes 
on by stage to Rosedale to reconnoiter."
"A good plan. We will adopt it. But in a gossiping 
little country neighborhood like that, Gow would need some 
pretext to roam about Bose Hill. What should it be ?" 
"I might go as a vagabond artist in search of the pie- [''it
turesque," suggested Ham.                             '
" Twon't do," briefly replied Detective Hutchings.
"Why won't it?" demanded Ham Gow. 
"Because as traveling artist you would have no pretext 
for pushing yourself into the presence of the ladies of Rose  ;
Hill! And I think one of your first enterprises should be
to contrive to get face to face with Miss Malvina Mattox, to
identify her to your own satisfaction as the young woman
you saw throw a parcel into the well on the night and at the
'hour in which the child was cast there."
"Certainly," said Mr. G(ower, "that should be your first
And principal object in going before us to Rosedale; and,
*a Mr. Hutchings justly observes, your traveling in the
.character of an artist in search of the picturesque would 'i
never help you to the attainment of that object."
"Well, then, will somebody please to suggest something
ttter, something that will do?" aid Hm Gow. in a tone
da piqu



<pb n="195"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   195
"Go as a peddler. You needn't burden yourself with a
large pack. Go with a small assortment of ribbons and.
laces, cords and tassels, combs and brushes, and such like 1,
Go as a peddler and you can get into any country home yow
like," said Hutchings.
"Got no license," said Ham Gow.
"Never mind    We will have time to fix all that when;
we get to York. I see by the Bradshaw that if we go by'
the 1 A. M. train, which reaches York at 8 A. M., we shall
have two hours to wait for our branch train, and that will
give time enough to buy your pack and license both."
"But, I say," interrupted Mr. Gower, "if we don't make 
a move soon we will not catch our train." 
"Oh, there's time enough; but we may as well ring for
the bill," replied Hutchings, as he arose and pulled the bell 
cord.
"Bill I" said Mr. Gower, to the waiter who answered the:
summons.
The account was presented and settled, and the three mew
left the house to walk the short distance between the Mitre!
and the station.
They were in full time to catch the express train for
York, after having telegraphed from the station the fact of
their sudden journey, to Lona, at their inn.
Mr. Gower engaged a first-class compartment for his
party, and when they entered it he said:
"Ham, you and I will ensconce ourselves in these com-
fortable corners, and leave the sofa opposite for Hutchings.
He has been going day and night for the last forty-eight
hours, and must need rest."
Hutchings thanked Mr. Gower for his thoughtful kind-
ness, and stretched himself on the sofa, and before the train 
left the station he fell into a deep and dreamless sleep.
The train moved slowly out, and gaining speed at every
minute, was soon rushing northward from London.
Mr. Hamilton Gower and his faithful "gillie," snugly
ensconced in opposite corners of the back seat, alternately
listened to the heavy breathing of the sleeper on the sofa
before them, or gazed from the windows out on the open
country through which they were rushing, with its sleeping
villages and darkened farmhouses looking weird and spectral
fci    _     .. 



<pb n="196"/>
196          THE TEST OF LOVE
at this silent and deserted hour of two o'clock in the morn-
ing.
"I say, Mr. Gower, I think you needed to stretch your
limbs at rest as much as Hutchings here i Surely, you have
been moving about as much in the last forty-eight hours 1
If he has been traveling in Yorkshire we have been traveling
in Cornwall. So I think you need that sofa as much as he
does."
"Speak for yourself, Ham! I never felt fresher in my
life."
"Speak for myself, indeed I As if moving about were not
my normal condition-my 'vital breath,' my 'native air'l
But with you the case is different. You do look both pale
and fagged."
"I am very anxious, Ham, that is all. I wish to do some-
thing definite, and have something of value to say to my
friends in Tasmania before I write to them, as I shall do
by the next Australian mail."
"That doesn't go for ten days yet! Courage! You shall
have something to tell them !" said Gow, hopefully.
"If you could get sight of that woman, Malvina Mattox, 
you might surprise her into self-betrayal, and you would :i
be far more likely to do it than anyone else," said Mr. 
Gower. 
"How so?" demanded his companion.
"Oh, Ham! You never were cut out for a detective. 
How so, indeed? Don't you see? Look herel Did you not
tell me that on the night when you saw that woman throw
the parcel into the old dry well-the parcel that you then
supposed to be waste paper, or something quite as worthless
-she turned around and met you face to face, and uaw
your features as plainly as you saw hers?"
"Yes! and she looked frightened enough at seeing me,
too!"
"At seeing the unsuspicious witness of her crime. Now,
do you suppose that she has ever forgotten your face, or that
she will ever cease to fear its reappearance before her?
Then, if suddenly you should come before her, especially if
at the same time you should give her a significant look, or a
significant word, do you not suppose that she might be
startled into self-betraval ?" gravely inquired Gower.
"By George   I should think she might, indeed  But I
'|



<pb n="197"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   197
hope it isn't on the cards that I shall have to hang that
wretched girl, after all !" exclaimed Ham Gow, uneasily.
"Even if it should come to that, it would still be your
solemn duty to give the testimony that should convict the
guilty in order to vindicate the innocent," said Mr. Gower.
"Yes, I know that, and I should not shrink from my
duty; but still I hope it will not come to hanging," said
Ham.
"Never fear! She is too much of an imbecile for capital
punishment. Imprisonment in the Hanwell Asylum for
criminal lunatics will be the utmost penalty she will have
to suffer. She will be kindly treated there; quite as well
off--indeed, much better off than in her mother's house, and
very much happier than she is now, with that guilty secret
weighing on her conscience, and the horrible fear of the
death penalty always over her."
"I am glad you think they won't hang the poor girl,"
said Ham Gow, with much feeling.
"'Think?   Nonsense! I don't 'think.' I know they
won't! They don't hang idiots in the nineteenth century,"
said Mr. Gower.
The slowing of the train, the flashing of the lights along
the platform, and the bustling arrival of the express at a
great branch depot, put an end to the conversation.
"Hitching!  Change here for Cambridge, Bedford and
Leicester!" bawled a guard, bustling noisily the carriage
doors.
This woke Detective Hutchings up.
"Hitchin Station, is it?  We are thirty-two miles from
London, and I have slept like death all the way!" he ex-
claimed, sitting up and shaking himself.
But the express was off again.
Mr. Hutchings did not lie down again, but implored his
fellow travelers that one or the other should take his turn.
Ham Gow declared that it was only recently he had be-
come reconciled to riding on a railway train; but as to
sleeping on one-well, he would see the whole world further
first!
After a little persuasion, finding that no one else would
occupy the sofa, Mr. Hamilton Gower lay down on it and
went to sleep.
Ham Gow and Detective Hutchings, reclining in opposite
L 



<pb n="198"/>
198           THE TEST OF LOVE 
corner chairs, talked until they grew drowsy, and then
dozed. until they reached the old cathedral city of Pe.er.
boro'.
There they waked up.
Day was dawning. They slept no more.
Mr. Gower arose refreshed from his sofa. There was a
.delay of ten minutes here that allowed the three travelers
-time to go into the station and refresh themselves by wash-
ing their faces and heads, after which they returned rein-
-vigorated for their journey.
The train started again, and the three companions, now
:fully aroused, wide awake, talked with each other on the
subject that brought them to the North, or they watched
the beautiful dawning of the morning over the broad moor
-through which the express was rushing.
The sun was an hour high when they reached Newark-
`Upon-Trent.
There they got out of the carriage, and drank some coffee 
and ate some rolls at the refreshment counter of the sta-
tion, and so reinforced for the last stage of their journey,
resumed their seats just as the train was moving off again.
At eight o'clock they reached York.
There they learned the truth of Hutchings' former state-
ment, that there would not be a train for Stockstone before
ten o'clock.
They, therefore, had two hours before them to attend to
whatever they had to do.
They took a cab and drove around to the largest stores,
and bought miscellaneous articles for Ham Gow's peddler's
pack.
As they bought from necessity at retail stores, they had  '
to pay retail prices, and so they could not expect to make
much profit; but as we know that profit was not their ob- 
ject, we are sure that the circumstance was of no conse-
,quence.
As soon as the public city offices were open for business,
-they went and bought a peddler's licence for Ham Gow.
Also here the three travelers had to purchase two extra
-ralipes and several changes of clothing, and other neces-
varies for their journey, which their hasty departure from
London had prevPnted them from providing in that city.
When all this business was accomplished, they returned
,, ,                                           A]~~~



<pb n="199"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   199
to the railway station, where they enjoyed a substantial
meal, which might have been called either breakfast or
luncheon.
After which they entered their train and were on their
way to Stockstone, where they arrived about noon.
The stagecoach that ran between the market town of
Stockstone and the village of Rosedale was at the station,.
waiting for chance passengers.
"We had better not seem to know each other here,"'
whispered Detective Hutchings to Ham Gow, before they
left the compartment which the three had occupied alone 
together.
"Just so  I will go immediately and get into the Rose-
dale coach with my pack, and I will write and report to Mr.
Gower, as arranged," whispered Ham Gow, in reply.
"Can you recommend any inn here?" hastily inquired
Mr. Gower.
"Yes, the Cat and Fiddle is the best. Never mind the
name. It is the best, really. We can walk thither," replied
Hutchings.
The carriage door was opened by the guard, and the three
men got out and parted on the platform as if they did not
know each other-Ham Gow going into the stagecoach for
Rosedale, and Mr. Hamilton Gower and Detective Hutch.
ings walking up Market Street, bound for accommodations
at the Cat and Fiddle.
We must follow Ham Gow.
While Mr. Gower and Detective Hutchings were seated
comfortably at dinner in the little coffee room of the Cat
and Fiddle, the largest inn in Stockstone, situated in the
busiest part of Market Street, Ham Gow, with his pack, was
being jolted along the turnpike road over the moors toward
Rosedale.
He was the only passenger by the stagecoach on this day,
which did not chance to be market day.
Ham was glad of the solitude and did not mind the jolt-
ing. He put his pack upon the opposite seat, crossed his
arms over his bosom and leaned back to enjoy at once the
threefold luxury of silence, isolation and passive exercise;
nor did he change his position until the coach rattled over
the rocky street leading into Rosedale and drew up before
the Campbell Arms.
L,



<pb n="200"/>
200          THE TEST OF LOVE
Then he paid his fare, took up his pack, and marhe~ 
into the taproom and called for a mug of "'arf-and-'arf." 
While he stood drinking his beer, the landlady ap- 
proached him-attracted by his pack; a peddler from Lon- 'i
don, as she supposed him to be, would produce novelties not 
to be found in Rosedale.
"Can 1 have a room here, ma'am ?" inquired Ham, meet-
ing her advances half *ay.
"Yes. How long will you want one ?" inquired the little  ;
widow, her black eyes turning from the peddler to his pack,
and snapping with eagerness to get into it.
"Well, that depends on how I dispose of my wares, 
ma'am," answered Ham, with a laugh.
"Oh! you are a peddler?" exclaimed the landlady, just
as if she had not known that all along.
"Yes, ma'am-a peddler. Will you take a look at my
wares-some of the newest and prettiest things out-- - "
"Say," whispered the landlady, interrupting him, "take
up your pack and follow me."
Ham Gow set down his empty mug, lifted his merchan- '
dise, and followed his leader into a little parlor behind the ,j
bar, where they found themselves alone.
"Now, then, put your pack on that table, and sit down in ·
that chair while you open it at your ease. But," she said, i';
lowering her voice to a whisper, "first tell me, are you a
smuggler ?"
"Oh, ma'am I" exclaimed Ham Gow, in a scandalized A
tone, as he fumbled in his pocket for his peddler's license.
"Oh, now, you needn't go off at a tangent! I have noth- 
ing to say against smuggling. I believe in free trade-I do,
-and in getting a silk gownd for two-and-six the yard, !
instead o' paying four-and-six, which the duty and the rest
of the cheating makes it."
"But I am not a smuggler, ma'am," put in Ham Gow.
"Oh, I see you don't believe me. You think I am trying 
to entrap you to hand you over to the excise men; but I am
not, indeed ! I wouldn't do such a thing for the world! I 
believes in free trade; and, as I had no voice in making the 
laws ag'in smuggling, I don't feel bound to obey them! I
try to keep the ten commandments, and that is about as
much as I can do. So trot out your French silks and 
Brussels lace."
.~~~~~~~



<pb n="201"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                  201
Ham Gow "trotted" out his peddler's license instead, and
laid it before her in triumph, which was a little dashed
when she exclaimed:
"Oh, yes; I see that, of course I You are obliged to have
that, anyway, smuggler or no smuggler. It's a blind to
moat people, but it don't blind me-not much! Now,
then !" 
Ham Gow had opened his pack and sred the contents
all over the table before her.
It was the miscellaneous assortment of the ordinary
peddler's pack.
Ham Gow sold her a black silk dress, a pair of black kid
gloves, and a lace collar and cuffs; all of which she bullied
him into selling at half price, because she insisted that he
had never paid dutyon them.
And then the barmaid, and chambermaid, and cook, and
scullion were called in and permitted to make purchases on
the same easy terms-the landlady still whispering confi-
dentially to each:
"He's a smuggler, so you must make him let you have
the things cheap; and you needn't mind dealing with him.
Women never had anything to do with making the laws
agin' free trade, and they ain't bound to respect them."
So Ham Gow had to see linen handkerchiefs, cotton lace
and gilt jewelry go at about half what he had paid for
them; but he did not care-the loss was not his, and profit
was not the object of his present employer.
"Do you think of going out with your pack this after-
noon ?" inquired the landlady, as Ham Gow, having sold
them all they wanted, was busily engaged doing up his
merchandise.
"Yes; I do," he replied.
"Then, I'd advise you to strike out into the country. You
won't sell so much in the village here, because we have
shops, you know."
"I see! But could you advise me as to the most profitable
route to take?"
"Yes. There, you women, you have got all you want,
now go!" said the landlady, suddenly turning to her four
handmaids, who thereupon gathered up their belongings
and departed.
b ' 



<pb n="202"/>
20!2           THE TEST OF LOVE 
She closed the door after them, and turned to the peddle r,
and resumed:
"Yes, I can advise you where to go. You go fust to Rols '.
Hill. It is a straight road from this to the park gates, ;
where my mother-in-law keeps the lodge. Tell her I sent'
you, and tell her you have got a heavy blanket shawl such ij
as she would want, and you can sell it to her at about half i
what she would have to give in the village shops, I know." :
"Thank you, ma'am! I'll take a bit of dinner and the, I
go! Rose Hill?   Let me see! Rose Hill?   Didn't I hear 
something dreadful about that place once?  What was it,,.
again? Oh, I know! A jealous husband shot his wife andi
shot his rival, and then cut his own throat-didn't he?"
"No! nothing of the sort! Not at Rose Hill! It was ae
young girl as dropped her little cousin down a well, so shei
could come in for his fortune; but she was conwicted fox,]
it, and would have been hunged ef it hadn't been she wai^
such a child herself. She was sent to Bottomy Bay to piclk
oakum for life; but she's dead now, sure enough, and her
ghost walks every night around the haunted well !" said the!]i
landlady, mysteriously.
"Good gracious! Does anybody live in the house?" 
"The Widow Campbell lives there with her two daughi:
tere, leastways with only one daughter now-the eldest, MisI
Lavinia; the youngest one, Miss Malvina, which is afflicted
have run away."
"Who has run away?" inquired Ham      Gow, now very
much interested.
"Miss Malvina, the afflicted daughter. I will tell you al
about it. Day before yesterday there came down a chap a
was agent for a pattink needle threader. And he went ove!
to Rose Hill to try and sell some of them there-which I
must say they are a real blessing to any woman, and no
fam'ly should be without.  Hows'ever, he went, and go
word with the ladies, and few there are as ever do that; fori
since Miss Malvinia has been so afflicted they never sees an1y
strangers."
"How is she afflicted ?"
"Apple-ipsy they call it. I say it is nothing but fitst 
Hows'ever, whether it was because she wasn't used to seeing
strangers, or what not, I can't say; but while the needledi
threader chap was there in presence she fell into one  i
.  :   .   .   .   .   ..                .      ..v~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="203"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                  208
her worst conniptions and from out'n one fit into another-
crying all the time:
"'It was not so  It was not so 1 It was not so ' Just
as if anybody ever said anything was so, to cross her, until,
as Sarah Ann, the parlor nsaid, told my old mother-in-law,
it was enough to drive everbody in the house demented 1"
"The girl is crazy, then?'\
"Crazy, or-something,   nyways, it was hours before
she sank into quietness and then into a deep sleep, such as
the madam thought from past experiences would last all
day and all night. So they drew the window curtain and
shut the door and left her alone.
"The ladies went to luncheon. Half an hour afterward,
sir, when the madam opened her door to see how she was
sleeping, she was gone I"
" 'Gone I' "echoed the peddler.
"Gone! The madam was surprised, but at fust she was
not alarmed. She thought the poor girl had waked up and
wandered off to some other room in the house, and she and
her eldest daughter went in search of her; but, sir, the
afflicted one could not be found, neither in the house, nor in
the grounds, nor in the neighborhood. Neither had anyone
seen her or any sign of her since her mother left her sleep-
ing soundly in bed when she went to luncheon."
"She had disappeared," said the peddler.
"Yes, she had disappeared. And naturally the poor
mother thought of that terrible time when her other child
disappeared and was found dead at the bottom of the old
dry well. And she sent to the village and had a man go
down into the well to search it, but nothing was found
there but a lot of old bundles made of nothing but waste
paper. Well, now, to make a long story short, the whole
country have been beat up, yesterday, last night and this
morning, and no trace of the lost girl has been found."
"How could she have vanished so suddenly and so com-
pletely ?"
"Ah! how? But the woods are thick around Rose Hill,
aid I should not wonder yet if she were found dead in some
of the thickets."
"Heaven forbid !" exclaimed Ham Gow, who felt that in
such a death of Malvina Mattox all hopes of the vindication
Ln



<pb n="204"/>
204         TTHE TEST OF LOVE 
of Margaret Campbell, upon which his friend, Mr. Hamil 
ton Gower, had so set his heart, would also die.
"Ahl Heaven forbid, indeed, for the poor madam's
sake I AhI they used to say that she did not care for her
poor, afflicted girl, and was ashamed of her, and would
rather have her out of the way than in it; but they ought to
see her now, as my old mother-in-law describes her, just
mad with distress and anxiety. But I'm keeping you from 
your dinner. You mentioned dinner, I think?"
"Yes, anything that you have got handy. I'll not wait 
to have anything cooked now, for I must 'make hay while I
the sun shines,' you know. I'll just take a cold bite, and ' 
make up for it at supper time," he said. 
"Then you can have that cold bite in here, if you like,"
said the landlady, as she arose and left the room.
In a very few minutes she returned, followed by a waiter i;
bearing a tray laden with all that was required.  L
The table was spread, and the peddler sat down and, 
made a hearty repast of cold beef, bread and cheese, and ,;
beer.
Then shouldering his pack he left the house, and being m
directed by the landlady, he marched out of the village by 'I
the road that led to the Rose Hill lodge, and reached it i!.s 
good time.                                           X
CHAPTER XXI
HIDDEN 
HAM Gow stopped for a moment to gaze at the high, mol-' 
dering old stone wall, now covered with moss, lichen and '
other parasitical plants, that had changed its original sur-
face of stone-gray to a variegated marble hue of red, green, 
brown and yellow, and on the crowded trees that reared their
lofty heads above it.
Then he tried the small gate on the right of the great one,. i
and, finding it open, he rang the bell at the little Gothic;
lodge.
The door was opened by the old dame, who, seeing a ped-. 
dler there with his pack, gladly welcomed him with the',
words:



<pb n="205"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   205
"Oh! Ahl You have got summat to sell. Come inl
Come in! I'll take a look at it."
Ham Gow nodded and smiled as he entered the cottage,
and sat down in a chair pla ed for him by the dame.
"Your daughter at the Cunpbell Arms recommended me
to come and show you my goods," said the peddler, as he
proceeded to open his pack.
"Ah, yes ! she's a good ddughter enough. She allus sends
me anything likely that comes in her way 1 Day before yes-
terday she sent me a thread-needling fellow, which I
wouldn't be without it now for double and treble its worth,
let alone other profits as I made out'n him! Ah! that's
what I want I That would just suit me-if it's anything
like a reasonable price!" exclaimed the dame, seizing on the
heavy blanket shawl of dark-gray color and holding it up.
"Your daughter thought it would suit you."
"Ah! she knowed it would! It isn't whether the shawl
would suit, it's whether the price would suit! That's the
question," said the old woman, cunningly.
"I think I can make the price suit," replied the peddler.
"I hope so, I'm sure! Yer see, here's where it is-I did
a sarvice for that needle-threader chap, which he paid me
princely in two guineas; which, if it hadn't been for that,
I shouldn't never ha' been able to buy a warm shawl for
the winter as I wanted worse kind. I know I shall never
see two more guineas the longest day I live in the world 
So, yer see, I ain't gwine to give all my fortin for a shawl,
bad as I want it!"
"Oh, no, ma'am, certainly not! You shall have this
shawl for one guinea. And, really, I only make one shilling
profit on it," said Ham Gow, telling the exact truth.
"Do yer expect me to believe that? Guinea, indeed!
Set yer up with it I I'll give yer no sich extorbitting price,"
exclaimed the dame.
"Well, then, what will you give?" inquired the peddler.
"I'll give yer ten and sixpence, and not a ha'penny
more 1"
"Oh, ma'am! I could never let the shawl go for half
price !"
"Well, then, yer kin keep it yerself! Half price, indeed I
Yer know very well as yer never give more'n eight shillings
k



<pb n="206"/>
206          THE TEST OF LOVE
for it  Yer smuggled of it ! All you peddlers be smugglers 
-or worse '!"
"Oh, ma'am! This could not be a smuggled shawl! It 
is home manufacture--"
"Oh, yes, yer made it yerself, or your missus did 1"
"It is from the woolen factories of--"
"I don't care where it's from, I won't give more'n ten-.,
and-six !"
"Say fifteen shillings and the shawl is yours! And I.
assure you I lose five shillings on it." 
"Set yer up with it ! I'll-well, I give you ten and nine l
pence and not a ha'penny more 1"                    . i
After a little more chaffering, which Ham Gow sustaine
on his side more for keeping up his character as a peddler."
than for any other purpose, the shawl was sold for twel4"
shillings, with a clear loss of eight shillings upon the coet,
And old Dame Keene afterward confided to Sarah Ani
at the manor house that she knew the peddler had eithe'
smuggled the shawl or stolen it, else he never would havd
sold it for twelve shillings, when it was worth every bit 
twenty-five 
But this is a digression.' 
When the purchase had been effected and a further '"
vestment of two shillings had been made on a pair of bro
doeskin gloves, and the dame had declared that she woul
spend no more money that day, the peddler asked her
the gentlefolks up to the manor house would not like to lo
at his wares.
"No! no, young man, they wouldn't! And if yer'll tak
a fool's advice, yer'll not go a-nigh the house I They won
see yer, the ladies won't, and any servant as let yer in would
be sure to lose her place  Why, yer don't know what'
happened there, do yer?" 
"I heard in the village that one of the young ladies had:
disappeared."                                       '
"Yes, she have, and the madam's purty nigh distracted'
and all the house is upsot! And they say it all happened
through letting that thread-needling fellow into the house !
"Why, do they think that the sales agent ran away with
the girl?"
"Oh, no! not that; but she were afflicted, were Miss Mei
winy, and he were a stranger, and they all will have it 
. ,
:4ii



<pb n="207"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   207
the sight of the stranger unsettled her. Anyway, she's been
gone ever since yesterday arternoon."
"And no tidings of her yet?"
"Yes; I reckon as they have got summat like tidings at
last."
Ham Gow pricked up his ears.
"Something like tidings, did you sayP"
"Well, yes; summat like that. Now, young man, ef I tell
you something, will yer promise me not to tell Susan, nor
any of them gossiping people at the Arms?" inquired the
old dame, who dearly loved to impart news.
"Yes, I promise, sacredly," answered Ham Gow, think-
ing to himself: "I am glad she does not want me to prom-
ise not to tell anybody out of the village."
"Well, now, then I'll tell yer.
" 'Bout noon to-day-I was just a-sitting down to dinner
with Jacob, which it were bacon and black-eyed bean soup
-when the gate bell rung. The same side yer came through
yerself, only it was locked then; and who should I see but
one of the fevthers!"
"One of the feathers " exclaimed Ham Gow.
"No! man alive; one of the feythers-one of the priests
of St. Sepulcher, to be sure, where the madam goes to
church, when she do go. You know St. Sepulcher, don't
yer ?"
"No, I do not."
"Well, it is about fifteen miles from here, and no rail-
road tor stage line. So I court'sied down to the ground,
and ]t his reverence in. And he only bowed, with his
quee topped hat on his head, and went walking solemnly
up tne avenue, with his black gown tied around his waist,
and/anging all the way down to his heels  Did yer ever
see one o' them rigs, sir ?"  -
"Yes, I have."
"Well, it is a sight to see. And, as I was a-saying, he
walks solemnly up the avenue; and says I to myself: 'Sum-
mat's afoot,' says I."
"The priest was afoot, anyway," laughed Ham Gow.
"So he was, sir; but I didn't mean him," solemnly replied
the old woman, who had no mirth in hersoul. "I meant
summat was up consarning Miss Melwiny !"
"Ah I"



<pb n="208"/>
X08          THE TEST OF LOVE
"Yes, sir; that was it. So I went in and put on
things, and went up to the house. But, lor' ! the priest 
got there long before I did, and he were closeted with t
madam at that present speaking. And Sary Ann, she 
nowhere to be seen. But I could guess very well where 
was. I knowed very well if there was any secret pave
and marveling in a room with closed doors Sary Ann wo
be at the key. So there I stayed in the kitchen a-waitin' 
what would happen next. Eh, dear I what a world this is 
muttered the dame. And she went off into reverie.
"What did happen next?" inquired Ham Gow.
"Eh ! nothing much, just at first. The missus rang
bell, after a bit, and ordered wine and biscuits brought
and half an hour or so later on I heard the priest co
down and leave the house. I didn't consider of it need
for me to go back to the lodge then, for I had left the ga
open for his reverence to pass out; so I waited till Sary 
come down. Then the cook up and 'tacked her.
" 'And wot fetch the priest here this morning?' says
cook, says she.
"'And how do I know, 'less he come to comfort mis
in her trouble, as a good Christian minister ought,' sa
Sary Ann, says she.
"'Well, I do reckon as that was his business a
enough,' says the cook, who was a onsuspicious soul as es
lived.
"'And now, Sary Ann, my dear,' says I, 'if so be as you
walk a bit back with me, I'll give you a couple o' 
needle threaders.'
"And Sary Ann ris right up at that, and said
would go.
"And we walked along the avenue toward the lodge.
" 'And now, Sary Ann,' says I, 'you and me be o
cronies, who don't have no secrets from one another, a
likewise we is two descreet wimming as don't go a-gossip
here and there! So now I want you to tell me true---w
did the priest come for this day, and do he know anyh
about Miss Melwiny ?
"Now, I seed Sary Ani were fairly a-busting to tell 
all about it; but says she:
" 'If I tell yer, will yer swear never to tell no hu
being?' 
I



<pb n="209"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    209
"And I promised faithful, never to tell no huming being,
an' no more I won't, sir, never; for I don't count telling
you, as ye're a perfect stranger, as will go away ter-morrer
or next day, and forget all about it 1 But mind, yer mustn't
mintion it to a soul in the willage while here you stay !"
"Never!" exclaimed Ham Gow, emphatically.
"Well, then Sary Ann, she up and told me all about it!
How the priest had told the missus as Miss Melwiny were at
the Convent of the Holy Sepulcher, which the pious sisters
were taking good care on her at that present speaking.
" 'Seems like, from wot I could hear,' says Sary Ann, 'as
she 'rived at the convent last night, and begged to be taken
in; and she was took in, because it was seen at once that
she was a poor needlet as it would be dangerous to turn
away. And this morning, when the priest seen her, he rec-
cognized her as one of the Miss Mattoxes-that is, the
afflicted one. And he came over here and told the missus.'"
"It was a long walk, fifteen miles," said Ham Gow.
"Bless you, he didn't walk all the way. He rode a horse-
back, it 'pears, far as a parishioner which is sick and
wanted spirituous consolation, and he left his horse there to
feed and rest, while he walked here, which is a short walk.
Leastways, that's wot Sary Ann says he told the missus,
when she offered to have the pony chay brought around for
him."
"So the young lady is at the Convent of the Holy
Sepulcher ?"
"Yes; but don't you go and tell anybody in the willage."
"No, I won't; but I don't see any reason why it should
kept secret."
"Don't yer? Well, then I'll tell yer! It is because, if
it got out now, the missus would be sure to think as some-
body had been a-listening! Missus is so wery suspicious."
"Ah, and is the young lady to be left at the convent, do
you know?"
"That's just what I arksed Sary Ann, when she said. it
'peared, from all she could make out, as the poor afflicted
gal was to stay there for the present."
"Where is that convent?" inquired the peddler, with as-
sumed carelessness.
"Oh, west of this! 'Way down by the sea."



<pb n="210"/>
210          THE TEST OF LOVE
"Ah, well, poor girl, I hope she will be taken care
And now. dame, as T cannot sell you anything more--"
"Which I think I have spent money enough for one da
I do."
"And as you think it would not be advisable for me to 
up to the manor house--"
"It would be worse nor useless, sir."
"Then I think I will bid you good-by, and return to 
village. It is getting late."
"So it be, indeed! And these roads over the moors
uncanny for strangers after sundown, which if once 
miss their way on 'em it ain't so easy to find it again; 
as there's any danger to you so long as you keep straight 
this road, and keep out'n public houses."
"Thanks!   I'll take your advice, dame. Good-a
noon." 
"Good-afternoon! Gi'e my love to my darter-in-la
Susan, at the Arms, and tell her as how I'm obleeged to h
for ree-commending you to me. I'm proud o' the shaw
though I do think as yer charged me too much fer it! W
you tell her?"
"With pleasure. Good-night."
"Thanky'! And mind, don't yer tell anybody in
willage what I told yer about Melwiny Mattox !"
"Not a word, on my honor ! Good-night."
"Good-night."
The sun had set, and the afterglow was fast fading fr
earth and sky as Ham Gow passed through the park g
and turned into the road that led back to the village.
He had obtained all the information he could find 
Rose Hill, and it was so very important that he resolved
go on that very night to Stockstone to impart it to M
Gower and Detective Hutchings, that they might take co
sel on the situation.
He walked rapidly over the ground that separated 
from the Campbell Arms.
He did not know whether the Rosedale and Stocks
stagecoach was to make another trip to the Stockstone
tion that night, or, if it should. at what hour it would
or, failing the stagecoach, whether he could get any ot
conveyance from the village to the market town; but



<pb n="211"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   21T
knew that opportunity might be missed by delay; and noth-
ing could be lost by haste.
So he walked at his utmost speed, notwithstanding his
heavy pack; and it was well for his enterprise that he did
so; for, just as he came in sight of the Campbell Arms, he
saw the stagecoach moving on.
He ran and shouted to the driver.
"Hello   Stop l Stop !" he cried, waving his hat in his
left hand, while his pack was held fast in his right one.
"Hello, yourself l What is it?" shouted the driver, in
reply, as he drew up.
"A passenger! Double fare if you'll wait two minutes !"
"Hurry up, then 1"
Ham Gow ran up, ran into the Campbell Arms, dropped
down his pack before the landlady, saying:
"Keep that for security of my bill until I come back!
Have got to go to Stockstone to look after something I have
left behind and feel uneasy about !"
And before the breathless landlady could recover her
wind, Ham Gow had rushed out, jumped on board the
starting coach and was off.
The alarmed landlady recovered her breath, and expressed
her sentiments.
"Humph! We'll never see him ag'in, unless it's in the
hands of the perlice I As sure as eggs is eggs, he stole these
things, and he's running from the perlice I Here! Peter!
John! Susan ! Mary    Listen what I say ! That peddler
what put up here has left his pack and gone off in the coach
to Stockstone! Now, I want you all to bear witness as I'm
no receiver of stolen goods! Let that pack lay right there
where he drapped it, and don't any of you lay finger on it
to put it away. I'd send it to the perlice station if there
was any nigher than Stockstone, but as there isn't, why
just let it lay there and nobody touch it till the perlicemen
come to look after him, as they will come soon, you bet i"
Meanwhile, Ham Gow, happily unconscious of the dark
suspicions against him, and brimful of the news he had to
tell his companions in this quixotic adventure of righting
i      the wrong, was jolted on his way to Stockstone, where he
arrived at the hour which old-fashioned housekeepers used
to call "early candlelight."
He went straight to the "Cat and Fiddle," and inquired



<pb n="212"/>
212          THE TEST OF LOVE
for his friends, and was at once ushered into a privat
parlor, where he found Mr. Gower and Detective Hutchin
quietly reading the country papers.
"What news " exclaimed the former, starting up.
"A sack full of news !" replied Ham Gow, throwing him$i
self into a chair.
And then and there he eagerly told his story.
"Fled to a convent, has she? Now, then, our bird is a
certainly netted! She leaves the convent only to stand a
the bar of justice 1" exclaimed the detective.
"Explain yourself," said Mr. Gower.             i
"The Assizes are to be held here in ten days from th
and Malvina Mattox shall be arraigned at them to stand
trial for the murder of Stuart Campbell. And of that
pledge you my official word of honor."
"But I do not understand! Explain, I beg you."
"I have a plan that is sure of success."
CHAPTER XXII
RUN TO COVER
"WHAT is this infallible plan of yours, then?" inq
Mr. Hamilton Gower of the detective.
"A very simple one. Mr. Gow here tells us that wh
he discovered the girl, Malvina Mattox, at the well, t
night, the moment after she had committed the crim
which he did not understand at the time to be a murder
they stood for an instant face to face with each other, gaz
at each other, fully taking in every feature of each other
said Hutchings.
"Well ?" inquired Gower.
"Do you not suppose that, under the circumstances, 
indelible impression of the other's face was made upon
memory of each?" 
"Yes, I do."
"Do you not suppose that girl's guilty conscience
haunted with the secret fear of seeing the face of that
ness again appearing some time to accuse her?"
"I think it more than likely."



<pb n="213"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   215
"Then, let Mr. Gow, here, go at once to the Convent of
the Holy Sepulcher, and, upon some pretext that we must
invent, ask to see the girl. When she shall be brought in the
visitors' room to see him, let him ask her if she remembers
the occasion of their first meeting at midnight by the old
dry well, some five years since-and-the result, mark me,
will be her self-betrayal!"
"Ah-h! I see," muttered Hamilton Gower.
"For, you see, by all. that we can judge from what we
have heard, she has been tortured by remorse for the last
five years, and has, doubtless, betrayed herself to her mother,
and must certainly have done so to others, had she not
been closely watched by that lady. Even my visit, for some
reason that I do not understand, disturbed her to such a
degree as to throw her into convulsions, and later to cause
her flight from her home and her taking sanctuary in the
convent. Judge, therefore, what the effect will be when
she shall find herself face to face once more with the only
mortal witness of her crime !"
"I see! I see! Let us lose no more time in talking!
Let us go at once to the Convent of the Holy Sepulcher 
Now, then-what train should we take? And what is the
nearest station?" hastily inquired Mr. Gower.
"There is no train leading anywhere near the convent,
and this is the nearest station, and it is nine miles off ! So
I learned by inquiry at Rose Hill. The Convent of the Holy
Sepulcher is one of the most secluded of the religious houses
in the realm. We shall have to take a private conveyance,"
said Hutchings.
"All right! I will go and get onel" exclaimed Ham
Gow, rising and running out.
"Hold on, if you please !" called out the detective.
Ham Gow ran in again, inquiring:
"What is up now?"
"It is too late to do anything to-night, you know!"
said Hutchings.
"Not so !" impatiently exclaimed Hamilton Gower. "We
shall not be able to gain admittance to the convent to-night,
it is true; but we can go on and stop at the nearest public
house, and be ready for as early a visit as the rules will
allow in the morning. So time will be saved, and time is
precious."



<pb n="214"/>
214           THE TEST OF LOVE
"That is so, if you choose to go to so much extra tr
and inconvenience," assented Hutchings.
"I would go to any trouble-suffer any inconvenience
exclaimed the young gentleman.
"You speak and you work as if you had a very heavy st
in this game, sir," said the detective.
"I have a very heavy stake in it, my friend," replied
young gentleman.
Ham Gow stood looking from one to the other, wait
orders, as it were.
"Go on, Gow, dear fellow, and engage a carriage 
a pair of good, fresh horses, and while you are at it inq
more particularly into the whereabouts of the convent, a
the best way of getting there," said Mr. Hamilton Gower.
The ex-tramp needed no spur, but ran out of the ro
again, and used such expedition that in less than twe
minutes he returned with the announcement that the c
riage was at the door, and that the Convent of the Ho
Sepulcher was situated on High Moor, ten miles north
Stockstone, and was to be reached only by a labyrinth
country roads.
"Ten milesl That.is one mile more than we bargain
for, to begin with, and the distance doubled by wind'
ways I However, it does not matter so much, since weco
not get into the convent by any means before mornig
said Hamilton Gower, as he made hasty preparations
departure.
In five minutes the three men were seated in the 
riage, bowling along the road toward High Moor.
It was a hazy night; but the moon, a little on the w
now. was shining through the thin clouds, making t
road over the seemingly boundless moor clearly visible.
"I would like to have some faint idea of where we are
sleep to-night; not having been in bed for the last t
nights, the subject is an interesting one," said Hutch
with a grim smile.
"Oh! I asked about that," returned Ham Gow, "and
find that within a quarter of a mile of the convent sta
the old inn of the Great Black Bear, on the old Lon
Road-an inn almost as ancient as the convent itself, w
-if you believe the Stockstone folk lore-must have 



<pb n="215"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   215
built on a rock in the sea, long before this island formed
around it."
Hutchings laughed at the tramp's hyperbole, but Mr.
Gower gravely said that-all jokes aside-the convent was
certainly of very ancient date.
Their horses were in good condition, and went so well
that, notwithstanding the winding ways, at about ten o'clock
they drew up before one of the oldest, quaintest and most
picturesque country inns that the travelers had'ever beheld.
It was a large building, or rather a large cluster of build-
ings, of graystone, red brick, peaked and tiled roofs, and
latticed windows, and with stable yards, corn cribs and hay-
ricks crowded behind it. On the right and left great forest
trees overshadowed it; in front, from a high pole, the sign
of the Great Black Bear swung and creaked in the night
wind.
And over all the moor there was not another building of
any sort visible, though the driver of the carriage, pointing
with the handle of his whip to a mass of black shadows on
the horizon, opposite the inn, told the travelers that there
stood the Convent of the Holy Sepulcher, supposed to be
the oldest of its class in England.
At the sound of wheels, a man with a lantern in his hand
emerged from the silent and solitary-looking inn and came
up to the carriage.
"Can we have accommodations here for the night?" in-
quired Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"Ou, ay, no doot, your honor," answered the man, with a
very low bow.
The three travelers alighted, and followed the waiter into
the house, while the driver took the carriage around to the
stables.
"What would your honors hae for supper?" inquired the
* waiter, as he ushered his guests into the best parlor.
Ham Gow whispered to his "feudal lord":
"No matter what you order, they will give us bacon and
eggs and bad beer, or worse wine."
"Anything will do; whatever you have in the house, so
that it is cleanly served," answered Mr. Gower.
The waiter bowed and withdrew, and his exit was soon
followed by the entrance of the chambermaid, who courte-



<pb n="216"/>
916           THE TEST OF LOVE
sied and conducted them to their rooms-three little cha
bers in a row, opening upon the same passage.
Sweet little rooms, with white dimity curtains and
spreads, all smelling of dried lavender; three-cornered w
stands with blue stone basins and ewers, and dressing ta
glasses.
By the time the travelers had refreshed themselves 
a good wash and had brushed their hair they were cal
down to supper, which was laid in the best parlor, the sa
into which they had been first introduced.
The supper was not what Ham Gow had prophesied t
it would be-bacon and eggs, with bad beer and worse w
-it was cold ham and beef, fine cheese and butter,
bread and prime Scotch ale.
After enjoying a hearty meal, the tired travelers ret
to rest, and-as neither of them had been in bed for t
nights-they each and all dropped into a deep and drea
less sleep that lasted until morning.
Mr. Hamilton Gower was the first to wake. The 1
beams of the rising sun, streaming in between the mid
opening of the white window curtains, struck him full
the evelids, and, with that kiss of light, aroused him.
He started up, collected his faculties, and went and 1l
out of the window.
The moor stretched away on every side until its bo
daries were lost in the distant horizon.
Not a house or a tree was to be seen in the vast expa
except that group of dense black shadows under the hor
straight before him which the coachman had pointed out
the night before as the buildings of the Convent of the H
Seplleher.
"The last refuge of the eoncc:ence-stricken murderess
has left an innocent girl to suffer in her stead." said Ha
ton Gower to himself, as he gazed upon the mass.
He was in no mood to incur delay by the somnolencvy
his fellow-travelers, so, before beginning to dress himself, 
walked out into the passage and beat a "reveille" upon
door of the room occupied by Ham Gow, which soon aro
the latter from his profound slumber.
"Hello! what the-" growled Ham. 
"It is I  The sun is up, and so should you be! I



<pb n="217"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    217
going to order breakfast. We must be off in an hour!
Hurry !" exclaimed Mr. Gower, as he left the door of Ham
Gow's room, and went to that of Mr. Hutchings.
But the noise had already aroused the detective, who
called out that he was awake and about to rise.
Mr. Gower returned to his own chamber, and rang for the
waiter, who promptly appeared.
"Breakfast in half an hour, and the carriage at the door
in three-quarters," he said.
The waiter touched his forehead and vanished.
Mr. Gower dressed himself and went down into the par-
lor, where he found the breakfast table set, and where he
was soon joined by his two traveling companions.
"Let our coachman get his breakfast and be ready to'
attend us," said Mr. Gower, as they took their seats at the
table.
The waiter went out to give the required order, and then
returned to serve the guests.
As soon as breakfast was over, the three travelers entered
the carriage, and gave the order:
"To the Convent of the Holy Sepulcher."
Their way lay across the barren moor. A quarter of a
mile of country road brought them to the high, gray wall
that surrounded the convent grounds and inclosed the con-
vent buildings.
Above the high wall could be seen the top of the main
edifice.
Had a full view been afforded from the outside, it would
have been observed that the structure was in that style of
architecture that might be called composite, since it was
a blending of the Roman with the early English style.
This Convent of the Holy Sepulcher, if it was not what
it was said to be, the oldest in the kingdom, yet was cer-
tainly very ancient.
It was founded in the reign of Edward the Confessor, by
a Saxon princess of great piety, who renounced the world,
endowed the house with all her worldly wealth, and lived
and died within its cloister-not its abbess, as she might
have been, but one of its humblest and most submissive
nuns; for all of which, in later days, she was canonized by
the church.
Enriched by the gifts and endowments of princes and



<pb n="218"/>
218          THE TEST OF LOVE
nobles, the Convent of the Holy Sepulcher steadily in
in power and splendor, through five centuries of pr
and then, all in one year, came adversity and destruct
Henry, the cutthroat, wife killer and church burner
his greedy raid upon the religious houses of his kin
sacked the rich convent, and drove the helpless sster
out to beggary or starvation.
The house, given to a court favorite, passed through x
hands in successive generations, until, in the year d"l
Catholic emancipation, it came, by purchase, into the
session of a wealthy Catholic gentleman. who, dying
married, bequeathed it to a community of Carmelite n
It was now restored after its model in the medieval ag
The carriage containing the three travelers drew np
fore a small, heavy, oaken door, that was the only i
which broke the monotony of the long stone wall.
"Have you made up your mind what pretext to adv
for seeing the girl? You know they won't let you ee
without a satisfactory reason," said the detective, as
Gow was about to leave the carriage.
"No! I have not thought of anything yet! I must 
to circumstances, or the inspiration of the moment," re
the tramp.
"You might say that her mother sent you to see h
suggested the detective.
"Oh, I hate to lie, even in a good cause," said the 
"But in such a case as this the end justifies the me
said Hutchings.
"Can't see it. I shall trust to circumstances," re
Ham Gow, as he got out of the carriage, leaving his
companions seated, while he went to the little door in
wall and rang the bell. 
A small panel in the door slipped aside, and an old w
an's face in a nun's veil and muffler appeared.
"I have come to see Miss Malvina Mattox," said
visitor.
The portress silently opened the door, which closed 
him with a clang as soon as he had passed the threshold.
The silent portress, without leaving her niche beside
door, pointed in the direction of the convent. and imm
ately, with bowed head, resumed the counting of her 
Ham Gow found himself in a courtyard where ther



<pb n="219"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   219
was covered by coarse grass, shaded by large trees and inter-
sected by gravel walks.
Following one of these gravel walks, he approached the
main entrance of the building, and found himself facing a
flight of broad steps that led up to a pair of heavy, oaken
doors.
Here he rang a second bell.
J   second panel opened, and a second old woman's face in
a nun's coif and veil appeared.
"I have come to see Miss Malvina Mattox," said Ham
Gow.
This second door swung open, and closed behind him with
a clang as soon as he had crossed the threshold.
Ham Gow found himself in a vestibule with three inner
doors-one on the right, one on the left and one opposite
-straight before him.
The right-hand door led into the den of the second old
portress, who had already turned her back on the visitor
and disappeared from his view.
While Ham Gow was wondering what he should do next,
the door straight before him opened, and a nun came out
with a bunch of keys in her hand.
She never raised her eyes to the visitor, but silently un-
locked the door on the left, and by a gesture indicated that
the visitor was to enter that room.
Ham Gow entered the room, and the door clanged behind
him as the other doors had done.
His attendant had disappeared as her predecessors had.
Ham Gow found himself alone in a small, square apart-
ment, with bare floor, whitewashed walls and four oaken
chairs. There was a grated window in front, and an iron
grating instead of a wall at the back.
While the tramp was wondering what would happen next,
a soft, sweet voice stole upon his ear.
"You have been sent to see Miss Malvina Mattox ?"
Ham started in a sort of panic, and turned in the direc-
tion of the sound, to see a lady of majestic presence and
surpassing beauty, which even the nun's ugly dress could
not spoil, seated on the other side of the grating; but her
eyes were fixed upon the ground, from which she never
raised them.



<pb n="220"/>
£20           THE TEST OF LOVE
"Yes, miss! Ma'am! My lady! Your holiness,
plied Ham, in utter confusion.
"You have been very prompt. We did not expect
bring Malvina's wardrobe for some hours yet. You
have left Rose Hill very early this morning," said the
"I-left Rose Hill last evening, my lady-your i
ence !" gasped Ham.
"Ah, you did."
"Yes, ma'am-your holiness, and I put up at the 
Bear-and-if you please, my lady-your reveren
would like to see Malvina Mattox, according to the .
of them that sent me." 
"Exactly. Mrs. Campbell would wish you to bring$
port of her daughter's condition from personal obser 
I know-I understand that this course would be thei
satisfactory to the mother. Remain here, and I willi
her in to you," said the beautiful nun, as she aro
without once lifting her eyes from the ground, passed
into the shadows behind the grating.
"There! I said I hated to lie! I said I would 
circumstances, and circumstances have favored me.
takes me for some one else-some messenger that  .
pected here with the girl's clothes-  Ah !"
This exclamation burst from Ham Gow as his soi
was cut short by the opening of the parlor door S!
entrance of Malvina Mattox, attended by an aged an
erable-looking nun, who, like her predecessors, never
her eyes from the floor, but silently led her char
chair, placed her in it, and stood with arms cros
hands hidden in her wide sleeves, and eyes cast downi
the floor.
The unhappy creature whom she had brought in
room sat fixed in her seat more like a corpse than a
being. She was clothed in a white cambric wrapperl
a white Berlin wool shawl thrown loosely around her'
ders. But her attire was no whiter than her pallid, f
face, that looked like a skeleton face with the skin
tightly over its bones. Her hair, faded to the palest
hung neglected over her shawl. Her light-blue eyes
their cavernous sockets stared straight before her 
cancy. Her hands hung down each side listlessly, fo
like those of some idiot.
!*



<pb n="221"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   221
A pang of pity shot through the heart of the tramp as
he gazed upon the young human wreck before him.
"You see what she is," said the nun, without raising her
eves or changing her position. "You see what she is, and
you can report to madam, her mother. That lady had
better come and see her in person. We can do nothing with
her. She sits always so. It is not likely that she notices
your presence. You had better speak to her."
Ham Gow desired nothing better. Although the aspect
of the poor creature filled him with the profoundest pity, it
also relieved him of one sickening dread-that of being
instrumental in consigning a wretched girl to the gallows!
He saw at a glance that this half-idiotic creature would
never be considered a proper subject for the death penalty.
He had, therefore, the less reluctance to try his experi-
ment upon her.
He arose and bowed to the nun-who, by the way, with
her downcast eyes, was perfectly unconscious of the courtesy
--and went and stood before the stupefied girl without at-
tracting attention.
"Good-morning, Miss Mattox," he said.
She gave no sign of hearing.
"How do you do, Malvina?" he inquired, taking one of
her limp hands, raising it and holding it in his own.
She slowly lifted her eyes to his and her ghastly face be-
gan to change. It could not grow more pallid, but the
sharp chin dropped, leaving the mouth wide open, and the
dull eyes dilated and fixed themselves upon his face with a
stare of amazed and horrified recognition.
Ham Gow saw in an instant that she knew him and that
she remembered when and where they had met; saw that
she recognized in him the secret witness of her crime.
He pressed the hand that he held, and that she seemed to
have no power to withdraw, and he said:
"Don't be frightened of me, Miss Mattox. This is not
the first time we have met. Don't you remember that damp,
drizzly night by the old dry well at Rose Hill ?"
Her staring eyes began to flame with terror.
"It was between midnight and morning, you know, and
you had just-"
"Don't don't! don't don't!" screamed the wretched
creature, suddenly breaking through her trance of horror,



<pb n="222"/>
R22           THE TEST OF LOVE
snatching her hand from his clasp and clapping both h
before her eves as if to shut out some hideous vision;
before he could intervene to save her she fell to the floor
strong convulsions.
"You see!" said the nun, as she arose and raised
stricken creature from the floor. "You see, she is a subj
for a lunatic asylum, not for a peaceful convent! 
madam, her mother, this! Go now, your presence has
cited her too much! You can leave her clothes with
portress."
Ham Gow bowed again and left the room.
As he opened the door a little bell rang, at the so
of which the nun with the keys appeared from the mid
door, and unlocked the front door and let the visitor out.
He walked through the grounds to the gate, thrilled 
pity and horror at what he had witnessed, yet fully satis
now that the guilty and wretched creature might be brou
to conviction, though not to punishment.
As he reached it the aged portress silently unlocked
and let him pass out.
He immediately joined his companions, who were
iously awaiting his return, seated in the carriage.
"Order the driver to go on," he said, "and I will tell
all about it as we proceed."
The order was given, and the carriage started.
Then Ham Gow described to his eager listeners the
that he had just passed through with the miserable
half-idiotic young criminal.
"The time is ripe," said the detective; "there must'
no further delay, lest the girl should die, or become h
lessly imbecile! With the evidence now in our pos
we must return to Stockstone and lay the case before
bench of magistrates who meet to-morrow."
This course was immediately agreed upon.
The travelers stopped at the Great Black Bear only to
their bill and feed their horses and then set out for 
stone.
I~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~i



<pb n="223"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   28
CHAPTER XXIII
IN THE CONFESSIONAL
FATHER BENEDICT, priest of the chapel of the Holy Sep.
ulcher and confessor of the sisterhood, sat in the little cab-
inet on the right of the altar, called the confessional.
The priest was very aged. He had seen four score years
and five, and on this day he was weary, for it was Saturday,
and nearly all the sisterhood had come to him in turn to
make their confessions and obtain absolution, preparatory to
receiving the Sunday morning's sacrament.
No very grievous sins had as yet been confided to his ear
by the harmless nuns; only such peccadillos as the wan-
derings of their thoughts during prayer, irritability of tem.
per during pain, little passing angers or cnvyings, or, at
most, intrusive doubts of the divine mercy toward such sin-
ners as themselves.
Such and such like were the heinous sins and misde-
meanors to which the good old man had been compelled to
listen all day long, and for which he had prescribed the ter-
rible penances of a little self-denial and a few short prayers.
And now that the day was nearly done, he was weary of it
all, as he sat upon his hard bench in the close, dark nook,
and he was thinking of withdrawing, when a sound fell
upon his ear that at once fixed his attention.
It was a most distressing moan, as of some dumb animal
in pain, and it came from the other side of the little panel,
through which his penitents, unseen, had breathed their
confessions.
The moanings were repeated, until at last the kind-
hearted old man could wait no longer for a voluntary com-
munication, but felt compelled to break his prescribed
silence, and ask:
"What is the matter? What can I do for you? Speak
freely."
"Oh, father! father!" wailed the voice of a woman from
behind the screen.
"You are in sorrow, my daughter. Confide your trouble
to me, without fear, and I will comfort you, if I can,"
gently whispered the old man.



<pb n="224"/>
X24          THE TEST OF LOVE
"But-I am-the blackest of sinners !" burst with a
from the lips of the unseen woman.
The old priest started and shuddered. It had never 
pened to him in his long, harmless life to receive the
fession of any great criminal, and there was that in the 
of the unseen woman, who spoke through the little open
in the panel, which convinced him that her words were 
the morbid exaggeration of a self-accusing fanatic, but
preface to some terrible revelation of crime. For a mo
he could not speak.
"Ah, you shrink from me already! What will you
when you hear what I must tell?" moaned the woman.
"I do not shrink from you, my daughter. Who am
that I should dare to shrink from any ? I wait to hear w
you wish to say," gently replied the old man.
"I must relieve myself-of the secret-that oppres
and suffocates-my soul 1" said the voice behind the ser
speaking with difficulty and in gasps.
"I listen, my child," murmured the old man.
"I have borne the burden-so long-so long that it
-nearly maddened-or killed me  I wish it had done 
-or the other !"
"Nay, nay, my daughter! Say not so! But why 
the burden of your sin, when you could lay it down at,.
foot of the cross?" gently inquired the priest. 
"Oh. I was not permitted to confess! I was watc
guarded, day and night! My mother would not let me
of her sight-until-by an artifice-by affecting a
sleep-I eluded her vigilance and fled here! For I 
confess, or die, or go raving mad !"
"Speak out, my child, in the name of Heaven !" said
priest.
"I am-that wretched creature called-Malvina 
tox !" spoke the penitent, in gasps. 
"I thought as much. I knew that unhappy one 
sought refuge in the convent. Go on, my child."
"You-remember-the awful death-of the ba
Rose Hill-five years ago----"                   ;
"I remember."
"And Margaret Campbell-was convicted-of the mi
der."
"Yes, upon your evidence," said the old man, sol
,;~



<pb n="225"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   225
"I was forsworn ! She was innocent-I alone was guilty
ef that crime " said the voice of the woman, in a dying
hadence.
The good old man started and shuddered.
"Miserable one," he said, as soon as he could command
his voice, "what led you to such a crime-to such a tissue
of crime ?"
"I don't know! I don't know! Oh, don't betray my
secret! Don't betray my secret! I had to tell you, but
don't you tell anyone !" wailed the woman, in a voice of ag-
onizing entreaty.
"You know that the seal of the confessional is on my
lips, and it may not be broken for any cause whatever. You
know that what passes here will never transpire through
me," gravely and sorrowfully replied the old priest.
"I know! I know I And yet I fear! I fear! Oh, father!
what shall I do?" cried the woman, wringing her hands.
"Make a full confession, in the first place! Tell me what
instigated you to such a course of crime."
"I say I do not know! I had no malice against the child
or against anyone! I liked the child  Indeed I did! I
used to like to play with him, for he was my baby brother,
you know, and I really liked him."
"Are vou telling me the truth ? Remember that to tell a
falsehood here is more than falsehood, it is sacrilege !" said
the priest, in a solemn voice.
"I am telling you the truth, as Heaven can bear me wit-
ness! I had no malice against the child! I liked him! 
But listen! One day, in the same summer that he was born,
I had him in my lap playing with him; I suddenly put him
in my mother's arms and ran out of the room. Afterward
they all asked me why I acted so strangely. I did not tell
them. I could not tell them; but I will tell you, father !"
"I am listening."
"It was because I was suddenly seized with an unaccount-
able, irresistible impulse to throw him out of the open win-
dow! It would have killed him! And to prevent doing so
I had to drop him in his mother's lap and run out of the
room! And I had no ill will to the child either !"
"It was a possession of the devil, against which you
should have struggled with fasting and prayer," said the
horrified priest.



<pb n="226"/>
S26          THE TEST OF LOVE
"I was afraid to tell anyone of that dreadful vsita
which grew upon me from that time. I was afraid tr
left alone with the child for a moment for fear I sho n
him some harm. I hated myself for these visitations 
could not foresee or resist-for they came upon me 
denly, unexpectedly. I never could trust myself near
child, and everyone thought I had taken a dislike to i
baby brother. But they were all mistaken! I loved
but I feared that I was doomed to destroy him I Oh I
horror of it all I"
The miserable girl paused, and shuddered, and let i
moments pass before she resumed:
"This malady grew upon me until I became a terror 
a horror to myself. I could not sleep nor eat; and I 
weak and thin. They said my health was failing,
hoped it was."
"My child, that was a sinful hope, to be repented 
*said the old man, in a warning voice.
"Was it? I could not help it any more than Ieo
help the rest of it. I wished to die before I could do
baby brother any harm. But though I grew thin and 
I did not die. I feared I could not die. I feared tha
was fated to live, and to do the deed I so much dra
Oh ! the horror of it !-the horror of it !"
The wretched girl shook as with an ague, and at 1
continued:
"At last I was tempted to commit suicide."
"Oh, my unhappy daughter !" groaned the priest.
"I could not help it, I say, any more than I could
the rest. I was tempted to kill myself to keep me 
hurting the innocent, helpless child. But I could not 
myself to do the act. I wish I could have done so.
how I wish I could  Oh! that I had taken my own
rather than his!"
"My child !-my child you speak wildly and wick
I must not listen to you if you speak so !" exclamed the
man.
"Bear with me! Bear with me! I am so wretched!
lost soul in the depths is more miserable than I
wailed the girl.
"Speak on, poor soul! I have nothing but pity for
now," said the priest, in a gentle tone.



<pb n="227"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   227
"The visitations increased upon me fearfully; day and
night that horrible, fratricidal impulse beset me with irre-
sistible power. I began to walk in my sleep, and to haunt
the nursery door at night-an infirmity of which I was to-
tally unconscious until my roommate, Margaret Campbell,
discovered it and told me of it. She also took to watching
me, following me, waking me up, and leading me back to
my bed."
Here the old priest sighed deeply, for he was thinking
how foully the guilty girl before him had repaid this friend
for all this kindness.
"And now I come to the fatal night. I had been pur-
sued and tortured by that terrible impulse all day long. At
one time my mother brought the baby into the parlor where
I was sitting alone, and told me to take care of him while
the nurse went to the village on an errand; but instead of
obeying my mother I screamed with terror, and ran out of
the room and out of the house. I was scolded and beaten
by my mother for what I did, yet I dared not tell her why
I had fled from the child, and so I became more nervous
and ill than before."
"You should have told her. She might have consulted a
physician. All this trouble might have been saved," said
the priest.
" Ah, yes ! but what is the use of saying this now ? What's
done is done!" moaned the penitent. 
"True," acquiesced the old man.
The unhappy girl continued:
"At night I went to bed and fell into the deepest sleep I
ever experienced. I fell into that deep sleep while I held
Margart Campbell in my arms; for, as I said, she was mv
roommate and my bedfellow, and my mother scolded her
as well as me, and we had a common cause of complaint that
united us in sympathy. So, with Margaret Campbell in
my arms, T fell into a deep, dreadful sleep, and dreamed-
a fatal dream !"
"'A fatal dream!'" echoed the priest.
"Yes. Father, I am going to tell you the strangest ex-
perience that ever happened to any human being-I am
going to tax your credulity, perhaps, to the utmost," said
the girl.
"Speak on, poor soul ll



<pb n="228"/>
228           THE TEST OF LOVE
"I say I dreamed a fatal dream! I did not know it
a dream then. I thought it was realityl  I thought th;
my bedfellow, Margaret Campbell, withdrew herself fro
my arms, got up and unlocked our door and left our roo
taking the key with her. I thought I arose and follow
her, and saw her kneel down at the nursery door, whia
was locked on the inside, and push the key out of its aocke
until it fell on the nursery floor, and then insert our key
which fitted the lock, turn it, open the door, and walk in
the room, lift the sleeping child from its crib, and brin
him out."
"What are you telling me?" demanded the priest.
"A dream, which, at the time, I took to be a reality, !
answered the girl.
"Go on."
"I thought that Margaret Campbell closed and locked the'
door and withdrew the key with her right hand while sai
held the sleeping child to her bosom with her left arm 
And then she walked out of the back door, I following her,b
She went out, as I thought, into the paddock, where the
old dry well had been left uncovered-that spot which had
possessed such a horrible fascination for me. I followed
her, horrified, but unable to stop her, or to call out, or to
do anything else but follow. I followed her then to the
verge of the dry well, when suddenly she and the child sank
into the ground before my eyes, and in their place arose 
strange, wild-looking man with a shock of black hair and
beard.
"We gazed in a panic at each other for an instant, an
then I turned and fled to the house. When I regained o
room I found Margaret Campbell sleeping quietly in 
bed 
"I was so puzzled by all that had happened, or ha
seemed to happen, that I slept no more that night.
"The next morning-      Oh, father, do not ask me 
recall the agony of the days that followed-the disappea
ance of the child; the anguish of the search; the horror o
the discovery when his body was found in the well; the inI
quest; the trial and conviction of Margaret Campbell !
"One other thing was strange. I had temporarily for
gotten half that dream which I had believed to be a reality,
and I remembered only that part of it which related to Mar'
*,



<pb n="229"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                  229
garet Campbell's rising and leaving the room, taking with
her the key which unlocked the nursery door, and of her
being back again when the clock struck three.
"And thus I gave in my evidence both at the inquest and
on the trial.
"Oh, father, it was not until weeks had elapsed after the
transportation of Margaret Campbell, that one night, while
I was walking in my sleep, I was followed by my mother
and awakened on 'the brink of the old dry well, while I was
in the act of dropping into it a puppet baby. And in that
awful moment full memory flashed back upon me, revealing
all the horrible truth, that I-I-in the homicidal mania
that haunted even my sleep and governed even my dreams,
had committed the atrocious crime for which the innocent
Margaret Campbell had been condemned to transportation
and penal servitude for her life."
CHAPTER XXIV
THE FIAT
"IN the homicidal mania that haunted even my sleep and
governed even my dreams, I had done the deed !"
The priest heard these words faintly breathed into his
ear, and he shuddered.
Never had it happened to him, in his gentle and monoton-
ous life, to receive the confession of a great crime. And
now he felt overwhelmed by grief, horror and the magnitude
of the responsibility thus thrown upon him. He seemed
unable to utter a word, though his penitent evidently paused
to give him the opportunity and waited to hear him.
"Oh, father! speak to me! Speak to me! Counsel me!
Tell me what I ought to do, while I am sane enough to
understand you!" cried the girl, in a voice of anguish, as
she knelt there, wringing her hands.
"Poor, miserable child! You made this discovery years
ago! Why did you not then do your obvious duty? Why
did you not go at once and confess your crime and vindicate
the innocent one who was suffering for your sin?" de-
manded the priest, in a voice of pain.



<pb n="230"/>
280          THE    TEST   OF LOVE                :
"Father, she would not let me!" wailed the girl. 
"'She?' Who? You should not have allowed anyone 
hinder you in the discharge of a duty so vital I"
"But she was my mother. She had authority over mi
She made the discovery in the same moment in which 
made it. I knew it at the time that she did I knew it b
the look of horror and terror that came over her counte.'
ance when she met my eyes !"
"What did she say?"
"Nothing at first. It was I who spoke. I said-for li
could not help saying it, the words rushed from my soul-I
I said:
"'Oh, mother! mother! I did that deed! I---'
"But she seized my elbow and shook me, as she hissed
into mv ear:
"'Is it not grievous and horrible enough that I shoulad
have my baby murdered, without having my daughtdri
hanged! You never did that! You have had a nightmare i,
Or you are crazy! Go on with you to the house!'
,"And she drove me before her, until we reached the house
and my room, where she locked me in! From that time ^
was a prisoner. It was my mother who prevented me from
explaining my sin and vindicating the innocent," moaned
the girl.
"You are not here to accuse your mother, but to accus
yourself! I am not here to audit your denunciation of th
sins of another, but your confession of your own," said the
rriest, with gentle firmness.
"I know! I know! And I do not wish to criminate m
mother, but I must tell the whole truth of the circumstan
under which I lived, or you will never understand my
tion," meekly replied the girl.
"Go on, then, poor child, only avoid mentioning oth
sinners as much as possible."
"I will try! Well, then, without mentioning names
persons, I must tell you that every mental and materi
means were taken to deter me from confession and to k
me quiet. I was never left alone except when I was securel
locked in my own room. My mind was subjected to dalj
terrors by tales of the horrors of imprisonment and the to
tures of a public execution. No dreadful, blood-curdli
story of death by public strangulation on the gallows 
.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~,!.U1



<pb n="231"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   281
ever published that was not read to me-with additions and
exaggerations, as I do now believe-until I screamed with
terror, and shrank from exposing myself to such a penalty."
"Poor girl! Was not the sense of remorse, then, strong
enough to overcome the sense of fear ?"
"Sometimes it was, father  Sometimes the thought of
my crime caused me such anguish that I felt willing to fac~
death in any form so that 1 might expiate my sin, be for-
given and find peace I Then I cried and wailed to be let
out to go and give myself up to justice !"
"And then?"
"Then opium was given to me I Opium, that plunged all
my senses in a fool's paradise of serene enjoyment."
"Ah! what sin!" breathed the priest.
"And this went on for years and years! I did not get a
chance or an opportunity to speak to anyone, even to my
own sister, even to a servant. She waited on me herself
and gave out that I was crazy, and that it was not safe for
others to attend me. At last I felt that I was really going
crazy."
"Were you at this time a sleepwalker?" inquired the
priest, who had heard the neighborhood rumor of the
"ghost" that haunted the old well, and who hoped to get
at some elucidation of the mystery.
"Within the limits of my own room I may have been a
sleepwalker, but not beyond it, for you see I could not get
out. My room was at the top of the house and I was
locked in every night. It had but one door, of which she
took the key, and but one window, with a sheer descent of
eighty feet to the ground. Why did you ask me that ques-
tion, father?" inquired the girl, in a low, earnest whisper.
"I will tell you. Because an absurd rumor is now dis-
turbing the minds of our rustic population. This rumor
is to the effect that an apparition is nightly seen to hover
about the old well which was the place of the tragedy. It
occurred to me that if anything of the sort has really been
seen, it must have been yourself walking in your sleep,"
frankly replied Father Benedict.
"It was not I! At least it was not I in the flesh !"
breathed Malvina, in a low, mysterious voice.
"Why do you say, 'at least it was not I in the flesh?'"
wistfully inquired the priest.
ik



<pb n="232"/>
282          THE TEST OF LOVE 
"Because, father, I could not leave my prison chamber;|
for the reasons that I have told you, to go anywhere ia'
the flesh during the night. I was locked fast in. But,
father, here is a mystery. I seemed to be driven to go to
the scene of my crime-in the spirit-every night," whis.
pered the girl.
"How say you ?" demanded the bewildered priest.
"I say that there are mysteries about myself in my ab-i
normal state that I cannot penetrate or understand."
"Explain yourself, my daughter."
"I cannot. I will tell you all I can, however. Every 
night, when I was locked in my room and covered up mI
bed, I fell into a deep sleep and had a very vivid dream."
"'Ah i"
"I always dreamed of rising in my bed and passing out ,i
of the door-not out through the open door, but through'
the closed door, as if its solid timbers had been only a'
shadow, and so on through every material barrier, as if
they had been shadows and I had been the only substance. :
And so passing through the house without opening a door )
-through the lawn and into the plantation without opening i
a gate, and through the thick plantation, where scarcely a 
fox could have gone-through the tangled brushwood as if.'
it had been but a mesh of shadows, and so into the paddock,'"
and so to the old dry well. And, oh, father !" she suddenly ,
exclaimed, with a startling change of look and tone. 
"What is it, daughter?"                  . 
"In my dream the child came to me, living-warm, liv-
ing, loving, joyous! In my dream I had not hurt it!" she.'!
answered, with a thrill that visibly shook her whole frame. '
"And what do you gather from that dream, poor girl?" 
"I think my spirit left my body and entered that world 
which lies all about us, invisible-that world where matter 
is shadow or is nothing, and spirit is substance and every- 
thing; that world in which the child whom I loved and;
whom I never wished to harm, and never really had the 
power to harm, still lived, and understood, and felt, and 
pitied, and came to comfort me. No; I never harmed the! 
child !"
"Unsound! Unsound!" murmured the priest. 
"It is not the thought of the child that tortures me! The i
child is an angel in heaven, and he knows that his puor i



<pb n="233"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   233
afflicted sister loved him  No! it is not for the child I
grieve, but for the poor girl unjustly convicted and sent to
the penal colonies for life-it is of her I think!"
"Yes, of her you should think! Of her who suffers for
your crime," said the priest.
"She shall suffer no longer than I can help I Father, I
wish to tell you what precipitated my flight from Rose
Hill."
"Speak on, my daughter."
"Three nights ago I had the strangest dream, or vision,
or experience-call it what you will-that I ever had in my
life."
"What was it, my child?"
"I dreamed that I rose from my bed, passed through
the closed door as a substance passes through shadow, and
passed out and on until I found myself in the paddock, with
the beautiful child in my arms, on the brink of the old well,
when-oh! it was terrible!" suddenly exclaimed the girl,
throwing up her wan, white hands and covering her face.
"Compose yourself and go on," said the priest, in a voice
of calm authority.
"Oh, it was terrible! terrible! for I suddenly stood face
to face with a man who attempted to seize me!"
"My daughter!"
"Yes, father, and in my agony of terror my spirit flashed
back again into my body and I woke up in my bed! I was
so distressed that I arose and tried to get out of the room,
but the door was securely locked and I could not escape I"
"But, my poor, unhappy child, to what purpose do you
recall and recount these nightmare dreams?" demanded the
priest.
"Nightmare dreams, do you call them, father-only
nightmare dreams?" wistfully inquired the girl.
"Only nightmare dreams, perfectly natural under the cir-
cumstances of a sin-troubled soul (and an unsound mind),"
he added, mentally.
"Only nightmare dreams " she murmured, thoughtfully.
"No more, at all! Why do you recall them ?"
"Because you told me to speak out. Because I wish to
explain the circumstances that drove me to this sanctuary."
"Go on, then "
"I could sleep no more that night! I was sick with ter.



<pb n="234"/>
254          THE TEST OF LOVE
ror of-I know not what I I walked the floor of my room.
I rapped and called at my door. All to no purpose  No
one heard me ! No one slept on the same floor, in fact 1 So
passed the remainder of the night 1 And now, father, listen
to what happened the next morning, and see if you can
explain that, for I cannot !"
"I listen."
"I did not go to bed again, but walked the floor until the
day broke and it was light enough for me to see to dress.
When my mother came to unlock my door and let me out,
she saw my terrible situation. I would have told her the
cause of it, but she would not let me talk. She gave me a
dose of morphine, which quieted and stupefied me, but did
not put me to sleep !"
"My daughter, let me interrupt to remind you that you  '
must not use names or refer to other persons more than
necessary," gently said the priest.
"I will try to avoid doing so. I could eat no breakfast," :
and after we left the table, my mother, sister and self went 
into our morning sitting room, where they occupied them-
selves with needlework, and I sat in a half stupor, until I
was terribly aroused from it  A man had come into the
room."
"Ah!" breathed the priest.
"At first I was only dimly conscious of his presence, of 
-of his being a sort of peddler or patent agent, who was 
trying to sell something to my mother and sister; but I took 
no notice of him, for I was not interested in what he was
doing, until at last he came boldly up to me, spoke to me,, l
put something in my lap, and so compelled me to look up ':
at him, when-oh, father 1" cried the girl, shuddering and
covering her face with her hands.
"What? what, my daughter?" cried the excited priest. 
"Oh, father ! in him, this peddler, I recognized the man' 
I had seen in my fearful dream of the previous night, who ,
had attempted to seize me !"
"And what happened next?" inquired the astonished'
priest.
"I hardly know   But was it not strange, was it not ,
horrible that I should meet this man face to face, in thei
flesh, after having met him in that terrible dream?" i
i!.



<pb n="235"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                  285
"It was, indeed, passing strange ! But compose yourself,
my child, and tell me what next occurred."
"I say I hardly know I I remember trying to pour out
a confession then and there, but I believe I soon became
incoherent, and fell into convulsions. I know that I finally
lost all consciousness of my surroundings,for when I came to
my senses again I found myself in bed, in my mother's cham-
ber. I was quite alone. My mind was singularly clear-
clearer, indeed, than it had been for many years. I deter-
mined then to try for liberty. I arose and went to the
door, but found it locked on the outside. I was locked in.
Then I went to the window, which was fastened on the
inside. I unfastened it and got out on the roof of the ve-
randa, and climbed to the ground by the aid of the old
knotted branches of the honeysuckle that grew over it. Then
I fled  Father-"
"Well, my poor child !"
"My fate pursued me even here. I fled hither for sanc-
tuary, for confession, for counsel; but my fate pursued me
even hither !"
"I do not understand you, my child."
"You know-or at least I know-that a messenger was
sent to let my mother know where I was."
"Yes."
"And she was persuaded to leave me here for a time."
"I know."
"And she promised to send my clothes to-day."
"Yes."
"Oh, fatherl while I was expecting only a messenger
from my mother, I was told that a visitor wished to see me
in the parlor. I went down with Sister Olympia, thinking
only of seeing one of our own servants; but, father, conceive
my terror when, for the first timie since that fatal night, I
stood face to face with the witness of my crime I Oh 1 oh I
it was overwhelming  He used I know not what words to
remind me when and where we had met before. And-
convulsions, chaos and unconsciousness on my part fol-
lowed. Father, this happened this morning! When I came
here I eluded the vigilance of Sister Olympia, and left the
infirmary to steal hither and make this confession. Father,
I killed my baby brother, though I did not mean to harm
him! I alone am guilty of that crime for which another



<pb n="236"/>
186           THE TEST OF LOVE
suffers in my stead! Father, what must I do?" pleaded
~i ~     the penitent, with clasped hands and beseeching eyes.
"My poor daughter, your conscience has already told you
what you must do. You must make a public confession of
your crime to clear the innocent! Think what it has been
to leave a guiltless girl to suffer an exile to the penal colo-
dies for these five long years !" mildly spoke the priest.
"She cannot have suffered as I have, and she should not  'i
have suffered if I could have had my liberty before this;
and she shall not suffer longer than I can help. But tell
me what I shall do?" inquired the girl.
"I have told you-your own conscience has told you; you
must make a public confession! You will have no forgive-
noss, find no peace, until you cleanse your soul by a public
confession. Be sure of this, my daughter."
"But-I thought-that you could give me absolution-
could make me at peace with myself," faltered the girl.
"No, no, nothing can be done for you without a public 
confession that shall acknowledge your own guilt and vindi. 
cate the innocent."
"Ah me! ah me! how can I make such a confession? I
cannot go upon the housetops and proclaim my crime P"
cried the girl, wringing her hands.
"You can go to a magistrate and give yourself up as the 
slayer of the child for whose murder Margaret Campbell
was transported to penal servitude for life." 
"Oh, Heaven ! And witness the horror with which every i
body will regard me! They will think I am the cold-blooded j
murderess who destroyed my own little brother and then ale
lowed an innocent girl to suffer in my place! They w
not know the very truth of the case! Oh, it is too hard
too hard I" exclaimed the wretched girl, wringing her hand h 
"Yes, it is hard, but it is absolutely necessary as yo
most imperative duty. I will not try to convince you other~
wise," said the priest. 
"And oh! to be imprisoned in a dreadful jail; to
brought to public trial!" wailed the girl.
"Yes, it will be grievous; there is no denying that
this will be very grievous; but, my child, it is no more th
Margaret Campbell innocently suffered in your stea
Think of that, and brace yourself to do her justice." 
"And oh! the end of it all-the public execution



<pb n="237"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   287
shameful, .cruel death  Oh, I cannot bear it! I cannot
bear it 1 I could risk my soul sooner I" she wailed, in utter
woe.
"My daughter, all this would be no more than many a
tender woman has endured before you, nor near so much as
some have suffered-ay, some of the best women that ever
lived have suffered the most cruel deaths, and suffered bravely
in the cause of justice, liberty, patriotism, or religion ! You,
if it should come to the worst with you, would not suffer
much. But it will not come to the worst in your case. You
will not have to suffer death as the consequence of your
confession."
"What? What? Not suffer death, when I did destroy
the child?" exclaimed the girl, in amazement and per-
plexity.
" No, for you did not wish or intend to harm the babe."
"No, I did not mean to hurt the child! I tried not to
do it! I succeeded in not doing it during my waking hours I
But an evil spirit seized me in my sleep, and I did the deed
in a dream! Oh, I am willing to suffer for it! Glad to
suffer imprisonment,transportation, penal servitude-every-
thing else, only I shrink from the gaze of people, and I
shudder at the thought of the public, ignominious death !"
she gasped, shaking from head to foot.
"You will not be called to suffer it. Daughter, can you
not confide in me?"
"Oh, yes, yes !"
"Then believe me that you have no reason to fear the ex-
treme penalty of the law. You are not a subject for it.
Come, my daughter! Rouse yourself to do your duty. I
will do all that I can to sustain and support you during the
trial. Will you do this, my child?"
"Oh, yes, I will, I will !" fervently replied the girl.
"And now return to your cot in the infirmary. Rest to-
night, and to-morrow you will do your duty. Benedicite,
my daughter," murmured the priest, and the penitent arose
and glided away in the darkness.
\



<pb n="238"/>
288           THE TEST OF LOVE 
CHAPTER XXV
THE FATE                                  X
MARLINA MATTox crept back to the infirmary and sank 
down upon her cot bed in a state of utter collapse.
The great strain upon her nervous system that had kept
her up so long was now relaxed, and a rapid reaction set in.
Sister Olympia, the head of the infirmary, came in with
a cup of tea and a piece of dry toast, which she set upon a
little stand beside the cot as she said:
"You must take some food now. I brought it to you an
hour ago, but you were not here. You should not have left, 
your bed. You are much too weak. Where did you go?" 
"I went to the chapel. I went to confession," faintly re-
plied the girl.
"You need not have done so. Father Benedict would :           r
have come to you here. Your mother has at length sent the 
messenger with your clothes. They have just come. Your A 
mother sends word that she will be here to see you to- :i
morrow." 
"Then she will not see me," sighed the girl. 
"What do you mean by that?    Why will your mother ,
not see you ?" questioned the sister.
"Father Benedict knows. He will tell you when he thinksI
fit," replied Malvina. 
Sister Olympia bowed her head and slightly changed 
subject.
"The man who was here this morning to see you in thei
parlor, and who frightened you so badly, was not your  :
mother's messenger, as it appears. Who, then, was he, ai , 
how did he frighten you?"
"Father Benedict knows. He will tell you when he 
fit," sighed the girl. 
Again Sister Olympia bowed her head, and finding th
she could learn nothing from the fast failing girl, ceased t
question her.
"Drink your tea," she said, at length.
Malvina obeyed, but found the liquid difficult, and 
solids impossible, to swallow. After a few sips of tea . 



<pb n="239"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   289
put down her cup and pushed away her plate, and dropped
back upon her pillow exhausted.
"You must do better than that," said the sister.
"I cannot-I cannot swallow anything more. I am dy-
ing," sighed the girl.
"Nonsense, you are low-spirited."
"No, I hope I am dying."
"You must not talk like that. If you do I shall call our
mother superior to you."
"No, do not. I will say no more. But please leave me
in peace," pleaded the girl.
"I must leave you for a little while to go to benediction,
but I will not be long away; and I will not have any more
nonsense talked about dying. Do you hear me ?"
"Yes," sighed the girl.
The sister took up the cup and saucer and plate and
carried them out.
Malvina Mattox closed her eyes and clasped her hands
above her head, and yielded herself up to rest, or sleep, or
death--she cared not which.
She lay perfectly quiet until an hour later, when she was
aroused by the entrance of the infirmary night nurse, who
insisted that the patient should undress and go regularly to
bed. 
Malvina obeyed, and gave no more trouble to anyone that
,    night.                                                        |
Early the next morning, however, she arose and began to
put on her walking suit, though she was still so weak and ill
that she tottered as she walked, and dropped things as she
handled them.
Sister Olympia, coming in from first matins, found her
patient in this condition, and ordered her immediately back
to bed.
But on this occasion the usually manageable girl refused
to obey.
"No, I cannot stay in bed. I have an engagement with
Father Benedict that I must fulfill," she explained.
"Father Benedict again! Welll" exclaimed the sister,
somewhat emphatically, but quickly recollecting herself, she
bowed her head and became silent.
A few minutes later a message came up from the portress:
r



<pb n="240"/>
240          THE TEST OF LOVE
"Father Benedict and Dr. Pullen are in the parlor, asking
to see Miss Mattox."
"They have come for me-they have come for me, though
I did not expect the doctor !" exclaimed Malvina, as she
took her bonnet from its hook and put it on her head.   '
"You will not go down before you get your breakfast,
and here it comas," said Sister Olympia, as one of the at-
tendants brought in a waiter and set it on the stand.
Malvina drank some coffee and tried to swallow some
bread, but finding it impossible to do so, she gave up the
attempt, and said that she was ready to obey Father Bene- 
diet's summons. 
"Where are you going in your bonnet and mantle?" in-
quired Sister Olympia.
"Father Benedict knows. He will tell you when he sees
fit," replied the girl.
"How oracular all that sounds !" exclaimed Sister Olym-
pia, as she followed her charge from the room, and down
through many corridors and flights of stairs to the bare
convent parlor, where the confessor and the physician of the
sisterhood awaited her.
Father Benedict immediately came to meet her at the
door, and said, in a low voice:
"I have a carriage at the gate to take you on your er-
rand, my child; and it is proper that Dr. Pullen should go
with us; but he goes only as your physician; he knows noth-'
ing of the secret you confided to me, and nothing of the
special business that takes you to the squire's."
Having said this, the old priest bowed, and stood aside 
to let her pass to a seat. 
She greeted the convent doctor and then sat down.
But the latter looked at her attentively, arose and took
her hand and felt her pulse, and then, turning to the priest, ^.,
said, earnestly: 
"Sir, this young lady is not in a condition to go out. I ,
make my protest against her doing so. She must go imme-,:'.
diately to bed." 
"My dear doctor, it is a matter of much more importance ~ i
than life, or death, that she should take this drive. Under-' .
stand that there is no alternative. She must go," said the ';
priest. 
"It is as much as her life is worth !" murmured the doe-?k
7.         .



<pb n="241"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    l41
tor, lowering his voice, so that his words should reach the
ears of the priest only.
"And the matter at stake is much more than her life is
worth. She will tell you so herself," firmly replied the
father.
"Listen to me. She is dying now; actually dying,"
whispered the doctor.
"Dying?" muttered the old priest, with a slight start.
"Oh, you mean that she has some mortal malady from which
she can never recover, as we say of an invalid that he or she
is dying of consumption, or cancer, while they may live for
years-dying surely all the time. That is just what you
mean, I suppose."
"1 mean that death is upon her now; her pulse counts
one hundred and forty; her breath is labored. She will not
live to see the sun set," earnestly replied the doctor.
"Holy Mother ! is this true ?" exclaimed the father, cross-
ing himself.
"It is true. You see now the urgent necessity of her
being placed in bed."
"Yes," said the priest, and he crossed the room and whis-
pered to his patient:
"The doctor thinks that you are not well enough to go
out, my poor child. You must return to bed and we can
send for the squire to come here and take your deposition."
"No! No I" exclaimed the girl, with startling energy for
one so weak--No! There will be no time to send a mes-
sage and fetch the squire I No 1 I must go! I must go
in person! I must tell my story, if I drop dead after end-
ing it! Oh !" she gasped, laboring for breath, "I caught
some words of your conversation I I heard the doctor say
I was dying   I knew it before  I have been dying since
last night! Oh, yes, thank Heaven, I am dying! But I
must use the last hour of my life to do that justice which
should have been done many years ago   Help me to the
carriage, Father Benedict l"
In vain both priest and physician earnestly endeavored
to dissuade her from her purpose.
Her dying self-will and energy was something frightful
to encounter. Her eyes blazed like coals of fire from the
white ashes of her sunken face, and her impetuous Words
came in gasps with her laboring breath.



<pb n="242"/>
242          THE TEST OF LOVE
"Doctor," said the priest, deferring to the authority that
he recognized as superior in this case, "doctor, do you not
think that we had better let her go, since we cannot recon-
cile her to the idea of staying? Will not this excitement
caused by our opposition to her will do her even more harm
than the journey would?"
"Yes, I think sol The choice is between two evils. In
any case, she cannot outlive the day. Let her have her way,"
concluded the physician.
It seemed impossible that the girl could have overheard
these words, which were whispered at the front window
some distance from the chair on which she sat, panting;
yet she spoke as if their meaning, at least, had reached her,
when she said:
"I shall go and tell my story to the squire, and I shall 
not die till then I Lead me to the carriage."
The doctor gave her his arm and supported her whole
weight as he led her out, followed closely by the priest,
who was ready to lend assistance when it should be needed.
They took her through the convent grounds and through
the outer gate and to the spot where the carriage stood
waiting.
They placed her in it, supporting her on every side by ':
the cushions and then gave the order to the coachman: i
"Drive very slowly to Squire Storkridge, at Croft Court."
Then they placed themselves on the seat fronting the ',
dying girl, and each held a hand of hers, rubbing and pat- :
ting it gently to impart some vital force to her failing sys- 
tem.
Squire Storkridge was one of the justices of the peace in :
the shire, and had been chosen by Father Benedict as tha<',i
recipient of his penitent's deposition, not only because the'
squire was a clear-headed, kind-hearted old man, but be..: 
cause his seat, Croft Court, was in easy distance from the  :
Convent of St. Sepulcher.
Twenty minutes' slow driving brought them to the outes 
gate of the park, and five more to the door of the huge gray  .
stone house that the squire called his hereditary home.
The dying girl was not so much exhausted by her drive 
as they had expected her to be. The mental satisfaction of
having her own way had done her good. 
"Best here for a few minutes, my child. The doctor will



<pb n="243"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    2 4
remain with you. I must see the squire alone," said the
priest, as he opened the door of the carriage and stepped
out.
As he walked up on the old moss-covered stone steps that
led to the front door, intending to knock for admittance,
that door was suddenly opened by a gray-haired servant in
livery, who was showing out a tall, dark-complexioned,
black-bearded young man, who looked as if he held a doubt-
ful social position between that of a gentleman and that of
a yeoman.
The young man raised his hat to the priest and passed on.
The eyes of the latter followed him with involuntary in-
terest that made him, for the moment, forget his business;
for, in fact, he recognized the visitor to'the squire as the
person who had gone to the convent on the preceding day
to inquire for Malvina Mattox, and whom the nuns had
mistaken as her mother's messenger, but whom she at once
remembered as the secret witness of her crime, whose pres-
ence in daylight and in dreams had lately afflicted her so
deeply-in a word, the tramp, Ham Gow!
What business had he with the magistrate ? Had he come
to denounce Malvina Mattox as the murderess of the little
Stuart Campbell, her infant brother?"
While he was asking himself this question, the gray-
haired servant waited respectfully, and then inquired:
"Did you wish to see my master, sir?"
"Yes ! yes I" exclaimed the priest, rousing himself. "I
wished to see the squire. Is he at home?"
"Yes, sir; please walk in. I will take your card."
The priest drew a blank card from his pocket, wrote upon
it, with a pencil:
"Benedict Riordon, S. J.," and handed it to the foot-
man, who first showed him into a small reception room and
then left him.
In what seemed but a moment, the man returned and
said:
"The squire will see you at once, sir, if you will please
to walk into the justice room, where he is engaged at pres-
ent, but will soon be at liberty."
The priest-trembling with impatience at the thought of
the vital interest then at stake, which a few minutes of de-
lay might ruin forever-followed the footman down the



<pb n="244"/>
24            THE TEST OF LOVE
hall to the rear of the building and through an oaken door, 
to a long room, comfortably carpeted and curtained, and
having a raised platform at one end covered with a green
drugget, and provided with a long writing table, behind
which, in a large, leather-covered armchair, sat Squire
8torkridge, busily writing and closely attended by a con- I
stable.
As the priest walked toward him, the squire looked up,
nodded, sighed deeply, and handed a folded paper to one of 
the constables, saying:
"Take this, go at once to the Convent of St. Sepulcher, 
and ask for Malvina Mattox. When you see her, serve the
warrant, and bring her hither. Stay! You must take a
carriage. The girl is in bad health. What can I do for
you, Mr. Riordon?" then inquired the squire, turning ab-
ruptlv to his new visitor.
"Recall your officer, Mr. Storkridge. If he bears a war..
rant for the arrest of Malvina Mattox, his errand will be a
vain one. She is not in the Convent of St. Sepulcher," said 
the latter.
"She was there no later than yesterday," said the old  ;
squire, bending a glance full of suspicion upon the face of
the speaker.
"Yes, she was there yesterday and she was there this 
morning, not an hour ago-but now-   "                  ;
"Where is she now?" demanded the magistrate.
"In a carriage at your door."
The squire stared.
"Waiting to come in and accuse herself of the crime she )
committed five years ago; to accuse herself, that she may '
vindicate the innocent girl who has for all these years been :
suffering in her stead-to accuse herself before she dies, for' !
she is dying," solemnly declared the priest.
And the squire stared.
"There is no time to explain further. Will you see this 
girl now?" inquired the visitor.
But the squire stared.
Father Benedict turned to go his errand, and when he hai
reached the door the squire spoke:
"Come back, if you please, Mr. Riordonl This is all
very strange, sir, that you tell me! Come back  I don't
understand all this."
.                 IN~~~~~~~~~:
.  .    ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ s-Au~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ii



<pb n="245"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    245
The priest turned to retrace his steps.
"Be I to go and sarve the warrant?" inquired the con-
stable, who had been hesitating all this while.
"No I You are to wait here for the present ! Come back,
Mr. Riordon   Ah! you are coming   Well, sir, what is all
this you are telling me?" demanded the squire, as soon as
the priest stood before him again.
"I tell you, sir, that the girl whom you have sent to
arrest has forestalled your warrant by coming voluntarily
to give herself up, and that her physical condition is such
as to render all delay in taking her deposition dangerous
to the cause of justice," said the priest.
"Unaccountablel Here, an hour ago, comes to me a
young man, one Gow, from Somerset-no, from Cornwall,
and more recently from Australia-who tells me that he
was an eyewitness to the murder of little Stuart Campbell,
of which he charges Malvina Mattox-and tells so straight
a story that I felt constrained to issue a warrant for the
girl's apprehension. And now you come to tell me that the
girl herself comes forward voluntarily to give herself up to
justice. I say these two circumstances, taken together, are
very strange."
"They will seem less so, squire, when you hear the gil's
confession, which I implore you to lose no time in doing.
Her physician declares that she cannot outlive the day,"
earnestly declared the priest.
"Ah! a deathbed repentance and a dying confession t I
place little confidence in either l"
"No; this is no mere deathbed repentance. The girl has
been for years suffering from remorse and eagerly longing
to confess her crime, but she has been confined and watched,
and prevented. You must hear her story. She is not so
guilty as appears," urged the priest.
"Send her in," said the squire.
"I will bring her," replied Father Benedict, as he turned
and left the room.
In a few minutes he returned with Malvina Mattox lean-
ing on his arm, and supported on the other side by the
doctor.
They carried her to a chair in front of the magistrate's
table and placed her in it.
She bowed to the magistrate and sank back, panting.
~Lim..m.



<pb n="246"/>
2,6           THE TEST OF LOVE
The priest stooped and whispered:
"Tell your story, my child, not with as much detail as
you used with me, but as briefly, as clearly, and in as few 
words as possible. Then answer any questions the magis-
trate may put to you."
"I-wish to be put under oath. I-want every form to 
be used to insure that justice shall be done," gasped the
girl.
The oath was duly administered to her, and she told again 
the strange story of her involuntary crime, committed dur-
ing somnambulism, utterly forgotten for a time, and then
suddenly remembered when she was abruptly awakened out
of a similar fit of somnambulism at the scene and hour of
the tragedy. She spoke with difficulty, while her whole  i
aspect revealed to the most careless observer that not her
hours only, but her minutes, were numbered.
The magistrate's clerk took down her deposition in writ-
ing, and when it was finished he presented the paper for
signature.
Three times the pen dropped from her relaxing fingers 
before she completed it, and then she sank back in her chair, , 
laboring for breath.
The doctor took her wrist in his hand, felt her pulse, and
then dropped it with a sigh. 
All the persons present signed the deposition as witnesses.   I
Then the priest inquired of the magistrate: 
"What will be your next move? You will not commit i           M
this dying woman to prison ?"
"No, poor soul 1 she would not reach there alive. Doctor, -i 
how long will this last?" inquired the magistrate, in a whis- i
per, as he glanced toward the panting girl. 
"A very few minutes," murmured the physician. 
"Then, doctor, pray do as you see fit. You may take her ' 
away, if you think she is strong enough to bear removal; 
or you may lay her on a bed in this house, if you choose. I 
will ring for my housekeeper," said the squire, kindly.
"No; don't, don't ring. Look I" replied the doctor, point- '
ing to the girl, whose eyes were fixed and glazed and whose :i
labored breathing had ceased, and over whose head the priest ,
was extending his open palms and murmuring some prayer -' 
in Latin.
j.l
· al        S 



<pb n="247"/>
A\            THE TEST OF LOVE                    247
A great awe fell upon the company, but the poor, sinning,
suffering and repenting soul of Malvina Mattox was at
peace.
CHAPTER XXVI
VINDICATION
THE old squire was the first to break the awe-stricken si-
lence that fell upon the death of Malvina Mattox.
"Poor creature " he said, compassionately, "this is the
very best thing that could have happened to her and for all
connected with her. What a strange, tragic phase of mania
was hers! She should have been placed in a lunatic asylum,
under medical treatment, years before she had any oppor-
tunity of doing harm. Doctor, you can, of course, give a
certificate of death from natural causes to forestall the in-
convenience of an inquest ?"
"Certainly," replied the physician.
"And I, if you will permit me, must go immediately to
Rose Hill to break the news to the family there; though,
ah me! I can easily understand how this event will be
more of a relief than a grief to the widowed mother and the
sister," sighed the priest.
"I will attend to the removal of the remains, if you will
instruct me as to where they shall be carried-to Rose
Hill, or to the Convent of St. Sepulcher," said the doctor.
"I thank you. To the Convent of St. Sepulcher. I will
bring the mother thither; and, gentlemen, it is not now
necessary, I hope, that the afflicted lady should ever know
anything about the painful scene that has transpired in
this room," suggested the priest.
"No, it is not; though she may unhappily hear of it by
accident," said old Mr. Storkridge.
"That is scarcely possible. She goes nowhere, she re-
ceives no visits; and even should any servant of hers hear
of this day's work, he or she would not dare to mention it
to the mistress," said the priest.
"Well, gentlemen, if I or my establishment can afford
you any assistance in this sad affair, command us. We are
entirely at your disposal," said the old squire.



<pb n="248"/>
248          THE TEST OF LOVE
"We thank you very much, but need not trouble you,
sir. Upon second thoughts, I will join the doctor in taking
the remains back to the convent and go from thence to Bose 
Hill to notify the family," replied the priest. 
"Will you not want another carriage? The break, or the
wagonette, or any other in the coach house is quite at your
service," persisted the squire.
"I thank you, no; we can take the body back in the same
carriage in which we came. But, squire, it is not only in
the departed soul that I feel deeply interested, but in the
innocent, living, suffering young girl serving out the term
of her natural life in the penal settlements of Van Dieman's
Land! It is of her that I am thinking now! With the best
haste that we can make it must be six or eight months before
justice can reach and relieve her."
"I shall lose no time, Mr. Riordon. I shall act promptly, 
you may be sure. These documents shall go up to London 
to the Home Office, this day, by a special messenger, who
shall urge them upon the attention of the secretary for im-
mediate action. There is not a doubt but that the order for 
the discharge of Margaret Campbell will go out with the
next mail to Hobart Town," warmly responded the oldc
squire.
"This contents me. I knew the girl, and through my re- 
lations to her as her spiritual director, I knew that she was i i
innocent, though I did not know who was guilty."               2
"Kelsy I" said the squire, turning somewhat abruptly to)'
the constable who still held the warrant, "oblige me by de'
stroying that paper ! You cannot serve it on a dead woman,
you know. And go and see who that is that Oxton is bring-?,
ing in." 
"Itbe Tom Rorke, your worship, cotch a-poaching ag'in," 
answered the officer.                               i
"Go turn him back. Tell Oxton to keep in the strong{ {:
room until I call up the case. You see how I am engaged l..
now," said the magistrate. 
"'Yes, yer worship, I do. I will turn 'em round, yer wor- >.
ship," exclaimed the constable, stumping off on his errand. .
"And I see that you are busy, squire, and that we area 
hindering you. I think I can carry this poor little light-i
weight out to the carriage without assistance," said Dr. Pul .
len, as he went to the body and drew the black mantlei'
!I ii



<pb n="249"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    249
around its form and let down the veil over its face, and
lifted it in his arms as if it were only a fainting girl, and
carried it out and laid it carefully in the carriage, without
even exciting the suspicions of the coachman that a corpse
and not a swooning woman had been returned to the
cushions.
Then, after having carefully closed the carriage door, the
doctor returned to the justice room to take leave of the
squire.
And when the physician and the priest had said good-by
to the kindly master of Croft Court, they went out and re-
entered their carriage, and drove back to the Convent of St.
Sepulcher.
At the gate of the convent the doctor again lifted out the
body, and carried it in his arms through the grounds to the
door of the building.
"Holy Mary 1" cried the portress at the outer gate, as she
crossed herself. "The poor child has fainted dead away l
She never ought to have been taken out to drive in her weak
state."
And words to the same effect were uttered by the portress
at the house, as the doctor bore the body into the main
building.
Not until they reached "The Room of the Dead" at the
back of the infirmary, and had laid the body on one of the
slabs, did the priest, leaving the doctor on guard, go to in-
form the mother superior of the convent about the death,
and even then he told that lady of nothing but the death,
and having dispatched her in haste to "The Room of the
Dead," he re-entered the carriage and drove to Rose Hill, to
notify the family there of what had just occurred.
On arriving he sent up his card to the lady of the house,
and was at once admitted to her presence in the upper sit-
ting room, which was her usual morning retreat.
"You bring ill news, father," she said, on observing the
deep gravity of the priests aspect.
He bowed solemnly and in silence, as he seated himself
on the chair that she drew forward for his accommodation.
"My unfortunate child 1 How is it with her?" anxiously
demanded the lady.
"Tt is well with her," gravely replied the priest
"You mean-you mean?" breathlessly inquired the lady..
-'t,
L',



<pb n="250"/>
250          THE TEST OF LOVE
"That she is at rest," responded the priest, reverently
bowing his head.
"Dead I"
"Passed to her eternal home."
A look, not of grief, nor even of regret, but of infinite *
relief, came into the mother's face. Every feature expressed
what her tongue only forbore to speak:
"Thank Heaven!" 
It was with a deep sigh of satisfaction that she inquired:
"When did it happen?"
"Not an hour ago-suddenly, too suddenly to have you
notified in time."
"I knew it would come suddenly when it did come. I .
was warned of that by our family physician. Did the poor 
girl suffer much at the last?"
"Not at all. She passed away very quietly. I am here '
to offer any assistance on my own part, and on the part of 
the community of the Holy Sepulcher. The sisterhood are ;
giving all requisite attention to the remains, but, of course, -
we wait your orders. We would know whether you would'
have the body brought hither, or interred in the convent .
cemetery."
"Oh, in the convent cemetery by all means, if the sisters I
of the Holy Sepulcher will be so good as to allow it," said ,
the lady..
"Then it shall be so, and the sisterhood will willingly ex-' i
tend to yourself and your daughter the hospitalities of their: ,
house in this time of trouble."
"They are very good. I would like to go to the convent;:i.
immediately."                                      t
"There is nothing to hinder. There is a carriage at the i H
door."
"I will speak to my daughter," said the lady, as she arosee
and left the room. 
A few minutes later Mrs. and Miss Campbell reappeared 
arrayed for their ride, and the priest attended them down- i
stairs and out to the carriage.
When they reached the convent the two ladies were re,!
ceived with the most tender sympathy by the mother supe-i 
nor, who did not suspect and could not have understood.
why the death of the girl should have been such a great!
relief to the mother and the sister.



<pb n="251"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    251
Mrs Campbell felt that her wretched daughter was at
last safe from the imminent danger of a public trial, and
possibly a public execution, and she was very glad that this
should be so.
She suspected nothing of the dying deposition made by
the girl, nor did anyone enlighten her on the subject, which
would have overwhelmed her with pain and shame.
To the questions of Mrs. Campbell the nuns replied that
Miss Malvina had arisen and dressed herself in the morn-
ing, and, with much excitement and obstinacy, had insisted
on taking a drive; that the physician thought there would
be less danger in gratifying her wishes than in opposing
them. Accordingly, she was allowed to take the drive,
attended by the physician, who kindly volunteered his serv-
ices. But the girl had expired in the carriage.
This was the impression the nuns had received, and
though it was not in all respects exactly true, yet it was
honestly believed and uttered as truth.
Mrs. and Miss Campbell remained three days at the con-
vent.
At the end of the third day the obsequies of Malvina
Mattox were performed in the chapel, and her body was
laid in the cemetery.
And on the morning of the fourth day Mrs. Campbell
made a munificent present to the convent, and then returned
with her daughter to Rose Hill, where they fell into the
monotonous routine of their secluded lives.
In the meantime other events of importance to the desti-
nies of our friends were rapidly transpiring elsewhere.
After Ham Gow had laid the formal charge of murder
against Malvina before Squire Storkridge, and had seen the
warrant made out for her apprehension-that warrant
which was destined never to be served-he returned to the
little wayside inn where he had left Mr. Hamilton Gower
and the detective waiting for him.
He found them in the private parlor-the only one the
little inn could boast.
"Well?" demanded Mr. Gower, eagerly.
"All right. The squire received the charge and acted on
it immediately. An officer, armed with a warrant, has been
dispatched to the Convent of the Holy Sepulcher to arrest
Malvina Mattox on the charge of having murdered her
LE.



<pb n="252"/>
252          THE TEST OF LOVE
infant brother," replied Ham Gow, speaking to the beut of
his knowledge and belief.
"When will the preliminary examination take place?"
inquired Mr. Gower.
"It is set down for three o'clock this afternoon, which, I  '
suppose, will be immediately after the squire's luncheon,
and will give ample time for the officer to have the criminal 
before the squire, and for me to return and meet her there .
as her accuser and the principal witness for the crown."
"Very well. I shall attend that examination. You, also,
Hutchings, must go with us to give your evidence in regard 
to the scene you witnessed in the boudoir of Mrs. Campbell
on the morning of your visit to Rose Hill," said Mr. Gower..
"Of course, I will go," replied the detective.
"I hope it will not go very hard with the poor, crazy'
creature I This hunting a poor, half-witted girl to disgrace 
and death is not at all to my taste, even in the cause of^-
justice," sighed Ham Gow.
"But it is to rescue another, a most innocent and mosgi!
grievously wronged young lady, from a degradation wors
than death that you must do this," said Mr. Gower.
"And it will not go hard with her; never fear. She ii!
too crazy to be amenable to the laws, though she will prob,,
ably be shut up in an asylum for criminal lunatics, to kl
her from further acts of violence," added the detective.
How little they suspected that they were discussing
fate of one who had already passed beyond the power ^
human tribunals! 
"Hope you will excuse me for saying that I am h
gentlemen!  S'pose we have some dinner, and then 
out for Croft Court to attend the investigation?" su
gested Ham Gow. 
"Agreed," said Mr. Gower, touching the bell pull.  '
The dinner was ordered and a carriage engaged.   i
And half an hour later, when they had well dined, thu
entered the vehicle and soon found themselves rolling ov
the moors toward Croft Court.
They arrived a little before three o'clock, but were imm
diately shown into the library, where they found the sq
alone, enjoying his pipe. 
"Well, sir," said the old man, on recognizing Ham GoWi
Uof course, you expected to find me at my duties in tel
,  .



<pb n="253"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   t55
justice room, ready to preside over the preliminary examina-
tion of a prisoner charged by you with murder."
"Yes, your worship, certainly I did," replied the young
man, with a respectful though puzzled air.
"And these," added the squire, indicating Gow's two com-
panions, "are other witnesses that you have brought ?"
"Mr. Hutchings here has testimony to give," replied
Ham, with a wave of his hand toward the detective, who
bowed to the squire at this informal introduction.
The squire nodded briefly, in response to this courtesy,
and then turned an inquiring look toward Mr. Gower.
"This gentleman-Mr. Hamilton Gower, lately from
Australia-has no direct evidence to offer, but, being deeply
interested in the case, wishes to attend the examination of
the accused," said Ham Gow, in explanation.
Mr. Gower bowed to the squire, who returned the saluta-
tion, and then said:
"But, gentlemen, there will be no examination, which is
the reason why you find me here instead of in the justice
room."
"No examination 1" exclaimed the three men in a breath,
as they looked from the squire toward each other.
"Has the accused woman escaped, then?" inquired Mr.
Gower.
"She has-entirely beyond the power of magistrate or
man to recapture her. She has gone to the judgment
above," gravely replied the squire.
"Dead I" exclaimed Ham Gow.
"I am not surprised," remarked Detective Hutchings.
"What a misfortune 1" exclaimed Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"No, sir; it was a very fortunate event for all concerned,"
said the squire, replying to the last speaker.
"But in what manner now can the innocence of Margaret
Campbell be established?" inquired Hamilton Gower, with
a bitter sigh.
"By the dying deposition of that unfortunate girl, taken
down from her own lips in my presence, and duly signed
and witnessed," replied the squire.
"She confessed, then " exclaimed Mr. Gower.
"I told you so !" said the detective.
"I thought she would," added Ham Gow.
"Yes, she confessed," answered the squire. "The poor
L ''
Of~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="254"/>
254           THE TEST OF LOVE 
creature, at her own earnest desire, was brought here in a 
carriage, accompanied by her physician and priest. She
was dying, and by what seemed a supernatural effort of
will, she lived-gasping, panting, fainting and rallying-- 
until she had made and signed her confession; and five
minutes afterward she expired in her chair."
Silence fell upon the men who heard this statement.
Mr. Hamilton Gower was the first to speak.
"You will take steps immediately to bring this case be-i:
fore the Home Secretary, that no time may be lost in doing
justice to Margaret Campbell," he said.
"I wish to communicate with the secretary immediately.'i.
I could send the documents up by mail, but in that case:j,
they would have to go through the hands of so many under-
lings before they could reach those of the secretary-if they:
ever should reach them-that at best there would be great 
delay, and the order for the liberation of that most deeply ,
wronged young lady could not go out, as it ought to do, b;i
the next mail steamer to Australia. Therefore, I wish to
find a responsible messenger, which is not a very easy mat.'
ter, just in a hurry," said the squire. 
"Allow me to be the bearer of these dispatches. I am, fei
certain reasons which I should be perfectly willing to 
plain to your worship, if there was time, the most deepl
interested of anyone in the vindication of Margaret Cam
bell  Allow me to bear the dispatches 1" eagerly exclaim
Hamilton Gower.
The old squire looked somewhat surprised and seemed 
hesitate.
"My great reason for returning to England at this tim
though I had other and very important interests to draw 
hither-was to vindicate the innocence of Margaret Camn
bell. Though I am a stranger to you, sir; and though I 
not come to you accredited; and though I have no t
now to lose in procuring credentials, yet, surely, you can
hesitate to trust me with those papers, which no hu
being would find any interest in embezzling or misapp 
priating. Or if you have the slightest doubt on that subj
proy intrust me only with the copy of the attested o
sion, and give me a letter from yourself to the ecre
and I will leave for London to-night," vehemently d
the young man. 
/\j)



<pb n="255"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   265
There was no possibility of doubting his earnestness and
sincerity.
"You are, perhaps, a near relation to this unhappy young
lady?" said the squire.
"I am her betrothed husband," answered the young gen-
tleman, "and not a ticket-of-leave man, though I have just
returned from the penal colonies," he added, with a smile,
as he met the scrutinizing gaze of the magistrate.
"I did not suspect you to be one. I will let you take the
papers, and give you a letter to the secretary. I believe you
to be trustworthy, and even if you were not, you could
have no temptation to betray this trust, since to do so would
not advantage you in any way. I need not detain you while
I write a letter to the secretary. I have the letter already
written, and waiting for a messenger to take it. I have only
now to put your name on the lower left-hand corner of the
envelope. Let's see," said the squire, dipping his pen in
ink, "it's Mr.-Mr.-"
"Hamilton Gower," explained the young man.
"Oh, ay, yes, to be sure I Any relation of the great ducal
house of that name?" inquired the old man..
"I have not the remotest claim to such an honor," replied
the young man, with a smile.
"Here you are, then, my young friend. And Heaven
speed you I" said the squire, as he put into his hand a long
envelope containing the attested confession of Malvina Mat-
tox and his own letter to the secretary.
"And now, sir, if you wish to catch the London train, we
must get back to our inn as soon as possible," suggested De-
tective Hutchings.
And the three men arose and bade good-by to the squire,
and re-entered their carriage to drive back to the market
town.
They stopped at the Cat and Fiddle only to pay their bill,
and then continued their journey on to Stockstone, where
they were so fortunate as to catch the night express to
Londo.
9e



<pb n="256"/>
326"          THE TEST OF LOVE
CHAPTER XXVII
sucass!
HAMILTON GowXB and his companions reached 
about seven o'clock the next morning, and then took a
and drove to their inn, the Borough.
They found Ham Gow's young wife safe and well, the
a little impatient at having been left alone for three wh
days and nights.
"Which, if it hadn't been for the friendliness of 
Bounce, the landlady, in taking me out sometimes, it
moped to death I should have been before this," she said,
she sat down at the head of the breakfast table to pour
the coffee, in the private parlor of the party.
"But I telegraphed you every day, Lona," said the y
husband, deprecatingly.
"Oh, what is a telegram with nothing in it but 'All w
be home soon, take good care of yourself,' or some
when I wanted you, or else a long letter every day," c
plained Mrs. Gow.
"But, my good child, we were all on a mission involve
more than life or death-involving justice and mercy.
had no time to eat or sleep-at least with any satisfae
to ourselves-much less to write letters 1" said Ham 
deprecatingly.
"I'd like to know what that business was that took
off at a tangent, and kept you three whole days ! I am 
if it hadn't been for the telegrams the landlady would ha
thought you had abandoned me, and I might have thou
so, tool" said Mrs. Ham.
"Oh, no! Oh, no! you never could have done me th
injustice, Lona !"
"I don't know! But tell me what that wonderful bu
ness was that made you leave London as suddenly as if y
had been running from the police."
"Other people's secrets, my good little woman, that I dafr
not divulge," said Ham Gow, so seriously that Lonace
to tease him.
As soon as breakfast was over Mr. Hamilton Gowe
changed his dress, made a very careful toilet, ordered 
-~~~~~~~~/1



<pb n="257"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    257
first-class hansom from a livery stable, entered it, and
taking with him his documents, drove to Somerset House,
in the fond, fallacious hope of finding the home secretary
at his office and of being admitted to his lordship's presence.
Perhaps, if he had presented himself under his proper
name and title, he might have commanded some respect and
attention; but appearing simply as Mr. Hamilton Gower,
though that name was a good one, too, and bearing a letter
from no more important a person than an obscure Yorkshire
squire, he met nothing but coolness, snubs, rebuffs and de-
lays, all the way up, through porters, footmen, messengers,
pages and clerks of all grades, until he reached the corridor
of the anteroom to the office of the private secretary of the
home secretary.
After difficulty and delay, he obtained one minute's in-
terview with the great man's great man, who told him that
"his lordship" was not at the office that day, nor was it
certain when "his lordship" would be there. Would the
gentleman leave letters ?
"No," said Mr. Gower, "they are to be delivered to his
lordship in person. They contain matters concerning life
or death."
"So many letters of that sort come to the minister. Good.
day, sir," replied the great man's great man, smiling "su-
perior" as he dismissed the applicant.
It would be tedious to tell how many times young Ham-
ilton Gower presented himself at Somerset House, without
succeeding in his attempt to see the secretary.
At length, after three days of vain effort, he wrote a
note, in which he briefly stated the urgent claims of justice
and mercy that had brought him from Australia, and lastly
from Yorkshire, to seek a personal interview with the home
minister. He marked this letter private, and addressed it
to the town house of the secretary, and then waited the
course of events.
The following morning he received a note from the pri-
vate secretary of the minister, saying that "his lordship"
would receive Mr. Gower at the "office" that same day at
twelve o'clock noon.
Hamilton Gower rejoiced, for he now considered his cause
as good as gained.
And he was right.
.&



<pb n="258"/>
258           THE TEST OF LOVE
He once more made a very careful toilet, engaged a first '
lass hansom, and drove to Somerset House.
Here his reception was now very different from what it 
had been on the occasion of his former visits.
The gentleman who presented himself by appointment to
Ibe admitted to the august presence must certainly be treated 
with the utmost respect, not to say reverence and veneration.
The underlings were obsequious, and passed the visitor on
:from one to another with bows and scrapes, until he found
ihimself before the awful potency that represented the throne
.in its dominion over life and death. The great minister
,was in point of fact a gentle and unassuming old man, who
'might have been the beloved pastor of some simple country 
,congregation; and yet he was one of England's most emi- '
inent as well as most Christian statesmen; while his high, 
full, broad forehead, thoughtful eyes, and calmly com- i
ipressed lips, quietly folded hands and easy attitude showed 
all an intellect as serene in its integrity as it was benevo-
lent in its aims and potent in its strength.
His manner at once put the young visitor at ease.
With a low, respectful bow Hamilton Gower laid the
letter and documents before his lordship.
"Sit down, young sir, while I look into these papers,"
said the minister, taking up the packets.
Hamilton Gower took a seat at a short distance an)}
glanced from time to time at the face of the secretary, who
was now reading the letter of Squire Storkridge. 
The young man now fully appreciated the act of the greats
minister in giving his personal attention to a matter that;
mighthave been referred to some of his numerous assisti
.ants.
"This is the most cruel case of the kind that ever camer
,under my notice," said the home secretary, as he finished
Treading the documents.
The young gentleman bowed in respectful assent, and the?}
elder one continued:
"Measures'shall be at once taken to redress this grea'
wrong, so far as it can be redressed; but what can com-'
pensate to that unhappy girl for the injuries she has sf-
lered-the distress of her trial and conviction, the misery
of five years of penal servitude? Not certainly the mere'
order for her discharge from custody. I would there were'



<pb n="259"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    259
some better way of compensating to her, and to all victims,
of circumstantial evidence, for the great wrong done to them
in their conviction." 
And the minister bowed his head upon his chest with a 
deep sigh that revealed the painful sympathy of his soul.
"I wish to say to you, my lord, since your lordship so 
kindly takes some interest in this case, that the young girl,
since her arrival in Tasmania, has had no suffering to en-
counter, beyond that of exile-exile softened by the pres-
ence and companionship of an aged relative, who preceded
her out to the colony, made a home for her there, and re-
ceived her on her arrival in the only way in which he could
do so, as his assigned servant, nominally, as his adopted
daughter really."
"I am glad to hear it. I know such arrangements are
sometimes made in the penal colonies. I am glad this has
been done in the case of this unfortunate girl. Mr. Gower,
the order for Margaret Campbell's discharge from custody
shall go out in the steamer that sails for Melbourne on the
tenth of September."
"I-beg your lordship's pardon. I had supposed the ship
would sail on the first," said the young gentleman, respect-
fully.
"The time of sailing has been changed," quietly re-
sponded his lordship.
The first feeling of Hamilton Gower on hearing this news
was one of disappointment-a delay of even ten days seemed
very grievous to him; but his next feeling, following almost
instantly upon the first, was one of delight at the thought
that this very delay would enable him to be the bearer of
the order for Margaret Campbell's release, if only the min-
ister would permit him to become so. He felt that he was
beginning to trespass a little too long on the golden minutes
of the home secretary; yet he could not help saying:
"Again I beg your lordship's pardon and forbearance, but
-I am going out to Australia by the steamer of the tenth,
and I should be very happy to be intrusted with the order
for Margaret Campbell's discharge."
The minister reflected for a moment, and then said:
mr   ~   "At present I see no objection to the plan. You came
to me accredited by Mr. Storkridge, of Croft Court, with



<pb n="260"/>
*60          THE TEST OF LOVE
whom I have some acquaintance. Come here again at this
hour on Monday next."
"I thank your lordship deeply. I have the honor to bid ?
your lordship good-morning," said the young man, who, '
feeling that the interview was at an end, thus took leave
and departed.
His face was radiant when he went back to his inn, where 
he found Ham Gow alone, smoking a pipe and reading a 8
paper while he waited for his friend.
Mrs. Ham was out shopping with her friend, the land-
lady.
"No use to ask you what news! Your whole face is 
beaming with good news 1" exclaimed Ham Gow, withdraw-
ing the pipe from his mouth and smiling.
"Oh, yes! Glorious news! I am to take out the order.
for Margaret Campbell's honorable discharge by the next.
mail steamer for Australia " joyously replied the young:
man.
Ham Gow stared.
"You?" he exclaimed. "Why, you have got to go down j;!
on the first of the month to claim your estates in Cornwall, ;(!
to celebrate your majority at Hawkewood, and to kick Lewis:;
Manton, neck and heels, out of Hawke Hall. Now, how 
can you do that and sail for Australia all in one day ?" 
"I cannot do it, of course."
"Then you mean to sacrifice your own interests for the 
present, at least, and leave the usurper in possession for an-i '
other year?" said Ham Gow, in a tone of disgust.
"I mean nothing of the sort. I shall go down to Hawke.'
wood on the last of this month so as to be early on the
ground at Hawke Hall on the first of next month, when ';
shall have the pleasure of shaking hands with my old ten.':
antrv and showing Mr. Manton the door."
"You cannot do all that and sail for Australia on the
same day to save your life and soul !" persisted Ham Gow.  !
"I know I cannot. I told you so," replied the young
man, with his eyes twinkling with amusement. 
"I don't understand you at all," said Ham Gow, resent~
fully.
"Of course you don't, old fellow, because you have noit
got the key! Here it is, however: the time of the sailing ji
the mail steamer is changed. She sails on the tenth. 



<pb n="261"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                  261
shall go down on the first, do all I have to do in Cornwall,
and be ready to embark on the tenth. Now do you compre-
bend?" inquired Mr. Hamilton Gower, with a laugh.
"Whe-ew 1" cried Ham Gow, withdrawing his pipe from
his mouth and sending a spiral column of smoke that re-
solved itself into a white cloud above his head.
"And now," exclaimed the young gentleman, gayly, "let
us do something pleasant to pass away the time. We have
been forced to neglect Mrs. Ham a great deal-and she the
only lady of our party I Now, what do you say to our taking
her to the theater to-night? They are playing 'The Lady
of Lyons' at the Princess. I am sure she would like that."
"I know she would. Thank you, we will go," said Ham
Gow.
Mrs. Ham returned soon after, and was very much
pleased with the proposition to go to the play, and immedi-
ately began to make a grand toilet for the occasion.
They went, and were so well entertained that they re-
solved to indulge themselves in the same pleasure at some
other theater on the succeeding night.
Still, to the eager spirits of Hamilton Gower, the time
hung very heavily until Monday noon, when he again went
by appointment to Somerset House.
On this occasion he did not see the minister, but was met
by his private secretary, who placed a sealed packet in his
hand, directed to "His Excellency, Viscount Seyres, Gov-
ernor of Van Dieman's Island," and having printed on the
left-hand upper corner the words: "On Her Majesty's
Service."
Hamilton Gower bowed his thanks, put the precious
packet carefully away in his breast pocket and came out.
When he returned to his inn, he found Ham Gow occu-
pied precisely as on a former occasion, smoking a pipe and
reading a paper while waiting for his companion's return.
"You find me alone here again, you see  Mrs. Ham has
gone out with the landlady to see Madam Tussaud's wax
works! London sights have turned that young woman's
head; and, as for Mrs. Bounce, who goes gadding with her
and at her expense-well, it is fortunate there is a landlord
and several grown-up sons and daughters to look after the
interests of the house, or the business would go to the bow-
wows," laughed Ham Gow.
_.



<pb n="262"/>
262          THE    TEST   OF LOVE                 '
"Well, leave Lona to enjoy herself, poor girl, and tell 
me what you think of this?" exclaimed Hamilton Gower, '
taking the long packet from his pocket and laying it on the '
table, just under the eyes of his friend.          '
"I think," said Ham Gow, drawing his pipe from his '
mouth and bending his head to scrutinize the superscrip- gi
tion," I think-in the inelegant but expressive language of 
my boyhood-that it is bully 1"
Before another word could be spoken, the door was sud- 'i
denly opened and two policemen unceremoniously entered i
the room.
The two men who were seated at the table looked up in
surprise.
"Have you not mistaken the room?" inquired Mr. Ham- 
ilton Gower, on seeing the officers approaching them as if
they meant business.
"No, I think not," said the foremost policeman, referring 
to a printed paper in his hand, and then looking atten-
tively at Ham Gow.
"Then, what is your business here ?" demanded Mr. Ham-
ilton Gower.
"Our business, sir, is with this gentleman," replied the ,
policeman, and going up to Ham, who was staring with all 
his might, he laid his hand on his shoulder, and said: "Ham 
Gow, I arrest you in the queen's name! You are my pris-
oner !"
"Me! In the name of all the dees, what do you want of
me?" demanded the ex-tramp. Then, with a sudden light '
breaking all over his dark face, he exclaimed: "Oh, I 
see I see ! By the Lord Harry ! but this is too funny !"
"You will not find it very funny, I am afraid, my fine.
fellow 1 You have eluded justice long enough, but now we,
have got you, and the charge against you is a very serious
one," said the policeman, as he drew a pair of handcuiffe
from his pocket, and, quick as lightning, snapped them upon 
Ham's wrists.
"Upon what charge do you arrest my friend?" gravely 
inquired Mr. Hamilton Gower; for though he divined at
once the nature of the accusation against the prisoner, he i
chose to hear it stated in distinct terms.
"Upon the charge of being an accomplice of Lewis Earl
of Hawkewood, in the murder of Horace, late Earl of '
? .



<pb n="263"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   266
Hawkewood, on the morning of Wednesday, September 1,
18-, at Hawke Hall," replied the policeman.
To the astonishment of that officer, the prisoner -urst
into a loud laugh, in which he was joined by his companion.
"Has the earl been arrested ?" demanded the young gen-
tleman.
"Yes, sir. His lordship was safely stowed in Hawke-
ville jail this morning," replied the policeman.
"Well, I'm blessed!" exclaimed Ham Gow. "I don't
mind being accused of a murder or so now and then, but to
be charged with being an accomplice of Lewis Manton's "
CHAPTER XXVIII
JAI[ GOW'8 GREAT GRIEVNCE
THE two policemen were preparing to take Ham Gow
away.
"Where are you going to carry him ?" inquired Mr. Ham-
ilton Gower, curiously divided between a sense of humor
and a feeling of annoyance.
"We shall take him down to Hawkeville, sir, and lodge
him in jail, alongside of his principal in the charge, least-
wise in another cell it will be, hows'ever; for it is ordered
as the accomplices be kept apart," answered the policeman.
Ham Gow made a wry face-such an awfully wry face
that Mr. Hamilton Gower hastened to say:
"I am very sorry for this inconvenience to you, old boy I
-though it will last but a day or two. Tuesday, you know,
is the first of September, when all this mystery of our own
making will be cleared up. Have patience, old fellow, until
you can turn the tables on your persecutors."
But Ham Gow screwed up his handsome face into the
likeness of a nut cracker, and made no answer.
"Really, I would do anything in the world that I could
do to relieve you of this inconvenience, but I cannot possibly
do anything now, or here  Suppose, for instance, I should
declare myself-who would believe me? There is no one
here to identify me, except yourself, and you would not
be believed under the circumstances ! Nor even if we should



<pb n="264"/>
16fi          THE TEST OF LOVE 
succeed in convincing these officers of the truth, oould t !i:.
act upon their convictions? They have made the arrest, aL ,
they have to take their prisoner to Hawkeville. They have'
no discretionary power. Come, dear old boy, brace up$l 
brace up! This will soon be over 1" urged the young gen. ,I
tieman.
"Oh, you misjudge me altogetherl" laughed Ham Gow'. :
"Do you think I mind being arrested on the charge of mnure  i
der, even such a murder? Oh, ye great, great guns andl
little whistles I-or a few days' imprisonment, which shall ',
end in such discomfiture and ridicule of the Hawkeville 
Dogberries? No, indeed! I don't mind in the least being i,'
charged with a murder or so, now and then! Many a bet.
ter man than Ham Gow has been so charged before this! 
But what grieves and humiliates my soul, oh, friend of my '
youth, is that I should be taken for an accomplice of Lewis ~;
Manton I"
"That is mortifying," gravely assented Lewis Manton's ":
enemy.
"'Mortifying ' Mortifying isn't any name for it I Look i
here, Mr. Hamilton Gower I You have known me ever since 
we were little shavers together, and you will know what I am 
going to say to be the truth. I should have been poor, i
ragged, hungry, homeless and friendless, but for you, a good I
part of my life, but I never did keep bad company! And ,
now to be pointed at as an accomplice of Lewis Manton, so-
called Earl of Hawkewood, is-a little too much of thes
monkey " complained the ex-tramp, with a very much in-l
jured air.
"Never mind, old fellow. You will disprove that charge i
as well as the other," said Mr. Hamilton Gower, cheerfully.
"Oh, yes! I shall disprove that charge and all the'
others. But when so much mud is thrown, and such black. 
mud at that, some will stick. I shall go back to the colonies
after this."
"Gentlemen, we don't want to be disagreeable, but we 
must take off our prisoner if we are to catch the down train f,
to Penzance," said the policeman who had made the arrest. j
"I will go down to Hawkeville with you, Ham," said the o
young gentleman.
"No, dear old man; please don't think of it! Pray stay '
hre, and look after my wife a little. She will be coming '



<pb n="265"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   265.
itome from the wax works presently, and will be frightened
out of her senses if she should miss me and then hear what
has happened. You wait here and meet her. Tell her I
have left town on important business. If she should chance
to hear of the visit of the policemen, explain to her that
they have taken me off as an important witness for the
claimant of an estate-for that is what they really are
taking me for, whether they know it or not," added Ham
Gow.
Mr. Hamilton Gower nodded.
"And when you come down on the thirtieth bring her
with you, and take her to Demondike."
"I will do so," said the young gentleman.
"We must really be off - We have not five minutes to
lose!" said the policeman.
'I am ready I And, indeed, old man, I am anxious to be
off, before my wife returns here to discover these men, and
to be frightened out of her wits! You can send my traps
down by express," added Ham, as he wrung the hand of his
friend, and turned to accompany the two policemen.
"Oh, see herel" impulsively exclaimed Mr. Hamilton
Gower, forgetting all his former reasoning as soon as he
saw his friend being led off. "This is supremely ridiculous,
you know! You have arrested that man for the murder of
one who is still living! Horace, sixteenth Earl of Hawke-
wood, is no more dead than I am!"
"Oh, come now, sir; that is a little too thin !" replied the
policeman.
"But it is true, I tell you!" persisted the young gentle-
man.
"Beg pardon, sir; but if any other than a gentleman had
made that statement I should think he was a fool, or took
me for one !"
"Horace Hawke is still alive and well, I say, and is in
London at this present time."
"All right, let him produce himself 1"
"He can do so immediately. I am Horace Hawke, for
whose murder you have arrested that man," earnestly de-
clared Mr. Hamilton Gower.
"Oh, I dare say you are my granny, who has been dead
this twenty years !" insolently laughed the policeman, who
was fast losing respect for the "gentleman."
A.'~~~~~



<pb n="266"/>
e66          THE TEST OF LOVE
"I repeat that I am the Earl of Hawkewood, who
supposed to have been murdered. Your prisoner kn
that I am so."
"You are chaffing us, sir, and we know it; and, beg
your pardon, this is no subject for chaffing !" said the 
policeman, joining in the discussion for the first time. 
"Ham Gowl Who am I?      Tell these blockheads" 
claimed the young gentleman, losing patience.
"You are Horace Hawke, sixteenth Earl of Hawkew
my lord l" answered the prisoner.
"You hear?" said the young nobleman, turning tow
the two officers. 
Both those persons burst into a simultaneous laugh 
derision.
"All right," said the elder one, ironically. "You pro
that to the sitting bench of magistrates at Hawkeville
morrow, and the charge against the prisoner will be instan
ly dismissed. For the present, we have got to do our d
and take away our prisoner, though all London were h
to declare you to be the nobleman you claim to be I Co
along, Gow!"
"You see, it is no use, my lord, I must go; but don
you mind it, for really I do not! It will all be right in'
day or two," said Ham Gow, cheerfully.
"I knew it would be of no use to declare myself here;
I felt that it would be wrong not to do so. However,
will go down with you to Cornwall, and find a-plent
identify me there."
"I beg you won't, sir ! Remember that the impression
you having been murdered has been so deeply stamped u
the minds of men that nothing but proof positive of
trick you and I played in changing characters will e
bring them to acknowledge you as the living earl who
supposed to have been murdered in his bed."
"Well, we will give the explanation!"
"But we cannot prove it without Delaplaine I You,
the claimant, would be an incompetent witness. I, 
under arrest for the earl's murder, would be another.
must wait for Delaplaine, who is to meet us on the firs
Hawke Hall."
"I believe you are right. I will not fail you on the f
said the young earl.                            '
.~



<pb n="267"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                  £67
"And, meanwhile-poor Lona-my lord 1"
"Yes, I will see to her."
"Now, good-night, my lord."
"Good-night, Ham ! God bless you, old fellow i"
"You, too, my lord."
The two policemen laughed incredulously at this dia-
logue, which they supposed to have been got up for their
especial edification, as they led their prisoner off.
They had not been gone fifteen minutes, when Lona came
running into the parlor, radiant from exercise and sight-
seeing.
Finding Mr. Hamilton Gower alone she demanded:
"Where is Ham r"
"He has been suddenly called out of town on most im-
portant business. He left me here, Lona, to tell you so,"
explained the young gentleman.
"That is just the way he went off before!" impatiently
exclaimed the young woman, sitting down and jerking off
her gloves.
" You must not blame him, Lona. He was obliged to go,"
said the young gentleman.
"Why was he obliged to go off so suddenly without giving
me a word of warning, just like he did before ?"
"My dear girl, I would rather not tell you."
"It is another secret, I suppose, like the cause of his
sudden night journey to Yorkshire."
"Yes, it is a secret for the present."
"I hate secrets, especially between husbands and wives l"
said Lona, petulantly throwing off her bonnet.
"So do I; but they cannot be told, when they are other
people's secrets, you know! But, never mind, you shall
know all about this one in a day or two."
"Where has he gone this time? Up into Yorkshire
again ?"
"No; down in an opposite direction."
"When is he coming back?"
"Not for a week; business will detain him in the neigh-
borhood that long at least; but I am to take you down to
him to-morrow."
"Oh! what time to-morrow?"
"We can leave by the nine-eighteen express from Pad-
dington."
L



<pb n="268"/>
268          THE TEST OF LOVE
"Oh I but where are we going?"
"Down to Southampton-first."
"Whatever business can Ham have in Southampton?
he had only prepared me 1"
·He had not time. He was called away too sudd
He did not even take his valise with him. Asked me
express it to-night."
"Well, if we are to leave by the nine-eighteen, I must
and pack up. Are we to take our sea boxes ?"
"I do not advise it. Leave them here in the care of
landlady. Take only a valise."
"Very well."
"And see here, my dear girl I The first thing you do
be to pack your husband's valise as quickly as you can,
let me have it. I must send that off to-night. He will 
it the first thing in the morning."
"Very well," said Lona Gow, again, as she seized
bonnet and vanished from the room.
The young man lighted his meerschaum and began
smoke while he read the evening papers-a bad habit-
the reading, but the smoking, which he had picked up ,
the Australian gold fields and fastened upon himself 
shipboard.
In a very short time, Lona Gow entered the room, 
ing a well-packed portmanteau, which she placed upon
table before the young gentleman, and then, with a
words of earnest thanks for the trouble he was about,
take on her husband's account, she left the parlor to 
her own preparations for the next day's journey.
Mr. Hamilton Gower put on his hat, took up the
manteau, and conveyed it to the office of the Royal P
Express Co. (Ltd.), and there sent it off to Ham Gow,
of the governor of the Hawkeville House of Detention,
the county prison was called.
He returned to his inn to join Lona Gow in a tit
supper, after which they bade each other good-night,
separated to retire to rest.
Very early in the morning, Mr. Hamilton Gower
astir.
On entering the parlor he found Lona Gow already
quite prepared for her journey, and the breakfast
waiting.
:':!.



<pb n="269"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE-                  269
Lona returned his kind good-morning, and then rang for
the coffee and accompaniments, which were promptly
brought by the waiter.
Lona, eager as any child for a holiday, was too much
excited by the thought of her journey to eat much.
She speedily dispatched her morning meal, and seemed to
feel aggrieved that Mr. Hamilton Gower should take more
time over his muffins and chops than she had done.
"Won't we miss the train, Mr. Gower?" she asked at
2ength.
"Possible!" exclaimed the gentleman, starting up.
At the same moment the waiter entered and announced
the cab that had been ordered to take them to the railwa:
station.
In ten more minutes they were seated in that cab and
bowling rapidly toward Paddington.
They caught their train. It was the express, which in
the course of a few hours rushed them rapidly down toward
Southampton.
Lona Gow was more aggrieved than ever. Mr. Hamilton
Gower, wishing to indulge in his own thoughts, had sup-
plied his companion with papers, magazines, cakes and
fruits, and had left her to enjoy herself with them while he
ensconced himself in a corner and gave his mind to reverie.
But Lona was no reader, and so she could not occupy her-
self with literature, nor could she munch cakes or suck
oranges forever, so she sat there, sometimes staring out of
the window at the fields, farmhouses and forests that seemed
to rush past her as the train went on, and sometimes casting
furtive glances at her silent escort, and putting questions,
which he answered absently in monosyllables that were not
always to the point.
So, when they reached Southampton, Lona heaved a great
sigh of relief, and said:
"Now, then, let us go and find Ham I Perhaps he is on
the platform waiting for us."
"Why--did you expect to see Ham here?" inquired Mr.
Hamilton Gower, in surprise.
"Of course I did I When I asked where you were going
to take me, you said to Southampton, and I expected to
fina h.m here, since we were following him," said Lona.



<pb n="270"/>
270           THE TEST OF LOVE
"And we are following him, but this is only the f
stage of our journey. We are to go on to Penzance." 
"Will we find him there?"
"No, my dear Lona; your husband is at Hawkeville."',i
"Then, why didn't you tell me so at first, Mr. Gower
"I thought I did tell you so. I had no intention to r
otherwise. We will take the train for Penzance in a 
minutes. Are you tired, Lona?"                    i
"No, I am not tired of anything but of these sud
journeys of Ham! I am tired enough of them."
"Never mind! Courage    This will be the last one,
hope!" said Mr. Gower, as they stepped out of their co
partment to the platform. 
"I hope so, too " answered Lona.
In a few more minutes they were on the express train f
Penzance, where they arrived late that night.
There was no train for Hawkeville until the next mor
ing. In fact, there were but four trains in the twenty-fo
hours on that little branch railroad, and the last one
the day had gone.
There was no alternative for the travelers but to put
at the Railroad Hotel for the night, which they reluctan
did.
At eight o'clock the next morning they entered upon 
"Hawkeville Special," and were soon flying over the 
stage of their journey. 
They reached the Hawkeville station at half-past n
They happened to be the only passengers that got out the
before the train went thundering on its way further do
the coast.
CHAPTER XXIX
THE BIBTHDAY
THIS was the morning of the first of September, and
twenty-first anniversary of the young Earl of Hawkeoo
birth.
He cared no longer to continue the masquerade he 
been enacting for the last two years.
To-day he would throw off all disguise, declare him
*.



<pb n="271"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   271
prove his identity, claim his estates and vindicate the ac-
cused prisoners from the charge of his murder.
He stepped gayly off the train, handed his companion out,
and, seeing no carriage at the station, inquired:
"Lona, do you think you can walk as far as Demondike ?"
"Of course I can. Is Ham there?"
"No, Lona; Ham is probably at the court room in the
town hall now-"
"Oh 1"
"You remember that I told you he was called down here
to attend a trial."
"Oh, yes, I remember," said the unsuspicious young
woman.
"So I shall take you to Demondike and then walk over to
see how the trial goes, and send Ham back to you when
the court adjourns."
"I thank you very much, sir. Bother the court! When
do you think it will adjourn?"
"It may not do so before a late hour in the afternoon."
"Very well; then you will send Ham to me, sir."
"Oh, yes!"
They were walking as briskly as young and strong
muscles could carry them  on the road to Demondike,
where the earl, as we shall henceforth call him, chose to
take Lona Gow, in preference to leaving her in the
village hotel, where she would be in danger of hearing
from some indiscreet gossip the present situation of her
husband, and without the key to the mystery, would be ter-
rifled out of her senses at his apparent danger.
A brisk walk of three-quarters of an hour brought them
to Demondike, where they found the old ruined watch tower
looking just the same as it had looked on their last visit- 
as it had looked, in fact, for the last hundred years, and
would look probably for the next hundred.
But this description refers only to the outside, which
presented the base of a fallen tower situated on the edge of
the cliff at the mouth of the raging torrent.
They opened the door and entered the strong room, where
they found Old Nan seated in her big armchair, smoking a
short pipe, and Young Nan busily engaged in packing.
The latter started violently on seeing the intruders; but



<pb n="272"/>
272          THE TEST OF LOVE
on recognizing them she shut down the lid of the trunk
had been filling and advanced toward them.
The earl made her a sign to be on her guard, and th
said: 
"I have taken the liberty of a friend of the family
bring Mrs. Gow here to wait for her husband, who is
tending a trial at the town hall."
"As a witness, you know, Nan. You don't mind 
coming in this offhand manner, do you?" inquired
"No, child; no, I don't," replied Young Nan, witth
tremor in her voice, for she knew that Ham Gow wea'
rested for murder, and she considered him in ext
danger.
"And she will not have long to wait. I pledge you 
word to send Ham to you as soon as the court shall adj
this afternoon," said the earl, to reassure Young Nan
well as to comfort Lona.
"EhI What's that you say? Come here, you !" 
Old Nan, in a peremptory voice, as she took her pipe
her mouth, and struck her stick sharply upon the 
floor.
Laughing, the earl went to her, while Lona Gow
stood near the old woman, trembling, for she was very 
afraid of Old Nan.
"Well, Mrs. Crook, here I am! What is your will
me?" inquired the earl, still laughing.
"Come here, youl I know youl And I knowed 
when you was here a month ago I You're the Airl o'
wood, you are!" said the old woman, snappishly.
"You are right, Mrs. Crook. I have no disposit
deny your statement. No! I thank you for recog
me," said the earl, gravely enough now.
"You're the Airl o' Harkwood lawfully; but you're
the airl justly! No!" exclaimed the crone.
"Who, then, is the rightful heir, Mother Crook?"
humoredly inquired the young earl.
"Your elder brother, my lord! Ham Gowl"
The young earl started violently and flushed to the 
his forehead.
However strongly he might have suspected his own:
tionship to the companion of his childhood, ever since 
;  1''  i



<pb n="273"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   a18
ing the story told by John Hice, it was terrible to have his
suspicion confirmed so suddenly.
The crone continued to speak, regardless of her hearer's
agitation.
"Yes! Ham Gow, the oldest living son of the late airl,
by his first marriage with Radiance Gow  Ay! it was a
gypsy marriage, you'll say, and not binding on the airl;
but I say it was binding on the man I Ah I Ham Gow, if he
had his just rights, would now be Airl o' Harkwood, and
you, my lord, would be only the airl's younger brother, the
Honorable Horace Hawke," said Old Nan, sharply.
The young earl found nothing to say to this tirade.
Old Nan continued:
"But law and justice is opposed to one another in this
case, as they often is in others, sich as the law of excise and
the justice of free trade, the law of landholders and the jus-
tice of free sile, the law o' game preserves and the justice
of poaching, and so on, and so on, forever till the day of
judgment!" fiercely exclaimed this old communist.
"But I could not reverse this order of things if I ever so
ardently desired to do so," said the young earl, deprecating-
ly, glad that the subject had assumed a general, in place of
a particular, character.
"Oh, I know you can't do nothing to alter it ! If you was
to try to put Ham Gow in your own shoes to-day the law
wouldn't let him wear them. So Ham Gow must remain
Ham Gow, and Horace Hawke must reign at Hawke Hall
as the Right Honorable Airl of Harkwood !"
"I will do all that I can for my brother! Does he know
his relationship to me?" inquired the lord.
"You may take your affidavy to it that he does! He has
known it ever since he was a baby! I told him !"
"How did you know it?" now inquired the young earl for
the first time.
"How!" exclaimed Qld Nan, with a harsh laugh.
"Wasn't I present at the marriage of Capt. Hawke and Ra-
diance Gow? Didn't I know 'em    when they lived at
Brighton? Didn't I see 'em often and often at Boulogne?
Wasn't I aboard o' Pierre Moreau's schooner La Belle
aemme, lying at anchor just off the coast, when we saw
{   the child carried off by the current, and Pierre offed with



<pb n="274"/>
274          THE TEST OF LOVE
his pea-jacket and flung hisself overboard, and fished it 
out o' the sea and brought it to me?"
"And that child was Ham Gow?" inquired the young  ,
earl.
"It was Ham Gow, in course."
"Why did you not restore him to his father?" 
"Why? That's a good un! The Belle Femme had a,.
cargo o' French silks and brandies as we wanted to land on i!'
t'other side before daylight, and to be quick about it, too Xr 
And we didn't want to draw no partic'lar attention. Pierreo,^
Moreau upped anchor and steered for the English coast in .':
about ten minutes after fishing the child out of the seaI
It was a week or more before we heard how the child had  i
got into the sea. Seems like the poor mother and her two ;
children had got into one o' them shallopy boats what the :',
'longshoremen have for hire, and it was upset. The boat- ':
man saved the eldest boy, but the youngest, Ham, was car-
ried out by the tide and picked up by Pierre Moreau, as I 
said, and the poor mother was drowned. It would ha' been
well if Jack had been drowned, too, for he only lived to.,
come to a worse fate!"
"You have heard the end of John Hice, then?"
"Haven't I? One of our boys in the free trading line o' 
business-I don't mind mentioning of it now, seeing as i
we have been druv to giv' it up, all along of Lewis Man-h.: j
ton's interference-dog him  I'm glad he's going to be'
kicked, neck and heels, out'n Hawke Hall, and if you hadn't C.
come back to do that, something better still would ha' hap- 'i
pened to him, and he would ha' been hanged for your mur.- 
der, and sarve him right! I wish you had kept dark, my :.;
lord, till the vilyan was hung, then you might have come-:
back and claimed your own; but nothing could 'a' brought. 
him back. That there's a mistake as can never be remedied 'l
If you'd only kept dark till he was hung for your murder, /.
my lord !"
"But that would have sacrificed Ham " said the youngm!,i
earl, laughing despite the gravity of the subject. 
"So it would. Ham would ha' had to swing alongside ot's
him. I'm glad you have come back to kick Lewis Mantoa,^,
out."
"You were saying that you had heard of the fate of John 
Gow, known as Jack Hice-from one of your friends ~.



<pb n="275"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   £75
believe," suggested the young earl, who was desirous of
finding out exactly how much of this history was known to
the old woman.
"Yes, I was saying one of our boys who was sent over for
seven years on account of his contempt of custom house,
came back on the Labrador, after honorably sarving out
his time, and he told me all about John Gow, and where he
died and where he was buried. Well, he's at rest, anyway.
But poor Ham 1"
"I will do the best I can for my brother," said the earl.
"You're a good un, I'll say that for you, lad, though you
do belong to an order which I ain't got much respects for,
noway! 'Lords,' indeed! The imperence of 'em! When
the youngest Sunday-school child knows as there ain't but
one Lord over the heavens and the earth."
"I said before, Mother Crook, that I cannot reverse the
order of society, if I wished to do so," said the young man,
good-humoredly.
"No more you can't as I said before."
"Mother Crook, I have a few more questions to ask you.
In the first place, why, when you discovered that the child
you rescued was mourned as lost, you did not send word to
the bereaved father that he was safe?"
"Mixed motives, such as rules the most of us. You see,
we was on this side when the news was brought by a fishing
smack that a boat had upset with a lady and two children,
and that the eldest boy was saved, but the lady was drowned,
and her body recovered, but as the youngest lad was drowned
and his body washed out to sea and not found. This were
full two weeks arter the ewent. I knowed well enough who
the child was when I first seed him. That wasn't no news
to me. But, you see, in those two weeks I had got fond of
the lad. I allus had a fondness for chillun, like some people
have for cats and dogs, and besides which I had a spite agin'
Capt. Hawke for not making that gypsy marriage lawful
by a Christian one; and so, partly out'n fondness for the
boy and partly out'n spite agin' the father, I kept the child
and never let on that he was alive."
"How came you first to the ruined watch tower?"
"Lor' bless you! the old tower, with the caves under it,
had been used by the free traders for time out o' mindl
And when I heard that Capt. Hawke had turned into the



<pb n="276"/>
276          THE TEST OF LOVE'
Airl o' Harkwood and married a dook's darter, I movel
right over from St. Rosalie, where I had been living, and  !
settled right down into this strong room and made it cornm-  ,'
fortable, and I kept guard over the smugglers' secrets."
"And did my-did the late earl ever find out that his son 
had been rescued from drowning ?"        .,
" Of course he did  Ah I1 went and told him I But he
was married then, as I said, and expecting of a legal heir .
every day. Ah! he would ha' taken the boy away from me, /,
but I threatened exposure of him and his gypsy marriage. 
And so he left the lad with me, which was nothing but a  '
baby anyway, you see ! And he promised, when the lad was 
old enough, to see to his education and his setting up in  ;
life; but, lor', he died too soon to do anything for poor
Ham."
"Did my-did the late earl suspect the smuggling opera-
tions in which you were engaged ?"
"I reckon he did! And winked at 'em  Why, he were  lf
our best protector! He muzzled the steward, old Traverse, 
who had his suspicions, and would ha' set the constables on 
us an' it hadn't been for the airl putting of a muzzle on his '.  l
mouth! And he'd ha' kept his word and edicated Ham if
he'd lived long enough! Poor Ham!"
"I repeat that I will do the very best I can for my  .
brother! But Ham is in no want of help. He was very ',"I
successful in the gold fields. He is a rich man."   it
"Glad to hear it! But he is sorely in need o' help now, ';
my lord! If it hadn't been as he is accused of murdering '!
you, I don't know as I should ha' let on to you as I knowed 
who you was this time any more than I did the last time
you was here, and I knowed you then !" said Old Nan.
The young earl arose and said:
"I must leave you now. I must hurry back to Hawke- 
ville, and present myself as a witness at the court room." 
"Werry well! And maybe when you have time you'll :
tell me how you come to be alive when we all thought as i:','
you were dead, and whose body that was as was thought to 
be stole and cut up by the doctors, and, most of all, why ,', 
you vanished, and where you have been these two yearsl"  '
said the old woman.
"I will leave Ham to tell you all that " said the yombn  X
earl, looking around for Lona. 
4A



<pb n="277"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   27T
But the two women had disappeared
"They went out, just as you came to me. Did you think
that I'd ha' spoken so free to you, if them wimmen had
been listening with all their four ears cocked? Not likely 1
Didn't you know they were gone ?"
"No, I never thought of them until this moment. Tell
Lona that I will send Ham to her as soon as the court shall
adjourn. She knows nothing of the accusation against him.
She thinks he is there as a witness, and so he really is,
though it was not as a witness that he was summoned, or,
rather, arrested," said the young man.
And he once more turned to leave the room; but the evi-
dences of impending removal, seen in the packed and half-
packed boxes and trunks through which he had to pick his
way, attracted his attention and excited his curiosity.
"Are you going to leave Demondike, after all these
years ?" he inquired of the old woman.
"Yes! Didn't I tell you as Lewis Manton-may the
fiend fly away with him I-broke up our free trading here?
Ain't four of our boys caught and waiting their trial at the
next assizes? Ain't Dennis Prout lost his situation as
coast guardsman? Not as anything in this world can be
proved agin' Dennis I But they charged him with neglect of
dooty, and suspicioned him o' favoring the smugglers, and
so they turned him off. Hows'ever, Dennis has saved a
pretty penny, as we all has, for the matter o' that 1 And
him and Nan is going to be married at last, and we are all
a-going over to the Newlighted States of Americky, where
there ain't no lords acknowledged, 'cept the One Lord as
rules the universe I But, my lad-or my lord, if it must be
so-hadn't you better be off to the courthouse?"
"Yes, yes; good-morning! I will see you again to say
good-by before you go. By the way, when do you leave ?"
"Next Monday."
"Oh, there'll be time enough, then. Good-morning."
"Good-morning. Go along now! You have wasted half
an hour here."
The young earl walked out into the sunlight. He saw
Young Nan and Lona Gow sitting down on an old boat on
the sands, talking confidentially.
He merely raised his hat as he passed them, saying:



<pb n="278"/>
278           THE TEST OF LOVE
"Good-morning   I shall be sure to send Ham to you aa s'
soon as the court adjourns."
"Oh, do!" cried Lona, but her words scarcely reached his
ears, he had walked on so rapidly. 
He Was absorbed in anxious thought. The strange rev- 
elations made to him by Old Nan Crook had disturbed him 
greatly, notwithstanding his long secret suspicion of the 'i
real relationship existing between himself and his beloved '
"tramp."  But mere suspicion is one thing and assured a
knowledge another. Strong as was his attachment to this 
half brother, he felt glad to remember that Ham Gow had. :
declared his intention to return to Australia and make that, 
prosperous colony his home. 
Besides this, he had great source of anxiety in the con-' ;
tinued silence of his late valet, Henri Delaplaine, who, as '
one of the chief witnesses to his identity, could scarcely be', 
spared on this day; for a man whom the law, represented by ',#
a coroner's jury, had declared to have been murdered two ':,
years ago, and whose titles and estates had passed to his,,i.
successor, would require something more than personal like- ".
ness to the earl who was supposed to have been assassinateda' 
and the testimony of his accused assassin, to establish hias 
identity and restore his rights.
He had written to Delaplaine before leaving Australia, I
and he had written again since arriving in England. HeiW I
had directed his letters to the only address left him by thai
valet--"M. Henri Delaplaine, Barbier et Coiffeur, Rue dail
Rivoli, Paris."                                     '
But no response in person or in writing had been re.':
ceived.
Now, suppose the ex-valet should be dead, or lost? HoW:|
awkward for the young earl l Instead of being at once a-c ':
knowledged as the Lord of Hawkewood, he might be lookedat.
upon as a mere adventurer, whom an accidental likeness toi
the murdered earl had tempted to take his name and claimi
his estates, and his very witness, Ham Gow, who was 'n1
custody for the murder of the earl, might be considered asX
his accomplice in the intended fraud  He might be patd
through endless and ruinous lawsuits, he might even bi
prosecuted in the criminal courts for fraud 1       i
He might have to pay very dearly for his two years' frolicS
Heaven only knew how it would all end, unless Mr. Henritl



<pb n="279"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   279
Delaplaine would come forward to identify his late master,
and tell the story of his masquerading exchange of character
with Ham Gow!
But where was Mr. Henri Delaplaine, and why did he not
come or write?
Why?
"Heaven of heavens " exclaimed the young earl, as the
answer came with the shock of a terrible revelation to his
memory I
Had he not heard in that story told by the camp fire in
the gold diggings, by Ham Gow, that the valet, Henri Dela-
plaine, had been accused of being an accomplice with (ow
in the earl's murder? Was not Henri Delaplaine even now
a fugitive from justice?
Could he be found?
And even supposing that he could be produced, would
not his place be in the dock, rather than on the witness
stand?
The young earl wondered how he could have forgotten
this circumstance.
And now his position seemed to him to be very doubtful
and difficult.
He was dead in law, and his witnesses were accused of
his murder. Should he come forward now and declare him-
self to be living, and call upon them to identify and tell
the story of the little comedy they had all enacted together
on the night of his birthday ball, he would be considered an
impostor and they his accomplices!
The prospect looked so dark and threatening that the
young man turned pale and cold, and walked slowly on,
dragging one foot after the other, with a gliding motion.
Verily, he looked like the ghost of himself  He had
shaved off his heavy black beard, and now wore only a light
mustache upon his upper lip, and he had trimmed his hair
and gotten rid of the sunburn of the sea voyage, and he
looked at this moment the very facsimile of the sickly youth
who had changed characters with the tramp and run away
two years ago.
But he did not realize this 1 He walked, or rather glided,
on along the beach, with his head upon his breast, his hands
in his pockets, and his mind absorbed in painful reverie
so deeply that he was unconscious of the approach of others,



<pb n="280"/>
'BO           THE TEST OF LOVE
until his ears were assailed by loud voices-though they iJ
were not speaking to him.
"Promised to go and see the women 'fore they left for,  B
'Meriky 1" said the voice of Penn, the locksmith.
"Well, I thought, being an idle day, as I'd stroll over and 
see how they was a-takin' of this new misfortin'. I don't. 
think as they'll be going off to 'Meriky, leaving poor Haza
in the lurch, till he's hanged, or 'quitted, or somethink,"] 
drawled the deep tones of Tree, the tanner. 
"I was only gwine to offer my sarvices, if belike I could 
be of any use," piped the wheezing whistle of little OldI 
Proddy, the cobbler.
But all these men, whatever other individual motives they 
might have had for visiting the Buined Tower at this crisis, 
were simultaneously moved by curiosity. 
The young earl raised his pale face and looked at them., 
There was a unanimous yell and flight. 
"Lord betune us and harm 1" cried little Penn.
"Hail Mary, full of grace I" rapidly intoned Tree, as
scudded away after Penn.
"Lord spare my life this time, and I will try to be 
better old man 1" whimpered the little cobbler, Proddy, fall
ing upon his knees, and hiding his panic-stricken face in
hands.
This incident made a revolution in the spirits of th
young earL
"These men have recognized me fast enough; only t
have taken me for a ghost," he laughed, as he strode rapidly
away.
He would have stopped to speak to Old Proddy, only he
was afraid of frightening the old man into fatal fits bfo
he could succeed in convincing him that the supposed dis. 
embodied spirit was incased in solid flesh and blood, and
besides, he was in a very great hurry to reach Hawkeville.
Ten minutes later he entered the village, which he found 
in the highest excitement over the great event of the time
There was no pretense of doing any sort of business 0
work.                                              4
Men were gathered at street corners, and women at
other's door step, and all were eagerly discussing the 
rest of the Earl of Hawkewood for the murder of
predecessor.



<pb n="281"/>
THE' TEST OF LOVE                 28t
The young nobleman made his way rapidly through all
this hubbub, occasioning a shriek now and then from some
woman who fancied she saw his ghost, and so at length he
reached the town hall, where the bench of magistrates were
sitting.
He pushed through the crowd that surrounded the build.
ing, and told the officer who guarded the door that he wag
a witness for the defense, and must have way made for him
to the witness box.
"You will please pass around to the side door, sir, which
will lead you right where you want to go," civilly replied
the man.
The young earl followed this direction and went down an
alley that led to a door in the side of the building.
To the man on guard here he told the same story, and was
at once admitted.
This door opened directly into the crowded iourt room,
where the magistrate was holding the preliminary examina-
tion of the accused prisoners.
But the first object that struck the sight of the young
earl was the dock, m which stood, side by side, Lewis Man-
ton, called Earl of Hawkewood, Ham Gow, and-Henri
Delaplaine.
CHAPTER XXX
MAZEKMENT
COMINO from the broad daylight into the semi-darkness
of the crowded court room, the dazzled vision of the young
nobleman could at first perceive nothing but a floor of heads
so close together that one might have walked over them
without tottering.
The first distinct figures that he recognized were those of
the three prisoners, whom he only saw plainly because they
were in the dock a few feet above the level of the crowd
and on the opposite side of the room, and in a direct line
with the door by which he entered and through which a
bright sunbeam fell upon them.
But when the door was closed, and the light was excluded,



<pb n="282"/>
282           THE TEST OF LOVE 
all the scene became obscure again until his eyes grew ao-,
customed to the half light.
"I am a witness for the defense," he said to an oficer
who was in attendance. 
"Then, you are the only one, I'm thinking, sir; but this i
just the preliminary examination before the justices, yo{
see," replied the man. 
"I am aware of that. Where shall I sit?"
"Here, if you please, sir."
The young earl took the indicated seat.
As the scene cleared before him, he perceived three m
istrates on the bench, the presiding one being old Mr. Oliv
Ball, whose round, white head and round, red face w
easily recognized. The two other magistrates were strang
to him.
There was a discussion going on in a rather low tone
prevented its purport from reaching his ears.
Turning his attention from the bench to the dock, he 
careful note of the prisoners there.
Lewis Manton, so-called Earl of Hawkewood, looked
pale as death, kept his eyes fixed upon the floor and sh
dered with every appearance of conscious guilt. If hewe
not a criminal, he was certainly a coward.
Ham Gow, on the contrary, stood erect, not with defia
but with a face full of fun, as if he exceedingly enjoyed
joke, and he never looked down except in the effort to s
press an explosion of laughter. If the ex-tramp had nd
been there upon the gravest of all charges, he might h
been committed for contempt of court-that is, if a 
could be committed for the inward laughter that gleam
from the corners of his dark eyes and bearded mouth.
Henri Delaplaine, evidently taking courage from  i
guilty looks of the "earl," as well as from the merry a
of the tramp, stood up in rather a theatrical attitude 
heroism, with his chest thrown out, his arms folded,
head thrown back, and his eyes rolling calmly over the 
Withdrawing his glance from the dock, the young
turned it upon persons seated nearer to himself. In a 
directly in front of him, and with their backs toward hi
were seated the Rev. Paul Laude; Dr. Ellis, the 
physician of Hawke Hall; the Rev. Mr. Vincent, rectoi
Hawkeville Old Church; Stepney, a footman formerly



<pb n="283"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   £88
the service of the "late" earl; and two stout matrons, serv-
ants from the HalL These were the witnesses for the prose-
cution, he knew, and what an array there was to prove
that Lewis Manton had murdered a man who was at that
moment sitting behind them, alive and well.
Evidently the trial or investigation had already made
some progress, the charge upon which the warrants for the
arrest of the accused were issued had been read, and had
been met by denial on the part of the prisoners; probably
the minutes of the coroner's inquest which had sat upon the
body of the "murdered earl" had also been read, and fol-
lowed by the little discussion that was going on between the
justices on the bench when the young earl had entered the
court room and taken his seat.
Now, that discussion was over, and the oily voice of the
bullet-headed Justice Ball was heard to say:
"Let the Rev. Dr. Paul Laude take the stand."
The doctor slowly arose, and reared his tall, grand form,
until it towered above the highest head in the room, and
stepped forward.
The oath was duly administered, and then Mr. Ball said
informally-for this was but a preliminary investigation:
"Dr. Laude, you will please tell us all you may happen
to know of the homicide at Hawke Hall."
"I know nothing whatever of that homicide, beyond the
patent fact that my ward, the late Earl of Hawkewood, was
certainly murdered there on the morning of the second of
September, 18-, two years since," answered the doctor.
"Oh! you know that, do you?" said the young earl to
himself, while in the dock Lewis Manton shuddered, Ham
Gow chuckled and Henri Delaplaine twirled his mustache.
"Then," said the magistrate, "tell us something of your
connection with the house, and any circumstances bearing,
directly or indirectly, upon the homicide that may have
come to your knowledge."
The reverend doctor cleared his throat, and began:
"My name is Paul Laude; my age is sixty-eight years;
I am a clerygman of the Established Church; I took my
degree twenty years ago, at Old Trinity, Oxford.
"For fourteen years, and up to two years since, I was resi.
dent guardian and tutor of the late youthful Earl of Hawke-
Vwood.



<pb n="284"/>
846         THE TEST OF LOVE 
"I remember the morning of the homicide. There
been a birthday ball on the night before, and the revelry
kept up until about three o'clock in the morning.
"When all the guests had departed except those who
to stay all night, I retired to my chamber in the bach
corridor. That was the place where all the guests
were single men were quartered.
"On that night no one was lodged in the bachelors'
ridor except myself, my waid and Mr. Lewis Manton.
ward, the earl, had the rooms exactly opposite to mine. 
few doors further up the corridor, and nearer the main 
per hall, were Mr. Lewis Manton's rooms."
"On which side?" inquired the presiding justice.
"On the same side as the late earl's," replied the d
"Proceed with your testimony," said Mr. Ball.
"Well, sir, about two hours after I had retired to
when all the household might be supposed asleep, I
roused from a light slumber by a slight noise in the c
dor. If it had been a frank, pronounced noise I should 
have stirred to investigate it; but this was a low, cauti
clicking, as of some one trying to pick a lock, or turn a
without being heard.
"I thought the sound a very suspicious one, and I got
of bed, threw on my gown and took a taper and went
into the passage. There I saw Mr. Lewis Manton stan
outside the door of my ward, evidently trying to open it.
"He started when he saw me and muttered something 
the effect that he had lost his way, and mistaken that to
for his own. I directed him aright, and went back to 
"Do you remember how the prisoner was dressed on
occasion?" inquired the magistrate.
"Perfectly. He wore a crimson satin dressing gown
a black velvet smoking cap with a heavy gold tassel."
"How is it that you have such a perfect memory of
costume? Are you usually so observant of dress, reve
sir?" sarcastically inquired Lawyer Poinsett, who had 
engaged to watch the case for the earl
"Not.usually. But on that occasion the richness
gaudiness of the dress attracted my attention, and, if 
will have it, my disapprobation. I hated to see a yo
man in a Christian country dressed in the gaudy trapp
of a heathen. That is the reason why I noticed and



<pb n="285"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   285
membered the costume. My ward and myself wore black
serge or gray flannel gowns-when we wore any," replied
the doctor.
"Ah !" exclaimed the lawyer, derisively.
"I think that this is really all that I have to give in evi-
dence; at least it is all that I know even remotely bearing
upon the case," said the doctor, addressing himself to the
bench.
"Then you may withdraw from the stand, reverend sir;
but oblige us by remaining in the room," replied the pre-
siding justice.
Dr. Laude came down and resumed his seat.
"Charles Stepney will take the stand," called out the
clerk, in obedience to the direction of the magistrate.
The footman from the Hall arose and went forward, and
testified to having been the last servant up in the house that
night, to the best of his knowledge and belief.
He said that the prisoner, Henri Delaplaine, had threat-
ened, in his hearing, to make something handsome out of
the earl that night.
That later on, when he thought the whole household had
retired, and he himself had put out the last light, and was
going upstairs with a bedroom candle in his hand, the can-
dle had dropped out of its socket and in falling had become
extinguished.
That he groped along slowly and cautiously in the dark
until he reached the bachelors' corridor, through which he
had to pass in going to his own attic chamber.
That when he reached the bachelors' corridor, where a
dim light was burning at one end, he saw the valet, Dela-
plaine, steal cautiously along toward his master's door and
open and enter the room, followed by another person whom
he could not identify.
He said that he thought nothing of it at the time, nor
did he, until after the murder had been discovered, under-
stand the significance of what he had seen, when taken in
connection with what he had overheard.
The footman was cross-examined by Mr. Poinsett, bat
without weakening his testimony.
Dr. Ellis was then called and testified:
"I was present when the late Countess of Hawkeweor,
then Lady Volante Belle Isle, gave her testimony under
L



<pb n="286"/>
286          THE TEST OF LOVE
oath, to the fact that at six o'clock on the morning o
murder, as she was passing through the bachelors' co
she saw a man, in crimson satin dressing gown and a 
velvet cap with a gold tassel, come out of the late
room. But she was not near enough to identify the 
The evidence of this lady was taken down in writing,
signed before several persons, who affixed their sign
as witnesses.
"This document is in the hands of the police autho
and can be procured for reference," concluded the p
cian.
"Jane Carraway," called out the voice of the clerk,.t
one of the stout women whom the earl had noticed
the witnesses for the prosecution got off the form and 
dled up to the stand.
Being sworn, she testified:
"My name is what the clerk called me by, and I
been housekeeper at the Hall this thirty years or
being sixty years of age now, and not a-growing
younger.
"I memorize the murder of my dear young maste, 
late earl, and all I have got to say about that, as I
well enough who done it, though not being able to sw
the same, through not being allowed to swear what I
inside of myself, but only to what I have seen or heard,
hopes as the grand villyan will be hung, and wishes
could be drawn and quartered as well, which he richly
serves to be burned up at the stakes  And-if I hai4
will of him, he should be tored by wild horses and go
wild bulls !"
Here the torrent of the woman's words was arrestedi
the stern reproof of the presiding justice, and she was
to keep to what she had seen and heard in connection
the homicide.
"I never saw nothing but the dead body of my poor
massycreed master I" sobbed the witness.
("Oh, you saw that, did you?" muttered the young
to himself, with an inward laugh.)
"And what I heard," proceeded the witness, "was 
the mouth of the poor, dear, departed countess herself,
she on her ill bed, as it might 'a' been her deathbed,.
all she had seen and heard to break her heart and
,1^^



<pb n="287"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    WT
her brain, being tied up, till death do 'em part, along with
a 'sassinator 1"
Again the woman was severely reproved by the bench,
and told to restrict her statement to facts.
"I am, your worship I Ain't it every bit a fact I'm telling
of you, and me on my oath? Yes, sir, I do memorize the
day as my new mistress, the late young Countess of Hawke-
wood, was brought home to Hawke Hall! I do memorize
that of all the five hundred days in the year, it was the very
day of the hamnaversly of my dear young master's murder,
and they was to have a festywall on the grounds! But it
didn't turn out to no good.
"That night, after all the visitors had gone home, except
the duke and duchess, as were to stay all night, I was sud-
denly startled by hearing some one scream out most fear-
full 
"I was at my supper, but I ran up the back stairs as
hard as I could go, and on toward the bachelors' corridor,
where the screams came from.
"And there I sees the earl, with the countess in his arms,
a-taking of her toward her room.
"'And is it highstrikes, my lord?' sez I.
"'I don't know,' he said, as he laid her on the bed. 'Stay
by her and do what is proper, while I go to look for the
duchess.'
"And he went out and left me alone with the lady."
"Did you notice how his lordship was dressed on that
occasion ?" inquired one of the magistrates.
"Ay, I did, sir! He were dressed in a flaming red satin
gown and a black velvet cap, and a glistening gold torsel,
all as one with any of them circus men, which I thought at
the time was misbecoming of a Christian nobleman."
"Go on. What occurred when you were left with the
countess ?"
"I soon brought herto, ir, your worship, which I was al-
lers well beknown fer.  kill with fainting fits and high-
strikes. And which herdyi    p'e ftrst words were wild
enough, for she were like  e disrated 
" 'He was the man I saw coming out of the earl's room
on the night of the murder  He was the assassin of his
cousin '
& 



<pb n="288"/>
18S8          THE TEST OF LOVE 
"'Who be your ladyship talking about, my ly4ra
I did think as she were off her head.
"'Him! Lewis Manton I Him I charge with the mt
of the late earl 1' she cried, fierce-like, staring at me O
great black eyes.
" 'Oh, dear, my lady, your ladyship don't know
you're saying of,' says I, feeling sure then as she was oi
her mind.
"'What have I said? Oh, what have I said?' she 
starting up and trying to fling herself out of bed.
"I had seen highstrikes afore then, but nothing like 
followed that 1 It was awful, she flung herself about so 
could scarcely keep her in bed.
"But presently my lord came in with the duchess,
the sight of him her ladyship went off worse than ever
began to charge him with some crime that she did not 
then, and suddenly, from violent convulsions, she fell
unconsciousness. 
"And then I was sent out of the room, and never saw
lady for weeks, and never heard her repeat the charge 
made on that wild night. That is all I know about it,
worship; but there are some here as knows more."
This witness was freely cross-examined; but the p
only strengthened her testimony, and brought out ad
items that weighed heavily against the accused, for
Mr. Poinsett inquired:
"You say, witness, that when her ladyship came to
senses she never repeated the charge she had made inu
delirium?"
"No, your honor, I didn't say anything of the sort,
ging your pardon; but I said after that I never saw
ladyship for weeks, and never heard her repeat the cha
replied the witness.
"Ah! When did you see her ladyship next ?"
"The day on which the duchess took her away to
Isle. My lady called me into her room and told m
was going away for a change, and said she meant to
my waes, and she presented me with one of her own
shawls, which was worth fifty pound if it was wo
shilling, and I was quite flustered with all this gracio
and coulan't return thanks enough, nor make co



<pb n="289"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    289
enough to show my thankfulness, until my lady says to me;
says she:
"'I hope, Carraway, that you have not repeated to any-
one any words of mine that I might have uttered in my
fever on the night when I was taken ill ?' says she.
"And then I knowed what she meant, and I knowed, too,
that she hadn't spoken them charges when she was off her
head, for people never remember what they have said in
such states, and I knowed also why my lady raised my
wages and gave me her Ingy shawl; but I replies, very
solemn:
" 'I hope I know my place better than to indulge in such
werry improper gossip.'
" 'I am glad to hear it, and I hope you will never speak
of this matter; it would be very wrong to do so; I shall
depend on your discretion, Carraway,' says my lady.
"And I promised never to mention what had passed in the
sick room that night, and I never would ha' done so, your
honor, if I hadn't been fetched here on my oath," concluded
the housekeeper.
"You may sit down," shortly exclaimed the lawyer.
Mrs. Possett, the sick nurse, was called, and, being sworn,
testified:
"My name is Ellen Possett, my age forty years. I have
lived in this neighborhood all my life. I am a sick nurse
by trade.
"I was called on the third of September, one year ago,
to attend upon the late Countess of Hawkewood at Hawke
Hall. I was with her ladyship during the whole of her
illness.
"I never saw her ladyship out of her head once while I
was in attendance on her. She was nervous and excitable,
but never insane. I heard her on several occasions, when
she was very much excited, charge his lordship, the Earl of
Hawkewood, with the murder of his cousin, the late earl.
"She never charged him with the crime to his face, but
if he ever came into her room she would shriek and cover
up her head to keep from seeing him; and then when he
would go out of the room she would mutter to herself:
" The assassin! he knows that I know he murdered his
cousin, Horace, and he dares to come here and torture me
by his presence."'



<pb n="290"/>
290          THE TEST OF LOVE                            1
"Were these strange charges ever made in the pr
of a third party ?" inquired Mr. Poinsett.
"Not when I was one of the three, sir. And I
think she ever made them in the presence of her grace 
duchess, who seemed to be all at sea as to what could 
caused her ladyship's sudden hatred of his lordship."
"You were with the late Countess of Hawkewood in
last illness, I think," said the presiding magistrate. ",
us what occurred on the last day of her ladyship's life."
"Yes, your worship. It was afternoon. My lady
very low. The little infant, Viscount Hawke, had died
day before, and he was lying in his little casket on a table
the foot of his mother's bed. She would not allow himft
be removed.
"There were in my lady's chamber about half a da
people-his lordship the earl, his grace the young d
her ladyship the Lady Victoria Belle Isle, the attend
physician (Dr. Ellis), and the sick nurse, which was
self, your honors. And we were all watching and expec
that every breath would be her last, when all of a sudden 
opens her great black eyes-and awfully large and sol
they looked in her thin, white face-and she said:
"'I desire that everybody shall leave this room except 
doctor and the nurse.'
"And after a little consultation with Dr. Ellis, by
advice they all did go out, leaving me and Dr. Ellis with
dying lady. Then she whispered:
" 'I have no strength to write, or to sign my name, or
make a mark; my hands are already cold and dead.'
"I took one of her hands and Dr. Ellis the other,
we rubbed them. After a little she whispered again:
" 'I cannot go out of this world and take with me a 
which may leave the innocent to suffer for the guilty. 
your ears, both of you, and listen to my dying words.'
"We stooped nearer, and she whispered:
" 'The secret that has cost me my life and the life of
little child, is this-that I know the present Earl of Haw
wood murdered the late earl. I saw him leave the roon
the murdered man in the darkness before day on the m
ing of the murder. I did not know it was he then, bt
knew it later. A few weeks ago I charged him with
crime, and he denied it and attempted to explain his



<pb n="291"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    291
ence there; and his denial imposed on me for a while, but
here on my deathbed the conviction is strong upon me that
he did the deed. If any other man should be brought to
trial for that crime, I charge you to make this my dying
declaration public; but-otherwise-keep it secret still; I
only wish to shield the innocent-and Gow and Delaplaine
are innocent-I do not-wish to--'
"And then, your honors, she lost her speech forever. Dr.
Ellis went to the door and called in her friends, who gath-
ered around the bed. But her eyes were fixed and her
breath coming in gasps, and in a few minutes she was gone,"
concluded the witness.
The effect of her testimony was electrical. The air be-
came alive with the buzz of voices. It is true that rumors
of this deathbed declaration of the countess had prevailed
and gained ground for weeks past; for the sick nurse had
probably not been so reticent as prudence might have dic-
tated to her to be; so the people were in a measure prepared
for the revelation; yet still to hear the rumor confirmed by
evidence given under oath produced the most profound sen-
sation.
'The presiding magistrate gave an order that silence
should be enforced or the hall should be cleared.
This order had the effect of striking the spectators dumb
for the time being; and then Mr. Poinsett began to worry
the witness on the stand.
"You have a most wonderful memory, Mrs. Possett, to
be able to repeat, word for word, that dying declaration of
the late countess-that dying declaration which was never
taken down in writing I How is it that you can repeat this
lesson so well ?" he sarcastically demanded.
"Your honors, I have repeated the last words of the
Countess of Hawkewood, to the best of my knowledge, and
that is all I can do. But your honors have a better witness
than me. There is Dr. Ellis, as also heard the words," re-
plied Ellen Possett.
"Dr. Ellis will please to take the stand," said the pre-
siding magistrate.
The Hawkeville physician came forward, and, after being
duly sworn, corroborated in every respect the testimony of
the previous witness; it is unnecessary to give his words



<pb n="292"/>
f29          TIE    TEST   OF LOVE 
here, as in substance they were but a repetition of tho
his predecessor on the stand. 
"What do you take to have been the mental condition
the late countess at the time of her making the dying ^
ment?" inquired the presiding justice.
"Her ladyship was perfectly sane, though much
in mind," replied the doctor.
"Have you at any time seen any evidence of mental 
ness or mental aberration on the part of the late countea
"Never, your honor, though I knew her ladyship from 
day that she was born until the day that she died; ha
been the medical attendant of her family when they 
at Castle Belle Isle the greater part of every year,
twenty years. And I must say this for her ladyship, tha
never knew a woman of any rank or any age of a soun
better balanced or more practical mind than was the 
Countess of Hawkewood."
The doctor was then permitted to withdraw.
CHAPTER XXXI
A DARK DEFENSE                '
THE three magistrates consulted together in a low t
and then the presiding justice, addressing the chief pris
"'q    said:
"You have heard the charge and the testimony a
you. What have you now to say in explanation or defense
The so-called Earl of Hawkewood arose in his place, e
eye turned upon him.
He stood there with a face as pale as his very light, fia
hair; his light-blue eyes bent upon the floor, his long, 
fingers clutching the front of the dock; his whole 
form trembling like a sapling in the wind.
His voice was low and quivering as he began to sp
"Yes, I have an explanation to make-an explanation
the action and the motive of that action, which has 
me in this humiliating position-false position, I
say.
"To make this explanation clear I must go back to,



<pb n="293"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                    293
days when I was traveling in the East, with my tutor-not
a clergyman, as most traveling tutors are, but a man de-
voted to science and especially to what are called 'occult
sciences'-to astrology as a matter of detail.
"We were in Aleppo, where, among other interesting per-
sons to be seen, was an astrologer famous for the accuracy
of his horoscopes. Even the deriders of his 'science' never
called him an impostor.
"I went with my tutor to see this wonderful personage.
Curiosity impelled me to have my future forecast.
"He told me, or he foretold me, of every event of im-
portance that has since happened to me-of the early death
of my father, who, indeed, died before my return to Eng-
land; of my sudden and unexpected inheritance of wealth,
landed estates and titles; of my marriage with a lady of
great beauty and high rank; and finally, of a series of ter-
rible misfortunes that would happen to me in the second
year of my marriage; of the loss of my wife and child by
sudden death, and of a heavier calamity still-of my own
i      apprehension and trial for the deepest crime known to the
law-the heinous crime of murder.
"He either could not, or would not, tell me how that
criminal trial was destined to terminate; whether I should
be acquitted or convicted of murder; or even whether I
should deserve the one or the other fate. He answered to
-   all my questions in his professional jargon:
" 'The celestial sphere is veiled, the seer can see no more.'
And so he took his fee and dismissed me; but I looked on
the dark side.
"You may wonder when I tell you that even then, before
*^     one of those predictions had been fulfilled to justify my
;_    forebodings, my mind was darkened and depressed, when in
obedience to the powers of a magician, these
'Forthcoming events cast their shadows before.'
"But, then, I was superstitious by nature and by-train-
ing, I was about to say. At least, the constant assdciation
of a traveling tutor given to the study of the 'occult sci-
ences' fostered a morbidly speculative disposition within
me."



<pb n="294"/>
294          THE TEST OF LOVE
Here the speaker paused for a moment, passed his
thin hand over his forehead, and resumed:
"Do you ask me what all this has to do with the crime
puted to me? You will soon hear.
"My father was in the prime of life, being scarcely f
two years of age. He was of a very robust constitu
and had the finest health, never having had a day's 
in his life. He had no dangerous habits, was not a
hunter, was not a heavy feeder or a hard drinker. In
he had every prospect of living to be ninety or a hun
years of age. I could hardly believe in that portion of
astrologer's prophecy.
"Yet the first news that met me on my return to E
was that my father had been killed in a railroad con
when on his journey to meet me on my landing at So
ampton !
"I will not speak of the sorrow that overwhelmed m
that time. It has nothing to do with this case. But I m
speak of the horror that darkened my soul and obscured
reason, as I brooded morbidly over this unexpected fl
ment of the astrologer's prediction."
("Ah! ha ! he's going to set up the plea of insanity I !
won't do, my lord! That game is played out !" mutt
more than one of the spectators, in these or other words
the same effect.)
"If the first unlikely prediction had been fulfilled, 
all the others might be. But only one of these troubled
It was not, you may be sure, that I was to come sud
into the possession of wealth, land and title, nor was it
I should wed a lady of high birth and great beauty; foi
one could object to such good fortunes as those; nor yet
I should lose both wife and child in the second yearJ
marriage, for no one can become very deeply interested
an imaginary wife and child.
"No! that which oppressed my soul almost to melanch!
madness was the prediction announcing the murder 
haunted my mind both day and night, took away my a
tite, prevented my sleep.
"I became very morbid. I read nothing but murder
past and present. I thought that no earthly pros
would be of any worth to me if my short career was to
in the awful way foretold and foreshadowed by the 



<pb n="295"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   R95
ger; for though he only foretold the trial, and could not, or
would not, tell anything beyond, I felt that he foreshadowed
what I cannot even breathe here in connection with myself.
"My mind was becoming diseased on this subject; the
more so that I was obliged to brood over it in silence. Any
other mental trouble I might have confided to my minister;
any other bodily ailment to my physician. But this trouble,
preying on both mind and body, I was compelled to keep to
myself. I could not tell it to anyone.
"I sought forgetfulness in society, in travel, in wine, but
found it never. It was about fifteen months after this pre-
diction had been made, and about twelve months after the
first part of it had been fulfilled in the death of my father,
that I was invited to attend the birthday festival of my
cousin, the late Earl of Hawkewood, and I accepted the in-
vitation and went to Hawke Hall on that fatal occasion.
"Now all that I have told you leads up to the explanation
of my conduct at that time.
"I was really glad to make friends with my cousin after
a family feud of three generations. And I should have
enjoyed the festival had I not been overshadowed by the
astrologer's prophecy of evil.
"The ball was kept up, as you-know, to a very late hour
of the night, or rather to an early hour of the morning. I
-according to a custom I was but too readily falling into-
drank too much wine, and perhaps too much of stronger
liquors.
"Thus it happened that when I left my room I lost my-
self in the labyrinth of halls and corridors on the second
floor, and as there seemed to be no servants at hand, it was
some time before I got back into the bachelors' corridor,
where my room was situated.
"Then, by the most natural mistake, I went to my
cousin's door instead of to my own, and was trying to open it
cautiously for fear of disturbing my fellow lodgers, when I
was startled by the sudden opening of the opposite door
ai c the appearance of Dr. Laude.
'"He saw the situation at once, told me I had mistaken
the door, and directed me to my own.
"I went to my room and went to bed, but some hours
later became so ill that I had to rise to seek relief. I wanted



<pb n="296"/>
296          THE TEST OF LOVE
a bottle of seltzer water. I had no idea where to find 
or where to look for a servant who would get me one.
"I was too ill to stand on ceremony; so I arose, tre
my dressing gown and smoking cap, and went to my 
door to rap him up, and to ask him how I could get.
seltzer.
"I could scarcely walk, I was so ill; but I reached his
at last and rapped. There was no answer. As I rap
little harder, the door swung open. It had not been 1
or even latched.
"With the privilege of a kinsman, I entered the r
There was a night light burning on the mantelpiece, a
feeble rays fell directly on the bed, whose crimson
curtains were festooned back. 
"I approached the bed, calling Horace, softly. There
no answer. I drew nearer, and then beheld a sight
seemed to turn me into stone with its horror! There
my cousin, dead, with a ghastly wound on the forehead,
his blanched face and black hair surrounded by a 
curdled blood.
"I stood there for-I know not how long or sh
time-congealed with horror! I took in the whole te
truth at a glance! He had been murdered! He was 
beyond recovery!
"And then, with the rush of a torrent, came the
sciousness of great danger to myself! I remembered 
the law, in looking for the perpetrator of a mysterious
der, always casts its eyes first upon the person who was
posed to be the most to be benefited by the death of"
murdered victim.
"Who, in this case, was to be most benefited by the
of Horace, Earl of Hawkewood?   Clearly no other
myself, Lewis Manton, the heir presumptive of his 
And had not the astrologer foretold that I should be
for murder and foreshadowed that I should be ex
for it ?
"All these thoughts, I say, rushed through my mind
the force of a raging torrent. I lost my self-possessio
became, for the time being, distraught! Instead of 
the alarm as I should have done, I fled from the room
hurried to my own, lest anyone should find me neai:
scene of the homicide ! I locked myself in, and fell upo



<pb n="297"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   297
bed, where I lost all sense of bodily suffering in the mental
anguish that consumed me. 
"I confess it now I I was afraid of being accused of this
murder, of being tried for it, doomed to death for it !
"I was haunted by the horrible fear that some night
watcher, like myself, might have seen me enter or leave
my murdered cousin's room, and that the fact would come
out as soon as the murder should be discovered.
6"I dreaded the morning, dreaded to face the assembled
household as if I had really been guilty of that dark deed
of which I so much dreaded to be suspected! I was the
latest up that morning; I did not leave my room until I
had been three times called.
"When at length I went downstairs I found the whole
family circle assembled with the exception of the host, for
whom they were waiting.
On my appearance, Dr. Laude declared that we should
wait no longer for the laggard, and he sent Pelton, the
groom of the chambers, to call him.
"But why should I recur to what many of you here know
so well? You, Dr. Ball, were on the spot, as well as Dr.
Laude and others. You all remember the terrible dismay
and confusion that ensued upon the return of Pelton with
the awful announcement that his master, the young earl,
lay murdered on his bed.
"I was not guilty, yet I am sure I must have looked most
guilty to anyone who might have had leisure to notice me.
"You all know what followed. The house invaded by the
police; the investigation; the coroner's inquest; the verdict
of willful murder against Gow and Delaplaine!
"I had shut myself up in the library with a bottle of
brandy and another of soda water, and there I sat and
drank all day, dreading, every time the door opened, to see
an officer come in to arrest me for the murder of my cousin.
"But when, in the evening, the verdict of the coroner's
jury was rendered, and warrants were issued for the appre-
liension of Gow and Delaplaine, I felt infinitely relieved. I
came out of my retirement to assume my place as master of
the house and to perform my duties as host. I inquired
&bout the evidence upon which the two men, Gow and Deln-
plaine, had been accused, and, when I heard it, I believed



<pb n="298"/>
298           THE TEST OF LOVE
then, as I believe now, that they, and they alone,l
guilty of the earl's murder.
"I felt quite easy, on my own account, until a fewi
afterward, when the Lady Volante Belle Isle, who had
present at the breakfast table when the murder wa#
nounced, and had been so overwhelmed by the shock
have been prostrated on a bed of sickness for nearly a 
recovered, and demanded to see a magistrate, and to
a statement to him under oath.
"You all know what that statement was. She had
twice in the vicinity of the bachelors' corridor on thatl
night, or morning, before daylight.
"On the first occasion she had seen the earl op
chamber door and dismiss Gow and Delaplaine, giving
full directions of the shortest route through the par
she had heard him close his chamber door and lock it
them.
"On the second occasion, two hours later, she was
in sight of the door, which was again opened, and thi
by a man in a crimson satin dressing gown and a
velvet cap and gold tassel-a man with a ghastly pal
and trembling form-who stole along the corridor
most guilty air.
"She did not recognize the man, nor did she at th
ment suspect him of having committed a crime. I
only after the discovery of the murder that she did In
full significance of what she had seen.
"But I knew that she had seen me, and I was fill
dread lest she should in some moment of mental ill
tion recognize and identify me, and I should be bro
trial and convicted of my cousin's murder under d
circumstantial evidence.
"She did not even suspect me, however. You alL
that some months later I married this lady; but t
ment of mental illumination which I had dreaded w
tined to come.
"You have heard from several witnesses what occ
the first night after I had brought my wife home to
Hall.
"But I must tell it to you from my point of view. 
all the festivities were over and our guets had re
bed, and my wife was in her chamber, I went into my"



<pb n="299"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   299
ing room to indulge in a cigar. This smoking room, I need
-carcely tell you, was situated in the bachelors' corridor.
"I happened there to find my old crimson satin wrapper
and black velvet cap. I really had forgotten that I had
worn these things on the fatal night of the murder, of which
this night was the anniversary.
"I threw off my dress coat and put on the wrapper and
cap and sat down to smoke. I felt so comfortable that my
one cigar grew to two or three. I was still smoking when
the sound of some one walking in the corridor outside, and
opening and shutting doors, reached my ears.
1"Knowing that all the household had long retired, I be-
lieved that a thief had in some way got into the house, and
I wished to surprise him. So I took a revolver from its case,
and instead of coming down the passage, I entered by a side
door into the bath room connected with the late earl's suite
of apartments, and passed through them all to its bedroom
and then opened the door of that bedroom and stepped out
into the corridor ready to cover the intruder with my pistol.
"But I suddenly came upon my wife, who, on seeing me,
stared until her face grew white with horror, and then, with
a piercing scream, she fell into a swoon.
"I dropped the pistol, and stooped to raise her from the
floor. I heard steps rapidly approaching, and soon the
housekeeper was by my side, and with many anxious in-
quiries that I was unable to answer, she followed me as I
carried the countess to her bedroom and laid her on the bed.
"You have heard from other witnesses that after that
night my wife could not endure the sight of me for weeks.
" Later on in the year, when I insisted on her giving me
an explanation of her strange conduct, she deliberately
charged me with the murder of the earl, declaring that she
had recognized in me, on that night of our home-coming,
- the man she had seen issuing from the dead earl's room on
the night of the murder.
"This was very shocking! But I gave her the explana-
tion of my illness as the motive of my visit to the earl's
r0oom, and of the terrible shock I had received on finding
him murdered in his bed.
She seemed at first to believe my statement; but-per-
haps because I did not make my explanation full enough,
and did not tell her my reason for not rousing the house



<pb n="300"/>
800           THE TEST OF LOVE
and proclaiming the murder-she still suspected
she cherished her suspicions with such morbid 
that they grew into a monomania that pos
and influenced the minds of others. My wife was 
accuser. Her suspicions, based on circumstantial 
though unjust, were sincere, for they broke her heart
accusation, though false, was conscientious, for it 
on her deathbed.
"Now, your worships, I have given you the exp
of my presence in the room of the murdered mas
night of the murder, and of my reasons for not ro
Aousehold and proclaiming my dreadful discovery.
"If that explanation does not satisfy you, I have
to give. If that explanation-taken together with a
to irreproachable character-does not constitute a 
defense, 1 have no other to offer. I have done, gen
concluded Lewis Manton, so-called Earl of Hawke
he resumed his seat. 
The three magistrates consulted together for a f
utes, and then the presiding magistrate, Mr. Oliv
said, mildly:
"Your explanation, my lord, appears to us as ve
ible, your defense very reasonable. Nevertheless,
much we may be inclined to receive them, inasmuch
rest on your own unsupported word, which, in your
stances, cannot be received as legal evidence, we 
pelled, in the discharge of our duty as guardian
public peace and functionaries of justice, to act it
ance with the law and the testimony. We are very'i
say that we shall have to commit you to wait the 
the grand jury."
The concluding words of the justice produced a p
sensation in the hall.
The prisoner turned as pale as a corpse; the 
seemed stricken dumb and motionless, for not evewn
mur of surprise escaped anyone; and before they
cover from their panic, Lawyer Poinsett sprang
feet and began to say:
"I protest! I protest! I protest against this ot
the person of my noble client, a peer of the realm 
At this moment the lawyer felt a hand laid ligh
ar m



<pb n="301"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   S01
He stopped and turned. A gentleman had stepped to his
side. The stranger whispered a few words in the lawyer's
ear. The lawyer started violently and stared like a mad-
man.
Then a short, whispered conference ensued.
While this was going on the presiding magistrate turned
to his clerk and directed him to make out a warrant for the
committal of Lewis Manton, Lord Hawkewood, to the
county jail.
"I pray a stay of the proceedings, your worship," said the
lawyer, rising up.
"Upon what plea, Mr. Poinsett?" inquired the presiding
magistrate.
"Upon the plea that a most important witness for the
defense has just appeared."
"Let the witness take the stand, then," said the presiding
magistrate.
The prisoner arose and looked toward the lawyer and the
stranger, and with an exclamation of "Great Heavenl"
sank down again.
Ham Gow nudged Mr. Delaplaine and laughed.
Mr. Delaplaine arched his eyebrows and "smiled su-
perior."
The spectators stood on tiptoe and craned their necks to
see what was going on now.
And in the meantime, Lawyer Poinsett took the stranger
by the hand and advanced to the witness stand, with the
air of a man who was about to introduce some eminent pub-
lie speaker to an expectant audience.
"Your worship," he said, addressing the presiding mag-
istrate, "you were about to commit my client under the
charge of the willful murder of the late Horace Hawke,
Earl of Hawkewood."
"Yes," replied the magistrate. "What objection can you
bring against my doing so?"
"The objection I can bring, your worship," said the law-
yer, presenting the stranger, "is the living Horace Hawke,
Earl of Hawkewood."



<pb n="302"/>
80S          THE TEST OF LOVE
CHAPTER XXXTI
DISCHARGED 
"THB living Horace Hawke, Earl of Hawkewood, 
before your worships to answer for himself, to assert
own rights to every legal, social and domestic recogni
and to vindicate the falsely accused prisoners from the 
posterous charge of his murder," continued Lawyer 
sett, as he handed the young nobleman up into the wi
stand, right under the eyes of the magistrates.
And then he let his eyes rove over bench, dock and ai
ence, with an expression strangely made up of mirth, 
casm and triumph.
The effect of his announcement upon all persons
that hall was something stupendous!
All the audience stood up upon their tiptoes and stre
their necks to the danger of dislocation in their effor
see and hear what was going on around the bench.
Of the prisoners in the dock, Lewis Manton, som
called Earl of Hawkewood, stood and stared with his
starting from his head like those of a madman.
Ham Gow looked and laughed silently.
Monsieur Henri Delaplaine threw back his sho
arched his eyebrows, and twirled his mustache in the
supercilious manner imaginable.
But the effect upon the three sitting magistrates 
"It was a thing to see, not hear 1"
They perfectly recognized the young man before
There was no doubt about that. He had grown up 
them from childhood to youth, and the last two ye
his life had not made such a change in his appear
to raise the slightest question of his identity. 
.So, as he stood there on the witness stand, fac
bench, with the full light of the great window abo
bench falling directly on his fine dark face and sligh
gant form, they saw and knew that Horace Hawke,
Hawkewood, stood before them! -l
But at the same time they remembered that
4.:



<pb n="303"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   80
Hawke, Earl of Hawkewood, had been murdered in his
bed just two years before this; that a coroner's inquest had
sat upon his body and found a verdict of willful murder
against two of the men there in the dock, and the body of
the unfortunate young nobleman had actually been stolen
and dissected by medical students I
How, then, could he be standing before them, though the
evidence of their senses proved that he was, while the testi-
mony of their memory assured them that he could not pos-
sibly be 
Stout old drinkers of "old brown stout" and portly bib-
bers of heavy port cannot be expected to have very clear
heads. And now these worthy administrators of justice had
their minds hopelessly muddled between the evidence of
their senses and the testimony of their memories.
They sat perfectly motionless and dumfounded, staring at
the young man on the witness stand for some moments, and
then all three gave vent to their amazement in a simul-
taneous utterance of the bothered Briton's favorite ex-
pletive:
"Lord bless my soul and body I"
It was lucky just then that the old clerk was a well-regu-
lated piece of clockwork, not to be put out of routine by any
sort of surprise or jar, and that, seeing the pause, he stood
up and asked:
"Shall I swear this witness, your worships ?"
"Eh? Yes. Swear himl" answered Mr. Ball, with a
start, glad to act upon any suggestion in the present ob-
fuscated and bewildered state of his magisterial intellect.
The oath was duly administered, and the young earl
looked around upon the audience, then bowed to the justices,
and made his brief statement under oath.
"My name is Horace Hawke, my age twenty-one years
this day. I am the sixteenth Earl of Hawkewood, being the
son and heir of Roscius, fifteenth earL
"Two years ago, on the morning of the second of Sep-
tember, in the hours between three and five in the morning,
I formed a plan, with the aid of my tenant, Ham Gow, and
my valet, Henri Delaplaine, by which I might escape from
a tutelage that had long oppressed me, to the serious injury
of mind and body, and travel free and unsuspected for the
r



<pb n="304"/>
904          THE TEST OF LOVE
two years that would intervene between that day atl
one of my majority and consequent independence.
"It was a wild scheme and fraught with much
unforeseen danger to my humble co-conspirators; but
other respects it was an entirely successful one.
"My old comrade, Ham Gow, was my perfect co
in form, feature and voice-my perfect counterparl
pearance, with the exception of the length of his bea
hair, the tan of his complexion and the roughness
dress.
"My plan was to change dress and characters witjI
leaving him to enact my part as Earl of Hawkewo
going off myself to try the life of a tramp. A wild 
1 repeat, but yet not a criminal one.
"With the skillful assistance of Delaplaine, who had'
been attached to an amateur theatrical company, the
metamorphosis was made-Gow, with his hair
and dressed, his beard shaved off, leaving only a light
tache, his skin whitened by cosmetics, and his form
in delicate fine linen, was left in possession of my
character and surroundings, to hold and enjoy for two
if he proved able to play his part for that length of
"I, with my skin darkened by red oak bark, and
false black wig and bushy black beard, clothed in
rough suit and accompanied by Delaplaine, left th
that morning, and took a third-class passage in the
train from Hawkeville to London, having left Delapl
make his way to Castle Belle Isle, where his wife, 
as Mademoiselle Labb6, lived as lady's maid to the 
of Grand Manors.
"I had for a chance companion to London the II
Traverse, who had known me and Gow from our b
up. He took me for Gow, without the slightest do
gave me plenty of good advice, and was so kind as
company me to the East India Docks and put me 
protection of the ship's chaplain and see me off to At
"I sailed on September 3d for Melbourne, in t
norance of the startling events then taking place at 
Hall.
"I have spent the last two years in traveling over
tralian colonies and in the voyages out and back. 
"I jailed on the fourth of last April by the
It
;i1i



<pb n="305"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   m05
from Hobart Town to London. I reached London on the
fifth of August, and purposely lingered about that city until
this twenty-first anniversary of my birth should make me
a free agent.
"Of all the strange events at Hawke Hall that followed
my departure, I have, of course, no personal knowledge
whatever. I have learned them from hearsay. But my con-
federates, Gow and Delaplaine, are competent to corroborate
my testimony and to supplement it by a statement of their
own.
"Your worships, I have done, unless anyone here may
wish to question me," concluded the young earl.
"Lord bless my soul alive!" again simultaneously ex-
claimed the three magistrates.
"Mr. Ball, may I venture to ask if you recognize me
now ?" inquired the young earl.
"Eh ?-I-Lord bless my soul and body !" exclaimed old
Oliver Ball, in confusion.
*'You seem in doubt. Will you allow me to call a witness
who can identify me ?"
"Eh?-I-yes-call a witness."
"Then let Ham Gow be put on the stand," said the young
earl, stepping down.
"Yes, certainly, let Ham Gow take the stand," said Mr.
Ball.
"I beg your pardon," here interrupted his brother magis.
trate-a Mr. Leigh-"the prisoner Gow, being held under
charge of murder, is not competent to give evidence in this
ease."
"Eh ?-Oh    Ay, certainly not  Bless my soul and body,
what a bother 1" exclaimed Mr. Ball, wiping his round, red
face.
"Other witnesses should be called to identify or deny the
pretensions of this claimant," said the third magistrate-
Mr. Thoms.
"Eh? Yes, of course, other witnesses," assented Mr.
Ball.
"Who are not under arrest for crime," added Mr. Leigh.
"To be sure, who are not under arrest! Do you hear-a
-sir-Mr.-my lord?" blundered old Ball.
"Heaven and earth, gentlemen, are other witnesses at all
necessary? You are all my old neighbors! You have
L



<pb n="306"/>
306          THE TEST OF LOVE
known me by sight ever since my childhood, as I 
known you! Surely no other witnesses besides your 
senses are necessary," exclaimed the young earl, 
tiently.
"It is not, sir, what we may believe you to be, but ,
you can prove yourself to be by the testimony of compe
witnesses I Nor may it rest with us to give a final d
in this case. It may have to go to the higher co
the Court of Chancery, for aught we know I This is, asX
are aware, only a preliminary investigation of the c
against these prisoners who are held to answer for the m
der of the late Earl of Hawkewood. You appear as a&
ness for their defense, claiming to be the living Ea
Hawkewood. I hope you may establish your claim to
name and title, but you must do it not by your own
assertion or even by your statement under oath, but by
nesses who can swear to your identity."
"Of course!" exclaimed the presiding justice. "Be
Lord bless my soul and body, man, you may look eve
much like the late young Earl of Hawkewood, but we
that you-I mean the late young Earl of Hawkewood
assassinated in his bed two years ago, and the co
jury that sat upon his body brought in a verdict of 
murder against one Ham Gow and one Henri Dela
now held in custody under the charge, and here pres
any man may see! And we have every reason to believe
your-I mean the late Earl of Hawkewood's body was
and dissected by medical students! These are hard
you see !" concluded the justice.
"And it is a much harder fact that I, Horace Ha
and so forth-stand bodily before you, and that you
know it I Therefore, it could not have been myself who
murdered in my bed and 'sat upon' by a coroner's jury.",'
Ham Gow were a competent witness, he could tell you 
it was that was-not murdered, but-stunned into ap
death, pronounced dead by the doctors, and decided
coroner's jury, to have been murdered, but who, in the
morning, recovered from his stupor, crawled through a.
window, and crept on to the ruined watch tower, w
was concealed and nursed for some weeks by old
Cry t ."t it w                            
"'That is a very strange story, but it wants proof, :



<pb n="307"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   807
Gow, as we told you, is not a competent witness," said Mr.
Leigh, while the two other magistrates stared more stupidly
than ever.
The young Earl of Hawkewood turned about and faced
the audience in the hall-the eager audience who had nearly
dislocated their vertebra by standing on tiptoes and stretch.
ing their necks, and he called in a loud voice:
'Are there any here present who recognize and can iden-
tify me?"
He was answered by a high tide of exclamations:
"Yes, yer lordship !"
"Lord bless yer anner, my lard l"
"Yer lardahip's Lard Harkewood, sure l"
And so forth.
"Order! Order I" cried the clerk.
"Silence this crowd, or clear the hall "
"Orderl Orderl" cried the clerk again.
The noise subsided.
Then a gentleman stepped from the witnesses' seats and
came and stood beside the young earl on the stand, grasped
his hand warmly, and said:
"Welcome back to England, my lord I I recognize you at
once. So do all here, though you look much stronger and
healthier than when we saw you last."
"I thank you heartily, Dr. Ellis. And-I am glad to
come back to you-though I must confess that I was also
very glad to get away! Do you forgive me for my esca-
pade?" laughed the young man.
"Your escapade saved your reason and your life, my
lord! That is a sufficient answer," replied the doctor.
Then addressing the confused bench of justices, he said:
"Your worships, I wish to be put under oath."
"Administer the oath," said the presiding justice.
The clerk advanced and performed this function, and the
new witness said:
"I recognize in the last witness Horace Hawke, Earl of
Hawkewood. I have known him from his earliest infancy,
and cannot possibly be mistaken in his identity. I am per-
fectly certain that this gentleman is what he claims to be-
the Earl of Hawkewood, and-if additional evidence of his
identity is needed-it is stamped on his person by nature's
own hand I The infant Earl of Hawkewood had, as a score



<pb n="308"/>
808          THE TEST OF LOVE
of men and women in this neighborhood can testify, a
singular birthmark-'the trail of the serpent'-on his
ankle. It is a slightly raised speckled green binding, ua
small grass snake had wound itself closely around '
limb."
"Will your lordship have the goodness to bare your 
that this strange phenomenon of nature shall be exhib
to prove your identity beyond all future question?" 
manded Mr. Leigh.
"Willingly," replied the "claimant," with a smile.
But as he stooped to comply, Mr. Henri Delapi
skipped over the rails of the dock, before anyone could
him, knelt before his late master and began to draw oft
boot and then his hose.
"Thank you, Delaplaine. There is the mark, your 
ships," said the young man, planting his naked foot
ankle on the seat of a chair placed for the purpose in
sight of the bench.
The justices bent down to examine it. The bailiffs
off the crowd that would have pressed around to stare at
It was no deformity; it was not even an ugly mark;
was, on the contrary, a very pretty one. On a lady's 
it might have seemed a curious enameled bracelet in
form of a serpent.
While the justices were gazing at this rare, na
anklet, the group around the young earl was augmente
the stately form of Dr. Paul Laude, who laid his hand
the shoulder of his late pupil and said:
"Horace, allow me to welcome you back to England, 
to say that I forgive you for running away."
"Thank you very much, Dr. Laude! I quite forgive y
for driving me to run away 1" laughed the young man, 
he took and pressed his late tutor's offered hand.
And now M. Henri Delaplaine, who seemed to think
!es bourgeois had stared long enough at his noble ma
handsome foot and decorated ankle, began carefully to 
them with hose and boot.
Mr. Poinsett here stood forward and addressed the be
"I move that the prisoners, Lewis Manton, Ham Gowt
Henri Delaplaine, held in custody for the murder of a
standing alive before you, be discharged from custody. "
"Eh? Yes, to be sure I Let the prisoners be dis
..~~~ ~    ~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ..'..



<pb n="309"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   80
Bless my soul and body! whatever are they kept for, any-
how ?" exclaimed old Mr. Ball, vigorously wiping his round,
red face, as he added: "And let the hall be at once cleared.
The sitting is adjourned."
Then the three magistrates came down from the bench
and shook hands with the young earl, warmly congratu-
lating him on his return home.
They were joined by the discharged prisoner, Lewis Man-
ton, who seized his cousin's hand, and in a voice broken by
emotion welcomed him to Hawkewood, adding:
"Never did an unconscious usurper so gladly give up his
false position to the true occupant."
'"I believe you, Manton, and I thank you!" heartily re-
sponded the young earl, warmly returning the hand grasp,
as the last vestige of his animosity against the usurper van-
ished away.
Ham Gow now claimed his attention.
"Will you allow me at last to congratulate you now, my
lord?"
"No, dear lad! I will not allow you to linger here any
longer for any purpose. I promised to send you home to
your wife just as soon as the court should adjourn. Now
be off with yourself as fast as you can go to Demondike,
where Lona is awaiting you! Hurry, now, or the poor
woman will be thinking that you have already received your
deserts and are 'comfortably' hanged!" laughed the young
gentleman.
Ham Gow, regardless of the presence of the
"Most potent, grave and reverend seigniors,"
and fearless of being committed for contempt of court, since
"court" had adjourned, laughed aloud, threw up his hat,
caught it again, and ran out of the hall.
The crowd had already left it, but they had not yet dis-
persed to their homes; they were waiting outside to make
a demonstration in honor of their young lord; for, ten
minutes later, when the earl appeared, accompanied by the
magistrates, the two clergymen, the village doctor, and Mr.
Lewis Manton, such a shout arose from the assembled vil-
lagers and tenantry and laborers as had never before been
heard in Hawkeville, and cries of:



<pb n="310"/>
810          THE TEST OF LOVE
"Long live the young Yarl of Harkewood I" rev
like articulate thunder through the air and was reec
from the distant hills.
A carriage had been hastily drawn by a dozen men 
the stables of the Hawkeville Arms, and with shouts 
lifted the laughing and protesting young nobleman into
body, and taking hold of its shafts, drew him in triunt
along the road that led to Hawke Hall, preceded by a p
cession of runners hastening to herald the news to the 
mestics, and followed by an enthusiastic crowd of 
women and children that increased with every mile of 
journey.
CHAPTER XXXIII
THE TRIUMPHAL ENTBRY
WHEN the procession reached Hawke Hall it was 
that the news had gone before them.            '
The outdoor servants were all assembled near the 1
gate, and as the carriage was drawn along the way every 
was doffed and every voice joined the chorus of:
"Long live our young lord !"
At this point the young earl ordered the carriage to
stopped.
Many of the older servants and tenants crowded aro
him with heartfelt congratulations.
And with all of these he cordially shook hands, gi
each some words of kindness and good cheer.
"Ah! steward, is that you? How are you, old friend
he said, to his land steward.
"Heaven bless your lordship!" responded the latter. 
"Why, Moss ! I am glad to see you I How does your g
den grow?"
"Splendidly, my honored lord; as if it knowed your 1
ship was a-coming back !" responded the gardener.
"And how are my old friends, Penn, Proddy and T
who have nearly run their limbs off from Demondike to
me ?"
"Hooray ! your lordship," responded the three.
And the laughing earl ordered the carriage to move
,;*
¥?/I[



<pb n="311"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   $11
Among those who had hurried on before was Lewis
Manton.
And as the young earl alighted from the carriage he was
met at the hall door by his predecessor, who came down
the steps and grasped his hand, saying:
"Permit me to welcome you to your home. The ex-gov-
ernor, I think, always receives and installs the new gov-
ernor. Allow me."
And so saying he drew the earl's arm within his own, and
conducted him into the hall, where the household servants
were drawn up on each side to receive their lord.
These domestics were too decorous to set up a shout, or
to indulge in any other loud or violent demonstrations of
joy; but as the young earl recognized one and another, the
clasped hands and tearful eyes, and earnest, low-breathed
prayers and thanksgivings testified to the depth and fervor
of their affections.
"Ah Pelton, is that you ?" he said, seeing the gray-haired
groom of the chambers, who had been in the service of the
family so many years.
"Ahl Lord bless your lordship, my lord, it is I. Left
lingering here to see your return. Oh ! but it is like a resur-
rection from the dead!" cried the old man, pressing the
hand given him by his young master to his heart.
"How do you do, Bruce?" echoed the young earl, as the
fat butler bowed before him.
"Ah, my lord, so much better for seeing your lordship.
Long life to you, my lord !"
"Stepney, I see you. Why, you have grown four inches
in height, and eight in breadth, since I saw you last. You
haven't broken your heart after your master," said the
young gentleman, as the Hall footman made his bow.
"Oh I my lord, indeed I have. I was so cut up by your
lordship's death that I fell often my feed and sleep, and
J'ined the Bible class and the Brotherhood of St. James,
and everythink, in hopes I might meet your lordship in
heaven at last !" exclaimed the great boy, with the tears roll-
ing down his red cheeks.
"Well, we have met at last, lad, never to part again, I
hope," laughed the young lord.
"Yes-thanks be to Heaven, my lord!" cried the foot-
man.
L~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="312"/>
815          THE TEST OF LOVE
"Why, Mrs. Carraway! The benevolent Mrs. Cam
who used to pamper me in the nursery and in the
room with cakes and tarts, when my excellent tutor #
have kept me on a regimen of oatmeal porridge and bu
milk !" laughed the young earl, as he offered his
the housekeeper, who grasped it, wept over it and p
it to her heart and to her lips, as she said:
"Oh, my lordl this is the very happiest day of my 
just as the day I thought we had lost you was the'
happiest !"
And so through all the line of servants, with a 
grasp of the hand and a pleasant smile and word for 
he passed into a reception room at the rear of the hall, 
there he found Ham Gow and Lona awaiting him. 
He gazed on them in surprise for a moment, and
with a comic gravity, exclaimed:
"You here, my children! Why, Ham, by what so
natural or supernatural magic did you get over the
between Hawkeville and Demondike and fetch Lona 
in this short time?"
"By no magic at all. I have not been to Demon
When you turned me out of the town hall in that s
and summary manner, the first person I saw on the o
was Lona, whining around the building like a sick kitt
said Ham, laughing.
"Oh, I grew so anxious! I could not stay at the t
so I walked over to the town hall, and I hadn't been 
more than five minutes at the most when Ham came
and-he told me all about it, my lord, and then put me
old Farmer Perry's tax cart that was going on that way,
brought me here to be ready to welcome you home, 
lord."
While these old companions were talking together
were joined by Dr. Paul.Laude, Dr. Ellis, the Rev.I
Vincent and Lawyer Poinsett, who had followed the 
another carriage, from the Hawke Arms, and had justI
rived.
"And now," said Mr. Lewis Manton, "as I have 
your lordship 'installed' if I may borrow the term, I 
take my leave."
"Why, where are you going?" inquired the earl, in
prise.
ii            -



<pb n="313"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   818
"To the Hawke Arms, for a few days, while I see to the
removal of my personal effects from Hawke HalL  I owe
your lordship the revenues of this place for the last two
years. It will be easy to pay them, for very little of those
revenues has been spent-nothing indeed except upon the
improvement of the property. My steward will see to a
settlement. After which I shall retire to my place in
Northumberland."
While Lewis Manton spoke the young earl looked at him
with grave attention. When he ceased speaking Lord
Hawkewood said:
"I beg that you will do nothing of the sort, Manton! I 
ask you, as a special favor to me, to remain here and make
this house your home so long as business may detain you in
this neighborhood, and as much longer as may be con-
venient or agreeable. Come, Manton! We are cousins.
Accept my invitation as frankly as it is given I You will
remain ?"
"Yes, thank you, Hawkewood, I will, with pleasure,"
readily replied the earl's kinsman.
"Well, Horace, your friends here and myself have only
dropped in to welcome you to your ancestral home and to
say good-by," began Dr. Paul Laude; but the young earl in.
terrupted him:
"You have come to spend the day, or the rest of the day,
and to dine this evening, gentlemen. I will take no refusal
from you. Our arrival is sudden and unprepared; but our
old housekeeper and butler are people of resources ! At any
rate, you must stay and take what our plain neighbors,
"'The rude forefathers of the hamlet,'
and their descendants call 'potluck' with us to-day !"
The friends invited in this offhand manner signified their
willingness to accept the young earl's hospitality.
"And now if you will excuse me, gentlemen, I must go
out and speak to my steward. There are about fifteen hun-
dred villagers, tenantr and laborers outside to be provided
for to-day, and as we have no floral works nor fireworks nor
pageantry of any sort to amuse them, the deficiency must
be made up in beef and beer, and cake and tea, and fiddle
and bagpipes; and old Traverse and the butler and hoses



<pb n="314"/>
814           THE TEST OF LOVE 
keeper will have to see to all," concluded the young
he left the room to issue his orders.
His upper servants were, as he had said, persons
sources.
A dozen casks of ale were carried out into the
and tapped; all the bread, cheese, cakes, cold meat anIJ
that were in the larder were taken out and distributed
messengers were sent off in haste to the village to buy
every baker and confectioner there, as well as all the
meat that could be spared from the Hawke Arms.
And in two hours' time a feast was spread in the
amply sufficient to feed the fifteen hundred people. 
And before they had got through eating and drink
fiddle and the bagpipes arrived, and all the young
deserted the viands for the violin.
The gentlemen came out from the house to join i'm
merrymaking.
The earl, with Mrs. Ham Gow for a partner, le1
d.nce, and Mr. Ham Gow, with the plainest young 
the ground, was their vis-d-vis.
Ham said he always paid attention to plain girls, for.
good and sufficient reasons: Firstly, because other men
lected them; secondly, because they were always so p
and grateful for attentions; and thirdly, because they.,
never cause Mrs. Ham a pang of jealousy.
Good Ham Gow I
The dancing was kept up until the night necessarily
an end to it as an outdoor amusement. And then, as
impossible to improvise lights or fireworks, the people, 
a full chorus of cheers for their young lord-cheers
frightened all the fowls of the air on the roosts, and s
all the dogs in the kennels to barking furiously-left
grounds and dispersed to their homes-to go to bed
sleep ? No, indeed; but to sit late into the night
over the strange events of the day.
The small, impromptu dinner party at Hawke Hall
success.
After it was over, and at quite a late hour in the ev
the guests arose to take leave.
The young earl, in the easy, offhand manner that
characterized his conduct since his return, pressed hi#,
itors to remain for the night.
,!~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="315"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   815
They, however, excused themselves, and with the excep-
tion of Dr. Paul Laude and Mr. Lewis Manton, took their
departure.
When these two last mentioned gentlemen had bid their
host good-night, and Lewis Manton had retired to his own
usual apartment, and Dr. Paul Laude had been marshaled
by old Pelton, the groom of the chambers, to his room in the
bachelors' corridor, the young host rang the bell, and de-
sired Stepney, the footman who answered it, to inquire of
the housekeeper what rooms had been prepared for himself
(the earl).
For so much engaged had the young nobleman been that
he had not once found time to ascertain.
The inquiry was answered by the appearance of Mrs
Carraway in person, who courtesied, and said:
"If you please, my lord, we have got ready the suite of
rooms over the drawing room for your lordship, as those in
the bachelors' corridor once occupied by your lordship have
been shut up these two years."
"Quite right. I will find my own way now. That will
do, Mrs. Carraway. Good-night."
"Good-night, my lord."
The young gentleman took a bedroom candle from a
bracket near at hand, and went upstairs to the magnificent
suite of apartments that were usually reserved for distin-
guished guests, and had last been occupied by the late Duke
and Duchess of Grand Manors on the occasion of their visit
to their daughter and son-in-law.
When Lord Hawkewood entered the bedroom, he found
his ex-valet, the elegant Monsieur Delaplaine, laying out a
dressing gown, slippers, fresh towels and other conven-
iences, as naturally as if there had been no interruption to
their relations during the last two years.
For a moment the interval seemed as a dream to him.
"Where have you been since you left my service, Dela-
plaine?" he inquired.
"In America, my lord-in the city of Chicago, engaged
in the hairdressing business there," replied the valet, with a
bow.
"And the fair Madame Delaplaine, nie Labb ?"
" She went with me, my lord. We had been married some
time before we left."



<pb n="316"/>
416          THE TEST OF LOVE
"Why were you not to be found at the address yo,
me in Paris?"
"Pardon, my lord, I read the papers and knew tb
a warrant out for my arrest on the charge of m
hastened with myself to the new world, my lord.'
"Then, you never got my letters?"
"Non, my lord."
"How, then, did you come back?"
"I remembered me of my appointment with your;
ship, and came back to keep it, well knowing that youit
ship would appear that day that was promised;
sooner do I my appearance make than I am se
thrown into prison on the charge of murder of my
"That was hard " said the earl, but he said it
laugh.
"It was varray hard, my lord !"
"Is your wife with you?"
"She is with some old friends in the village, my
She was on the grounds this afternoon with the
though your lordship did not see her."
"Ahh  What do you intend to do, Delaplaine-to
to America?"
"Non, my lord, not if your lordship will conde
take me into your service again. I like not the publi41
dressing. An artiste cannot choose his patrons, and
exposed to the too intimate association with les no
richs. I like more the private service of my lord."
"You really wish to re-enter my service? Very well,
I engage you from to-night ! But how about your wife
"Ah, she will take service again also. We have no
ily, my lord ! And in the future, when my lord shal
a fair countess to the Hall, it may be that M6lanie ma
favor with my lord's lady."
The young earl laughed, and as during this conve
he had thrown off his coat and boots, and with the 
ance of the valet drawn on his dressing gown, he di
Delaplaine for the night and soon after retired to bed."
The next morning Lord Hawkewood requested Dr.
Laude to give him a private interview in the library.
When they were seated, and the door was closed,
young nobleman delicately led the conversation up
doctor's affairs and indirectly learned that the aged 
h'!:



<pb n="317"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   817
man had, for the last two years, been living in cheap lodg-
ings on the Westminster Road, with nothing to do and no
other income than that derived from the small interest of
his savings which were invested in the safe but poorly pay-
ing three per cent. consols.
That he had been brought down from London as a wit-
ness at the preliminary examination of the prisoners
charged with the murder of the earl, and that he had been
living for the last few days at the Hawke Arms.
Now, although the old doctor had been an austere tutor
and guardian to his pupil and ward, yet he had stood almost
in the relation of a father to the orphan boy, and now the
young earl was surprised to find that he felt almost a filial
affection for the ster but conscientious old man. He felt
a tender compassion for him as he looked on his pale, worn
face, thin gray hair and rusty, threadbare coat.
He knew that he could make the aged bookworm's life
as happy as it was capable of being made, and he deter-
mined to do it.
"Doctor," he said, "I answered you with inexcusable flip-
pancy when you kindly expressed to me your forgiveness
yesterday. I hope you will pardon me for that, and for all
my other offenses against you."
"My dear Horace, I have said that I do. I have always
had your true interests at heart, and have always tried to
do my duty by you," replied the old man.
"Indeed, I know it, Dr. Laude. And now I am going to
beg you not to desert me; not to leave me to myself. I be-
lieve that I shall now be a much more satisfactory pupil
than I have ever been before."
"Do you wish to re-enter Oxford? Many an older man
than yourself has done so," said the doctor.
"Oh, no; but I shall read-after a time. In the mean-
while, dear sir, I wish you to be so kind, if you will, as to
return to your old quarters here and resume your old avoca-
tions! Dear doctor, I wish you to remain with me here, at
the same salary, looking after the library and leading the
morning and evening worship-so long as we both shall
live. Will you do this, dear doctor? You have no one in
the world so near to you as the troublesome boy you have
reared." 
"Horace," said the old man, in a voice quivering with



<pb n="318"/>
$18          THE TEST OF LOVE
emotion, "I was never given to softness or sentimeat'
youth. Do not make a child of me now. Do not ml
shed tears. If-if I can be of use to you, I will very
remain, as domestic chaplain and librarian, for that,
pose, is what you mean. Yes! I will acknowle
that for fifteen years I had grown into this old li
an oyster in its shell-and the leaving it was as neari
to me as tearing from its shell would have been
oyster."
"I thank Heaven that it was not quite fatal to y
doctor I I thank Heaven that you have lived to c I
And now you must never leave it again I Nay, ide
must consider that you never have really left it ex
a holiday.. And, by the way, the estate is in arrears 
for two years' salary, which I shall instruct my stew
pay. Doctor, you have been accustomed to issue ord
Pray send a servant at once to the Hawke Arms fo
luggage. Will you? And see to the removal of your
from London at your earliest convenience. Will
so?"
"Yes, yes, my dear boy, I will; but just now, if y
excuse me, I want to find that black letter copy of P
which I have been longing to look up for months," l
doctor.
The young earl smiled, and arose and went out, 
the old man mousing among the musty bookshelves. ;,
The next few days were occupied by the earl in r
congratulatory visits from friends and neighbors. 
On the Friday, Ham Gow and his wife, Lona, c
the Hall, and asked to see the earl.  '
Whet they were admitted to his presence, the ex.
said:
"We have come to take a short leave of your lo
Mother Crook, and Nan, and Dennis go up to Lo
morrow, as they expect to sail for New York on
Lona and myself are going to see them off, and also
in certain English goods, chattels and comforts to 
with us to the colony, for we have determined to re
the same ship that will take your lordship out, and 
sail on the tenth."
"I am very glad to know that I shall have yourc
for the voyage out. Remember me to the excellen
. .]



<pb n="319"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   819
Crook and her daughter, and say that I wish them much
prosperity in the country of their adoption," said the young
earl, in a serio-comic tone.
"I will do so. We shall go to the same old inn, and, after
seeing the old folks off to America, we will wait your com-
ing there. I suppose you will be in town very soon?" said
Ham.
"Yes, in a very few days. Just as soon as I can arrange
affairs here for my long absence. The ship, as you say, will
sail on the tenth; I shall certainly be in London on the
eighth, at the latest."
"Yes, my lord. We only came to take short leave, and
now we wish your lordship good-by," said Ham Gow.
And he and his wife, declining all offered refreshments,
on the score of haste, shook hands with the earl, and went
their way.
The next morning, according to arrangement, Nan Crook
and her disreputable family vacated the old watch tower
that had been their home for over twenty years.
Four days later the young Earl of Hawkewood, leaving
his old tutor, Dr. Paul Laude, in charge of the Hall, and
his faithful steward, Traverse, in charge of the estate, bade
good-by to his friends, and started for London.
And on Saturday, the tenth of September, attended by
Ham Gow and Lona, he sailed in the Norfolk for Australia.
CHAPTER XXXIV
LOVE's LoNG SUSPENSE
VIsCOUNT S:YmES did not find the governorship of a con-
vict colony situated far beyond the last "jumping off"
point of the civilized world, very much to his liking.
His lordship's delegated sovereignty and vice-regal court,
with all their attendant power and dignity, did not com-
pensate to him for the los-let us say-of the Times at his
breakfast table every morning, and all his other newspapers
and newsmongers at his club every noon; for his ride in
Rotten Row every afternoon; for his seat in the House, or
his stall at the opera in the evening; for Epsom, Ascot, or



<pb n="320"/>
3eo          THE TEST OF LOVE
~Qodwood races in their seasons; for bird   f
hunting or deer stalking in their seasons; nor for
society of friends who had grown old with him,
familiar from his rhildhood.
Viscount Seyres had been "deadly poor" before hb
ried the beautiful heiress of the Princess Zavieski, 
cepted the governorship of Tasmania. His seat in
was half a ruin, his whole estate a bog, and his
were starving on land for which they could not a
not required to pay any rent.
But poor as the old nobleman was, he did not n
heiress for her money, but for love notwithstand
money; and he accepted the governorship of Tas
cause it would give him a salary by which he would 
to support his household in good style without tou
penny of his wife's fortune.
So he had come out to Hobart Town and brou
bride, who had accepted him partly from admiration
person and character, and partly from ambition to 
rank and title; and she had consented to their emi
because it was not safe for her to venture into Engi
ciety while yet that second will of her grandaunt-ta
of whose existence she had no suspicion-had not be
covered.
But in this first year of their married life such a
mutual affection had grown up between the husba
wife, and made them so entirely one in heart and minda
all morbid sensitiveness about living on her money was
and forgotten.
He discovered that she was equally anxious with
to return to England, and, after a final consultation,
her on the subject, he made up his mind to send in hi
ignation by the first homeward bound ship.
Then, to please his wife, he set himself to persuade
son-in-law, Cosmo Belle Isle, to sell out his commissio
return to England with them.
Nothing could have pleased the young lieutenant
than to do that very thing; but he had his scrup
liesitaate 
"You knew, my dear boy," urged the viscount, "t
utter folly in a young man with fifty thousand 
year to be living the life of a subaltern officer out



<pb n="321"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   Ml
the garrison of a convict colony, and subjecting his you~.
ful bride to the same dreary existence."
"Yes, I know," responded the honest lad, "but you see,
sir, that I have hitherto been so vacillating, that I should
be steady now, even if it be to my own hurt."
"And to other people's hurt, also? I don't see it. Look
here, Cosmo! There is another point of view  You are
holding a position that you do not need, and that some other
brave fellow does. Sell out, Cosmo, and give the other poor
lad, whoever he may be, a chance I"
"I know you would not advise me to do anything wrong.
If you, my lord, say that I can sell out with honor, I will do
so with delight," eagerly declared the lieutenant.
"Then, see to it without delay!" said the viscount.
"I will !" exclaimed the young officer.
This was joyful news to the viscountess and to her daugh-
ter, Isola, who both longed with an unutterable longing to
return to their native land.
All this took place within a few weeks after the young
Earl of Hawkewood and his humble friends had sailed in
the Labrador for London, on that first of April.
By the Eyre, that sailed from Hobart Town just a month
later, on the first of May, the viscount sent home his resig-
nation of office, to take effect on the arrival of his successor,
who, he prayed, might be appointed and dispatched to re-
lieve him with all convenient expedition.
In any case, the homesick exiles knew that there must be
a weary time of months to wait before they could get an-
swers to these dispatches.
* The holy and happy season of Christmas came and passed
before the governor began to look for advices from home.
However, news came at last. The Sea Oull, from London
on the tenth of October, arrived at Hobart Town on the first
of February.
She brought dispatches to the governor announcing the
facts that his resignation had been accepted, and that his
successor would sail for Tasmania by the Derwent on the
tenth of the ensuing November.
This was most delightful news to the viscount and via-
countess, and to the young lieutenant and his wife.
The Derwent, with the newly appointed governor and his
staff, might be expected to arrive on or before the first of
L.L



<pb n="322"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE 
Marh, at which time the retiring governor woul
erty to return with his family to England.
They began to make preparations for the rese
Strangers, and for their own voyage home.
But while the governor's household were rej
other families in the town were beginning to 
anxiety for the fate of the Norfolk-which had le4
on the tenth of the preceding September, and had.
heard from since. She should have been in pet
first of February, and was now, therefore, ov
month. 
The only news the Sea Gull brought of her was,
had certainly left London on the tenth of Sep
month before the Sea Gull's own departure. 
All, therefore, who expected friends, goods, or l
the Norfolk were suffering all the worries of hope
But if the delay of the ship caused anxiety in
how much more it must have caused in the Mount
mitage?
After the departure of the young earl on his
perilous voyage, a gloom fell upon that bright 
home such as had never overcast it before.
Even old Theobald Elfinstar painfully missed
youth who had been his guest for so many months, 
his almost daily visitor for so many weeks.
And as for Seraph Elfinstar, it required all the
and patience she had learned from suffering to 
to endure the severe ordeal of her lover's absence
and dangerous voyage, while her suspense would
lieved by any certainty of letters or of news from
,a period of from eight to ten months.
It is true that there was a possibility of news,
;a mere possibility. If the Labrador, bound for
·should be fortunate enough to meet a ship in
bound to Hobart Town, passengers would be able,
change letters on this highway of the sea, and
onuld surely write to her. If this should not
would have to wait the best part of a year for n
By every ship that reached this port after the
Of the Labrador, Seraph Elfinstar hoped "against.
ceive news from the sea; but ship after ship camil
I



<pb n="323"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                  SS
rate of one a month, and no news of the Labrador reached
Hobart Town.
Four months passed in this manner, and then the waiting:
bride said to herself:
"Half the time has gone. If he has had a prosperous'
voyage he is in port now. And the next ship that shall
come from London after this date will bring me a letter
from my love I And it may bring my discharge, also, if my
knight succeeds as he. hoped to do."
The thought inspired her with courage to endure the:
remainder of her trial.
She sent her faithful old groom, Stackpole, to the office
cf the shipping agent in the town, to bring her a copy of
the shipping list, and on referring to it she found the Nor-
folk gazetted to sail from London on September 10th.
"The Labrador expected to reach London about the first
of August. If she did-and she is reported to be a good,
fast sailer-he will have time to work out his plan for my
vindication, and send me the result by the Norfolk. Only
four months more to wait ! The Norfolk should reach here
by the first of January, in the new year I And, oh I if she
should be very fortunate, she may reach port by Christ-
Iras I"
From this time Seraph Elfinstar began to look forward.
with hope. And still she continued to expect a letter from
the sea by every incoming ship, for she said to herself:
"He may have met an outward bound ship when very
near the end of the voyage, and he would have written by.
her."
But though mail ships continued to arrive every month,.
no letter came from her lover.
Yet as the time drew near for the expected arrival of the.
Norfolk her spirits rose. She checked off the days of the
last month in the year with great pleasure, and kept her
thoughts fixed upon the end, when Christmas or the New
Year would bring the Norfolk with news of her lover, andc
liberty for herself.
But Christmas came and passed without the Norfolk; and
New Year came and passed without intelligence of the lin.
gering ship.
For the first week or two, though everyone was impatient,



<pb n="324"/>
8s4           THE TEST OF LOVE 
no one was alarmed. Ships were often delayed,,
weather, and the Norfolk might have met with such.;
But when a month had passed away, and the first 
ruary brought the Sea  ull to port, with the news
Norfolk had certainly sailed from London on thb 
down for her, a full month before the Sea Gu/l had:
then, indeed, anxiety rose to fever heat.
Jonas Stackpole, who had gone to town to make hil
monthly purchases, brought the news of the arrival
Sea Gull to the Hermitage, and though it was late
forenoon, old Mr. Elfinstar at once set out for Hobart
to ascertain if there were any news of the Norfolk,  I
letters for the Hermitage.
There were no letters, and there was no news beyo'
the Norfolk had certainly sailed from London on the 
of September, bound for Hobart Town and Melbourpe.
The old gentleman came home disappointed, yet d
mined to keep up the spirits of his drooping daughter ,
"You know, my love, that in so long a voyage a 
more or less is no ground of anxiety," he remarked, 
had told her the result of his quest. 
"But, oh, my dear father, if the ship should be lost
"Tut, tut, my dear I there is not one chance in a tho
that she is lost. How many ships are delayed by:
weather! How few, how very few, are lost 1"
But the old gentleman spoke, perhaps, more hop
than he felt.
Seraph was not comforted.
Another weary month of almost intolerable suspense
anxiety passed slowly and heavily away, and brought'.
Derwent, with the new governor and suite on board, an
the young gentleman for whom Lieut. Belle Isle's c
sion had been purchased.
There was another great gala day in Hobart Town,
ing which the retiring governor went in state to mee
successor, and to escort him to the town hall, where 
auguration was to be celebrated, and where there was a
great crowd assembled to see the ceremonies and to
the speech-making.
After this came the public dinner, ordered from the
Victoria, but laid in the largest room of the town 
which both governors, all the higher officers of the



<pb n="325"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                  M
and navy who happened to be present in the town, together
with those of the civil service, were present, and where the
revelry was kept up to quite a late hour.
This was followed by a ball, at which the "beauty and
fashion" of the colonial city, as well as its "intellect and
chivalry," were present.
Among the guests were, of course, the family of the ex-
governor, consisting of the Viscount and Viscountess
Seyres, and Mr. and Mrs. Belle Isle.
These were by special invitation to remain as the guests
of the new governor, at the government house, until such
time as the Derwent, by which they intended to return,
should be ready to sail for England, which would not occur
for some weeks, as the Derwent was going on a further
voyage to Melbourne, and would only stop at Hobart Town
on her return voyage home.
This day and night was a season of great rejoicing to
all, except such as were especially interested in the fate of
the Norfolk.
Among the latter were, of course, old Mr. Elfinstar and
his daughter.
Again Jonas Stackpole, who was sent into the town now
every day to glean news, came back with the announcement
of a ship's arrival.
And again old Mr. Elfinstar had mounted his horse and
ridden into the town to hear all that could be learned from
the Derwent.
He witnessed the pageantry of the new governor's recep-
tion and inauguration, but he got no letters in the mail
that was opened, and heard no news of the missing ship.
And he went home that evening to his desponding daugh-
ter with the heavy news that there was no news.
She had ceased to hope, indeed; but still it is very hard
to have despair confirmed.
On the afternoon of the second day succeeding the new
governor's inauguration, the father and daughter were sit-
ting out on the front piazza, pensively looking over the
magnificent panorama of scenery rolled out beneath them-
their own beautiful terraced plateau, with its statues, vases,
fountains, arbors, shrubs and flowers, and the wooded de-
scent of the mountain, the bright river beneath, now flushed
with the crimson glow of the descending sun; the wooded,
'



<pb n="326"/>
826           THE TEST OF LOVE
flowery, undulating hills beyond it, and the i
tains whose summits were lost in the gorgeo
clouds; they were in nature's own temple, gazngH
glories of form and color; inhaling her incense in
fume of a thousand flowers; listening to her ve
low hum of innumerable insects and the subdued
of countless birds; yet they were very sadly though
"Father," at last breathed the daughter, "wher,
love now, do you think?"
The old man hesitated for a moment, and then
"In London, waiting for us to come home-if he
.ceeded in his enterprise, and secured your disc
sent it out by the Norfolk-he is there waiting for
ever may have been the fate of the poor ship."
"But if he has not succeeded in securing my vind
dear father ?"
"Then, he is at work for you, and he will never.l
stop until he does succeed 1"
"Well, in any case, death will at last end all our
Life does not often last over seventy years, and tW
mine are gone, thank Heaven! Grandfather, dea
you not happy in the thought that your term of pen
tude, called life on this convict planet called the ,
almost over ?"
"I should feel very peacefully happy in the certa
every day brings me nearer home, were it not
thought of leaving you alone, my darling."
She raised his venerable hand to her lips, and 
murmuring:
"Grandfather, I wish I was seventy years old, anl'
to go with you."
"No, no, my child! Do not say so  You are but
as you say, and I hope that you have fifty years of
lore you-life that shall be so full of sweet affe
.good works, and of the joy and peace they bring, 
planet shall seem no more to you a penal settlement
paradise."
She kissed his hand again and was silent.
Then she suddenly started up and bent forward
tened as if every faculty were merged in the one 
sense of hearing.                            'i
*                           ,'A
·  ,     . ' , ,                         -. -a:7



<pb n="327"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                 ' i
CHAPTER XXXV
TEB BSURPIS. 
"WHAT is it, Seraph? What is it, love?" gently inquied
old Theobald Elfinstar.
"Oh, hush hush! It is his step  It is his step 1 Or-
I am going mad!" panted the girl, tranfixed in listening 
"Impossible, dear child," tenderly murmured the old
gentleman. "It is your fancy only."
But it was not "fancy only." It was the most joyful
reality that ever burst unexpectedly upon a hopeless heart,
lighting up the "darkest hour" of life into a blaze of sun-
shine.
For even as the old man spoke a firm footstep crunched
over the pebble walk beneath the piazza, and-
"Seraph I"
"Horace !"
And with that cry of joy the girl sprang forward, and
was caught to her lover's bosom.
A few moments of utterly silent bliss, and then a few
words of inarticulate endearments, and finally the young
man's hand held out to the old gentleman, with the broken
words:
"All is well, dear friend! Margaret Campbell is vin-
dicated ! I bring the order for her release I"
"Thank Heaven! Oh, thank Heaven " exclaimed old
Theobald Elfinstar, fervently, grasping the hand that had
been held out to him, and then sinking back to his seat,
overcome by emotion.
"It is such an unlooked-for delight I Our wildest hopes
did not suggest the joy of seeing you here. We had almost
lost hope even of hearing from you ! We feared the Norfolk
had gone down, with your letters on board," said Seraph, as
she drew her lover in and made him sit down on the bench
between her father and herself
"The Norfolk encountered foul weather and was driven
far out of her course, and she reached port only at noon to-
day, in a very crippled condition. I came directly from the
ship out here to bring you the good news," replied the young
man.
. M.~~~~~~~~I



<pb n="328"/>
US9        THE TEST OF LOVE 
"Thank Heaven that we see you safe ! But how 
we have the great happiness of seeing you, inte
your letters?" inquired Mr. Elfinstar. 
"By a special Providece, I sem to think. The
sailing of the mail ships for the East was ch
the first to the tenth, so that the business that wr
detained me in England the first week in the mo
satisfactorily concluded in time for me to sail in th
folk, and, having the opportunity, I could not r
temptation to bring the order for release, instead of
it. But, dear friends, I have a long story to tell yo^
I must reserve for some future occasion." 
"Tell me only this: As you say that Margaret  H
has been vindicated, of course the real criminal mui
been convicted I That wretched girl I What is her
inquired Seraph.
"Malvina Mattox is at rest. She died of nerVr
haustion before she could be brought to trial, but not:
she had made a full confession. She was not near so
as we imagined. Hers is a strange story of nerv
cerebral disease, that I must tell you some time but n
now," sighed the young man.
"Oh, no, not now," assented the old gentleman, "f
are doubtless weary and in want of refreshments..
hark there is the tea bell ! We will go in and ha
and afterward we will talk. Only one question I 
you as we go: How is it with that fine fellow who w
chief help in bringing the truth to light?"
"Ham Gow ?"
"Yes, Gow l"
"He made up his mind to return to the colonies. 
his wife came out with me in the Norfolk. They are
Royal Victoria now and are going on to Melbourne 
Deuent, which we found in port here."
"And not by the Norfolk`'
" o, the Norfolk will have to lie to for repairs. The
went will take her mails and passengers to Melbou
"Ah that is all I wished to ask you now. Com
tea," said the old gentleman, rising, and leading the
the dining room.
The young man gave his arm to the young lady, anM
followed to the bright and cheerful tea table.
"i'



<pb n="329"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                   S9
After tea, when they sat together in the pleasant parlor,
they talked over their affairs.
First the young earl gave the father and daughter a can-
did account of himself, and his reasons for leaving home at
the age of nineteen and remaining absent until he had
reached his majority. He frankly related all the serious
complications that had followed his youthful escapade.
The old gentleman listened gravely, but could find no
word of blame for the young man who had shown such devo-
tion to himself and to his beloved child.
Seraph listened with the closest attention and deepest
sympathy.
Next the narrator passed on to the story of their pursuit
and detection of the real criminal, for whose guilt poor Mar-
garet Campbell had so innocently suffered.
He explained how necessary it was to find other evidence
in support of Ham Gow's testimony, which, under all the
circumstances, would scarcely have been received alone and
on its own merits.
He related the means that had been taken to bring the
guilty woman to the confession of that secret crime whose
burden was bearing her to the grave.
He described the circumstances of her death, and his own
prompt action and successful appeal to the home secretary.
Lastly, reverting to his personal affairs, he told them of
his journey down into Cornwall to claim his inheritance,
and of his opportune appearance in the town hall, where his
quasi-successor, Lewis Manton, his friend, Ham Gow, and
his ex-valet, Henri Delaplaine, were arraigned to answer
the charge of his, the earl's, murder. He told of the tri-
umphal acquittal of the prisoners and his own immediate
entrance into his possessions.
"I had no time to write and advise you of these matters,
dear sir, for I found by the change in the day of sailing
that I should be able to go personally on the same ship,
which, had she sailed sooner, would have taken only my let-
ters with the official order for Margaret Campbell's release.
And so, by coming in person, although I have had a some-
what rough and tedious voyage out, I have met you six
months sooner than I should otherwise have done. But I
have wearied you with my long story," concluded the young
man, with a smile.



<pb n="330"/>
j        880            THE TEST OF LOVE
"You have wearied yourself, poor lad, but youi
deeply interested us. Now you must have a glass iof
and a biscuit and retire to rest," replied the old gent
rising to ring for the required refreshments, afte~
taking of which the trio of friends separated and re
the night.
The next morning, after breakfast, the young eox
companied by his aged host, set out to ride into e
Town to deliver the order for the release of 
Campbell to the superintendent of convicts.
When the necessary form had been observed, 
paired to the Royal Victoria to see Ham Gow and hia
and after a pleasant interview with that light-hearted
and his light-headed woman, they went to a house and
agent's office to advertise the Mountain Hermitage fo4r,
or rent.
*'I leave the colonies in about a month from noWi
should like to dispose of my property just as it stands
I go; so much should I like to do this, that I will 1
place go at some sacrifice," said the old gentleman. 
Then, turning to the young earl, he added:
"I do not suppose that I shall be able to get rid of.
soon; but that shall not keep us in the colony a day 
than we can get away. We shall go to England by t
went, which will stop here on her return from Mel
about a month hence, as usual-whether the He
shall be disposed of or not."
"I think, sir, you will have no trouble in selling the
erty. The new governor has authorized me to look
a country seat for himself away from the sea, in a h
mountainous district, and within ten or fifteen milesf
city. It seems to me your place, from what I hear a['
exactly what the governor would like, and much better
he could hope to get, for I do not suppose there is
place like it in the colony," said the agent, looking upi:
the book he had been examining.
"Very well, then, negotiate with the governor, an
ten per cent. on the sale from me. I leave the ma
your hands," concluded Mr. Elfinstar, as he took the
porting arm of his young friend and left the office.
They returned to the "mews" where they had leti
..,



<pb n="331"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                  881
horses, mounted and rode off toward the Hermitage, at
which they arrived in time for their early dinner.
Seraph was informed of the good prospect of disposing of
the Mountain Hermitage, and rejoiced in it, because her
father rejoiced.
The next morning they had a final discussion of affairs,
in which it was decided that the young pair should be pri-
vately married in the colony, the bridegroom under his
simple name of Horace Hawke, and the bride under her real
name of Margaret Campbell. This was to be done in order
to make the marriage strictly legal, after which ceremony
they were to appear as before-merely as a betrothed couple.
They were to go to England as such, and, afterward, in
London, they were to be publicly married, the bridegroom
under his full name and title, and the bride as Seraph,
granddaughter of Theobald Elfinstar, Esq., of ThorndiKe.
"For," said the old man, "the name and memory of
Margaret Campbell, even though she has been vindicated,
must die, lest the world should visit upon her, and all con-
nected with her, her misfortunes as crime. My grand-
daughter, your lordship's betrothed, must be known in Eng-
land only as Seraph Elfinstar, the heiress of Thorndike.
You understand me?"
"I do," replied the young earl, gravely, while Seraph took
the old man's hand and pressed it.
"And that brings me to another point. By the death of
that infant boy who was murdered by the lunatic, Malvina
Mattox, Margaret Campbell became the sole heiress of Rose
Hill. Now, as Seraph Elfinstar she could not claim her
inheritance. She inherits it as Margaret Campbell, the last
of the Campbells of Rose Hill. But as Margaret Campbell
she must not be heard of in England. How, then, shall she
manage to enjoy her inheritance? This is my plan: Let
Margaret Campbell, before her marriage with your lordship,
execute a deed, giving Rose Hill to me, Theobald Elfinstar;
after which, at another office, I will execute another deed,
giving Rose Hill to my granddaughter, Seraph, Countess of
Hawkewood. Do you undersand?"
"Perfectlyl" responded the young earl, who, with the
hand of his beloved clasped in his own, thought no more of
these business details than any other ardent lover of twenty-
one might do.
L._~



<pb n="332"/>
s*2            THE TEST OF LOVE
The next day, Thursday, Ham Gow and his wife
to the Hermitage to inform their friends that the
would set sail for Melbourne that evening. They
their traps on board the ship, and had now comet!
good-by.
"When you have quite made your fortune you 
back to England, Ham, dear boy," said the young 
"I'll come back to visit before that, my lord; but'
live out here. I like the free life of the colonies,"'
the tramp.
Seraph Elfinstar begged the visitors to excuse 
few minutes, and she flew upstairs and took a casket
jewels, earrings, brooch, necklace and bracelets of p
phires set in pearls. 
She presented them as a parting souvenir to 
who received them with frank surprise and delight,
outburst of gratitude that provoked smiles from
saw and heard her.
Soon, with many good wishes, the visitors took  l
went away, accompanied by the young earl, who, at
moment, determined to return to town with his fri
see them off to Melbourne.
"But come back to-night, though it will be late
moon shines, and the road is good, and-I will sit;
you," said Seraph Elfinstar.
He gave her a fond and grateful look that promised
thing.
The month that intervened between the sailing
Derwent for Melbourne and its return to Hobart 
a very busy one.
In the first place, the new governor came out -i:
to inspect the property he thought of buying for a a
retreat. He liked the place very much, and at on~es'
fled his intention to buy it if the price should prove,'
factory as the place.
The bargain was finally concluded, and the He
-house, land, stock and furniture-was sold to 
governor, and possession was to be given on the f
next month.
Next, Margaret Campbell executed a deed, be
her right, title and interest in Rose Hill Manor, in'
shire, to Theobald Elfinstar, of Thomdike, Cumbel
·   ·   ,  



<pb n="333"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE 
After this, the betrothed pair, under the auspices of the
old gentleman, went to Launceton, a town in the interior,
where they were unknown.
There the young lovers were privately married, every
legal form having been carefully observed by the precaution
of Mr. Elfinstar.
They returned to the Hermitage immediately after the
ceremony was concluded.
The young Earl of Hawkewood had been in the colony
full a fortnight before he found time to renew his ac-
quaintance with his former friends, the Belle Isles, and
others.
At length, however, he called at the quarters of the lieu-
tenant and learned for the first time that he had resigned or
sold out his commission and left the garrison for apartments
in the Royal Albert, the fine new hotel on Prince Street,
where he was awaiting the return of the Derwent, by which
he was to go home.
The earl went to the Royal Albert, where he was heartily
welcomed by Mr. and Mrs. Cosmo Belle Isle, who addressed
him as Mr. Hamilton Gower.
He did not set them right.
"They must find me out for themselves when we get back
to England, if they do not before. And then they will re-
member that noblemen, as well as kings, and less honest
men, sometimes travel incog., as I have done."
He told them that he was going to England by the Der-
went, and they expressed much pleasure in the prospect of
having his company on the long voyage.
"There will be an unusually pleasant company in the
cabin, I understand," said Mr. Belle Isle. "The ex-governor
and his wife, our father and mother-in-law, you know, are
going, and I hear that a Mr. and Mrs, Elfinstar-who, by
the way, are friends of yours, are they not?"
"Yes," responded the young gentleman, with a smile.
"Seemed to me that I had heard you mention them when
you were here last year. Well, I suppose, then, you know
all about the old gentleman having sold out to take his
daughter to England, and that they are going by the Der-
went."
"Yes," said the earl, as briefly as before.
Then they talked of the "gay and happy" Gows and of



<pb n="334"/>
884           THE TEST OF LOVE
the two calls they had made on the Belle Isles, i-
on landing from the Derwent, and the one just 
ing for Melbourne.
After a pleasant half hour spent with his fr
earl took leave and returned to the Hermitage in
join his bride and her grandfather at tea.
In three weeks from this day, a happy party of 
embarked on the Dernent, bound for "Old England.
Of the voyage it is not necessary to speak. "'
that life-or that voyage-which has no history.
this I must say, that in the intimacy of ship associa
real rank of the earl transpired, and nothing ev
thought of his having traveled incog. Also, it was
suspected that his lordship was engaged to Miss
But that was really all that was discovered or ami
cerning the young couple or the aged grandfather. ,,
The Derwent was a new ship and a fast sailer, ant
time landed at the East India Docks, London, "
well on board," according to gazette, and according'
facts.
Three weeks after this, in the last days of Augui
was a brilliant wedding at Thorndike in Cumberland,
was attended by all the neighboring gentry, and at.
Mr. Theobald Elfinstar, of that ilk, bestowed the
his granddaughter and heiress, Seraph, on Horace
Earl of Hawkewood, in Cornwall, and at which M'
star gave the bride, as a wedding present, the fine 3
Rose Hill, in Yorkshire.
Immediately after the ceremony, the bridegroom'.
bride took the train for London, en route for the
seat of the earl, Hawke Hall, in Cornwall, whe're:
cent preparations were made for their reception, as[
they arrived on the morning of September the '
twenty-second anniversary of the earl's birth.  i
There was a gala day worth describing, in which'
day fete and a bride's reception were merged intii,
day long to be remembered in Hawkeville.
*      e         *   *      *      *
Some years have passed, and now here is the 
tion of the principal parties who have figured in o
The Earl and Countess of Hawkewood live at
wood, and have a son and daughter. With them 



<pb n="335"/>
THE TEST OF LOVE                  '8
Theobald Elfinstar, who, at eighty years of age, bids tair to
complete his century of life, and who is very happy in his
great-grandchildren, and old Dr. Paul Laude, who is
"Planted unco right"
in the grand old library, and who takes great pleasure in
teaching the little Viscount Hawke his catechism and his.
Latin grammar.
These old gentlemen have formed a close friendship, and
smoke their after-dinner pipes together in the library.
Lord and Lady Seyres live at Seyres Castle, in Ireland.
At the earnest desire of Lady Seyres a large portion of her
fortune was well invested in the complete restoration of the
venerable castle, in the thorough draining of the land, and
in the erection of comfortable cottages for the tenants and
the agricultural laborers.
They, at least, live in the midst of a healthy, prosperous,
smiling and contented peasantry, whatever other landlords
may be doing.
They are blessed with one son, whom the viscount calls
the Isaac of his age.
Mr. and Mrs. Belle Isle live principally in London at the
Palace Zavieski; but they have a country seat in Northum-
berland, and a seaside house at Torquay, and
"Many children around them grow."'
Ham Gow is one of the wealthiest merchants in Mel-
bourne, and his town house and seaside residence are among
the most splendid mansions in the colony. Lona is very
much admired for her beauty and amiability.
No one out there knows, or would care, even if they did
know, that the wealthy merchant king was once a poor
tramp, who married a poor servant maid, for they live in a
colony of self-made men and women, who have risen from
the lowest ranks. They have a house full of children, in
whom they take the greatest delight.
Our worthy friend, Dennis Prout coast guardsman and
smuggler from Cornwall, has "fallen on his feet," so to
speak, in one of our American cities-never mind which.
By what political hocus pocs the "ring" and the demon



<pb n="336"/>
886           THE TEST OF LOVE 
only know, he is in the enjoyment of a post of
emolument, with unlimited opportunities for 
one of the most important custom houses. Mr.
Prout-Dennis and his wife, Nan-are in very good
and are considered an eminently respectable c
they have no family, and they decline all open in
with Old Nan, on account of her peculiar line of b
although they are sociable enough with the old w
private.
Old Nan's success is, perhaps, the most surprisingo
related in this story.
She is no longer known as Old Nan. She is Ma
Crook, the seventh daughter of a seventh daughte*,i
seventh daughter through seven generations and is
quently, by birth and inheritance, the most won
trologer, clairvoyant healing medium-and humb
the world ever rejoiced in.
She lives in a handsomely furnished French flat,
meals supplied from a first-class restaurant, has a
wait on her, and a stylish colored man to open the
her dupes. She wears a picturesque costume of black 
with a turban of the same, and a brilliant brooch,
may be a solitaire diamond or a big bit of glass; there
telling one from the other in these days, unless one
to be a lapidary.
Old Nan Crook may fall into the hands of the polic
fine morning, and spend the remainder of her long au
used life in the calm retreats of the State penitentiary
But, in the meantime, she is making her own
by telling the fortunes of others, and-equally wis
more worthy friends-enjoying a full share of hesla :
prosperity.
THE END OF "THE TEST OF LOVE. ':
(PAw nI, "THE TAI OP THE BB PENT.")
THE TRAIL OF THE SERPENT.
(PIasT PART.)
A TORTURED HEART.
(PAT II, "THE TRAIL OF THE SBEPENT.) 
· ,)
''ii



<pb n="337"/>
Good Fiction Worth Readin                                                         |
A serie of romance containng s    r d   the old favoris  in the flM
of historical fAt  roplete with pow rful romaep   tovo ond dflowema
that ecel In thrilng nd absorbin interet
A COLONIAL PIREBLAMCB. A story l         Ar~i I CombloI TIe By
Chauncey C.   otchs    Cbth,  mo. with four illutatioi  by J. Watson
Davis. Price L
A book that appeals to Amerias m   a vivid pictre of  evoluttoa
scenes. The   ory    a  ro   o     a trlUg on. It causes the tre
America  to flush with edotemnt, to devour hapt~r after baptr, until
the eye   a         and It fairly mok  with patrotism. The love story  o
singlrlula obar~hUt IdyL
THB TOWBR OF LONDON. A Hisoricallomaceoftheimes                dy
Jane Grey andMaTudor. ByWm.L Barrion       nsworth. Cloth, lm. with
four illustration by George Crikshank. Price, $o
This romance of the "Tower of London" deplcts the Tower a  ala
srison and  ortre, with many histortcal asocations. Th    era 
middle of the sriteenth century.
The  tory  is  divided  Into  two  parts,  one  dealing  with  Iad y  JaUe  O ey
and the other with Mary Tudor as Queen. Introducin  other notable ea
actera of the er  Througout the   ory hold the Intert of the reade
In the midst of ntriue and conspirac, etendin    considebly over 
half a century.
IN DEFIANCB OP THB KINGO. A Romae of the merican evbntlo
Chauney C. Hotchlki     Cloth, zm. with four lustrations by J. Watson
Davis. Price, 1.o.
Mr. Hotchks has etched In burmng words a story otf ane brave
and true love that thrll from beginning to end, with the sirit of th,
Revolution. The heart beat   quicly, and we feel ourselve  takldn 
part in the eiting scenes decribed. His whole story s sO abeorbln
that you will st up far into the night to finih It. As a loav romea
it s ohprming.
GARTHOWEN. A toyof a Wels Ho~         ste     By Aien  nhe. Cloth
mo. with four llmtatonse by . Watoa Davis   PrDaeLv  a
'"This    1a l ttle idyl of humble lifte and enduring lov, laid bat bef~
us, very real and pure which in Its tll how  us ome sltrong     s 
Welsh charaterthe pride the hsty temper. the quik ding out    wratb.
. . We      all this a well-written story, Intreting alie through IM
romance and its limpses into another life than ours.  A delIhtul  d
clever plture of Welsh vllag life. The result to ezoellel ."-Detroit Fre
Pres.
MIPANWY. The tory of a Welshdnger.        By Alln     i      ^e.  Clth,
umo. with four illustrantonam ty. Watson Da. Prce, 
"This is a love story, sp, tenderand prtty    s one would eare t
read. The action throughout I brik and pleasing; the charates It is ap-
Parent at ono, are aa true to life a though the author had known them
all personall. Bimple in ll is situationsa the tory t1 work up in that
touching and quaint stra  which never grows wearisome, no matter how
often the lights and shad    of love are          Itt ring true, and
does not tax the magination."-Boston Herald.
hr sale by all bookselles, or  t potp    on recept of price by the pub
liber, A. L. BURT COMPANY, -B Duae         t., Hew York.



<pb n="338"/>
Good Fiction Worth 
A series of romanecotI     in  evera~  o the dd .
of historical fiction, replete with powerhf romasen
tht e    l ih thrillin  and absorng Interest. 
DARiLt  B. A Romane of the time of Henry     IL
yO G. P. LR. me&  Cloth, mo with foer lustr
Price,                                            ' ''
In point of publicatioln "Darnle"'  that wot It.i
follo    "Richeleu," andf rumor can be credted, It
vice and insistence of our own Wahigton Iri
primarily for the story, the young author 
properly paint the differenee in the harater of the
And It is not urprising that James should have 
eminently succesul in giving to the world theo
man, and by attempting a similar task with Wol 
much like tempting fortune. Irv     insisted that'
ally In sequence, and this opinion bing spport
the author set about the wor                    '
As a historical romance "Darnley" t a book st^a
leasurably again and aa, for there t about It that
those who are strangers to the works otf . P. B. 
oIy to be imparted by Duma .
If there was nothng more about the wok to
the acount of the meeting of the kings on the hiestert
gold" would entitle the tory to the most favona b
reader.
There t really but littl pre romance in thi" . tj l
taken care to Imagine love pasaes only between
credited with having entertained the tender Pand, n
he suoceeds in man such lovers    all the world
CAPTAIN BRAND, OF THB SCHOONER BB
enry A. We     U.8.N. (Harry    ngo). Cloth, zuP
tions by 7. Watson Davi. Price, .oo.' 
The re-publication of this story will lease tYb~ 
~ho delight in so much of the salty Iavor of the oo  * ^
the medium of a printed page, tor never has a     ^tE U
who go down In ships" been written by one more
depicted.
The one book of this gifted author which bt beet
will be read with pleasure for many years tooo   |
who, as the author states on hi title page. wa a     B,
the West Indles." As a sea story pure and simple.
aever been excelled, and as a tory of piratical l f
embeishmentsof blood and thunder. it has no    u 
WICK OP TSH     WOODS. Astoryo theBar
Robert Montgomery Bird. Cloth, tamo with four
Davis. Price, $1.o
This most popular novel and thrilling  to     
Kentucky was originally published In the year
print, had in its day a phenomenal sae tor 
Indian and frontier life in the early day of^
rated in the tale with all the art of a
love romance runs through the story. Thisr 
"Nick of the Wood' will be oertaln to make
ths enchanting story from Dr. Blrd's clever at
or sale by all boosellers, or snt postpaid ore   t OM Z
tihers A. L. BURT COMPANY, p8 Dme         Rfl
·i



<pb n="339"/>
Good Fiction Worth Reading.
serleo of romanoee contanlng several of the old tvme in the ield
of hlstorical ction, replete with powerfhl romane.f allov and diploacy
that eael in thrllin  and aborbing interest.
GUY FAWKES. A Romnce of the Gunpowder Treon. By Wn Harr
sonAinsworth. Cloth, ^mo. with four illstrations by Geoige CruikShank
Price, x.oo
The "'npowsder Plot" was a modaet attempt to blow up Palament.
the 1ng and hi Counsellors. Jamu of cotland, then ~Kin   of ingad,
was weak-minded and extravagnt. He hit upon the effient scheme of
extorting money from the people by mposing taxe on the Catholicm  In
their natural resentment to this extortion, a handful of bold spirits on
cluded to overthrow the government. Finally the plotters were arrested
and the Kg    put to torture.   uy Fakes  and the other prisoners with
oyal vigor. A very ntense love story rns through the entire romtan.
THE SPIRIT OF THE       BORER A Romance of the     rly Settler in the.
Ohio Valley. By Zane Grey. Cloth. za2o. with four lustations by J. Watso
Davia. Price, $.oo
A book rather out of the ordinary is this 'prtt of the Border." The
nain thread of the story has to do with the work of the Moravian mi-
sionaries In the Ohio Valley. Incidentally the reader is given details of the
frontier lfle of those hardy pioneer who broke the wilderne   for the plant-
g o this great nation    Chief among these, a  a matter of course, la
ews Wetzel, one of the most peculiar, and at the ame time the most
admirable of all the brave men who spent their livea battling with the
savage foe, that others might dwell in comparative security.
Details of the establishment and destruction of the Moravlan "Village
of Peace" are given at some length, and with minute description. The
efforts to Christianize the Indians are described aa they never have been
before, and the author has depicted the characters of the leaders of the
several Indian tribes with great care, which of itself will be of Interest to
the student.
By no means least among the charms of the story are the vivfd word-
pictures of the thrilling adventures, and the Intense paintings of the beau-
ties of nature, as seen In the almost unbroken forest 
It is the spirit of the frontier which is described, and one can by It
perhaps, the better er undetand why men, and women too willingly braved
every privation end danger that the westward progress o the star of em-
pire might be the more certain and rapid. A love story, simple and tender,
runs through the book.
RICHELIU. A tale of Prnce n the rign of Kng Zoals rsT       ByG.P.
3L James Cloth, zno. with four illustrations by J. Watson Davi. Prie, L.oa
In IS Mr. James published hs frst romanrce "Richeli," and wa
recognized at once as one of the mate    te craft
In this book he laid the story during tho   later day of the great car-
dinal's life, when his power was beginning to wane, but while it wan
yet suiciently strong to permit now and then of volcanic outbursts which
overwhelmed foes and carried triends to the topmot wave of prosperity
One of the most striking portions of the story i tha t of Cnq  ar's cons-
acy: the method of condauctin  criminal case  and the political trickery'
resorted to by royal lfvortes, affordin  a better nsight into the etate-
craft of that day than cn be had even   eb     ative study of history
It Is a powerful romance of love and diplomacy, and In point of thriUln
and absorbing interest has never been excelled
Psrle by all booksers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the pub
Ulers, A. L, DURT COMPANY, -58 Dane 8t., New York.



<pb n="340"/>
Good Fiction Wo 
A sries or romane~ containing ,eerl dbk idS
of htorcal fction, replete with powerflro_ mM- ieE
that ed    n thiin   and aaborbing irt. I           ,~ 
WIND8OR CASTLE. A Historical Romance of t
Catharine of Arago~ and Anne Bolen. By Win. a
zma    with four liuratos by Geore C~ r
"Windsor Castle" to the story of Hnar  VMII.
Boleyn. "Bluff Kin  Hal, although a welll
good a one in many ways. Of all his el f i
one ws more discreditable than his divore frm 
ae to the beautiful Anne Boleyn. The Kins 
as vehement. Jane    eymour, wtf maid on the
aad Anne Boleyn was forced to the block to make 
is romance      one of etreme inteet to a          i d
HOREtBHOB ROBINSON. Atale otheTory
ainn178     ByJoh. CyohuPKenne. Cloth,       th. wh
Watson~ Dav    Pri~e, .                           i '
Among the old favorite in the field of what bi
tlon. there ae one which appeal to a larr    Mbr~
orwehoe Robinson, and thio because It 1o tthe
with fidelity to the faet the heroic efforts o the
lisa to defend their homes against the brutl 
under such leaders a Corwallo and Tarleto~    '' 
The reader bt charmed with the story of love
of the tale, and then impresed with the wealth
timea The picture of the mniold   ufferin ot
drawn, but painted faithfully and honestly
time nor labor labor n his efforts to present in this
price in blood and tear which the Carolnian
wrinning of the republic. 
TaL    It all In all 'Horeshoe Robinson" Is 
found on every book-shelf, not only because tt e. 
tory, but because of the wealth of valuable
colonirt wbhih It contains  That it has been
Ilustrated. ti something which will live plerre 
long de~red an opportunity to read the story  i
have tried vainly in thee latter days to pro  * l
read t for the firt time.
THB    PEARL OF ORR'8 ISLAND. A tory Qfot*'i
Harrieteechertowe     Cloh,     .     trat. d
Written prior to 18, the "Pear of Ore's s  O 
Jlled with delicate fan , such as seemingy
time one rads them.    One see   the '"ea
around the pine-airt, lonely shorhe oft OrS
comee "the heavy, hollow moan of the U        wE  ,
ngry howl or eome savage anlmal."         _
Who en read of the beginning of that
imne Into thio world under the very 
without having an inten~e deoare to kow
tomed? Aatin and again one inem o
meter of that baby boy Moses, who came
gr     billows pillowed onu hi deaded moth ^' ^ 
There Is no more faith             of       , 
Which Mrs   towe ive In "Th    Pearl 
For mle by al boonklers. or ent pospad oat;
lie, A., L. BURT COMPANY, f1        
··~~~~' ',P:MEEN



<pb n="2"/>
POPULAR BOOKS
,  11S  F. e.D.F. N. SOVFHWORKH
::u   IIn Habon° Cloth Biodiml
P,:  ;iOe pe  eme . . .           -    -   060 Cent.
-sptdASetBintheCloset    Love's Bittere~ t (Cp
Xi       BfFaiSBBS^eTnt iequed to er Mothr's eCBt
,      . a The Changed Brides  Mystrl3 Matria8se., The
.'I.bri   O(rdeal, The      Sequel to ALeap I  the Dark
Capitola's Peril               Nearst and Deare
.,         Sl. to the dde  ad       Noble Lord. A
Cha~ned Brides, The          boeltoTheteaotH
?'...' .    Cruel as the Grave         Self-Raised
,'  ".   David LUndsay               Seuel to ihmas
Seuel to Gloria          Skeleton In the loset, A
J,       D eed Without a Name. A    Strngle of a SL The
Dorothy Harcourt' Secret    S      toTe   a       e
toA Deed WithoutaNae    Sweet Love's Atonement
Husband                   Test of Love, The
Equ to"EHnsb               Sequel to A Totured Heart
sePelatoyEm               To His Fate'
oFr Whose Sake              S~quel to Dorothy Har~aour's
'For Whose Sake              -eq  ret
Seaus to Wly Did He Wed Hert  Torturd Heart A
.           For Woman 8 Love             Sequel to The Trailof the Serpent
lfi;ing Her Destiny        Trail of the Serpent, The
Sequelto WhnLove Command T     for Her Life
:  Gloria  a fe            Sequel to Cruel as the Grve
Her Lve or Her Life        Unloed Wfe The
Sequel to The Bride's Ordeal  U ed Wif, The
..,^SSS^0^                 Unrequited Love, An.
Her Mother's Secret        USeel t  Fo Woan's 
ffidd  H"   TSehe                to For Wesma's LoMv
Hidden Hand, The           Viotor'I Triumph
How He Won Her              S    to Bea ot.dlFled
euel to Fair Pla          When Love Commands
'   Leap %in-the Dark, A   When Shadows Die
Le    th    a               S~ ique a  to L n'* Met Cop
el to the Unloved Woe    Why Did Heo.Wed Efrt
',           Little Nea's EngaPment    Zenobia's Sritos
Soquel to Nearest and Dearet  Sequel to Swtesonm t
For Sale by all Boolers or will be sent postpalMd  relpt of rice.
A. L BURT COMPANY, PWUB.lSS
52 Duane Street  .N                            York
Copyright 37H-ta5S
'  BT Ro~ Bn
,   I       Beoea ral nted to Mr. Charlotte Stiohrth LawrBoe .1
JUL 1 1^3           J
,, ,uNV ,  ,:'/B



