<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
These pages did not produce entirely excellent results, probably due to uneven background color and light text. However, most of the text files are clear and accurate. 

Poor OCR sections

odd pages, 3 - 39
odd pages 127 - 131
149, 153, 155, 167<pb n="1"/>
THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE



<pb n="2"/>
1-



<pb n="3"/>
MS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
tli'hie narrow gorge the little foot-bridge
ld-abrace of logs, the upper surface hewn,
!i~ght hand-rail formed of a cedar pole. A
irCbtaere, one might think, looking down at
and rocky depths beneath, through which
thile mountain stream, swift and strong, but.
Hlb   btless substantial enough for all ordinary
l Enid certainly sufficient for the impondera-
_ selusive travellers who by common report
it.
Hn'!t likely ter meet nobody. Few folks
,way. nowadays, 'thout it air jes' ter ford
along hyar a piece, sence harnts an'
,jl.My1critters hev been viewed a-crossin'
~H ji      ~ An'. iUt hev got the name o' bein'
_9 ," said Roxby.
^ ^iwH."f *rew back slightly. He had his
_~~.^   | irecoil from the subject of death.
_    lllJ'invested with a more immediate
_-u^^~    usual to many of the living, with
_~  H ~ipersuasion of immortality in every
_      tIM ^0n repudiating all possibility of ces-
:_? Zlifting his gloomy, long-lashed eyes
; ^i^far up the stream, he asked, "Whose



<pb n="4"/>
4     THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
His voice had a low, repressed cadence, as of one
who speaks seldom, grave, even melancholy, and
little indicative of the averse interest that had kin-
dled in his sombre eyes. In comparison the drawl
of the mountaineer, who had found him heavy com-
pany by the way, seemed imbued with an abnormal
vivacity, and keyed a tone or two higher than was
its wont.
"Thar ain't a few," he replied, with a sudden,
glow of the pride of the cicerone. " Thar's a grave-
yard t'other side o' the gorge, an' not more than
a haffen-mile off, an' a cornsider'ble passel o' folks
hev been buried thar off an' on, an' the foot-bredge
ain't in nowise ill-convenient ter them."
Thus demonstrating the spectral resources of the
locality, he rode his horse well into the stream as
he spoke, and dropped the reins that the animaPs
impatient lips might reach the water. He sat fac-
ing the foot-bridge, flecked with the alternate shift-
ing of the sunshine and the shadows of the tremulous
firs that grew on either side of the high banks on
the ever-ascending slope, thus arching both above
and below the haunted bridge. His companion had
joined him in the centre of the stream; but while
the horses drank, the stranger's eyes were persis-
tently bent on the concentric circles of the water
that the movement of the animals had set astir
in. the current, as if he feared that too close or
curious a gaze might discern some pilgrim, whom
he cared not to see, traversing that shadowy quiv-
ering foot-bridge. He was mounted on a strong,
handsome chestnut, as marked a contrast to his
guide's lank and trace-galled sorrel as were the two



<pb n="5"/>
_ : : 'itB;' 2AN TOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE  5
ieder gloved hand had fallen with the
Oimmel of the saddle. His soft felt
brero, shadowed his clear-cut face.
y shaven, save for a long drooping
ieand imperial. His suit of dark
li concealed b? a black cloak, one
.ithrown back across his shoulder
awigiht blue lining, the color giving a sud-
g touch to his attire, as if he were
e" It was a fleeting fashion of the
'.it added a certain picturesqueness to a
,and seemed far enough from the times
duced the square-tailed frock-coat which
taieer wore, constructed of brown jeans,
of which stood stiffly out on each side of
e, and gave him, with his broad-brimmed
ei'tamin Quakerish aspect.
uno' why folks be so 'feared of 'em," Rox-
ed,speculatively. "The dead ain't so
on, nhow. Them ez.hev been in the war,
an' me done, oughter be in an 'bout used
iu-ghqough I never seen none o"em afoot
.Vt a smit field o' battle,'arter the
_   *- ed oughter gin a body a realizin'
i;: the sperit kin flee, an' what pore
thespark o' life human clay be."
ihy   had a keen, not unkindly face,
:tiat  look of extreme intelligence which
stinct from intellectuality, and which
es sees in a minor degree in a very
!3^S    et' a fine horse. One might rely on him
d  instinctively everything one might
~';,       W.:: a even in its subtler esthetic values, al-
C* * P*f," .,, ';*



<pb n="6"/>
6     THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
though he had consciously learned little. He was
of the endowed natures to whom much is given,
rather than of those who are set to acquire. He
had many lines in his face-even his simple life
had gone hard with him, its sorrows unassuaged by
its simplicity. His hair was grizzled, and hung
long and straight on his collar. He wore a grizzled
beard cut broad and short. His boots had big
spurs, although the lank old sorrel had never felt
them. He sat his horse like the cavalryman he had
been for four years of hard riding and raiding, but
his face had a certain gentleness that accented the
Quaker-like suggestion of his garb, a look of com-
muning with the higher things. j
" I never blamed 'em," he went on, evidently re-
verting to the spectres of the bridge-" I never
blamed 'em for comin' back wunst in a while. It
'pears ter me 'twould take me a long time ter git
familiar with heaven, an' sociable with them ez hev
gone before. -An', my Lord, jes' think what the
good green yearth is 1 Leastwise the mountings.
I ain't settin' store on the valley lands I seen
whenst I'went ter the wars. I kin remember yit
what them streets in the valley towns smelt like."
He lifted his head, drawing a long breath to in-
hale the exquisite fragrance df the fir, the freshness
of the pellucid water, the aroma of the autumn
wind, blowing through the sere leaves still clinging
red and yellow to the boughs of the forest.
"Naw, I ain't blamnin' 'et, though I don't hanker
ter view 'em,'* he resumed. "One of'em I wouldn't
be afeard of, though. I feel mighty sorry fur her.
The old folks used ter tell about her. A young



<pb n="7"/>
'-'Ti,-l.TX P:ALNTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE    7
Hi.ra  a-crossin' this bredge with her child
_ She war young, an' mus' have been
'[ckcon; though ez 'twar her fust baby,
hev been practised in holdin' it an'
ws it slipped through her arms an'
it. wer, an' war killed in a minit, dashin'
_    ' She jes' stood fur a second a-
*   a wild painter, an' jumped off'n the
it . She got it agin; for when they
i/h er body out'n the ruver she' hed it in her
1too tight fur even death ter onloose. An'
yair together in the buryin'-ground."
ave a nod toward the slope of the mountain
tercepted the melancholy view of the grave-
it it it" he continued; "bekase" (he low-
voice) "on windy nights, whenst the moon
t/ thae wane, she is viewed kerryin' the baby
t1he.bredge  kerryin' it clear over, safe an'
lke she thought she oughter done, I reckon,
'1 e 16 minute, whilst she stood an' screamed
_vy wdthat she bed done. That child would
'! alec*te miy..ge ef he hed lived."
_I' iUeiams wavered athwart the bridge
P'«.a~yed  above, giving glimpses, of
_^' t^ir fibrous shadows flickered back
fnountain stream flashed white
oomrn v ow lders, and plunged down the
uccessi n of cascades, each seeming
ntly reen and amber and brown
B.  T  chestnut horse gazed meditat-
::*% § f. . , Un.d out-gushings, having drunk his
.  better of his moderation, and once



<pb n="8"/>
8     THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
more thrust his head down to the water. The hand
of his rider, which had made a motion to gather up
the reins, dropped leniently on his neck, as Simeon
Roxby spoke again:
"Several-several others hev been viewed, actin'
accordin' ter thar motions in life. Now thar war a
peddler-some say he slipped one icy evenin', 'bout
dusk in winter--some say evil ones waylaid him
fur his gear an' his goods in his pack, but the set-
tlemint mostly believes he war alone whenst he fell.
His pack 'pears ter be full still, they say -but ye
air 'bleeged ter know he hev hed ter set that pack
down fur good 'fore this time. We kin take nuthin'
out'n this world, no matter what kind o' a line o'
goods we kerry in life. Heaven's no place fur
tradin', I understan', an' I do wonder sometimes
how in the wor' them merchants an' sech in the
valley towns air goin' ter entertain tharse'fs in the
happy land o' Canaan. It's goin' ter be sorter bleak
fur them, sure's ye air born."
With a look of freshened recollection, he sud-
denly drew a plug of tobacco from his pocket, and
he talked on even as he gnawed a piece from it.
" Durin' the war a cavalry-man got shot out hyar
whilst runnin' 'crost that thar foot-bredge. That
hed been a scrimmage an' his horse war kilt, an'
he tuk ter the bresh on foot, hopin' ter hide in the
laurel. But ez he war crossin' the foot-bredge some
o' the pursuin' party war fordin' the ruver over
thar, an' thinkin' he'd make out ter escape they
fired on him, jes' ez the feller tried ter surrender.
He turned this way an' flung up both arms-but
thar's mighty leetle truce in a pistol-ball. That



<pb n="9"/>
I.'"' -THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE         9
minute it tuk him right through the brain. Seems
tol9t, tqong range fur a pistol, don't it ? He kin
-'  ow most enny moonlight night out hyar
t-bredge, throwin' up both hands in sign
,dgeese were a-wing on the way southward.
tii L Op  p to that narrow section of the blue sky
he incision of the gorge into the very depths
t:wods made visible, he could see the tiny
deploying along the azure or the flecking cir-
-  ', and hear the vague clangor of their leader's cry.
. -  He'lifted his head to mechanically follow their
i;.,': ;,,h. lht Then, as his eyes came back to earth, they
. .redt again on the old bridge.
a,     *Slrange enough," he said, suddenly, "the sker-
;J  rlie'tle I hev ever hearn 'bout that thar old bredge
l; id obe that my niece set a-goin'. She seen the harnt
-i Add"- an' it shakes me wuss 'n the idee o' all the
;'t E    ompanion's gloomy gaze was lifted for a
with an expression of inquiry from the
W '?idening circles of the water about the
as he drank. ,B      by's eyes, with
.e of eicitement, a sperstitious di-
t upon the bndge at the end of
_:-psta. He went on merely from the
e subject. "Yes, sir- -she seen it a-
Ui t rowful way acrost that bredge, same
of the percession o' harnts. 'Twar
'   - I l'cent- brother's darter -by name,
tl^Qxby.    Waal, Mill'cent an' a lot o'
.i ':P      b* O' her age-little over fryin' size-they
-'i. tled'Cmp-ndeetin' down hyar on Tomahawk
,...



<pb n="10"/>
10    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
Creek-'tain't so long ago -along with the old
folks. An' 'bout twenty went huddled up tergether
in a road-wagin. An', lo ! the wagin it bruk down
on the way home, an' what with proppin' it up on a
crotch, they made out ter reach the cross-roads
over yander at the Notch, an' thar the sober old
folks called a halt, an' hed the wagin mended at
the blacksmith-shop. Waal, it tuk some two hours,
fur Pete Rodd ain't a-goin' ter hurry hisself--in
my opinion the angel Gabriel will hev ter blow his
bugle oftener'n wunst at the last day 'fore Pete
Rodd makes up his mind ter rise from the dead
an' answer the roll-call -an' this hyar young lot
sorter found it tiresome waitin' on thar elders'
solemn company. The old folks, whilst gwaitin',
set outside on the porches of the houses at the
settlemint, an' repeated some o' the sermons they
hed hearn at camp, an' more'n one raised a hyme
chune. An' the young fry-they hed hed a steady
diet o' sermons an' hyme chunes fur fower days-
they tuk ter stragglin' off down the road, two an'
two, like the same sorter idjits the world over,
leavin' word with the old folks that the wagin
would overtake 'em an' pick 'em up on the road
when it passed. Waal, they walked several mile,
an' time they got ter the crest o' the hill over
yander the moon hed riz, an' they could look down
an' see the mist in the valley. The moon war
bright in the buryin'-groun' when they passed it,
an' the head-boards stood up white an' stiff, an' a
light frost hed fell on the mounds, an' they showed
plain, an' shone sorter lonesome an' cold. The
young folks begun ter look behind em' fur the



<pb n="11"/>
B ^'  O*ki AArTiOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE  II
. VIV,
.aeid-I b'lieve'twar Em'ry Keenan
fiead the names on the boards plain,
,. the moon bein' nigh the full: but
nuthin' at night by the moon in
t enny too capable o' wrastlin' with
a strong daytime on his book ter
i.owledge. An' the shadows war
,n'm' all -te yearth looked ez ef
dor ever would agin, an' they hearn a
Waal, that disaccommodated the gals
l an they hed a heap more interes' in that
all smellin' rank with wagin-grease an'
i  they did in thar .lovyers; an' they hed
I S ei bearn that old botch of a wheel that Pete
e set onto it comin' a-creakin' an' a-com-
along. the road than the sweetest words
war able ter make up or remember. So
.:   ed ~thar in the road- a-stare-gazin'.hem
.ds like they expected every grave ter 
_      .w|HM ^  the reveilly ter sound--a-waitin' ter be
_laK;^by the wagin, a-listenin', but hearin' nuth-
_i ltenig     lce o' the frost -not a dead leaf a-
_~      ~.r'~'~.~ ti_ blade o' grass astir. An' then
_ =,    XJiM^'lbe1 gals 'lowed they hed ruther
_ ..       ~,:^t ~ ~'the wagin, an' whenst the boys
_;t-n         /,ll14-buthin' war likely ter ketch 'em
_).iJtubasut out a-cryin'. Waal, thar war the
imuch I So the gay party set out on
i[~ MH  0Sg^  :a-keepin' step ter sobs an' sniffles,
-; h. ....    kem they seen no harnt. But Mill'-
; -'-.o ,      .r four o' the t'others 'lowed they'd
i;,F -gi. l ihf   warn't two mile from home, an' full
:m a me cross-roads. So Em'ry Keenan - he
_:`: J.



<pb n="12"/>
12    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
hev been waitin' on'her sence the year one-so he
put his skeer in his pocket an' ker along with her,
afshakin'. in his shoes, I'll be bound I So down the
hill in the frosty moonlight them few kernm -purty
nigh beat out, I reckon, Mill'cent war, what with
the sermonizin' an' the hyme-singin' an' hevin' ter
look continual at the sheep's-eyes o' Em'ry Keenan
-he wears my patience ter the bone I So she con-
cluded ter take the short-cut. An' Em'ry he
agreed. So they tuk the lead, the rest a followin',
an' kem down thar through all that black growth"-
he lifted his arm and pointed at the great slope,
dense with fir and pine and the heavy underbrush-
" keepin' the bridle-path-easy enough even at night,
fur the bresh is so thick they couldn't lose thar way.
But the moonlight war mightily slivered up, fallin'
through the needles of the pines an' the skeins of
dead vines, an' looked bleached and onnatural, an'
holped the dark mighty leetle. An' they seen the
water a-shinin' an' a-plungin' down the gorge, an'
the glistenin' of the frost on the floor o' the bredge.
Thar war a few icicles on the hand-rail, an' the
branches o' the firs hung ez still ez death; only
that cold, racin', shoutin', jouncin' water moved.
Jes ez they got toler'ble nigh the foot-bredge a
sudden cloud kem over the face o' the sky. Thar
warn't no wind on the yearth, bhit up above the
air war a-stirrin'. An' Em'ry he 'lowed Mill'cent
shouldn't cross the foot-bredge whilst the light
warn't clar- I wonder the critter hed that much
sense l An' she jes' drapped down on that rock
thar ter rest"-he pointed up the slope to a great
fragment that had broken off from the ledges and



<pb n="13"/>
MS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE   13
_            ;3;i'^^ Hk.: the bulk of the mass was over-
and lichen, but the jagged edges
e gleamed white and crystalline
,and olive-green shadows about
e beside it. "Agin that thar
tihe stood an' leaned. The rest
' down the hill. An' all of a
on the furder eend o' the foot-
Haiight, mighty white an' mistyin
nes  Mill'cent 'lowed ez fust she
.rthe moon. An' lookin' up, she seen
·'it held the moon close Idvered. An'
wn, she seen the light war movin'-
~the furder eend o' the bredge, straight
i~,Sometimes a hand war held afore it, ez
it from the draught, an' then Mill'cent
* a candle, an' the white in the mistiness
weadin' white an' carryin' it. Lookin'
' .tein ter lef' the 'oman kem, with now
_  sieldin' the candle she held, an'
~.h'i hand-rail. The cansoh-ine
id~n't flare, an' whey/the 'oman
t the light mase a bright
-An' in the da k air about
,?   over her had. An' a
i  Fit ang about her white frock,
fiace, fur when she reached the
dbredge she laid her hand agin
in the clear light o' the candle
e  harnt's face. An' thar she be-
- ; her own face she looked upon
ar under the tree watchin' the foot-
w face pale an' troubled; her own



<pb n="14"/>
14    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
self dressed in white, crossin' the foot-bredge, an'
lightin' her steps with a corpse's candle." He
drew up the reins abruptly. He seemed in sudden
haste to go.
His companion looked with deepening interest at
the bridge, although he followed his guide's surging
pathway to the opposite bank. As the two dripping
horses struggled up the steep incline he asked, "Did
the man with her see the manifestation also ?"
"He 'lows he did," responded Roxby, equivo-
cally. " But when Mill'cent fust got so she could
tell it, 'peared ter me ez Em'ry Keenan fund it ez
much news ez the rest o' we-uns. Mill'cent jes'
drapped stone-dead, accordin' ter all accounts, an'
he an' the t'other young folks flung water in her
face till she kem out'n her faint; an' jes' then they
hearn the wagin a-rattlin' along the road, an' they
stopped it an' fetched her home in it. She never
told the tale till she war home, an' it skeered me
an' my mother powerful, fur Mill'cent is all the kin
we hey got. Mill'cent is gran'daddy an' gran'mam-
my, sons an' daughters, uncles an' aunts, cousins,
nieces, an' nephews, all in one. The only thing I
ain't pervided with is a nephew-in-law, an' I don't
need him. Leastwise I ain't lookin' fur Em'ry
Keenan jes' at present."
The pace was brisker when the two horses, bend-
ing their strength sturdily to the task, had pressed
up the massive slope from the deep cleft of the
gorge. As the road curved about the outer verge
of the mountain, the valley far beneath came into
view, with intersecting valleys and transverse
ranges, dense with the growths of primeval wilder-



<pb n="15"/>
OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE I    5
with the tilted strata of great
_.chasms cut in the solid rock
n, traces of some remote cata-
ng thus its throes and tur-
e*en beyond a gaunt profile
- summits that defined its
the ultimate distances
aeemned of a singularly
'ilth the savagery of the
_fd d 'portents of storm might
The little graveyard, which
ed with recognizing eyes, al-
_4-ver before rested upon it, was re-
,1tyi:g hign  the opposite side of
'rost glimmered now on the lowly
kering autumnal sunshine loitered
,them, according to its languid
,. .year.  Shadows of the gray nn-
..lay on the withered grass,
lith.naever a cicada left to break
l .i- A'tuft of red leaves, vagrant
t on one of the primi-
_  there with a decora-
_ L.~i"~, to unaccus-
and few the denizens
and a resting-place, but
of the country- side for
_many   ayear, and somehow the
_ge d to  degree by the reflec-
s . kn.own each other in life, unlike
i cities, and that it was a common
:?e'ihbors, huddled together, en-
_w~~~~*y



<pb n="16"/>
I6    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
It had no discordant effect in the pervasive sense
of gloom, of mighty antagonistic forces with which
the scene was replete; it fostered a realization of
the pitiable minuteness and helplessness of human
nature in the midst of the vastness of inanimate
nature and the evidences of infinite lengths of for-
gotten time, of the long reaches of unimagined his-
tory, eventful, fateful, which the landscape at once
suggested and revealed and concealed.
Like the sudden flippant clatter of castanets in
the pause of some solemn funeral music was the
impression given by the first glimpse along the
winding woodland way of a great flimsy white
building, with its many pillars, its piazzas, its "ob-
servatory," its band-stand, its garish intimations
of the giddy, gay world of a summer hotel. But,
alack I it, too, had its surfeit of woe.
"The guerrillas an' bushwhackers tuk it out on
the old hotel, sure 1" observed Sim Roxby, by way
of introduction. "Thar warn't much fightin' hyar-
abouts, an' few sure-enough soldiers ever kem
along. But wunst in a while a band o' guerrillas
went through like a suddint wind-storm, an' I tell
ye they made things whurl while they war about it.
They made a sorter barracks o' the old place.
Looks some like lightning hed struck it."
He had reined up his horse about one hundred
yards in front of the edifice, where the weed-grown
gravelled drive-carefully tended ten years agone
-had diverged from the straight avenue of pop-
lars, sweeping in a circle around to the broad flight
of steps.
"Though," he qualified abruptly, as if a sudden



<pb n="17"/>
-0? THE FOOT-BRIDGE   17
_idim, "ef ye air countin' on
y spent ter keerful purpose
tSward makin' it ez Bdyez
ilot reply, and for/the first
a covert glance charged
i mould have been earlier
! Bn another man by the
*· ~.}t~ter-infrequent mis-
.cme from an ancient
~?fwotmer colonel, requesting
.it of the old commander to
~atiton, thirty miles distant, to
PiCoSpective purchaser of the
ibf the property. And now as
lthe suspicion which his kind
uiick to entertain was seized
C ooled somehows," he said
J '  Ebn Dundas contem-
e f him concerned
pcthe problems of re-
./u d the painter and
e    evidently neither
..tesgned to despair, as
_! ';foreknowledge of the
_if t'hbe expenditures over the
!pensive, listless melancholy,
his'eyes traversed the long
Lriven by rude hands from their
asly to and fro in the wind,
ed and desolate old place a



<pb n="18"/>
I8    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
spurious air of motion and life. Many of the shut-
ters had been wrenched from their hinges, and
lay rotting on the floors. The ball-room windows
caught on their shattered glass the reflection of the
clouds, and it seemed as if here and there a wan
face looked through at the riders wending along the
weed-grown path. Where so many faces had been
what wonder that a similitude should linger in the
loneliness I The pallid face seemed to draw back as
they glanced up while slowly pacing around the
drive. A rabbit sitting motionless on the front piaz-
za did not draw back, although observing them with
sedate eyes as he poised himself upright on his
haunches, with his listless fore-paws suspended in
the air, and it occurred to Dundas that he was
'probably unfamiliar with the presence of human
beings, and had never heard the crack of a gun. A
great swirl of swallows came soaring out of the big
kitchen chimneys and circled in the sky, darting
down again and again upward. Through an open
passage was a glimpse of a quadrangle, with its
weed-grown spaces and litter of yellow leaves. A
tawny streak, a red fox, sped through it as Dundas
looked. A half-moon, all a-tilt, hung above it. He
saw the glimmer through the bare boughs of the
leafless locust-trees here and there still standing,
although outside on the lawn many a stump bore
token how ruthlessly the bushwhackers had fur-
nished their fires.
"That thar moon's a-hangin' fur rain," said the
mountaineer, commenting upon the aspect of the lu-
minary, which he, too, had noticed as they passed.
"I ain't s'prised none ef we hev fallin' weather



<pb n="19"/>
MS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE   19
-' .the man--by name Morgan
v.charge o' the hotel property
aweek an' better."
* to find himself so suspicious
. mind, with the thought that
bight have reckoned on this
,$irs down yander at Knox-
with all this-wet weather,"
Ijq' Holden he went ter Col-
me tbusiness in court, an' the
thati what with the bredges bein'
-the foad so onsartain an' tricky,
',',ltvalls.  He don't know ye
:.iThe mail-rider hev quit, 'count
fPVor, an' thar's no way ter git
. ,ye air minded ter wait, I'll
.fur yer comp'ny down ter my
;an' Holden he gits back."
ed his obligations, but his
_thelold  hotel, with its
_ windows. Through
'4pRaced opposite in the
_ -iGmpses of the grassy
-with its leafless locust-
e ir* foliage to the autumn
1.was shrilling stridulously
'y and the melancholy moon.
ter put up at the olaid hotel ?"
inherent quickness supplying
answer.
.~e the stranger turned upon him
sive than the casual fragmen-



<pb n="20"/>
20    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
tary attention with which he had half heeded, half
ignored his talk since their first encounter at the
railway station.
"A simple fellow, but good as gold," was the
phrase with which Simeon Roxby had been com-
,mended as guide and in some sort guard.
"Not so simple, perhaps," the sophisticated
man thought as their eyes met. Not so simple but
that the truth must serve. "The colonel suggested
that it might be best," he replied, more alert to the
present moment than his languid preoccupation
-had heretofore permitted.
The answer was good as far as it went. A few
days spent in the old hostelry certainly would serve
well to acquaint the prospective purchaser with
its actual condition and the measures and means
needed for its repair; but as Sim Roxby stood
there, with the cry of the owl shrilling in the des-
ert air, the lonely red sky, the ominous tilted
moon, the doors drearily flapping to and fro as the
wind stole into the forlorn and empty place and
sped back affrighted, he marvelled at the refuge
contemplated.
rI- "I believe there is some of the furniture here
yet. We could contrive to set up a bed from what
/ is left. The colonel could make it all right with
Holden, and I could stay a day or two, as we origi-
. nally planned."
L  "Ye-es.  I don't mind Holden: a man ain't
much in charge of a place ez ain't got a lock or a
key ter bless itself with, an' takes the owel an' the
fox an' the gopher fur boarders; but, ennyhow,
kem with me home ter supper. Mill'cent will hev



<pb n="21"/>
OiJ THE FOOT-BRIDGE  21
C"UIyhows, an' ye need suthin'
en ye up ter move inter sech
. qundas hesitated, but the
taken assent for granted,
·o   a sharp trot. Evidently
Dundas pressed for-
er along the winding
'its long low roof half
iiundergrowth springing
' trees; past the stables;
ottages, strangely staring of
i doors and windows, giv-
ssion of vacancy, a sense
_f tsecret occupancy. If one's
ick enough, were there not
shattered panes - scarcely
:t; he had hardly been so
life; yet he bore through
of espionage, and ever
ly lat the overgrown
aof autumn leaves,
'f ring doors, which
:creaking wails in the
iassure himself of the
l[id took cognizance and
e nt, although sedulously
_s  Sim Roxby; and he was
subtle way, of the relief his
,when they plunged into the
d left the forlorn place behind
ilp which it was situated seemed
*iX



<pb n="22"/>
22    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
an oasis of light in the desert of night in which
the rest of the world lay. From the obscurity of
the forest Dundas saw, through the vistas of the
giant trees, the clustering cottages, the great hotel,
gables and chimneys and tower, stark and dis-
tinct as in some weird dream-light in the midst of
the encircling gloom. The after-glow of sunset
was still aflare on the western windows; the whole
empty place was alight with a reminiscence of its
old aspect-its old gay life. Who knows what
memories were a-stalk there-what semblance of
former times? What might not the darkness
foster, the impunity of desertion, the associations
that inhabited the place with almost the strength
of human occupancy itself? Who knows--who
knows?
He remembered the scene afterward, the im-
pression he received. And from this, he thought,
arose his regret for his decision to take up here
his abiding-place.
The forest shut out the illumined landscape,
and the night seemed indeed at hand; the gigantic
boles of the trees loomed through the encompass-
ing gloom, that was yet a semi-transparent me-
dium, like some dark but clear fluid through which
objects were dimly visible, albeit tinged with its
own sombre hue. The lank, rawboned sorrel had
set a sharp pace, to which the chestnut, after mo-
mentary lagging, as if weary with the day's travel,
responded briskly. He had received in some way
intimations that his companion's corn-crib was
near at hand, and if he had not deduced from
these premises the probability of sharing his fare,



<pb n="23"/>
OIMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE   23
ses served him quite as well as
pit him to the same result. On
,  neck and neck, through the
;ia fire flahed now and again from
; often a splash and a shower
t dashing through the mud-
i   'bad fostered in the shallows.
i . sng boughs came on the
h diestnut shied from a sudden
po|nAt sptinging up in the darkness
wthich the country-bred horse dis-
ias fox-fire, and kept steadily oA, un-
the rotting log where it glowed. Far in
the dank depths of the woods, a Will-
':danced and flickered and lured the
ieye;  The stranger was not sure of the
quality of another light, appearing down
tbe road turned, until the sorrel, making
ous spurt, headed for it, uttering a joyous
e sight.
voiced barking of hounds rose melo-
itp silence, and as the horses burst out
* (i i:stmall clearing, Dundas beheld
ght a half-dozen of the animals
road, one springing over the
!he act of climbing, his fore-paws
t rail, his long neck stretched, and
aboqt in attitudes of observation.
w;_ished to assure himself whether the
his friends was warranted by the
Ebe troubled himself to vault over the
-or four still lingered near the door of
ifawning about a girl who stood on the
¢,t. v  ."
'?I?



<pb n="24"/>
24    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
porch. Her pose was alert, expectant; a fire in the
dooryard, where the domestic manufacture of soap
had been in progress, cast a red flare on the house,
its .appurtenances, the great dark forest looming
all around, and, more than the glow of the hearth
within, lighted up the central figure of the scene.
She was tall, straight, and strong; a wealth of fair
hair was clustered in a knot at the back of her
head, and fleecy tendrils fell over her brow; on it
was perched a soldier's cap; and certainly more
gallant and fearless eyes had never looked out from
under the straight, stiff brim.  Her chin; firm,
round, dimpled, was uplifted as she raised her
head, descrying the horsemen's approach. She
wore a full dark-red skirt, a dark brown waist, and
around her neck was twisted a gray cotton kerchief,
faded to a pale ashen hue, the neutrality of which
somehow aided the delicate brilliancy of the blended
roseate and pearly tints of her face. Was this the
seer of ghosts- Dundas marvelled -this the Mil-
licent whose pallid and troubled phantom already
paced the foot-bridge ?
He did not realize that he had drawn up his
horse suddenly at the sight of her, nor did he no-
tice that his host had dismounted, until Roxby was
at the chestnut's head, ready to lead the animal to
supper in the barn. His evident surprise, his pre-
occupation, were not lost upon Roxby, however.
His hand hesitated on the girth of the chestnut's
saddle when he stood between the two horses in
the barn. He had half intended to disregard the
stranger's declination of his invitation, and stable
the creature. Then he shook his head slowly; the



<pb n="25"/>
OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE    25
'about the new-comer was not
heap o' wuthless cattle 'mongst
,he said; for the war had been
on to his simplicity. ' Let
P1annel expected him ter stay.
e a-hangin' round about
.; ,Keenan ain't a pattern
_,Wtler'ble  well acquainted
ess, an' I know his
: both' sets o' gran'daddies
pa?'i   . could tell ye exac'ly
.  got his nose an' his mouth
L heep's-eyes o' his'n, an' nigh
_otced Em'ry never thunk afore
Riit' acquainted with him. He
to well
Ri-j'n  d through the open door
in dscape.  Horizontal gray
across the pearly spaces
stubble gleamed among
_.4erl field, still striped
_orest encircled the
:.t as astir among
earmed through the
.I"of, the fire still flared
t..The dooryard, and the
d.~itten by a high cracked
iim that his mother had per.
tt  stranger at the gate, and
min g him.
_to the door, where the girl still
& n in the shadow. Dundas
passed her, following his aged
_5,Z~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~,,.



<pb n="26"/>
26    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
hostess into the low room, all bedight with the
firelight of a huge chimney-place, and comfortable
with the realization of a journey's end. The wil-
derness might stretch its weary miles around, the
weird wind wander in the solitudes, the star look
coldly on unmoved by aught it beheld, the moon
show sad portents, but at the door they all failed,
for here waited rest and peace and human com-
panionship and the sense of home.
"Take a cheer, stranger, an' make yerself at
home. Powerful glad ter see ye-wa 'feard night
would overtake ye. Ye fund the water tbler'ble
high in all the creeks an' sech, I reckon, an' fords
shifty an' onsartain. Yes, sir. Fall rains kern on
earlier'n common, an' more'n we need. Wisht we
could divide it with that thar drought we had in
the summer. Craps war cut toler'ble short, sir-
toler'ble short."
Mrs. Roxby's spectacles beamed upon him with
an expression of the utmost benignity as the fire-
light played on the lenses, but her eyes peering
over them seemed endowed in some sort with in-
dependence of outlook. It was as if from behind
some bland mask a critical observation was poised
for unbiased judgment. He felt in some degree
under surveillance. But when a light step heralded
an approach he looked up, regardless of the be-
trayal of interest, and bent a steady gaze upon
Millicent as she paused in the doorway.
And as she stood there, distinct in the firelight
and outlined against the black background of the
night, she seemed some modern half-military ideal
of Diana, with her two gaunt hounds beside her,



<pb n="27"/>
OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE    27
-vaguely glimpsed at her heels
outline and chiselling of her
*strong, supple figure, the look
,i 'her eyes, and the soldier's
H Ier face so impressed itself
,seemed to have seen her
lance to a picture of a
kiDoreign gallery-he could
:, "a remnant of a tourist's
ins; a half-realized reminis-
"with an uneasy sense of recog-
F ', '...F  . X
cent I home agin !" Roxby cried, in
as he entered at the back door op-
at sorter topknot is that ye got on ?"
"l ooking jocosely at her head-gear.
p her hand with an expression of
eip red flush dyed her cheek as she
t d " I forgot 'twar thar," she mur-
.Then, with a sudden rush of
:t ;ofi: "'Twar granny's fault.
_tso ez ter see which -one
Ithe old woman, with a
VOce, "'I los' fpwer sons in
heer got the fambly favor."
met me know ez I war a-perlitin'
'men's gear yit," the girl mut-
the cap on a prong of the deer
..rested the rifle of the master of
Hadclouded at the mention of the
gone out from the mountains
_.*.~~~T1~.V . .



<pb n="28"/>
28    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
never to return, leaving to their mother's aching
heart only the vague comfort of an elusive resem-
blance in a girl's face; but as he noted Millicent's
pettish manner, and divined her mortification be-
cause of her unseemly head-gear in the stranger's
presence, he addressed her again in that jocose tone
without which he seldom spoke to her.
"Warn't you-uns apologizin' ter me t'other day
fur not bein' a nephew 'stiddier a niece? Looked
sorter like a nephew ter-night."
She shook her head, covered now only with its
own charming tresses waving in thick undulations
to the coil at the nape of her neck -a trifle di-
shevelled from the rude haste with which the cap
had been torn off.
Roxby had seated himself, and with his elbows
on his knees he looked up at her with a teasing
jocularity, such as one might assume toward a
child.
"Ye war," he declared, with affected solemnity
-" ye war 'pologizin' fur not bein' a nephew, an'
'lowed ef ye war a nephew we could go a-huntin'
tergether, an' ye could holp me in all my quar'ls
an' fights. I been aging some lately, an' ef I war
ter go ter the settlemint an' git inter a fight I
mought not be able ter hold my own. Think what
'twould be ter a pore old man ter hev a dutiful
nephew step up an' "-he doubled his fists and
squared off-"jes' let daylight through some o'
them cusses. An' didn't ye say "-he dropped his
belligerent attitude and pointed an insistent finger
at her, as if to fix the matter in her recollection-
"ef ye war a nephew 'stiddier a niece ye could fire



<pb n="29"/>
S pF THE FOOT-BRIDGE     29
'yer eyes? An' I told ye then
yer aim mightily. I told ye
mortified ef I hed a nephew.
ter :keep the noise out'n his
' aifle. The tale would go
, it the settlemint."
1upon him with the fixity
child who is entertained
,s jovial wiles. A flash of
.tr,;, and the low, gurgling,
was' pleasant to hear. She was
;than a .child to these bereft old
1iem acherished as naught else on
.l yeu-wasr," he went on, affecting
4I.scu~ssion, and in reality oblivious
,E the guest-" didn't I tell ye ez
:a nephew 'stiddier a niece ye
icttle ez Em'ry Keenan a-dan-
-like a puppy ye can't gin
t 'lost an' ye ain't.got the
d with scorn. "Yer
ter make a ch'ice fur
_yar mounting gals-Par-
y¥ M'ria Matthews, or one
" 8Waal, sir, I'd ruther be yer
ty Keenan air like a puppy un-
rt gin away, an' won't git lost,
heart ter kill." She laughed
_white teeth. She evidently rel-
o   of the persistent adherence of
n.( "But which one o' these



<pb n="30"/>
30    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
hyar gals would ye recommend ter yer nephew ter
marry-ef ye bed a nephew ?"
She looked at him with flashing eyes, conscious
of having propounded a poser.
He hesitated for a moment. Then-" I'm sur-
rounded," he said, with a laugh. "Ez I couldn't
find a wife fur myself, I can't ondertake ter recom-
mend one ter my nephew. Mighty fine boy he'd
hev beer, an' saaft-spoken an' perlite ter aged men
-not sassy an' makin' game o' old uncles like a
niece. Mighty fine boy 1"
"Ye air welcome ter him," she said, with a sim-
ulation of scorn, as she turned away to the table.
Whether it were the military cap she had worn,
or the fancied resemblance to the young soldiers,
never to grow old, who had gone forth from this
humble abode to return no more, there was still to
the guest's mind the suggestion of the vivandiere
about her as she set the table and spread upon it
the simple fare. To and from the fireplace she was
followed by two or three of the younger dogs, their
callowness expressed in their lack of manners and
perfervid interest in the approaching meal. This
induced their brief journeys back and forth, albeit
embarrassed by their physical conformation, short
turns on four legs not being apparently the easy
thing it would seem from so much youthful supple-
ness. The dignity of the elder hounds did not
suffer them to move, but they looked on from erect
postures about the hearth with glistening eyes and
slobbering jaws.
Ever and anon the deep blue eyes of Millicent
were lifted to the outer gloom, as if she took note



<pb n="31"/>
OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE     31
She showed scant interest in
gaze seldom left her as he sat
was a handsome man, his
d by the firelight, and it
e felt a certain pique, an
that his presence was so
the estimation of any
iof ;the feminine sex.
ed sucl absolute
i r.- away look beto-
'ihd forth with her young
i[ils, or stood at the table
'g bread, the dogs poised
legs to better view the ap-
wlrhentever she turned her
laid their heads languish-
i d her that supper could
f thabuon them. One, to
~~lt ,ed   his fore-paw on.
d.d toes leaving
thecoarse white
:  , sportsman, and
nicety where
_:vbeggar was con-
of his own troubles
dreary aspect of the
'from his accustomed
tComfort, the poverty and
ndi ngs.  He was sorry
-   longer lease of Roxby's
in his mind to reconsider
i..in proffered. Her attitude,
-her environment, all appealed
_        {        ,



<pb n="32"/>
32    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
to his sense of beauty, his interest, his curiosity,
as little ever had done heretofore. Slice after slice
of the firm fragrant bread was deftly cut and laid
on the plate, as again and again she lifted her eyes
with a look that might seem to expect to rest on
summer in the full flush of a June noontide with-
out, rather than on the wan, wintry night sky and
the plundered, quaking woods, while the robber
wind sped on his raids hither and thither so swiftly
that none might follow, so stealthily that none might
hinder. A sudden radiance broke upon her face, a
sudden shadow fell on the firelit floor, and there
was entering at the doorway a tall, lithe young
mountaineer, whose first glance, animated with a
responsive brightness, was for the girl, but whose
punctilious greeting was addressed to the old
woman.
"Howdy, Mis' Roxby-howdy?    Air yer rheu-
matics mendin' enny ?" he demanded, with the con-
dolent suavity of the would-be son-in-law, or grand-
son-in-law, as the case may be. And he hung with
a transfixed interest upon her reply, prolix and dis-
cursive according t6 the wont of those who cultivate
"rheumatics," as if each separate twinge racked
his own sympathetic and filial sensibilities. Not
until the tale was ended did he set his gun against
the wall and advance to the seat which Roxby had
indicated with the end of the stick he was whittling.
He observed the stranger with only slight interest,
till Dundas drew up his chair opposite at the table.
There the light from the tallow dip, guttering in
the centre, fell upon his handsome face and eyes,
his carefully tended beard and hair, his immaculate



<pb n="33"/>
'TIRE FOOT-BRIDGE   33
,the seal-ring on his taper
"' thought Emory Keenan.
" t six feet high I"
_ marvelling that they so
t which this effemi-
D, forgetting that. it
even observe it. In
.before the war, they
"in garb and equi-
W/  th e jeuwnsse dart who
X iose halcyon times, and
'li/details. It might be that
_ such flimsy daintiness.
diy with a sense of infe-
'   O ine of his fingers had
",and. with the first twinge
ung to look very red
.t.iaad just remembered
. . it, once more at
;l.ow, deferential,
lightened and
ie'med somehow
ie as she looked
.'white eyelids and
_ gbe  was standing be-
eplate of bread. Then,
,oiselessly on to the others.
umsy, for he had stretched
offDer a morsel to a friend of
e  was on terms of exceeding
ted  members of the house
-Frt



<pb n="34"/>
34    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
hold-and in his absorption not withdrawing it as
swiftly as one accustomed to canine manners should
do, he had his frosted finger well mumbled before
he could, as it were, repossess himself of it.
" I wonder what they charge fur iron over yander
at the settlemint, Em'ry?" observed Sim Roxby
presently.
"Dun'no', sir," responded Emory, glumly, his sul-
len black eyes full of smouldering fire-" hevin' no
call ter know, ez I ain't no blacksmith."
" I war jes' wonderin' ef tenpenny nails didn't
cost toler'ble high ez reg'lar feed," observed Roxby,
gravely.
But his mother laughed out with a gleeful cracked
treble, always a ready sequence of her son's rustic
sallies. " He got ye that time, Em'ry," she cried.
A forced smile crossed Emory's face. He tossed
back his tangled dark hair with a gasp that was
like the snort of an unruly horse submitting to the
inevitable, but with restive projects in his brain.
" I let the dog hyar ketch my finger whilst feedin'
him," he said. His plausible excuse for the ten-
penny expression was complete; but he added, his
darker mood recurring instantly, "An', Mis' Roxby,
I hev put a stop ter them ez hev tuk ter callin' me
Em'ly, I hev."
The old woman looked up, her small wrinkled
mouth round and amazed. " I never called ye
Emily," she declared.
Swift repentance seized him.
"Naw, 'm," he said, with hurried propitiation.
"I 'lowed ye did."
"I didn't," said the old woman. " But ef I war



<pb n="35"/>
~"        WTHE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGZ    35
ter find it toothsome ter call ye ' Emily,' I duino'
h6t )e air goin' ter pervent it. Ye can't go gun-
Xb' tr me, like ye done fur the men at the mill, fur
ye' Emily."'
,>!Ew;, Mis' Roxby !" he could only exclaim, in
;  ' owrror and contrition at this picture he had
: |   conjured up. "Ye air welcome ter call me
tiything ye air a mind ter," he protested.
',And then he gasped once more. The eyes of
the guest, contneptuous, amused, seeing through
him, were fixed upon him. And he himself had
furnished the lily-handed stranger with the informa-
.tion that he had been stigmatized s Em'ly " in the
banter of his associates, until he had taken up arms,
as it were, to repress this derision.
"It takes powerful little ter put ye down, Em'ry,"
said Roxby, with rallying laughter. "Mam hev sent
ye skedaddlin' in no time at all. I don't b'lieve the
Lord made woman out'n the man's rib. He made
her out'n the man's backbone; fur the man ain't
hed none ter speak of sence."
!      Millicent, with a low gurgle of laughter, sat down
'   Bide Emory at the table, and fixed her eyes, soft-
'  gited with mirth, upon him. The others too
lS, ughed, the stranger with a flattering intona-
ibut young Keenan looked at her wvith a dumb
i  jeig humility that did not altogether fail of
it its      , for she busied herself to help his plate
'   with aU uir of proprietorship as if he were a child,
and returned it with a smile very radiant and suffi-
cient at close range. She then addressed herself
to her own meal. The young dogs under the ta-
ble ceased to beg; and gambolled and gnawed and
I,.



<pb n="36"/>
36    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
tugged at her stout little shoes, the sound of their
callow mirthful growls rising occasionally above the
talk. Sometimes she rose again to wait on the ta-
ble, when they came leaping out after her, jumping
and catching at her skirts, now and then casting
themselves on the ground prone before her feet,
and rolling over and over in the sheer joy of ex-
istence.
The stranger took little part in the talk at the
table. Never a question was asked him as to his
mission in the mountains, or the length of his stay,
his vocation, or his home. That extreme courtesy
of the mountaineers, exemplified in their singular
abstinence from any expressions of curiosity, ac-
cepted such account of himself as he had volun-
teered, and asked for no more. In the face of this
standard of manners any inquisitiveness on his
part, such as might have elicited points of inter-
est for his merely momentary entertainment, was
tabooed. Nevertheless, silent though he was for
the most part, the relish with which he listened, his
half-covert interest in the girl, his quick observation
of the others, the sudden very apparent enlivening of
his mental atmosphere, betokened that his quarters
were not displeasing to him. It seemed only a short
time before the meal was ended and the circle all,
save Millicent, with pipes alight before the fire again.
The dogs, well fed, had ranged themselves on the
glowing hearth, lying prone on the hot stones; one
old hound, however, who conserved the air of listen-
ing to the conversation, sat upright and nodded
from time to time, now and again losing his balance
and tipping forward in a truly human fashion, then



<pb n="37"/>
-OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE     37
ci;rcle with an open luminous
,yhe had not slept.
1 within, but outside the
ly. Once more Dundas
i"ed the invitation to re-
iewhat tentative inten-
!to return to the hotel.
his resolution as
an insistence. The
ement at the mnere
*1" weere, in the old hotel.
le government here, not-
Bygeri-n that Eve was made
*as very apparent in their
~~    alacrity with which they
tices, according to his di-
s stay more com-
' ,hoip," he said, heart-
irperceiving that the
.i  presence was
b etween himself
was pitia-
. still not without
1i go too. Hence
once in the saddle,
wh'ich his former' dis-
-d: promise.
_ 0uite  element. The twi-
eir heads, as they galloped
the bare boughs of the
--~so high above their heads
un~accustomed to these great



<pb n="38"/>
38    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
growths, the sound seemed not of the vicinage, but
unfamiliar, uncanny, and more than once he checked
his horse to listen. As they approached the moun-
tain's verge and overlooked the valley and beheld
the sky, the sense of the predominance of darkness
was redoubled. The ranges gloomed against the
clearer spaces, but a cloud, deep gray with curling
white edges, was coming up from the west, with an
invisible convoy of vague films, beneath which the
stars, glimmering white points, disappeared one by
one. The swift motion of this aerial fleet sailing
with the wind might be inferred from the seeming-
ly hurried pace of the moon making hard for the
west. Still bright was the illumined segment, but
despite its glitter the shadowy space of the full
disk was distinctly visible, its dusky field spangled
with myriads of minute, dully golden points. Down,
down it took its way in haste-in disordered fright,
it seemed, as if it had no heart to witness the storm
which the wind and the clouds foreboded-to fairer
skies somewhere behind those western mountains.
Soon even its vague light would encroach no more
upon the darkness. The great hotel would be in-
visible, annihilated as it were in the gloom, and not
even thus dimly exist, glimmering, alone, forlorn,
so incongruous to the wilderness that it seemed
even now some mere figment of the brain, as the
two horsemen came with a freshened burst of speed
along the deserted avenue and reined up beside a
small gate at the side.
"No use ter ride all the way around," observed
Emory Keenan. "Mought jes ez well 'light an'
hitch hyar."



<pb n="39"/>
.  OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE     39
the escort of a great gro-
e hrew himself from his horse
Eve r a decrepit hitching-post
_ essayed the latch of the
,up at Dundas, the moon-
. a smile as it resisted
.fellow when rid of
.His eyes, mouth,
_teliable and recog-
|b, atures, and statuesque
the drooping curves of
was tall, with the slen-
his evident weight and
d and lithe and small
-shoulders, whose play'
the gate was not alto-
_nu t jeans coat belted
ieeathern belt. His
I ;ag. legs, and jingled
_   His stalwart
.the obdurate
_,   with a rasping
it swung slowly
gazing for a mo-
hinges. "How long
_tbeean opened afore ?" he
_At Dundas with a smile.
struck a chill to the stran-
se of the loneliness of the
Elied him with a sort of awe.
X.i derness itself was not more



<pb n="40"/>
40    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
daunting than these solitary tiers of piazzas, these
vacant series of rooms and corridors, all instinct
with vanished human presence, all alert with ech-
oes of human voices. A step, a laugh, a rustle of
garments-he could have sworn he heard them at
any open doorway as he followed his guide along
the dim moonlit piazza, with its pillars duplicated
at regular intervals by the shadows on the floor.
How their tread echoed down these lonely ways I
From the opposite side of the house he heard Kee-
nan's spurs jangling, his soldierly stride sounding
back as if their entrance had roused barracks.
He winced once to see his own shadow with its
stealthier movement. It seemed painfully furtive.
For the first time during the evening his jaded mind,
that had instinctively sought the solace of contem-
plating trifles, reverted to its own tormented proc-
esses. "Am I not hiding ?" he said to himself, in
a sort of sarcastic pity of his plight.
The idea seemed never to enter the mind of the
transparent Keenan. He laughed out gayly as they
turned into the weed-grown quadrangle, and the
red fox that Dundas had earlier observed slipped
past him with affrighted speed and dashed among
the shadows of the dense shrubbery of the old
lawn without. Again and again the sound rang
back from wall to wall, first with the jollity of
seeming imitation, then with an appalled effect
sinking to silence, and suddenly rising again in a
grewsome staccato that suggested some terrible un-
earthly laughter, and bore but scant resemblance
to the hearty mirth which had evoked it. Keenan
paused and looked back with friendly gleaming



<pb n="41"/>
THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE         41
eyes. "Oughter been a leetle handier with these
hyar consarns," he said, touching the pistols in his
belt.
It vaguely occurred to Dundas that the young
man went strangely heavily armed for an evening
visit at a neighbor's house. But it was a lawless
country and lawless times, and the sub-current of
suggestion did not definitely fix itself in his mind
until he remembered it later. He was looking into
each vacant open doorway, seeing the still moon-
light starkly white upon the floor; the cobwebbed
and broken window-panes, through which a section
of leafless trees beyond was visible; bits of furni-
ture here and there, broken by the vandalism of
the guerillas. Now and then a scurrying move-
ment told of a gopher, hiding too, and on one
mantel-piece, the black fireplace yawning below,
sat a tiny tawny-tinted owl, whose motionless bead-
like eyes met his with a stare of stolid surprise. Af-
ter he had passed, its sudden ill-omened cry set
the sflence to shuddering.
Keenan, leading the way, paused in displeasure.
" I wisht I hed viewed that critter," he said, glumly.
" I'd hev purvented that screechin' ter call the devil,
sure. It's jes a certain sign o' death."
He was about to turn, to wreak his vengeance,
perchance. But the bird, sufficiently fortunate it-
self, whatever woe it presaged for others, suddenly
took its awkward flight through sheen and shadow
across the quadrangle, and when they heard its
cry again it came from some remote section of the
building, with a doleful echo as a refrain.
The circumstance was soon forgotten by Kee-



<pb n="42"/>
42    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
nan. He seemed a happy, mercurial, lucid nature,
and he began presently to dwell with interest on
the availability of the old music-stand in the centre
of the square as a manger. " Hyar," he said, strik-
ing the rotten old structure with a heavy hand, which
sent a quiver and a thrill through all the timbers-
"hyar's whar the guerillas always hitched thar
beastises. Thar feed an' forage war piled up thar
on the fiddlers' seats. Ye can't do no better'n ter
pattern arter them, till ye git ready ter hev fiddlers
an' sech a-sawin' away in hyar agin."
And he sauntered away from the little pavilion,
followed by Dundas, who had not accepted his sug-
gestion of a room on the first floor as being less
liable to leakage, but finally made choice of an inner
apartment in the second story. He looked hard
at Keenan, when he stood in the doorway survey-
ing the selection. The room opened into a cross-
hall which gave upon a broad piazza that was lat-
ticed; tiny squares of moonlight were all sharply
drawn on the floor, and, seen through a vista of
gray shadow, seemed truly of a gilded lustre.
From the windows of this room on a court-yard
no light could be visible to any passer-by without.
Another door gave on an inner gallery, and through
its floor a staircase came up from the quadrangle
close to the threshold. Dundas wondered if these
features were of possible significance in Keenan's
estimation. The young mountaineer turned sud-
denly, and snatching up a handful of slats broken
from the shutters, remarked:
"Let's see how the chimbly draws-that's the
main p'int."



<pb n="43"/>
THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE     43
There was no defect in the chimney's constitu-
tion. It drew admirably, and with the white and
red flames dancing in the fireplace, two or three
chairs, more or less disabled, a table, and an uphol-
stered lounge gathered at random from the rooms
near at hand, the possibility of sojourning comfort-
ably for a few days in the deserted hostelry seemed
amply assured;
Once more Dundas gazed fixedly at the face of
the young mountaineer, who still bent on one knee
on the hearth, watching with smiling eyes the tri-
umphs of his fire-making. It seemed to him after-
wards that his judgment was strangely at fault; he
perceived naught of import in the shallow bright-
ness of the young man's eyes, like the polished sur-
face of jet; in the instability of his jealousy, his
anger; in his hap-hazard, mercurial temperament.
Once he might have noted how flat were the spaces
beneath the eyes, how few were the lines that de-
fined the lid, the socket, the curve of the cheek-
bone, the bridge of the nose, and how expression-
less. It was doubtless the warmth and glow of
the fire, the clinging desire of companionship, the
earnest determination to be content, pathetic in
one who had bit little reason for optimism, that
caused him to ignore the vacillating glancing
moods that successively swayed Keenan, strong
while they lasted, but with scanty augury because
of their evanescence. He was like some newly
discovered property in physics of untried poten-
tialities, of which nothing is ascertained but its un-
certainties.
And yet he seemed to Dundas a simple country



<pb n="44"/>
44    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
fellow, good-natured in the main, unsuspicious, and  i
helpful. So, giving a long sigh of relief and fatigue, 
Dundas sank down in one of the large arm-chairs
that had once done duty for the summer loungers
on the piazza. 
In the light of the fire Emory was once more 
looking at him. A certain air of distinction, a 
grace and ease of movement, an indescribable 
quality of bearing which he could not discrimi- 
nate, yet which he instinctively recognized as su-
perior, offended him in some sort. He noticed
again the ring on the stranger's hand as he drew
off his glove. Gloves! Emory Keenan would as
soon have thought of wearing a petticoat. Once
more the fear that these effeminate graces found
favor in Millicent's estimation smote upon his
heart. It made the surface of his opaque eyes
glisten as Dundas rose and took up a pipe and to-
bacco.pouch which he had laid on the mantel-
piece, his full height and fine figure shown in the
changed posture.
"Ez tall ez me, ef not taller, an', by gum  a good
thirty pound heavier," Emory reflected, with. a
growing dismay that he had not those stalwart
claims to precedence in height and weight as an
offset to the smoother fascinations of the stranger's
polish.
He had risen hastily to his feet: He would not
linger to smoke fraternally over the fire, and thus
cement friendly relations.
" I guided him hyar, like old Sim Roxby axed me
ter do, an' that's all. I ain't keerin' ef I never lay
eyes on him again," he said to himself.



<pb n="45"/>
THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE     45
':"    "Going ?" said Dundas, pleasantly, noticing th
motion. "You'll look in again, won't you ?"
"Wunst in a while, I reckon," drawled Keenan,
' a trifle thrown off his balance by this courtesy.
He paused at the door, looking back over his
shoulder for a moment at the illumined room, then
i stepped out into the night, leaving the tenant of the
lonely old house filling his pipe by the fire.
His tread rang along the deserted gallery, and
sudden echoes came tramping down the vacant halls
as if many a denizen of the once populous place was
once more astir within its walls. Long after Dun-
das had heard him spring from the lower piazza
to the ground, and the rusty gate clang behind him,
vague footfalls were audible far away, and were still
again, and once more a pattering tread in some
gaunt and empty apartment near at hand, faint and
fainter yet, till he hardly knew whether it were the
reverberations of sound or fancy that held his senses
in thrall.
And when all was still and silent at last he felt
less solitary than whei) these elusive tokens of hu-
man presence were astir.
Late, late he sat over the dwindling embers. His
mind, no longer diverted by the events of the day,
recurred with melancholy persistence to a theme
which even they, although fraught with novelty and
presage of danger, had not altogether crowded out.
And as the sense of peril dulled, the craft of soph-
istry grew clumsy. Remorse laid hold upon him in
these dim watches of the night. Self-reproach had
found him out here, defenceless so far from the spe-
cious wiles and ways of men. All the line of provo-
:



<pb n="46"/>
l 4
46    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
cations seemed slight, seemed naught, as he reviewed 
.them and balanced them against a human life. True,
it was not in some mad quarrel that his skill had X
taken it and had served to keep his own-a duel, a 
fair fight, strictly regular according to the code of 
"honorable men" for ages past-and he sought to 
argue that it was doubtless but the morbid sense of
the wild fastnesses without, the illimitable vastness 
of the black nightthe unutterable indurability of nat-
ure to the influences of civilization, which made it
taste like murder. He had brought away even from
the scene of action, to which he had gone with de-
corous deliberation-his worldly affairs arranged 
for the possibility of death, his will made, his voli-
tion surrendered, and his sacred honor in the hands
of his seconds- a humiliating recollection of the
sudden revulsion of the aspect of all things; the
criminal sense of haste with which he was hurried
away after that first straight shot; the agitation,
nay, the fright of his seconds; their eagerness to be
swiftly rid of him, their insistence that he should go
away for a time, get out of the country, out of the
embarrassing purview of the law, which was prone
to regard the matter as he himself saw it now,
and which had an ugly trick of calling things by
their right names in the sincere phraseology of
an indictment. And thus it was that he was here,
remote from all the usual lines of flight, with his
affectation of being a possible purchaser for the
old hotel, far from the railroad, the telegraph,
even the postal service.  Some time-. soon, in-
deed, it might be, when the first flush of excite-
ment and indignation should be overpast, and the



<pb n="47"/>
THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE    47
law, like a barking dog that will not bite, should
have noisily exhausted the gamut of its devoirs-he
would go back and live according to his habit in his
wonted place, as did other men whom he had known
to be "called out," and who had survived their op-
ponents. Meantime he heard the ash crumble; he
saw the lighted room wane from glancing yellow to
a dull steady red, and so to dusky brown; he marked
the wind rise, and die away, and come again, bang-
ing the doors of the empty rooms, and setting tim-
bers all strangely to creaking as under sudden tram-
pling feet; then lift into the air with a rustling sound
like the stir of garments and the flutter of wings,
calling out weirdly in the great voids of the upper
atmosphere.
He had welcomed the sense of fatigue earlier in
the evening, for it promised sleep. Now it had
slipped away from him. He was strong and young,
and the burning sensation that the frosty air had
left on his face was the only token of the long jour-
ney. It seemed as if he would never sleep again
as he lay on the lounge watching the gray ash grad-
ually overgrow the embers, till presently only a
vague dull glow gave intimation of the position of
the hearth in the room. And then, bereft of this
dim sense of companionship, he stared wide-eyed
in the darkness, feeling the only creature alive and
awake in all the world. No; the fox was suddenly
barking within the quadrangle -a strangely wild
and alien tone. And presently he heard the ani-
mal trot past his door on the piazza, the cushioned
footfalls like those of a swift dog. He thought with
a certain anxiety of the tawny tiny owl that had sat



<pb n="48"/>
48    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
like a stuffed ornament on the mantel-piece of a
neighboring room, and he listened with a quaking
vicarious presentiment of woe for the sounds of
capture and despair. He was sensible of waiting
and hoping for the fox's bootless return, when he
suddenly lost consciousness.
How long he slept he did not know, but it seemed
only a momentary respite from the torture of
memory, when, still in the darkness, thousands of
tremulous penetrating sounds were astir, and with
a great start he recognized the rain on the roof.
It was coming down in steady torrents that mflade
the house rock before the tumult of his plunging
heart was still, and he was longing again for the for-
getfulness of sleep. In vain. The hours dragged
by; the windows slowly, slowly defined their dull
gray squares against the dull gray day dawning
without. The walls that had been left with only
the first dark coat of plaster, awaiting another sea-
son for the final decoration, showed their drapings
of cobweb, and the names and pencilled scribblings
with which the fancy of transient bushwhackers had
chosen to deface them. The locust-trees within the
quadrangle drearily tossed their branches to and
fro in the wind, the bark very black and distinct
against the persistent gray lines of rain and the
white walls of the galleried buildings opposite; the
gutters were brimming, roaring along like miniature
torrents; nowhere was the fox or the owl to be
seen. Somehow their presence would have been
a relief-the sight of any living thing reassuring.
As he walked slowly along the deserted piazzas,
in turning sudden corners, again and again he



<pb n="49"/>
THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE    49
paused, expecting that something, some one, was
approaching to meet him. When at last he mount-
ed his horse, that had neighed gleefully to see
him, and rode away through the avenue and along
the empty ways among the untenanted summer cot-
tages, all the drearier and more forlorn because of
the rain, he felt as if he had left an aberration,
some hideous dream, behind, instead of the stark
reality of the gaunt and vacant and dilapidated
old house.
The transition to the glow and cheer of Sim
Roxby's fireside was like a rescue, a restoration.
The smiling welcome in the women's eyes, their
soft drawling voices, with mellifluous intonations
that gave a value to each commonplace simple
word, braced his nerves like a tonic. It might have
been only the contrast with the recollections of the
night, with the prospect visible through the open
door-the serried lines of rain dropping aslant from
the gray sky and elusively outlined against the dark
masses of leafless woods that encircled the clear-
ing; the dooryard half submerged with puddles of
a clay-brown tint, embossed always with myriads of
protruding drops of rain, for however they melted
away the downpour renewed them, and to the eye
they were stationary, albeit pervaded with a con-
tinual tremor-but somehow he was cognizant of a
certain coddling tenderness in the old woman's
manner that might have been relished by a petted
child, an unaffected friendliness in the girl's clear
eyes. They made him sit close to the great wood
fire; the blue and yellow flames gushed out from
the piles of hickory logs, and the bed of coals
4



<pb n="50"/>
50    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
gleamed at red and white heat beneath. They took
his hat to carefully dry it, and they spread out his |
cloak on two chairs at one side of the room, where :i
it dismally dripped. When he ventured to sneeze, i.
Mrs. Roxby compounded and administered a "yerb i
tea," a sovereign remedy against colds, which he !
tasted on compulsion and in great doubt, and '
swallowed with alacrity and confidence, finding its '
basis the easily recognizable "toddy." He had
little knowledge how white and troubled his face
had looked as he came in from the gray day, how
strongly marked were those lines of sharp mental
distress, how piteously apparent was his mute ap-
peal for sympathy and comfort.
"Mill'cent," said the old woman in the shed-room,
as they washed and wiped the dishes after the cozy
breakfast of venison and corn-dodgers and honey
and milk, "that thar man hev run agin the law,
sure's ye air born."
Millicent turned her reflective fair face, that
seemed whiter and more delicate in the damp
dark day, and looked doubtfully out over the
fields, where the water ran in steely lines in the
furrows.
" Mus' hev been by accident or suthin'. He ain't
no hardened sinner."
" Shucks I" the old woman commented upon her
reluctant acquiescence. "I ain't keerin' for the
law   'Tain't none o' my job. The tomfool men
make an' break it. Ennybody ez hev seen this war
air obleeged to take note o' the wickedness o' men
in gineral. This hyer man air a sorter pitiful sin-
ner, an' he hev got a look in his eyes that plumb



<pb n="51"/>
.[        THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE     51
teches my heart. I 'ain't got no call ter know
nuthin' 'bout the law, bein' a 'oman an' naterally
ignorunt. I dun'no' ez he hev run agin it."
"Mus' hev been by accident," said Millicent,
dreamily, still gazing over the sodden fields.
The suspicion did nothing to diminish his com-
fort or their cordiality. The morning dragged by
without change in the outer aspects. The noontide
dinner came and went without Roxby's return, for the
report of the washing away of a bridge some miles
distant down the river had early called him out to the
scene of the disaster, to verify in his own interests
the rumor, since he had expected to haul his wheat
to the settlement the ensuing day. The afternoon
found the desultory talk still in progress about the
fire, the old woman alternately carding cotton and
nodding in her chair in the corner; the dogs ey-
ing the stranger, listening much of the time with
the air of children taking instruction, only occa-
sionally wandering out-of-doors, the floor here
and there bearing the damp imprint o2 their feet;
and Millicent on her knees in the other corner, the
firelight on her bright hair, her delicate cheek, her
quickly glancing eyes, as she deftly moulded bul-
lets.
"Uncle Sim hed ter s'render his shootin'-irons,"
she explained, "an' he 'ain't got no ca'tridge-loadin'
i  ones lef. So he makes out with his old muzzle-
loadin' rifle that he hed afore the war, an' I moulds
his bullets for him rainy days."
As she held up a moulded ball and dexterously
clipped off the surplus lead, the gesture was so
culinary in its delicacy that one of the dogs in



<pb n="52"/>
52    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE 
front of the fire extended his head, making a long. 
neck, with a tentative sniff and a glistening glut-:5
tonous eye.
"Ef I swallered enny mo' lead, I wouldn't take 
it hot, Towse," she said, holding out the bullet for;
canine inspection. "'Tain't healthy !"
But the dog, perceiving the nature of the com-pa
modity, drew back with a look of deep reproach,i
rose precipitately, and with a drooping tail went out '
skulkingly into the wet gray day.
" Towse can't abide a bullet," she observed, " nor
nuthin' 'bout a gun. He got shot wunst a-huntin',
an' he never furgot it. Jes show him a gun an' he
ain't nowhar ter be seen-like he war cotch up in 
the clouds."
- "Good watch-dog, I suppose," suggested Dun-
das, striving to enter into the spirit of her talk.
"Naw; too sp'ilt for a gyard-dog--granny cod- 
dled him so whenst he got shot. He's jest vally'ble
fur his conversation, I reckon," she continued, with
a smile in her eyes. " I dun'no' what else, but he
is toler'ble good company."
The other dogs pressed about her, the heads of
the great hounds as high as her own as she sat
among them on the floor. With bright eyes and
knitted brows they followed the motions of pouring
in the melted metal, the lifting of the bullets from
the mould, the clipping off of the surplus lead, and
the flash of the keen knife.
Outside the sad light waned; the wind sighed
and sighed; the dreary rain fell; the trees clashed
their boughs dolorously together, and their turbu-
lence deadened the sound of galloping horses. As



<pb n="53"/>
THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE      53
Dundas sat and gazed at the girl's intent head, with
its fleecy tendrils and its massive coil, the great
hounds beside her, all emblazoned by the firelight
upon the brown wall near by, with the vast fire-
place at hand, the whole less like reality than some
artist's pictured fancy, he knew naught of a sudden
entrance, until she moved, breaking the spell, and
looked up to meet the displeasure in Roxby's eyes
and the dark scowl on Emory Keenan's face.
That night the wind shifted to the north. Morn-
ing found the chilled world still, ice where the water
had lodged, all the trees incased in glittering garb
that followed the symmetry alike of every bough and
the tiniest twig, and made splendid the splintered
remnants of the lightning-riven. The fields were
laced across from furrow to furrow, in which the fro-
zen water still stood gleamning, with white arabesques
which had known a more humble identity as stubble
and crab-grass; the sky was slate-colored, and from
its sad tint this white splendor gained added values
of contrast. When the sun should shine abroad
much of the effect would be lost in the too dazzling
glister; but the sun did not shine.
All day the gray mood held unchanged. Night
was imperceptibly sifting down upon all this white-
ness, that seemed as if it would not be obscured, as
if it held within itself some property of luminosity,
when Millicent, a white apron tied over her golden
head, improvising a hood, its superfluous fulness
gathered in many folds and pleats around her neck,
fichu-wise, stood beside the ice-draped fodder-stack
and essayed with half-numbed hands to insert a



<pb n="54"/>
54    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
tallow dip into the socket of a lantern, all incrusted.
and clumsy with previous drippings.
"I dun'no' whether I be a-goin' ter need thi;
hyar consarn whilst milkin' or no," she observd
half to herself, half to Emory, who, chewing a straw
somewhat surlily had followed her out for a wori
apart. "The dusk 'pears slow ter-night, but Spot'
mighty late comin' home, an' old Sue air fractiou~
an' contrairy-minded, and feels mighty anxious an '
oneasy 'boutn her calf, that's ez tall ez she is nowa-'
days, an' don't keer no mo' 'bout her mammy 'n a
half-grown human does. I tell her she oughtn't ter
be mad with me, but with the way she brung up her
chile, ez won't notice her-now."
She looked up with a laugh, her eyes and teeth
gleaming; her golden hair still showed its color be-
neath the spotless whiteness of her voluminous head-
gear, and the clear tints of her complexion seemed
all the more delicate and fresh in the snowy pallor of
the surroundings and the grayness of the evening.
"I reckon I'd better take it along," and once more
she addressed herself to the effort to insert the dip
into the lantern.
Emory hardly heard. His pulse was quick. His
eye glittered. He breathed hard as, with both
hands in his pockets, he came close to.her.
"Mill'cent," he said, "I told ye the t'other day
ez ye thunk a heap too much o' that thar stran-
ger-"
"An' I tole ye, bubby, that I didn't think nuthin'
o' nobody but you-uns," she interrupted, with an
effort to placate his jealousy. The little jocularity
which she affected dwindled and died before the



<pb n="55"/>
THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE      55
steady glow of his gaze, and she falteringly looked
at him, her unguided hands futilely fumbling with
the lantern.
"Ye can't fool me," he stoutly asseverated.
( Ye think mo' o' him 'n o' me, kase ye 'low he air
rich, an' book-larned, an' smooth-fingered, an' fini-
fled ez a gal, an' goin' ter buy the hotel. I say,
hotel! Now I'll tell ye what he is-I'll tell ye!
He's a criminal. He's runnin' from the law. He's
hidin' in the old hotel that he's purtendin' ter buy."
She stared wide-eyed and pallid, breathless and
waiting.
He interpreted her expression as doubt, denial.
"It's gospel sure," he cried. "Fur this very
evenin' I met a gang o' men an' the sheriff's deputy
down yander by the sulphur spring 'bout sundown,
an' he 'lowed ez they war a-sarchin' fur a criminal
ez war skulkin' round hyarabout lately-ez they
wanted a man fur hevin' c'mitted murder."
"But ye didn't accuse him, surely; ye hed no
right ter s'picion him. Uncle Sim! Oh, my Lord!
Ye surely wouldn't! Oh, Uncle Sim !"
Her tremulous words broke into a quavering cry
as she caught his arm convulsively, for his face con-
firmed her fears. She thrust him wildly away, and
started toward the house.
" Ye needn't go tattlin' on me," he said, roughly
pushing her aside. "I'll tell Mr. Roxby myself. I
ain't 'shamed o' what I done. I'll tell him. I'll
tell him myself." And animated with this intention
to forestall her disclosure, his long strides bore him
swiftly past and into the house.
It seemed to him that he lingered there only a
/



<pb n="56"/>
56    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE 
moment or two, for Roxby was not at the cabin, and
he said nothing of the quarrel to the old woman.
Already his heart had revolted against his treachw.
ery, and then there came to him the further reflec- 
tion that he did not know enough to justify sus-i:f
picion. Was not the stranger furnished with the
fullest credentials--a letter to Roxby from the ;;
Colonel? Perhaps he had allowed his jealousy to
endanger the man, to place him in jeopardy even of 
his life should he.resist arrest.
Keenan tarried at the house merely long enough
to devise a plausible excuse for his sudden excited
entrance, and then took his way back to the barn-
yard.
It was vacant. The cows still stood lowing at
the bars; the sheep cowered together in their shed;
the great whitened cone of the fodder-stack gleamed
icily in the purple air; beside it lay the lantern
where Millicent had cast it aside. She was gone !
He would not believe it till he had run to the
barn, calling her name in the shadowy place, while
the horse at his manger left his corn to look over
the walls of his stall with inquisitive surprised eyes,
luminous in the dusk. He searched the hen-house,
where the fowls on their perches crowded close be-
cause of the chill of the evening. He even ran to
the bars and looked down across the narrow ravine
to which the clearing sloped. Beyond the chasm-
like gorge he saw presently on the high ascent op-
posite footprints that had broken the light frost-
like coating of ice on the dead leaves and moss-
climbing footprints, swift, disordered. He looked
back again at the lantern where Millicent had flung



<pb n="57"/>
THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE    57
it in her haste. Her mission was plain now. She
had gone to warn Dundas. She had taken a direct
line through the woods. She hoped to forestall the
deputy sheriff and his posse, following the circuit-
ous mountain road.
Keenan's lip curled in triumph. His heart burned
hot with scornful anger and contempt of the futility
of her effort. "They're there afore she started!"
he said, looking up at the aspects of the hour shown
by the sky, and judging of the interval since the
encounter by the spring. Through a rift in the
gray cloud a star looked down with an icy scintilla-
tion and disappeared again. He heard a branch in
the woods snap beneath the weight of ice. A light
sprang into the window of the cabin hard by, and
came in a great gush of orange-tinted glow out into
the snowy bleak wintry space. He suddenly leaped
over the fence and ran like a deer through the woods.
Millicent too had been swift. He had thought to
overtake her before he emerged from the woods into
the more open space where the hotel stood. In this
quarter the cloud-break had been greater. Toward
the west a fading, amber glow still lingered in long
horizontal bars upon the opaque gray sky. The
white mountains opposite were hung with purple
shadows borrowed from a glimpse of sunset some-
where far away over the valley of East Tennessee;
one distant lofty range was drawn in elusive snowy
suggestions, rather than lines, against a green space
of intense yet pale tint. The moon, now nearing
the full, hung over the wooded valley, and aided
the ice and the crust of snow to show its bleak,
wan, wintry aspect; a tiny spark glowed in its depths



<pb n="58"/>
58    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE
from some open door of an isolated home. Over
it all a mist was rising from the east, drawing iit
fleecy but opaque curtain. Already it had climbe
the mountain-side and advanced, windless, souad
less, overwhelming, annihilating all before and b
neath it. The old hotel had disappeared, save tha
here and there a gaunt gable protruded and w
withdrawn, showed once more, and once more wa
submerged.
A horse's head suddenly looking out of the en-
veloping mist close to his shoulder gave him the
first intimation of the arrival, the secret silent wait-
ing, of those whom he had directed hither. That
the saddles were empty he saw a moment later.
The animals stood together in a row, hitched to
the rack. No disturbance sounded from the silent
building. The event was in abeyance. The fugi-
tive in hiding was doubtless at ease, unsuspecting, A
while the noiseless search of the officers for his 
quarters was under way.
With a thrill of excitement Keenan crept stealth- 
ily through an open passage and into the old grass- 
grown spaces of the quadrangle. Night possessed ^
the place, but the cloud seemed denser than the 
darkness. He was somehow sensible of its convor
lutions as he stood against the wall and strained
his eyes into the dusk. Suddenly it was pene-:i
trated by a milky-white glimmer, a glimmer dupli-
cated at equidistant points, each fading as its suc-
cessor sprang into brilliance. The next moment
he understood its significance. It had come from
the blurred windows of the old ball-room. Milli-
cent had lighted her candle as she searched for the



<pb n="59"/>
THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE     59
fugitive's quarters; she was passing down the
length of the old house on the second story, and
suddenly she emerged upon the gallery. She shield-
ed the feeble flicker with her hand; her white-
hooded head gleamed as with an aureola as the di-
vergent rays rested on the opaque mist; and now
and again she clutched the baluster and walked
with tremulous care, for the flooring was rotten here
and there, and ready to crumble away. Her face
was pallid, troubled; and Dundas, who had been
warned by the tramp of horses and the tread of
men, and who had descended the stairs, revolver in
hand, ready to slip away if he might under cover
of the mist, paused appalled, gazing across the quad-
rangle as on an apparition-the sight so familiar to
his senses, so strange to his experience. He saw
in an abrupt shifting of the mist that there were
other figures skulking in doorways, watching her
progress. The next moment she leaned forward to
clutch the baluster, and the light of the candle fell
full on Emory Keenan, lurking in the open passage.
A sudden sharp cry of " Surrender !"
The young mountaineer, confused, swiftly drew
his pistol.  Others were swifter still.  A sharp
report rang out into the chill crisp air, rousing all
the affrighted echoes-a few faltering steps, a
heavy fall, and for a long time Emory Keenan's
life-blood stained the floor of the promenade. Even
when it had faded, the rustic gossips came often
and gazed at the spot with morbid interest, until, a
decade later, an enterprising proprietor removed
the floor and altered the shape of that section of
the building out of recognition.



<pb n="60"/>
60    THE PHANTOMS OF THE FOOT-BRIDGE 
The escape of Dundas was easily effected. The'
deputy sheriff, confronted with the problem of sate.
isfactorily accounting for the death of a man whoj
had committed no offence against public polity, was
no longer formidable. His errand had been thdi
arrest of a horse-thief, well-known to him, and he!
had no interest in pursuing a fugitive, however obol
noxious to the law, whose personal description wasp
so different from that of the object of his search.
Time restored to Dundas his former place in life
and the esteem of his fellow-citizens. His stay in
the mountains was an episode which he will not
often recall, but sometimes volition fails, and he
marvels at the strange fulfilment of the girl's vision;
he winces to think that her solicitude for his safety
should have cost her her lover; he wonders whether
she yet lives, and whether that tender troubled
phantom, on nights when the wind is still and the
moon is low and the mists rise, again joins the
strange, elusive, woful company crossing the quak-
ing foot-bridge.
.                  \~~~~~
.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="61"/>
I -
HIS "DAY IN COURT"
I
.



<pb n="62"/>
.I
i
.;
.         .~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~·
.                                           .~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="63"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"
IT had been a hard winter along the slopes of
the Great Smoky Mountains, and still the towering
treeless domes were covered with, snow, and the
vagrant winds were abroad, rioting among the clifty
heights where they held their tryst, or raiding down
into the sheltered depths of the Cove, where they
seldom intruded. Nevertheless, on this turbulent
rush was borne in the fair spring of the year. The
fragrance of the budding wild-cherry was to be dis-
cerned amidst the keen slanting javelins of the rain.
A cognition of the renewal and the expanding of
the forces of nature pervaded the senses as dis-
tinctly as if one might hear the grass growing, or
feel along the chill currents of the air the vernal
pulses thrill. Night after night in the rifts of the
breaking clouds close to the horizon was glimpsed
the stately sidereal Virgo, prefiguring and promising
the harvest, holding in her hand a gleaming ear of
corn. But it was not the constellation which the tu-
multuous torrent at the mountain's base reflected
in a starry glitter. From the hill-side above a light
cast its broken image among the ripples, as it shone
for an instant through the bosky laurel, white, stel-
lular, splendid-only a tallow dip suddenly placed
in the window of a log-cabin, and as suddenly with-
drawn.



<pb n="64"/>
64          HIS "DAY IN COURT"          ,
For a gruff voice within growled out a re
strance: "What-ye doin' that fur, Steve?
that thar candle got enny call ter bide in that 
winder ?"
The interior, contrary to the customary aspect
the humble homes of the region, was in great
array. Cooking utensils stood uncleaned about
hearth; dishes and bowls of earthen-ware were
sembled upon the table in such numbers as to s
gest that several meals had been eaten without
ceremony of laying the cloth anew, and that in
fault of washing the crockery it had been re-enforc
from the shelf so far as the limited store might 
mit. Saddles and spinning-wheels, an ox-yyo
and trace-chains, reels and wash-tubs, were inco
gruously pushed together in the corners. Only on
of the three men in the room made any effor
to reduce the confusion to order. This was th
square-faced, black-bearded, thick-set young fellow
who took the candle from the window, and now ad-
vanced with it toward the hearth, holding it at an
angle that caused the flame to swiftly melt the tal
low, which dripped generously upon the floor.
"I hev seen Eveliny do it," he said, excitedl
justifying himself. "I noticed her sot the can
in the winder jes' las' night arter 'supper."  H
glanced about uncertainly, and his patience seem
to give way suddenly. " Dad-burn the old candle
I dunno whar ter set it," he cried, desperately, 
he flung it from him, and it fell upon the floor close
to the wall.
The dogs lifted their heads to look, and one soft-
stepping old hound got up with the nimbleness of



<pb n="65"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"              65
expectation, and, with a prescient gratitude astir
in his tail, went and sniffed at it. His aspect
drooped suddenly, and he looked around in re-
proach at Stephen Quimbey, as if suspecting a
practical joke. But there was no merriment in the
young mountaineer's face. He threw himself into
his chair with a heavy sigh, and desisted for a time
from the unaccustomed duty of clearing away the
dishes after supper.
"An' 'ain't ye got the gumption ter sense what
Eveliny sot the candle in the winder fur?" his
brother Timothy demanded, abruptly-" ez a sign
ter that thar durned Abs'lom Kittredge."
The other two men turned their heads and looked
at the speaker with a poignant intensity of interest.
"I 'lowed ez much when I seen that light ez I war
a-kemin' home las' night," he continued; "it shined
spang down the slope acrost the ruver an' through
all the laurel; it looked plumb like a star that hed
fell ter yearth in that pitch-black night. I dun-
no how I s'picioned it, but ez I stood thar an'
gazed I knowed somebody war a-standin' an' gazin'
too on the foot-bredge a mite ahead o' me. I
couldn't see him, an' he couldn't turn back an' pass
me, the bredge bein' too narrer. He war jes
obligated ter go on. I hearn him breathe quick;
then-pit-pat, pit-pat, ez he walked straight toward
that light. An' he be 'bleeged ter hev hearn me,
fur arter I crost I stopped. Nuthin'. Jes' a whis-
per o' wind, an' jes' a swishin' from the ruver. I
knowed then he hed turned off inter the laurel.
An' I went on, a-whistlin' ter make him 'low ez I
never s'picioned nuthin'. An' I kem inter the
5



<pb n="66"/>
66          HIS "DAY IN COURT" 
house an' tole dad ez he'd better be a-lookin';`
Eveliny, fur I b'lieved she war a-settin' her 
ter run away an' marry Abs'lom Kittredge."  i!
"Waal, I ain't right up an' down sati'fiede
oughter done what we done," exclaimed Step
fretfully. "It don't 'pear edzacly right fur t
men ter fire on one."                   '
Old Joel Quimbey, in his arm-chair in the cbh
ney-corner, suddenly lifted his head-a thin h
with fine white hair, short and sparse, upon it.
thin, lined face was clear-cut, with a pointed 
and an aquiline nose. He maintained an air of i
dignant and rebellious grief, and had hitherto s
silent, a gnarled and knotted hand on either ar
of his chair. His eyes gleamed keenly from u
der his heavy brows as he turned his face upo
his sons. "How could we know thar warn't bui
one, eh ?"
He had not been a candidate for justice of the*
peace for nothing; he had absorbed something of
the methods and spirit of the law through sheer
propinquity to the office. "We-uns wouldn't be
persumed ter know." And he ungrudgingly gave
himself all the benefit of the doubt that the law
accords.                                   !
"That's a true word !" exclaimed Stephen, quicl
to console his conscience. "Jes' look at the fac's,
now. We-uns in a plumb black midnight hear a manl
a-gittin' over our fence; we git our rifles; a-peeking
through the chinkin' we ketch a glimge o' him-": 
"Ha 1" cried out Timothy, with savage satisfac-
tion, "we seen him by the light she set ter lead|
him on!" 



<pb n="67"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"          67
He was tall and lank, with a delicately hooked
nose, high cheek-bones, fierce dark eyes, and dark
eyebrows, which were continually elevated, corru-
gating his forehead. His hair was black, short and
straight, and he was clad in brown jeans, as were
the others, with great cowhide boots reaching to
the knee. He fixed his fiery intent gaze on his
brother as the slower Stephen continued, "An' so
we blaze away-"
" An' one durned fool's so onlucky ez ter hit him
an' not kill him," growled Timothy, again interrupt-
ing. "An' so whilst Eveliny runs out a-screamin',
'He's dead ! he's dead !-ye hev shot him dead!'
we-uns make no doubt but he is dead, an' load up
agin, lest his frien's mought rush in on we-uns
whilst we hedn't no use o' our shootin'-irons. An'
suddint-ye can't hear nuthin' but jes' a owel hoot-
in' in the woods, or old Pa'son Bates's dogs a-howlin'
acrost the- Cove. An' we go out with a lantern,
an' thar's jes' a pool o' blood in the dooryard, an'
bloody tracks down ter the laurel."
" Eveliny gone 1" cried the old man, smiting his
hands together; "my leetle darter I The only one
ez never gin me enny trouble. I couldn't hev
made out ter put up with this hyar worl' no longer
when my wife died ef it hedn't been fur Eveliny.
Boys war wild an' mischeevious, an' folks outside
don't keer nuthin' 'bout ye-ef they war ter 'lect
ye ter office 'twould be ter keep some other feller
from hevin' it, 'kase they 'spise him more'n ye.
An' hyar she's runned off an' married old Tom
Kittredge's gran'son, Josiah Kittredge's son-when
our folks 'ain't spoke ter none o' 'em fur fifty year



<pb n="68"/>
68           HIS "DAY IN COURT"      . 
-Josiah Kittredge's son -ha ! ha I ha I"
laughed aloud in tuneless scorn of himself
this freak of froward destiny and then fell to 
ing his hands and calling upon Evelina.
The flare from the great chimney-place gen
played over the huddled confusion of the room 
the brown logs of the wall, where the gig
shadows of the three men mimicked their ev
gesture with grotesque exaggeration. The rainb
yarn on the warping bars, the strings of red-pepp
hanging from the ceiling, the burnished metal
flash from the guns on their racks of deer antler
served as incidents in the monotony of the alternat
yellow flicker and brown shadow. Deep under the
blaze the red coals pulsated, and in the farthest vis
tas of the fire quivered a white heat.
"Old Tom Kittredge," the father resumed, after
a time, "he jes' branded yer gran'dad's cattle with
his mark; he jes' cheated yer gran'dad, my dad,
out'n six head o' cattle."
" But then," said the warlike Timothy, not willing
to lose sight of reprisal even in vague reminiscence, 
"he hed only one hand ter rob with arter that, fur I 
hev hearn ez how when gran'dad got through with'
him the doctor hed ter take his arm off."
" Sartainly, sartainly," admitted the old man, in'I
quiet assent. "'An' Josiah Kittredge he put ou
the eyes of a horse critter o' mine right thar at the
court-house door-" 
"Waal, arterward, we-uns fired his house over
his head," put in Tim.
"An' Josiah Kittredge an' me," the old man
went on, "we-uns clinched every time we met in.



<pb n="69"/>
this mortal life. Every time I go past the grave-
yard whar he be buried I kin feel his fingers on
my throat. He had a nervy grip, but no variation;
he always tuk holt the same way."
"'Pears like ter me ez 'twar a fust-rate time ter
fetch out the rifles again," remarked Tim, "this
mornin', when old Pa'son Bates kem up hyar an'
'lowed ez he hed married Eveliny ter Abs'lom
Kittredge on his death-bed; 'So be, pa'son,' I say.
An' he tuk off his hat an' say, 'Thank the Lord,
this will heal,the breach an' make ye frien's!' An'
I say, ' Edzacly, pa'son, ef it air Abs'lom's death-
bed; but them Kittredges air so smilin' an' deceiv-
in' I be powerful feared he'll cheat the King o'
Terrors himself. I'll forgive 'em ennything-over
his grave.'"
" Pa'son war tuk toler'ble suddint in his temper,"
said the literal Steve. " I hearn him call yer talk
onchristian, cussed sentiments, ez he put out."
"Ye mus' keep up a Christian sperit, boys; that's
the main thing," said the old man, who was esteemed
very religious, and a pious Mentor in his own fam-
ily. He gazed meditatively into the fire. "What
ailed Eveliny ter git so tuk up with this hyar Abs'-
lom ? What made her like him ?" he propounded.
"His big eyes, edzacly like a buck's, an' his
long yaller hair," sneered the discerning Timothy,
with the valid scorn of a big ugly man for a slim
pretty one. "'Twar jes 'count o' his long yaller
hair his mother called him Abs'lom. He war
named Pete or Bob, I disremember what-suthin'
common-till his hair got so long an' curly, an' he
sot out ter be so plumb all-fired beautiful, an' his



<pb n="70"/>
70          HIS "DAY IN COURT"
mother named him agin; this time Abs'lom, aty
the king's son, 'count o' his yaller hair."  ;:i
"Git hung by his hair some o' these days in t;
woods, like him the Bible tells about; that happene
ter the sure-enough Abs'lom," suggested Stepher
hopefully.
"Naw, sir," said Tim; "when Abs'lom Kittredg
gits hung it '11 be with suthin' stronger'n hair; he'
stretch hemp." He exchanged a glance of tri'
umphant prediction with his brother, and anon
gazed ruefully into the fire.
"Ye talk like ez ef he war goin' ter live, boys,":
said old Joel Quimbey, irritably. "Pa'son 'lowed; :
he war powerful low." 
"Pa'son said he'd never hev got home alive 
'thout she'd holped him," said Stephen. " She jes'
tuk him an' drug him plumb ter the bars, though I
don't see how she done it, slim leetle critter ez she
be; an' thar she holped him git on his beastis; an'
then - I declar' I feel ez ef I could kill her fur
a-demeanin' of herself so-she led that thar horse,
him a-ridin' an' a-leanin' on the neck o' the beastis,
two mile up the mountain, through the night."
"Waal, let her bide thar. I'll look on her face,
no mo'," declared the old man, his toothless jawil
shaking. "Kittredge she be now, an' none o' the 
name kin come a-nigh me. How be I ever a-goin'
'bout 'mongst the folks at the settlement agin withi
my darter married ter a Kittredge ? How Josiahi
an' his dad mus' be a-grinnin' in thar graves at mea
this night! An' I 'low they hev got suthin' ter grin,,
about."
And suddenly his grim face relaxed, and oncei.



<pb n="71"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"            71
more he began to smite his hands together and to
call aloud for Evelina.
Timothy could offer no consolation, but stared
dismally into the fire, and Stephen rose with a sigh
and addressed himself to pushing the spinning-
wheels and tubs and tables into the opposite cor-
ner of the room, in the hope of solving the enigma
of its wonted order.
It seemed to Evelina afterward that when she
climbed the rugged ways of the mountain slope in
that momentous night she left forever in the depths
of the Cove that free and careless young identity
which she had been. She did not accurately dis-
criminate the moment in which she began to realize
that she was among her hereditary enemies, en-
compassed by a hatred nourished to full propor-
tions and to a savage strength long before she drew
her first breath. The fact only gradually claimed
its share in her consciousness as the tension of anx-
iety for Absalom's sake relaxed, for the young
mountaineer's strength and vitality were promptly
reasserted, and he rallied from the wound and his
pallid and forlorn estate with the recuperative
power of the primitive man. By degrees she came
to expect the covert unfriendly glances his brother
cast upon her, the lowering averted mien o0 her
sister-in-law, and now and again she surprised a
long, lingering, curious gaze in his mother's eyes.
They were all Kittredges I And she wondered how
she could ever have dreamed that she might live
happily among them-one of them, for her name
was theirs. And then perhaps the young husband



<pb n="72"/>
72          HIS "DAY IN COURT"
would stroll languidly in, with his long hair :
on his blue jeans coat-collar, and an assured i
in his dark brown eyes, and some lazy jest oJ
lips, certain of a welcoming laugh, for he hadl-
so near to death that they all had a sense of
quisition in that he had been led back. Forl
sake they had said little; his mother would b
herself in brewing his "yerb" tea, and his br
would offer to saddle the mare if he felt that'
could ride, and they would all be very friendly 
gether; and his alien wife would presently s
out unnoticed into the "gyarden spot," where  i
rows of vegetables grew as they did in the Cov
turning upon her the same neighborly looks the
wore of yore, and showing not a strange le
among them. The sunshine wrapped itself in it
old fine gilded gossamer haze and drowsed upon
the verdant slopes; the green jewelled " Juny-bugs '
whirred in the soft air; the mould was as richly
brown as in Joel Quimbey's own enclosure; the
flag-lilies bloomed beside the onion bed; and the
woolly green leaves of the sage wore their old deli-
cate tint and gave out a familiar odor.  ,
Among this quaint company of the garden bo
ders she spent much of her time, now hoeing in 
desultory fashion, now leaning on the long han
of the implement and looking away upon the fU
reaches of the purple mountains. As they stretch
to vague distances they became blue, and fart
on the great azure domes merged into a still mo
tender hue, and this in turn melted into a soft i
determinate tint that embellished the faint horizo
Her dreaming eyes would grow bright and wistful
.,!



<pb n="73"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"            73
her rich brown curling hair, set free by the yellow
sun-bonnet that slipped off her head and upon her
shoulders, would airily float backward in the wind;
there was a lithe grace in the slender figure, albeit
clad in a yellow homespun of a deep dye, and the
faded purplish neckerchief was caught about a
throat fairer even than the fair face, which was
delicately flushed. Absalom's mother, standing be-
side Peter, the eldest son, in the doorway, watched
her long one day.
"It all kem about from that thar bran dance,"
said Peter, a homely man, with a sterling, narrow-
minded wife and an ascetic sense of religion. " Thar
Satan waits, an' he gits nimbler every time ye shake
yer foot. The fiddler gin out the figger ter change
partners, an' this hyar gal war dancin' opposite Abs'-
lom, ez hed never looked nigh her till that day. The
gal didn't know what ter do; she jes' stood still;
but Abs'lom he jes' danced up ter her ez keerless
an' gay ez he always war, jes' like she war ennybody
else, an' when he held out his han' she gin him
hern, all a-trembly, an' lookin' up at him, plumb
skeered ter death, her eyes all wide an' sorter wish-
ful, like some wild thing trapped in the woods. An'
then the durned fiddler, moved by the devil, I'll be
be bound, plumb furgot ter change 'em back. So
they danced haff'n the day tergether. An' arter
that they war forever a-stealin' off an' accidentally
meetin' at the spring, an' whenst he war a-huntin'
or she drivin' up the cow, an' a-courtin' ginerally,
till they war promised ter marry."
"'Twarn't the bran dance; 'twar suthin' ez fleet-
in' an' ez useless," said his mother, standing in the



<pb n="74"/>
74          HIS "DAY IN COURT".
door and gazing at the unconscious girl, who 'w
leaning upon the hoe, half in the shadow of .i
blooming laurel that crowded about the enclosu
and bent over the rail fence, and half in the bur
nished sunshine; " she's plumb beautiful-thar'stl
snare ez tangled Abs'lom's steps. I never 'lowe
ter see the day ez could show enny comfort fur hi?
dad bein' dead, but we hev been spared some o' thud,
tallest cavortin' that ever war seen sence the Big,,
Smoky war built. Sometimes it plumb skeers me ter
think ez we-uns hev got a Quimbey abidin' up hyar
along o' we-uns in his house an' a-callin' o' herse'f
Kittredge. I looks ter see him a-stalkin' roun' hyar
some night, too outdone an' aggervated ter rest in
his grave."
But the nights continued spectreless and peace-
ful on the Great Smoky, and the same serene stars
shone above the mountain as over the Cove. Ev-
elina could watch here, as often before, the rising
moon ascending through a rugged gap in the range, 
suffusing the dusky purple slopes and the black
crags on either hand with a pensive glamour, and
revealing the river below by the amber reflection its
light evoked. She often sat on the step of the
porch, her elbow on her knees, her chin in her
hand, following with her shining eyes the pearly '
white mists loitering among the ranges. Hear! a
dog barks in the Cove, a cock crows, a horn is !
wound, far, far away; it echoes faintly. And once
more only the sounds of the night-that vague stir
in the windless woods, as if the forest breathes, the
far-away tinkle of water hidden in the darkness-
and the moon is among the summits.
*                  , »



<pb n="75"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"           75
The men remained within, for Absalom avoided
the chill night air, and crouched over the smoulder-
ing fire. Peter's wife sedulously held aloof from
the ostracized Quimbey woman. But her mother-
in-law had fallen into the habit of sitting upon
the porch these moonlit nights. The sparse, new-
ly-leafed hop and gourd vines clambering to its
roof were all delicately imaged on the floor, and
the old woman's clumsy figure, her grotesque sun-
bonnet, her awkward arm-chair, were faithfully re-
produced in her shadow on the log wall of the
cabin-even to the up-curling smoke from her pipe.
Once she suddenly took the stem from her mouth.
"Eveliny," she said, "'pears like ter me ye talk
mighty little. Thar ain't no use in gittin' tongue-
tied up hyar on the mounting."
Evelina started and raised her eyes, dilated with
a stare of amazement at this unexpected overture.
" I ain't keerin," said the old woman, recklessly,
to herself, although consciously recreant to the tra-
ditions of the family, and sacrificing with a pang
her distorted sense of loyalty and duty to her
kindlier impulse. "I warn't born a Kittredge
nohow."
"Yes, 'm," said Evelina, meekly; "but I don't
feel much like talkin' noways; I never talked
much, bein' nobody but men-folks ter our house,
I'd ruther hear ye talk 'n talk myself."
" Listen at ye now I The headin' young folks o'
this kentry '11 never rest till they make thar elders
shoulder all the burdens. An' what air ye wantin' a
pore ole 'oman like me ter talk about ?"
Evelina hesitated a moment, then looked up,



<pb n="76"/>
76          HIS "DAY IN COURT" 
with a face radiant in the moonbeams. "Tell 
'bout Abs'lom-afore I ever seen him."    ^
His mother laughed. "Ye air a powerful fo:
Eveliny."
The girl laughed a little, too. "I dunno ez 
want ter be no wiser," she said.
But one was his wife, and the other was hil
mother, and as they talked of him daily and long,
the bond between them was complete. 
"I hev got 'em both plumb fooled," the hand-
some Absalom boasted at the settlement, when the
gossips wondered once more, as they had often
done, that there should be such unity of interest
between old Joel Quimbey's daughter and old Jo-
siah Kittredge's widow. As time went on many
rumors of great peace on the mountain-side came
to the father's ears, and he grew more testy daily
as he grew visibly older. These rumors multiplied
with the discovery that they were as wormwood and
gall to him. Not that he wished his daughter to
be unhappy, but the joy which was his grief and
humiliation was needlessly flaunted into his face;
the idlers about the county town had invariably a
new budget of details, being supplied, somewhat
maliciously, it must be confessed, by the Kittredges"
themselves. The ceremony of planting one foot
on the neck of the vanquished was in their minds 
one of the essential concomitants of victory. The
bold Absalom, not thoroughly known to either of the
women who adored him, was ingenious in expedi-
ents, and had applied the knowledge gleaned from
his wife's reminiscences of her home, her father,



<pb n="77"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"           77
and her brothers to more accurately aim his darts.
Sometimes old Quimbey would fairly flee the town,
and betake himself in a towering rage to his de-
serted hearth, to brood futilely over the ashes, and
devise impotent schemes of vengeance.
He often wondered afterward in dreary retro-
spection how he had survived that first troublous
year after his daughter's elopement, when he was
so lonely, so heavy-hearted at home, so harried and
angered abroad.  His comforts, it is true, were
amply insured: a widowed sister had come to pre-
side over his household-a deaf old woman, who
had much to be thankful for in her infirmity, for
Joel Quimbey in his youth, before he acquired re-
ligion, had been known as a singularly profane man
-" a mos' survigrus cusser " - and something of
his old proficiency had returned to him. Perhaps
public sympathy for his troubles strengthened his
hold upon the regard of the community. For it
was in the second year of Evelina's marriage,
in the splendid midsummer, when all the gifts of
nature climax to a gorgeous perfection, and candi-
dates become incumbents, that he unexpectedly at-
tained the great ambition of his life. He was said
to have made the race for justice of the peace from
sheer force of habit, but by some unexplained freak
of popularity the oft- defeated candidate was suc-
cessful by a large majority at the August election.
"Laws- a- massy, boys," he said, tremulously, to
his triumphant sons, when the result was announced,
the excited flush on his thin old face suffusing his
hollow veinous temples, and rising into his fine
white hair, " how glad Eveliny would hev been ef-



<pb n="78"/>
78          HIS "DAY IN COURT" 
ef-"' He was about to say if she had livedit
he often spoke of her as if she were dead. 
turned suddenly back, and began to eagerly ab
the details of the race, as if he had often bef
been elected, with calm superiority canvassing 
relative strength, or rather the relative weakness, 
the defeated aspirants. 
He could scarcely have measured the joy whi
the news gave to Evelina. She was eminently sus|
ceptible-of the elation of pride, the fervid glow of
success; but her tender heart melted in sympa- f
thetic divination of all that this was to him who 
had sought it so long, and so unabashed by defeat.
She pined to see his triumph in his eyes, to hear it
in his voice. She wondered-nay, she knew that
he longed to tell it to her. As the year rolled
around again to summer, and she heard from time
to time of his quarterly visits to the town as a mem-
ber of the worshipful Quarterly County Court, she
began to hope that, softened by his prosperity,
lifted so high by his honors above all the cavillings
of the Kittredges, he might be more leniently dis.',
posed toward her, might pity her, might even go so"!
far as to forgive. 
But none of her filial messages reached her fai
ther's fiery old heart.                    -a
"Ye'll be sure, Abs'lom, ef ye see Joe Boyd in:.
town, ye'll tell him ter gin dad my respec's, an' the.
word ez how the baby air a-thrivin', an' I wants ter
fotch him ter see the fambly at home, ef they'll
lemme."
Then she would watch Absalom with all the,
confidence of happy anticipation, as he rode off:



<pb n="79"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"           79
down the mountain with his hair flaunting, and his
spurs jingling, and his shy young horse curveting.
But no word ever came in response; and some-
times she would take the child in her arms and
carry him down a path, worn smooth by her own
feet, to a jagged shoulder thrust out by the moun-
tain where all the slopes fell away, and a crag beetled
over the depths of the Cove. Thence she could
discern certain vague lines marking the enclosure,
and a tiny cluster of foliage hardly recognizable
as the orchard, in the midst of which the cabin
nestled. She could not distinguish them, but she
knew that the cows were coming to be milked, low-
ing and clanking their bells tunefully, fording the
river that had the sunset emblazoned upon it, or
standing flank deep amidst its ripples; the chickens
might be going to roost among the althea bushes;
the lazy old dogs were astir on the porch. She
could picture her brothers at work about the barn;
most often a white-haired man who walked with a
stick-alack! she did not fancy how feebly, nor
that his white hair had grown long and venerable,
and tossed in the breeze. " Ef he would jes lemme
ker fur one haff'n hour 1" she would cry.
But all her griefs were bewept on the crag, that
there might be no tears to distress the tender-
hearted Absalom when she should return to the
house.
The election of Squire Quimbey was a sad blow
to the arrogant spirit of the Kittredges. They had
easily accustomed themselves to ascendency, and
they hotly resented the fact that fate had forborne
the opportunity to hit Joel Quimbey when he was



<pb n="80"/>
80          HIS "DAY IN COURT"             .'
down. They had used their utmost influenCe i4
defeat him in the race, and had openly avowed.
their desire to see him bite the dust. The inimical
feeling between the families culminated pne rainy 
autumnal day in the town where the quarterly'
county court was in session.
A fire had been kindled in the great rusty stove,
and crackled away with grudging merriment inside,
imparting no sentiment of cheer to the gaunt bare
room, with its dusty window -panes streaked with
rain, its shutters drearily flapping in the wind, and
the floor bearing the imprint of many boots bur-
dened with the red clay of the region. The sound
of slow strolling feet in the brick-paved hall was
monotonous and somnolent.
Squire Quimbey sat in his place among the jus-
tices. Despite his pride of office, he had not the
heart for business that might formerly have been
his. More than once his attention wandered. He
looked absently out of the nearest window at the
neighboring dwelling-a little frame-house with a
green yard; a well-sweep was defined against the
gray sky, and about the curb a file of geese followed
with swaying gait the wise old gander. "What a
hand for fow-els Eveliny war !" he muttered to him-
self; "an' she hed luck with sech critters." He
used the obituary tense, for Evelina had in some
sort passed away.
He rubbed his hand across his corrugated brow,
and suddenly he became aware that her husband
was in the room, speaking to the chairman of the
county court, and claiming a certificate in the sum
of two dollars each for the scalps of one wolf, " an'



<pb n="81"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"           81
one painter," he continued, laying the small furry
repulsive objects upon the desk, "an' one dollar
fur the skelp of one wild-cat." He was ready to
take his oath that these animals were killed by him
running at large in this county.
He had stooped a little in making the trans-
fer. He came suddenly to his full height, and stood
with one hand in his leather belt, the other shoul-
dering his rifle. The old man scanned him curi-
ously. The crude light from the long windows
was full upon his tall slim figure; his yellow hair
curled down upon the collar of his blue jeans coat;
his great miry boots were drawn high over the trou-
sers to the knee; his pensive deer-like eyes bright-
ened with a touch of arrogance and enmity as,
turning slowly to see who was present, his glance
encountered his father-in-law's fiery gaze.
" Mr. Cheerman ! Mr. Cheerman !" exclaimed the
old man, tremulously, "lemme examinate that thar
wild-cat skelp. Thanky, sir; thanky, sir; I wanter
see ef 'tain't off'n the head o' some old tame tom-
cat. An' this air a painter's "-affecting to scan
it by the window-" two ears 'cordin' to law; yes,
sir, two; and this "-his keen old face had all the
white light of the sad gray day on its bleaching hair
and its many lines, and his eager old hands trem-
bled with the excitement of the significant satire he
enacted-" an' this air a wolf's, ye say? Yes; it's
a Kittredge's; same thing, Mr. Cheerman, by a
diff'ent name; nuthin' in the code 'bout'n a pre-
mium fur a Kittredge's skelp; but same natur';
coward, bully, thief-thieff'
The words in the high cracked voice rang from
6



<pb n="82"/>
82          HIS "DAY IN COURT"
the bare walls and bare floors as he tossede 
scalps from him, and sat down, laughing silen4c'
painful, mirthless fashion, his toothless jaw qu.i
ing, and his shaking hands groping for the arms 'o
his chair.
"Who says a Kittredge air a thief says a lie " ,'
cried out the young man, recovering from his tense
surprise. " I don't keer how old he be," he stipu-
lated-for he had not thought to see her father so
aged-" he lies."
The old man fixed him with a steady gaze and a
sudden alternation of calmness. "Ye air a Kit-
tredge; ye stole my daughter from me."
"I never. She kern of her own accord."
"Damn ye!" the old man retorted to the unwel-
come truth. There was nothing else for him to
say. "Damn the whole tribe of ye; everything
that goes by the accursed name of Kittredge, that's
got a drop o' yer blood, or a bone o' yer bones, or
a puff o' yer breath-"
"Squair! squair !" interposed an officious old
colleague, taking him by the elbow, " jes' quiet down
now; ye air a-cussin' yer own gran'son."
"So be! so be !" cried the old man, in a frenzy
of rage. "Damn 'em all-all the Kittredge tribe 1"
He gasped for breath; his lips still moved speech-
lessly as he fell back in his chair.
Kittredge let his gun slip from his shoulder, the
butt ringing heavily as it struck upon the floor.
"I ain't a-goin' ter take sech ez that off'n ye, old
man," he cried, pallid with fury, for be it remem-
bered this grandson was that august institution, a
first baby. "He sha'n't sit up thar an' cuss the



<pb n="83"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"          83
baby, Mr. Cheerman." He appealed to the pre-
siding justice, holding up his right arm as tremu-
lous as old Quimbey's own. "I want the law! I
ain't a-goin' ter tech a old man like him, an' my
wife's father, so I ax in the name o' peace fur the
law. Don't deny it"-with a warning glance-
"'kase I ain't school-larned, an' dunno how ter
get it. Don't ye deny me the law! I know the
law don't 'low a magistrate an' a jestice ter cuss in
his high office, in the presence of the county court.
I want the law! I want the law !"
The chairman of the court, who had risen in his
excitement, turning eagerly first to one and then to
the other of the speakers, striving to silence the
colloquy, and in the sudden surprise of it at a mo-
mentary loss how to take action, sat down abrupt-
ly, and with a face of consternation.  Profanity
seemed to him so usual and necessary an incident
of conversation that it had never occurred to him
until this moment that by some strange aberration
from the rational estimate of essentials it was en-
tered in the code as a violation of law. He would
fain have overlooked it, but the room was crowded
with spectators. The chairman would be a candi-
date for re-election as justice of the peace at the
expiration of his term. And after all what was old
Quimbey to him, or he to old Quimbey, that, with
practically the whole town looking on, he should
destroy his political prospects and disregard the
dignity of his office. He had a certain twinge of
conscience, and a recollection of the choice and
fluent oaths ,of his own repertory, but as he turned
over the pages of the code in search of the section



<pb n="84"/>
84          HIS "DAY IN COURT"
he deftly argued that they were uttered in his own
presence as a person, not as a justice.
And so for the first time old Joel Quimbey ap-
peared as a law-breaker, and was duly fined by the
worshipful county court fifty cents for each oath,
that being the price at which the State rates the
expensive and impious luxury of swearing in the
hearing of a justice of the peace, and which in its
discretion the court saw fit to adopt in this instance.
The old man offered no remonstrance; he said
not a word in his own defence. He silently drew
out his worn wallet, with much contortion of his
thin old anatomy in getting to his pocket, and paid
his fines on the spot. Absalom had already left
the room, the clerk having made out the certificates,
the chairman of the court casting the scalps into
the open door of the stove, that they might be con-
sumed by fire according to law.
The young mountaineer wore a heavy frown, and
his heart was ill at ease. He sought some satis-
faction in the evident opinion of the crowd which
now streamed out, for the excitements within were
over, that he had done a fine thing; a very clever
thought, they considered it, to demand the law of
Mr. Chairman, that one of their worships should
be dragged from the bench and arraigned before
the quarterly county court of which he was a mem-
ber. The result gave general satisfaction, although
there were those who found fault with the court's
moderation, and complained that the least possible
cognizance had been taken of the offence.
"Ho! ho! ho!" laughed an old codger in the
street. "I jes knowed that hurt old Joel Quimbey



<pb n="85"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"           85
wuss 'n ef a body hed druv a knife through him;
he's been so proud o' bein' jestice 'mongst his bet-
ters, an' bein' 'lected at las', many times ez he hev
run. Waal, Abs'lom, ye hev proved thar's law fur
jestices too. I tell ye ye hev got sense in yer skull-
i-bone."
But Absalom hung his head before these con-
gratulations; he found no relish in the old man's
humbled pride. Yet had he not cursed the baby,
lumping him among the Kittredges?  Absalom
went about for a time, with a hopeful anxiety in
his eyes, searching for one of the younger Quim-
beys, in order to involve him in a fight that might
have a provocation and a result more to his mind.
Somehow the recollection of the quivering and aged
figure of his wife's father, of the smitten look on his
old face, of his abashed and humbled demeanor
before the court, was a reproach to him, vivid and
continuously present with his repetitious thoughts
forever re-enacting the scene. His hands trem-
bled; he wanted to lay hold on a younger man, to
replace this asthetic revenge with a quarrel more
wholesome in the estimation of his own conscience.
But the Quimbey sons were not in town to-day.
He could only stroll about and hear himself praised
for this thing that he had done, and wonder how
jhe should meet Evelina with his conscience thus ar-
rayed against himself for her father's sake. " Plumb
turned Quimbey, I swear," he said, in helpless re-
proach to this independent and coercive moral force
within. His dejection, he supposed, had reached
its lowest limits, when a rumor pervaded the town,
so wild that he thought it could be only fantasy.



<pb n="86"/>
86          HIS "DAY IN COURT"
It proved to be fact. Joel Quimbey, aggrieved,
humbled, and indignant, had resigned his office, and
as Absalom rode out of town toward the mountains,
he saw the old man in his crumpled brown jeans
suit, mounted on his white mare, jogging down the,
red clay road, his head bowed before the slanting
lines of rain, on his way to his cheerless fireside.
He turned off presently, for the road to the levels
of the Cove was not the shorter cut that Absalom
travelled to the mountains. But all the way the
young man fancied that he saw from time to time,
as the bridle-path curved in the intricacies of the
laurel, the bowed old figure among the mists, jog-
ging along, his proud head and his stiff neck bent to
the slanting rain and the buffets of his unkind fate.
And yet, pressing the young horse to overtake him,
Absalom could find naught but the fleecy mists
drifting down the bridle-path as the wind might
will, or lurking in the darkling nooks of the laurel
when the wind would.
The sun was shining on the mountains, and Ab-
salom went up from the sad gray rain and through
the gloomy clouds of autumn hanging over the
Cove into a soft brilliant upper atmosphere-a
generous after-thought of summer-and the warm
brightness of Evelina's smile. She stood in the
doorway as she saw him dismounting, with her fin-
ger on her lips, for the baby was sleeping: he put
much of his time into that occupation. The tiny
gourds hung yellow among the vines that clam-
bered over the roof of the porch, and a brave jack-
bean-a friend of the sheltering eaves-made shift



<pb n="87"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"           87
to bloom purple and white, though others of the
kind hung crisp and sere, and rattled their dry
bones in every gust. The "gyarden spot" at the
side of the house was full of brown and withered
skeletons of the summer growths; among the crisp
blades of the Indian-corn a sibilant voice was for-
ever whispering; down the tawny-colored vistas
the pumpkins glowed. The sky was blue; the yel-
low hickory flaming against it and hanging over
the roof of the cabin was a fine color to see. The
red sour-wood tree in the fence corner shook out a
myriad of white tassels; the rolling tumult of the
gray clouds below thickened, and he could hear the
rain a-falling-falling into the dreary depths of the
Cove.
All this for him: why should he disquiet himself
for the storm that burst upon others?
Evelina seemed a part of the brightness; her
dark eyes so softly alight, her curving red lips, the
faint flush in her cheeks, her rich brown hair, and
the purplish kerchief about the neck of her yellow
dress. Once more she looked smilingly at him,
and shook her head and laid her finger-on her lip.
"I oughter been sati'fied with all I got, stiddier
hectorin' other folks till they 'ain't got no heart ter
hold on ter what they been at sech trouble ter git,"
he said, as he turned out the horse and strode
gloomily toward the house with the saddle over
his arm.
"Hev ennybody been spiteful ter you-uns ter-
day ?" she asked, in an almost maternal solicitude,
and with a flash of partisan anger in her eyes.
"Git out'n my road, Eveliny," he said, fretfully,
!



<pb n="88"/>
88          HIS "DAY IN COURT" '     '
pushing by, and throwing the saddle on thei
There was no one in the room but the occu p
the rude box on rockers which served as cradle.
Absalom had a swift, prescient fear. "Sh
git it all out'n me ef I don't look sharp," he s'
to himself. Then aloud, "Whar's mam ?" he d
manded, flinging himself into a chair and looki
loweringly about.        .                :
"Topknot hev jes kem off'n her nest with four-
teen deedies, an' she an' 'Melia hev gone ter thee,
barn ter see 'bout'n 'em."
"Whar's Pete ?"
"A-huntin'."
A pause. The fire smouldered audibly; a hick-
ory-nut fell with a sharp thwack on the clapboards
of the roof, and rolled down and bounded to the '
ground.
Suddenly: "I seen yer dad ter- day," he began,
without coercion. " He gin me a cussin', in the court-
room, 'fore all the folks. He cussed all the Kit-
tredges, all o' 'em; him too"-he glanced in the
direction of the cradle--"cussed 'em black an' 
blue, an' called me a thief fur marryin' ye an kerry- 
in' ye off."
Her face turned scarlet, then pale. She sat 
down, her trembling hands reaching out to rock the. 
cradle, as if the youthful Kittredge might be dis- i
turbed by the malediction hurled upon his tribe.
But he slept sturdily on.
"Waal, now," she said, making a great effort at
self-control, " ye oughtn't ter mind it. Ye know he
war powerful tried. I never purtended ter be ez
sweet an' pritty ez the baby air, but how would



<pb n="89"/>
HI. "DAY IN COURT"            89
you-uns feel ef somebody ye despised war ter kem
hyar an' tote him off from we-uns forever?"
" I'd cut thar hearts out," he said, with prompt
barbarity.
"Thar, now I" exclaimed his wife, in triumphant
logic.
He gloomily eyed the smouldering coals. He
was beginning to understand the paternal senti-
ment. By his own heart he was learning the heart
of his wife's father.
"I'd chop 'em inter minch-meat," he continued,
carrying his just reprisals a step further.
"Waal, don't do it right now," said his wife, try-
ing to laugh, yet vaguely frightened by his vehe-
mence.
"Eveliny," he cried, springing to his feet, "I be
a-goin' ter tell ye all 'bout'n it. I jes called on the
cheerman fur the law agin him."
"Agin dad/-the law!"   Her voice dropped as
she contemplated aghast this terrible uncompre-
hended force brought to oppress old Joel Quim-
bey; she felt a sudden poignant pang for his for-
lorn and lonely estate.
"Never mind, never mind, Eveliny," Absalom
said, hastily, repenting of his frantic candor and
seeking to soothe her.
" I will mind," she said, sternly. " What hev ye
done ter dad ?"
"Nuthin'," he replied, sulkily-" nuthin'."
"Ye needn't try ter fool me, Abs'lom Kittredge.
Ef ye ain't minded ter tell me, I'll foot it down
ter town an' find out. What did the law do ter
him ?"



<pb n="90"/>
90           HIS "DAY IN COURT"
"Jes fined him," he said, striving to make light
of it.
"An' ye done that fur-spite r' she cried. "A-set-
tin' the law ter chouse a old man out'n money, fur
gittin' mad an' sayin' ye stole his only darter. Oh, .
I'll answer fur him"-she too had risen; her hand-
trembled on the back of the chair, but her face was
scornfully smiling-"he don't mind the money;
he'll never git you-uns fined ter pay back the
gredge. He don't take his wrath out on folkses'
wallets; he grips thar throats, or teches the trig-
ger o' his rifle. Laws-a-massy I takin' out yer gredge
that-a-way I It'sye poorer fur them dollars, Abs'lom
-'tain't him." She laughed satirically, and turned
to rock the cradle.
"What d'ye want me ter do ? Fight a old man ?"
he exclaimed, angrily.
She kept silence, only looking at him with a
flushed cheek and a scornful laughing eye.
He went on, resentfully: "I ain't 'shamed," he
stoutly asserted. "Nobody 'lowed I oughter be.
It's him, plumb bowed down with shame."
"The shoe's on the t'other foot," she cried.
"It's ye that oughter be 'shamed, an' ef ye ain't,
it's more shame ter ye. What hev he got ter be
'shamed of ?"
"'Kase," he retorted, "he war fetched up afore
a court on a crim'nal offence-a-cussin' afore the
court! Ye may think it's no shame, but he do;
he war so 'shamed he gin up his office ez jestice o'
the peace, what he hev run fur four or five times,
an' always got beat 'ceptin' wunst."
"Dad !" but for the whisper she seemed turning



<pb n="91"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"           91
to stone; her dilated eyes were fixed as she stared
into his face.
' An' I seen him a-ridin' off from town in the
rain arterward, his head hangin' plumb down ter
the saddle-bow."
Her amazed eyes were still fastened upon his
face, but her hand no longer trembled on the back
of the chair.
He suddenly held out his own hand to her, his
sympathy and regret returning as he recalled the
picture of the lonely wayfarer in the rain that had
touched him so. "Oh, Eveliny !" he cried, "I nev-
er war so beset an' sorry an'-"
She struck his hand down; her eyes blazed.
Her aspect was all instinct with anger.
" I do declar' I'll never furgive ye-ter spite him
so-an' kem an' tell me/ An' shame him so ez he
can't hold his place -an' kem an' tell me! An'
bow him down so ez he can't show his face whar
he hev been so respected by all-an' kem an' tell
me/ An' all fur spite, fur he hev got nuthin' ye
want now. An' I gin him up an' lef' him lonely,
an' all fur you-uns. Ye air mean, Abs'lom Kit-
tredge, an' I'm the mos' fursaken fool on the face
o' the yearth !"
He tried to speak, but she held up her hand in
expostulation.
"Nare word-fur I won't answer. I do declar'
I'll never speak ter ye agin ez long ez I live."
He flung away with a laugh and a jeer. " That's
right," he said, encouragingly; "plenty o' men would
be powerful glad ef thar wives would take pattern
by that."



<pb n="92"/>
92           HIS "DAY IN COURT"
He caught up his hat and strode out of the room.
He busied himself in stabling his horse, and in
looking after the stock. He could hear the wom-
en's voices from the loft of the barn as they dis-
puted about the best methods of tending the newly
hatched chickens, that had chipped the shell so late
in the fall as to be embarrassed by the frosts and
the coming cold weather. The last bee had ceased
to drone about the great crimson prince's-feather by
the door-step, worn purplish through long flaunting,
and gone to seed. The clouds were creeping up
and up the slope, and others were journeying hith-
er from over the mountains. A sense of moisture
was in the air, although a great column of dust
sprang up from the dry corn-field, with panic-strick-
en suggestions, and went whirling away, carrying
off withered blades in the rush. The first drops of
rain were pattering, with a resonant timbre in the
midst, when Pete came home with a newly killed
deer on his horse, and the women, with fluttering
skirts and sun-bonnets, ran swiftly across from the
barn to the back door of the shed-room. Then the
heavy downpour made the cabin rock.
"Why, Eveliny an' the baby oughtn't ter be out
in this hyar rain -they'll be drenched," said the
old woman, when they were all safely housed ex-
cept the two. "Whar be she ?"
"A-foolin' in the gyarden spot a-getherin' seed an'
sech, like she always be," said the sister-in-law, tartly.
Absalom ran out into the rain without his hat,
his heart in the clutch of a prescient terror. No;
the summer was over for the garden as well as for
him; all forlorn and rifled, its few swaying shrubs



<pb n="93"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"           93
tossed wildly about, a mockery of the grace and
bloom that had once embellished it. His wet hair
streaming backward in the wind caught on the
laurel boughs as he went down and down the tan-
gled path that her homesick feet had worn to the
crag which overlooked the Cove. Not there! He
stood, himself enveloped in the mist, and gazed
blankly into the folds of the dun-colored clouds
that with tumultuous involutions surged above the
valley and baffled his vision. He realized it with
a sinking heart. She was gone.
That afternoon-it was close upon nightfall-
Stephen Quimbey, letting down the bars for the
cows, noticed through the slanting lines of rain,
serried against the masses of sober-hued vapors
which hid the great mountain towering above the
Cove, a woman crossing the foot-bridge. He
turned and lifted down another bar, and then
looked again. Something was familiar in her as-
pect, certainly. He stood gravely staring. Her
sun-bonnet had fallen back upon her shoulders,
and was hanging loosely there by the strings tied
beneath her chin; her brown hair, dishevelled by
the storm, tossed back and forth in heavy wave-
less locks, wet through and through. When the
wind freshened they lashed, thong-like, her pallid
oval face; more than once she put up her hand
and tried to gather them together, or to press them
back-only one hand, for she clasped a heavy bun-
dle in her arms, and as she toiled along slowly up
the rocky slope, Stephen suddenly held his palm
above his eyes. The recognition was becoming



<pb n="94"/>
94          HIS "DAY IN COURT"
definite, and yet he could scarcely believe his
senses: was it indeed Evelina, wind-tossed, tempet-
beaten, and with as many tears as rain-drops on her
pale cheek? Evelina, forlorn and sorry, and wifh
swollen sad dark eyes, and listless exhausted step
-here again at the bars, where she had not stood
since she dragged her wounded lover thence on
that eventful night two years and more ago.
Resentment for the domestic treachery was up-
permost in his mind, and he demanded surlily,
when she had advanced within the sound of his
words, "What hev ye kern hyar fur ?"
"Ter stay," she responded, briefly.
His hand in an uncertain gesture laid hold upon
his tuft of beard.
"Fur good ?" he faltered, amazed.
She nodded silently.
He stooped to lift down the lowest bar that she
might pass. Suddenly the bundle she clasped
gave a dexterous twist; a small head, with yellow
downy hair, was thrust forth; a pair of fawn-like
eyes fixed an inquiring stare upon him; the pink
face distended with a grin, to which the two small
teeth in the red mouth, otherwise empty, lent a
singularly merry expression; and with a manner
that was a challenge to pursuit, the head disappeared
as suddenly as it had appeared, tucked with af-
fected shyness under Evelina's arm.
She left Stephen standing with the bar in his
hand, staring blankly after her, and ran into the
cabin.
Her father had no questions to ask-nor she.
As he caught her in his arms he gave a great



<pb n="95"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"           95
cry of joy that rang through the house, and brought
Timothy from the barn, in astonishment, to the
scene.
" Eveliny's home!" he cried out to Tim, who, with
the ox-yoke in his hand, paused in the doorway.
"Kem ter stay  Eveliny's home  I knowed she'd
ker back to her old daddy. Eveliny's kem ter
stay fur good."
"They tole me they'd hectored ye plumb out'n
the town an' out'n yer office. They hed the in-
surance ter tell me that word !" she cried, sobbing
on his breast.
"What d'ye reckon I keer fur enny jestice's
cheer when I hev got ye agin ter set alongside o'
me by the fire?" he exclaimed, his cracked old
voice shrill with triumphant gladness.
He pushed her into her rocking-chair in the
chimney-corner, and laughed again with the su-
preme pleasure of the moment, although she had
leaned her head against the logs of the wall, and
was sobbing aloud with the contending emotions
that tore her heart.
"Didn't ye ever want ter kem afore, Eveliny ?"
he demanded. "I hev been a-pinin' fur a glimge
o' ye." He was in his own place now, his hands
trembling as they lay on the arms of his chair; a
pathetic reproach was in his voice. "Though old
folks oughtn't ter expec' too much o' young ones, ez
be all tuk up naterally with tharse'fs," he added,
bravely. He would not let his past lonely griefs mar
the bright present. " Old folks air mos'ly cumber-
ers-mos'ly cumberers o' the yearth, ennyhow."
Her weeping had ceased; she was looking at him



<pb n="96"/>
96           HIS "DAY IN COURT"
with dismayed surprise in her eyes, still lustrous
with unshed tears. "Why, dad I sent ye a hun-
dred messages ef I mought ker. I tole Abs'lom
ter tell Joe Boyd-bein' as ye liked Joe-I wanted
ter see ye." She leaned forward and looked up at
him with frowning intensity. "They never gin ye
that word ?"
He laughed aloud in sorry scorn. "We can't
teach our chil'n nuthin'," he philosophized. " They
hev got ter hurt tharse'fs with all the thorns an' the
stings o' the yearth. Our sperience with the sharp
things an' bitter ones don't do them no sarvice.
Naw, leetle darter-naw ! Ye mought ez well gin
a message o' kindness ter a wolf, an' expec' him ter
kerry it ter some lonesome, helpless thing a-wounded
by the way-side, ez gin it ter a Kittredge."
"I never will speak ter one o' 'em agin ez long
ez I live," she cried, with a fresh gust of tears.
"Waal," exclaimed the old man, reassuringly, and
chirping high, "hyar we all be agin, jes' the same
ez we war afore. Don't cry, Eveliny; it's jes' the
same."
A sudden babbling intruded upon the conversa-
tion. The youthful Kittredge, as he sat upon the
wide flat stones of the hearth, was as unwelcome
here in the Cove as a Quimbey had been in the
cabin on the mountain. The great hickory fire
called for his unmixed approval, coming in, as he
had done, from the gray wet day. He shuffled his
bare pink feet-exceedingly elastic and agile mem-
bers they seemed to be, and he had a remarkable
"purchase" upon their use-and brought them
smartly down upon their heels as if this were one



<pb n="97"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"           97
of the accepted gestures of applause. Then he
looked up at the dark frowning faces of his moth-
ers brothers, and gurgled with laughter, showing
the fascinating spectacle of his two front teeth.
Perhaps it was the only Kittredge eye that they
were not willing to meet. They solemnly gazed
beyond him and into the fire, ignoring his very ex-
istence. He sustained the slight with an admira-
ble cheerfulness, and babbled and sputtered and
flounced about with his hands. He grew pinker in
the generous firelight, and he looked very fat as he
sat in a heap on the floor. He seemed to have
threads tightly tied about his bolster-shaped limbs
in places where elder people prefer joints - in his
ankles and wrists and elbows-for his arms were
bare, and although his frock of pink calico hung
decorously high on one shoulder, it drooped quite
off from the other, showing a sturdy chest.
His mother took slight notice of him; she was
beginning to look about the room with a certain
critical disfavor at the different arrangement of the
household furniture adopted by her father's deaf and
widowed old sister who presided here now, and who,
it chanced, had been called away by the illness of
a relative. Evelina got up presently, and shifted
the position of the spinning-wheels, placing the flax-
wheel where the large wheel had been. She then
pushed out the table from the corner. " What ailed
her ter sot it hyar ?" she grumbled, in a disaffected
undertone, and shoved it to the centre of the floor,
where it had always stood during her own sway.
She cast a discerning glance up among the strings
of herbs and peppers hanging from above, and ex-
7



<pb n="98"/>
98          HIS "DAY IN COURT"
amined the shelves where the simple stores for table
use were arranged in earthen-ware bowls or gourds 
-all with an air of vague dissatisfaction. SWip
presently stepped into the shed-room, and therets
looked over the piles of quilts. They were in
order, certainly, but placed in a different method
from her own; another woman's hand had been at
work, and she was jealous of its very touch among
these familiar old things to which she seemed posi-
tively akin. "I wonder how I made out ter bide
so long on the mounting," she said; and with the
recollection of the long-haired Absalom there was
another gush of tears and sobs, which she stifled as
she could in one of the old quilts that held many
of her own stitches and was soothing to touch.
The infantile Kittredge, who was evidently not
born to blush unseen, seemed to realize that he had
failed to attract the attention of the three absorbed
Quimbeys who sat about the fire. He blithely ad-
dressed himself to another effort. He suddenly
whisked himself over on all-fours, and with a cer-
tain ursine aspect went nimbly across the hearth,
still holding up his downy yellow head, his pink
face agrin, and alluringly displaying his two face-
tious teeth. He caught the rung of Tim's chair,
and lifted himself tremulously to an upright post-
ure. And then it became evident that he was
about to give an exhibition of the thrilling feat of
walking around a chair. With a truly Kittredge
perversity he had selected the one that had the
savage Timothy seated in it. For an instant the
dark-browed face scowled down into his unaf-
frighted eyes: it seemed as if Tim might kick him



<pb n="99"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"           99
into the fire. The next moment he had set out to
circumnavigate, as it were. What a prodigious
force he expended upon it! How he gurgled and
grinned and twisted his head to observe the effect
upon the men, all sedulously gazing into the fire!
how he bounced, and anon how he sank with sud-
den genuflections ! how limber his feet seemed, and
what free agents ! Surely he never intended to put
them down at that extravagant angle. More than
once one foot was placed on top of the other-an
attitude that impeded locomotion and resulted in
his sitting down in an involuntary manner and
with some emphasis. With an appalling temerity
he clutched Tim's great miry boots to help him up
and on his way round. Occasionally he swayed
to and fro, with his teeth on exhibition, laughing
and babbling and shrilly exclaiming, inarticulately
bragging of his agile prowess, as if he were able to
defy all the Quimbeys, who would not notice him.
And when it was all over he went in his wriggling
ursine gait back to the hearth-stone, and there he
was sitting, demurely enough, and as if he had
never moved, when his mother returned and found
him.
There was no indication that he had attracted a
moment's attention. She looked gravely down at
him; then took her chair. A pair of blue yarn
socks was in her hand. " I never see sech darnin'
ez Aunt Sairy Ann do fur ye, dad; I hev jes tuk
my shears an' cut this heel smang out, an' I be
goin' ter do it over."
She slipped a tiny gourd into the heel, and began
to draw the slow threads to and fro across it.



<pb n="100"/>
100         HIS "DAY IN COURT"
The blaze, red and yellow, and with elusive ptr
pie gleams, leaped up the chimney. The sap 'w4
still in the wood; it sang a summer-tide song. But
an autumn wind was blowing shrilly down the
chimney; one could hear the sibilant rush of the
dead leaves on the blast. The window and the
door shook, and were still, and once more rattled
as if a hand were on the latch.
Suddenly-" Ever weigh him ?" her father asked.
She sat upright with a nervous start. It was a
moment before she understood that it was of the
Kittredge scion he spoke.
With his high cracked laugh the old man leaned
over, his outspread hand hovering about the plump
baby, uncertain where, in so much soft fatness, it
might be practicable to clutch him. There were
some large horn buttons on the back of his frock, a
half-dozen of which, gathered together, afforded a
grasp. He lifted the child by them, laughing in
undisguised pleasure to feel the substantial strain
upon the garment.
"Toler'ble survigrus," he declared, with his high
chirp.
His daughter suddenly sprang up with a pallid
face and a pointing hand.
"The winder!" she huskily cried-" suthin's at
the winder !"
But when they looked they saw only the dark
square of tiny panes, with the fireside scene genially
reflected on it. And then she fell to declaring that
she had been dreaming, and besought them not to
take down their guns nor to search, and would not
be still until they had all seemed to concede the



<pb n="101"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"           lo0
point; it was she who fastened the doors and shut-
ters, and she did not lie down to rest till they were
all asleep and hours had passed. None of them
doubted that it was Absalom's face that she had
seen at the window, where the light had once lured
him before, and she knew that she had dreamed no
dream like this.
It soon became evident that whenever Joe Boyd
was intrusted with a message he would find means
to deliver it. For upon him presently devolved
the difficult duties of ambassador. The first time
that his honest square face appeared at the rail
fence, and the sound of his voice roused Evelina
as she stood feeding the poultry close by, she re-
turned his question with a counter-question hard
to answer.
"I hev been up the mounting," he said, smiling,
as he hooked his arms over the rail fence. "Abs'-
lom he say he wanter know when ye'll git yer visit
out an' kem home."
She leaned her elbow against the ash-hopper, bal-
ancing the wooden bowl of corn-meal batter on its
edge and trembling a little; the geese and chickens
and turkeys crowded, a noisy rout, about her feet.
"Joe," she said, irrelevantly, "ye air one o' the
few men on this yearth ez ain't a liar."
He stared at her gravely for a moment, then
burst into a forced laugh. "Ho! ho! I tell a
bushel o' 'em a day, Eveliny !" He wagged his
head in an anxious affectation of mirth.
"Why'n't ye gin dad them messages ez Abs'lom
gin ye from me ?"



<pb n="102"/>
102         HIS "DAY IN COURT"
Joe received this in blank amaze; then, with si
den comprehension, his lower jaw dropped. .'He
looked at her with a plea for pity in his eyes. And
yet his ready tact strove to reassert itself.
"I mus' hev furgot 'em," he faltered.
"Did Abs'lom ever gin 'em ter ye?" she per-
sisted.
" Efhe did, I mus' hev furgot 'em," he repeated,
crestfallen and hopeless.
She laughed and turned jauntily away, once more
throwing the corn-meal batter to the greedily jost-
ling poultry. "Tell Abs'lom I hev f'und him out,"
shesaid. "He can't sot me agin dad no sech way.
This be miy home, an' hyar I be goin' ter 'bide."
And so she left the good Joe Boyd hooked on by
the elbows to the fence.
The Quimbeys, who had heard this conversation
from within, derived from it no small elation. " She
hev gin 'em the go-by fur good," Timothy said,
confidently, to his father, who laughed in triumph,
and pulled calmly at his pipe, and looked ten years
younger.
But Steve was surlily anxious. "I'd place heap
mo' dependence in Eveliny ef she didn't hev this
hyar way o' cryin' all the time. She 'lows she's glad
she kern-so gltzd she hev lef'Abs'lom fur good an'
all-an' then she busts out a-cryin' agin. I ain't
able ter argufy'on sech."
"Shucks! wimmen air always a-cryin', an' they
don't meah nuthin' by it," exclaimed the old man,
in the plenitude of his wisdom. "It air jes' one
o'-thar most contrarious ways. I hev seen 'em set
down an' cry fur joy an' pleasure."



<pb n="103"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"          103
But Steve was doubtful. "It be a powerful low-
sperited gift fur them ez hev ter 'bide along of 'em.
Eveliny never useter be tearful in nowise. Now
she cries a heap mo' 'n that thar shoat"--his
lips curled in contempt as he glanced toward the
door, through which was visible a small rotund fig-
ure in pink calico, seated upon the lowest log of
the wood - pile - " ez she fotched down hyar with
her. He never hev hed a reg'lar blate but two or
three times sence he hev been hyar, an' them war
when that thar old tur-rkey gobbler teetered up ter
him an' tuk his corn-dodger that he war a-eatin' on
plumb out'n his hand. He hed suthin' to holler fur
-hed los' his breakfus."
" Don't he 'pear ter you-uns to be powerful peeg-
eon-toed?" asked Tim, anxiously, turning to his
father.
"The gawbbler ?" faltered the amazed old man.
"Naw; him, him--ittredge," said Tim, jerking
his big thumb in the direction of the small boy.
" Law - dy Gawd A'mighty I naw / naw!" The
grandfather indignantly repudiated the imputation
of the infirmity. One would have imagined that
he would deem it meet that a Kittredge should be
pigeon-toed. " It's jes the way all babies hev got
a-walkin'; he ain't right handy yit with his feet-
jes a-beginnin' ter walk, an' sech. Peegeon- toed I
I say it, ye fool I" He cast a glance of contempt
on his eldest-born, and arrogantly puffed his pipe.
Again Joe Boyd came, and yet again. He
brought messages contrite and promissory from
Absalom; he brought commands stern and insist-
ent. He came into the house at last, and sat and



<pb n="104"/>
104         HIS "DAY IN COURT"
talked at the fireside in the presence of the ae
of the family, who bore themselves in a manner
calculated to impress the Kittredge emissary with
their triumph and contempt for his mission, al-
though they studiously kept silence, leaving it to
Evelina to answer.
At last the old man, leaning forward, tapped Joe
on the knee. "See hyar, Joe. Ye hev always
been a good frien' o' mine. This hyar man he
stole my darter from me, an' whenst she wanted ter
be frien's, an' not let her old dad die unforgivin',
he wouldn't let her send the word ter me. An'
then he sot himself ter spite an' hector me, an'
fairly run me out'n the town, an' harried me out'n
my office; an' when she f'und out-she wouldn't
take my word fur it-the deceivin' natur' o' the
Kittredge tribe, she hed hed enough o' 'em. I hev
let ye argufy 'bout'n it; ye hev hed yer fill of words.
An' now I be tired out. Ye ain't 'lowin' she'll ever
go back ter her husband, air ye ?"
Joe dolorously shook his head.
"Waal, ef ever ye kem hyar talkin' 'bout'n it
agin, I'll be 'bleeged ter take down my rifle ter ye."
Joe gazed, unmoved, into the fire.
"An' that would be mighty hard on me, Joe,
'kase ye be so pop'lar 'mongst all, I dunno what
the kentry-side would do ter me ef I war ter
put a bullet inter ye. Ye air a young man, Joe.
Ye oughter spare a old man sech a danger ez
that."
And so it happened that Joe Boyd's offices as
mediator ceased.
A week went by in silence and without result.



<pb n="105"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"           105
Evelina's tears seemed to keep count of the min-
utes. The brothers indignantly noted it, and even
the old man was roused from the placid securities
of his theories concerning lachrymose womankind,
and remonstrated sometimes, and sometimes grew
angry and exhorted her to go back. What did it
matter to her how her father was treated? He
was a cumberer of the ground, and many people
besides her husband had thought he had no right
to sit in a justice's chair. And then she would
burst into tears once more, and declare again that
she would never go back.
The only thoroughly cheerful soul about the
place was the intruding Kittredge. He sat con-
tinuously-for the weather was fine-on the lowest
log of the wood-pile, and swung his bare pink feet
among the chips and bark, and seemed to have
given up all ambition to walk. Occasionally red
and yellow leaves whisked past his astonished eyes,
although these were few now, for November was on
the wane. He babbled to the chickens, who pecked
about him with as much indifference as if he were
made of wood. His two teeth came glittering out
whenever the rooster crowed, and his gleeful laugh
-he rejoiced so in this handsomely endowed bird
--could be heard to the barn. The dogs seemed
never to have known that he was a Kittredge, and
wagged their tails at the very sound of his voice,
and seized surreptitious opportunities to lick his
face. Of all his underfoot world only the gobbler
awed him into gravity and silence; he would gaze
in dismay as the marauding fowl irresolutely ap-
proached from around the wood - pile, with long



<pb n="106"/>
o16         HIS "DAY IN COURT"
neck out-stretched and undulating gait, applying
first one eye and then the other to the pink hands,
for the gobbler seemed to consider them a per.
petual repository of corn-dodgers, which indeed
they were. Then the head and the wabbling red
wattles would dart forth with a sudden peck, and
the shriek that ensued proved that nothing could
be much amiss with the Kittredge lungs.
One fine day he sat thus in the red November
sunset.. The sky, seen through the interlacing
black boughs above his head, was all amber and
crimson, save for a wide space of pure and pallid
green, against which the purplish-garnet wintry
mountains darkly gloomed. Beyond the rail fence
the avenues of the bare woods were carpeted with
the sere yellowish leaves that gave back the sun-
light with a responsive illuminating effect, and thus
the sylvan vistas glowed. The long slanting beams
elongated his squatty little shadow till it was hard-
ly a caricature. He heard the cow lowing as she
came to be milked, fording the river where the
clouds were so splendidly reflected. The chickens
were going to roost. The odor of the wood, the
newly- hewn chips, imparted a fresh and fragrant
aroma to the air. He had found among them a
sweet-gum ball and a pine cone, and was applying
them to the invariable test of taste. Suddenly he
dropped them with a nervous start, his lips trem-
bled, his lower jaw fell, he was aware of a stealthy
approach. Something was creeping behind the
wood-pile. He hardly had time to bethink himself
of his enemy the gobbler when he was clutched
under the arm, swung through the air with a swift-



<pb n="107"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"          IO7
ness that caused the scream to evaporate in his
throat, and the next moment he looked quakingly
up into his father's face with unrecognizing eyes;
for he had forgotten Absalom in these few weeks.
He squirmed and wriggled as he was held on the
pommel of the saddle, winking and catching his
breath and spluttering, as preliminary proceedings
to an outcry. There was a sudden sound of heav-
ily shod feet running across the puncheon floor
within, a wild, incoherent exclamation smote the
air, an interval of significant silence ensued.
"Get up !" cried Absalom, not waiting for Tim's
rifle, but spurring the young horse, and putting
him at the fence. The animal rose with the elas-
ticity and lightness of an uprearing ocean wave.
The baby once more twisted his soft neck, and
looked anxiously into the rider's face. This was
not the gobbler. The gobbler did not ride horse-
back. Then the affinity of the male infant for the
noble equine animal suddenly overbore all else.
In elation he smote with his soft pink hand the
glossy arched neck before him. "Dul-lup !" he
arrogantly echoed Absalom's words. And thus
father and son at a single bound disappeared into
woods, and so out of sight.
The savage Tim was leaning upon his rifle in
the doorway, his eyes dilated, his breath short, his
whole frame trembling with excitement, as the
other men, alarmed by Evelina's screams, rushed
down from the barn.
"What ails ye, Tim?  Why'n't ye fire?" de-
manded his father.



<pb n="108"/>
108         HIS "DAY IN COURT"
Tim turned an agitated, baffled look upon him.
"I-I mought hev hit the baby," he faltered.
" Hain't ye got no aim, ye durned sinner ?" asked
Stephen, furiously.
"Bullet mought hev gone through him and struck
inter the baby," expostulated Tim.
"An' then agin it moughtn't !" cried Stephen.
"Lawd, ef I hed hed the chance !"
"Ye wouldn't hev done no differ," declared Tim.
"Hyar !" Steve caught his brother's gun and
presented it to Tim's lips. "Suck the bar'l. It's
'bout all ye air good fur."
The horses had been turned out. By the time
they were caught and saddled pursuit was evidently
hopeless. The men strode in one by one, dashing
the saddles and bridles on the floor, and finding in
angry. expletives a vent for their grief. And indeed
it might have seemed that the Quimbeys must have
long sought a choice Kittredge infant for adop-
tion, so far did their bewailings discount Rachel's
mourning.
" Don't cry, Eveliny," they said, ever and anon.
"We-uns '11 git him back fur ye."
But she had not shed a tear. She sat speech-
less, motionless, as if turned to stone.
"Laws - a - massy, child, ef ye would jes hev
b'lieved me 'bout'n them Kittredges- Abs'lom in
partic'lar- ye'd be happy an' free now," said the
old man, his imagination somewhat extending his
experience, for he had had no knowledge of his
son-in-law until their relationship began.
The evening wore drearily on. Now and then
the men roused themselves, and with lowering



<pb n="109"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"          109
faces discussed the opportunities of reprisal, and
the best means of rescuing the child. And whether
they schemed to burn the Kittredge cabin, or to
arm themselves, burst in upon their enemies, shoot-
ing and killing all who resisted, Evelina said noth-
ing, but stared into the fire with unnaturally dilated
eyes, her white lined face all drawn and somehow
unrecognizable.
" Never mind," her father said at intervals, taking
her cold hand, "we-uns '11 git him back, Eveliny.
The Lord hed a mother wunst, an' I'll be bound
He keeps a special pity for a wdman an' her
child."
"Oh, great gosh! who'd hev dreamt we'd hev
missed him so!" cried Tim, shifting his position,
and slipping his left arm over the back of his chair.
"Jes ter think o' the leetle size o' him, an' the
great big gap he hev lef' roun' this hyar ha'th-
stone 1"
"An' yit he jes sot underfoot, 'mongst the cat
an' the dogs, jes ez humble I" said Stephen.
"I'd git him back even ef he warn't no kin ter
me, Eveliny," declared Tim, and he spoke advisedly,
remembering that the youth was a Kittredge.
Still Evelina said not a word. All that night
she silently walked the puncheon floor, while the
rest of the household slept. The dogs, in vague
disturbance, because of the unprecedented vigil
and stir in the midnight, wheezed uneasily from
time to time, and crept restlessly about under the
cabin, now and again thumping their backs or
heads against the floor; but at last they betook
themselves to slumber. The hickory logs broke in



<pb n="110"/>
10          HIS "DAY IN COURT"
twain as they burned, and fell on either side, and
presently there was only the dull red glow of the
embers on her pale face, and the room was full of
brown shadows, motionless, now that the flames
flared no more. Once when the red glow, growing
ever dimmer, seemed almost submerged beneath
the gray ashes, she paused and stirred the coals.
The renewed glimmer showed a fixed expression
in her eyes, becoming momently more resolute.
At intervals she knelt at the window and placed
her hands about her face to shut out the light
from the hearth, and looked out upon the night.
How the chill stars loitered I How the dawn
delayed  The great mountain gloomed darkling
above the Cove. The waning moon, all melancholy
and mystic, swung in the purple sky. The bare,
stark boughs of the trees gave out here and there
a glimmer of hoar-frost. There was no wind;
when she heard the dry leaves whisk she caught a
sudden glimpse of a fox that, with his crafty shadow
pursuing him, leaped upon the wood-pile, nimbly
ran along its length, and so, noiselessly, away-
while the dogs snored beneath the house. A cock
crew from the chicken-roost; the mountain echoed
the resonant strain. She saw a mist come steal-
ing softly along a precipitous gorge; the gauzy
web hung shimmering in the moon; presently
the trees were invisible; anon they showed rigid.
among the soft enmeshment of the vapor, and again
were lost to view.
She rose; there was a new energy in her step;
she walked quickly across the floor and unbarred
the door.



<pb n="111"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"          III
The little cabin on the mountain was lost among
the'clouds. It was not yet day, but the old woman,
with that proclivity to early rising characteristic of
advancing years, was already astir. It was in the
.principal room of the cabin that she slept, and it
'contained another bed, in which, placed crosswise,
Were five billet-shaped objects under the quilts,
.,which when awake identified themselves as Peter
Kittredge's children. She had dressed and un-
covered the embers, and put on a few of the chips
.'  which had been spread out on the hearth to dry,
and had sat down in the chimney corner. A timid
blaze began to steal up, and again was quenched,
and only the smoke ascended in its form; then the
light flickered out once more, casting a gigantic
shadow of her sun-bonnet-for she had donned it
thus early-half upon the brown and yellow daubed
wall, and half upon the dark ceiling, making a spe-
cious stir amidst the peltry and strings of pop-corn
hanging motionless thence.
She sighed heavily once or twice, and with an
aged manner, and leaned her elbows on her knees
and gazed contemplatively at the fire. All at once
the ashes were whisked about the hearth as in a
sudden draught, and then were still. In momentary
surprise she pushed her chair back, hesitated, then
replaced it, and calmly settled again her elbows on
her knees. Suddenly once more a whisking of the
ashes; a cold shiver ran through her, and she
turned to see a hand fumbling at the batten shutter
close by. She stared for a moment as if paralyzed;
her spectacles fell to the floor from her nerveless
hand, shattering the lenses on the hearth. She



<pb n="112"/>
112         HIS "DAY IN COURT"
rose trembling to her feet, and her lips parted as if
to cry out. They emitted no sound, and she turned
with a terrified fascination and looked back. The
shutter had opened; there was no glass; the small
square of the window showed the nebulous gray
mist without, and defined upon it was Evelina's
head, her dark hair streaming over the red shawl
held about it, her fair oval face pallid and pensive,
and with a great wistfulness upon it; her lustrous
dark eyes glittered.
" Mother," her red lips quivered out.
The old crone recognized no treachery in her
heart. She laid a warning finger upon her lips.
All the men were asleep.
Evelina stretched out her yearning arms. "Gin
him ter me 1"
"Naw, naw, Eveliny," huskily whispered Absa-
lom's mother. "Ye oughter kem hyar an' 'bide
with yer husband-ye know ye ought."
Evelina still held out her insistent arms. "Gin
him ter me !" she pleaded.
The old woman shook her head sternly. "Ye
kem in, an' 'bide whar ye b'long."
Evelina took a step nearer the window. She
laid her hand on the sill. " Spos'n 'twar Abs'lom
whenst he war a baby," she said, her eyes softly
brightening, "an' another woman hed him an' kep'
him, 'kase ye an' his dad fell out-would ye hev
'lowed she war right ter treat ye like ye treat me-
whenst Abs'lom war a baby ?"
Once more she held out her arms.
There was a step in the inner shed-room; then
silence.



<pb n="113"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"           113
"Ye hain't got no excuse," the soft voice urged;
" ye know jes how I feel, how ye'd hev felt, whenst
Abs'lom war a baby."
'. The shawl had fallen back from her tender face;
.ir eyes glowed, her cheek was softly flushed. A
;Sudden terror thrilled through her as she again
. '; eard the heavy step approaching in the shed-room.
', . '-"Whenst Abs'lom war a baby," she reiterated, her
,  'whole pleading heart in the tones.
i'   A sudden radiance seemed to illumine the sad,
dun-colored folds of the encompassing cloud; her
'~ '.  'face shone with a transfiguring happiness, for the
hustling old crone had handed out to her a warm,
somnolent bundle, and the shutter closed upon the
mists with a bang.
"The wind's riz powerful suddint," Peter said,
noticing the noise as he came stumbling in, rubbing
his eyes. He went and fastened the shutter, while
his mother tremulously mended the fire. /
The absence of the baby was not noticed for
.   some time, and when the father's hasty and angry
questions elicited the reluctant facts, the outcry for
i:. his loss was hardly less bitter among the Kittredges
'',itan among the Quimbeys. The fugitives were
'; '!,' #:hielded from capture by the enveloping mist, and
'ihen Absalom returned from the search he could
'lo naught but indignantly upbraid his mother.
She was terrified by her own deed, and cowered
under:Absalom's wrath. It was in a moral collapse,
she felt, that she could have done this thing. She
flung.her apron over her head, and sat still and 
silent-a monumental figure-among them. Once,
roused by Absalom's reproaches, she made some
5



<pb n="114"/>
114         HIS "DAY IN COURT"
effort:to defend and exculpate herself; speakitg
from behind the enveloping apron. 
"I ain't born no Kittredge nohow," she irrele-
vantly asseverated, "an' I never war. An' when
Eveliny axed me how I'd hev liked ter hev another
'oman take Abs'lom whenst he war a baby, I couldn't
hold out no longer."
" Shucks !" cried Absalom, unfilially; " ye'd a heap
better be a-studyin' 'bout'n my good now 'n whenst
I war a baby--a-givin' away my child ter them
Quimbeys; a-h'istin' him out'n the winder!"
She was glad to retort that he was "impident,"
and to take refuge in an aggrieved silence, as many
another mother has done when outmatched by logic.
After this there was more cheerfulness in her hid-
den face than might have been argued from her
port of important sorrow. "Bes' ter hev no jawin',
though," she said to herself, as she sat thus inscrut-
ably veiled. And deep in her repentant heart she
was contradictorily glad that Evelina and the baby
were safe together down in the Cove.
Old Joel Quimbey, putting on his spectacles, with
a look of keenest curiosity, to read a paper which
the deputy-sheriff of the county presented when he
drew rein by the wood-pile one afternoon some
three weeks later, had some difficulty in identifying
a certain Elnathan Daniel Kittredge specified there-
in. He took off his spectacles, rubbed them smart-
ly, and- put them on again. The writing was un-
changed. Surely it must mean the baby. That
was the only Kittredge whose body they could be
summoned. to produce on the 24th of December



<pb n="115"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"           115
before the judge of the circuit court, now in session.
He turned the paper about and looked at it, his
natural interest as a man augmented by his recog-
nition as an ex-magistrate of its high important
legal character.
"Eveliny," he quavered, at once flattered and
furious, "dad-burned ef Abs'lom hain't gone an'
got out a habeas corpus fur the baby !"
The phrase had a sound so deadly that there was
much ado to satisfactorily explain the writ and its
functions to Evelina, who had felt at ease again since
the baby was at home, and so effectually guarded
that to kidnap him was necessarily to murder two
or three of the vigilant and stalwart Quimbey men.
So much joy did it afford the old man to air his
learning and consult his code-a relic of his justice-
ship-that he belittled the danger of losing the said
Elnathan Daniel Kittredge in the interest with
which he looked forward to the day for him to be
produced before the court.
There was a gathering of the clans on that day.
Quimbeys and Kittredges who had not visited the
town for twenty years were jogging thither betimes
that morning on the red clay roads, all unimpeded
by the deep mud which, frozen into stiff ruts and
ridges here and there, made the way hazardous to
the running-gear. The lagging winter had come,
and the ground was half covered with a light fall
of snow.
The windows of the court-house were white with 
frost; the weighted doors clanged continuously.
An old codger, slowly ascending the steps, and
pushing into the semi-obscurity of the hall, paused



<pb n="116"/>
I16      l HIS "DAY IN COURT"
as the door slammed behind him, stared at the
sheriff in surprise, then fixed him with a bantering
leer.  The light that slanted through the open
court-room door fell upon the official's burly figure,
his long red beard, his big broad-brimmed hat
pushed back from his laughing red face, conscious-
ly ludicrous and abashed just now.
"Hev ye made a find?" demanded the new-
comer.
For in the strong arms of the law sat, bolt-
upright, Elnathan Daniel Kittredge, his yellow
head actively turning about, his face decorated
with a grin, and on most congenial terms with
the sheriff.
"They're lawin' 'bout'n him in thar "-the sheriff
jerked his thumb toward the door. " Habeas corpus
perceedin's. Dunno ez I ever see a friskier leetle
cuss. Durned ef I 'ain't got a good mind ter run
off with him myself."
The said Elnathan Daniel Kittredge once more
squirmed round and settled himself comfortably in
the hollow of the sheriff's elbow, who marvelled to
find himself so deft in holding him, for it was twen-
ty years since his son-a gawky youth who now
affected the company at the saloon, and was none
too filial-was the age and about the build of this
infant Kittredge.
"They hed a reg'lar scrimmage hyar in the hall
-them fool men-Quimbey an' Kittredge. Old
man Quimbey said suthin' ter Abs'lom Kittredge
-I dunno what all. Abs'lom never jawed back
none. He jes made a dart an' snatched this hyar
leetle critter out'n his mother's arms, stiddier wait-



<pb n="117"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"           117
in' fur the law, what he summonsed himself. Blest
ef  didn't hev ter hold my revolver ter his head,
A, '' then crack him over the knuckles, ter make him
L:   W :j g o -the child. I didn't want ter arrest him-
i;> , mighty clever boy, Abs'lom Kittredge! I promised
t jat ityoung woman I'd keep holt o' the child till the
}Ift ii.[w'gins its say-so. I feel sorry fur her; she's been
,  ..!rough a heap."
i  '- "'':" Waal, ye look mighty pritty, totin' him around
l  '" , hyar," his friend encouraged him with a grin. " I'll
l  'say that fur ye-ye look mighty pritty."
PI''   And in fact the merriment in the hall at the sher-
iffs expense began to grow so exhilarating as to
make him feel that the proceedings within were too
interesting to lose. His broad red face with its big
red beard reappeared in the doorway-slightly em-
barrassed because of the sprightly manners of his
charge, who challenged to mirth every eye that
glanced at him by his toothful grin and his gurgles
and bounces; he was evidently enjoying the excite-
ment and his conspicuous position. He manfully
gnawed at his corn-dodger from time to time, and
'     tt:from the manner in which he fraternized with his
B    e.-w acquaintance, the sheriff, he seemed old enough
AI6 dispense with maternal care, and, but for his in-
:imnplete methods of locomotion, able to knock about
!i';to'wn with the boys. The Quimbeys took note of
,.: ' 'hs mature demeanor with sinking hearts; they
:  looked anxiously at the judge, wondering if he had
ever before seen such precocity-anything so young
to be so old: "He 'ain't never afore 'peared so
survigrus- so durned survigrus ez he do ter-day,"
they whispered to each other.



<pb n="118"/>
118         HIS "DAY IN COURT"
"Yes, sir," his father was saying, on examina-
tion, "year old. Eats anything he kin git-cab9
bage an' fat meat an' anything. Could walk if he
wanted ter. But he 'ain't been raised right"-he
glanced at his wife to observe the effect of this
statement. He felt a pang as he noted her pensive,
downcast face, all tremulous and agitated, over-
whelmed as she was by the crowd and the infinite
moment of the decision. But Absalom, too, had his
griefs, and they expressed themselves perversely.
"He hev been pompered an' fattened by bein' let
ter eat an' sleep so much, till he be so heavy ter
his self he don't wanter take the trouble ter git
about. He could walk ennywhar.    He's plumb
survigrus."
And as if in confirmation, the youthful Kittredge
lifted his voice to display his lung power. He hila-
riously babbled, and suddenly roared out a stento-
rian whoop, elicited by nothing in particular, then
caught the sheriff's beard, and buried in it his con-
scious pink face.
The judge looked gravely up over his spectacles.
He had a bronzed complexion, a serious, pondering
expression, a bald head, and a gray beard. He wore
a black broadcloth suit, somewhat old-fashioned in
cut, and his black velvet waist-coat had suffered an
eruption of tiny red satin spots. He had great re-
spect for judicial decorums, and no Kittredge, how-
ever youthful, or survigrus, or exalted in importance
by habeas corpus proceedings, could "holler" un-
molested where he presided.
"Mr. Sheriff," he said, solemnly, "remove that
child from the presence of the court."
.                     ,    .~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="119"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"          119
A'-Ad' the said Elnathan Daniel Kittredge went
Pt gleefully kicking in the arms of the law.
;' .  " :The hundred or so grinning faces in the court-
relapsed quickly into gravity and excited in-
71,,      The rows of jeans-clad countrymen seated
i the long benches on either side of the bar
,i{bie' d forward with intent attitudes. For this was
.ciicih feast of local gossip, such as had not been so
;?'ltountifully spread within their recollection. All
ti i' ancient Quimbey and Kittredge feuds contrived
to be detailed anew in offering to the judge reasons
why father or mother was the more fit custodian of
,  the child in litigation.
' '   . As Absalom sat listening to all this, his eyes
were suddenly arrested by his wife's face -half
'·.     draped it was, half shadowed by her sun-bonnet,
its fine and delicate profile distinctly outlined
against the crystalline and frosted pane of the win-
dow near which she sat. The snow without threw
a white reflection upon it; its rich coloring in con-
trast was the more intense; it was very pensive,
with the heavy lids drooping over the lustrous eyes,
i .atpd with a pathetic appeal in its expression.
'.,'And suddenly his thoughts wandered far afield.
B  e wondered that it had come to this; that she
co'i d have misunderstood him so; that he had
'/ imght her hard and perverse and unforgiving.
',ls heart was all at once melting within him;
,. : somehow he was reminded how slight a thing she
wau, and how strong was the power that nerved her
slender hand to drag his heavy weight, in his dead
and' helpless unconsciousness, down to the bars
and into the safety of the sheltering laurel that



<pb n="120"/>
120         HIS "DAY IN COURT"
night, when he lay wounded and bleeding under
the lighted window of the cabin in the Cove. A
deep tenderness, an irresistible yearning had come
upon him; he was about to rise, he was about to
speak he knew not what, when suddenly her face
was irradiated as one who sees a blessed vision; a
happy light sprang into her eyes; her lips curved
with a smile; the quick tears dropped one by one
on her hands, nervously clasping and unclasping
each other. He was bewildered for a moment.
Then he heard Peter gruffly growling a half-whis-
pered curse, and the voice of the judge, in the exer-
cise of his discretion, methodically droning out his
reasons for leaving so young a child in the custody
of its mother, disregarding the paramount rights of
the father. The judge concluded by dispassionate-
ly recommending the young couple to betake them-
selves home, and to try to live in peace together, or,
at any rate, like sane people. Then he thrust his
spectacles up on his forehead, drew a long sigh of
dismissal, and said, with a freshened look of inter-
est, "Mr. Clerk, call the next case."
The Quimbey and Kittredge factions poured into
the hall; what cared they'for the disputed claims
of Jenkins versus Jones ? The lovers of sensation
cherished a hope that there might be a lawless ef-
fort to rescue the infant Kittredge from the custo-
dy to which he had been committed by the court.
The Quimbeys watchfully kept about him in a close
squad, his pink sun-bonnet, in which his head was
eclipsed, visible among their brawny jeans shoul-
ders, as his mother carried him in her arms. The
sheriff looked smilingly after him from the court-



<pb n="121"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT           121
hofee steps, then inhaled a long breath, and began
j'0ear out to the icy air the name of a witness
'  -,ilt11ed within. Instead of a gate there was a flight
Nr izsteps on each side of the fence, surmounted by
small platform. Evelina suddenly shrank back
'~    Haihe stood on the platform, for beside the fence
ilom was waiting. Timothy hastily vaulted
the fence, drew his " shootingiron" from his
tleg, and cocked it with a metallic click, sharp
peremptory in the keen wintry air. For a mo-
. mnent Absalom said not a word. He looked up at
Evelina with as much reproach as bitterness in his
dark eyes. They were bright with the anger that
fired his blood; it was hot in his bronzed cheek; it
quivered in his hands. The dry and cold atmos-
phere amplified the graces of his long curling yel-
low hair that she and his mother loved. His hat
was pushed back from his face. He had not
spoken to her since the day of his ill-starred confi-
dence,'but he would not be denied now.
"Ye'll repent it," he said, threateningly. "I'll
,': ,. take special pains fur that."
.i::.i  She bestowed on him one defiant glance, and
'"i. 'ghed-a bitter little laugh. "Ye air ekal ter it;
?:   ce'uhave  a special gift fur makin' folks repent they
^    ?- Pver seen ye."
!H~% * "The jedge jes gin him ter ye 'kase ye made him
·     u Aut sech a fibble little pusson," he sneered. "But
it'a jes fur a time."
'  She held the baby closer. He busied himself in
taking off his sun-bonnet and putting it on hind part
before, gurgling with smothered laughter to find
himself thus queerly masked, and he made futile



<pb n="122"/>
122         HIS "DAY IN COURT"
efforts to play "peep- eye" with anybody jovially
disposed in the crowd. But they were all gravely
absorbed in the conjugal quarrel at which they
were privileged to assist.
"It's jes fur a time," he reiterated.
"Wait an' see !" she retorted, triumphantly.
"I won't wait," he declared, goaded; "I'll take
him yit; an' when I do I'll clar out'n the State o'
Tennessee-see ef I don't !"
She turned white and trembled. "Ye dassent,"
she cried out shrilly. "Ye'll be 'feared o' the law."
"Wait an' see 1" He mockingly echoed her words,
and turned in his old confident manner, and strode
out of the crowd.
Faint and trembling, she crept into the old can-
vas-covered wagon, and as it jogged along down
the road stiff with its frozen ruts and ever nearing
the mountains, she clasped the cheerful Kittredge
with a yearning sense of loss, and declared that
the judge had made him no safer than before. It
was in vain that her father, speaking from the
legal lore of the code, detailed the contempt of
court that the Kittredges would commit should
they undertake to interfere with' the judicial de-
cision-it might be even considered kidnapping.
" But what good would that do me-an' the baby
whisked plumb out'n the State? Ef Abs'lom ain't
'feared o' Tim's rifle, what's he goin' ter keer fur
the pore jedge with nare weepon but his leetle con-
tempt o' court -ter jail Abs'lom, ef he kin make
out ter ketch him !"
She leaned against the swaying hoop of the cov-
er of the wagon and burst into tears. "Oh, none



<pb n="123"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"           123
o' ye I1l do nuthin' fur me !" she exclaimed, in fran-
tic eproach. "Nuthin' !"
- ** Ye talk like 'twar we-uns ez made up sech fool-
:,:. ':: "ipfess ez habeas corpus out'n our own heads," said
'1"-iiothby. "I 'ain't never looked ter the law fur
4'., ,pu;ftmction.  Hyar's the pertecter."  He touched
^''i,          ° trigger of his rifle and glanced reassuringly at
;        M Al ister as he sat beside her on the plank laid as
i2tWseat from side to side of the wagon.
l ;!;-. / She calmed herself for a moment; then suddenly
is 'iooked aghast at the rifle, and with some occult and
'   hideous thought, burst anew into tears.
'   Waal, sir," exclaimed Stephen, outdone, "what
with all this hyar daily weepin' an' nightly mournin',
I 'ain't got spunk enough lef' ter stan' up agin the
leetlest Kittredge a-goin'. I ain't man enough ter
sight a rifle. Kittredges kin ker enny time an'
take my hide, horns, an' tallow ef they air minded
so ter do."
"I 'lowed I hearn suthin' a-gallopin' down the
'; . road," said Tim, abruptly.
i I Her tears suddenlyceased. She clutched the baby
'"dtpser, and turned and lifted the flap of the white
l    ta.in at the back of the wagon, and looked out
L:;:,I  a wild and terror-stricken eye. The red clay
~f!i~t1 stretched curveless, a long way visible and
nt.nt'. The black bare trees stood shivering in
t h'*te chilly blast on either side; among them was an
occasional clump of funereal cedars. Away off the
brown wooded hills rose; snow lay in thin crust-like
patches here and there, and again the earth wore
the pallid gray of the crab-grass or the ochreous
red of the gully-washed clay.



<pb n="124"/>
124         HIS "DAY IN COURT"
"I don't see nuthin'," she said, in the bated
voice of affrighted suspense.
While she still looked out flakes suddenly began
to fly, hardly falling at first, but poised tentatively,
fluctuating athwart the scene, presently thickening,
quickening, obscuring it all, isolating the woods with
an added sense of solitude since the sight of the
world and the sound of it were so speedily annulled.
Even the creak of the wagon-wheels was muffled.
Through the semicircular aperture in the front of
the wagon-cover the horns of the oxen were dimly
seen amidst the serried flakes; the snow whitened
the backs of the beasts and added its burden to
their yoke. Once as they jogged on she fancied
again that she heard hoof-beats--this time a long
way ahead, thundering over a little bridge high
above a swirling torrent, that reverberated with a
hollow tone to the faintest footfall. "Jes some-
body ez hev passed we-uns, takin' the short-cut by
the bridle-path," she ruminated. No pursuer, evi-
dently.
Everything was deeply submerged in the snow
before they reached the dark little cabin nestling
in the Cove. Motionless and dreary it was; not
even a blue and gauzy wreath curled out of the
chimney, for the fire had died on the hearth in their
absence. No living creature was to be seen. The
fowls were huddled together in the hen-house, and
the dogs had accompanied the family to town, trot-
ting beneath the wagon with lolling tongues and
smoking breath; when they nimbly climbed the
fence their circular footprints were the first traces
to mar the level expanse of the door-yard. The



<pb n="125"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"          12$
bie imbs of the trees were laden; the cedars bore
.' .  It flower-like tufts amidst the interlacing fibrous
,age. The eaves were heavily thatched; the
s "hilts lay in the fence corners.
y'.,-yerything was covered except, indeed, one side
,-i  e fodder-stack that stood close to the barn.
e na, going out to milk the cow, gazed at it for
>,moment in surprise. The snow had slipped
;down from it, and lay in rolls and piles about the
base, intermixed with the sere husks and blades
!?  that seemed torn out of the great cone. "Waal,
E   sir, Spot mus' hev been hongry fur true, ter kem
a-foragin' this wise. Looks ez ef she hev been
fairly a-burrowin'."
She turned and glanced over her shoulder at
tracks in the snow-shapeless holes, and filling
fast-which she did not doubt were the footprints
of the big red cow, standing half in and half out of
the wide door, slowly chewing her cud, her breath
; i'.  visibly curling out on the chill air, her great lips
,' opening to emit a muttered low. She moved for-
i;.ward suddenly into the shelter as Evelina started
'iMaew toward it, holding the piggin in one hand
aitod clasping the baby in the other arm.
: id f Evelina noted the sound of her brothers' two axes,
A.s i;., y at the wood-pile, their regular cleavage split-
f ::;-^i g the air with a sharp stroke and bringing a
, :  crystalline shivering echo from the icy mountain.
She did not see the crouching figure that came cau-
tiously burrowing out from the stack. Absalom
rose to his full height, looking keenly about him the
while, and stole noiselessly in the soft snow to the
stable, and peered in through a crevice in the wall.



<pb n="126"/>
126         HIS "DAY IN COURT"
Evelina had placed the piggin upon the straw.
covered ground, and stood among the horned
cattle and the huddling sheep, her soft melancholy
face half shaded by the red shawl thrown over her
head and shoulders. A tress of her brown hair
escaped and curled about her white neck, and hung
down over the bosom of her dark-blue homespun
dress. Against her shoulder the dun-colored cow
rubbed her horned head. The baby was in a pen-
sive mood, and scarcely babbled. The reflection
of the snow was on his face, heightening the ex-
quisite purity of the tints of his infantile complex-
ion. His gentle, fawn-like eyes were full of soft
and lustrous languors. His long lashes drooped
over them now, and again were lifted. His short
down of yellow hair glimmered golden against the
red shawl over his mother's shoulders.
One of the beasts sank slowly upon the ground
-a tired creature doubtless, and night was at
hand; then another, and still another. Their post-
ure reminded Absalom, as he looked, that this was
Christmas Eve, and of the old superstition that the
cattle of the barns spend the night upon their
knees, in memory of the wondrous Presence that
once graced their lowly place. The boughs rattled
suddenly in the chill blast above his head; the
drifts fell about him. He glanced up mechanically
to see in the zenith a star of gracious glister, trem-
ulous and tender, in the rifts of the breaking clouds.
"I wonder ef it air the same star o' Bethlehem ?"
he said, thinking of the great sidereal torch her-
alding the Light of the World. He had a vague
sense that this star has never set, however the wan-



<pb n="127"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"          127
planets may come and go in their wide jour-
^l the seasons roll. He looked again into the
::   oiniug place, at the mother and her child, re-
B^ Shbering that the Lord of heaven and earth had
H        i5U!lain in a manger, and clung to a humble
hmother.
_s:? ~man shook'with a sudden affright. He had
to wrest the child from her grasp, and
iit and ride away; he was roused from his
O       'i^^ne by the thrusting upon him of his opportu-
':ity, facilitated a hundredfold.  Evelina had evi-
-    dently forgotten something. She hesitated for a
moment; then put the baby down upon a great pile
it/,~  of straw among the horned creatures, and, catching
her shawl about her head, ran swiftly to the house.
1K     Absalom moved mechanically into the doorway.
The child, still pensive and silent, and looking ten-
derly infantile, lay upon the straw.  A sudden
,. ping of pity for her pierced his heart: how her own
- ~mil~  d be desolated I His horse, hitched in a clump
_edars, awaited him ten steps away. It was his
_ c   elmj1anc-nhis  last chance. And he had been
entreaited. The child's eyes rested, startled
_       iHlffd, 'upon him; he must be quick.
_     F:HH^ltK  instant he turned suddenly, ran has-
_^^*~t'f    the snow, crashed among the cedars,
_     dH Bi ~his horse, and galloped away.
Rs: only a moment that Evelina expected to
. ~?"'.' .     hbouse, but the gourd of salt which she
",.'. :sought'was not in its place. She hurried out with
it at last, unprescient of any danger until all at
once she saw the footprints of a man in the snow,
otherwise untrodden, about the fodder-stack. She



<pb n="128"/>
128         HIS "DAY IN COURT"
still heard the two axes at the wood-pile.  Her
father, she knew, was at the house.
A smothered scream'escaped her lips. The steps
had evidently gone into the stable, and had come
out thence. Her faltering strength could scarcely
support her to the door, And then she saw lying
in the straw Elnathan Daniel, beginning to babble
and gurgle again, and to grow very pink with joy
over a new toy-a man's glove, a red woollen glove,
accidentally dropped in the straw. She caught it
from his hands, and turned it about curiously. She
had knit it herself-for Absalom I
When she came into the house, beaming with joy,
the baby holding the glove in his hands, the men
listened to her in dumfounded amaze, and with sig-
nificant side glances at each other.
" He wouldn't take the baby whenst he hed the
chance, 'kase he knowed 'twould hurt me so. An'
he never wanted ter torment me - I reckon he
never did mean ter torment me. An' he did 'low
wunst he war sorry he spited dad.  h ! I hev been
a heap too quick an' spiteful myself. I hev been
so terrible wrong ! Look a-hyar; he lef' this glove
ter show me he hed been hyar, an' could hev tuk
the baby ef he hed hed the heart ter do it. Oh! 
I'm goin' right up the mounting an' tell him how
sorry I be."
"Toler'ble cheap!" grumbled Stephen-" one
old glove. An' he'll git Elnathan Daniel an' ye too.
A smart fox he be."
They could not dissuade her. And after a time
it came to pass that the Quimbey and Kittredge
feuds were healed; for how could the heart of a



<pb n="129"/>
HIS "DAY IN COURT"          129
gi'fa$er withstand a toddling spectacle in pink
*        .;i< that ran away one day some two years later,
-'i iL mpany with an'adventurous dog, and came
the mountain to the cabin in the Cove,
ng through the fence rails after the manner
B~'  Js h.underfoot world, proceeding thence to the
, where he made himself very merry and very
i ? And when Tim mounted his horse and
_  -up the mountain with the youngster on the
mel of the saddle, lest Evelina should be out of
mind with fright because of his absence, how
_ Ibhould he and old Mrs. Kittredge differ in their
,?respective opinions of his vigorous growth, and
-i. grace of countenance, and peartness of manner?
:." On the strength of this concurrence Tim was in-
.' duced to "'light an' hitch," and he even sat on the
-:.cabin porch and talked over the crops with Ab-
salom, who, the next time he went to town, stopped
. at the cabin in the Cove to bring word how El-
H  nathan Daniel was "thrivin'." The path that Eve-
isia had worn to the crag in those first homesick
on the mountain rapidly extended itself into
^ Cove, and widened and grew smooth, as the
Gufather went up and the grandson came down.
'  ?  o'
, .
,.



<pb n="130"/>



<pb n="131"/>
· .  ' 
i¢,~'~~~~~~~~~~~ .
B^    WVAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
"i'
w~~~~~~~~~~! ...,
.,
:?-
'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
W.i
::,-
ii:
i:;.,,L ': .
~;.,
g·i 



<pb n="132"/>
. a
I
9
I



<pb n="133"/>
WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
: ,. . 
;,.   NE memorable night in Lonesome Cove the
^-  tanger of the county entered upon a momentous
:;:'. '  crisis in his life. What hour it was he could hardly
'  have said, for the primitive household reckoned
time by the sun when it shone, by the domestic
-' routine when no better might be. It was late. The
old crone in the chimney-corner nodded over her
knitting. In the trundle-bed at the farther end of
the shadowy room were transverse billows under the
quilts, which intimated that the small children were
numerous enough for the necessity of sleeping cross-
wise. He had smoked out many pipes, and at last
knocked the cinder from the bowl. The great hick-
ovry logs had burned asunder and fallen from the
;  tones that served as andirons. He began to slowly
i ' cover the embers with ashes, that the fire might
;:i 'lkeep till morning.
I.'  '. -EHiS wife, a faded woman, grown early old, was
bringing the stone jar of yeast to place close by
''the hearth, that it might not " take a chill" in some
sudden change of the night. It was heavy, and
she bent in carrying it. Awkward, and perhaps
nervous, she brought it sharply against the shovel
in his hands.
The clash roused the old crone in the corner.



<pb n="134"/>
134     'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
She recognized the situation instantly, and the feat-
ures that sleep had relaxed into inexpressiveness
took on a weary apprehension, which they wore like
a habit. The man barely raised his surly black
eyes, but his wife drew back humbly with a mutter
of apology.
the next moment the shovel was almost thrust
out of his grasp.  A tiny barefooted girl, in a
straight unbleached cotten night-gown and a quaint
little cotton night-cap, cavalierly pushed him aside,
that she might cover in the hot ashes a burly sweet-
potato, destined to slowly roast by morning. A
long and careful job she made of it, and unconcern-
edly kept him waiting while she pottered back and
forth about the hearth. She loooked up once with
an authoritative eye, and he hastily helped to ad-
just the potato with the end of the shovel. And
then he glanced at her, incongruously enough, as
if waiting for her autocratic nod of approval. She
gravely accorded it, and pattered nimbly across the
puncheon floor to the bed.
"Now," he drawled, in gruff accents, " ef you-uns
hev all had yer fill o' foolin' with this hyar fire, I'll
kiver it, like I hev started out ter do."
At this moment there was a loud trampling upon
the porch without. The batten door shook violently.
The ranger sprang up. As he frowned the hair on
his scalp, drawn forward, seemed to rise like bristles.
"Dad-burn that thar fresky filly !" he cried, an-
grily. "Jes' brung her noisy bones up on that thar
porch agin, an' her huffs will bust spang through the
planks o' the floor the fust thing ye know."
The narrow aperture, as he held the door ajar,



<pb n="135"/>
'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE      I35
showed outlined against the darkness the graceful
head of a young mare, and once more hoof-beats
resounded on the rotten planks of the porch.
t'. Clouds were adrift in the sky. No star gleamed
ini the wide space high above the sombre mountains.
On every side they encompassed Lonesome Cove,
. irhcb seemed to have importunately thrust itself
,.  i ito the darkling solemnities of their intimacy.
. '';:' .I All at once the ranger let the door fly from his
y':? , hand, and stood gazing in blank amazement. For
.':;id there was a strange motion in the void vastnesses
.l;'" of the wilderness. They were creeping into view.
How, he could not say, but the summit of the great
mountain opposite was marvellously distinct against
the sky.  He saw the naked, gaunt, December
woods. He saw the grim, gray crags. And yet
Lonesome Cove below and the spurs on the other
side were all benighted. A pale, flickering light
was dawning in the clouds; it brightened, faded,
glowed again, and their sad, gray folds assumed a
vivid vermilion reflection, for there was a fire in
the forest below. Only these reactions of color on
the clouds betokened its presence and its progress.
Sometimes a fluctuation of orange crossed them,
then a glancing line of blue, and once more that
living red hue which only a pulsating flame can
bestow.
"Air it the comin' o' the Jedgmint Day, Tobe ?"
asked his wife, in a meek whisper.
"I'd be afraid so if I war ez big a sinner ez you-
uns," he returned.
"The woods air afire," the old woman declared,
in a shrill voice.



<pb n="136"/>
136     'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
"They be a-soakin' with las' night's rain," he re-
torted, gruffly.
The mare was standing near the porch. Sudden-
ly he mounted her and rode hastily off, without a
word of his intention to the staring women in the
';:r  · -doorway.
He left freedom of speech behind him. "Take
4.'.4'       yer bones along, then, ye tongue-tied catanountl"
I;'  ~    his wife's mother apostrophized him, with all the
acrimony of long repression. "Got no mo' polite-
ness 'n a settin' hen," she muttered, as she turned
back into the room.
The young woman lingered wistfully. "I wisht
he wouldn't go a-ridin' off that thar way 'thout lettin'
we-uns know whar he air bound fur, an' when he'll
ker back. He mought git hurt some ways roun'
;f   ~    that thar fire-git overtook by it, mebbe."
"Ef he war roasted 'twould be mighty peaceful
round in Lonesome," the old crone exclaimed, ran-
corously.
Her daughter stood for a moment with the bar
of the door in her hand, still gazing out at the flare
in the sky. The unwonted emotion had conjured a
change in the stereotyped patience in her face-
even anxiety, even the acuteness of fear, seemed a
less pathetic expression than that meek monotony
bespeaking a broken spirit. As she lifted her eyes
to the mountain one might wonder to see that they
were so blue. In the many haggard lines drawn
upon her face the effect of the straight lineaments
was lost; but just now, embellished with a flush, she
looked young-as young as her years.
As she buttoned the door and put up the bar her



<pb n="137"/>
'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE       137
mother's attention was caught by the change. Peer-
ing at her critically, and shading her eyes with her
hand from the uncertain flicker of the tallow dip,
she broke out, passionately: " Wa'al, 'Genie, who
would ever hev thought ez yer cake would be all
dough ? Sech a laffin', plump, spry gal ez ye useter
be-.fur all the worl' like a fresky young deer  An'
sech a pack o' men ez ye hed the choice amongst!
:  At' ter pick out Tobe Gryce an' marry him, an' kern
,,';'.  'way down hyar ter live along o' him in Lonesome
':Cove I"
She chuckled aloud, not that she relished her
f''t"'-  mirth, but the harlequinade of fate constrained a
laugh for its antics. The words recalled the past
to Eugenia; it rose visibly before her. She had
had scant leisure to reflect that her life might have
been ordered differently. In her widening eyes
were new depths, a vague terror, a wild speculation,
all struck aghast by its own temerity.
"Ye never said nuthin ter hender," she fal-
tered.
"I never knowed Tobe, sca'cely. How's enny-
body goin' ter know a man ez lived 'way off down
hyar in Lonesome Cove?" her mother retorted,
acridly, on the defensive. "He never courted me,
nohows. All the word he gin me war, ' Howdy,' an'
I gin him no less."
There was a pause.
Eugenia knelt on the hearth. She placed to-
gether the broken chunks, and fanned the flames
with a turkey wing. "I won't kiver the fire yit,"
she said, thoughtfully. "He mought be chilled
when he gits home."



<pb n="138"/>
138     'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
The feathery flakes of the ashes flew; they caught
here and there in her brown hair. The blaze flared
up, and flickered over her flushed, pensive face, and
glowed in her large and brilliant eyes.
"Tobe said 'Howdy,'" her mother bickered on.
"I knowed by that ez he hed the gift o' speech, but
he spent no mo' words on me." Then, suddenly,
with a change of tone: "I war a fool, though, ter
gin my cornsent ter yer marryin' him, bein' ez ye
war the only child I hed, an' I knowed I'd hev ter
live with ye 'way down hyar in Lonesome Cove.
I wish now ez ye hed abided by yer fust choice, an'
married Luke Todd."
Eugenia looked up with a gathering frown. "I
hev no call ter spen' words 'bout Luke Todd," she
said, with dignity, "ez me an' him are both married
ter other folks."
"I never said ye hed," hastily replied the old
woman, rebuked and embarrassed. Presently, how-
ever, her vagrant speculation went recklessly on.
"Though ez ter Luke's marryin', 'tain't wuth while
ter set store on sech. The gal he found over thar
in Big Fox Valley favors ye ez close ez two black-
eyed peas. That's why he married her. She looks
precisely like ye useter look. An' she laffs the
same. An' I reckon she 'ain't hed no call ter quit
laffin', 'kase he air a powerful easy-goin' man.
Leastways, he useter be when we-uns knowed him."
"That ain't no sign," said Eugenia. "A saafter-
spoken body I never seen than Tobe war when he
fust ker a-courtin' round the settlemint."
" Sech ez that ain't goin' ter las' noways," dryly
remarked the philosopher of the chimney-corner.



<pb n="139"/>
'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE       139
This might seem rather a reflection upon the
courting gentry in general than a personal observa-
tion. But Eugenia's consciousness lent it point.
" Laws-a-massy," she said, " Tobe ain't so rampa-
gious, nohows, ez folks make him out. He air
toler'ble peaceable, cornsiderin' ez nobody hev ever
hed grit enough ter make a stand agin him, 'thout
'twar the Cunnel thar."
She glanced around at the little girl's face framed
in the frill of her night-cap, and peaceful and infan-
tile as it lay on the pillow.
"Whenst the Cunnel war born," Eugenia went
on, languidly reminiscent, "Tobe war powerful outed
'kase she war a gal. I reckon ye 'members ez how
he said he hed no use for sech cattle ez that. An'
when she tuk sick he 'lowed he seen no differ. 'Jes
ez well die ez live,' he said. An' bein' ailin', the
Cunnel tuk it inter her head ter holler. Sech holler-
in' we-uns hed never hearn with none o' the t'other
chil'ren. The boys war nowhar. But a-fust it never
'sturbed Tobe. He jes spoke out same ez he useter
do at the t'others,' Shet up, ye pop-eyed buzzard '
Wa'al, sir, the Cunnel jes blinked at him, an' braced
-herself ez stiff, an' yelled/ I 'lowed 'twould take
off the roof. An' Tobe said he'd wring her neck ef
she warn't so mewlin'-lookin' an' peaked. An' he
tuk her up an' walked across the floor with her, an'
she shet up; an' he walked back agin, an' she stayed
shet up. Ef he sot down fur a minit, she yelled so
ez ye'd think ye'd be deef fur life, an' ye 'most hoped
ye would be. So Tobe war obleeged ter tote her
agin ter git shet o' the noise. He got started on
that thar 'forced march,' ez he calls it, an' he never



<pb n="140"/>
140     'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
could git off'n it. Trot he must when the Cunnel
pleased. He 'lowed she reminded him o' that that
old Cunnel that he sarved under in the wars. Ef it
killed the regiment, he got thar on time.  Sence
then the Cunnel jes gins Tobe her orders, an' he
moseys. ter do 'em quick, jes like he war obleeged
ter obey. I b'lieve he air, somehows."
"Wa'al, some day," said the disaffected old wom-
an, assuming a port of prophetic wisdom, "Tobe
will find a differ. Thar ain't no man so headin' ez
don't git treated with perslimness by somebody some
time. I knowed a man wunst ez owned fower horses
an' cattle-critters quarryspondin', an' he couldn't
prove ez he war too old ter be summonsed ter work
on the road, an' war fined by the overseer 'cordin'
ter law. Tobe will git his wheel scotched yit, sure
ez ye air born. Somebody besides the Cunnel will
skeer up grit enough ter make a stand agin him. I
dunno how other men kin sleep o' night, knowin'
how he be always darin' folks ter differ with him,
an' how brigaty he be. The Bible 'pears ter me ter
hev Tobe in special mind when it gits ter mournin'
'bout'n the stiff-necked ones."
The spirited young mare that the ranger rode
strove to assert herself against him now and then,
as she went at a breakneck speed along the sandy
bridle-path through the woods. How was she to
know that the white-wanded young willow by the
way-side was not some spiritual manifestation as it
suddenly materialized in a broken beam from a rift
in the clouds? But as she reared and plunged she
felt his heavy hand and his heavy heel, and so for-



<pb n="141"/>
'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE       141
Wad again at a steady pace. The forests served to
:.U4en the strange light in the sky, and the lonely
'  'fvw.as dark, save where the moonbeam was splin-
iWed and the mists loitered.
;  :~',Presently there were cinders flying in the breeze,
,a:*uell of smoke pervaded the air, and the ranger
* i'ot to curse the mare when she stumbled.
; .. :   wonder," he muttered, "what them no 'count
uilf-livers o' town folks hev hed the shiftlessness
.ter let ketch afire thar "
" .'As he neared the brink of the mountain he saw a
dense column of smoke against the sky, and a break
in the woods showed the little town-the few log
.houses, the "gyarden spots " about them, and in the
. centre of the Square a great mass of coals, a flame
:  flickering here and there, and two gaunt and totter-
,   ing chimneys where once the court-house had stood.
,. At some distance -for the heat was still intense-
' were grouped the slouching, spiritless figures of the
aaineers. On the porches of the houses, plainly
i.in.the unwonted red glow, were knots of
aad children-ever and anon a brat in the
-.of. riment ran nimbly in and out. The
lA '.Bborrowed. the light from below, and the
" la.e.s woods on one side were outlined
;gainst the reflection in the sky. The
tdtoo, the abrupt precipice on the other
abysmal gloom of the valley, the austere
-line of the mountain beyond, and gave
;q .te"yedarki. mysteries of the night a sombre revela-
.tion,.. in'visible blackness it filled the illimitable
space. ,.
The little mare was badly blown as the ranger
* 



<pb n="142"/>
142     'WAY, DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
sprang to the ground. He himself was panting
with amazement and eagerness.
"The stray-book !" he cried. "Whar's the stray-
book ?"
One by one the slow group turned, all looking at
him with a peering expression as he loomed distort-
ed through the shimmer of the heat above the bed
of live coals and the hovering smoke.
"Whar's the stray-book ?" he reiterated, imperi-
ously.
"Whar's the court- house, I reckon ye mean to
say," replied the sheriff-a burly mountaineer in
brown jeans and high boots, on which the spurs
jingled; for in his excitement he had put them on
as mechanically as his clothes, as if they were an
essential part of his attire.
" Naw, I ain't meanin' ter say whar's the court-
house," said the ranger, coming up close, with the
red glow of the fire on his face, and his eyes flash-
ing under the broad brim of his wool hat. He had
a threatening aspect, and his elongated shadow,
following him and repeating the menace of his atti-
tude, seemed to back him up.   "Ye air sech a
triflin', slack-twisted tribe hyar intown, ez ennybody
would know ef. a spark cotched fire ter suthin, ye'd
set an' suck yer paws, an' eye it till it bodaciously
burnt up the court - house - sech a dad-burned lazy
set o' half-livers ye be! I never axed 'bout'n the
court-house. I want ter know whar's that thar stray-
book," he concluded, inconsequently.
"Tobe Gryce, ye air fairly demented," exclaimed
the register-a chin-whiskered, grizzled old fellow,
sitting on a stump and hugging his knee with a



<pb n="143"/>
'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE       143
desolate, bereaved look-"talkin' 'bout the stray-
MA&, an' all the records gone! What will folks do
'bout thar deeds, an' mortgages, an' sech? An' that
thar keerful index ez I had made-ez straight ez a
string-all cinders 1"
He shook his head, mourning alike for the par-
ty of the first part and the party of the second part,
and the vestiges of all that they had agreed to-
gether.
"An' ye ter kem mopin' hyar this time o' night
arter the stray-book " said the sheriff. "Shucks!"
And he turned aside and spat disdainfully on the
ground.
"I want that thar stray-book!" cried Gryce, in-
dignantly. "Ain't nobody seen it ?" Then realiz-
ing the futility of the question, he yielded to a fresh
burst of anger, and turned upon the bereaved regis-
ter. "An' did ye jes set thar an' say, 'Good Mister
Fire, don't burn the records; what '11 folks do 'bout
thar deeds an' sech ?' an' hold them claws o' yourn,
' an' see the court-house burn up, with that thar stray-
,.:book in it ?"
:.Half a dozen men spoke up. "The fire tuk in-
, an' the court-house war haffen gone 'fore 'twar
l.' said one, in sulky extenuation.
ILeoave Tobe be-let him jaw!" said another,
.  :-Tobe 'pears ter be sp'ilin' fur a fight," said a
:   i. ibrd, impersonally, as if to direct the attention of
any belligerent in the group to the opportunity.
The register had an expression of slow cunning as
he cast a glance up at thb overbearing ranger.
"What ailed the stray-book ter bide hyar in the



<pb n="144"/>
144     'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
court-house all night, Tobe? Couldn't ye gin it
house-room ? Thar warn't no special need fur it to
be hyar."
Tobe Gryce's face showed that for once he was
at a loss. He glowered down at the register and
said nothing.
"Ez ter me," resumed that worthy, "by the law
o' the land my books war obligated ter be thar."
He quoted, mournfully, "' Shall at all times be and
remain in his office.'"
He gathered up his knee again and subsided into
silence.
All the freakish spirits of the air were a-loose in
the wind. In fitful gusts they rushed up the gorge,
then suddenly the boughs would fall still again, and
one could hear the eerie rout a-rioting far off down
the valley. Now and then the glow of the fire
would deepen, the coals tremble, and with a gleam-
ing, fibrous swirl, like a garment of flames, a sudden
animation would sweep over it, as if an apparition
had passed, leaving a line of flying sparks to mark
its trail.
"I'm goin' home," drawled Tobe Gryce, presently.
"I don't keer a frog's toe-nail ef the whole settle-
mint burns bodaciously up; 'tain't nuthin ter me.
I hev never hankered ter live in towns an' git tuk
up with town ways, an' set an' view the court-house
like the apple o' my eye. We-uns don't ketch fire
down in the Cove, though mebbe we ain't so peart
ez folks ez herd tergether like sheep an' sech."
The footfalls of the little black mare annotated
the silence of the place as he rode away into the
darkling woods. The groups gradually disappeared



<pb n="145"/>
'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE      145
from the porches. The few voices that sounded at
long intervals were low and drowsy. The red fire
smouldered in the centre of the place, and some-
times about it appeared so doubtful a shadow that
it could hardly argue substance. Far away a dog
barked, and then all was still.
Presently the great mountains loom aggressively
along the horizon. The black abysses, the valleys
and coves, show duncolored verges and grow grad-
ually distinct, and on the slopes the ash and the
pine and the oak are all lustrous with a silver rime.
The mists are rising, the wind springs up anew, the
clouds set sail, and a beam slants high.
"What I want ter know," said a mountaineer
newly arrived on the scene, sitting on the verge of
the precipice, and dangling his long legs over the
depths beneath, "air how do folks ez live 'way
down in Lonesome Cove, an' who nobody knowed
nuthin about noways, ever git 'lected ranger o' the
county, enhyhow. I ain't s'prised none ter hear
'bout Tobe Gryce's goin's-on hyar las' night. I
hev looked fur more'n that."
"Wa'al, I'll tell ye," replied the register. "Nuth-
in' but favoritism in the county court. Ranger air
'lected by the jestices. Ye know," he added, vain-
glorious of his own tenure of office by the acclaim-
ing voice of the sovereign people, "ranger ain't
'lected, like the register, by pop'lar vote."
A slow smoke still wreathed upward from the
charred ruins of the court-house. Gossiping groups
stood here and there, mostly the jeans-clad moun-
taineers, but there were a few who wore "store
10



<pb n="146"/>
146     'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
clothes," being lawyers from more sophisticated re-
gions of the circuit. Court had been in session the
previous day. The jury, serving in a criminal case
-still strictly segregated, and in charge of an officer
-were walking about wearily in double file, wait-
ing with what patience they might their formal dis-
charge.
The sheriff's dog, a great yellow cur, trotted in
the rear. When the officer was first elected, this
animal, observing the change in his master's habits,
deduced his own conclusions. He seemed to think
the court-house belonged to the sheriff, and thence-
forward guarded the door with snaps and growls;
being a formidable brute, his idiosyncrasies invested
the getting into and getting out of law with abnor-
mal difficulties. Now, as he followed the disconso-
late jury, he bore the vigilant mien with which he for-
merly drove up the cows, and if a juror loitered
or stepped aside from the path, the dog made a
slow detour as if to round him in, and the melan-
choly cortdge wandered on as before. More than
one looked wistfully at the group on the crag, for it
was distinguished by that sprightly interest which
scandal excites so readily.
"Ter my way of thinkin'," drawled Sam Peters,
swinging his feet over the giddy depths of the
valley, "Tobe ain't sech ez oughter be set over
the county ez a ranger, noways. 'Pears not ter
me, an' I hev been keepin' my eye on him mighty
sharp."
A shadow fell among the group, and a man sat
down on a bowlder hard by. He, too, had just
arrived, being lured to the town by the news of the



<pb n="147"/>
WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE       147
fire. His slide had been left at the verge of the
clearing, and one of the oxen had already lain down;
the other, although hampered by the yoke thus
diagonally displaced, stood meditatively gazing at
the distant blue mountains. Their master nodded
a slow, grave salutation to the group, produced a plug
of tobacco, gnawed a fragment from it, and restored
ft to his pocket. He had a pensive face, with an
expression which in a man of wider culture we
should discriminate as denoting sensibility. He
had long yellow hair that hung down to his shoul-
ders, and a tangled yellow beard. There was some-
thing at once wistful and searching in his gray eyes,
dull enough, too, at times. He lifted them heavily,
and they had a drooping lid and lash. There seem-
ed an odd incongruity between this sensitive, weary
face and his stalwart physique. He was tall and
well proportioned. A leather belt girded his brown
"' '-  jeans coat. His great cowhide boots were drawn
-*. to the knee over his tr9users. His pose, as he
e on the rock, had a muscular picturesque-
~     ' ilh be ye a-talkin' about?" he drawled.
relished his opportunity. He laughed in
d fashion, his pipe-stem held between his
_   i _^K gl~ts ain't wantin' ter swop lies 'bout sech ez
_B  H||||"e I We war a-talkin' 'bout Tobe Gryce."
R  ~    l /Color flared into the new-comer's face. A
! ?. ' sdena ·animation fired his eye.
fi .I  "Tube Gryce air jes the man I'm always wantin'
ter hear a word about. Jes perceed with yer rat-
killin'. I'm with ye." And Luke Todd placed his



<pb n="148"/>
148     'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
elbows on his knees and leaned forward with an air
of attention.
Peters looked at him, hardly comprehending this
ebullition. It was not what he had expected to elicit.
No one laughed. His fleer was wide of the mark.
"Wa'al" - he made another effort -" Tobe, we
war jes sayin', ain't fitten fur ter be ranger o' the
county. He be ez peart in gittin' ter own other
folkses' stray cattle ez he war in courtin' other
folkses' sweetheart, an', ef the truth mus' be knowed,
in marryin' her." He suddenly twisted round, in
some danger of falling from his perch. "I want
ter ax one o' them thar big- headed lawyers a ques-
tion on a p'int o' law," he broke off, abruptly.
"What be Tobe Gryce a-doin' of now?" asked
Luke Todd, with eager interest in the subject.
"Wa'al," resumed Peters, nowise loath to return
to the gossip, "Tobe, ye see, air the ranger o' this
hyar county, an' by law all the stray horses ez air
tuk up by folks hev ter be reported ter him, an' ap-
praised by two householders, an' swore to afore the
magistrate an' be advertised by the ranger, an' ef
they ain't claimed 'fore twelve months, the taker-up
kin pay into the county treasury one-haffen the ap-
praisement an' hev the 'critter fur his'n. An' the
owner can't prove it away arter that."
"Thanky," said Luke Todd, dryly. "S'pose ye
teach yer gran'mammy ter suck aigs. I knowed all
that afore."
Peters was abashed, and with some difficulty col-
lected himself.
"An' I knowed ye knowed it, Luke," he hastily
conceded. "But hyar be what I'm a-lookin' at-



<pb n="149"/>
' , .'.    'W AY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE        149
;  ^ in't got no pervision fur a stray horse ez
i  ,.igS1dark night, 'thout nobody's percuremint,
A'I~:  ,tgePr'_s own house. Now, the p'int o' law
'e ter ax the lawyers 'bout air this - kin
;be the ranger an' the taker-up too ?"
MXis eyes upon the great landscape lying
Edoded with the chill matutinal sunshine,
bhereand there with the elusive shadows
t  drifting clouds. Far away the long
iines of the wooded spurs, converging on
side Of the valley and rising one behind the
-Wore a subdued azure, all unlike the burning
-of summer, and lay along the calm, passionless
that itself was of a dim, repressed tone. On the
p      bs nearer, the leafless boughs, massed together,
hbd .purplish-garnet depths of color wherever the
tsbhine struck aslant, and showed richly against
*fkaintly tinted horizon. Here and there among
boldly jutting gray crags hung an evergreen-vine,
rBiqgsrge on the opposite mountain gleamed
q lshia, Aike the waving of a silver plume,
't i~   .... sprang down the rocks. In the
Fey, a field in which crab-grass had
~H |     OfI the harvested wvheat showed a
lfplest yellow, and beside it a red clay
Wl0er a hill, was visible. Above all a
: le :winter fairly set in las' year," Peters
r eseutly, "a stray ker ter Tobe's house.
i;r me ez he fund her a-standin' by the
:e g a-lullin' off'n it. An' he 'quired round,
,.      te, '  e  ver hearn o' no owner. I reckon he never
i':'  axed outside o' Lonesome," he added, cynically.



<pb n="150"/>
150     'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
He puffed industriously at his pipe for a few mo-
ments; then continued: "Wa'al, he 'lowed he
couldn't feed the critter fur fun. An' he couldn't
work her till she war appraised an' sech, that bein'
agin the law fur strays. So he jes ondertook ter be
ranger an' taker-up too -the bangedest consarn in
the kentry! Ef the leetle mare hed been wall-eyed,
or lame, or ennything, he wouldn't hev wanted ter
be ranger an' taker-up too. But she air the peartest
little beastis-she war jes bridle-wise when she fust,
ker-young an' spry!"
Luke Todd was about to ask a question, but
Peters, disregarding him, persisted:
"Wa'al, Tobe tuk up the beastis, an' I reckon he
reported her ter hisself, bein' the ranger-the critter
makes me laff-an' he hed that thar old haffen-blind
uncle o' his'n an' Perkins Bates, ez be never sober,
ter appraise the vally o' the mare, an' I s'pose he
delivered thar certificate ter hisself, an' I reckon he
tuk oath that she kem 'thout his procuremint ter his
place, in the presence o' the ranger."
"I reckon thar ain't no law agin the ranger's bein'
a ranger an' a taker-up too," put in one of the by-
standers. "'Tain't like a sher'ff's buyin' at his own
sale. An' he hed ter pay haffen her vally into the
treasury o' the county arter twelve months, ef the
owner never proved her away."
"Thar ain't no sign he ever paid a cent," said
Peters, with a malicious grin, pointing at the charred
remains of the court-house, " an' the treasurer air jes
dead."
" Wa'al, Tobe hed ter make a report ter the jedge
o' the county court every six months."



<pb n="151"/>
'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE        151
"The papers of his office air cinders," retorted
Peters.
"Wa'al, then," argued the optimist, "the .stray-
book will show ez she war reported an' sech."
'" The ranger took mighty partic'lar pains ter hev his
stray-book in that thar court-house when 'twar burnt."
There was a long pause while the party sat rumi-
·nmting upon the suspicions thus suggested.
Luke Todd heard them, not without a thrill of
satisfaction. He found them easy to adopt. And
he, too, had a disposition to theorize. 
" It takes a mighty mean man ter steal a horse,"
he said. "Stealin' a horse air powerful close ter
murder. Folkses' lives fairly depend on a horse ter
work thar corn an' sech, an' make a support fur em.
I hev knowed folks ter ker mighty close ter starvin'
through hevin thar horse stole. Why, even that
thar leetle filly of our'n, though she hedn't been
fairly bruk ter the plough, war mightily missed.
We-uns hed ter make out with the old sorrel, ez air
nigh fourteen year old, ter work the crap, an' we war
;       .**+ · powerful disapp'inted. But we ain't never fund no
',  'l r*e o' the'filly sence she war tolled off one night
. As' fail a year ago."
.; A':.** he hawk floating above the valley and its winged
*:  tedow disappeared together in the dense glooms of
'i  ~iiep gorge. Luke Todd watched them as they
·   ' suddenly he lifted his eyes. They were wide with
a new speculation. An angry flare blazed in them.
" What sort'n beastis is this hyar mare ez the ranger
tuk up?"'.he asked.
Peters'looked at him, hardly comprehending his
,. 



<pb n="152"/>
152     'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
tremor of excitement. "Seems sorter sizable," he
replied, sibilantly, sucking his pipe-stem.
Todd nodded meditatively several times, leaning
his elbows on his knees, his eyes fixed on the land-
scape. "Hev she got enny partic'lar marks, ez ye
knows on ?" he drawled.
"Wa'al, she be ez black ez a crow, with the nigh
fore-foot white. An' she hev got a white star spang
in the middle o' her forehead, an' the left side o' her
nose is white too."
Todd rose suddenly to his feet. "By gum 1" he
cried, with a burst of passion, "she air my filly I
An' 'twar that thar durned horse-thief of a ranger
ez tolled her off I"
Deep among the wooded spurs Lonesome Cove
nestles, sequestered from the world. Naught emi-
grates thence except an importunate stream that
forces its way through a rocky gap, and so to free-
dom beyond. No stranger intrudes; only the moon
looks in once in a while. The roaming wind may
explore its solitudes; and it is but the vertical sun-
beams that strike to the heart of the little basin, be-
cause of the massive mountains that wall it round and
serve to isolate it. So nearly do they meet at the
gap that one great assertive crag, beetling far above,
intercepts the view of the wide landscape beyond,
leaving its substituted profile jaggedly serrating the
changing sky. Above it, when the weather is fair,
appear vague blue lines, distant mountain summits,
cloud strata, visidns. Below its jutting verge may
be caught glimpses of the widening valley without.
But pre-eminent, gaunt, sombre, it sternly dominates



<pb n="153"/>
'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE       153
"Lonesome," and is the salient feature of fhe little
world it limits.
Tobe Gryce's house, gray, weather- beaten, moss-
grown, had in comparison an ephemeral, modern
aspect. For a hundred years its inmates had come
and gone and lived and died. They took no heed
of the crag, but .never a sound was lost upon it.
Their drawling-iterative speech the iterative echoes
conned. The ringing blast of a horn set astir some
J-antom chase in the air. When the cows came
Wlding home, there were lowing herds in viewless
company. Even if one of the children sat on a
rotting log crooning a vague, fragntentary ditty,
some faint-voiced spirit in the rock would sing.
Lonesome Cove ?-home of invisible throngs I
,.,  As the ranger trotted down the winding road,
multitudinous hoof-beats, as of a troop of cavalry,
[l  eablded his approach to the little girl who stood
_*    :   pWrc'h of the log-cabin and watched for him.
_^^Bt~   ~.iJ~' 0nnel ?' he cried, cordially.
Hff.C|(l         i(odonel"' took no heed. She looked
- vague blue mountains, against
i        rock was heavily imposed,
' dlo.  in' g dead crisp weed, distinct.
|  ltm^Oimie curling briskly up in the
E   .l. e'tlay and slick chimney. He
H   into the house, as Eugenia, with all
A    _        iH,  Uhyouth faded from her countenance,
|_jj]jEd<"hollow-eyed in the morning light, was
1.Y'    l B   1* ·..c rn-dodgers and venison steak on the
/    Pedira ihe did not appreciate that the women
were pilig with curiosity, for he vouchsafed no
'



<pb n="154"/>
154     'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
word of the excitements in the little town; and he
himself was ill at ease.
"What ails the Cunnel, 'Genie?" he asked, pres-
ently, glancing up sharply from under his hat brim,
and speaking with his mouth full.
"The cat 'pears ter hev got her tongue," said
Eugenia, intending that the "Colonel" should hear,
and perhaps profit. "She ain't able ter talk none
this mornin'."
The little body cast so frowning a glance upon
them as she stood in the doorway that her expres-
sion was but slightly less lowering than her father's.
It was an incongruous demonstration, with her infan-
tile features, her little yellow head, and the slight
physical force she represented. She wore a blue
cotton frock, fastened up the back with great horn
buttons; she had on shoes laced with leather strings;
one of her blue woollen stockings fell over her ankle,
disclosing the pinkest of plump calves; the other
stocking was held in place by an unabashed cotton
string. She had a light in her dark eyes and a
color in her cheek, and albeit so slight a thing, she
wielded a strong coercion.
"Laws-a-massy, Cunnel!" said Tobe, in a harried
manner, "couldn't ye find me nowhar? I'm power-
ful sorry. I couldn't git back hyar no sooner."
But not in this wise was she to be placated. She
fixed her eyes upon him, but made no sign.
He suddenly rose from his half-finished breakfast.
"Look-a-hyar, Cunnel," he cried, joyously, "don't
ye want ter ride the filly ?-ye knew ye hanker ter
ride the filly."
Even then she tried to frown, but the bliss of the



<pb n="155"/>
'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE       155
prosect overbore her. IHer cheek and chin dim-
pled, and there was a gurgling display of two rows
pjagged little teeth as the doughty "Colonel" was
-i ing to his shoulder and he stepped out of the
dior.
4e laughed as he stood by the glossy black mare
aio lifted the child to the saddle. The animal
ateid her neck and turned her head and gazed
· :ik6 at him curiously. "Hold on tight, Cunnel,"
he said as he looked up at her, his face strangely
softened almost beyond recognition. And she gur-
gled and laughed and screamed with delight as he
began to slowly lead the mare along.
<      The "Colonel" had the gift of continuance.
Some time elapsed before she exhausted the joys of
exaltation. More than once she absolutely refused
'; to dismount. Tobe patiently led the beast up and
down, and the "Colonel" rode in state. It was
ly when the sun had grown high, and occasional-
was fain to lift her chubby hands to her eyes,
_   j'_ her safety on the saddle, that he ventured
,y.remnstrate, and finally she permitted
ito 'assisted to the ground. When, with
at his heels, he reached the porch, he
bat and wiped the perspiration from
ihfb his great brown hand.
i .ye, jouncin' round arter the Cunnel air
_ liNt work," he declared.
tm -oment he paused. His wife had come
i v "dgi; and there was a strange expression of
al;t'iamPg the anxious lines of her face.
"TobeI' she said, in a bated voice, "who war
them men ?



<pb n="156"/>
156     'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
He stared at her, whirled about, surveyed the
vacant landscape, and once more turned dumfound-
ed toward her. "What men ?" he asked.
"Them men ez acted so cur'ous," she said. "I
couldn't see thar faces plain, an' I dunno who they
war."
"Whar war they?" And he looked over his
shoulder once more.
"Yander along the ledges of the big rock. Thar
war two of 'em, hidin' ahint that thar jagged aidge.
An' ef yer back war turned they'd peep out at ye
an' the Cunnel ridin'. But whenst ye would face
round agin, they'd drap down ahint the aidge o' the
rock. I 'lowed wunst ez I'd holler ter ye, but I war
feared ye moughtn't keer ter know." Her voice
fell in its deprecatory cadence.
He stood in silent perplexity. "Ye air a fool,
'Genie, an' ye never seen nuthin'. Nobody hev got
enny call ter spy on me."
He stepped in-doors, took down his rifle from the
rack, and went out frowning into the sunlight.
The suggestion of mystery angered him. He
had a vague sense of impending danger. As he
made his way along the slope toward the great
beetling crag all his faculties were on the alert.
He saw naught unusual when he stood upon its
dark-seamed summit, and he went cautiously to the
verge and looked down at the many ledges. They
jutted out at irregular intervals, the first only six
feet below, and all accessible enough to an expert
climber. A bush grew in a niche. An empty
nest, riddled by the wind, hung dishevelled from a
twit. Coarse withered grass tufted the crevices.



<pb n="157"/>
'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE       157
Far below he saw the Depths of the Cove-the tops
Of the leafless trees, and, glimpsed through the in.-
terlacing boughs, the rush of a mountain rill, and a
,hite flash as a sunbeam slanted on the foam.
He was. turning away, all incredulous, when with
a sudden start he looked back. On one of the
ledges was a slight, depression. It was filled with
and and earth. Imprinted upon it was the shape
f-a man's foot. The ranger paused and gazed
'fixedly at it. " Wa'al, by the Lord I" he exclaimed,
under his breath. Presently, "But they hev no
calll" he argued. Then once more, softly, "By
the Lord !"
The mystery baffled him. More than once that
day he went up to the crag and stood and stared
futilely at the footprint.  Conjecture had license
and limitations, too. As the hours wore on he be-
,    came harassed by the sense of espionage. He was
/  t,/a bold man before the foes he knew, but this idea
inimical lurking, of furtive scrutiny for unknown
preyed upon him. He brooded over it as
l_ p     'g idle by the fire. Once he went to the door
_-tpe    lr~speculatively at the great profile of the
_~'JIEB~_ !-sky above it was all a lustrous amber,
*y sunset of the shortest days of the year
i_^ S.R   aiand-, The mountains, seen partly above
below it, wore a glamourous purple.
':"f, ~ ,_  Jre clouds, and from their rifts long diver-
,/ ...^. ieS of light slanted down upon the valley,
.       ' atnet amuong their shadows. The sun was not
visible-only in the western heavens was a half-
veiled effulgence too dazzlingly white to be gazed
upon. The ranger shaded his eyes with his hand.



<pb n="158"/>
I58     'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
No motion, no sound; for the first time in his life
the unutterable loneliness of the place impressed
him.
"'Genie," he said, suddenly, looking over his shoul-
der within the cabin, " be you-uns sure ez they war-
folks ?"
"I dunno what you mean," she faltered, her eyes
dilated. "They looked like folks."
"I reckon they war," he said, reassuring himself.
"The Lord knows I hope they war."
That night the wind rose. The stars all seemed to
have burst from their moorings, and were wildly adrift
in the sky. There was a broken tumult of billowy
clouds, and the moon tossed hopelessly amongst
them, a lunar wreck, sometimes on her beam ends,
sometimes half submerged, once more gallantly
struggling to the surface, and again sunk. The
bare boughs of the trees beat together in a dirge-
like monotone. Now and again a leaf went sibi-
lantly whistling past. The wild commotion of the
heavens and earth was visible, for the night was
not dark. The ranger, standing within the rude
stable of unhewn logs, all undaubed, noted how
pale were the horizontal bars of gray light alternat-
ing with the black logs of the wall. He was giving
the mare a feed of corn, but he had not brought his 
lantern, as was his custom. That mysterious es-
pionage had in some sort shaken his courage, and
he felt the obscurity a shield. He had brought, in-
stead, his rifle.
The equine form was barely visible among the
glooms. Now and then, as the mare noisily munched,



<pb n="159"/>
'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE       159
she lifted a hoof and struck it upon the ground
with a dull thud. How the gusts outside were swirl-
ing up the gorge I The pines swayed and sighed.
Again the boughs of the chestnut-oak above the
roof crashed together. Did a fitful blast stir .the
door?
He lifted his eyes mechanically. A cold thrill
ran through every fibre. For there, close by the
door, somebody-something-was peering through
the space between the logs of the wall. The face
was invisible, but the shape of a man's head was
distinctly defined.  He realized that it was no
supernatural manifestation when a husky voice be-
gan to call the mare, in a hoarse whisper, "Cobel
Cobe I Cobe !" With a galvanic start he was about
to spring forward to hold the door. A hand from
without was laid upon it.
He placed the muzzle of his gun between the
logs, a jet of red light was suddenly projected into
the darkness, the mare was rearing and plunging
violently, the little shanty was surcharged with roar
and reverberation, and far and wide the crags and
chasms echoed the report of the rifle.
There was a vague clamor outside, an oath, a cry
of pain. Hasty footfalls sounded among the dead
leaves and died in the distance.
. When the ranger ventured out he saw the door of
his;house wide open, and the firelight flickering out
among the leafless bushes. His wife met him half-
way down the hill.
"Air ye hurt, Tobe ?" she cried. "Did yer gun
go off suddint ?"
"Mighty suddint," he replied, savagely.



<pb n="160"/>
I6o     'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
"Ye didn't fire it a-purpose ?" she faltered.
"Edzactly so," he declared.
"Ye never hurt nobody, did ye, Tobe ?" She had
turned very pale. "I 'lowed it couldn't be the wind
ez I hearn a-hollerin'."
"I hopes an' prays I hurt 'em," he said, as he re-
placed the rifle in the rack. He was shaking the
other hand, which had been jarred in some way by
the hasty discharge of the weapon. "Some dad-
burned horse-thief war arter the mare. Jedgin' from
the sound o' thar runnin', 'peared like to me ez thar
mought be two o' 'em."
The next day the mare disappeared from the
stable. Yet she could not be far off, for Tobe was
about the house most of the time, and when he and
the "Colonel" came in - doors in the evening the
little girl held in her hand a half-munched ear of
corn, evidently abstracted from the mare's supper.
"Whar be the filly hid, Tobe?" Eugenia asked,
curiosity overpowering her.
"Ax me no questions an' I'll tell ye no lies," he
replied, gruffly.
In the morning there was a fall of snow, and she
had some doubt whether her mother, who had gone
several days before to a neighbor's on the summit of
the range, would return; but presently the creak of
unoiled axles heralded the approach of a wagon, and
soon the old woman, bundled in shawls, was sitting
by the fire. She wore heavy woollen socks over her
shoes as protection against the snow. The incom-
patibility of the shape of the hose with the human
foot was rather,marked, and as they were somewhat
inelastic as well, there was a muscular struggle to



<pb n="161"/>
'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE      i6i
get them off only exceeded by the effort which had
been required to get them on. She shook her head
again'and again, with a red face, as she bent over
the socks, but plainly more than this discomfort
vexed her.
" Laws-a-massy, 'Genie! I hearn a awful tale over
yander'mongstthem Jenkins folks. Ye oughter hev
married Luke Todd, an' so I tole ye an' fairly be-
set ye ter do ten year ago. He keered fur ye. An'
Tobe--shucks I Wa'al, laws-a-massy, child I I hearn
a awful tale 'bout Tobe up yander at Jenkinses'."
Eugenia colored.
" Folks hed better take keer how they talk 'bout
Tobe," she said, with a touch of pride. "They be
powerful keerful ter do it out'n rifle range."
With one more mighty tug the sock came off, the
red face was lifted, and Mrs. Pearce shook her head
ruefully.
" The Bible say ' words air foolishness.' Ye dun-
no what ye air talkin' 'bout, child."
With this melancholy preamble she detailed the
gossip that had arisen at the county town and per-
vaded the country-side. Eugenia commented, de-
nied, flashed into rage, then lapsed into silence.
Although it did not constrain credulity, there was
something that made her afraid when her mother
said:
."Ye hed better not be talkin' 'bout rifle range
so brash, 'Genie, nohows. They 'lowed ez Luke
Todd an' Sam Peters kem hyar-'twar jes night be-
fore las'-aimin' ter take the mare away 'thout no
words an' no lawin', 'kase they didn't want ter wait.
Luke hed got a chance ter view the mare, an' knowed
I!



<pb n="162"/>
162     'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
ez she war his'n. An' Tobe war hid in the dark be-
side the mare, an' fired at 'em, an' the rifle-ball tuk
Sam right through the beam o' his arm. I reck-
on, though, ez that warn't true, else ye would hev
knowed it."
She looked up anxiously over her spectacles at
her daughter.
" I hearn Tobe shoot," faltered Eugenia. " I seen
blood on the leaves."
" Laws-a-massy!" exclaimed the old woman, irri-
tably. "I be fairly feared ter bide hyar; 'twouldn't
s'prise me none ef they ker hyar an' hauled Tobe
out an' lynched him an' sech, an' who knows who
mought git hurt in the scrimmage ?"
They both fell silent as the ranger strode in.
They would need a braver heart than either bore to
reveal to him the suspicions of horse-stealing sown
broadcast over the mountain. Eugenia felt that
this in itself was coercive evidence of his innocence.
Who dared so much as say a word to his face?
The weight of the secret asserted itself, however.
As she went about her accustomed tasks, all bereft
of their wonted interest, vapid and burdensome, she
carried so woe-begone a face that it caught his at-
tention, and he demanded, angrily,
" What ails ye ter look so durned peaked ?"
This did not abide long in his memory, however,
and it cost her a pang to see him so unconscious.
She went out upon the porch late that afternoon
to judge of the weather. Snow was falling again.
The distant summits had disappeared. The moun-
tains near at hand loomed through the myriads of
serried white flakes. A crow flew across the Cove



<pb n="163"/>
'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE       163
in its midst  It heavily thatched the cabin, and
tufts dislodged by the opening of the door fell down
upon her hair. Drifts lay about the porch. Each
rail of the fence was laden. The ground, the rocks,
were deeply covered. She reflected with satisfaction
that the red splotch of blood on the dead leaves was
no longer visible. Then a sudden idea struck her
that took her breath away. She came in, her cheeks
fitshed, her eyes bright, with an excited dubitation.
Her husband commented on the change. "Ye
air a powerful cur'ous critter, 'Genie," he said: "a
while ago ye looked some fower or five hundred
year old - now ye favors yerself when I fust kem
a-courtin' round the settlemint."
She hardly knew whether the dull stir in her heart
were pleasure or pain. Her eyes filled with tears,
and the irradiated iris shone through them with a
liquid lustre. She could not speak.
Her mother took ephemeral advantage of his
softening mood. " Ye useter be mighty perlite and
saaft-spoken in them days, Tobe," she ventured.
"I hed ter be," he admitted, frankly, "'kase thar
war sech a many o' them mealy- mouthed cusses a-
waitin' on 'Genie. The kentry 'peared ter me ter
bristle with Luke Todd; he 'minded me o' brum-
siddge-ecvrywhar ye seen his yaller head, ez homely
'aiS'pz onwelcome."
"I never wunst gin Luke a thought arter ye tuk
ter comin' round the settlemint," Eugenia said, softly.
"I wisht I hed knowed that then," he replied;
"else I wouldn't hev been so all-fired oneasy an'
beset  I wasted mo' time a-studyin' 'bout ye an'
Luke Todd 'n ye war both wuth, an' went 'thout



<pb n="164"/>
164     'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
my vittles an' sot up o' nights. Ef I hed spent that
time a-moanin' fur my sins an' settin' my soul at
peace, I'd be 'quirin' roun' the throne o' Grace now 
Young folks air powerful fursaken fools."
Somehow her heart was warmer for this allusion.
She was more hopeful. Her resolve grew stronger
and stronger as she sat and knitted, and looked at
the fire and saw among the coals all her old life at
the settlement newly aglow. She was remembering
now that Luke Todd had been as wax in her hands.
She recalled that when she was married there was a
gleeful "sayin'" going the rounds of the mountain
that he had taken to the woods with grief, and he was
heard of no more for weeks. The gossips relished
his despair as the corollary of the happy bridal. He
had had no reproaches for her. He had only looked
the other way when they met, and she had not spo-
ken to him since.
"He set store by my word in them days," she
said to herself, her lips vaguely moving. "I mis-
doubts ef he hev furgot."
All through the long hours of the winter night she
silently canvassed her plan. The house was still
noiseless and dark when she softly opened the door
and softly closed it behind her.
It had ceased to snow, and the sky had cleared.
The trees, all the limbs whitened, were outlined dis-
tinctly upon it, and through'the boughs overhead a
brilliant star, aloof and splendid, looked coldly down.
Along dark spaces Orion had drawn his glittering
blade. Above the snowy mountains a melancholy
waning moon was swinging. The valley was full of
mist, white and shining where the light fell upon it,



<pb n="165"/>
'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE       165
a vaporous purple where the shadows held sway.
So still it was I the only motion in all the world the
throbbing stars and her palpitating heart. So sol-
emnly silentl It was a relief, as she trudged on
and on, to note a gradual change; to watch the sky
withdraw, seeming fainter; to see the moon grow
filmy, like some figment of the frost; to mark the
gray mist steal on apace, wrap mountain, valley,
and heaven with mystic folds, shut out all vision of
things familiar. Through it only the sense of dawn
could creep.
She recognized the locality; her breath was short;
her step quickened. She appeared, like an appari-
tion out of the mists, close to a fence, and peered
through the snow-laden rails. A sudden pang
pierced her heart.
For there, within the enclosure, milking the cow,
she saw, all blooming in the snow-herself; the
'izalea-like girl she had been 
'5the had not known how dear to her was that
[l      l'y:young identity she remembered. She had
how far it had gone from her. She
u'iornl changeling looking upon her own es-
ty .escaped her.
:   cow, wvith lifted head and a muttered low of
;::!H i   I:_  mIoved out of reach of the milker, who,
.      Ss. saeling upon the ground, stared with wide
Ir3e byes at her ghost in the mist.
There was a pause. It was only a moment be-
fore Eugenia spoke; it seemed years, so charged
it was with retrospect.



<pb n="166"/>
x66     'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
"I kem over hyar ter hev a word with ye," she said.
At the sound of a human voice Luke Todd's wife
struggled to her feet. She held the piggin with one
arm encircled about it, and with the other hand she
clutched the plaid shawl around her throat. Her
bright hair was tossed by the rising wind.
"I 'lowed I'd find ye hyar a-milkin' 'bout now."
The homely allusion reassured the younger
woman.
" I hev ter begin toler'ble early," she said. " Spot
gins 'bout a gallon a milkin' now."
Spot's calf, which subsisted on what was left
over, seemed to find it cruel that delay should be
added to his hardships, and he lifted up his voice
in a plaintive remonstrance. This reminded Mrs.
Todd of his existence; she turned and let down
the bars that served to exclude him.
The stranger was staring at her very hard. Some-
how she quailed under that look. Though it was
fixed upon her in unvarying intensity, it had a
strange impersonality. This woman was not see-
ing her, despite that wide, wistful, yearning gaze;
she was thinking of something else, seeing some
one else.
And suddenly Luke Todd's wife began to stare
at the visitor very hard, and to think of something
that was not before her.
" I be the ranger's wife," said Eugenia. " I kem
over hyar ter tell ye he never tuk yer black mare
nowise but honest, bein' the ranger."
She found it difficult to say more. Under that
speculative, unseeing look she too faltered.
"They tell me ez Luke Todd air powerful outed



<pb n="167"/>
, ri .'           D         ,i o AN   DO W  IN LONESOME COVE  167
,'    v    4-A,^  n'I 'lowed ef he knowed from me ez
_         aiier, he'd b'lieve me."
ibl~tated . Her courage was flagging; her
_H iN^d.  The eyes of the man's wife burned
_     I[ P^";~iseter be toler'ble well 'quainted 'fore
an' I 'lowed he'd b'lieve my word,"
IBtltence. The sun was rising; long li-
_~        ~hUllatijs of light of purest amber-color were
through the snowy woods; the shadows
H ~     '~~fence rails alternated with bars of dazzling
t~e~r#; elusive prismatic gleams of rose and lilac
,      ,blue shimmered on every slope -thus the
w'i Winter flowered. Tiny snow-birds were hopping
[': about; a great dog came down from the little snow-
: thatched cabin; and was stretching himself elasti-
t' cally and yawning most portentously.
'   "An' I 'lowed I'd see ye an' git you-uns ter tell
i'- him that word from me, an' then he'd b'lieve it,"
.~ ·Eugenia .
fflg'   e younger woman nodded mechanically, still
at her.
;     Fe',^; ;d was this her mission I Somehow it had lost
~  A' :i':' ency. Where was its potency, her enthusi-
.; . A   -f , Eugenia realized that her feet were wet, her
;., {i  t. draggled; that she was chilled to the bone
%  . trembling violently.  She looked about her
'd btfully. Then her eyes came back to the face
of tie woman before her.
"Ye'll fell him, I s'pose ?"
Once more Luke Todd's wife nodded mechani-
cally, still staring.



<pb n="168"/>
i68     'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
There was nothing further to be said. A vacant
interval ensued. Then, "I 'lowed I'd tell ye," Eu-
genia reiterated, vaguely, and turned away, vanish-
ing with the vanishing mists.
Luke Todd's wife stood gazing at the fence
through which the apparition had peered.  She
could see yet her own face there, grown old and
worn. The dog wagged his tail and pressed against
her, looking up and claiming her notice. Once
more he stretched himself elastically and yawned
widely, with shrill variations of tone. The calf was
frisking about in awkward bovine elation, ahd now
and then the cow affectionately licked its coat with
the air of making its toilet. An assertive chanti-
cleer was proclaiming the dawn within the hen-
house, whence came too an impatient clamor, for the
door, which served to exclude any marauding fox,
was still closed upon the imprisoned poultry. Still
she looked steadily at the fence where the ranger's
wife had stood.
"That thar woman favors me," she said, pres-
ently. And suddenly she burst into tears.
Perhaps it was well that Eugenia could not see
Luke Todd's expression as his wife recounted the
scene. She gave it truly, but without, alas! the
glamour of sympathy.
"She 'lowed ez ye'd b'lieve her, bein' ez ye use-
ter be 'quainted."
His face flushed. "Wa'al, sir! the insurance o'
that thar woman !" he exclaimed. "I war 'quainted
with her; I war mighty well 'quainted with her."
He had a casual remembrance of those days when
"he tuk ter the woods ter wear out his grief."



<pb n="169"/>
'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE      169
"She never gin me no promise, but me an' her war
courtin' some. Sech dependence ez I put on her
war mightily wasted. I dunno what ails the critter
ter 'low ez I set store by her word."
Poor Eugenia   There is nothing so dead as
ashes. His flame had clean burned out. So far
afield were all his thoughts that he stood amazed
when his wife, with a sudden burst of tears, de-
clared passionately that she knew it-she saw it-
she favored Eugenia Gryce. She had found out
that he had married her because she looked like
another woman.
"'Genie Gryce hev got powerful little ter do ter
kem a-jouncin' through the snow over hyar ter try
ter set ye an' me agin one another," he exclaimed,
angrily. "Stealin' the filly ain't enough ter sati'fy
her !"
His wife was in some sort mollified. She sought
to reassure herself.
"Air we-uns of a favor ?"
"I dunno," he replied, sulkily. "I 'ain't seen
the critter fur nigh on ter ten year. I hev furgot
the looks of her. 'Pears like ter me," he went on,
ruminating, "ez 'twar in my mind when I fust seen
ye ez thar war a favor 'twixt ye. But I misdoubts
now. Do she 'low ez I hev hed nuthin ter study
'bout sence ?"
Perhaps Eugenia is not the only woman who
overrates the strength of a sentimental attachment.
A gloomy intuition of failure kept her company all
the lengthening way home. The chill splendors of
the wintry day grated upon her dreary mood. How
should she care for the depth and richness of the



<pb n="170"/>
170     WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
blue deepening toward the zenith in those vast
skies? What was it to her that the dead vines,
climbing the grim rugged crags, were laden with
tufts and corollated shapes wherever these fantasies
of flowers might cling, or that the snow flashed with
crystalline scintillations ? She only knew that they
glimmered and dazzled upon the tears in her eyes,
and she was moved to shed them afresh. She did
not wonder whether her venture had resulted amiss.
She only wondered that she had tried aught. And
she was humbled.
When she reached Lonesome Cove she found the
piggin where she had hid it, and milked the cow
in haste. It was no great task, for the animal was
going dry. "Their'n gins a gallon a milkin'," she
said, in rueful comparison.
As she came up the slope with the piggin on her
head, her husband was looking down from the
porch with a lowering brow. "Why n't ye spen'
the day a-milkin' the cow ?" he drawled. "Dawdlin'
yander in the cow-pen till this time in the mornin'!
An' ter-morrer's Chrismus I"
The word smote upon her weary heart with a
dull pain. She had no cultured phrase to char-
acterize the sensation as a presentiment, but she
was conscious of the prophetic process. To-night
"all the mounting" would be riotous with that du-
bious hilarity known as "Chrismus in the bones,"
and there was no telling what might come from the
combined orgy and an inflamed public spirit.
She remembered the familiar doom of the moun-
tain horse-thief, the men lurking on the cliff, the
inimical feeling against the ranger. She furtively



<pb n="171"/>
'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE      171
watched him with forebodings as he came and went
at intervals throughout the day.
Disk had fallen when he suddenly looked in and
beckoned to the " Colonel," who required him to
take her with him whenever he fed the mare.
"Let me tie this hyar comforter over the Cunnel's
head," Eugenia said, as he bundled the child in
a shawl and lifted her in his arms.
"'Tain't no use," he declared. "The Cunnel
ain't travellin' fur."
She heard him step from the creaking porch.
She heard the dreary wind without.
Within, the clumsy shadows of the warping- bars,
the spinning- wheel, and the churn were dancing in
the firelight on the wall. The supper was cooking
on the live coals. The children, popping corn in
the ashes, were laughing; as her eye fell upon the
"Colonel's" vacant little chair her mind returned
to the child's excursion with her father, and again
she wondered futilely where the mare could be hid.
The next moment she was heartily glad that she did
not know.
It was like the fulfillment of some dreadful dream
when the door opened. A man entered softly,
slowly; the flickering fire showed his shadow-was
it?-nay, another man, and still another, and another.
The old crone in the corner sprang up, screaming
in a shrill, tremulous, cracked voice. For they were
masked. Over the face of each dangled a bit of
homespun, with great empty sockets through which
·eyes vaguely glanced. Even the coarse fibre of the
intruders responded to that quavering, thrilling ap-
peal. One spoke instantly:



<pb n="172"/>
172     'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
"Laws-a-massy! Mis' Pearce, don't ye feel inter-
rupted none-nor Mis' Gryce nuther. We-uns ain't
harmful noways-jes want ter know whar that thar
black mare hev disappeared to. She ain't in the
barn."
He turned his great eye-sockets on Eugenia.
The plaid homespun mask dangling about his face
was grotesquely incongruous with his intent, serious
gaze.
"I dunno," she faltered; "I dunno."
She had caught at the spinning-wheel for support.
The fire crackled. The baby was counting aloud
the grains of corn popping from the ashes. "Six,
two, free," he babbled. The kettle merrily sang.
The man still stared silently at the ranger's wife.
The expression in his eyes changed suddenly. He
chuckled derisively. The others echoed his mock-
ing mirth. "Ha ha! ha " they laughed aloud;
and the eye-sockets in the homespun masks all
glared significantly at each other. Even the dog
detected something sinister in this laughter. He
had been sniffing about the heels of the strangers;
he bristled now, showed his teeth, and growled. The
spokesman hastily kicked him in the ribs, and the
animal fled yelping to the farther side of the fire-
place behind the baby, where he stood and barked
defiance. The rafters rang with the sound.
Some one on the porch without spoke to the leader
in a low voice. This man, who seemed to have a
desire to conceal his identity which could not be
served by a mask, held the door with one hand that
the wind might not blow it wide open. The draught
fanned the fire. Once the great bowing, waving



<pb n="173"/>
'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE       173
white blaze sent a long, quivering line of light
through the narrow aperture, and Eugenia saw the
dark lurking figure outside. He had one arm in
a sling. She needed no confirmation to assure her
that this was Sam Peters, whom her husband had
shot at the stable door.
The leader instantly accepted his suggestion.
"Wa'al, Mis' Gryce, I reckon ye dunnb whar Tobe
be, nuther?"
"Naw, I dunno," she said, in a tremor.
The homespun mask swayed with the distortions
of his face as he sneered:
"Ye mean ter say ye don't 'low ter tell us."
"I dunno whar he be." Her voice had sunk to
a whisper.
Another exchange of glances.
"Wa'al, ma'am, jes gin us the favor of a light by
yer fire, an' we-uns '11 find him."
He stepped swiftly forward, thrust a pine torch
into the coals, and with it all whitely flaring ran out
into the night; the others followed his example;
and the terror-stricken women, hastily barring up
the door, peered after them through the little batten
shutter of the window.
The torches were already scattered about the
slopes of Lonesome Cove like a fallen constellation.
What shafts of white light they cast upon the snow
in the midst of the dense blackness of the night 
Somehow they seemed endowed with volition, as
they moved hither and thither, for their brilliancy
almost cancelled the figures of the men that bore
them-only an occasional erratic shapeless shadow



<pb n="174"/>
174     'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
was visible. Now and then aflare pierced the icicle-' 
tipped holly bushes, and again there was a fibrous
glimmer in the fringed pines.
The search was terribly silent. The snow dead-
ened the tread. Only the wind was loud among the
muffled trees, and sometimes a dull thud sounded
when the weight of snow fell from the evergreen
laurel as the men thrashed through its dense growth.
They separated after a time, and only here and
there an isolated stellular light illumined the snow,
and conjured white mystic circles into the wide
spaces of the darkness. The effort flagged at last,
and its futility sharpened the sense of injury in Luke
Todd's heart.
He was alone now, close upon the great rock, and
looking at its jagged ledges all cloaked with snow.
Above those soft white outlines drawn against the
deep clear sky the frosty stars scintillated. Beneath
were the abysmal depths of the valley masked by the
darkness.
His pride was touched. In the old quarrel his
revenge had been hampered, for it was the girl's
privilege to choose, and she had chosen. He cared
nothing for that now, but he felt it indeed a reproach
to tamely let this man take his horse when he had
all the mountain at his back. There was a sharp
humiliation in his position. He felt the pressure of
public opinion.
"Dad-burn him 1" he exclaimed. "Ef I kin make
out ter git a glimge o' him, I'll shoot him dead-
dead !"
He leaned the rifle against the rock. It struck
upon a ledge. A metallic vibration rang out. Again



<pb n="175"/>
'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE      175
and again the sound was repeated- now loud, still
clanging; now faint, but clear; now soft and away
to a doubtful murmur which he hardly was sure that
he heard. Never before had he known such an echo.
And suddenly he recollected that this was the great
"Talking Rock," famed beyond the limits of Lone-
some. It had traditions as well as echoes. He re-
membered vaguely that beneath this cliff there was
said to be a cave which was utilized in the manufact-
ure of saltpetre for gunpowder in the War of I812.
As he looked down the slope below he thought
the snow seemed broken-by footprints, was it?
With the expectation of a discovery strong upon
him, he crept along a wide ledge of the crag, now
and then stumbling and sending an avalanche of
snow and ice and stones thundering to the foot of
the cliff. He missed his way more than once. Then
he would turn about, laboriously retracing his steps,
and try another level of the ledges. Suddenly be-
fore him was the dark opening he sought. No
creature had lately been here. It was filled with
growing bushes and dead leaves and brambles.
Looking again down upon the slope beneath, he felt
very sure that he sa* footprints.
"The old folks useter 'low ez thar war two open-
ings ter this hyar cave," he said. "Tobe Gryce
mought hev hid hyar through a opening down yan-
der on the slope. But I'll go the way ez I hev
hearn tell on, an' peek in, an' ef I kin git a glimge
o' him, I'll make him tell me whar that thar filly air,
or I'll let daylight through him, sure !"
He paused only to bend aside the brambles, then
he crept in and took his way along a low, narrow



<pb n="176"/>
176     'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE          - 
passage. It had many windings, but was without
intersections or intricacy. He heard his own steps :
echoed like a pursuing footfall. His labored breath.t ,
ing returned in sighs from the inanimate rocks. It
was an uncanny place, with strange, sepulchral, sol.
emn effects. He shivered with the cold. A draught
stole in from some secret crevice known only to the
wild mountain winds. The torch flared, crouched be-
fore the gust, flared again, then darkness. He hesi-
tated, took one step forward, and suddenly-a miracle I
A soft aureola with gleaming radiations, a low,
shadowy chamber, a beast feeding from a manger,
and within it a child's golden head.
His heart gave a great throb. Somehow he was
smitten to his knees. Christmas Eve l He remem-
bered the day with a rush of emotion. He stared
again at the vouchsafed vision. He rubbed his eyes.
It had changed.
Only hallucination caused by an abrupt transition
from darkness to light; only the most mundane facts
of the old troughs and ash-hoppers, relics of the in-
dustry that had served the hideous carnage of battle; '
only the yellow head of the ranger's brat, who had.
climbed into one of them, from which the mare was
calmly munching her corn.
Yet this was Christmas Eve. And the Child did
lie in a manger.
Perhaps it was well for him that his ignorant faith-
could accept the illusion as a vision charged with all
the benignities of peace on earth, good-will toward
men. With a keen thrill in his heart, on his knees
he drew the charge from his rifle, and flung it down
a rift in the rocks. " Chrismus Eve," he murmured.
I



<pb n="177"/>
'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE      177
He leaned his empty weapon against the wall, and
strode out to the little girl who was perched up on
the trough.
"Chrismus gift, Cunnel !" he cried, cheerily.
"Ter-morrer's Chrismus."
The echoes caught the word. In vibratory jubi-
lance they repeated it. "Chrismus I" rang from
the roof, scintillating with calc-spar; " Chrismus !"
sounded from the colonnade of stalactites that
hung down to meet the uprising stalagmites;
"Chrismus !" repeated the walls incrusted with
roses that, shut in from the light and the fresh air
of heaven, bloomed forever in the stone. Was ever
chorus so sweet as this?
It reached Tobe Gryce, who stood at his impro-
vised corn-bin. With a bundle of fodder still in his
arms he stepped forward. There beside the little
Colonel and the black mare he beheld a man seated
upon an inverted half-bushel measure, peacefully
lighting his pipe with a bunch of straws which he
kindled at the lantern on the ash-hopper.
The ranger's black eyes were wide with wonder
at this intrusion, and angrily flashed. He con-
nected it at once with the attack on the stable.
The hair on his low forehead rose bristlingly as
he frowned. Yet he realized with a quaking heart
that he was helpless. He, although the crack shot
of the county, would not have fired while the Colo-
nel was within two yards of his mark for the State
of Tennessee.
He stood his ground with stolid courage-a tar-
get.
Then, with a start of surprise, he perceived that
12



<pb n="178"/>
178     'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
the intruder was unarmed. Twenty feet away his
rifle stood against the wall.
Tobe Gryce was strangely shaken. He experi-
enced a sudden revolt of credulity. This was surely
a dream.
" Ain't that thar Luke Todd ? Why air ye a-wait-
in' thar ?" he called out in a husky undertone.
Todd glanced up, and took his pipe from his
mouth; it was now fairly alight.
"Kase it be Chrismus Eve, Tobe," he said,
gravely.
The ranger stared for a moment; then came
forward and gave the fodder to the mare, pausing
now and then and looking with oblique distrust
down upon Luke Todd as he smoked his pipe.
" I want ter tell ye, Tobe, ez some o' the moun-
ting boys air a-sarchin fur ye outside."
"Who air they ?" asked the ranger, calmly.
His tone was so natural, his manner so unsuspect-
ing, that a new doubt began to stir in Luke Todd's
mind.
"What ails ye ter keep the mare down hyar,
Tobe ?" he asked, suddenly. "'Pears like ter me
ez that be powerful comical."
"Kase," said Tobe, reasonably, "some durned
horse-thieves kem arter her one night. I fired at
'em. I hain't hearn on 'em sence. An' so I jes
hid the mare."
Todd was puzzled. He shifted his pipe in his
mouth. Finally he said: "Some folks 'lowed ez
ye hed no right ter take up that mare, bein' ez ye
war the ranger."
Tobe Gryce whirled round abruptly. "What



<pb n="179"/>
'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE       179
war I a-goin' ter do, then ? Feed the critter fur
nuthin till the triflin' scamp ez owned her ker arter
her? I couldn't work her 'thout takin' her up an'
hevin her appraised. Thar's a law agin sech. An'
I couldn't git somebody ter toll her off an' take her
up. That ain't fair. What ought I ter hev done ?"
"Wa'al," said Luke, drifting into argument, " the
town-folks 'low ez ye hev got nuthin ter prove it by,
the stray-book an' records bein"burnt. The town-
folks 'low ez ye can't prove by writin' an' sech ez ye
ever tried ter find the owner."
"The town-folks air fairly sodden in foolishness,"
exclaimed the ranger, indignantly.
He drew from his ample pocket a roll of ragged
newspapers, and pointed with his great thumb at a
paragraph. And Luke Todd read by the light of
the lantern the advertisement and description of
the estray printed according to law in the nearest
newspaper.
The newspaper was so infrequent a factor in the
lives of the mountain gossips that this refutation
of their theory had never occurred to them.
The sheet was trembling in Luke Todd's hand;
his eyes filled. The cavern with its black distances,
its walls close at hand sparkling with delicate points
of whitest light; the yellow flare of the lantern; the
grotesque shadows on the ground; the fair little
girl with her golden hair; the sleek black mare;
the burly figure of the ranger-all the scene swayed
before him. He remembered the gracious vision
that had saluted him; he shuddered at the crime
from which he was rescued. Pity him because he
knew naught of the science of optics; of the be-



<pb n="180"/>
180     'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE
wildering effects of a sudden burst of light upon
the delicate mechanism of the eye; of the vagaries
of illusion.
"Tobe," he said, in a solemn voice--all the
echoes were bated to awed whispers-" I hev been
gin ter view a vision this night, bein' 'twar Chris-
mus Eve. An' now I want ter shake hands on it
fur peace."
Then he told the whole story, regardless of the
ranger's demonstrations, albeit they were sometimes
violent enough. Tobe sprang up with a snort of
rage, his eyes flashing, his thick tongue stumbling
with the curses crowding upon it, when he realized
the suspicions rife against him at the county town.
But he stood with his clinched hand slowly relaxing,
and with the vague expression which one wears
who looks into the past, as he listened to the recital
of Eugenia's pilgrimage in the snowy wintry dawn.
"Mighty few folks hev got a wife ez set store by
'em like that," Luke remarked, impersonally.
The ranger's rejoinder seemed irrelevant.
"'Genie be a-goin' ter see a powerful differ arter
this," he said, and fell to musing.
Snow, fatigue, and futility destroyed the ardor of
the lynching party after a time, and they dispersed
to their homes. Little was said of this expedition
afterward, and it became quite impossible to find
a man who would admit having joined it. For
the story went the rounds of the mountain that
there had been a mistake as to unfair dealing on
the part of the ranger, and Luke Todd was.quite
content to accept from the county treasury half the
sum of the mare's appraisement-with the deduc-



<pb n="181"/>
'WAY DOWN IN LONESOME COVE      181
tion of the stipulated per cent.-which Tobe Gryce
had paid, the receipt for which he produced.
The gossips complained, however, that after all
this was settled according to law, Tobe wouldn't
keep the mare, and insisted that Luke should re-
turn to him the money he had paid into the treas-
ury, half her'value, "bein' so brigaty he wouldn't
own Luke Todd's beast. An' Luke agreed ter so
do; but he didn't want ter be outdone, so fur the
keep o' the filly he gin the Cunnel a heifer. An'
Tobe war mighty nigh tickled ter death fur the
Cunnel ter hev a cow o' her own."
And now when December skies darken above
Lonesome Cove, and the snow in dizzying whirls
sifts softly down, and the gaunt brown leafless
heights are clothed with white as with a garment,
and the wind whistles and shouts shrilly, and above
the great crag loom the distant mountains, and be-
low are glimpsed the long stretches of the valley,
the two men remember the vision that illumined
the cavernous solitudes that night, and bless the
gracious power that sent salvation 'way down to
Lonesome Cove, and cherish peace and good-will
for the sake of a little Child that lay in a manger.



<pb n="182"/>



<pb n="183"/>
THE
MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS



<pb n="184"/>
a



<pb n="185"/>
THE
MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
IF the mission of the little school-house in Holly
Cove was to impress upon the youthful mind a
comprehension and appreciation of the eternal
verities of nature, its site could hardly have been
better chosen. All along the eastern horizon de-
ployed the endless files of the Great Smoky Moun-
tains-blue and sunlit, with now and again the ap-
parition of an unfamiliar peak, hovering like a
straggler in the far-distant rear, and made visible
for the nonce by some exceptional clarification of
the atmosphere; or.lowering, gray, stern; or with
ranks of clouds hanging on their flanks, while all
the artillery of heaven whirled about them, and the
whole world quaked beneath the flash and roar of
its volleys. The seasons successively painted the
great landscape-spring, with its timorous touch,
its illumined haze, its tender, tentative green and
gray and yellow; summer, with its flush of comple-
tion, its deep, luscious, definite verdure, and the
golden richness of fruition; autumn, with a full
brush and all chromatic splendors; winter, in mel-
ancholy sepia tones, black and brown and many



<pb n="186"/>
I86 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
sad variations of the pallors of white. So high 
was the little structure on the side of a transverse 
ridge that it commanded a vast field of sky above
the wooded ranges; and in the immediate fore-
ground, down between the slopes which were cleft J
to the heart, was the river, resplendent with the 
reflected moods of the heavens. In this deep "
gorge the winds and the pines chanted like a i
Greek chorus; the waves continuously murmured
an intricate rune, as if conning it by frequent rep-
etition; a bird would call out from the upper air
some joyous apothegm in a language which no creat-
ure of the earth has learned enough of happiness
to translate.
But the precepts which prevailed in the little
school- house were to the effect that rivers, except
as they flowed as they listed to confusing points of
the compass, rising among names difficult to re-
member, and emptying into the least anticipated
body of water, were chiefly to be avoided for their
proclivity to drown small boys intent on swimming
or angling. Mountains, aside from the desirabil-
ity of their recognition as forming one of the divis-
ions of land somewhat easily distinguishable by
the more erudite youth from plains, valleys, and
capes, were full of crags and chasms, rattlesnakes
and vegetable poisons, and a further familiarity with
them was liable to result in the total loss of the
adventurous-to see friends, family, and home no
more.
These dicta, promulgated from the professorial
chair, served to keep the small body of callow
humanity, with whose instruction Abner Sage was



<pb n="187"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 187
intrusted by the State, well within call and'out of
harm's way during the short recesses, while under
his guidance they toddled along the rough road
that leads up the steeps to knowledge. But one
there was who either bore a charmed life or pos-
sessed an unequalled craft in successfully defying
danger; who fished and swam with impunity; who
was ragged and torn from much climbing of crags;
whose freckled face bore frequent red tokens of an
indiscriminate sampling of berries. It is too much
to say that Abner Sage would have been glad to
have his warnings made terrible by some bodily
disaster to the juvenile dare-devil of the school,
but Leander Yerby's disobedient incredulity as to
the terrors that menaced him, and his triumphant
immunity, fostered a certain grudge against him.
Covert though it was, unrecognized even by Sage
himself, it was very definitely apparent to Tyler
Sudley when sometimes, often, indeed, on his way
home from hunting, he would pause at the school-
house window, pulling open the shutter from the
outside, and gravely watch his protegd, who stood
spelling at the head of the class.
For Leander Yerby's exploits were not altogether
those of a physical prowess. He was a mighty
wrestler with the multiplication table. He had
met and overthrown the nine line in single-hand-
ed combat. He had attained unto some inter-
esting knowledge of the earth on which he lived,
and could fluently bound countries with neatness
and precision, and was on terms of intimacy with
sundry seas, volcanoes, islands, and other sizable
objects. The glib certainty of his contemptuous



<pb n="188"/>
188 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
familiarity with the alphabet and its untoward com-
binations, as he flung off words in four syllables in
his impudent chirping treble, seemed something
uncanny, almost appalling, to Tyler Sudley, who
could not have done the like to save his stalwart
life. He would stare dumfounded at the erudite
personage at the head of the class; Leander's bare
feet were always carefully adjusted to a crack be-
tween the puncheons of the floor, literally "toeing
the mark "; his broad trousers, frayed out liberally
at the hem, revealed his skinny and scarred little
ankles, for his out-door adventures were not with-
out a record upon the more impressionable portions
of his anatomy; his waistband was drawn high up
under his shoulder-blades and his ribs, and girt
over the shoulders of his unbleached cotton shirt
by braces, which all his learning did not prevent
him from calling "galluses"; his cut, scratched,
calloused hands were held stiffly down at the side
seams in his nether garments in strict accordance
with the regulations. But rules could not control
the twinkle in his big blue eyes, the mingled effron-
tery and affection on his freckled face as he per-
ceived the on-looking visitor, nor hinder the wink,
the swiftly thrust-out tongue, as swiftly withdrawn,
the egregious display of two rows of dishevelled
jagged squirrel teeth, when once more, with an off-
hand toss of his tangled brown hair, he nimbly
spelled a long twisted-tailed word, and leered capa-
bly at the grave intent face framed in the window.
"Why, Abner!" Tyler Sudley would break out,
addressing the teacher, all unmindful of scholastic
etiquette, a flush of pleasure rising to his swarthy



<pb n="189"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 189
cheek as he thrust back his wide black hat on his
long dark hair and turned his candid gray eyes,
all aglow, upon the cadaverous, ascetic preceptor,
"ain't Lee-yander a-gittin' on powerful, powerful
fas' with his book ?"
" Not in enny ways so special," Sage would reply
in cavalier discouragement, his disaffected gaze
resting upon the champion scholar, who stood elat-
ed, confident, needing no commendation to assure
him of his pre-eminence; "but'he air disobejient,
an' turr'ble, turr'ble bad."
The nonchalance with which Leander Yerby
hearkened to this criticism intimated a persuasion
that there were many obedient people in this world,
but few who could so disport themselves in the in-
tricacies of the English language; and Sudley, as
he plodded homeward with his rifle on his shoul-
der, his dog running on in advance, and Leander
pattering along behind, was often moved to add the
weight of his admonition to the teacher's reproof.
"Lee-yander," he would gently drawl, "ye
mustn't be so bad, honey; ye mustn't be so turr'ble
bad."
" Naw, ma'am, I won't," Leander would cheerily
pipe out, and so the procession would wend its way
along.
For he still confused the gender in titles of re-
spect, and from force of habit he continued to
do so in addressing Tyler Sudley for many a year
after he had learned better.
These lapses were pathetic rather than ridiculous
in the hunter's ears. It was he who had taught
Leander every observance of verbal humility tow-



<pb n="190"/>
190 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
ard his wife, in the forlorn hope of propitiating her
in the interest of the child, who, however, with his
quick understanding that the words sought to do
honor and express respect, had of his own accord
transferred them to his one true friend in the house-
hold. The only friend he had in the world, Sudley
often felt, with a sigh over the happy child's forlorn
estate. And, with the morbid sensitiveness pecul-
iar to a tender conscience, he winced under the
knowledge that it was he who, through wrong-
headedness or wrongheartedness, had contrived to
make all the world besides the boy's enemy. Both
wrongheaded and wronghearted he was, he some-
times told himself. For even now it still seemed
to him that he had not judged amiss, that only the
perversity of fate had thwarted him. Was it so fan-
tastically improbable, so hopeless a solace that he
had planned, that he should have thought his wife
might take comfort for the death of their own child
in making for its sake a home for another, orphaned,
forlorn, a burden, and a glad riddance to those
into whose grudging charge it had been thrown?
This bounty of hope and affection and comfort had
seemed to him a free gift from the dead baby's
hands, who had no need of it since coming into its
infinite heritage of immortality, to the living waif,
to whom it was like life itself, since it held all the
essential values of existence. The idea smote him
like an inspiration. He had ridden twenty miles
in a snowy night to beg the unwelcome mite from
the custody of its father's half-brothers, who were
on the eve of moving to a neighboring county with
all their kin and belongings.



<pb n="191"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 191
Tyler Sudley was a slow man, and tenacious of
impressions. He could remember every detail of
the events as they had happened-the palpable
surprise, the moment of hesitation, the feint of de-
nial which successively ensued on his arrival. It
mattered not what the season or the hour-he
could behold at will the wintry dawn, the deserted
cabin, the glow of embers dying on the hearth with-
in; the white-covered wagon slowly a-creak along
the frozen road beneath the gaunt, bare, overhang-
ing trees, the pots and pans as they swung at the
rear, the bucket for water swaying beneath, the
mounted men beside it, the few head of swine and
cattle driven before them. Years had passed, but
he could feel anew the vague stir of the living bun-
dle which he held on the pommel of his saddle, the
sudden twist it gave to bring its inquiring, appre-
hensive eyes, so large in its thin, lank-jawed, pit-
eous little countenance, to bear on his face, as if it
understood its transfer of custody, and trembled
lest a worse thing befall it. One of the women
stopped the wagon and ran back to pin about its
neck an additional wrapping, an old red-flannel pet-
ticoat, lest it should suffer in its long, cold ride.
His heart glowed with vicarious gratitude for her
forethought, and he shook her hand warmly and
wished her well, and hoped that she might prosper
in her new home, and stood still to watch the
white wagon out of sight in the avenue of the snow-
laden trees, above which the moon was visible,
a-journeying too, swinging down the western sky.
Laurelia Sudley sat in stunned amazement when,
half-frozen, but triumphant and flushed and full



<pb n="192"/>
192 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
of his story, he burst into the warm home atmos-
phere, and put the animated bundle down upon the
hearth-stone in front of the glowing fire. For one
moment she met its forlorn gaze out of its peaked
and pinched little face with a vague hesitation in
her own worn, tremulous, sorrow-stricken eyes.,
Then she burst into a tumult of tears, upbraiding
her husband that he could think that another child
could take the place of her dead child--all the
dearer because it was dead; that she could play
the traitor to its memory and forget her sacred
grief; that she could do aught as long as she
should live but sit her down to bewail her loss,
every tear a tribute, every pang its inalienable
right, her whole smitten existence a testimony to
her love. It was in vain that he expostulated. The
idea of substitution had never entered his mind.
But he was ignorant, and clumsy of speech, and un-
accustomed to analyze his motives. He could not
put into words his feeling that to do for the wel-
fare of this orphaned and unwelcome little creature
all that they would have done for their own was in
some sort a memorial to him, and brought them
nearer to him-that she might find in it a satisfac-
tion, an occupation-that it might serve to fill her
empty life, her empty arms.
But no! She thought, and the neighbors thought,
and after a time Tyler Sudley came to think also,
that he had failed in the essential duty to the dead
-that of affectionate remembrance; that he was
recreant, strangely callous. They all said that he
had seemed to esteem one baby as good as another,
and that he was surprised that his wife was not



<pb n="193"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 193
consoled for the loss of her own child because he
took it into his head to go and toll off the Yerby
baby from his father's half-brothers "ez war movin'
away an' war glad enough ter get rid o' one head o'
human stock ter kerry, though, bein' human, they
oughter been ashamed ter gin him away like a
puppy-dog, or an extry cat, all hands consarned."
From the standpoint she had takerrLaurelia had
never wavered. It was an added and a continual
reproach to her husband that all the labor and
care of the ill-advised acquisition fell to her share.
She it was who must feed and clothe and tend the
gaunt little usurper; he needs must be accorded
all the infantile prerogatives, and he exacted much
time and attention. Despite the grudging spirit in
which her care was given she failed in no essential,
and presently the interloper was no longer gaunt
or pallid or apprehensive, but grew pink and che-
rubic of build, and arrogant of mind. He had no
sensitive sub-current of suspicion as to his welcome;
he filled the house with his gay babbling, and if no
maternal chirpings encouraged the development of
his ideas and his powers of speech, his cheerful
spirits seemed strong enough to thrive on their
own stalwart endowments. His hair began to curl,
and a neighbor, remarking on it to Laurelia, and
forgetting for the moment his parentage, said, in
admiring glee, twining the soft tendrils over her fin-
ger, that Mrs. Sudley had never before had a child so
well-favored as this one. From this time forth was
infused a certain rancor into his foster-mother's
spirit toward him. Her sense of martyrdom was
complete when another infant was born and died,
13



<pb n="194"/>
194 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
leaving her bereaved once more to watch this
stranger grow up in her house, strong and hearty,
and handsomer than any child of hers had been.
The mountain gossips had their own estimate of
her attitude.
"I ain't denyin' but what she hed nat'ral feelin'
fur her own chil'ren, bein' dead," said the dame who
had made the unfortunate remark about the curl-
ing hair, "but Laurelia Sudley war always a con-
trary-minded, lackadaisical kind o' gal afore she war
married, sorter set in opposition, an' now ez she
ain't purty like she useter was, through cryin' her
eyes out, an' gittin' sallow-complected an' bony, I
kin notice her contrariousness more. Ef Tyler
hedn't brung that chile home, like ez not she'd hev
sot her heart on borryin' one herself from some-
body. Lee-yander ain't in nowise abused, ez I
kin see--ain't acquainted with the rod, like the
Bible say he oughter be, an' ennybody kin see ez
Laurelia don't like the name he gin her, yit she
puts up with it. She larnt him ter call Ty ' Cap'n,'
bein' she's sorter proud of it, 'kase Ty war a cap'n
of a critter company in the war: 'twarn't sech a
mighty matter nohow; he jes got ter be cap'n
through the other off'cers bein' killed off. An' the
leetle boy got it twisted somehows, an' calls her
'Cap'n' an' Ty 'Neighbor,' from hearin' old man
Jeemes, ez comes in constant, givin' him that old-'
fashioned name. ' Cap'n' 'bout fits Laurelia, though,
an' that's a fac'."
Laurelia's melancholy ascendency in the house-
hold was very complete. It was characterized by
no turbulence, no rages, no long-drawn argument



<pb n="195"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 195'
or objurgation; it expressed itself only in a settled
spirit of disaffection, a pervasive suggestion of
martyrdom, silence or sighs, or sometimes a de-
pressing singing of hymn tunes. For her husband
had long ago ceased to remonstrate, or to seek to
justify himself. It was with a spirit of making
amends that he hastened to concede every point of
question, to defer to her preference in all matters,
and Laurelia's sway grew more and more absolute
as the years wore on. Leander Yerby could re-
member no other surroundings than the ascetic
atmosphere of his home. It had done naught ap-
parently to quell the innate cheerfulness of his
spirit. He evidently took note, however, of the
different standpoint of the "Captain" and his
"Neighbor," for although he was instant in the
little manifestations of respect toward her which
he had been taught, his childish craft could not
conceal their spuriousness.
"That thar boy treats me ez ef I war a plumb
idjit," Laurelia said one day, moved to her infre-
quent anger. " Tells me, 'Yes, ma'am, cap'n,' an'
'Naw, ma'am, cap'n,' jes ter quiet me-like folks
useter do ter old Ed'ard Green, ez war in his do-
tage-an' then goes along an' does the very thing I
tell him not ter do."
Sudley looked up as he sat smoking his pipe by the
fire, a shade of constraint in his manner, and a con-
traction of anxiety in his slow, dark eyes, never quite
absent when she spoke to him aside of Leander.
She paused, setting her gaunt arms akimbo, and
wearing the manner of one whose kindly patience
is beyond limit abused. "Kems in hyar, he do,



<pb n="196"/>
196 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
a-totin' a fiddle. An' I says, 'Lee-yander Yerby,
don't ye know that thar thing's the devil's snare ?'
' Naw, ma'am, cap'n,' he says, grinnin' like a imp;
'it's my snare, fur I hev bought it from Peter Teaze-
ly fur two rabbits what I cotch in my trap, an' my
big red rooster, an' a bag o' seed pop-corn, an' the
only hat I hev got in the worl'.' An' with that the
consarn gin sech a yawp, it plumb went through
my haid. An' then the critter jes tuk ter a-bowin'
it back an' forth, a- playin' 'The Chicken in the
Bread-trough' like demented, a-dancin' off on fust
one foot an' then on t'other till the puncheons
shuck. An' I druv him out the house. I won't
stan' none o' Satan's devices hyar! I tole him he
couldn't fetch that fiddle hyar whenst he kems
home ter - night, an' I be a-goin' ter make him a
sun-bonnet or a nightcap ter wear stiddier his hat
that he traded off."
She paused.
Her husband had risen, the glow of his pipe fad-
ing in his unheeding hand, his excited eyes fixed
upon her. "Laurely," he exclaimed, "ye ain't
meanin' ez that thar leetle critter could play a
chune fust off on a fiddle 'thout no larnin' I"
She nodded her head in reluctant admission.
He opened his mouth once or twice, emitting no
sound. She saw how his elation, his spirit of com-
mendation, his pride, set at naught her displeasure,
albeit in self-defence, perchance, he dared not say
a word. With an eye alight and an absorbed face,
he laid his pipe on the mantel-piece, and silently
took his way out of the house in search of the
youthful musician.



<pb n="197"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 197
Easily found I The racked and tortured echoes
were all aquake within' half a mile of the spot
where, bareheaded, heedless of the threatened igno-
miny alike of sun-bonnet or nightcap, Leander sat
in the flickering sunshine and shadow upon a rock
beside the spring, and blissfully experimented with
all the capacities of catgut to produce sound.
" Listen, Neighbor !" he cried out, descrying Ty-
ler Sudley, who, indeed, could do naught else-" lis-
ten / Ye won't hear much better fiddlin' this side
o' kingdom come !" And with glad assurance he
capered up and down, the bow elongating the sound
to a cadence of frenzied glee, as his arms sought to
accommodate the nimbler motions of his legs.
Thus it was the mountaineers later said that Le-
ander fell into bad company. For, the fiddle being
forbidden in the sober Laurelia's house, he must
needs go elsewhere to show his gift and his growing
skill, and he found a welcome fast enough. Before'
he had advanced beyond his stripling youth, his un-
tutored facility had gained a rude mastery over the
instrument; he played with a sort of fascination
and spontaneity that endeared his art to his uncrit-
ical audiences, and his endowment was held as
something wonderful. And now it was that Laure-
lia, hearing him, far away in the open air, play once
a plaintive, melodic strain, fugue-like with the elfin
echoes, felt a strange soothing in the sound, found
tears in her eyes, not all of pain but of sad pleas-
ure, and assumed thenceforth something of the
port of a connoisseur. She said she "couldn't
abide a fiddle jes sawed helter-skelter by them ez
hedn't lamed, but ter play saaft an' slow an' solemn,



<pb n="198"/>
198 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
and no dancin' chune, no frolic song-she warn't
set agin that at all." And she desired of Leander
a repetition of this sunset motive that evening when
he had come home late, and she discovered him
hiding the obnoxious instrument under the porch.
But in vain. He did not remember it. It was
some vague impulse, as unconsciously voiced as
the dreaming bird's song in the sudden half-awake
intervals of the night. Over and again, as he stood
by the porch, the violin in his arms, he touched the
strings tentatively, as if, perchance, being so alive,
they might of their own motion recall the strain
that had so lately thrilled along them.
He had grown tall and slender. He wore boots
to his knees now, and pridefully carried a "shoot-
in'-iron " in one of the long legs-to his great dis-
comfort. The freckles of his early days were
merged into the warm uniform tint of his tanned
complexion. His brown hair still curled; his
shirt-collar fell away from his throat, round and
full and white-the singer's throat-as he threw
his head backward and cast his large roving eyes
searchingly along the sky, as if the missing strain
had wings.
The inspiration returned no more, and Laurelia
experienced a sense of loss. "Some time, Lee-
yander, ef ye war ter ker acrost that chune agin,
try ter set it in yer remembrance, an' play it whenst
ye kem home," she said, wistfully, at last, as if this
errant melody were afloat somewhere in the vague
realms of sound, where one native to those haunts
might hope to encounter it anew.
"Yes, ma'am, cap'n, I will," he said, with his



<pb n="199"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 199
facile assent. But his tone expressed slight inten-
tion, and his indifference bespoke a too great wealth
of " chunes "; he could feel no lack in some unre-
membered combination, sport of the moment, when
another strain would come at will, as sweet per-
chance, and new.
She winced as from undeserved reproach when
presently Leander's proclivities for the society of
the gay young blades about the countryside, some-
times reputed "evil men," were attributed to this
exile of the violin from the hearth-stone. She
roused herself to disputation, to indignant repudia-
tion.
"They talk ez ef it war me ez led the drinkin',
an' the gamin', an' the dancin', and sech, ez goes
on in the Cove, 'kase whenst Lee-yander war about
fryin' size I wouldn't abide ter hev him a-sawin' away
on the fiddle in the house enough ter make me deef
fur life. At fust the racket of it even skeered Towse
so he wouldn't come out from under the house fur
two days an' better; he jes sot under thar an'
growled, an' shivered, an' showed his teeth ef enny-
body spoke ter him. Nobody don't like Lee-yan-
der's performin' better'n I do whenst he plays them
saaft, slippin'-away, slow medjures, ez sound plumb
religious-ef 'twarn't a sin ter say so. Naw, sir,
ef ennybody hev sot Lee-yander on ter evil ways
'twarn't me. My conscience be clear."
Nevertheless she was grievously ill at ease when
one day there rode up to the fence a tall, gaunt, ill-
favored man, whose long, lean, sallow countenance,
of a Pharisaic cast, was vaguely familiar to her, as
one recognizes real lineaments in the contortions of



<pb n="200"/>
200 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
a caricature or the bewilderments of a dream. She
felt as if in some long-previous existence she had
seen this man .as he dismounted at the gate and
came up the path with his saddle-bags over his arm.
But it was not until he mustered an unready, un-
willing smile, that had of good-will and geniality so
slight an intimation that it was like a spasmodic
grimace, did she perceive how time had deepened
tendencies to traits, how the inmost thought and
the secret sentiment had been chiselled into the
face in the betrayals of the sculpture of fifteen
years.
"Nehemiah Yerby !" she exclaimed. "I would
hev knowed ye in the happy land o' Canaan."
" Let's pray we may all meet thar, Sister Sudley,"
he responded. " Let's pray that the good time may
find none of us unprofitable servants."
Mrs. Sudley experienced a sudden recoil. Not
that she did not echo his wish, but somehow his
manner savored of an exclusive arrogation of piety
and a suggestion of reproach.
"That's my prayer," she retorted, aggressively.
"Day an' night, that's my prayer."
"Yes'm, fur us an' our households, Sister Sudley
-we mus' think o' them c'mitted ter our charge."
She strove to fling off the sense of guilt that op-
pressed her, the mental attitude of arraignment.
He was a young man when he journeyed away in
that snowy dawn. She did not know what changes
had come in his experience. Perchance his effer-
vescent piety was only a habit of speech, and had
no significance as far as she was concerned. The
suspicion, however, tamed her in some sort. She



<pb n="201"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 201
attempted no retort. With a mechanical, reluctant
smile, ill adjusted to her sorrow-lined face, she
made an effort to assume that the greeting had
been but the conventional phrasings of the day.
"Kem in, kem in, Nehemiah; Tyler will be glad
ter see ye, an' I reckon ye will be powerful inter-
ested ter view how Lee-yander hev growed an'
prospered."
She felt as if she were in some terrible dream as
she beheld him slowly wag his head from side
to side. He had followed her into the large main
room of the cabin, and had laid his saddle-bags
down by the side of the chair in which he had seated
himself, his elbows on his knees, his hands held
out to the flickering blaze in the deep chimney-
place, his eyes significantly narrowing as he gazed
upon it.
"Naw, Sister Sudley," he wagged his head more
mournfully still. "I kin but grieve ter hear how
my nevy Lee-yander hev ' prospered,' ez ye call it,
an' I be s'prised ye should gin it such a name.
Oh-h-h, Sister Sudley!" in prolonged and dreary
vocative, "I 'lowed ye war a godly woman. I
knowed yer name 'mongst the church-goers an' the
church-members." A faint flush sprang into her
delicate faded cheek; a halo encircled this repute
of sanctity; she felt with quivering premonition
that it was about to be urged as a testimony against
her. "Elsewise I wouldn't hev gin my cornsent
ter hev lef' the leetle lam', Lee-yander, in yer fold.
Precious, precious leetle lam' 1"
Poor Laurelia! Were it not that she had a sense
of fault under the scathing arraignment of her mo-



<pb n="202"/>
202 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
tives, her work, and its result, although she scarce-.,
ly saw how she was to blame, that she had equally
with him esteemed Leander's standpoint iniquitous,
she might have made a better-fight in her own in-
terest. Why she did not renounce the true culprit
as one on whom all godly teachings were wasted,
and, adopting the indisputable vantage-ground of
heredity, carry the war into the enemy's country,
ascribing Leander's shortcomings to his Yerby
blood, and with stern and superior joy proclaiming
that he was neither kith nor kin of hers, she won-
dered afterward, for this valid ground of defence
did not occur to her then. In these long mourn-
ing years she had grown dull; her mental proc-
esses were either a sad introspection or reminis-
cence. Now she could only take into account her
sacrifices of feeling, of time, of care; the illnesses
she had nursed, the garments that she had made
and mended - ah, how many! laid votive on the
altar of Leander's vigor and his agility, for as he
scrambled about the crags he seemed, she was
wont to say, to climb straight out of them. The
recollection of all this-the lesser and unspiritual
maternal values, perchance, but essential-surged
over her with bitterness; she lost her poise, and
fell a-bickering.
"' Precious leetle lam',' she repeated, scornfully.
"Precious he mus' hev been! Fur when ye lef'
him he hedn't a whole gyarmint ter his back, an'
none but them that kivered him."
Nehemiah Yerby changed color slightly as the
taunt struck home, but he was skilled in the more
aesthetic methods of argument.



<pb n="203"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 203
"We war pore-mighty pore indeed, Sister
Sudley."
Now, consciously in the wrong, Sister Sudley,
with true feminine inconsistency, felt better. She
retorted with bravado.
"Needle an' thread ain't 'spensive nowhar ez I
knows on, an' the gov'mint hev sot no tax on saaft
home-made soap, so far ez hearn from."
She briskly placed her chair, a rude rocker, the
seat formed of a taut-stretched piece of ox-hide, be-
side the fire, and took up her knitting. A sock for
Leander it was-one of many of all sizes. She re-
membered the first that she had measured for the
bare pink toes which he had brought there, forlorn
candidates for the comfortable integuments in which
they were presently encased, and how she had mor-
bidly felt that every stitch she took was a renuncia-
tion of her own children, since a stranger was hon-
ored in their place. The tears came into her eyes.
It was only this afternoon that she had experienced
a pang of self-reproach to realize how near happi-
ness she was-as near as her temperament could
approach. But somehow the air was so soft; she
could see from where she sat how the white velvet
buds of the aspen-trees in the dooryard had length-
ened into long, cream-tinted, furry tassels; the
maples on the mountain-side lifted their red flower-
ing boughs against the delicate blue sky; the grass
was so green; the golden candlesticks bunched
along the margin of the path to the rickety gate
were all a-blossoming. The sweet appeal of spring
had never been more insistent, more coercive.
Somehow peace, and a placid content, seemed as



<pb n="204"/>
204 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
essential incidents in the inner life as the growth of
the grass anew, the bursting of the bud, or the soft
awakening of the zephyr. Even within the house,
the languors of the fire drowsing on the hearth, the
broad bar of sunshine across the puncheon floor,
so slowly creeping away, the sense of the vernal
lengthening of the pensive afternoon, the ever-flit-
ting shadow of the wren building under the eaves,
and its iterative gladsome song breaking the fire-
side stillness, partook of the serene beatitude of
the season and the hour. The visitor's drawling
voice rose again, and she was not now constrained
to reproach herself that she was too happy.
"Yes'm, pore though we war then--an' we
couldn't look forward ter the Lord's prosperin' us
s6me sence-we never would hev lef' the precious
letle lam"'-his voice dwelt with unvanquished
emphasis upon the obnoxious words-" 'mongst
enny but them persumed ter be godly folks. Tyler
war a toler'ble good soldier in the war, an' hed a
good name in the church, but ye war persumed to be
a plumb special Christian with no pledjure in this
worl'."
Laurelia winced anew. This repute of special
sanctity was the pride of her ascetic soul. Few of
the graces of life or of the spirit had she coveted,
but her pre-eminence as a religionist she had fos-
tered and cherished, and now through her own
deeds of charity it seemed about to be wrested
from her.
"Lee-yander Yerby hev larnt nuthin' but good
in this house, an' all my neighbors will tell you the
same word. The Cove 'lows I hev been too strict."



<pb n="205"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 205
Nehemiah was glancing composedly about the
room. "That thar 'pears ter be a fiddle on the
wall, ain't it, Mis' Sudley?" he said, with an inci-
dental air and the manner of changing the sub-
ject.
Alack, for the asthetic perversion! Since the
playing of those melancholy minor strains in that
red sunset so long ago, which had touched so re-
sponsive a chord in Laurelia's grief-worn heart, the
crazy old fiddle had been naturalized, as it were,
and had exchanged its domicile under the porch
for a position on the wall. It was boldly visible,
and apparently no more ashamed of itself than was
the big earthen jar half full of cream, which was
placed close to the fireplace on the hearth in the
hope that its contents might become sour enough
by to-morrow to be churned.
Laurelia looked up with a start at the instrument,
red and lustrous against the brown log wall, its bow
poised jauntily above it, and some glistening yellow
reflection from the sun on the floor playing among
the strings, elusive, soundless fantasies.
Her lower jaw dropped. She was driven to her
last defences, and sore beset. "It air a fiddle,"
she said, slowly, at last, and with an air of con-
scientious admission, as if she had had half a mind
to deny it. "A fiddle the thing air." Then, as
she collected her thoughts, "Brother Pete Vickers
'lows ez he sees no special sin in playin' the fiddle.
He 'lows ez in some kentries-I disremember whar
-they plays on 'em in church, quirin' an' hymn
chunes an' sech."
Her voice faltered a little; she had never thought



<pb n="206"/>
206 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
to quote this fantasy in her own defence, for she se-
cretly believed that old man Vickers must have been
humbugged by some worldly brother skilled in draw-
ing the long bow himself.
Nehemiah Yerby seemed specially endowed with
a conscience for the guidance of other people, so
quick was he to descry and pounce upon their short-
comings. If one's sins are sure to find one out, there
is little doubt but that Brother Nehemiah would be
on the ground first.
"Air you-uns a-settin' under the preachin' o'
Brother Peter Vickers ?" he demanded in a sepul-
chral voice.
"Naw, naw," she was glad to reply. "'Twar
onderstood ez Brother Vickers wanted a call ter the
church in the Cove, bein' ez his relations live hyar-
abouts, an' he kem up an' preached a time or two.
But he didn't git no call. The brethren 'lowed
Brother Vickers war too slack in his idees o' re-
ligion. Some said his hell warn't half hot enough.
Thar air some powerful sinners in the Cove, an'
nuthin' but good live coals an' a liquid blazin' fire
air a-goin' ter deter them from the evil o' thar
ways. So Brother Vickers went back the road he
kem."
She knit off her needle while, with his head still
bent forward, Nehemiah Yerby sourly eyed her, feel-
ing himself a loser with Brother Vickers, in that he
did not have the reverend man's incumbency as a
grievance.
" He 'pears ter me ter see mo' pleasure in religion
'n penance, ennyhow," he observed, bitterly. " An'
the Lord knows the bes' of us air sinners."



<pb n="207"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 207
"An' he laughs loud an' frequent-mightily like a
sinner," she agreed. "An' whenst he prays, he
prays loud an' hearty, like he jes expected ter git
what he axed fur sure's shootin'. Some o' the breth-
erin' sorter taxed him with his sperits, an' he 'lowed
he couldn't holp but be cheerful whenst he hed the
Lord's word fur it ez all things work tergether fur
good. An' he laffed same et'ef they hedn't spoke
ter him serious."
"Look at that, now " exclaimed Nehemiah.
"An' that thar man ez good ez dead with the heart-
disease."
Laurelia's eyes were suddenly arrested by his
keen, pinched, lined face. What there was in it to
admonish her she could hardly have said, nor how
it served to tutor her innocent craft.
"I ain't so sure 'bout Brother Vickers bein' so
wrong," she said, slowly. "He 'lowed ter me ez I
hed spent too much o' my life a-sorrowin', 'stiddier
a-praisin' the Lord for his mercies." Her face
twitched suddenly; she could not yet look upon
her bereavements as mercies. "He 'lowed I would
hev been a happier an' a better 'oman ef I hed took
the evil ez good from the Lord's hand, fur in his
sendin' it's the same. An' I know that air a true
word. An' that's what makes me 'low what he said
war true 'bout'n that fiddle; that I ought never ter
hev pervented the boy from playin' 'round home an'
sech, an' 'twarn't no sin but powerful comfortable
an' pleasurable ter set roun' of a cold winter night
an' hear him play them slow, sweet, dyin'-away
chunes-" She dropped her hands, and gazed with
the rapt eyes of remembrance through the window



<pb n="208"/>
208 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
at the sunset clouds which, gathering red and pur-
ple and gold on the mountain's brow, were reflected
roseate and amethyst and amber at the mountain's
base on the steely surface of the river. " Brother
Vickers 'lowed he never hearn sech in all his life.
It brung the tears ter his eyes-it surely did."
"He'd a heap better be weepin' fur them black
sheep o' his congregation an' fur Lee-yander's short-
comin's, fur ez fur ez I kin hear he air about ez black
a sheep ez most pastors want ter wrestle with fur
the turnin' away from thar sins. Yes'm, Sister Sud-
ley, that's jes what p'inted out my jewty plain afore
my eyes, an' I riz up an' kem ter be instant in a-do-
in' of it. ' I'll not leave my own nevy in the tents
o' sin,' I sez. ' I hev chil'n o' my own, heartyfeeders
an' hard on shoe-leather, ter support, but I'll not
grudge my brother's son a home.' Yes, Laurely
Sudley, I hev kem ter kerry him back with me. Yer
jewty ain't been done by him, an' I'll leave him a
dweller in the tents o' sin no longer."
His enthusiasm had carried him too far. Lau-
relia's face, which at first seemed turning to stone
as she gradually apprehended his meaning and his
mission, changed from motionless white to a tremu-
lous scarlet while he spoke, and when he ceased she
retorted herself as one of the ungodly.
"Ye mus' be mighty ambitious ter kerry away a
skin full o' broken bones! Jes let Tyler Sudley
hear ez ye called his house the tents o' the ungodly,
an' that ye kem hyar a-faultin' me, an' tellin' me ez
I 'ain't done my jewty ennywhar or ennyhow C" she
exclaimed, with a pride which, as a pious saint, she
had never expected to feel in her husband's reputa-



<pb n="209"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 209
tion as a high-tempered man and a " mighty handy
fighter," and with implicit reliance upon both endow-
ments in her quarrel.
" Only in a speritchual sense, Sister Sudley," Ne-
hemiah gasped, as he made haste to qualify his as-
severation. " I only charge you with havin' sp'iled
the boy; ye hev sp'iled him through kindness ter
him, an' not ye so much ez Ty. Ty never hed so
much ez a dog that would mind him !. His dog
wouldn't answer call nor whistle 'thout he war so
disposed.  never faulted ye, Sister Sudley; 'twar
jes Ty I faulted. I know Ty."
He knew, too, that it was safer to call Ty and his
doings in question, big and formidable and belliger-
ent though he was, than his meek-mannered, mel-
ancholy, forlorn, and diminutive wife. Nehemiah
rose up and walked back and forth for a moment
with an excited face and a bent back, and a sort of
rabbit-like action. "Now, I put it to you, Sister
Sudley, air Ty a-makin' that thar boy plough ter-
day ?-jes be-you-ti-ful field weather 1"
Sister Sudley, victorious, having regained her
normal position by one single natural impulse of
self-assertion, not as a religionist, but as Tyler Sud-
ley's wife, and hence entitled to all the show of re-
spect which that fact unaided could command, sat
looking at him with a changed face-a face that
seemed twenty years younger; it had the expres-
sion it wore before it had grown pinched and as-
cetic and insistently sorrowful; one might guess
how she had looked when Tyler Sudley first went
up the mountain "a-courtin'." She sought to as-
sume no other stand-point.  Here she was in-
14



<pb n="210"/>
210 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS'
trenched. She shook her head in negation. The
affair was none of hers. 'Ty Sudley could take
ample care of it.
Nehemiah gave a little skip that might suggest
a degree of triumph. "Aha, not ploughin'  But
Ty is ploughin'. I seen him in the field. An'
Lee-yander ain't ploughin' ! An' how did I know?
Ez I war a-ridin' along through the woods this
mornin' I kem acrost a striplin' lad a-walkin'
through the undergrowth ez onconsarned ez a,
killdee an' ez nimble. An' under his chin war a
fiddle, an' his head war craned down ter it." He
mimicked the attitude as he stood on the hearth.
"He never looked up wunst. Away he walked,
light ez a plover, an' a-ping, pang, ping, pang," in a
high falsetto, "went that fiddle! I war plumb
'shamed fur the critters in the woods ter view sech
idle sinfulness, a ole owe/, a-blinkin' down out'n a
hollow tree, kem ter see what ping, pang, ping, pang
meant, an' thar war a rabbit settin' up on two legs
in the bresh, an' a few stray razor-back hawgs; I
tell ye I war mortified 'fore even sech citizens ez
them, an' a lazy, impident-lookin' dog ez followed
him."
"How did ye know 'twar Lee-yander ?" demanded
Mrs. Sudley,'recognizing the description perfectly,
but after judicial methods requiring strict proof.
"Oh-h ! by the fambly favor," protested the gaunt
and hard-featured Nehemiah, capably. "I knowed
the Yerby eye."
"He hev got his mother's eyes." Mrs. Sudley
had certainly changed her stand-point with a ven-
geance. "He hev got his mother's be-you-tiful



<pb n="211"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 211
blue eyes and her curling, silken brown hair-sorter
red; little Yerby in that, mebbe; but sech eyes, an'
sech lashes, an' sech fine curling hair ez none o'
yer fambly ever hed, or ever will."
" Mebbe so. I never seen him more'n a minit.
But he might ez well hev a be-you-ti-ful curlin' nose,
like the elephint in the show, for all the use he air,
or I be afeard air ever likely ter be."
Tyler Sudley's face turned gray, despite his bellig-
erent efficiencies, when his wife, hearing the clank
of the ox-yoke as it was flung down in the shed
outside, divined the home-coming of the ploughman
and his team, and slipped out to the barn with her
news. She realized, with a strange enlightenment
as to her own mental processes, what angry jeal-
ousy the look on his face would have roused in her
only so short a time ago-jealousy for the sake of
her own children, that any loss, any grief, should
be poignant and pierce his heart save for them.
Now she was sorry for him; she felt with him.
But as he continued silent, and. only stared at
her dumfounded and piteous, she grew frightened
-she knew not of what.
"Shucks, Ty !" she exclaimed, catching him by
the sleeve with the impluse to rouse him, to awaken
him, as it were, to his own old familiar identity;
" ye ain't 'feared o' that thar snaggle-toothed skeer-
crow in yander; he would be plumb comical ef he
didn't look so mean-natured an' sech a hyper-
crite."
He gazed at her, his eyes eloquent with pain.
"Laurely !" he gasped, "this hyar thing plumb



<pb n="212"/>
212 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
knocks me down; it jes takes the breath o' life
out'n me!"
She hesitated for a moment. Any anxiety, any
trouble, seemed so incongruous with the sweet
spring-tide peace in the air, that one did not readily
take it home to heart. Hope was in the atmosphere
like an essential element; one might call it oxygen
or caloric or vitality, according to the tendency of
mind and the habit of speech. But the heart knew
it, and the pulses beat strongly responsive to it.
Faith ruled the world. Some tiny bulbous thing
at her feet that had impeded her step caught her
attention. It was coming up from the black earth,
and the buried darkness, and the chill winter's
torpor, with all the impulses of confidence in the
light withdut, and the warmth of the sun, and the
fresh showers that were aggregating in the clouds
somewhere for its nurture-a blind inanimate thing
like that! But Tyler Sudley felt none of it; the
blow had fallen upon him, stunning him. He
stood silent, looking gropingly into the purple dusk,
veined with silver glintings of the moon, as if he
sought to view in the future some event which he
dreaded, and yet shrank to see.
She had rarely played the consoler, so heavily
had she and all her griefs leaned on his supporting
arm. It was powerless now. She perceived this,
all dismayed at the responsibility that had fallen
upon her. She made an effort to rally his courage.
She had more faith in it than in her own.
"'Feard o' him/" she exclaimed, with a sharp
tonic note of satire. " Kern in an' view him."
"Laurely," he quavered, "I oughter hev got it



<pb n="213"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 213
down in writin' from him; I oughter made him sign
p pers agreein' fur me ter keep the boy till he
igrowed ter be his own man."
' She, too, grew pale. "Ye ain't meanin' ter let
him take the boy sure enough l" she gasped.
"I moughtn't be able ter holp it; I dun'no' how
the law stands. He air kin ter Lee-yander, an'
mebbe hev got the bes' right tel him."
She shivered slightly; the dew was falling, and
all the budding herbage was glossed with a silver
glister. The shadows were sparse. The white
branches of the aspens cast only the symmetrical
outline of the tree form on the illumined grass, and
seemed scarcely less bare than in winter, but on one
swaying bough the mocking-bird sang all the joyous
prophecies of the spring to the great silver moon
that made his gladsome day so long.
She was quick to notice the sudden cessation of
his song, the alert, downward poise of his beautiful
head, his tense critical attitude. A mimicking whis-
tle rose on the air, now soft, now keen, with swift
changes and intricate successions of tones, ending
in a brilliant borrowed roulade, delivered with a
wonderful velocity and slan. The long tail feath-
ers, all standing stiffly upward, once more drooped;
the mocking-bird turned his head from side to side,
then lifting his full throat he poured forth again his
incomparable, superb, infinitely versatile melody,
fixing his glittering eye on the moon, and heeding
the futilely ambitious worldling no more.
The mimicking sound heralded the approach of
Leander. Laurelia's heart, full of bitterness for
his sake, throbbed tenderly for him. Ah, what was



<pb n="214"/>
214 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
to be his fate I What unkind lot did the future
hold for him in the clutches of a man like thisl .
Suddenly she was pitying his mother-her own
children, how safe I
She winced to tell him what had happened, but
she it was who, bracing her nerves, made the dis-
closure, for Sudley remained silent, the end of the
ox-yoke in his trembling hands, his head bare to
the moon and the dew, his face grown lined and old.
Leander stood staring at her out of his moonlit
blue eyes, his hat far back on the brown curls she
had so vaunted, damp and crisp and clinging, the
low limp collar of his unbleached shirt showing his
round full throat, one hand resting on the high curb
of the well, the other holding a great brown gourd
full of the clear water which he had busied himself
in securing while she sought to prepare him to
hear the worst. His lips, like a bent bow as she
thought, were red and still moist as he now and
then took the gourd from them, and held it motion-
less in the interest of her narration, that indeed
touched him so nearly. Then, as she made point
after point clear to his comprehension, he would
once more lift the gourd and drink deeply, for he
had had an active day, inducing a keen thirst.
She had been preparing herself for the piteous
spectacle of his frantic fright, his futile reliance on
them who had always befriended him, his callow
forlorn helplessness, his tears, his reproaches; she
dreaded them.
He was silent for a reflective moment when she
had paused.  "But what's he want with me,
Cap'n ?" he suddenly demanded. "Mought know



<pb n="215"/>
TtIE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 215
X *wn't industrious in the field, ez he seen me
d' a-fiddlin' in the woods whilst Neighbor war
aploughin'."
' "aMebbe he 'lows he mought make ye industrious
an'.git cornsider'ble work out'n ye," she faltered,
flinching for him.
After another refreshing gulp from the gourd he
canvassed this dispassionately. "Say his own
chil'n air ' hearty feeders an' hard on shoe-leather ?'
Takes a good deal o' goadin' ter git ploughin'
enough fur the wuth o' feed out'n a toler'ble
beastis like old Blaze-face thar, don't it, Neigh-
bor?-an' how is it a-goin' ter be with a human
ez mebbe will hold back an' air sot agin plough-
in' ennyhow, an' air sorter idle by profession?
'Twould gin him a heap o' trouble-more'n the
ploughin' an' sech would be wuth - a heap o' trou-
ble." Once more he bowed his head to the gourd.
" He 'lowed ye shouldn't dwell no mo' in the tents
o' sin. He seen the fiddle, Lee; it's all complicat-
ed with the fiddle," she quavered, very near tears
of vexation.
. He lifted a smiling moonlit face; his half-sup-
pressed laugh echoed gurglingly in the gourd.
"Cap'n," he. said, reassuringly, "jes let's hear
Uncle Nehemiah talk some mo', an' ef I can't see
no mo' likely work fur me 'n ploughin', I'll think
myself mighty safe."
They felt like three conspirators as after supper
they drew their chairs around the fire with the un-
suspicious Uncle Nehemiah. However, Nehemiah
Yerby could hardly be esteemed unsuspicious in
any point of view, so full of vigilant craft was his



<pb n="216"/>
2I6 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS '
intention in every anticipation, so slyly sanctim
nious was his long countenance.
There could hardly have been a greater contrat
than Tyler Sudley's aspect presented. His can
did face seemed a mirror for his thought; he had
had scant experience in deception, and he prove4
a most unlikely novice in the art. His features.
were heavy and set; his manner was brooding and 
depressed; he did not alertly follow the conversa-z
tion; on the contrary, he seemed oblivious of it as '
his full dark eyes rested absently on the fire. More ,i
than once he passed his hand across them with a
troubled, harassed manner, and he sighed heavily.
For which his co-conspirators could have fallen
upon him. How could he be so dull, so forgetful
of all save the fear of separation from the boy
whom he had reared, whom he loved as his own
son; how could he fail to know that a jaunty, as-
sured mien might best serve his interests until at
any rate the blow had fallen; why should he wear
the insignia of defeat before the strength of his
claim was tested? Assuredly his manner was cal-
culated to greatly reinforce Nehemiah Yerby's con-
fidence, and to assist in eliminating difficulties in
the urging of his superior rights and the carry-
ing out of his scheme. Mrs. Sudley's heart sank
as she caught a significant gleam from the boy's
eyes; he too appreciated this disastrous policy,
this virtual surrender before a blow was struck.
"An' Ty ain't afeard o' bars," she silently com-
mented, "nor wolves, nor wind, nor lightning, nor
man in enny kind o' a free fight; but bekase he
dun'no' how the law stands, an' air afeard the law



<pb n="217"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 2I7
mought be able ter take Lee-yander, he jes sets
thar ez pitiful ez a lost kid, fairly ready ter blate
aloud."
She descried the covert triumph twinkling
among the sparse light lashes and "crow-feet"
about Nehemiah's eyes as he droned on an ever-
lengthening account of his experiences since leav-
ing the county.
" It's a mighty satisfyin' thing ter be well off in
yearthly goods an' chattels," said Laurelia, with
sudden inspiration. "Ty, thar, is in debt."
For Uncle Nehemiah had been dwelling unctu-
.   ously upon the extent to which it had pleased the
Lord to prosper him. His countenance fell sud-
F     denly. His discomfiture in her unexpected dis-
closure was twofold, in that it furnished a reason
for Tyler's evident depression of spirits, demolishing
the augury that his manner had afforded as to the
success of the guest's mission, and furthermore, to
Nehemiah's trafficking soul, it suggested that a
money consideration might be exacted to mollify
the rigors of parting.
For Nehemiah Yerby had risen to the dignities,
solvencies, and responsibilities of opening a store
at the cross-roads in Kildeer County. It was a
new and darling enterprise with him, and his mind
and speech could not long be wiled away from the
subject. This abrupt interjection of a new ele-
ment into his cogitations gave him pause, and he
did not observe the sudden rousing of Tyler Sud-
ley from his revery, and the glance of indignant
reproach which he cast on his wife. No man, how-
ever meek, or however bowed down with sorrow,



<pb n="218"/>
218 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 
will bear unmoved a gratuitous mention of his..
debts; it seems to wound him with all the rancor' 
of insult, and to enrage him with the hopelessness, 
of adequate retort or reprisal. It is an indignity, 
like taunting a ghost with cock-crow, or exhorting 
a clergyman to repentance. He flung himself all 
at once into the conversation, to bar and baffle any
renewed allusion to that subject, and it was acci- 
dent rather than intention which made him grasp
Nehemiah in the vise of a quandary also.
" Ye say ye got a store an' a stock o' truck, Ne-
hemiah. Air ye ekal ter keepin' store an' sech ?"
he demanded, speculatively, with an inquiring and
doubtful corrugation of his brows, from which a
restive lock of hair was flung backward like the
toss of a horse's mane.
"I reckon so," Nehemiah sparely responded,
blinking at him across the fireplace.
"An' ye say ye hev applied fur the place o' post-
master?" Tyler prosed on. "All that takes a
power o' knowledge-readin' an' writin' an' cipher-
in' an' sech. How air ye expectin' to hold out,
'kase I know ye never hed no mo' larnin' than me,
an' I war acquainted with ye till ye war thirty years
old an' better ?"
The tenor of this discourse did not comport with
his customary suavity and tactful courtesy toward
a guest, but he was much harassed and had lost
his balance. He had a vague idea that Mrs. Sud-
ley hung upon the flank of the conversation with a
complete summary of amounts, dates, and names
of creditors, and he sought to balk this in its in-
ception. Moreover, his forbearance with Nehe-



<pb n="219"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 219
miah, with his presence, his personality, his mis-
sion, had begun to wane. Bitter reflections might
suffice to fill the time were he suffered to be silent;
but since a part in the conversation had been made
necessary, he had for it no honeyed words.
"I'd make about ez fit a postmaster, I know, ez
that thar old owel a-hootin' out yander. I could
look smart an' sober like him. but that's 'bout all
the fur my school-larnin' kerried me, an' yourn
didn't reach ter the nex' mile-post-an' that I
know."
Nehemiah's thin lips seemed dry. More than
once his tongue appeared along their verges as he
nervously moistened them. His small eyes had
brightened with an excited look, but he spoke very
slowly, and to Laurelia it seemed guardedly.
"I tuk ter my book arterward, Brother Sudley.
I applied myself ter larnin' vigorous. Bein' ez I
seen the Lord's hand war liberal with the gifts o'
this worl', I wanted ter stir myself ter desarve the
good things."
Sudley brought down the fore-legs of his chair
to the floor with a thump. Despite his anxiety a
slow light of ridicule began to kindle on his face;
his curling lip showed his strong white teeth.
"Waal, by gum! ye mus' hev been a sight ter be
seen I Ye, forty or fifty years old, a-settin' on the
same seat with the chil'n at the deestric' school, an'
a-competin' with the leetle tadpoles fur 'Baker an'
Shady' an sech!"
He was about to break forth with a guffaw of
great relish when Nehemiah spoke hastily, fore-
stalling the laughter.



<pb n="220"/>
220 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 
"Naw; Abner Sage war thar fur a good while 
las' winter a-visitin' his sister, an' he ker an' gin .
me lessons an' set me copies thar at my house, an' 
I larnt a heap." 
Leander lifted his head suddenly. The amount .
of progress possible to this desultory and limited ,
application he understood only too well. He had ;
not learned so much himself to be unaware how
much in time and labor learning costs. The others
perceived no incongruity. Sudley's face was florid ;
with pride and pleasure, and his wife's reflected the
glow.
"Ab Sage at the cross-roads! Then he mus' hev
tole ye 'bout Lee-yander hyar, an' his larnin'. Ab
tole, I know."
Nehemiah drew his breath in quickly. His
twinkling eyes sent out the keenest glance of
suspicion, but the gay, affectionate, vaunting laugh,
as Tyler Sudley turned around and clapped the
boy a ringing blow on his slender shoulder, ex-
pressed only the plenitude of his simple vain-
glory.
"Lee-yander hyar knows it all!" he boasted.
"Old Ab himself don't know no mo'l I'll be
bound old Ab went a-braggin'-hey, Lee-yander?" 
But the boy shrank away a trifle, and his smile
was mechanical as he silently eyed his relative.
"Ab 'lowed he war tur'ble disobejient," said Ne-
hemiah, after a pause, and cautiously allowing him-
self to follow in the talk, "an' gi'n over ter playin'
the fiddle." He hesitated for a moment, longing
to stigmatize its ungodliness; but the recollection
of Tyler Sudley's uncertain temper decided him,



<pb n="221"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 221
and he left it unmolested. " But Ab 'lowed ye war
middlin' quick at figgers, Lee-yander-middlin'
quick at figgers !"
Leander, still silent and listening, flushed slightly.
This measured praise was an offence to him; but
he looked up brightly and obediently when his
uncle wagged an uncouthly sportive head (Nehe-
miah's anatomy lent itself to the gay and graceful
with much reluctance), thrust his hands into his
pockets, and, tilting himself back in his chair, con-
tinued:
" I'll try ye, sonny-I'll try ye. How much air
nine times seven ?-nine times seven ?"
"Forty-two!" replied the boy, with a bright,
docile countenance fixed upon his relative.
There was a pause. " Right !" exclaimed Nehe-
miah, to the relief of Sudley and his wife, who had
trembled during the pause, for it seemed so threat-
ening. They smiled at each other, unconscious that
the examination meant aught more serious than a
display of their prodigy's learning.
"An', now, how much air twelve times eight ?"
demanded Nehemiah.
"Sixty-six I" came the answer, quick as lightning.
"Right, sir, every time 1" cried Nehemiah with a
glow of genuine exultation, as he brought down
the fore-legs of the chair to the floor, and the two
Sudleys laughed aloud with pleasure.
Leander saw them all distorted and grimacing
while the room swam round. The scheme was
clear enough to him now. The illiterate Nehe-
miah, whose worldly prosperity had outstripped his
mental qualifications, had bethought himself of fill-



<pb n="222"/>
222 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
ing the breach with his nephew, given away as'
surplusage in his burdensome infancy, but trans- 
formed into a unique utility under the tutelage of i
Abner Sage. It was his boasting of his froward i
pupil, doubtless, that had suggested the idea, and, 
Leander understood now that he was to do the 
work of the store and the post-office under the
nominal incumbency of this unlettered lout. Had
the whole transaction been open and acknowl-
edged, Leander would have had scant appetite for
the work under this master; but he revolted at the
flimsy, contemptible sham; he bitterly resented the
innuendoes against the piety of the Sudleys, not
that he cared for piety, save in the abstract; he
was daunted by the brutal ignorance, the doltish
inefficiency of the imposture that had so readily
accepted his patently false answers to the simple
questions. He had a sort of crude reverence for
education, and it had seemed to him a very serious
matter to take such liberties with the multiplica-
tion table. He valued, too, with a boy's stalwart
vanity, his reputation for great learning, and he
would not have lightly jeopardized it did he not
esteem the crisis momentous. He knew not what
he feared. The fraud of the intention, the ground-
less claim to knowledge, made Nehemiah's scheme 
seem multifariously guilty in some sort; while
Tyler Sudley and his wife, albeit no wiser mathe-
matically, had all the sanctions of probity in their '
calm, unpretending ignorance.
"Ef Cap'n or Neighbor wanted ter run a post- 
office on my larnin', or ter keep store, they'd be
welcome; but I won't play stalkin'-horse fur that



<pb n="223"/>
,  TH MOiONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 223
tbit man's still-hunt, sure ez shootin'," he said to
himself.
The attention which he bent upon the conver-
sation thenceforth was an observation of its effect
rather than its matter. He saw that he was alone
in his discovery. Neither Sudley nor his wife had
perceived any connection between the store, the
prospective post-office, and the desire of the illiter-
ate would-be postmaster to have his. erudite neph-
ew restored to his care.
It may be that the methods of his " Neighbor"
and the "Captain" in the rearing of Leander,
the one with unbridled leniency, the other with
spurious severity and affected indifference, had
combined to foster self-reliance and decision of
character, or it may be that these qualities were
inherent traits. At all events, he encountered the
emergency without an instant's hesitation. He
felt no need of counsel. He had no doubts. He
carried to his pallet in the roof-room no vacillations
and no problems. His resolve was taken. For a
time, as he listened to the movements below-stairs,
the sound of voices still rose, drowsy as the hour
waxed late; the light that flickered through the
cracks in the puncheon flooring gradually dulled,
and presently a harsh grating noise acquainted him
with the fact that Sudley was shovelling the ashes
over the embers; then the tent-like attic was illu-
mined only by the moonlight admitted through the
little square window at the gable end-so silent,
so still, it seemed that it too slept like the silent
house. The winds slumbered amidst the mute
woods; a bank of cloud that he could see from



<pb n="224"/>
224 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
his lowly couch lay in the south becalmed. The;
bird's song had ceased. It seemed to him as he.
lifted himself on his elbow that he had never known
the world so hushed. The rustle of the quilt of
gay glazed calico was of note in the quietude; the
impact of his bare foot on the floor was hardly a
sound, rather an annotation of his weight and his
movement; yet in default of all else the sense of
hearing marked it. His scheme seemed impractica-
ble as for an instant he wavered at the head of the
ladder that served as a stairway; the next moment
his foot was upon the rungs, his light, lithe figure
slipping down it like a shadow. The room below,
all eclipsed in a brown and dusky-red medium, the
compromise between light and darkness that the
presence of the embers fostered, was vaguely re-
vealed to him. He was hardly sure whether he saw
the furniture all in place, or whether he knew its
arrangement so well that he seemed to see. Sud-
denly, as he laid his hand on the violin on the wall,
it became visible, its dark red wood richly glowing
against the brown logs and the tawny clay daubing.
A tiny white flame had shot up in the midst of the
gray ashes, as he stood with the cherished object
in his cautious hand, his excited eyes, dilated and
expectant, searching the room apprehensively, while
a vague thrill of a murmur issued from the instru-
ment, as if the spirit of music within it had been
wakened by his touch-too vague, too faintly elu-
sive for the dormant and somewhat dull perceptions
of Nehemiah Yerby, calmly slumbering in state in
the best room.
The faint jet of flame was withdrawn in the ashes



<pb n="225"/>
TE. MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 225
s uddenly as it had shot forth, and in the ensuing
dakness, deeper for the contrast with that momen-
tait illumination, it was not even a shadow that
deftly mounted the ladder again and emerged into
the sheeny twilight of the moonlit roof-room. Lean-
der was somehow withheld for a moment motionless
at the window; it may have been by compunction;
it may have been by regret, if it be possible to the
very young to definitely feel either. There was an
intimation of pensive farewell in his large illu-
mined eyes as they rested on the circle of famil-
iar things about him-the budding trees, the well,
with its great angular sweep against the sky, the
still sward, the rail-fences glistening with the dew,
the river with the moonlight in a silver blazonry
on its lustrous dark surface, the encompassing
shadows of the gloomy mountains. There was no
sound, not even among the rippling shallows; he
could hear naught but the pain of parting throb-
bing in his heart, and from the violin a faint con-
tinuous susurrus, as if it murmured half-asleep
memories of the melodies that had thrilled its
waking moments. It necessitated careful hand-
ling as he deftly let himself out of the window,
the bow held in his mouth, the instrument in one
arm, while the other hand clutched the boughs of
a great holly-tree close beside the house. It was
only the moonlight on those smooth, lustrous leaves,
but it seemed as if smiling white faces looked
suddenly down from among the shadows: at this
lonely hour, with none awake to see, what strange
things may there not be astir in ;the world, what un-
measured, unknown forces, sometimes felt through
I5



<pb n="226"/>
226 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS    M
the dulling sleep of mortals, and then called dreams I i
As he stood breathless upon the ground the wind i
awoke. He heard it race around the corner of the`
house, bending the lilac bushes, and then it softly'
buffeted him full in the face and twirled his hat on,,
the ground. As he stooped to pick it up he heard :
whispers and laughter in the lustrous boughs of '
the holly, and the gleaming faces shifted with the 
shadows. He looked fearfully over his shoul.- 
der; the rising wind might waken some one of the
household. His "Neighbor" was, he knew, solici-4
tous about the weather, and suspicious of its in-
tentions lest it not hold fine till all the oats be
sown. A pang wrung his heart; he remembered
the long line of seasons when, planting corn in the
pleasant spring days, his "Neighbor" had opened
the furrow with the plough, and the "Captain"
had followed, dropping the grains, and he had
brought up the rear with his hoe, covering them
over, while the clouds floated high in the air, and
the mild sun shone, and the wind kept the shadows :
a-flicker, and the blackbird and the crow, corn-
placently and craftily watching them from afar, i
seemed the only possible threatening of evil in all 
the world. He hastened to stiffen his resolve.i
He had need of it. Tyler Sudley had said that,
he did not know how the law stood, and for himve
self, he was not willing to risk his liberty on it'
He gazed apprehensively upon the little batte1i
shutter of the window of the room where Nehb
miah Yerby slept, expecting to see it slowly swing 
open and disclose him there. It did not stir, and 
gathering resolution from the terrors that had be- !



<pb n="227"/>
t.o    I .'it QSEINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 227
set,    wi"when he fancied his opportunity threat-
endl he ran like a frightened deer fleetly down
the road, and plunged into the dense forest. The
wind kept him company, rollicking, quickening,
coming and going in fitful gusts. He heard it die
away, but now and again it was rustling among
a double file of beech-trees all up the mountain-
side. He saw the commotion in their midst, the
effect of swift movement as the scant foliage flut-
tered, then the white branches of the trees all
a-swaying like glistening arms flung upward, as if
some bevy of dryads sped up the hill in elusive
rout through the fastnesses.
The next day ushered in a tumult and excite-
ment unparalleled in the history of the little log-
cabin. When Leander's absence was discovered,
and inquiry of the few neighbors and search of
the vicinity proved fruitless, the fact of his flight
and its motive were persistently forced upon Ne-
hemiah Yerby's reluctant perceptions, with the de-
struction of his cherished scheme as a necessary
sequence. With some wild craving for vengeance
he sought to implicate Sudley as' accessory to the
mysterious disappearance. He found some small
measure of solace in stumping up and down the
floor before the hearth, furiously railing at the ab-
sent host, for Sudley had not yet relinquished the
bootless quest, and indignantly upbraiding the for-
lorn, white-faced, grief-stricken Laurelia, who sat
silent and stony, her faded eyes on the fire, heed-
less of his words. She held in her lap sundry
closely-rolled knitted balls-the boy's socks that



<pb n="228"/>
228 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS :
she had so carefully made and darned. A pile
his clothing lay at her feet. He had carried n
ing but his fiddle and the clothes he stood in, 
if she had had more tears she could have wept f
his improvidence, for the prospective tatters an
rents that must needs befall him in that unkno
patchless life to which he had betaken himself.  '
Nehemiah Yerby argued that it was Sudley w
had prompted the whole thing; he had put the boi
up to it, for Leander was not so lacking in feelin
as to flee from his own blood-relation. But hu
would set the law to spy them out. He would be"
back again, and soon.                  * 
He may have thought better of this presently,
for he was in great haste to be gone when Tyler
Sudley returned, and to his amazement in a coun-
terpart frame of mind, charging Nehemiah with the
responsibility of the disaster. It was strange to
Laurelia that she, who habitually strove to fix her
mind on religious things, should so relish the as-
pect of Ty Sudley in his secular rage on this occa-
sion.
"Ye let we-uns hev him whilst so leetle an' help-
less, but now that he air so fine growed an' robust-
tious ye want ter git some work out'n him, an' he
hev runned away an' tuk ter the woods tarrified 
the very sight of ye," he averred. "He'll nevert
ker back; no, he'll never kem back; fur he'll 'low:
ez ye would kem an' take him home with you; an';
now the Lord only knows whar he is, an' what will
become of him."
His anger and his tumultuous grief, his wild, ir-
repressible anxiety for Leander's safety, convinced



<pb n="229"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 229
the crafty Nehemiah that he was no party to the
boy's scheme. Sudley's sorrow was not of the
kind that renders the temper pliable, and when Ne-
hemiah sought to point a moral in the absence of
the violin, and for the first time in Sudley's pres-
ence protested that he desired to save Leander
from that device of the devil, the master of the
house shook his inhospitable fist very close indeed
to his guest's nose, and Yerby was glad enough to
follow that feature unimpaired out to his horse at
the bars, saying little more.
He aired his views, however, at each house where
he made it convenient to stop on his way home,
and took what comfort there might be in the r61e
of martyr. Leander was unpopular in several lo-
calities, and was esteemed a poor specimen of the
skill of the Sudleys in rearing children. He had
been pampered and spoiled, according to general
report, and more than one of his successive inter-
locutors were polite enough to opine that the
change to Nehemiah's charge would have been a
beneficent opportunity for much-needed discipline.
Nehemiah was not devoid of some skill in interrog-
atory. He contrived to elicit speculations without
giving an intimation of unduly valuing the an-
swer.
"He's 'mongst the moonshiners, I reckon," was
the universal surmise. "He'll be hid mighty safe
'mongst them."
For where the still might be, or who was engaged
in the illicit business, was even a greater mystery
than Leander's refuge. Nothing more definite
could be elicited than a vague rumor that some



<pb n="230"/>
230 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS:
such work was in progress somewhere along 
many windings of Hide-and-Seek Creek. 
Nehemiah Yerby had never been attached 
temperance principles, and, commercially speaki
he had thought it possible that whiskey on which 
tax had been paid might be more profitably 
pensed at his store than that sold under the san
tions of the government. These consideratio
however, were as naught in view of the paralys
which his interests and schemes had suffered i
Leander's flight. He dwelt with dismay upon th
possibility that he might secure the postmastershi
without the capable assistant whose services wer
essential. In this perverse sequence of events dis-
aster to his application was more to be desired
than success. He foresaw himself browbeaten,
humiliated, detected, a butt for the ridicule of the
community, his pretensions in the dust, his pitiful
imposture unmasked. And beyond these esthetic
misfortunes, the substantial emoluments of "keepin'
store," with a gallant sufficiency of arithmetic tc
regulate prices and profits, were vanishing like 
elusive matutinal haze before the noontide su
Nehemiah Yerby groaned aloud, for the financi
stress upon his spirit was very like physical pai
And in this inauspicious moment he bethou
himself of the penalties of violating the Inte
Revenue Laws of the United States. 
Now it has been held by those initiated into s
mysteries that there is scant affinity between
key and water. Nevertheless, in this connectioni
Nehemiah Yerby developed an absorbing interest
in the watercourses of the coves and adjaceni



<pb n="231"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 231
mountains, especially their more remote and se-
questered tributaries. He shortly made occasion
to meet the county surveyor and ply him with ques-
tions touching the topography of the vicinity, cloak-
ing the real motive under the pretence of an inter-
est in water-power sufficient and permanent enough
for the sawing of lumber, and professing to con-
template the erection of a saw-mill at the most
eligible point. The surveyor had his especial van-
ity, and it was expressed in his frequent boast that
he carried a complete map of the county graven
upon his brain; he was wont to esteem it a gra-
cious opportunity when a casual question in a
group of loungers enabled him to display his famil-
iarity with every portion of his rugged and moun-
tainous region, which was indeed astonishing, even
taking into consideration his incumbency for a
number of terms, aided by a strong head for local-
ity. Nehemiah Yerby's scheme was incalculably
favored by this circumstance, but he found it un-
expectedly difficult to support the figment which
he had propounded as to his intentions. Fiction
is one of the fine arts, and a mere amateur like
Nehemiah is apt to fail in point of consistency.
He was inattentive while the surveyor dilated on
the probable value, the accessibility, and the rel-
ative height of the "fall" of the various sites, and
their available water-power, and he put irrelevant
queries concerning ineligible streams in other lo-
calities. No man comfortably mounted upon his
hobby relishes an interruption. The surveyor would
stop with a sort of bovine surprise, and break out
in irritable parenthesis.



<pb n="232"/>
232. THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS .
"That branch on the t'other side o' Pant
Ridge ? Why, man alive, that thread o' wa
wouldn't turn a spider web."
Nehemiah, quaking under the glance of his ke
questioning eye, would once more lapse into si
lence, while the surveyor, loving to do what hJ
could do well, was lured on in his favorite subject
by the renewed appearance of receptivity in his
listener.
"Waal, ez I war a-sayin', I know every furlongi
o' the creeks once down in the Cove, an' all their
meanderings, an' the best part o' them in the hills
amongst the laurel and the wildernesses. But now
the ways of sech a stream ez Hide-an'-Seek Creek
are past finding out. It's a 'sinking creek,' you
know; goes along with a good volume and a swift
current for a while to the west, then disappears
into the earth, an' ain't seen fur five mile, then
comes out agin running due north, makes a tre-
menjious jump-the Hoho-hebee Falls-then pops
into the ground agin, an' ain't seen no more for-.
ever," he concluded, dramatically.
"How d'ye know it's the same creek?" de%
manded Nehemiah, sceptically, and with a wrinkl.
ling brow.
"By settin' somethin' afloat on it before it sinkl
into the ground-a piece of marked bark or 
shingle or the like-an' finding it agin after th
stream comes out of the caves," promptly replie
the man of the compass, with a triumphant snap ot
the eye, as if he entertained a certain pride in the
vagaries of his untamed mountain friend. ' No-
body knows how often it disappears, nor where it 



<pb n="233"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 233
rises, nor where it goes at last. It's got dozens of
fust-rate millin' sites, but then it's too fur off fur
you ter think about."
"Oh no 'tain't!" exclaimed Nehemiah, suddenly.
The surveyor stared. "Why, you ain't thinkin'
'bout movin' up inter the wilderness ter live, an' ye
jes applied fur the post-office down at the cross-
roads ? Ye can't run the post-office thar an' a saw-
mill thirty mile away at the sam; time."
Nehemiah was visibly disconcerted. His wrinkled
face showed the flush of discomfiture, but his craft
rallied to the emergency.
"Moughtn't git the post-office, arter all's come
an' gone. Nothin' is sartin in this vale o' tears."
" An' ye air goin' ter take ter the woods ef ye
don't?" demanded the surveyor, incredulously.
"Thought ye war goin' ter keep store ?"
"Waal, I dun'no'; jes talkin' round," said Ne-
hemiah, posed beyond recuperation. "I mus' be
-     a-joggin', ennyhow. Time's a-wastin'."
As he made off hastily in the direction of his
house, for this conversation had taken place at the
blacksmith's shop at the cross-roads, the surveyor
gazed after him much mystified.
"What is that old fox slyin' round after? He
ain't studyin' 'bout no saw-mill, inquirin' round
about all the out-o'-the-way water-power in the ken-
try fifty mile from where he b'longs. He's a heap
likelier to be goin' ter start a wild-cat still in them
wild places-git his whiskey cheap ter sell in his
store."
He shook his head sagely once for all, for the
surveyor's mind was of the type prompt in reach-



<pb n="234"/>
234 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
ing conclusions, and he was difficult to divert from
his convictions.
A feature of the development of craft to a cer-
tain degree is the persuasion that this endowment
is not shared. A fine world it would be if the
Nehemiah Yerbys were as clever as they think
themselves, and their neighbors as dull. He readily
convinced himself that he had given no intimation
that his objects and motives were other than he
professed, and with unimpaired energy he went to
work upon the lines which he had marked out for
himself. A fine chase Hide-and-Seek Creek led.
him, to be sure, and it tried his enthusiasms to the
uttermost. What affinity this brawling vagrant had
for the briers and the rocks and the tangled fast-
nesses I Seldom, indeed, could he press in to its
banks and look down upon its dimpled, laughing,
heedless face without the sacrifice of fragments of
flesh and garments left impaled upon the sharp
spikes of the budding shrubs. Often it so in-
trenched itself amidst the dense woods, and the
rocks and chasms of its craggy banks, that ap-
proach was impossible, and he followed it for miles
only by the sound of its wild, sweet, woodland voice.
And this, too, was of a wayward fancy; now, in
turbulent glee among the rocks, riotously chant-'
ing aloud, challenging the echoes, and waking far.
and near the forest quiet; and again it was merely"i
a low, restful murmur, intimating deep, serene pools
and a dallying of the currents, lapsed in the fulness'
of content. Then Nehemiah Yerby would be beset
with fears that he would lose this whisper, and his
progress was slight; he would pause to listen, hear-



<pb n="235"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 235
ing nothing; would turn to right, to left; would take
his way back through the labyrinth of the laurel to
catch a thread of sound, a mere crystalline tremor,
and once more follow this transient lure. As the
stream came down a gorge at a swifter pace and in
a succession of leaps-a glassy cataract visible here
and there, airily sporting with rainbows, affiliating
with ferns and moss and marshy growths, the bound-
ing spray glittering in the sunshine-it flung forth
continuously tinkling harmonies in clear crystal
tones, so penetrating, so definitely melodic, that
more than once, as he paced along on his jaded
horse, he heard in their midst, without disassoci-
ating the sounds, the ping, pang, ping, pang, of the
violin he so condemned. He drew up at last, and
strained his ear to listen. It did not become more
distinct, always intermingled with the recurrent
rhythm of the falling water, but always vibrating
in subdued throbbings, now more acute, now less,
as the undiscriminated melody ascended or de-
scended the scale. It came from the earth, of this
he was sure, and thus he was reminded anew of the
caves which Hide-and-Seek Creek threaded in its
long course. There was some opening near by,
doubtless, that led to subterranean passages, dry
enough here, since it was the stream's whim to flow
in the open sunshine instead of underground. He
would have given much to search for it had he
dared. His leathery, lean, loose cheek had a glow
of'excitement upon it; his small eyes glistened;
for the first time in his life, possibly, he looked
young. But he did not doubt that this was' the
stronghold of the illicit distillers, of whom one



<pb n="236"/>
236 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
heard so much in the Cove and saw so little. A
lapse of caution, an inconsiderate movement, and .
he might be captured and dealt with as a spy and 
informer.
Nevertheless his discovery was of scant value 
unless he utilized it further. He had always be- M
lieved that his nephew had fled to the secret haunts 
of the moonshiners. Now he only knew it the
more surely; and what did this avail him, and how
aid in the capture of the recusant clerk and assist-
ant postmaster ? He hesitated a moment; then fix- M
ing the spot in his mind by the falling of a broad
crystal sheet of water from a ledge some forty feet
high, by a rotting log at its base that seemed to
rise continually, although the moving cataract ap-
peared motionless, by certain trees and their rel-
ative position, and the blue peaks on a distant
skyey background of a faint cameo yellow, he
slowly turned his horse's rein and took his way out
of danger. It was chiefly some demonstration on ,
the animal's part that he had feared. A snort, a
hoof-beat, a whinny would betray him, and very
liable was the animal to any of these expressions.
One realizes how unnecessary is speech for the ex-
position of opinion when brought into contradictory 
relations with the horse which one rides or drives. 
All day had this animal snorted his doubts of his ,
master's sanity; all day had he protested against .
these aimless, fruitless rambles; all day had he held 
back with a high head and a hard mouth, while whip 
and spur pressed him through laurel almost im- 
penetrable, and through crevices of crags almost
impassable. For were there not all the fair roads 



<pb n="237"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 237
of the county to pace and gallop upon if one must
needs be out and jogging I Unseen objects, vague-
ly discerned to be moving in the undergrowth af-
frighted the old plough-horse of the levels-infinite-
ly reassured and whinnying with joyful relief when
the head of horned cattle showed presently as the
cause of the commotion. He would have given
much a hundred times that day, and he almost said
so a hundred times, too, to be at home, with the
old bull-tongue plough behind him, running the
straight rational furrow in the good bare open field,
so mellow for corn, lying in the sunshine, inviting
planting.
" Ef I git ye home wunst more, I'll be bound I'll
leave ye thar," Nehemiah said, ungratefully, as they
wended their way along; for without the horse he
could not have traversed the long distances of his
search, however unwillingly the aid was given.
He annotated his displeasure by a kick in the
ribs; and when the old equine farmer perceived that
they were absolutely bound binward, and that their
aberrations were over for the present, he struck a
sharp gait that would have done honor to his youth-
ful days, for he had worn out several pairs of legs
in Nehemiah's fields, and was often spoken of as
being upon the last of those useful extremities. He
stolidly shook his head, which he thought so much
better than his master's, and bedtime found them
twenty miles away and at home.
Nehemiah felt scant fatigue. He was elated with
his project. He scented success in the air. It
smelled like the season. It too was suffused with
the urgent pungency of the rising sap, with the fra-



<pb n="238"/>
238 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
grance of the wild-cherry, with the vinous promise. i
of the orchard, with the richness of the mould, with 
the vagrant perfume of the early flowers.
He lighted a tallow dip, and he sat him down 
with writing materials at the bare table to indite a 
letter while all his household slept. The windows 
stood open to the dark night, and Spring hovered
about outside, and lounged with her elbows on the 
sill, and looked in. He constantly saw something i
pale and elusive against the blackness, for there
was no moon, but he thought it only the timid ir-
radiation with which his tallow dip suffused the
blossoming wands of an azalea, growing lithe and
tall hard by. With this witness only he wrote the
letter-an anonymous letter, and therefore he was
indifferent to the inadequacies of his penmanship
and his spelling. He labored heavily in its compo-
sition, now and then perpetrating portentous blots.
He grew warm, although the fire that had served
to cook supper had long languished under the bank
of ashes. The tallow dip seemed full of caloric, and
melted rapidly in pendulous drippings. He now 
and again mopped his red face, usually so blood- 
less, with his big bandanna handkerchief, while
all the zephyrs were fanning the flying tresses of 
Spring at the window, and the soft, sweet, delicate- 
ly attuned vernal chorus of the marshes were ten- 
tatively running over sotto voce their allotted melo- 
dies for the season. Oh, it was a fine night outside,
and why should a moth, soft-winged and cream-
tinted and silken-textured, come whisking in from
the dark, as silently as a spirit, to supervise Nehe-
miah Yerby's letter, and travel up and down the



<pb n="239"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 239
page all befouled with the ink? And as he sought
to save the sense of those significant sentences from
its trailing silken draperies, why should it rise sud-
denly, circling again and again about the candle,
pass through the flame, and fall in quivering agonies
once more upon the page? He looked at it, dead
now, with satisfaction. It had come so very near
ruining his letter-an important letter, describing
the lair of the illicit distillers to a deputy marshal
of the revenue force, who was known to be in a
neighboring town. He had good reason to with-
hold his signature, for the name of the informer in
the ruthless vengeance of the region would be as
much as his life was worth. The moth had not.
spoiled the letter-the laborious letter; he was so
glad of that! He saw no analogies, he received
not even a subtle warning, as he sealed and ad-
dressed the envelope and affixed the postage-stamp.
Then he snuffed out the candle with great satis-
faction.
The next morning the missive was posted, and
all Nehemiah Yerby's plans took a new lease of
life. The information he had given would result
in an immediate raid upon the place. Leander
would be captured among the moonshiners, but his
youth and his uncle's representations-for he would
give the officers an inkling of the true state of the
case-would doubtless insure the boy's release,
and his restoration to those attractive commercial
prospects which had been devised for him.



<pb n="240"/>
II                    {  i
The ordering of events is an intricate process,
and to its successful exploitation a certain degree
of sagacious prescience is a prerequisite, as well as
a thorough mastery of the lessons of experience. 
For a day or so all went well in the inner con-
sciousness of Nehemiah Yerby. The letter had
satisfied his restless craving for some action tow-
ard the consummation of his ambition, and he had .
not the foresight to realize how soon the necessity
of following it up would supervene. He first grew
uneasy lest his letter had not reached its destina-
tion; then, when the illimitable field of speculation
was thus opened out, he developed an ingenuity of ,
imagination in projecting possible disaster. Day
after day passed, and he heard naught of his cher-
ished scheme. The revenuers-craven wretches 
he deemed them, and he ground his teeth with rage 
because of their seeming cowardice in their duty, ,
since their duty could serve his interests-might /
not have felt exactly disposed to risk their lives in
these sweet spring days, when perhaps even a man 
whose life belongs to the government might be
presumed to take some pleasure in it, by attempt-
ing to raid the den of a gang of moonshiners on
the scanty faith of an informer's word, tenuous
guaranty at best, and now couched in an anony-



<pb n="241"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 241
mous letter, itself synonym for a lie. Oh, what fine
eulogies rose in his mind upon the manly virtue of
courage ! How enthusing it is at all times to con-
template the courage of others !-and how safe!
Then a revulsion.of belief ensued, and he began
to fear that they might already have descended
upon their quarry, and with all their captives have
returned to the county town by the road by which
they came-nearer than the route through the cross-
roads, though far more rugged. Why had not this
possibility before occurred to him! He had so
often prefigured their triumphant advent into the
hamlet with all their guarded and shackled prison-
ers, the callow Leander in the midst, and his own
gracefully enacted role of virtuous, grief-stricken,
pleading relative, that it seemed a recollection-
something that had really happened-rather than
the figment of anticipation. But no word, no breath
of intimation, had ruffled the serenity of the cross-
roads. The calm, still, yellow sunshine day by day
suffused the land like the benignities of a dream
-almost too good to be true. Every man with the
heart of a farmer within him was at the plough-
handles, and making the most of the fair weather.
The cloudless sky and the auspicious forecast of
fine days still to come did more to prove to the
farmer the existence of an all-wise, overruling Provi-
dence than all the polemics of the world might ac-
complish. The furrows multiplied everywhere save
in Nehemiah's own fields, where he often stood so
long in the turn-row that the old horse would desist
from twisting his head backward in surprise, and
start at last of his own motion, dragging the plough,
z6



<pb n="242"/>
242 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS     :
the share still unanchored in the ground, half across,' 
the field before he could be stopped. The vagaries 4
of these " lands " that the absent-minded Nehemiah -
laid off attracted some attention. 
"What ails yer furrows ter run so crooked, Nehe-
miah?" observed a passer-by, a neighbor who had '
been to the blacksmith-shop to get his plough-point
sharpened; he looked over the fence critically.
"Yer eyesight mus' be failin' some."
"I dun'no'," rejoined Nehemiah, hastily. Then
reverting to his own absorption. "War it you-uns
ez I hearn say thar war word kern ter the cross-
roads 'bout some revenuers raidin' 'round some-
whar in the woods ?"
The look of surprise cast upon him seemed to
his alert anxiety to betoken suspicion. "Laws-a-
massy, naw !" exclaimed his interlocutor. "Ye air
the fust one that hev named sech ez that in these
diggin's, fur I'd hev hearn tell on it, sure, ef thar
hed been enny sech word goin' the rounds."
Nehemiah recoiled into silence, and presently
his neighbor went whistling on his way. He stood
motionless for a time, until the man was well out of
sight, then he began to hastily unhitch the plough-
gear. His resolution was taken. He could wait no '
longer. For aught he knew the raiders might have
come and gone, and be now a hundred miles away
with their prisoners to stand their trial in the Fed-
eral court. His schemes might have all gone amiss,
leaving him in naught the gainer. He could rest
in uncertainty no more. He feared to venture
further questions when no rumor stirred the air.
They rendered him doubly liable to suspicion-to



<pb n="243"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 243
the law-abiding as a possible moonshiner, to any
sympathizer with the distillers as a probable in-
former. He determined to visit the spot, and there
judge how the enterprise had fared.
When next he heard that fine sylvan symphony
of the sound of the falling water-the tinkling bell-
like tremors of its lighter tones mingling with the
sonorous, continuous, deeper theme rising from its
weight and volume and movement; with the surg-
ing of the wind in the pines; with the occasional
cry of a wild bird deep in the new verdure of the
forests striking through the whole with a brilliant,
incidental, detached effect-no faint vibration was
in its midst of the violin's string, listen as he might.
More than once he sought to assure himself that
he heard it, but his fancy failed to respond to his
bidding, although again and again he took up his
position where it had before struck his ear. The
wild minstrelsy of the woods felt no lack, and
stream and wind and harping pine and vagrant
bird lifted their voices in their wonted strains. He
could hardly accept the fact; he would verify anew
the landmarks he had made and again return to
the spot, his hat in his hand, his head bent low,
his face lined with anxiety and suspense. No
sound, no word, no intimation of human presence.
The moonshiners were doubtless all gone long ago,
betrayed into captivity, and Leander with them.
He had so hardened his heart toward his recalci-
trant young kinsman and his Sudley friends, he
felt so entirely that in being among the moonshin-
ers Leander had met only his deserts in coming
to the bar of Federal justice, that he would have



<pb n="244"/>
244 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALL.S 
experienced scant sorrow if the nephew had f
carried off with his own personality his uncl,
book-keeper and postmaster's clerk. And so-ala
for Leander! As he meditated on the untowar
manner in which he had overshot his target, thiu
marksman of fate forgot the caution which h4
distinguished his approach, for hitherto it had bee
as heedful as if he fully believed the lion still .i'
his den. He slowly patrolled the bank below th;
broad, thin, crystal sheet, seeing naught but its rain'
bow hovering elusively in the sun, and its green an4d
white skein-like draperies pendulous before the great '
dark arch over which the cataract fell. The log '
caught among the rocks in the spray at the base 
was still there, seeming always to rise while the
restless water seemed motionless.
No trace that human beings had ever invaded
these solitudes could he discover. No vague, faint
suggestion of the well-hidden lair of the moon-
shiners did the wild covert show forth. "The
revenuers war smarter'n me; I'll say that fur 'em,"
he muttered at last as he came to a stand-still, his 
chin in his hand, his perplexed eyes on the ground 
And suddenly-a footprint on a marshy spot; only
the heel of a boot, for the craggy ledges hid all the
ground but this, a mere sediment of sand in a tine.
hollow in the rock from which the water had evap!i
orated. It was a key to the mystery. Instantl,
the rugged edges of the cliff took on the similitude
of a path. Once furnished with this idea, he couil4f
perceive adequate footing all adown the precipitous
way. He was not young; his habits had been in-
active, and were older even than his age. He could



<pb n="245"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 245
not account for it afterward, but he followed for a
few paces this suggestion of a path down the pre-
cipitous sides of the stream. He had a sort of
triumph in finding it so practicable, and he essayed
it still farther, although the sound of the water
had grown tumultuous at closer approach, and
seemed to foster a sort of responsive turmoil of
the senses; he felt his head whirl as he looked
at the bounding, frothing spray, then at the long
swirls of the current at the base of the fall as they
swept on their way down the gorge. As he sought
to lift his fascinated eyes, the smooth glitter of the
crystal sheet of falling water so close before him
dazzled his sight. He wondered afterward how his
confused senses and trembling limbs sustained him
along the narrow, rugged path, here and there cov-
ered with oozing green moss, and slippery with the
continual moisture. It evidently was wending to
a ledge. All at once the contour of the place was
plain to him; the ledge led behind the cataract
that fell from the beetling heights above. And
within were doubtless further recesses, where per-
chance the moonshiners had worked their still. As
he reached the ledge he could see behind the fall-
ing water and into the great concave space which
it screened beneath the beetling cliff. It was as he
had expected-an arched portal of jagged brown
rocks, all dripping with moisture and oozing moss,
behind the semi-translucent green-and-white dra-
pery of the cascade.
But he had not expected to see, standing quietly
in the great vaulted entrance, a man with his left
hand on a pistol in his belt, the mate of which his



<pb n="246"/>
246 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
more formidable right hand held up with a steady :
finger on the trigger.
This much Nehemiah beheld, and naught else, '
for the glittering profile of the falls, visible now 
only aslant, the dark, cool recess beyond, that 
menacing motionless figure at the vanishing-point
of the perspective, all blended together in an in-.
distinguishable whirl as his senses reeled. He :
barely retained consciousness enough to throw up
both his hands in token of complete submission. s
And then for a moment he knew no more. He
was still leaning motionless against the wall of
rock when he became aware that the man was
sternly beckoning to him to continue his approach.
His dumb lips moved mechanically in response,
but any sound must needs have been futile indeed
in the pervasive roar of the waters. He felt that
he had hardly strength for another step along the
precipitous way, but there is much tonic influence
in a beckoning revolver, and few men are so weak
as to be unable to obey its behests. Poor Nehe-
miah tottered along as behooved him, leaving all
the world, liberty, volition, behind him as the de-
scending sheet of water fell between him and the
rest of life and shut him off.
"That's it, my leetle man! I thought you could
make it !" were the first words he could distinguish
as he joined the mountaineer beneath the crag.
Nehemiah Yerby had never before seen this man.
That in itself was alarming, since in the scanty popu-
lation of the region few of its denizens are unknown
to each other, at least by sight. The tone of satire,
the gleam of enjoyment in his keen blue eye, were



<pb n="247"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 247
not reassuring to the object of his ridicule. He was
tall and somewhat portly, and he had a bluff and off-
hand manner, which, however, served not so much
to intimate his good-will toward you as his abound-
ing good-humor with himself. He was a man of most
arbitrary temper, one could readily judge, not only
from his own aspect and manner, but from the doc-
ile, reliant, approving cast of countenance of his
reserve force - a half - dozen men, who were some-
what in the background, lounging on'the rocks about
a huge copper still. They wore an attentive aspect,
but offered to take no active part in the scene
enacted before them. One of them-even at this
crucial moment Yerby noticed it with a pang of
regretful despair-held noiseless on his knee a
violin, and more than once addressed himself seri-
ously to rubbing rosin over the bow. There was
scant music in his face-a square physiognomy,
with thick features, and a shock of hay-colored hair
striped somewhat with an effect of darker shades
like a weathering stack. He handled the bow with
a blunt, clumsy hand that augured little of delicate
skill, and he seemed from his diligence to think that
rosin is what makes a fiddle play. He was evidently
one of those unhappy creatures furnished with some
vague inner attraction to the charms of music, with
no gift, no sentiment, no discrimination. Something
faintly sonorous there was in his soul, and it vibrated
to the twanging of the strings. He was far less alert
to the conversation than the others, whose listening
attitudes attested their appreciation of the impor-
tance of the moment.
"Waal," observed the moonshiner, impatiently,



<pb n="248"/>
248 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 
eying the tremulous and tongue-tied Yerby, " hev y-
fund what ye war a-huntin' fur ?"          ;·
So tenacious of impressions was Nehemiah thaft
it was the violin in those alien hands which stiUll
focussed his attention as he stared gaspingly about; -
Leander was not here; probably had never been '
here; and the twanging of those strings had lured '
him to his fate. Well might he contemn the festive, 
malevolence of the violin's influence I His letter ,
had failed; no raider had intimidated these bluff, 
unafraid, burly law-breakers, and he had put his i
life in jeopardy in his persistent prosecution of his iG
scheme. He gasped again at the thought.
" Waal," said the moonshiner, evidently a man of
short patience, and with a definite air of spurring on
the visitor's account of himself, "we 'ain't been
lookin' fur any spy lately, but I'm 'lowin' ez we hev
fund him."
His fear thus put into words so served to realize
to Yerby his immediate danger that it stood him in
the stead of courage, of brains, of invention; his
flaccid muscles were suddenly again under control;
he wreathed his features with his smug artificial j
smile, that was like a grimace in its best estate, and- :
now hardly seemed more than a contortion. But.
beauty in any sense was not what the observer was 
prepared to expect in Nehemiah, and the moon- 
shiner seemed to accept the smile at its face value, A
and to respect its intention.
"Spies don't kem climbin' down that thar path o' 
yourn in full view through the water"-for the
landscape was as visible through the thin falling
sheet as if it had been the slightly corrugated glass
.                                           ..,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~*



<pb n="249"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 249
of a window-" do they ?" Yerby asked, with a jocose
intonation. "That thar shootin'-iron o' yourn liked
ter hev skeered me ter death whenst I fust seen it."
His interlocutor pondered on this answer for a
moment. He had an adviser among his corps
whose opinion he evidently valued; he exchanged a
quick glance with one of the men who was but dimly
visible in the shadows beyond the still, where there
seemed to be a series of troughs leading a rill of
running water down from some farther spring and
through the tub in which the spiral worm was coiled.
This man had a keen, white, lean face, with an
ascetic, abstemious expression, and he looked less
like a distiller than some sort of divine-some rustic
pietist, with strange theories and unhappy specula-
tions and unsettled mind. It was a face of subtle in-
fluences, and the very sight of it roused in Nehemiah
a more heedful fear than the " shootin'-iron " in the
bluff moonshiner's hand had induced. He was si-
lent, while the other resumed the office of spokesman.
"Ye ain't 'quainted hyar "-he waved his hand
with the pistol in it around at the circle of uncower-
ing men, although the mere movement made Nehe-
miah cringe with 'the thought that an accidental
discharge might as effectually settle his case as
premeditated and deliberate murder. "Ye dun'no'
none o' us. What air ye a-doin' hyar ?"
"Why, that thar war the very trouble," Yerby
hastily explained. " Ididn't know none o' ye / I hed
hearn ez thar war a still somewhars on Hide-an'-Seek
Creek "-once more there ensued a swift exchange
of glances among the party-" but nobody knew
who run it nor whar 'twar. An' one day, consider'ble



<pb n="250"/>
250 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
time ago, I war a-passin' nigh 'bouts an' I hearn that
fiddle, an' that revealed the spot ter me. An' I kem
ter-day 'lowin' ye an' me could strike a trade."
Once more the bluff man of force turned an anx-
ious look of inquiry to the pale, thoughtful face in
the brown and dark green shadows beyond the cop-
per gleam of the still. If policy had required that
Nehemiah should be despatched, his was the hand
to do the deed, and his the stomach to support
his conscience afterward. But his brain revolted
from the discriminating analysis of Nehemiah's dis-
course and a decision on its merits.
" Trade fur what ?" he demanded at last, on his
own responsibility, for no aid had radiated from
the face which his looks had interrogated.
"Fur whiskey, o' course." Nehemiah made the
final plunge boldly. " I be goin' ter open a store
at the cross-roads, an' I 'lowed I could git cheaper
whiskey untaxed than taxed. I 'lowed ye wouldn't
make it ef ye didn't expec' ter sell it. I didn't
know none o' you-uns, an' none o' yer customers.
An' ez I expec' ter git mo' profit on sellin' whiskey
'n ennything else in the store, I jes took foot in
hand an' kem ter see 'boutn it mysef. I never
'lowed, though, ez it mought look cur'ous ter you-
uns, or like a spy, ter kem ez bold ez brass down
the path in full sight."
The logic of the seeming security of his, ap-
proach, and the apparent value of his scheme, has4
their full weight. He saw credulity gradually over4-
powering doubt and distrust, and his heart grew
light with relief. Even their cautious demur, inti-
mating a reserve of opinion to the effect that they



<pb n="251"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HESEE FALLS 251
would think about it, did not daunt him now. He
believed, in the simplicity of his faith in his own
craft, now once more in the ascendant, that if they
should accept his proposition he would be free to
go without further complication of his relations
with wild-cat whiskey. He could not sufficiently
applaud his wits for the happy termination of the
adventure to which they had led him. He had
gone no further in the matter than he had always
intended. Brush whiskey was the commodity that
addressed itself most to his sense of speculation.
For this he had always expected to ferret out some
way of safely negotiating. He had gone no fur-
ther than he should have done, at all events, a lit-
tle later. He even began mentally to " figger on
the price" down to which he should be able to
bring the distillers, as he accepted a proffered seat
in the circle about the still. He could neither di-
vide nor multiply by fractions, and it is not too
much to say that he might have been throttled on
the spot if the moonshiners could have had a men-
tal vision of the liberties the stalwart integers were
taking with their price-current, so to speak, and the
preternatural discount that was making so free with
their profits. So absorbed in this pleasing intel-
lectual exercise was Nehemiah that he did not ob-
serve that any one had left the coterie; but when
a stir without on the rocks intimated an approach
he was suddenly ill at ease, and this discomfort
increased when the new-comer proved to be a man
who knew him.
"Waal, Nehemiah Yerby !" he exclaimed, shak-
ing his friend's hand, " I never knowed you-uns



<pb n="252"/>
252 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
ter be consarned in sech ez moonshinin'. I hevy
been a-neighborin' Isham hyar," he laid his heavy'
hand on the tall moonshiner's shoulder, "fur ten'
year an' better, but I won't hev nuthin' ter do with.
bresh whiskey or aidin' or abettin' in illicit 'stilling '
I like Isham, an' Isham he likes me, an' we hev jOs:
agreed ter disagree."
Nehemiah dared not protest nor seek to explain.
He could invent no story that would not give the
lie direct to his representations to the moonshin- 
ers. He felt that their eyes were upon him. He
could only hope that his silence did not seem to
them like denial-and yet was not tantamount to
confession in the esteem of his upbraider.
"Yes, sir," his interlocutor continued, "it's a
mighty bad government ter run agin." Then he
turned to the moonshiner,'evidently taking up the
business that had brought him here. "Lemme
see what sorter brand ye hev registered fur yer cat-
tle, Isham."
Yerby's heart sank when the suspicion perco- 
lated through his brain that this man had been in-
duced to come here for the purpose of recognizing 
him. More fixed in this opinion was he when n,.
description of the brand of the cattle could bo
found, and the visitor finally went away, his errandi
bootless.                                 .3
From time to time during the afternoon o
men went out and returned with recruits on variou,
pretexts, all of which Nehemiah believed masked'
the marshalling of witnesses to incriminate him as,
one of themselves, in order to better secure his 
constancy to the common interests, and in case he



<pb n="253"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 253
was playing false to put others into possession of
the facts as to the identity of the informer. His
liability to the law for aiding and abetting in
moonshining was very complete before the day
darkened, and his jeopardy as to the information
he had given made him shake in his shoes.
For at any moment, he reflected, in despair, the
laggard raiders might swoop down upon them, and
the choice of r6les offered to him was to seem to
them a moonshiner, or to the moonshiners an in-
former. The first was far the safer, for the clutches
of the law were indeed feeble as contrasted with
the popular fury that would pursue him unwearied
for years until its vengeance was accomplished.
From the one, escape was to the last degree im-
probable; from the other, impossible.
Any pretext to seek to quit the place before the
definite arrangements of his negotiation were con-
summated seemed even to him, despite his eager-
ness to be off, too tenuous, too transparent, to be
essayed, although he devised several as he sat med-
itative and silent amongst the group about the still.
The prospect grew less and less inviting as the lin-
gering day waned, and the evening shadows, dank
and chill, perceptibly approached. The brown and
green recesses of the grotto were at once murkier,
and yet more distinctly visible, for the glow of the
fire, flickering through the crevices of the metal
door of the furnace, had begun to assert its lumi-
nous quality, which was hardly perceptible in the full
light of day, and brought out the depth of the shad-
ows. The figures and faces of the moonshiners
showed against the deepening gloom. The sunset



<pb n="254"/>
254 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
clouds were still red without; a vague roseate suffu- '
sion was visible through the falling water. The sui 
itself had not yet sunk, for an oblique and almost.
level ray, piercing the cataract, painted a series of
faint prismatic tints on one side of the rugged arch, .
But while the outer world was still in touch with-i
the clear-eyed day, night was presently here, with .
mystery and doubt and dark presage. The voice 
of Hoho-hebee Falls seemed to him louder, full of 
strange, uncomprehended meanings, and insistent 
iteration. Vague echoes were elicited. Sometimes:i
in a seeming pause he could catch their lisping
sibilant tones repeating, repeating-what ? As the
darkness encroached yet more heavily upon the
cataract, the sense of its unseen motion so close at
hand oppressed his very soul; it gave an idea of
the swift gathering of shifting invisible multitudes,
coming and going-who could say whence or
whither ? So did this impression master his nerves
that he was glad indeed when the furnace door was
opened for fuel, and he could see only the inani- 
mate, ever-descending sheet of water-the reverse:
interior aspect of Hoho-hebee Falls-all suffusedf
with the uncanny tawny light, but showing white
and green tints like its diurnal outer aspect, instead
of the colorless outlines, resembling a drawing of 
cataract, which the cave knew by day. He di
not pause to wonder whether the sudden transieQ
illumination was visible without, or how it migh
mystify the untutored denizens of the woods, beari
or deer, or wolf, perceiving it aglow in the midst o
the waters like a great topaz, and anon lost in the.
gloom. He pined to see it; the momentary cessa-!



<pb n="255"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 255
tion of darkness, of the effect of the sounds, so
strange in the obscurity, and of the chill, pervasive
mystery of the invisible, was so grateful that its in-
fluence was tonic to his nerves, and he came to
watch for its occasion and to welcome it. He did
not grudge it even when it gave the opportunity
for a close, unfriendly, calculating scrutiny of his
face by the latest comer to the still This was the
neighboring miller, also liable to the revenue laws,
the distillers being valued patrons of the mill, and
since he ground the corn for the mash he thereby
aided and abetted in the illicit manufacture of the
whiskey. His life was more out in the world than
that of his underground confreres, and perhaps, as
he had a thriving legitimate business, and did not
live by brush whiskey, he had more to lose by de-
tection than they, and deprecated even more any
unnecessary risk. He evidently took great um-
brage at the introduction of Nehemiah amongst
them.
" Oh yes," he observed, in response to the cordial
greeting which he met; " an' I'm glad ter see ye all
too. I'm powerful glad ter kem ter the still enny
time. It's ekal ter goin' ter the settlemint, or plumb
ter town on a County Court day. Ye see every-
body, an' hear all the news, an' meet up with inter-
estin' strangers. I tell ye, now, the mill's plumb
lonesome compared ter the still, an' the mill's al-
ways hed the name of a place whar a heap o'
cronies gathered ter swap lies, an' sech."
The irony of this description of the social delights
and hospitable accessibilities of a place esteemed
the very stronghold of secrecy itself-the liberty of



<pb n="256"/>
256 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 
every man in it jeopardized by the slightest laps
of vigilance or judgment-was very readily to '
appreciated by the group, who were invited by th
fair show of words to look down the vista of thqi
future to possible years of captivity in the jails 
far-away States as Federal prisoners. The me)'!
gazed heavily and anxiously from one to another
as the visitor sank down on the rocks in a relaxed 
attitude, his elbow on a higher ledge behind him, 1
supporting his head on his hand; his other haind'
was on his hip, his arm stiffly akimbo, while he 
looked with an expression of lowering exasperation
at Yerby. It was impossible to distinguish the col-
or of his garb, so dusted with flour was he from
head to foot; but his long boots drawn over his
trousers to the knee, and his great spurs, and a
brace of pistols in his belt, seemed incongruous ac-
cessories to the habiliments of a miller. His large,
dark hat was thrust far back on his head; his hair,
rising straight in a sort of elastic wave from his
brow, was powdered white; the effect of his florid
color and his dark eyes was accented by the con.1
trast; his pointed beard revealed its natural tints'
because of his habit of frequently brushing his handl
over it, and was distinctly red. He was lithe amd
lean and nervous, and had the impatient temper
characteristic of mercurial natures. It mattered no
to him what was the coercion of the circumstanc
which had led to the reception of the strangerher
nor what was the will of the majority; he disa
proved of the step; he feared it; he esteemed it a
grievance done him in his absence; and he could!
not conceal his feelings nor wait a more fitting time
il



<pb n="257"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 257
to express them in private. His irritation and ob-
jection evidently caused some solicitude amongst
the others. He was important to them, and they
deprecated his displeasure. Isham Beaton listened
to the half-covert sneers of his words with pertur-
bation plainly depicted on his face, and the man
whom Nehemiah had at first noticed as one whose
character seemed that of adviser, and whose qpin-
ion was valued, now spoke for the first time. He
handed over a broken-nosed pitcher with the re-
mark, "Try the flavor of this hyar whiskey, Al-
fred; 'pears like ter me the bes' we-uns hev ever
hed."
His voice was singularly smooth; it had all the
qualities of culture; every syllable, every lapse of
his rude dialect, was as distinct as if he had been
taught to speak in this way; his tones were low
and even, and modulated to suave cadences; the
ear experienced a sense of relief after the loud,
strident voice of the miller, poignantly penetrating
and pitched high.
"Naw, Hilary, I don't want nuthin' ter drink.
'Bleeged ter ye, but I ain't wantin' nuthin' ter
drink," reiterated the miller, plaintively.
Isham Beaton cast a glance of alarm at the
dimly seen, monastic face of his adviser in the
gloom. It was unchanged. Its pallor and its
keen outline enabled its expression to be discerned
as he himself went through the motions of sampling
the rejected liquor, shook his head discerningly,
wiped his mouth on the back of his hand, and de-
posited the pitcher near by on a shelf of the rock.
A pause ensued. Nehemiah, with every desire
17



<pb n="258"/>
258 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
to be agreeable, hardly knew how to commen..
himself to the irate miller, who would have none 4
of his very existence. No one could more eagerly 
desire him to be away than he himself. But his |l
absence would not satisfy the miller; nothing less ,i
than that the intruder should never have been i
here. Every perceptible lapse of the moonshiners
into anxiety, every recurrent intimation of their '
most pertinent reason for this anxiety, set Nehemiah'.
a-shaking in his shoes. Should it be esteemed the
greatest good to the gfeatest number to make safe-
ly away with him, his fate would forever remain
unknown, so cautious had he been to leave no
trace by which he might be followed. He gazed
with deprecating urbanity, and with his lips dis-
tended into a propitiating smile, at the troubled face
powdered so white and with its lowering eyes so
dark and petulant. He noted that the small-talk
amongst the others, mere unindividualized lump-
ish fellows with scant voice in the government of
their common enterprise, had ceased, and that they
no longer busied themselves with the necessary 
work about the still, nor with the snickering-inter- t
ludes and horse-play with which they were wont to ,
beguile their labors. They had all seated them- ,
selves, and were looking from one to the other of j
the more important members of the guild with an ;
air which betokened the momentary expectation of "
a crisis. The only exception was the man who had ,
the violin; with the persistent, untimely industry ,
of incapacity, he twanged the strings, and tuned 
and retuned the instrument, each time producing a
result more astonishingly off the key than before.



<pb n="259"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 259
He was evidently unaware of this till some one
with senses ajar would suggest that all was not as
it should be in the drunken reeling catch he sought
to play, when he would desist in surprise, and once
more diligently rub the bow with rosin, as if that
mended the matter. The miller's lowering eyes rest-
ed on his shadowy outline as he sat thus engaged,
for a moment, and then he broke out suddenly:
"Yes, this hyar still is the place fur news, an'
the place ter look out fur what ye don't expec' ter
happen. It's powerful pleasant ter be a-meetin' of
folks hyar-this hyar stranger this evenin' "-his
gleaming teeth in the semi-obscurity notified Yerby
that a smile of spurious politeness was bent upon
him, and he made haste to grin very widely in re-
sponse-"an' that thar fiddle 'minds me o' how
onexpected'twar whenst I met up with Lee-yander
hyar-'pears ter me, Bob, ez ye air goin' ter diddle
the life out'n his fiddle-an' Hilary jes begged an'
beseeched me ter take the boy with me ter help
'round the mill, ez he war a-runnin' away. Ye
want me ter 'commodate this stranger too, ez
mebbe air runnin' from them ez wants him, hey
Hilary ?"
The grin was petrified on Nehemiah's face. He
felt his blood rush quickly to his head in the ex-
citement of the moment. So here was the bird
very close at hapd! And here was his enterprise
complete and successful. He could go away after
the cowardly caution of the moonshiners should
have expended itself in dallying and delay, with
his negotiation for the "wild-cat" ended, and his
accomplished young relative in charge. He drew



<pb n="260"/>
260 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
himself erect with a sense of power. The moo0
shiners, the miller, would not dare to make an ob
jection. He knew too much! he knew far toti
much'!
The door of the furnace was suddenly flung ajar;
but he was too much absorbed to perceive the-,
change that came upon the keen face of Hilary 
Tarbetts, who knelt beside it, as the guest's porten-
tous triumphant smile was fully revealed. Yerby
did not lose, however, the glance of reproach which
the moonshiner cast upon the miller, nor the miller's
air at once triumphant, ashamed, and regretful. He
had in petulant pique disclosed the circumstance
which he had pledged himself not to disclose.
"This man's name is Yerby too," Hilary said,
significantly, gazing steadily at the miller.
The miller looked dumfounded for a moment.
He stared from one to the other in silence. His
conscious expression changed to obvious discom-
fiture. He had expected no such result as this. 
He had merely given way to a momentary spite in
the disclosure, thinking it entirely insignificant,-
only calculated to slightly annoy Hilary, who had. 
made the affair his own. He would not in any:
essential have thwarted his comrade's plans in-i
tentionally, nor in his habitual adherence to they
principles of fair play would he have assisted in tha
boy's capture. He drew himself up from his re-
laxed posture; his spurred feet shuffled heavily oj:
the stone floor of the grotto. A bright red spot ap-
peared on each cheek; his eyes had become anxious '
and subdued in the quick shiftings of temper com-
mon to the red-haired gentry; his face of helpless



<pb n="261"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 201
appeal was bent on Hilary Tarbetts, as if relying on
his resources to mend the matter; but ever and
anon he turned his eyes, animated with a suspi-
cious dislike, on Yerby, who, however, could have
snapped his fingers in the faces of them all, so
confident, so hilariously triumphant was he.
"Yerby, I b'lieve ye said yer.name war, an' so
did Peter Green," said Tarbetts, still kneeling by
the open furnace door, his pale cheek reddening
in the glow of the fire.
Thus reminded of the testimony of his acquaint-
ance, Yerby did not venture to repudiate his cog-
nomen.
"An' what did ye kem hyar fur ?" blustered the
miller. "A-sarchin' fur the boy ?"
Yerby's lips had parted to acknowledge this fact,
but Tarbetts suddenly anticipated his response,
and answered for him:
"Oh no, Alfred. Nobody ain't sech a fool ez
ter kem hyar ter this hyar still, a stranger an'
mebbe suspected ez a spy, ter hunt up stray chil-
dren, an' git thar heads shot off, or mebbe drownded
in a mighty handy water-fall, or sech. This hyar
man air one o' we-uns. He air a-tradin' fur our
liquor, an' he'll kerry a barrel away whenst he
goes."
Yerby winced at the suggestion conveyed so
definitely in this crafty speech; he was glad when
the door of the furnace closed, so that his face
might not tell too much of the shifting thoughts
and fears that possessed him.
The miller's fickle mind wavered once more. If
Yerby had not come for the boy, he himself had



<pb n="262"/>
262 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
done no damage in disclosing Leander's where.of
abouts. Once more his quickly illumined angex
was kindled against Tarbetts, who had caused him i
a passing but poignant self-reproach. " Waal, then, 
Hilary," he demanded, "what air ye a-raisin' sechi.
a row fur? Lee-yander ain't noways so special pre-, I
cious ez I knows on. Toler'ble lazy an' triflin', an' 
mightily gi'n over ter moonin' over a readin'-book X
he hev got. That thar mill war a-grindin' o' nuthin' -'
at all more'n haffen ter-day, through me bein' a-nap-,
pin', and Lee-yander plumb demented by his book so 
ez he furgot ter pour enpy grist inter the hopper.
Shucks ! his kin is welcome ter enny sech critter ez
that, though I ain't denyin' ez he'd be toler'ble spry
ef he could keep his nose out'n his book," he quali-
fied, relenting, "or his fiddle out'n his hands. I
made him leave his fiddle hyar ter the still, an' I be
goin' ter hide his book."
"No need," thought Nehemiah, scornfully. Book
and scholar and it might be fiddle too, so indulgent
had the prospect of success made him, would by to-
morrow be on the return route to the cross-roads.
He even ventured to differ with the overbearing -
miller. 
"I dun'no' 'bout that; books an' edication in 
gin'ral air toler'ble useful wunst in a while ;" he was 
thinking of the dark art of dividing and multiplying I
by fractions. "The Yerbys hev always hed thet
name o' bein' quick at thar book." 
Now the democratic sentiment in this country is.'
bred in the bone, and few of its denizens have so 
diluted it with Christian grace as to willingly ac-
knowledge a superior. In such a coterie as this



<pb n="263"/>
THE .MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 263
"eating humble-pie" is done only at the muzzle of
a " shootin'-iron."
"Never hearn afore ez enny o' the Yerbys knowed
B from bull-foot," remarked one of the unindivid-
ualized lumpish moonshiners, shadowy, indistin-
guishable in the circle about the rotund figure of
the still. He yet retained acrid recollections of
unavailing struggles with the alphabet, and was
secretly of the opinion that education was a painful
thing, and, like the yellow-fever or other deadly
disease, not worth having. Nevertheless, since it
was valued by others, the Yerbys should scathless
make no unfounded claims. "Ef the truth war
knowed, nare one of 'em afore could tell a book
from a bear-trap."
Nehemiah's flush the darkness concealed; he
moistened his thin lips, and then gave a little cack-
ling laugh, as if he regarded this as pleasantry.
But the demolition of the literary pretensions of his
family once begun went bravely on.
"Abner Sage larnt this hyar boy all he knows,"
another voice took up the testimony. " Ab 'lows ez
his mother war quick at school, but his dad-law!
I knowed Ebenezer Yerbyl He war a frien'ly
sorter cuss, good-nachured an' kind-spoken, but ye
could put all the larnin' he hed in the corner o' yer
eye."
"An' Lee-yander don't favor none o' ye," ob-
served another of the undiscriminated, unimportant
members of the group, who seemed to the groping
scrutiny of Nehemiah to be only endowed with suf-
ficient identity to do the rough work of the still,
and to become liable lo the Federal law. "Thar's



<pb n="264"/>
264 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE EALLS      '
Hil'ry-he seen it right off. Hil'ry he tuk a look at .
Lee-yander whenst he wanted ter ker an' worlk,"
along o' we-uns, 'kase his folks wanted ter take him.
away from the Sudleys. Hil'ry opened the furnace '
door-jes so; an' he cotch the boy by the arm"--
the great brawny fellow, unconsciously dramatic, !
suited the action to the word, his face and figure.
illumined by the sudden red glow-" an' Hil'ry, he
say, 'Naw, by God-ye hev got yer mother's eyes in 
yer head, an' I'll swear ye sha'n't larn ter be a sotl'
An' that's how kem Hil'ry made Alf Bixby take
Lee-yander ter work in the mill. Efennybody tuk
arter him he war convenient ter disappear down hyar |
with we-uns. So he went ter the mill."
"An' I wisht I hed put him in the hopper an' 
ground him up," said the miller, in a blood-curdling
tone, but with a look of plaintive anxiety in his eyes.
"He hev made a heap o' trouble 'twixt Hil'ry an'
me fust an' last. Whar's Hil'ry disappeared to, en-
nyways ?"
For the flare from the furnace showed that this
leading spirit amongst the moonshiners had gone 
softly out.  Nehemiah, whose courage was dis.,
sipated by some subtle influence of his presence,.
now made bold to ask, " An' what made him ter set 
store on Lee-yander's mother's eyes?"  His tone;
was as bluffly sarcastic as he dared.* 
"Shucks-ye mus' hev hearn that old tale," said
the miller, cavalierly. "This hyar Malviny Hixon'
-ez lived down in Tanglefoot Cove then-her an!
Hil'ry war promised ter marry, but the revenuers
captured him-he war a-runnin' a still in Tangle-
foot then-an' they kep' hin in jail somewhar in'



<pb n="265"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 265
the North fur five year. Waal, she waited toler'ble
constant fur two or three year, but Ebenezer Yerby
he ker a-visitin' his kin down in Tanglefoot Cove,
an' she an' him met at a bran dance, an' the fust
thing I hearn they war married, an' 'fore Hil'ry got
back she war dead an' buried, an' so war Eben-
ezer."
There was a pause while the flames roared in the
furnace, and the falling water desperately dashed
upon the rocks, and its tumultuous voice continu-
ously pervaded the silent void wildernesses without,
and the sibilant undertone, the lisping whisperings,
smote the senses anew.
"He met up with cornsider'ble changes fur five
year," remarked one of the men, regarding the mat-
ter in its chronological aspect.
Nehemiah said nothing. He had heard the story
before, but it had been forgotten. A worldly mind
like his is not apt to burden itself with the senti-
mental details of an antenuptial romance of the
woman whom his half-brother had married many
years. ago.
A persuasion that it was somewhat unduly long-
lived impressed others of the party.
"It's plumb cur'us Hil'ry ain't never furgot her,"
observed one of them. " He hev never married at
all. My wife says it's jes contrariousness. Ef Mal-
viny hed been his wife an' died, he'd hev married
agin 'fore the year war out. An' I tell my wife
that he'd hev been better acquainted with her then,
an' would hev fund out ez no woman war wuth
mournin' 'bout fur nigh twenty year. My wife says
she can't make out ez how Hil'ry 'ain't got pride



<pb n="266"/>
266 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
enough not ter furgive her fur givin' him the mitten 
like she done. An' I tell my wife that holdin' wa
gredge agin a woman fur bein' fickle is like holdin!
a gredge agin her fur bein' a woman."
He paused with an air, perceived somehow in the i
brown dusk, of having made a very neat point. A"
stir of assent was vaguely suggested when some6
chivalric impulse roused a champion at the farther
side of the worm, whose voice rang out brusquely:
"Jes listen at Tom ! A body ter hear them tales,
he tells 'bout argufyin' with his wife would 'low he.'
war a mighty smart, apt man, an' the pore foolish: 
'oman skeercely hed a sensible word ter bless her-
self with. When everybody that knows Tom knows
he sings mighty small round home. Ye stopped too
soon, Tom. Tell what yer wife said to that."
Tom's embarrassed feet shuffled heavily on the
rocks, apparently in search of subterfuge.  The
dazzling glintings from the crevices of the furnace
door showed here and there gleaming teeth broadly
agrin.
"Jes called me a fool in gineral," admitted the 
man skilled in argument.
" An' didn't she 'low ez men folks war fickle too.:
an' remind ye o' yer young days whenst ye went
a-courtin' hyar an' thar, an' tell over a string o' gals.
names till- she sounded like an off'cer callin' th
roll ?"
"Ye-es," admitted Tom, thrown off his balance
by this preternatural insight, " but all them gals wai
a-tryin' ter marry me--not me tryin' ter marryi
them."
There was a guffaw at this modest assertion, but



<pb n="267"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 267
the disaffected miller's tones dominated the rude
merriment.
"Whenst a feller takes ter drink folks kin spell
out a heap o' reasons but the true one-an' that's
'kase he likes it.  Hil'ry 'ain't never named that
'oman's name ter me, an' I hev knowed him ez well
ez ennybody hyar. Jes t'other day whenst that boy
kem, bein' foolish an' maudlin, he seen suthin' on-
common in Lee-yander's eyes-they'lt be mighty
oncommon ef he keeps on readin' his tomfool book,
ez he knows by heart, by the firelight when it's dim.
Ef folks air so sot agin strong drink, let 'em drink
less tharsefs. Hear Brother Peter Vickers preach
agin liquor, an' ye'd know ez all wine - bibbers air
bound fur hell."
"But the Bible don't name ' whiskey' once," said
the man called Tom, in an argumentative tone.
"Low wines I'll gin ye up;" he made the discrim-
ination in accents betokening much reasonable ad-
mission; "but nare time does the Bible name whis-
key, nor yit peach brandy, nor apple-jack."
"No      r cider nor beer," put in an unexpected re-
cruit from the darkness.
The miller was silent for a moment, and gave
token of succumbing to this unexpected polemic
strength. Then, taking thought and courage to-
gether, "Ye can't say the Bible ain't down on
'strong drink'?" There was no answer from the
vanquished, and he went on in the overwhelming
miller's voice: "Hil'ry hed better be purtectin' his-
self from strong drink, 'stiddier the boy-by makin'
him stay up thar at the mill whar he knows thar's
no drinkin' goin' on-ez will git chances at it other



<pb n="268"/>
268 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
ways, ef not through him, in the long life he hev got
ter live. The las' time the revenuers got Hil'ry !
'twar through bein' ez drunk ez a fraish-biled owl.
It makes me powerful oneasy whenever I know ye
air all drunk an' a-gallopadin' down hyar, an' no mo' 
able to act reasonable in case o' need an' purtect
yersefs agin spies an' revenuers an' sech 'n nuthin' 
in this worl'. The las' raid, ye 'member, we hed the
still over yander ;" he jerked his thumb in the direc- 
tion present to his thoughts, but unseen by his coad-
jutors; "a man war wounded, an' we dun'no' but
what killed in the scuffle, an' it mought be a hang-
in' matter ter git caught now. Ye oughter keep
sober; an' ye know, Isham, ye oughter keep Hil'ry
sober. I dun'no' why ye can't. I never could
abide the nasty stuff--it's enough ter turn a bull-
frog's stomach. Whiskey is good ter sell-not ter
drink. Let them consarned idjits in the flat woods
buy it, an' drink it. Whiskey is good ter sell-not
ter drink."
This peculiar temperance argument was received
in thoughtful silence, the reason of all the moun-
taineers commending it, while certain of them knew
themselves and were known to be incapable of prof-
iting by it.
Nehemiah had scant interest in this conversation.
He was conscious of the strain on his attention as
he followed it, that every point of the situation
should be noted, and its utility canvassed at a leisure, 
moment. He marked the allusion to the man sup- 
posed to have been killed in the skirmish with the
raiders, and he appraised its value as coercion in
any altercation that he might have in seeking to
1



<pb n="269"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 269
take Leander from his present guardians. But he
felt in elation that this was likely to be of the
slightest; the miller evidently found himself ham-
pered rather than helped by the employment of the
boy; and as to the moonshiner's sentimental parti-
sanship, for the sake of an old attachment to the
dead-and-gone mountain girl, there was hardly any-
thing in the universe so tenuous as to bear compar-
ison with its fragility. "A few drinks ahead," he
said to himself, with a sneer, "an' he won't remem-
ber who Malviny Hixon was, ef thar is ennything in
the old tale-which it's more'n apt thar ain't."
He began, after the fashion of successful people,
to cavil because his success was not more complete.
How the time was wasting here in this uncomfort-
able interlude! Why could he not have discovered
Leander's whereabouts earlier, and by now be jog-
ging along the road home with the boy by his side?
Why had he not bethought himself of the mill in
the first instance-that focus of gossip where all the
news of the countryside is mysteriously garnered
and thence dispensed bounteously to all comers?
It was useless, as he fretted and chafed at these un-
toward omissions, to urge in his own behalf that he
did.not know of the existence of the mill, and that
the miller, being an ungenial and choleric man,
might have perversely lent himself to resisting his
demand for the custody of the young runaway. No,
he told himself emphatically, and with good logic,
too, the miller's acrimony rose from the fact of a
stranger's discovery of the still and the danger of his
introduction into its charmed circle. And that re-
flection reminded him anew of his own danger here



<pb n="270"/>
270 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS     : 
-not from the lawless denizens of the place, but ':
from the forces which he himself had evoked, and hi
again he glanced out toward the water-fall as fear- ,|
ful of the raiders as any moonshiner of them all.  i
But what sudden glory was on the waters, mystic, :
white, an opaque brilliance upon the swirling foam 
and the bounding spray, a crystalline glitter upon
the smooth expanse of the swift cataract I The moon -
was in the sky, and its light, with noiseless tread, 
sought out strange, lonely places, and illusions were
astir in the solitudes. Pensive peace, thoughts too
subtle for speech to shape, spiritual yearnings, were
familiars of the hour and of this melancholy splen-
dor; but he knew none of them, and the sight gave
him no joy. He only thought that this was a night
for the saddle, for the quiet invasion of the woods,
when the few dwellers by the. way-side were lost in
slumber. He trembled anew at the thought of the
raiders whom he himself had summoned; he forgot
his curses on their laggard service; he upbraided
himself again that he had not earlier made shift to 
depart by some means-by any means-before the
night came with this great emblazoning bold-faced
moon that but prolonged the day; and he started -
to his feet with a galvanic jerk and a sharp exclama- ;
tion when swift steps were heard on the rocks out- 
side, and a man with the lightness of a deer sprang 
down the ledges and into the great arched opening
of the place.
"'Tain't nobody but Hil'ry," observed Isham
Beaton, half in reproach, half in reassurance.
The pervasive light without dissipated in some
degree the gloom within the grotto; a sort of gray



<pb n="271"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 271
visibility was on the appurtenances and the figures
about the still, not strong enough to suggest color,
but giving contour. His fright had been marked,
he knew; a sort of surprised reflectiveness was in
the manner of several of the moonshiners, and Ne-
hemiah, with his ready fears, fancied that this inop-
portune show of terror had revived their suspicions
of him. It required some effort to steady his nerves
after this, and when footfalls were again audible out-
side, and all the denizens of the place sat calmly
smoking their pipes without so much as a movement
toward investigating the sound, he, knowing whose
steps he had invited thither, had great ado with the
coward within to keep still, as if he had no more rea-
son to fear an approach than they.
A great jargon in the tone of ecstasy broke sud-
denly on the air upon this new entrance, shatter-
ing what little composure Nehemiah had been able
to muster; a wide-mouthed exaggeration of welcome
in superlative phrases and ready chorus. Swiftly
turning, he saw nothing for a moment, for he looked
at the height which a man's head might reach, and
the new-comer measured hardly two feet in stature,
waddled with a very uncertain gait, and although he
bore himself with manifest complacence, he had evi-
dently heard the like before, as he was jovially hailed
by every ingratiating epithet presumed to be accept-
able to his infant mind. He was attended by a tall,
gaunt boy of fifteen, barefooted, with snaggled teeth
and a shock of tow hair, wearing a shirt of unbleached
cotton, and a pair of trousers supported by a single
suspender drawn across a sharp, protuberant shoul-
der-blade behind and a very narrow chest in front.



<pb n="272"/>
272 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
But his face was proud and happy and gleeful, as if he
occupied some post of honor and worldly emolument 
in attending upon the waddling wonder on the floor
in front of him, instead of being assigned the ungrate- 
ful task of seeing to it that a very ugly baby closely 
related to him did not, with the wiliness and inge- 
nuity of infant nature, invent some method of mak-
ing away with himself. For he was an ugly baby as
he stood revealed in the flare of the furnace door,
thrown open that his admirers and friends might
feast their eyes upon him. His short wisps of red
hair stood straight up in front; his cheeks were puffy
and round, but very rosy; his eyes were small and
dark, but blandly roguish; his mouth was wide and
damp, and had in it a small selection of sample
teeth, as it were; he wore a blue checked home-
spun dress garnished down the back with big horn
buttons, sparsely set on; he clasped his chubby
hands upon a somewhat pompous stomach; he si-
dled first to the right, then to the left, in doubt as to
which of the various invitations he should accept.
"Kem hyar, Snooks !"  "Right hyar, Toodles I"
"Me hyar, Monkey Doodle !" " Hurrah fur the lee- 'i
tle-est moonshiner on record !" resounded fulsomely
about him. Many were the compliments showered
upon him, and if his flatterers told lies, they had told
more wicked ones. The pipes all went out, and the.
broken-nosed pitcher languished in disuse as he trot-.
ted from one pair of outstretched arms to another to 
give an exhibition of his progress in the noble art of.
locomotion; and if he now and again sat down, un-
expectedly to himself and to the spectator, he was
promptly put upon his feet again with spurious ap-



<pb n="273"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 273
plause and encouragement. He gave an exhibition
of his dancing-a funny little shuffle of exceeding te-
merity, considering the facilities at his command for
that agile amusement, but he was made reckless by
praise-and they all lied valiantly in chorus. He re-
peated all the words he knew, which were few, and
for the most part unintelligible, crowed like a cock,
barked like a dog, mewed like a cat, and finally went
away, his red cheeks yet more ruddily aglow, grave
and excited and with quickly beating pulses, like
one who has achieved some great public success and
led captive the hearts of thousands.
The turmoils of his visit and his departure were
great indeed. It all irked Nehemiah Yerby, who had
scant toleration of infancy and little perception of the
jocosity of the aspect of callow human nature, and it
seemed strange to him that these men, all with their
liberty, even their existence, jeopardized upon the
chances that a moment might bring forth, could so
relax their sense of danger, so disregard the man-
dates of stolid common-sense, and give themselves
over to the puerile beguilements of the visitor. The
little animal was the son of one of them, he knew,
but he hardly guessed whom until he marked the
paternal pride and content that had made unwont-
edly placid the brow of the irate miller while the
ovation was in progress. Nehemiah greatly pre-
ferred the adult specimen of the race, and looked
uIpo youth as an infirmity which would mend only
with time. He was easily confused by a stir; the
gurglings, the ticklings, the loud laughter both in
the deep bass of the hosts and the keen treble of
the guest had a befuddling effect upon him; his
18



<pb n="274"/>
274 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 
.powers of observation were numbed, As the gredgt"
burly forms shifted to and fro, resuming their foir
mer places, the red light from the open door of thes
furnace illumining their laughing, bearded counte-J
nances, casting a roseate suffusion upon the white 
turmoils of the cataract, and showing the rugged in-
terior of the place with its damp and dripping ledges, '
he saw for the first time among them Leander's slight ,
figure and smiling face; the violin was in his hand,
one end resting on a rock as he tightened a string;
his eyes were bent upon the instrument, while his
every motion was earnestly watched by the would-be 
fiddler.
Nehemiah started hastily to his feet. He had
not expected that the boy would see him here. To
share with one of his own household a secret like
this of aiding in illicit distilling was more than his
hardihood could well contemplate. As once more
the contemned " ping-pang " of the process of tuning
fell upon the air, Leander chanced to lift his eyes.
They smilingly swept the circle until they rested
upon his uncle. They suddenly dilated with as-
tonishment, and the violin fell from his nerveless
hand upon the floor. The surprise, the fear, the
repulsion his face expressed suddenly emboldened
Nehemiah. The boy evidently had not been pre-
pared for the encounter with his relative here. Its
only significance to his mind was the imminence of
capture and of being constrained to accompany his
uncle home. He cast a glance of indignant re-
proach upon Hilary Tarbetts, who was not even
looking at him. The moonshiner stood filling his
pipe with tobacco, and as he deftly extracted a coal



<pb n="275"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 275
from the furnace to set it alight, he shut the door
with a clash, and for a moment the whole place'
sunk into invisibility, the vague radiance vouchsafed
to the recesses of the grotto by the moonbeams on
the water without annihilated for the time by the
contrast with the red furnace glare. Nehemiah had
a swift fear that in this sudden eclipse Leander
might slip softly out and thus be again lost to him,
but as the dull gray light gradually reasserted itself,
and the figures and surroundings emerged from the
gloom, resuming shape and consistency, he saw
Leander still standing where he had disappeared
in the darkness; he could even distinguish his pale
face and lustrous eyes. Leander at least had no
intention to shirk explanations.
"Why, Uncle Nehemiah " he said, his boyish
voice ringing out tense and excited above the tones
of the men, once more absorbed in their wonted in-
terests. A sudden silence ensued amongst them.
"What air ye a-doin' hyar ?"
"Waal, ah, Lee-yander, boy-" Nehemiah hesi-
tated. A half-suppressed chuckle among the men,
whom he had observed to be addicted to horse-play,
attested their relish of the situation. Ridicule is
always of unfriendly intimations, and the sound
served to put Nehemiah on his guard anew. He
noticed that the glow in Hilary's pipe was still and
dull: the smoker did not even draw his breath as
he looked and listened. Yerby did not dare avow
the true purpose of his presence after his represen-
tations to the moonshiners, and yet he could not,
he would not in set phrase align himself with the
illicit vocation. The boy was too young, too irre-



<pb n="276"/>
276 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 
sponsible, too inimical to his uncle, he reflected in d
a sudden panic, to be intrusted with this secret. If i
in his hap-hazard, callow folly he should turn in- 
former, he was almost too young to be amenable to '
the popular sense of justice. He might, too, by i
some accident rather than intention, divulge the 
important knowledge so unsuitable to his years and
his capacity for guarding it. He began to share '
the miller's aversion to the introduction of outsiders 
to the still. He felt a glow of indignation, as if he 
had always been a party in interest, that the corn-
mon safety should not be more jealously guarded.
The danger which Leander's youth and inexperience
threatened had not been so apparent to him when
he first heard that the boy had been here, and the
menace was merely for the others. As he felt the
young fellow's eyes upon him he recalled the ef-
fusive piety of his conversation at Tyler Sudley's
house, his animadversions on violin-playing and
liquor-drinking, and Brother Peter Vickers's mild-
and merciful attitude toward sinners in those un-
spiced sermons of his, that held out such affluence 
of hope to the repentant rather than to the self- 
righteous. The blood surged unseen into Nehe-
miah's face. For shame, for very shame he could 
not confess himself one with these outcasts. He 
made a feint of searching in the semi-obscurity for 
the rickety chair on which he had been seated, and y
resumed his former attitude as Leander's voice once '
more rang out:
"What air ye a-doin' hyar, Uncle Nehemiah ?" 
"Jes a-visitin', sonny; jes a-visitin'."
There was a momentary pause, and the felicity of



<pb n="277"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 277
the answer was demonstrated by another chuckle
from. the group. His senses, alert to the emergency,
discriminated a difference in the tone. This time
the laugh was with him rather than at him. He
noted, too, Leander's dumfounded pause, and the
suggestion of discomfiture in the boy's lustrous eyes,
still widely fixed upon him. As Leander stooped to
pick up the violin he remarked with an incidental
accent, and evidently in default of retort, "I be
powerful s'prised ter view ye hyar."
Nehemiah smarted under the sense of unmerited
reproach; so definitely aware was he of being out
of the character which he had assumed and worn
until it seemed even to him his own, that he felt as
if he were constrained to some ghastly masquerade.
Even the society of the moonshiners as their guest
was a reproach to one who had always piously, and
in such involuted and redundant verbiage, spurned
the ways and haunts of the evil-doer. According to
the dictates of policy he should have rested content
with his advantage over the silenced lad. But his
sense of injury engendered a desire of reprisal, and
be impulsively carried the war into the enemy's
country.
"I ain't in no ways s'prised ter view you-uns hyar,
Lee-yander," he said. " From the ways, Lee-yander,
ezye hev been brung up by them slack-twisted Sud-
leys-ungodly folks 'ceptin' what little regeneration
they kin git from the sermons of Brother Peter Vick-
ers, who air onsartain in his mind whether folks ez
ain't church-members air goin' ter be damned or no
-I ain't s'prised none ter view ye hyar." He sud-
denly remembered poor Laurelia's arrogations of



<pb n="278"/>
278 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
special piety, and it was with exceeding ill will that 
he added: "An' Mis' Sudley in partic'lar. Ty ain't :
no great shakes ez a shoutin' Christian. I dun'no' 
ez I ever hearn him shout once, but his wife air one 
o' the reg'lar, mournful, unrejicing members, always 
questioning the decrees of Providence, an' what ain't
no nigher salvation, ef the truth war knowed, 'n a  '
sinner with the throne o' grace yit ter find."
Leander had not picked up the violin; this dis-
quisition had arrested his hand until his intention
was forgotten. He came slowly to the perpendicu-
lar, and his eyes gleamed in the dusk. A vibration
of anger was in his voice as he retorted:
"Mebbe so-mebbe they air sinners; but they'd
look powerful comical 'visitin" hyar 1"
"Ty Sudley ain't one o' the drinkin' kind," inter-
polated the miller, who evidently had the makings
of a temperance man. " He never sot foot hyar in
his life."
" Them ez kem a-visitin' hyar," blustered the boy,
full of the significance of his observations and ex-
perience, "air either wantin' a drink or two 'thout
payin' fur it, or else air tradin' fur liquor ter sell, an'
that's the same ez moonshinin' in the law."
There was a roar of delight from the circle of
lumpish figures about the still which told the boy
that he had hit very near to the mark. Nehemiah
hardly waited for it to subside before he made an
effort to divert Leander's attention.
" An' what airyou-uns doin' hyar ?" he demanded.
"Tit for tat."
"Why," bluffly declared Leander, " I be a-runnin'
away from you-uns. An' I 'lowed the still war one



<pb n="279"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 279
place whar I'd be sure o' not meetin' ye. Not ez I
hev got ennything agin moonshinin' nuther," he
added, hastily, mindful of a seeming reflection on
his refuge. "Moonshinin' is business, though the
United States don't seem ter know it. But I hev
hearn ye carry on so pious 'bout not lookin' on the
wine whenst it be red, that I 'lowed ye wouldn't like
ter look on the still whenst-whenst it's yaller." He
pointed with a burst of callow merriment at the big
copper vessel, and once more the easily excited
mirth of the circle burst forth irrepressibly.
Encouraged by this applause, Leander resumed:
"Why, Ieven turns my back on the still myself out'n
respec' ter the family-Cap'n an' Neighbor bein' so
set agin liquor. Cap'n's ekal ter preachin' on it ef
ennything onexpected war ter happen ter Brother
Vickers. An' when I hev ter view it, I look at it
sorter cross-eyed." The flickering line of light from
the crevice of the furnace door showed that he was
squinting frightfully, with the much-admired eyes his
mother had bequeathed to him, at the rotund shadow,
with the yellow gleams of the metal barely suggested
in the brown dusk. "So I tuk ter workin' at the
milL  An' I hev got nuthin' ter do with the still."
There was a pause. Then, with a strained tone of
appeal in his voice, for a future with Uncle Nehe-
miah had seemed very terrible to him, " So ye warn't
a-sarchin' hyar fur me, war ye, Uncle Nehemiah ?"
Nehemiah was at a loss. There is a peculiar glu-
tinous quality in the resolve of a certain type of char-
acter which is not allied to steadfastness of purpose,
nor has it the enlightened persistence of obstinacy.
In view of his earlier account of his purpose he



<pb n="280"/>
280 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
could not avow his errand; it bereft him of naught ,
to disavow it, for Uncle Nehemiah was one of thosei:':
gifted people who, in common parlance, do not mind .
what they say. Yet his reluctance to assure Lean,?
der that he was not the quarry that had led him into ;
these wilds so mastered him, the spurious relinquish-
ment had so the aspect of renunciation, that he hes- 
itated, started to speak, again hesitated, so palpably
that Hilary Tarbetts felt impelled to take a hand in
the game.
"Why don't ye sati'fy the boy, Yerby ?" he said, !
brusquely. He took his pipe out of his mouth and 
turned to Leander. "Naw,bub. He's jestradin'fur
bresh whiskey, that's all; he's sorter skeery 'bout
bein' a wild-catter, an' he didn't want ye ter know
it."
The point of red light, the glow of his pipe, the
only exponent of his presence in the dusky recess
where he sat, shifted with a quick, decisive motion
as he restored it to his lips.
The blood rushed to Nehemiah's head; he was 
dizzy for a moment; he heard his heart thump heav- -
ily; he saw, or he fancied he saw, the luminous dis- 
tention of Leander's eyes as this Goliath of his bat- 
ties was thus delivered into his hands. To meet .
him here proved nothing; the law was not violated |
by Nehemiah in the mere knowledge that illicit^
whiskey was in process of manufacture; a dozenp,
different errands might have brought him. But this
statement put a sword, as it were, into the boy'#
hands, and he dared not deny it. 
"'Pears ter me," he blurted out at last, "ez ye air 
powerful slack with yer jaw." 
.  i



<pb n="281"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 281
"Lee-yander ain't," coolly returned Tarbetts.
"He knows all thar is ter know 'bout we-uns - an'
why air ye not ter share our per'ls ?"
"I ain't likely ter tell," Leander jocosely reas-
sured him. "But I can't help thinkin' how it would
rejice that good Christian 'oman, Cap'n, Sudley, ez
war made ter set on sech a low stool 'bout my pore
old fiddle."
And thus reminded of the instrument, he picked
it up, and once more, with the bow held aloft in his
hand, he dexterously twanged the strings, and with
his deft fingers rapidly and discriminatingly turned
the screws, this one up and that one down. The ear-
nest would-be musician; who had languished while
the discussion was in progress, now plucked up a
freshened interest, and begged that the furnace door
might be set ajar to enable him to watch the process
of tuning and perchance to detect its subtle secret.
No objection was made, for the still was nearly
empty, and arrangements tending to replenishment
were beginning to be inaugurated by several of the
men, who were examining the mash in tubs in the
further recesses of the place. They were lighted by
a lantern which, swinging to and fro as they moved,
sometimes so swiftly as to induce a temporary fluc-
tuation threatening eclipse, suggested in the dusk the
erratic orbit of an abnormally magnified fire-fly. It
barely glimmered, the dullest point of white light,
when the rich flare from the opening door of the
furnace gushed forth and the whole rugged interior
was illumined with its color. The inadequate moon-
light fell away; the chastened white splendor on the
foam of the cataract, the crystalline glitter, timorous-



<pb n="282"/>
282 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 
ly and elusively shifting, were annihilated; the swift- i
ly descending water showed from within only a con-'.,
tinuously moving glow of yellow light, all the bright- 
er from the dark-seeming background of the world 3
glimpsed without. A wind had risen, unfelt in these 
recesses and on the weighty volume of the main
sheet of falling water, but at its verge the fitful 
gusts diverted its downward course, tossing slender 
jets aslant, and sending now and again a shower of 
spray into the cavern. Nehemiah remembered his
rheumatism with a shiver. The shadows of the men, 
instead of an unintelligible comminglement with the
dusk, were now sharp and distinct, and the light
grotesquely duplicated them till the cave seemed full
of beings who were not there a moment before-
strange gnomes, clumsy and burly, slow of move-
ment, but swift and mysterious of appearance and
disappearance. The beetling ledges here and there
imprinted strong black similitudes of their jagged
contours on the floor; with the glowing, weird illumi-
nation the place seemed far more uncanny than be- ,
fore, and Leander, with his face pensive once morei
in response to the gentle strains slowly elicited by;
the bow trembling with responsive ecstasy, his large
eyes full of dreamy lights, his curling hair fallin
about his cheek as it rested upon the violin, his fig
ure, tall and slender and of an adolescent grac
might have suggested to the imagination a re
iniscence of Orpheus in Hades.   They all 1
tened in languid pleasure, without the effort to 
praise the music or to compare it with other
formances-the bane of more cultured audiences
only the ardent amateur, seated close at hand on -



<pb n="283"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 283
bowlder, watched the bowing with a scrutiny which
betokened earnest anxiety that no mechanical trick
might elude him. The miller's half-grown son,
whose ear for any fine distinctions in sound might be
presumed to have been destroyed by the clamors of
the mill, sat a trifle in the background, and sawed
awayon an imaginary violin with many flourishes and
all the exaggerations of mimicry; he thus furnished
the zest of burlesque relished by the devotees of
horse-play and simple jests, and was altogether una-
ware that he had a caricature in his shadow just be-
hind him, and was doing double duty in making both
Leander and himself ridiculous.  Sometimes he
paused in excess of interest when the music elicited
an amusement mnore to his mind than the long-
drawn, pathetic cadences which the violinist so much
affected. For in sudden changes of mood and in
effective contrast the tones came showering forth in
keen, quick staccato, every one as round and distinct
as a globule, but as unindividualized in the swift ex-
uberance of the whole as a drop in a summer's rain;
the bow was but a glancing line of light in its rapidity,
and the bounding movement of the theme set many
i- foot astir marking time. At last one young fellow,
an artist too in his way, laid aside his pipe and came
oitito dance. A queerpas seul it might have been
esteemed, but he was light and agile and not un-
gpaceful, and he danced with an air of elation-al-
beit with a grave face-which added to the enjoy-
ment of the spectator, for it seemed so slight an
effort. He was long-winded, and was still bounding
about in the double-shuffle and the pigeon-wing, his
shadow on the wall nimbly following every motion,



<pb n="284"/>
284 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS '.i
when the violin's cadence quavered off in a discq';
ant wail, and Leander, the bow pointed at the wat^
fall, exclaimed: "Look out I Somebody's tha4f
Out thar on the rocks" I"
It was upon the instant, with the evident ii.i
tention of a surprise, that a dozen armed meoi
rushed precipitately into the place. Nehemiah, bij
head awhirl, hardly distinguished the events as thqj|i
were confusedly enacted before him. There wer, ,
loud, excited calls, unintelligible, mouthing back i
the turbulent echoes of the place, the repeated wor! '
" Surrender 1" alone conveying meaning to his mind, '
The sharp, succinct note of a pistol-shot was a short
answer. Some quick hand closed the door of the
furnace and threw the place into protective gloom.
He was vaguely aware that a prolonged struggle
that took place amongst a group of men near him
was the effort of the intruders to reopen it. All un-
availing. He presently saw figures drawing back
to the doorway out of the m#le, for moonshiner and
raider were alike indistinguishable, and he became
aware that both parties were equally desirous to gain
the outer air. Once more pistol-shots-outside this
time-then a tumult of frenzied voices. Struck by
a pistol-ball, Tarbetts had fallen from the ledge
under the weight of the cataract and into the deep
abysses below. The raiders were swiftly getting to
saddle again. Now and then a crack mountain
shot drew a bead upon them from the bushes; buS
mists were gathering, the moon was uncertain, and
the flickering beams deflected the aim. Two or
three of the horses lay dead on the river-bank,
and others carried double, ridden by men with rid-



<pb n="285"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 285
died hats. They were in full retreat, for the catas-
trophe on the ledge of the cliff struck dismay to
their hearts. Had the man been shot, according to
the expectation of those who resist arrest, this would
be merely the logical sequence of events. But to be
hurled from a crag into a cataract savored of atroc-
ity, and they dreaded the reprisals of capture.
It was soon over. The whole occurrence; charged
with all the definitiveness of fate, was scant ten min-
utes in transition. A laggard hoof-beat, a faint echo
amidst the silent gathering of the moonlit mists, and
the loud plaint of Hoho-hebee Falls were the only
sounds that caught Nehemiah's anxious ear when
he crept out from behind the empty barrels and
tremulously took his way along the solitary ledges,
ever and anon lo9king askance at his shadow, that
more than once startled him with a sense of unwel-
come companionship. The mists, ever thickening,
received him into their midst. However threatening
to the retreat of the raiders, they were friendly to
him. Once, indeed, they parted, showing through
the gauzy involutions of their illumined folds the
pale moon high in the sky, and close at hand a
horse's head just above his own, with wild, dilated
eyes and quivering nostrils. Its effect was as de-
tadhed as if it were only drawn upon a canvas; the
mists rolled over anew, and but that he heard the
subdued voice of the rider urging the animal on,
and the thud of the hoofs farther away, he might
have thought this straggler from the revenue party
some wild illusion born of his terrors.
The fate of Hilary Tarbetts remained a mystery.
When the stream was dragged for his body it was
<j



<pb n="286"/>
286 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS .',
deemed strange that it should not be found,' sinc
the bowlders that lay all adown the rocky gorge
so interrupted the sweep of the current that so['
heavy a weight seemed likely to be caught amongsti
them.  Others commented on the strength and.
great momentum of the flow, and for this reason it
was thought that in some dark underground channel"
of Hide-and-Seek Creek the moonshiner had found';
his sepulchre. A story of his capture was circulat-
ed after a time; it was supposed that he dived and
swam ashore after his fall, and that the raiders.
overtook him on their retreat, and that he was now.
immured, a Federal prisoner. The still and all the
effects of the brush-whiskey trade disappeared as
mysteriously, and doubtless this silent flitting gave
rise to the hopeful rumor that Tarbetts had been
seen alive and well since that fateful night, and
that in some farther recesses of the wilderness, un-
discovered by the law, he and like comrades con-
tinue their chosen vocation. However that may
be, the vicinity of Hoho-hebee Falls, always a
lonely place, is now even a deeper solitude. The'
beavers, unmolested, haunt the ledges; along their')
precipitous ways the deer come down to drink; on,
bright days the rainbow hovers about the falls; oni
bright nights they glimmer in the moon; but never,
again have they glowed with the shoaling oradgjE
light of the furnace, intensifying to the deep tawqi
tints of its hot heart, like the rich glamours of som
great topaz.
This alien glow it was thought had betrayed the'
place to the raiders, and Nehemiah's instrumentality'
was never discovered. The post-office appointment



<pb n="287"/>
THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS 287
was bestowed upon his rival for the position, and it
was thought somewhat strange that he should en-
dure the defeat with such exemplary resignation.
No one seemed to connect his candidacy with his
bootless search for his nephew. When Leander
chanced to be mentioned, however, he observed
with some rancor that he reckoned it was just as
well he didn't come up with Lee-yander? there was
generally mighty little good in a runaway boy, and
Lee-yander had the name of being disobejent an'
turr'ble bad.
Leander found a warm welcome at home. His
violin had been broken in the mlle, and the miller,
though ardently urged, never could remember the
spot where he had hidden the book-such havoc
had the confusion of that momentous night wrought
in his mental processes. Therefore, unhampered
by music or literature, Leander addressed himself
to the plough-handles, and together that season he
and " Neighbor " made the best crop of their lives.
.Laurelia sighed for the violin and Leander's
music, though, as she always made haste to say,
some pious people misdoubted whether it were not
a sinful pastime. On such occasions it went hard
with Leander not to divulge his late experiences
and the connection of the pious Uncle Nehemiah
tberewith.  But he always remembered in time
Laurelia's disability to receive confidences, being a
woman, and consequently unable to keep a secret,
and he desisted.
One day, however, when he and Ty Sudley,
ploughing the corn, now knee-high, were pausing to
rest in the turn-row, a few furrows apart, in an ebul-



<pb n="288"/>
288 THE MOONSHINERS AT HOHO-HEBEE FALLS
lition of filial feeling he told all that had befallei
him in his absence. Ty Sudley, divided betweea
wrath toward Nehemiah and quaking anxiety fo#
the dangers that Leander had been constrained to
run--expost fado tremors, but none the less acute
-felt moved now and then to complacence in his
prodigy.
" So 'twar you-uns ez war smart enough ter slam
the furnace door an' throw the whole place inter
darkness ! That saved them moonshiners and raid-
ers from killin' each other. It saved a deal o' blood-
shed-ez sure ez shootin'. 'Twar mighty smart in
ye. But"-suddenly bethinking himself of sundry
unfilial gibes at Uncle Nehemiah and the facetious
account of his plight-" Lee-yander, ye mustn't be
so turr'ble bad, sonny; ye mustn't be so turr'ble
bad."
"Naw, ma'am, Neighbor, I won't," Leander pro-
tested.
And he went on following the plough down the
furrow and singing loud and clear.



<pb n="289"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS



<pb n="290"/>
;,t
-   .   .
.. -  
I
I·



<pb n="291"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS
UPON the steep slope of a certain " bald " among
the Great Smoky Mountains there lie, just at the
verge of the strange stunted woods from which the
treeless dome emerges to touch the clouds, two
great tilted blocks of sandstone. They are of
marked regularity of shape, as square as if hewn
with a chisel. Both are splintered and fissured;
one is broken in twain. No other rock is near.
The earth in which they are embedded is the rich
black soil not unfrequently found upon the sum-
mits. Nevertheless no great significance might
seem to attach to their isolation-an outcropping
of ledges, perhaps; a fracture of the freeze; a trace
of ancient denudation by the waters of the spring in
the gap, flowing now down the trough of the gorge
'. in. a silvery braid of currents, and with a murmur
that is earnest of a song.
'It may have been some distortion of the story
heard. only from. the lips of the circuit rider, some
fantasy of tradition invested with the urgency of
fact, but Roger Purdee could not remember the
time when he did not believe that these were the
stone tables of the Law that Moses flung down from
the mountain-top in his wrath. In the dense igno-
rance of the mountaineer, and his secluded life, he



<pb n="292"/>
292       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS
knew of no foreign countries, no land holier than
the land of his home. There was no incongruity
to his mind that it should have been in the solemn
silence and austere solitude of the "bald," in the
magnificent ascendency of the Great Smoky, that
the law-giver had met the Lord and spoken with
Him. Often as he lay at length on the strange
barren place, veiled with the clouds that frequented
it, a sudden sunburst in their midst would suggest
anew what supernal splendors had once been here
vouchsafed to the faltering eye of man. The illu-
sion had come to be very dear to him; in this insist-
ent localization of his faith it was all very near.
And so he would go down to the slope below, among
the weird, stunted trees, and look once more upon
the broken tables, and ponder upon the strange
signs written by time thereon. The insistent fall
of the rain, the incisive blasts of the wind, coming
again and again, though the centuries went, were
registered here in mystic runes. The surface had
weathered to a whitish-gray, but still in tiny de-
pressions its pristine dark color showed in rugose
characters. A splintered fissure held delicate fucoid
impressions in fine script full of meaning. A series
of worm-holes traced erratic hieroglyphics across a
scaling corner; all the varied texts were illuminated
by quartzose particles glittering in the sun, and here
and there fine green grains ofglauconite. He knew
no names like these, and naught of meteorological
potency. He had studied no other rock. His
casual notice had been arrested nowhere by similar
signs. Under the influence of his ignorant super-
stition, his cherished illusion, the lonely wilderness,



<pb n="293"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS         293
what wonder that, as he pondered upon the rocks,
strange mysteries seemed revealed to him? He
found significance in these cabalistic scriptures-
nay, he read inspired words I With the ramrod of
his gun he sought to follow the fine tracings of the
letters writ by the finger of the Lord on the stone
tables that Moses flung down from the mountain-
top in his wrath.
With a devout thankfulness Putdee realized that he
owned the land where they lay. It was worth, per-
haps, a few cents an acre; it was utterly untillable,
almost inaccessible, and his gratulation owed its
fervor only to its spiritual values. He was an idle
and shiftless fellow, and had known no glow of ac-
quisition, no other pride of possession. He herded
cattle much of the time in the summer, and he hunted
in the winter-wolves chiefly, their hair being long
and finer at this season, and, the smaller furry gen-
try; for he dealt in peltry. And so, despite the
,  vastness of the mountain wilds, he often came and
knelt beside the rocks with his rifle in his hand,
and sought anew to decipher the mystic legends.
His face, bending over the tables of the Law with
:the earnest research of a student, with the chastened
giubduement of devotion, with all the calm sentiments
of reverie, lacked something of its normal aspect.
When a sudden stir of the leaves or the breaking of
A'twig recalled him to the world, and he would lift
his head, it might hardly seem the same face, so
heavy was the lower jaw, so insistent and coercive
his eye. But if he took off his hat to place therein
his cotton bandana handkerchief or (if he were in
luck and burdened with game) the scalp of a wild-



<pb n="294"/>
294       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS
cat-valuable for the bounty offered by the State-
he showed a broad, massive forehead that added
the complement of expression, and suggested a
doubt if it were ferocity his countenance bespoke or
force. His long black hair hung to his shoulders,
and he wore a tangled black beard; his deep-set
dark blue eyes were kindled with the fires of imag-
ination. He was tall, and of a commanding pres-
ence but for his stoop and his slouch. His garments
seemed a trifle less well ordered than those of his
class, and bore here and there the traces of the
blood of beasts; on his trousers were grass stains
deeply grounded, for he knelt often to get a shot,
and in meditation beside the rocks. He spent little
time otherwise upon his knees, and perhaps it was
some intuition of this fact that roused the wrath of
certain brethren of the camp-meeting when he sud-
denly appeared among them, arrogating to himself
peculiar spiritual experiences, proclaiming that his
mind had been opened to strange lore, repeating
thrilling, quickening words that he declared he had
read on the dead rocks whereon were graven the
commandments of the Lord. The tumultuous tide
of his rude eloquence, his wild imagery, his ecstasy
of faith, rolled over the assembly and awoke it
anew to enthusiasms. Much that he said was ac-
cepted by the more intelligent ministers who led
the meeting as figurative, as the finer fervors of
truth, and they felt the responsive glow of emotion
and quiver of sympathy. He intended it in its sim-
ple, literal significance. And to the more local
members of the congregation the fact was patent.
"Sech a pack o' lies hev seldom been tole in the



<pb n="295"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS       295
hearin' o' Almighty Gawd," said Job Grinnell,-a few
days after the breaking up of camp. He was re-
hearsing the proceedings at the meeting partly
for the joy of hearing himself talk, and partly at
the instance of .his wife, who had been prevented
from attending by the inopportune illness of one of
the children. "Ez I loant my ear ter the words o'
that thar brazen buzzard I eyed him constant. Fur
I looked ter see the jedgmint o' the Lord descend
upon him like S'phira an' An'ias."
" Who 7" asked his wife, pausing in her task of
picking up chips. He had spoken of them so fa-
miliarly that one might imagine they lived close by
in the cove.
"An'ias an' S'phira-them in the Bible ez war
streck by lightnin' fur lyin'," he explained.
"I 'member her," she said. " S'phia, I calls her."
"Waal, A'gusta, S'phira do me jes ez well," he
said, with the momentary sulkiness of one corrected.
"Thar war a man along, though. An' 'pears ter me
thar war powerful leetle jestice in thar takin' off, ef
.Roger Purdee be 'lowed ter stan' up thar in the face
A0'the meetin' an' lie so ez no yearthly critter in
the worl' could b'lieve him-'ceptin' Brother Jacob
'Page, ez'peared plumb out'n his head with religion,
an' got ter shoutin' when this Purdee tuk ter tellin'
the law he read on them rocks-Moses' tables, folks
calls em-up yander in the mounting."
He nodded upward toward the great looming
range above them. His house was on a spur'of
the mountain, overshadowed by it; shielded. It
was to him the Almoner of Fate. One by one it
doled out the days, dawning from its summit; and



<pb n="296"/>
296       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS 
thence, too, came the darkness and the glooms of ;
night. One by one it liberated from the enmesh- 
ments of its tangled wooded heights the constella- ;
tions to gladden the eye and lure the fancy, Its 
largess of silver torrents flung down its slopes made 
fertile the little fields, and bestowed a lilting song 4
on the silence, and took a turn at the mill-wheel, 
and did not disdain the thirst of the humble cattle.
It gave pasturage in summer, and shelter from the
winds of the winter. It was the assertive feature
of his life; he could hardly have imagined existence
without" the mounting."
"Tole what he read on them rocks-yes, sir, ez
glib ez swallerin' a persimmon. 'Twarn't the reg'lar
ten comman'ments-some cur'ous new texts-jes
a-rollin' 'em out ez sanctified ez ef he hed been
called ter preach the gospel I An' thar war Brother
Eden Bates a-answerin' 'Amen 'ter every one. An'
Brother Jacob Page: 'Glory, brother! Ye hev re-
ceived the outpourin' of.the Sperit I Shake hands,
brother!' An' sech ez that. Ter hev hearn the
commotion they raised about that thar derned lyin'
sinner ye'd hev 'lowed the meetin' war held ter
glorify him stiddier the Lord."
Job Grinnell himself was a most notorious Chris-
tian. Renown, however, with him could never be i
a superfluity, or even a sufficiency, and he grudged.
the fame that these strange spiritual utterances 
were acquiring. He had long enjoyed the distino .i
tion of being considered a miraculous convert; hi  ,
rescue from the wily enticements of Satan had been i
celebrated with much shaking and clapping of
hands, and cries of "Glory," and muscular ecstasy.



<pb n="297"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS       297
His religious experiences thenceforth, his vacilla-
tions of hope and despair, had been often elabo-
rated amongst the brethren. But his was a con-
ventional soul; its expression was in the formulae
and platitudes of the camp-meeting. They sank
into oblivion in the excitement attendant upon
Purdee's wild utterances from the mystic script of
the rocks.
As Grinnell talked, he often padsed in his work to
imitate the gesticulatory enthusiasms of the saints at
the camp-meeting. He was a thickset fellow of only
medium height, and was called, somewhat invidious-
ly, "a chunky man." His face was broad, prosaic,
good-natured, incapable of any fine gradations of
expression. It indicated an elementary rage or a
sluggish placidity. He had a ragged beard of a red-
dish hue, and hair a shade lighter. He wore blue
jeans trousers and an unbleached cotton shirt, and
the whole system depended on one suspender. He
was engaged in skimming a great kettle of boiling
sorghum with a perforated gourd, which caught the
scum and strained the liquor. The process was
primitive; instead of the usual sorghum boiler and
furnace, the kettle was propped upon stones laid
together so as to concentrate the heat of the fire.
His wife was continually feeding the flames with
chips which she brought in her apron from the
pood-pile. Her countenance was half hidden in
Fr faded pink sun-bonnet, which, however, did not
obscure an expression responsive to that on the
man's face. She did not grudge Purdee the salva-
tion he had found; she only grudged him the pres-
tige he had derived from its unique method.



<pb n="298"/>
298       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS
"Why can't the critter elude Satan with less
n'ise ?" she asked, acrimoniously.
"Edzackly," her husband chimed in.
Now and then both turned a supervisory glance
at the sorghum mill down the slope at some little
distance, and close to the river. It had been a
long day for the old white mare, still trudging
round and round the mill'; perhaps a long day as
well for the two half-grown boys, one of whom fed
the machine, thrusting into it a stalk at a time,
while the other brought in his arms fresh supplies
from the great pile of sorghum cane hard by.
All the door-yard of the little log cabin was
bedaubed with the scum of the sorghum which Job
Grinnell flung from his perforated gourd upon the
ground. The idle dogs-and there were many-
would find, when at last disposed to move, a clog
upon their nimble feet. They often sat down with
a wrinkling of brows and'a puzzled expression of
muzzle to investigate their gelatinous paws with
their tongues, not without certain indications of
pleasure, for the sorghum was very sweet; some of
them, that had acquired the taste for it from imi-
tating the children, openly begged.
One, a gaunt hound, hardly seemed so idle; he
had a purpose in life, if it might not be called a
profession. He lay at length, his'paws stretched
out before him, his head upon them; his big brown
eyes were closed only at intervals; ever and again
they opened watchfully at the movement of a
small child, ten months old, perhaps, dressed in
pink calico, who sat in the shadow formed by the
protruding clay and stick chimney, and played by



<pb n="299"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS        299
bouncing up and down and waving her fat hands,
which seemed a perpetual joy and delight of posses-
sion to her. Take her altogether, she was a person
of prepossessing appearance, despite her frank dis-
play of toothless gums, and around her wide mouth
the unseemly traces of sorghum. She had the
plumpest graces of dimples in every direction, big
blue eyes with long lashes, the whitest possible
skin, and an extraordinary pair of pink feet, which
she rubbed together in moments of joy as if she
had mistaken them for her hands. Although she
sputtered a good deal, she had a charming, un-
affected laugh, with the giggle attachment natural
to the young of her sex.
Suddenly there sounded an echo of it, as it were
-a shrill, nervous little whinny; the boys whirled
round to see whence it came. The persistent rasp-
ing noise of the sorghum mill and the bubbling of
the caldron had prevented them from hearing an
approach. There, quite close at hand, peering
through the rails of the fence, was a little girl of
seven or eight years of age.
: "I wanter kem in an' see you-uns's baby !" she
exclaimed, in a high, shrill voice. "I want to pat
it on'the head."
She was a forlorn little specimen, very thin and
sharp-featured. Her homespun dress was short
enough to show how fragile were the long lean legs
that supported her. The curtain of her sun-bonnet,
which was evidently made for a much larger person,
hung down nearly to the hem of her skirt; as she
turned,and glanced anxiously down the road, evi-
dently suspecting a pursuer, she looked like an



<pb n="300"/>
300       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS
erratic sun-bonnet out for a stroll on a pa
borrowed legs. 
She turned again suddenly and applied her 
freckled little face to the crack between the r
She smiled upon the baby, who smiled in respo
and gave a little bounce that might be account
a courtesy. The younger of the boys left the ca
pile and ran up to his brother at the mill, whi
was close to the fence. "Don't ye let her do il
he said, venomously. "That thar gal is one of th
Purdee fambly. I know her. Don't let her in. 
And he ran back to the cane. 
Grinnell had seemed pleased by this homage at,'
the shrine of the family idol; but at the very men- 
tion of the "Purdee fambly" his face hardened, an
angry light sprang into his eyes, and his gesturein
skimming with the perforated gourd the scum from
the boiling sorghum was as energetic as if with the
action he were dashing the "Purdee fambly" from
off the face of the earth. It was an ancient feud; -,
his grandfather and some contemporary Purdee v,
had fallen out about the ownership of certain va--
grant cattle; there had been blows and bloodshed ;, 3
other members of the connection had been dragged !
into the controversy; summary reprisals were fol ;i
lowed by counter-reprisals. Barns were mysteri- 
ously fired, hen-roosts robbed, horses unaccount-?
ably lamed, sheep feloniously sheared by unknown
parties; the feeling widened and deepened, and .
had been handed down to the present generation,
with now and then a fresh provocation, on the part
of one or the other, to renew and continue the rank-
ling old grudges.



<pb n="301"/>
THE RIDDLE OF .THE ROCKS       301
And here stood the hereditary enemy, wanting to
pat their baby on the head.
"Naw, sir, ye won't 1" exclaimed the boy at the
mill, greatly incensed at the boldness of this propo-
sition, glaring at the lean, tender, wistful little face
between the rails of the fence.
But the' baby, who had not sense enough to know
anything about hereditary enemies, bounced and
laughed and gurgled and sputtered with glee, and
waved her hands, and had never looked fatter or
more beguiling.
"I jes wanter pat it wunst," sighed the hereditary
enemy, with a lithe writhing of her thin little anato-
my in the anguish of denial-"jes wunst '
"Naw, sir!" exclaimed the youthful Grinnell, more
insistently than before. He did not continue, for
suddenly there came running down the road a boy
of his own size, out of breath, and red and angry-
the pursuer, evidently, that the hereditary enemy
had feared, for she crouched up against the fence
with a whimper.
"Ker along away from thar, ye miser'ble little
stack o' bones 1" he cried, seizing his sister by one
hand and giving her a jerk-" a-foolin' round them
Grinnells' fence an' a-hankerin' arter thar old baby !"
He felt that the pride of the Purdee family was
involved in this admission of envy.
"I jes wanter pat it on the head wunst," she
sighed.
" Waal, ye won't now," said the Grinnell boys in
chorus.,
The Purdee grasp was gentler on the little girl's
arm. This was due not to fraternal feeling so much



<pb n="302"/>
302       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS 
as to loyalty to the clan ; "stack o' bones" th
she was, they were Purdee bones.
"Kem along," Ab Purdee exhorted her. "I
baby ain't nuthin' extry, nohow "-he glanced s
ingly at the infantile Grinnell. "The mountings a[
fairly a-roamin' with 'em."
"We-uns 'ain't got none at our house," whinedi
the sun-bonnet, droopingly, moving off slowly on its
legs, which, indeed, seemed borrowed, so unsteady
and loath to go they were.
The Grinnell boys laughed aloud, jeeringly and /
ostentatiously, and the Purdee blood was moved to
retort: "We-uns don't want none sech ez that. Nary
tooth in her head !"
And indeed the widely stretched babbling lips
displayed a vast vacuity of gum.
Job Grinnell, who had listened with an attentive
ear to the talk of the children, had nevertheless
continued his constant skimming of the scum. Now
he rose from his bent posture, tossed the scum upon
the ground, and with the perforated gourd in his
hand turned and looked at his wife. Augusta had 
dropped her apron and chips, and stood with foldecdl
arms across her breast, her face wearing an express
sion of exasperated expectancy. 
The Grinnell boys were humbled and abashed. \
The wicked scion of the Purdee house, joying to'L
note how true his shaft had sped, was again fitting
his bow. 
"An' ez bald-headed ez the mounting."
The baby had a big precedent, but although no
peculiar shame attaches to the bare pinnacle of the
summit, she-despite the difference in size and age



<pb n="303"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS        303
-was expected to show up more fully furnished, and
in keeping with the rule of humanity and the gentil-
ities of life.
No teeth, no hair, no sign of any: the fact that
she was so backward was a sore point with all the
family. Job Grinnell suddenly dropped the perfo-
rated gourd, and started down toward the fence.
The acrimony of the old feud was as a trait bred in
the bone. Such hatred as was inherent in him was
evoked by his religious jealousies, and the pious
sense that he was following the traditions of his
elders and upholding the family honor blended in
gentlest satisfaction with his personal animosity
toward Roger Purdee as he noticed the boy edging
off from the fence to a safe distance. He eyed him
derisively for a moment.
"Kin ye kerry a message straight?"  The boy
looked up with an expression of sullen acquiescence,
but said nothing. "Ax yer dad-an' ye kin tell him
the word kems from me-whether he hev read sech
ez this on the lawgiver's stone tables yander in the
mounting: 'An' ye shall claim sech ez be yourn, an'
yer neighbor's belongings shall ye in no wise boast-
fully medjure fur yourn, nor look upon it fur covet-
iousness, nor yit git up a big name in the kentry fur
ownin' sech ez be another's.'"
He laughed silently-a twinkling, wrinkling dem-
onstration over all his broad face-a laugh that was
younger than the man, and would have befitted a
square-faced boy.
The youthful Purdee, expectant of a cuffing, stood
his ground more doubtfully still under the insidious
thrusts of this strange weapon, sarcasm. He knew



<pb n="304"/>
304       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS       '
that they were intended to hurt; he was wou
primarily in the intention, but the exact lesion:
could not locate. He could meet a threat witl
bold face, and return a blow with the best. But
was mortified in this failure of understanding, 
perplexity cowed him as contention could not. 
hung his head with its sullen questioning eyes, a
he found great solace in a jagged bit of cloth on tl
torn bosom of his shirt, which he could turn in hi
embarrassed fingers.
"Whar be yer dad ?" Grinnell asked. 
"Up yander in the mounting," replied the sub..i
dued Purdee.                                 |
"A-readin' of mighty s'prisin' matter writ on the
rocks o' the yearth !" exclaimed Grinnell, with a
laugh. "Waal, jes keep that sayin' o' mine in yer
head, an' tell him when he kerns home. An' look
a-hyar, ef enny mo' o' his stray shoats kem about
hyar, I'll snip thar ears an' gin 'em my mark."
The youth of the Purdee clan meditated on this
for a moment. He could not remember that they
had missed any shoats. Then the full meaning of i
the phrase dawned upon him-it was he and the ,
wiry little sister thus demeaned with a porcine ap-
pellation, and whose ears were threatened. He l
looked up at the fence, the little low house, the 
barn close by, the sorghum mill, the drying leaves 
of tobacco on the scaffold, the saltatory baby; his
eyes filled with helpless tears, that could not con- 
ceal the burning hatred he was born to bear them
all. He was hot and cold by turns; he stood star-
ing, silent and defiant, motionless, sullen. He
heard the melodic measure of the river, with its
I



<pb n="305"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS       305
crystalline, keen vibrations against the rocks; the
munching teeth of the old mare-allowed to come
to a stand-still that the noise of the sorghum mill
might not impinge upon the privileges of the quar-
rel; and the high, ecstatic whinny of the little sister
.waiting on the opposite bank of the river, having
crossed the foot-bridge. There the Grinnell baby
had chanced to spy her, and had bounced and
grinned and sputtered affably. It was she who
had made all the trouble yearning after the Grin-
nell baby.
He would not stay, however, to be ignominious-
ly beaten, for Grinnell had turned away, and was
looking about the ground as if in search of a thick
stick. He accounted himself no craven, thus nu-
merically at a disadvantage, to turn shortly about,
take his way down the rocky slope, cross the foot-
bridge, jerk the little girl by one hand and lead her
whimpering off, while the round-eyed Grinnell baby
stared gravely after her with inconceivable emo-
tions. These presently resulted in rendering her
cross; she whined a little and rubbed her eyes, and,
smarting from her own ill-treatment of them, gave
a sharp yelp of dismay. The old dog arose and
went and sat close by her, eying her solemnly and
wagging his tail, as if begging her to observe how
content he was.  His dignity was somewhat im-
paired by sudden abrupt snaps at flies, which
caused her to wink, stare, and be silent in astonish-
ment.
" Waal, Job Grinnell," exclaimed Augusta, as her
husband came back and took the perforated gourd
from her hand--for she had been skimming the
20



<pb n="306"/>
306       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS 
sorghum in his absence--"ye air the longest.
tongued man, ter be so short-legged, I ever see I" .
He looked a trifle discomfited. He had deported>4
himself with unwonted decision, conscious that Aut
gusta was looking on, and in truth somewhat supri
ported by the expectation of her approval.  :
"What ails ye ter say words ye can't abide by-
ye 'low ye 'pear so graceful on the back track ?" she
asked.
He bent over the sorghum, silently skimming.
His composure was somewhat ruffled, and in throw-
ing away the scum his gesture was of negligent and
discursive aim; the boiling fluid bespattered the foot
of one of the omnipresent dogs, whose shrieks rent
the sky and whose activity on three legs amazed
the earth. He ran yelping to Mrs. Grinnell, nearly
overturning her in his turbulent demand for sym-
pathy; then scampered across to the boys, who
readily enough stopped their work to examine the
wounded member and condole with its wheezing
proprietor.
"What ye mean, A'gusta?" Grinnell said at
length. " Kase I 'lowed I'd cut thar ears? I ain't
foolin'.  Kem meddlin' about remarkin' on our
chill'n agin, I'll show 'em."
Augusta looked at him in exasperation. "I ain't
keerin' ef all the Purdees war deef," she remarked,
inhumanly, " but what war them words ye sent fur a
message ter Purdee?-'bout pridin' on what ain't
theirn."
Grinnell in his turn looked at her-but dubiously,
However much a man is under the domination of his
wife, he is seldom wholly frank. It is in this wise



<pb n="307"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS        307
that his individuality is preserved to him. "I war
jes wantin' ter know ef them words war on the
rocks," he said with a disingenuousness worthy of a
higher culture.
She received this with distrust. "I kin tell ye
now-they ain't," she said, discriminatingly; "Pur-
dee's words don't sound like them."
"Waal, now, what's the differ?" he demanded,
with an indignation natural enough to aspiring hu-
manity detecting a slur upon one's literary style.
"Waal-" she paused as she knelt down to feed
the fire, holding the fragrant chips in her hand; the
flame flickered out and lighted up her reflective eyes
while she endeavored to express the distinction she
felt: "Purdee's words don't sound ter me like the
words of a man sech ez men be."
Grinnell wrinkled his brows, trying to follow her
here.
"They sound ter me like the words spoke in a
dream-the pernouncings of a vision." Mrs. Grin-
nell fancied that she too had a gift of Biblical phrase-
ology. "They sound ter me like things I hearn
whenst I war a-hungered arter righteousness an'
seekin' religion, an' bided alone in the wilderness
a-waitin' o' the Sperit."
"'Gusta I" suddenly exclaimed her husband, with
the cadence of amazed conviction, "ye b'lieve the lie
o' that critter, an' that he reads the words o' the
Lord on the rock!"
She looked up a little startled. She had been un-
conscious of the circuitous approaches of credence,
and shared his astonishment in the conclusion.
"Waal, sir !" he said, more hurt and cast down



<pb n="308"/>
308.      THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS
than one would have deemed possible. "I'm *if
ter hev it so. I'm jes nuthin' but a'sinner an' a f
ripenin' fur damnation, an' he air a saint o'
yearth !" 
Now such sayings as this were frequent upon 
Grinnell's tongue. He did not believe them; thl
utility was in their challenge to contradiction. Th
they often promoted an increased cordiality of t
domestic relations and an accession of self-esteem..#
Augusta, however, was tired; the boiling sorghum
and the September sun were debilitating in thei
effects. There was something in the scene with the
youthful Purdee that grated'upon her half-develope
sensibilities. The baby was whimpering outright,;
and the cow was lowing at the bars. She gave her'.
irritation the luxury of withholding the salve to Grin-
nell's wounded vanity. She said nothing. The
tribute to Purdee went for what it was worth, and he 
was forced to swallow the humble-pie he had taken
into his mouth, albeit it stuck in his throat. 
A shadow seemed to have fallen into the moral'
atmosphere as the gentle dusk came early on. One
had a sense as if bereft, remembering that so short'
a time ago at this hour the sun was still high, and";
that the full-pulsed summer day throbbed to a cli-'
max of color and bloom and redundant life. Now,?
the scent of harvests was on the air; in the stubble'
of the sorghum patch she saw a quail's brood more'
than half-grown, now afoot, and again taking to?
wing with a loud whirring sound. The perfume d^
ripening muscadines came from the bank of the ."
river. The papaws hung globular among the leaves
of the bushes, and the persimmons were reddening.



<pb n="309"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS        309
The vermilion sun was low in the sky above the
purpling mountains; the stream had changed from a
crystalline brown to red, to gold, and now it was be-
ginning to be purple and silver. And this reminded
her that the full-moon was up, and she turned to look
at it-so pearly and. luminous above the jagged
ridge-pole of the dark little house on the rise. The
sky about it was blue, refinihg into an exquisitely
delicate and ethereal neutrality near the horizon.
The baby had fallen asleep, with its bald head on the
old dog's shoulder.
After the supper was over, the sorghum fire still
burned beneath the great kettle, for the syrup was
not yet made, and sorghum-boiling is an industry
that cannot be intermitted. The fire in the midst of
the gentle shadow and sheen of the night had a cer-
tain profane, discordant effect. Pete's ill-defined
figure slouching over it while he skimmed the syrup
was grimly suggestive of the distillations of strange
elixirs and unhallowed liquors, and his simple face,
lighted by a sudden darting red flame, had unrecog-
nizable significance and was of sinister intent. For
Pete was detailed to attend to the boiling; the grind-
ing was done, and the old white mare stood still in
the midst of the sorghum stubble and the moon-
light, as motionless and white as if she were carved
in marble. Job Grinnell sat and smoked on the
porch.
Presently he got up suddenly, knocked the ashes
out of his pipe, and looked at it carefully before he
stuck it into his pocket. He went, without a word,
down the rocky slope, past the old drowsing mare,
and across the foot-bridge. Two or three of the



<pb n="310"/>
310       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS
dogs, watching him as he reappeared on the opposi
bank, affected a mistake in identity. They growle
then barked outright, and at last ran down an
climbed the fence and bounded about it, baying the
vista where he had vanished, until the sleepy ol4
mare turned her head and gazed in mild surprise at:
them.                                      ;
Augusta sat alone on the step of the porch. 
She had various regrets in her mind, incipient v
even before he had quite gone, and now defining '
themselves momently with added poignancy. A :
woman who, in her retirement at home, charges her-
self with the control of a man's conduct abroad, is
never likely to be devoid of speculation upon proba-
ble disasters to ensue upon any abatement of the
activities of her discretion. She was sorry that she
had allowed so trifling a matter to mar the serenity
of the family; her conscience upbraided her that
she had not besought him to avoid the blacksmith's
shop, where certain men of the neighborhood were
wont to congregate and drink deep into the night.
Above all, her mind went back to the enigmatical
message, and she wondered that she could have
been so forgetful as to fail to urge him to forbear
angering Purdee, for this would have a cumulative
effect upon all the rancors of the old quarrels, and
inaugurate perhaps a new series of reprisals.
"I ain't afeard o' no Purdee ez ever stepped,"
she said to herself, defining her position. " But I'm
fur peace. An' ef the Purdees will leave we-uns be,
I ain't a-goin' ter meddle along o' them."
She remembered an old barn-burning, in the days
when she and her husband were,newly married, at



<pb n="311"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS        311
his father's house.  She looked up at the barn
hard by, on a line with the dwelling, with that ten-
derness which one feels for a thing, not because
of its value, but for the sake of possession, for the
kinship with the objects that belong to the home. A
cat was sitting high in a crevice in the logs where
the daubing had. fallen out; the moon glittered in
its great yellow eyes. A frog was leaping along the
open space about the rude step at Augusta's feet.
A clump of mullein leaves, silvered by the light,
spangled by the dew, hid him presently. What an
elusive glistening gauze hung over the valley far be-
low, where the sense of distance was limited by the
sense of sight !--or it was here only that the night,
though so brilliant, must attest the incomparable lu-
cidity of daylight. She could not even distinguish,
amidst those soft sheens of the moon and the dew,
the Lombardy poplar that grew above the door of
old Squire Grove's house down in the cove; in the
daytime it was visible like a tiny finger pointing up-
ward.  How drowsy was the sound of the katydid,
now loudening, now falling, now fainting away!
And the tree-toad shrilled in the dog-wood tree.
The frogs, too, by the river in iterative fugue sent
forth a song as suggestive of the margins as the
scent of the fern, and the mint, and the fragrant
weeds.
A convulsive start 1 She did not know that she
slept until she was again awake. The moon had
travelled many a mile along the highways of the
skies. It hung over the purple mountains, over
the farthest valley. The cicada had grown dumb.
The stars were few and faint. The air was chill.



<pb n="312"/>
312       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS          .
She started to her feet; her garments were heavy'
with dew. The fire beneath the sorghum kettle
had died to a coal, flaring or fading as the fainti
fluctuations of the wind might will. Near it Pete,
slumbered where he too had sat down to rest.:i
And Job-Job had never returned. 
He had found it a lightsome enough scene at
the blacksmith's shop, where it was understood
that the neighboring politicians collogued at times,
or brethren in the church discussed matters of
discipline or more spiritual affairs. In.which of
these interests a certain corpulent jug was most
active it would be difficult perhaps to accurately
judge. The great barn-like doors were flung wide
open, and there was a group of men half within the
shelter and half without; the shoeing-stool, a bro-
ken plough, an empty keg, a log, and a rickety chair
sufficed to seat the company. The moonlight fall-
ing into the door showed the great slouching, dark-
ling figures, the anvil, the fire of the forge (a dim
ashy coal), and the shadowy hood merging indis-
tinguishably into the deep duskiness of the interior.
In contrast, the scene glimpsed through the low
window at the back of the shop had a certain
vivid illuminated effect. A spider web, revealing
its geometric perfection, hung half across one cor-
ner of the rude casement; the moonbeams without
were individualized in fine filar delicacy, like the
ravellings of a silver skein. The boughs of a tree
which grew on a slope close below almost touched
the lintel; the leaves seemed a translucent green;
a bird slept on a twig, its head beneath its wing.



<pb n="313"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS       313
Back of the cabin, which was situated on a limited
terrace, the great altitudes of the mountain rose
into the infinity of the night.
The drawling conversation was beset, as it
were, by faint fleckings of sound, lightly drawn
from a crazy old fiddle under the chin of a gaunt,
yellow-haired young giant, one Ephraim Blinks,
who lolled on a log, and who by these vague har-
monies unconsciously gave to the talk of his com-
rades a certain theatrical effect. '
Grinnell slouched up and sat down among
them, responding with a nod to the unceremonious
"Hy're, Job ?" of the blacksmith, who seemed thus
to do the abbreviated honors of the occasion. The
others did not so formally notice his coming.
The subject of conversation was the same that
had pervaded his own thoughts. He was irritated
to observe how Purdee had usurped public atten-
tion, andyet he himself listened with keenest interest.
"Waal," said the ponderous blacksmith, "I kin
onderstan' mighty well ez Moses would hev been
mighty mad ter see them folks a-worshippin' o' a
calf-senseless critters they be I 'Twarn't no use
flingin' down them rocks, though, an' gittin' 'em
bruk. Sandstone ain't like metal; ye can't heat it
an' draw it down an' weld it agin."
His round black head shone in the moonlight,
glistening because of his habit of plunging it, by
way of making his toilet, into the barrel of water
where he tempered his steel. He crossed his
huge folded bare arms over his breast, and leaned
back against the door on two legs of the rickety
chair.



<pb n="314"/>
314       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS   .
"Naw, sir," another chimed in. "He moug
knowed he'd jes hev ter go ter quarryin' agin.
" They air always a-crackin' up them folks in 
Bible ez sech powerful wise men," said ano
whose untrained mind evidently held the germe
advanced thinking. "'Pears ter me ez some of 
conducted tharselves ez foolish ez enny folks I kua
-this hyar very Moses one o' 'em. Throwin' d
them rocks 'minds me o' old man Pinner's tantru
Sher'ff ker ter his house 'bout a jedgmint debt, 
levied on his craps. An' arter he war gone !
man tuk a axe an' gashed bodaciously inter t
loom an' hacked it up. Ez ef that war goin' ter
enny good ! His wife war the mos' outed woman 
ever see. They'ain't got nare nother loom nuthe
an' hain't hearn no advices from the Lord."
The violinist paused in his playing. " They 'lowe
Moses war a meek man too," he said. "He killed i
man with a brick-badge an' buried him in the san
Mighty meek ways "-with a satirical grimace.
The others, divining that this was urged in just
fication and precedent for devious modern way
that were not meek, did not pursue this branch o
the subject.
" S'prised me some," remarked the advanced think
er, " ter hear ez them tables o' stone war up on th
bald o' the mounting thar. I hed drawed the idee 
'twar in some other kentry somewhar-I dunno-
He stopped blankly. He could not formulate b
geographical ignorance. "An' I never knowed1
he resumed, presently, " ez thar war enough gold ih
Tennessee ter make a gold calf; they fund gold
hyar, but 'twar mighty leetle."



<pb n="315"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS        315
"Mebbe 'twar a mighty leetle calf," suggested the
blacksmith.
"Mebbe so," assented the other.
"Mebbe 'twar a silver one," speculated a third;
"plenty o' silver they' low thar air, in the moun-
tings."
The violinist spoke up suddenly. "Git one o'
them Injuns over yander ter Quallatown right sea-
sonable drunk, an' he'll tell ye a power o' places
whar the old folks said thar war silver." He bowed
his chin once more upon the instrument, and again
the slow drawling conversation proceeded to soft
music.
"Ef ye'll b'lieve me," said the advanced thinker,
"I never war so conflusticated in my life ez I war
when he stood up in meetin' an' told 'bout'n the
tables o' the law bein' on the bald ! I 'lowed 'twar
somewhar 'mongst some sort'n people named 'Gyp-
tians."
"Mebbe some o' them Injuns air named 'Gyp-
tians," suggested Spears, the blacksmith.
"Naw, sir," spoke up the fiddler, who had been
to Quallatown, and was the ethnographic authority
of the meeting. "Tennessee Injuns be named Cher'-
kee, an' Chick'saw, an' Creeks."
There was a silence. The moonlight sifted through
the dark little shanty of a shop; the fretting and
foaming of a mountain stream arose from far down
the steep slope, where there was a series of cas-
cades, a fine water-power, utilized by a mill. The
sudden raucous note of a night-hawk jarred upon
the air, and a shadow on silent wings sped past.
The road was dusty in front of the shop, and for a



<pb n="316"/>
316       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS
space there was no shade. Into the full radiance
of the moonlight a rabbit bounded along, rising
erect with a most human look of affright in its great'
shining eyes as it tremulously gazed at the motion-
less figures. It too was motionless for a moment.
The young musician made a lunge at it with his'
bow; it sprang away with a violent start-its elon-i*
gated grotesque shadow bounding kangaroo-like be-
side it-into the soft gloom of the bushes. There
was no other traveller along the road, and the talk,.
was renewed without further interruption. "Waal,
sir, ef'twarn't fur the testimony o' the words he reads
ez air graven on them rocks, I couldn't git my
cornsent ter b'lieve ez Moses ever war in Tennes-
see," said the advanced thinker. "I ain't onder- 
takin' ter say what State he settled in, but I 'lowed
'twarn't hyar. It mus' hev been, though, 'count o'
the scripture on them broken tables."
"I never knowed a meetin' woke ter sech a
pint o' holiness. The saints jes rampaged around 
till it fairly sounded like the cavortin's o' the un-
godly," a retrospective voice chimed in.
"I raised thirty -two hyme chunes," said the
musician, who had a great gift in quiring, and was
the famed possessor of a robust tenor voice. "A A
leetle mo' gloryin' aroun' an' I'd hev kern ter the
eend o' my row, an' hev hed ter begin over agin."
He spoke with acrimony, reviewing the jeopardy
in which his repertoire had been placed.
"Waal," said the blacksmith, passing his hand
over his black head, as sleek and shining as a
beaver's, " I'm a-goin' up ter the bald o' the moun- 
ting some day soon, ef so be I kin make out ter



<pb n="317"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS        317
shoe that mare o' mine"-for the blacksmith's
mount was always barefoot-" I'm afeard ter trest
her unshod on them slippery slopes; I want ter
read some o' them sayin's on the stone tables my-
self. I likes ter git a tex' or the eend o' a hyme
set a-goin' in my head-seems somehow ter teach
itself ter the anvil, an' then it jes says it back an'
forth all day. Yestiddy I never seen its beat-
'Christ-rwar-born-in-Bethlehem.' The anvil
jes rang with that ez ef the actial metal hed the
gift o' prayer an' praise."
"Waal, sir," exclaimed Job Grinnell, who had
been having frequent colloquies aside with the
companionable jug, "ye mought jes ez well save
yer shoes an' let yer mare go barefoot. Thar ain't
nare sign o' a word writ on them rocks."
They all sat staring at him. Even the singing,
long-drawn vibrations of the violin were still.
"By Hokey !" exclaimed the young musician,
"I'll take Purdee's word ez soon ez yourn."
The whiskey which Grinnell had drunk had ren-
dered him more plastic still to jealousy. The day
was not so long past when Purdee's oath would
have been esteemed a poor dependence against
the word of so zealous a brother as he-a pillar in
the church, a shining light of the congregation.
He noted the significant fact that it behooved him
to justify himself; it irked him that this was ex-
acted as a tribute to Purdee's newly acquired
sanctity.
" Purdee's jes a-lyin' an' a-foolin' ye," he declared.
' Ever been up on the bald ?"
They had lived in its shadow all their lives.



<pb n="318"/>
318       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS 
Even by the circuitous mountain ways it was not ,
more than five miles from where they sat. But'
none had chanced to have a call to go, and it was':
to them as a foreign land to be explored.
"Waal, I hev, time an' agin," said Grinnell. "I
dunno who gin them rocks the name of Moses'
tables o' the Law. Moses must hev hed a power-: 
ful block an' tackle ter lift sech tremenjious rocks.
I hev known 'em named sech fur many a year..
But I seen 'em not three weeks ago, an' thar ain't
nare word writ on 'em. Thar's the mounting;
thar's the rocks; ye kin go an' stare-gaze 'em an'
sati'fy yerse'fs."
Whether it were by reason of the cumulative in-
fluences of the continual references to the jug, or of
that sense of reviviscence, that more alert energy,
which the cool Southern nights always impart after
the sultry summer days, the suggestion that they
should go now and solve the mystery, and meet
the dawn upon the summit of the bald, found instant
acceptance, which it might not have secured in the
stolid daylight.
The moon, splendid, a lustrous white encircled
by a great halo of translucent green, swung high
above the duskily purple mountains. Below in the
valleys its progress was followed by an opalescent
gossamer presence that was like the overflowing
fulness, the surplusage, of light rather than mist.
The shadows of the great trees were interlaced with
dazzling silver gleams. The night was almost as i
bright as the day, but cool and dank, full of sylvan
fragrance and restful silence and a romantic liberty.
The blacksmith carried his rifle, for wolves were



<pb n="319"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS        319
often abroad in the wilderness. Two or three oth-
ers were similarly armed; the advanced thinker
had a hunting-knife, Job Grinnell a pistol that went
by the name of "shootin'-iron." The musician
carried no weapon. "I ain't 'feared o' no wolf,"
he said; "I'll play 'em a chune."  He went on in
the vanguard, his tousled yellow hair idealized with
many a shimmer in the moonlight as it hung curling
down on his blue jeans coat, iis cheek laid softly
on the violin, the bow glancing back and forth as
if strung with moonbeams as he played. The men
woke the solemn silences with their loud mirthful
voices; they startled precipitate echoes; they fell
into disputes and wrangled loudly, and would have
turned back if sure of the way home, but Job Grin-
nell led steadily on, and they were fain to follow.
They lagged to look at a spot where some man,
unheeded even by tradition, had dug his heart's
grave in a vain search for precious metal. A deep
excavati6n in the midst of the wilderness told the
story; how long ago it was might be guessed from
the age of a stalwart oak that had sunk roots into
its depths; the shadows were heavy about it; a
sense of despair brooded in the loneliness. And
so up and up the endless ascent; sometimes great
chasms were at one side, stretching further and fur-
ther, and crowding the narrow path-the herder's
trail-against the sheer ascent, till it seemed that
the treacherous mountains were yawning to engulf
them. The air was growing colder, but was exqui-
sitely clear and exhilarating; the great dewy ferns
flung silvery fronds athwart the way; vines in stu-
pendous lengths swung from the tops of gigantic



<pb n="320"/>
320       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS
trees to the roots. Hark I among them birds chirp ;<
a matutinal impulse seems astir in the woods; the.
moon is undimmed; the stars faint only because
of her splendors; but one can feel that the earth
has roused itself to a sense of a new day. And
there, with such feathery flashes of white foam, such
brilliant straight lengths of translucent water, such
a leaping grace of impetuous motion, the currents'
of the mountain stream, like the arrows of Diana,
shoot down the slopes. And now a vague mist is
among the trees, and when it clears away they seem
shrunken, as under a spell, to half their size. They 
grow smaller and smaller still, oak and chestnut
and beech, but dwarfed and gnarled like some old
orchard. And suddenly they cease, and the vast
grassy dome uprises against the sky, in which the
moon is paling into a dull similitude of itself; no
longer wondrous, transcendent, but like some lily
of opaque whiteness, fair and fading. Beneath is
a purple, deeply serious, and sombre earth, to which
mists minister, silent and solemn; myriads of
mountains loom on every hand; the half-seen mys.'
teries of the river, which, charged with the red clay
of its banks, is of a tawny color, gleams as it winds
in and out among the white vapors that reach in
fantastic forms from heaven above to the valley
below. There is a certain relief in the mist-it
veils the infinities of the scene, on which the mindc;
can lay but a tremlling hold.
"Folks tell all sort'n cur'ous tales 'bout'n this
hyar spot," said Job Grinnell, his square face, his
red hair hanging about his ears, and his ragged red '
beard visible in the dull light of the coming day.,
* .



<pb n="321"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS        321
"I hev hearn folks 'low ez a pa'tridge up hyar will
look ez big ez a Dominicky rooster. An' ef ye
listens ye kin hear words from somewhar. An'
sometimes in the cattle-herdin' season the beastises
will kem an' crowd tergether, an' stan' on the bald
irj the moonlight all night."
"I dunno," said the advanced thinker, "ez I be
s'prised enny ef Purdee, ez be huntin' up hyar so
constant, hev got sorter teched in the head, ter
take up sech a cur'ous notion 'bout'n them rocks."
He glanced along the slope at the spot, visible
now, where Moses flung the stone tables and they
broke in twain. And there, standing beside them,
was a man of great height, dressed in blue jeans,
his broad-brimmed hat pushed from his brow, and
his meditative dark eyes fixed upon the rocks; a
deer, all gray and antlered, lay dead at his feet,
and his rifle rested on the ground as he leaned on
the muzzle.
A glance was interchanged between the others.
Their intention, the promptings of curiosity, had
flagged during the long tramp and the gradual
waning of the influence of the jug. The coinci-
dence of meeting Purdee here revived their interest.
Grinnell, remembering the ancient feud, held back,
being unlikely to elicit Purdee's views in the face of
their contradiction. The blacksmith and the young
fiddler took their way down toward him.
He looked up with a start, seeing them at some
little distance. His full, contemplative eyes rested
upon them for a moment almost devoid of ques-
tioning. It was not the face of a man who finds
himself confronted with the discovery of his duplic-
21



<pb n="322"/>
322       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS 
ity and his hypocrisy. There was a strange doub
stirring in the blacksmith's heart.  As he al
proached he looked upon the storied rocks with :
sort of solemn awe, as if they had indeed been
given by the hand of the Lord to his servant, who
broke them here in his wrath. He knew that the:
step of the musician slackened as he followed. .
What holy mysteries were they not rushing in upon ?l
He spoke in a bated voice. 
"Roger," he said, "we'uns hearn ye tell 'bout 
the scriptures graven on these hyar tables ez MosesX
flung down, an' we'uns 'lowed we'uns would kem:
an' read some fur ourselves."
Purdee did not speak nor hesitate; he moved
aside that the blacksmith, might stand where he
had been-as it were at the foot of the page.
But what transcendent glories thronged the
heavens -what august splendors of dawn l Had,
the sun ever before risen like this, with the sky an
emblazonment of red, of gold, of darting gleams of
light; with the mountains most royally purple or
most radiantly blue; with the prismatic mists in
flight; with the slow climax of the dazzling sphere
ascending to dominate it all ?
The blacksmith knelt down to read. The musi- 
cian, his silent violin under his chin, leaned over
his comrade's shoulder. The hunter stood still,.'
expectant. 
Alas ! the corrugations of time; the fissile results
of the frost; the wavering line of ripple-marks of-
seas that shall ebb no more; growth of lichen; ani
army of ants in full march; a passion-flower trail-s
ing from a crevice, its purple blooms lying upon'^



<pb n="323"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS        323
the gray stone near where it is stamped with the
fossil imprint of a sea-weed, faded long ago and
forgotten. Or is it, alas I for the eyes that can see
only this ?
The blacksmith looked up with a twinkling leer;
the violinist recovered his full height, and drew
the bow dashingly across the strings; then let his
arm fall.
"Roger," the blacksmith said, " dad-burned ef I
kin read ennything hyar."
The young musician looked over his brawny shoul-
der in silence.
"Whai d'ye make out enny letters, Roger?" per-
sisted Spears.
Purdee leaned over and eagerly pointed with his
ramrod to a curious corrugation of the surface of
the rock. Again the blacksmith bent down; the
musician craned forward, his yellow hair hanging
about his bronzed face.
"I hev been toler'ble well acquainted with the
alphabit," said Spears, "fur goin' on thirty year an'
better, an' I'll swar ter Heaven thar ain't nare sign
of a letter thar."
Purdee stared at him in wild-eyed amazement
for a moment. Then he flung himself upon his
knees beside the great rock, and guiding his ram-
rod over the surface, he exclaimed, "Hyar, Spears;
right hyar !"
The blacksmith was all incredulous as he lent
himself to a new posture, and leaned forward to
look with the languid indulgence of one who will
not again entertain doubt.
"Nare A, nor B, nor C, nor none o' the fambly,"



<pb n="324"/>
324       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS 
he declared. "These hyar rocks ain't no Mo
tables sure enough; Moses never war in Tenness
They be jes like enny other rock, an' thar ain'
word o' writin' on 'em." 
He looked up with a curious questioning at Pu
dee's face-a strange face for a man detected in.
falsehood, a trick. The deep-set eyes were wide i
if straining for perception denied them. Despi
the chill, rare air, great drops had started on 
brow, and were falling upon his beard, and upon h
hands. These strong hands were quivering; the
hovered above the signs on the rocks. The mys
letters, the inspired words, where were they ? Gro
as he might, he could not find them. Alas I doul
and denial had climbed the mountain-the awful'
limitations of the more finite human creature-and'
his inspiration and .the finer enthusiasms of the
truth were dead.
Dead with a throe that was almost like a literal
death. This-on this he had lived; the ether o
ecstasy was the breath of his life. He clutched 
the stained red handkerchief knotted about h
throat as if he were suffocating; he tore it open a
he swayed backward on his knees. He did no
hear-or he did not heed-the laugh among th
little crowd on the bald-satirical, rallying, zestfu
He was deaf to the strains of the violin, jeeringl
and jerkinglyplaying a foolish tune. It was gro
ing fainter, for they had all turned about to bet
themselves once more to the world below. 
could have seen, had he cared to see, their beard
grinning faces peering through the stunted tr
as descending they came near the spot where hie
*"1' ·



<pb n="325"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS       325
had lavished the spiritual graces of his feeling, his
enthusiasm, his devotion, his earnest reaching for
something higher, for something holy, which had
refreshed his famished soul; had given to its dumb-
ness words; had erased the values of the years, of
the nations; had made him friends with Moses on
the "bald "; had revealed to him the finger of the
Lord on the stone.
He took no heed of his gestures, of which, in-
deed, he was unconscious. They were fine dramat-
ically, and of great power, as he alternately rose to
his full height, beating his breast in despair, and
again sank upon his knees, with a pondering brow
and a searching eye, and a hovering, trembling
hand, striving to find the clew he had lost. They
might have impressed a more appreciative audi-
ence, but not one more entertained than the cluster
of men who looked and paused and leered in
amusement at one another, and thrust out satirical
tongues.  Long after they had disappeared, the
strains of the violin could be heard, filling the
solemn, stricken, strangely stunted woods with a
grotesquely merry presence, hilarious and jeering.
Purdee found it possible to survive the destruc-
tion of illusions. Most of us do. It wrought in
him, however, the saturnine changes natural upon
the relinquishment of a dear and dead fantasy.
This ethereal entity is a more essential component
of happiness than one might imagine from the ex-
treme tenuity of the conditions of its existence.
Purdee's fantasy may have been a poor thing, but,
although he could calmly enough close its eyes,
g*



<pb n="326"/>
326       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS
and straighten its limbs, and bury it decently 
out the offended view of fact, he felt that he sho
mourn it in his heart as long as he should 
And he was bereaved.
There is a certain stage in every sorrow when.
rejects sympathy. Purdee, always taciturn, grav
uncommunicative, was invested with an auste
aloofness, and was hardly to be approached as
sat, silent and absent, brooding over the fire at hi
own home. When roused by some circumstan
of the domestic routine, and it became appar
that his mood was not sullenness or anger, b
simple and complete introversion, it added a d
nity and suggested a remoteness that were yet les
reassuring. His son, who stood in awe of him--
not because of paternal severity, but because noJ
boy could refrain from a worshipping respect for"
so miraculous a shot, a woodsman so subtlyi
equipped with all elusive. sylvan instincts and
knowledge--forbore to break upon his medi
tions by the delivery of Grinnell's message. Nl
ertheless the consciousness of withholding 
weighed heavily upon him. He only pretermitt/
it for a time, until a more receptive state of min
should warrant it. Day by day, however, he lookei
with eagerness when he came into the cabin in t
evening to ascertain if his father were still seat
in the chimney-corner silently smoking his pi
Purdee had seldom remained at home so long at
time, and the boy had a daily fear that the gun 
the primitive rack of deer antlers would be 
ing, and word left in the family that he had tal//l
the trail up the mountain, and would return "'cdi
h,1



<pb n="327"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS        327
in' ter luck with the varmints." And thus Job
Grinnell's enigmatical message, that had the ring
of defiance, might remain indefinitely postponed.
Abner had not realized how long a time it had
been delayed, until one evening at the wood-pile, in
tossing off a great stick to hew into lengths for the
chimney-place, he noticed that thin ice had formed
in the moss and the dank cool shadows of the inter-
stices. "I tell ye now, winter air a-comin'," he ob-
served. He stood leaning on'his axe-handle and
looking down upon the scene so far below; for Pur-
dee's house was perched half-way up on the moun-
tain- side, and he could see over the world how it
fared as the sun went down. Far away upon the
levels of the valley of East Tennessee a golden haze
glittered resplendent, lying close upon an irradi-
ated earth, and ever brightening toward the hori-
zon, and it seemed as if the sun in sinking might
hope to fall in fairer spheres than the skies he had
left, for they were of a dun-color and an opaque
consistency. Only one horizontal rift gave glimpses
of a dazzling ochreous tint of indescribable brill-
iancy, from the focus of which the divergent light
was shed upon the western limits of the land.
Chilhowee, near at hand, was dark enough-a pur-
plish garnet hue; but the scarlet of the sour-wood
gleamed in the cove; the hickory still flared gal-
lantly yellow; the receding ranges to the north
and south were blue and more faintly azure. The
little log cabin stood with small fields about it, for
Purdee barely subsisted on the fruits of the soil,
and did not seek to profit. It had only one room,
with a loft above; the barn was a makeshift of



<pb n="328"/>
328       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS         '
poles, badly chinked, and showing through 
crevices what scanty store there was of corn a
pumpkins. A black-and-white work-ox, that hi
evidently no deficiency of ribs, stood outside of i
fence and gazed, a forlorn Tantalus, at these un
tainable dainties; now and then a muttered lo
escaped his lips. Nobody noticed him or sym
thized with him, except perhaps the little girl, wl
had come out in her sun-bonnet to help her broth
bring in the fuel. He gruffly accepted her com
pany, a little ashamed of her because she was a girl;
since, however, there was no other boy by to laughi
he permitted her the delusion that she was of as-
sistance.
As he paused to rest he reiterated, "Winter air' 
a-comin', I tell ye."
"D'ye reckon, Ab," she asked, in her high, thin
little voice, her hands full of chips and the basket
at her feet, "ez Grinnell's baby knows Chris'mus
air a-comin' ?"
He glowered at her as he leaned on the axe. "I
reckon Grinnell's old baby dunno B from Bull-foot,"
he declared, gruffly.
The recollection of the message came over him.
He had a pang of regret, remembering all the ol
grudges against the Grinnells. They were re
enforced by this irrepressible yearning after the
baby, this admission that they had aught whic
was not essentially despicable. Nevertheless, 
suddenly saw a reason for the Grinnell baby's 
istence; he loaded up both arms with the sticks'
wood, and, followed by the peripatetic sun-ben
conscientiously weighed down with one billet,'



<pb n="329"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS       329
strode into the house, and let his burden fall with
a mighty clatter in the corner of the chimney.
The sun-bonnet staggered up and threw her stick
on the top of the pile of wood.
Purdee, sitting silently smoking, glanced up at
the noise. Abner took advantage of the momenta-
ry notice to claim, too, the attention of his mother.
"I wish ye'd make Eunice quit talkin' 'bout the
Grinnells' old baby, like she war actially demented
-uglies' bald-headed, slab-sided, slobbery old baby
I ever see-nare tooth in its head! I do despise
them Grinnells."
As he anticipated, his father spoke suddenly:
"Ye jes keep away from thar," he said, sternly.
"I trest them folks no furder 'n a rattlesnake."
"I ain't consortin' along o' 'em," declared the
boy. "But I actially hed ter take Eunice by the
scalp o' her head an' lug her off one day when she
hung on thar fence a-stare-gazin' Grinnell's baby
like 'twar fitten ter eat."
The child's mother, a cadaverous, pale woman,
was listlessly stringing the warping-bars with hanks
of variegated yarn. The grandmother, who con-
served a much more active and youthful interest in
life, took down a brown gourd used as a scrap-bas-
ket that was on a protruding lath of the clay-and-
stick chimney, and hunted among the scraps of
homespun and bits of yarn stowed within it. The
room was much like the gourd in its aged brown
tint; its indigenous aspect, as if it had not been
made with hands, but was some spontaneous pro-
duction of the soil; with its bits of bright color-
the peppers hanging from the rafters, the rainbow-



<pb n="330"/>
330       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS        .''
hued yarn festooning the warping-bars, the r
coals of the fire, the blue and yellow ware rang
on the shelf, the brown puncheon floor and w
and ceiling and chimney-it might have se
the interior of a similar gourd of gigantic prop
tions. She dressed a twig from the pile of wo
in a gay scrap of cloth, casting glances the while 
the little girl, and handed it to her.
"I hain't never seen ez good a baby ez this," ski
said, with the convincing coercive mendacity of
grandmother.
The little girl accepted it humbly; it was a goc
baby doubtless of its sort, but it was not alive
which could not be denied of the Grinnell babyj
Grinnell though it was.
"An' Job Grinnell he kem down ter the fence,
an' 'lowed he'd slit our ears, an' named us shoats,"
continued her brother. Purdee lifted his head.
"An' sent a word ter dad," said the boy, tremu-
lously.
"What word did he send ter-me 7" cried P
dee.
The boy quailed to tell him. " He tole me 
ax ye ef ye ever read sech ez this on Moses' tab
in the mountings-' An' ye shell claim sech ez
yer own, an' yer neighbors' belongings shell ye
no wise boastfully medjure fur yourn, nor look u
it fur covetiousness, nor yit git a big name up
the kentry fur ownin' sech ez be another's,' "falte
the sturdy Abner.
The next moment he felt an infinite relief. S
suddenly recognized the fact that he had be
chiefly restrained from repeating the words by j



<pb n="331"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS        331
unrealized terror lest they prove true-lest some-
thing his father claimed was not his, indeed.
But the expression of anger on Purdee's face
was merged first in blank astonishment, then in
perplexed cogitation, then in renewed and over-
powering amazement.
The wife turned from the warping-bars with a
vague stare of surprise, one hand poised uncer-
tainly upon a peg of the frame, the other holding
a hank of "spun truck." The grandmother looked
over her spectacles with eyes sharp enough to
seem subsidized to see through the mystery.
" In the name o' reason and religion, Roger Pur-
dee," she adjured him, "what air that thar per-
verted Philistine talkin' 'bout ?"
"It air more'n I kin jedge of," said Purdee, still
vainly cogitating.
He sat for a time silent, his dark eyes bent on
the fire, his broad, high forehead covered by his
hat pulled down over it, his long, tangled, dark
locks hanging on his collar.
Suddenly he rose, took down his gun, and started
toward the door.
"Roger," cried his wife, shrilly, "I'd leave the
critter be. Lord knows thar's been enough blood
spilt an' good shelter burned along o' them Purdees'
an' Grinnells' quar'ls in times gone. Laws-a-massy !"
-she wrung her hands, all hampered though they
were in the "spun truck "-" I'd ruther be a sheep
'thout a soul, an' live in peace."
"A sca'ce ch'ice," commented her mother.
"Sheep's got ter be butchered. I'd ruther be the
butcher, myself-healthier."



<pb n="332"/>
332       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS
Purdee was gone. He had glanced absently
his wife as if he hardly heard. He waited till 
paused; then, without answer, he stepped hast
out of the door and walked away.
The cronies at the blacksmith's shop latter
gathered within the great flaring door, for th
frost lay on the dead leaves without, the sta
scintillated with chill suggestions, and the wi
was abroad on nights like these. On shrill pip
it played; so weird, so wild, so prophetic were iM
tones that it found only a shrinking in the heart
him whose ear it constrained to listen. The soun
of the torrent far below was accelerated to a
agitated, tumultuous plaint, all unknown when its'
pulses were bated by summer languors. The moon
was in the turmoil of the clouds, which, routed in
some wild combat with the winds, were streaming
westward.
And although the rigors of the winter were
abeyance, and the late purple aster called t]
Christmas-flower bloomed in the sheltered gr
at the door, the forge fire, flaring or dully glowi`
overhung with its dusky hood, was a friendly thi
to see, and in its vague illumination the rude i
terior of the shanty-the walls, the implements 
the trade, the bearded faces grouped about, 
shadowy figures seated on whatever might se
a block of wood, the shoeing- stool, a plough,
perched on the anvil--became visible to RO
Purdee from far down the road as he approac
Even the head of a horse could be seen thrust
at the window, while the brute, hitched outside,.
I 



<pb n="333"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS        333
guiled the dreary waiting by watching with a lumi-
nous, intelligent eye the gossips within, as if he
understood the drawling colloquy. They were suf-
fering some dearth of timely topics, supplying the
deficiency with reminiscences more or less stale,
and had expected no such sensation as they experi-
enced when a long shadow fell athwart the doorway,
-the broad aperture glimmering a silvery gray con-
trasted with the brown duskiness of the interior
and the purple darkness of the distance; the forge
fire showed Purdee's tall figure leaning on the door-
frame, and lighted up his serious face beneath his
great broad-brimmed hat, his intent, earnest eyes,
his tangled black beard and locks. He gave no
greeting, and silence fell upon them as his search-
ing gaze scanned them one by one.
"Whar's Job Grinnell ?" he demanded, abruptly.
There was a shuffling of feet, as if those mem-
bers most experienced relief from the constraint
that silence had imposed upon the party. A vi-
bration from the violin-a sigh as if the instru-
ment had been suddenly moved rather than a touch
upon the strings-intimated that the young musi-
cian was astir. But it was Spears, the blacksmith,
who spoke.
"Kem in, Roger," he called out, cordially, as he
rose, his massive figure and his sleek head showing
in the dull red light on the other side of the an-
vil, his bare arms folded across his chest. "Naw,
Job ain't hyar; hain't been hyar for a right smart
while."
There was a suggestion of disappointment in the
attitude of the motionless figure at the door. The



<pb n="334"/>
334       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS          \
deeply earnest, pondering face, visible albeit 
red light from the forge-fire was so dull, was keenl]
watched. For the inquiry was fraught with pec
iar meaning to those cognizant of the long an
bitter feud.
"I ax," said Purdee, presently, "kase Grinnel
sent me a mighty cur'ous word the t'other day.'
He lifted his head. "Hev enny o' you-uns hearn
him 'low lately ez I claim ennything ez ain'tc
mine ?" 
There was silence for a moment. Then they
forge was suddenly throbbing with the zigzagging; 
of the bow of the violin jauntily dandering along;
the strings. His keen sensibility apprehended the
sudden jocosity as a jeer, but before he could say
aught the blacksmith had undertaken to reply.
"Waal, Purdee, ef ye hedn't axed me, I warn't
layin' off ter say nuthin 'bout'n it. 'Tain't no con-
sarn o' mine ez I knows on. But sence ye hev
axed me, I hold my jaw fur the fear o' no man.
The words ain't writ ez I be feared ter pernounce.!:
An' ez all the kentry hev hearn 'bout'n it 'ceptin':
you-uns, I dunno ez I hev enny call ter hold my:'
jaw. The Lord 'ain't set no seal on my lips ez 3i
knows on."
"Naw, sir!" said Purdee, his great eyes gloom-
ing through the dusk and flashing with impatienc
"He 'ain't set no seal on yer lips, ter jedge by th
way ye wallop yer tongue about inside o' 'em wit
fool words. Whyn't ye bite off what ye air tryi
ter chaw ?"                               | 
"Waal, then," said the admonished orator, blun
ly, "Grinnell 'lows ye don't own that thar la.i



<pb n="335"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS        335
around them rocks on the bald, no'more'n ye read
enny writin' on 'em."
"Not them rocks 1" cried Purdee, standing sud-
denly erect-" the tables o' the Law, writ with the
finger o' the Lord-an' Moses flung 'em down thar
an' bruk 'em. All the kentry knows they air Moses'
tables. An' the groun' whar they lie air mine."
"'Tain't, Grinnell say 'tain't."
"Naw, sir," chimed in the'young musician, his
violin silent. "Job Grinnell declars he owns it
hisself, an' ef he war willin' ter stan' the expense
he'd set up his rights, but the lan' ain't wuth it.
He 'lows his line runs spang over them rocks, an' a
heap furder."
Purdee was silent; one or two of the gossips
laughed jeeringly; he had been proved a liar once.
It was well that he did not deny; he was put to
open shame among them.
"An' Grinnell say," continued Blinks, "ez ye hev
gone an' tole big tales 'mongst the brethren fur
ownin' sech ez ain't yourn, an' readin' of s'prisin'
sayin's on the rocks."
He bent his head to a series of laughing har-
monics, and when he raised it, hearing no retort,
the silvery gray square of the door was empty.
He saw the moon glimmer on the clumps of grass
outside where the Christmas-flower bloomed.
The group sat staring in amaze; the blacksmith
strode to the door and looked out, himself a massive,
dark silhouette upon the shimmering neutrality of
the background. There was no figure in sight; no
faint foot-fall was audible, no rustle of the sere
leaves; only the voice of the mountain torrent, far



<pb n="336"/>
336 .     THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS 
below, challenged the stillness with its in '
cry.
He looked back for a moment, with a 
strange doubt if he had seen aught, heard al
in 'the scene just past. "Hain't Purdee,!
hyar?" he asked, passing his hand across
eyes. The sense of having dreamed was
strong upon him that he stretched his arms
yawned.
The gleaming teeth of the grouped shadows 
monstrated the merriment evoked by the qde
The chuckle was arrested midway.
"Ye 'pear ter 'low ez suthin' hev happened t
Purdee, an' that thar war his harnt," suggeste
one.
The bold young musician laid down his violin
suddenly. The instrument struck upon a keg of
nails, and gave out an abrupt, discordant jangle,
startling to the nerves. "Shet up, ye durned
squeech-owl !" he exclaimed, irritably. Then, low-
ering his voice, he asked: "Didn't they 'low down
yander in the Cove ez Widder Peters, the day her
husband war killed by the landslide up in the moun-
ting, heard a hoe a-scrapin' mightily on the gravel in:
the gyarden-spot, an' went ter the door, an' seen him
thar a-workin', an' axed him when he kem home ?
An' he never lifted his head, but hoed on. An'"
she went down thar 'mongst the corn, an' she
couldn't find nobody. An' jes then the Johns boys
rid up an' 'lowed ez Jim Peters war dead, an' hed
been fund in the mounting, an' they war a-fetchin'
of him then."
The horse's head within the window nodded vi-



<pb n="337"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS        337
olently among the shadows, and the stones rolled
beneath his hoof as he pawed the ground.
" Mis' Peters she knowed suthin' were a-goin' ter
happen when she seen that harnt a-hoein'."
", reckon she did," said the blacksmith, stretch-
ing himself, his nerves 'still under the delusion of
recent awakening. "Jim never hoed none when
he war alive. She mought hev knowed he war
dead ef she seen him hoein'."
' Waal, sir," exclaimed the violinist, "I'm a-goin'
up yander ter Purdee's ter-morrer ter find out what
he died of, an' when."
That he was alive was proved the next day, to
the astonishment of the smith and his friends.
The forge was the voting-place of the district, and
there, while the fire was. flaring, the bellows blow-
ing, the anvil ringing, the echo vibrating, now loud,
now faint, with the antiphonal chant of the ham-
mer and the sledge, a notice was posted to inform
the adjacent owners that Roger Purdee's land, held
under an original grant from the State, would be
processioned according to law some twenty days
after date, and the boundaries thereof defined and
established. The fac-simile of the notice, too, was
posted on the court-house door in the county town
twenty miles away, for there were those who jour-
neyed so far to see it.
"I wonder," said the blacksmith, as he stood in
the unfamiliar street and gazed at it, his big arms,
usually bare, now hampered with his coat sleeves
and folded upon his chest-" I wonder ef he footed
it all the way ter town at the gait he tuk when he
lit out from the forge ?"
22



<pb n="338"/>
338       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS
It was a momentous day when the county 
veyor planted his Jacob's-staff upon the State
on the summit of the bald. His sworn chain-b
ers, two tall young fellows clad in jeans,
broad-brimmed wool hats, their heavy boots dra
high over their trousers, stood ready and waiti
with the sticks and clanking chain, on the mar
of the ice-cold spring gushing out on this bl
height, and signifying more than a fountain in 
wilderness, since it served to define the southe
corner of Purdee's land. The two enemies w
perceptibly conscious of each other. Grinne,
broad face and small eyes laden with fat lids we
persistently averted. Purdee often glanced to
ard him gloweringly, his head held, nevertheless
a little askance, as if he rejected the very sight.
There was the fire of a desperate intention in his 
eyes. Looking at his face, shaded by his broad-
brimmed hat, one could hardly have doubted no
whether it expressed most ferocity or force. H
breath came quick--the bated breath of a m
who watches and waits for a supreme momea
His blue jeans coat was buttoned close about 
sun-burned throat, where the stained red hand
chief was knotted. He wore a belt with his p
der-horn and bullet-pouch, and carried his rifle
his shoulder; the hand that held it trembled,
he tried to quell the quiver. "I'll prove it
an' kill him arterward-kill him arterward,"'
muttered.
In the other hand he held a yellowed old pa
Now and then he bent his earnest dark eyes U
the grant, made many a year ago by the Stat*J



<pb n="339"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS       339
Tennessee to his grandfather; for there had been
no subsequent conveyances.
The blacksmith had come begirt with his leather
apron, his shirt-sleeves rolled up, and with his ham-
mer in his hand, an inopportune customer having
jeopardized his chance of sharing in the sensation of
the day. The other neighbors all wore their coats
closely buttoned. BlinkS' carried his violin hung
upon his back; the sharp timbre of the wind, cut-
ting through the leafless boughs of the stunted
woods, had a kindred fibrous resonance. Clouds
hung low far beneath them; here and there, as they
looked, the trees on the slopes showed above and
again below the masses of clinging vapors. Some-
times close at hand a peak would reveal itself,
asserting the solemn vicinage of the place, then
draw its veil slowly about it, and stand invisible and
in austere silence. The surveyor, a stalwart figure,
his closely buttoned coat giving him a military as-
pect, looked disconsolately downward.
"I hoped I'd die before this," he remarked.
"I'm equal to getting over anything in nature
that's flat or oblique, but the vertical beats me."
He bent to take sight for a moment, the group
silently watching him. Suddenly he. came to the
perpendicular, and strode off down the rugged
slope over gullies and bowlders, through rills and
briery tangles, his eyes distended and eager as if
he were led into the sylvan deptks by the lure of a
vision. The chain-bearers followed, continually
bending and rising, the recurrent genuflections re-
sembling the fervors of some religious rite. The
chain rustled sibilantly among the dead leaves,



<pb n="340"/>
340       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS        '
and was ever and anon drawn out to its extre
length. Then the dull clank of the links
silent. 
"Stick !" called out the young mountaineer
the rear.
"Stuck !" responded his comrade ahead.
And once more the writhing and jingling amol
the withered leaves. The surveyor strode on, tu
ing his face neither to the right nor to the left, wi
his Jacob's-staff held upright before him. T
other men trooped along scatteringly, dodging u
der the low boughs of the stunted trees. Th
pressed hastily together when the great squa
rocks-Moses' tables of the Law-came into view
lying where it was said the man of God flung them
upon the sere slope below, both splintered and fis-
sured, and one broken in twain. The surveyor was
bearing straight down upon them. The men run-
ning on either side could not determine whether the
line would fall within the spot or just beyond. They
broke into wild exclamations.
"Ye may hammer me out ez flat ez a skene,
cried the blacksmith, "ef I.don't b'lieve ez Purd
hev got 'em."
"Naw, sir,.naw !" cried another fervent amateur
"thar's the north. I jes now viewed Grinne
dad's deed; the line ondertakes ter run with Pt
dee's line; he hev got seven hunderd poles ter 
north; ef they air a-goin' ter the north, them tabl
o' the Law air Grinnell's." 
A wild chorus ensued. 
" Naw!" "Yes!" "Thar they go!" "A-
in' off that-a-way!"  "Beats my time!" as
,:ii



<pb n="341"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS        341
stumbled and scuttled alongside the acolytes of
the Compass, who bowed down and rose up at
every length of the chain. Suddenly a cry from
the chain-bearers.
" Out !"
Stillness ensued.
The surveyor stopped to register the " out." It
was a moment of thrilling suspense; the rocks lay
only a few chains further; Grinnell, into whose con-
fidence doubt had begun to be instilled, said to
himself, all a-tremble, that he would hardly have
staked his veracity, his standing with the brethren,
if he had realized that it was so close a matter as
this. He had long known that his father owned
the greater part of the unproductive wilder-
ness lying between the two ravines; the land was
almost worthless by reason of the steep slants
which rendered it utterly untillable. He was sure
that by the terms of his deed, which his father
had from its vendor, Squire Bates, his line included
the Moses' tables on which Purdee had built so fal-.
lacious a repute of holiness. He looked once more
at the paper-"thence from Crystal Spring with
Purdee's line north seven hundred poles to a stake
in the middle of the river."
Purdee too was all a-quiver with eagerness. He
had not beheld those rocks since that terrible day
when all the fine values of his gifted vision had
been withdrawn from him, and he could read no
more with eyes blinded by the limitations of what
other men could see-the infinitely petty purlieus
of the average sense. He had a vague idea that
should they say this was his land where those



<pb n="342"/>
342       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS
strange rocks lay, he would see again, he wo
read undreamed-of words, writ with a pen of 
He started toward them, and then with a conscio
effort he held back.                     v
The surveyor took no heed of the sentiment
involved in processioning Purdee's land. He stoo
leaning on his Jacob's-staff, as interesting to hi
as Moses' rocks, and in his view infinitely mo
useful, and wiped his brow, and looked about, a
yawned. To him it was merely the surveying for
a foolish cause of a very impracticable and steep
tract of land, and the only reason it should b1e
countenanced by heaven or earth was the fees in-
volved. And this was what he saw at the end of
Purdee's line.
Suddenly he took up his Jacob's-staff and march-
ed on with a long stride, bearing straight down
upon the rocks. The whole coratge started anew-
the genuflecting chain-bearers, the dodging, scram-
bling, running spectators. On one of the strange
stunted leafless trees a colony of vagrant crows 
had perched, eerie enough to seem the denizens-i
of those weird forests; they broke into raucous:
laughter-Haw ! haw ! haw !-rising to a wild com-:;,
motion of harsh, derisive discord as the men once ;'
more gave vent to loud, excited cries. For the;'
surveyor, stalking ahead, had passed beyond the.
great tables of the Law; the chain-bearers were 
drawing Purdee's line on the other side of them,
and they had fallen, if. ever they fell here from'
Moses' hand and broke in twain, upon Purdee's,
land, granted to his ancestor by the State of,
Tennessee.
',1



<pb n="343"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS       343
He could not speak for joy, for pride. His dark
eyes were illumined by a glancing, amber light.
He took off his hat and smoothed with his rough
hand his long black hair, falling from his massive
forehead. He leaned against one of the stunted
oaks, shouldering his rifle that he had loaded for
Grinnell-he could hardly believe this, although he
remembered it. He did not want to shoot Grin-
nell; he would not waste the good-lead !
And indeed Grinnell had much ado to defend
himself against the sneers and rebukes with which
the party beguiled the way through the wintry
woods. "Ter go a-claimin' another man's land,
an' put him ter the expense o' processionin' it, an'
git his line run !" exclaimed the blacksmith, indig-
nantly. "An' ye 'ain't got nare sign o' a show at
Moses' tables !"
"I dunno how this hyar line air a-runnin'," de-
clared Grinnell, sorely beset. "I don't b'lieve it
air a-runnin' north."
The surveyor was hard by. He had planted his
staff again, and was once more taking his bearings.
He looked up for a second.
"Northwest," fie said.
Grinnell stared for a moment; then strode up to
the surveyor, and pointed with his stubby finger at
a word on his deed.
The official looked with interest at it; he held
up suddenly Purdee's grant and read aloud, " From
Crystal Spring seven hundred poles northwest to a
stake in the middle of the river."
He examined, too, the original plat of survey
which he had taken to guide him, and also the plat



<pb n="344"/>
344       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS 
made when Squire Bates sold to Grinnell's fa
"northwest" they all agreed. There was evide
a clerical error on the part of the scrivener who 
written Grinnell's deed.
In a moment the harassed man saw that thro
the processioning of Purdee's land he had 1
heavily in the extent of his supposed possessio
He it was who had claimed what was rightful
another's. And because of the charge Purdee w
the richer by a huge slice of mountain land-ho
large he could not say, as he ruefully followed 
line of survey.
But for this discovery the interest of procession.
ing Purdee's land would have subsided with the.
determination of the ownership of the limited envi-.
ronment of the stone tables of the Law. Now, as
they followed the ever-diverging line to the north-
west, the group was pervaded by a subdued and
tremulous excitement, in which even the surveyor
shared. Two or three whispered apart now andj
then, and Grinnell, struggling to suppress his dis.
may, was keenly conscious of the glances th
sought him again and again in the effort to Jud
how he was taking it. Only Purdee himself w
withdrawn from the interest that swayed them all
He had loitered at first, dallying with a temptati
to slip silently from the party and retrace his wayt
the tables and ascertain, perchance, if some vest
of that mystic scripture might not reveal itself to hi
anew, or if it had been only some morbid fancy, so
futile influence of solitude, some fevered conditi
of the blood or the brain, that had traced on-
stone those gracious words, the mere echo of wl



<pb n="345"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS        345
-his stuttered, vague recollections-had roused
the camp-meeting to fervid enthusiasms undreamed
of before. And then he put from him the project
-some other time, perhaps, for doubts lurked in
his heart, hesitation chilled his resolve-some other
time, when his companions and their prosaic in-
fluence were all far away. He was roused abrupt-
ly, as he stalked along, to the perception of the
deepening excitement among them. They had
emerged from the dense growths of the mountain
to the lower slope, where pastures and fields-
whence the grain had been harvested--and a
garden and a dwelling, with barns and fences,
lay before them all. And as Purdee stopped and
stared, the realization of a certain significant fact
struck him so suddenly that it seemed to take his
breath away. That divergent line stretching to
the northwest had left within his boundaries the
land on which his enemy had built his home.
He looked; then he smote his thigh and laughed
aloud.
The rocks on the river-bank caught the sound,
and echoed it again and again, till the air seemed
full of derisive voices. Under their stings of jeer-
ing clamor, and under the anguish of the calamity
which his reeling senses could scarcely measure,
Job Grinnell's composure suddenly gave way. He
threw up his arms and called upon Heaven; he
turned and glared furiously at his enemy. Then,
as Purdee's laughter still jarred the air, he drew a
"shooting-iron " from his pocket. The blacksmith
closed with him, struggling to disarm him. The
weapon was discharged in the turmoil, the ball



<pb n="346"/>
346       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS
glancing away in the first quiver of sunshine
had reached the earth to-day, and falling s
across the river. 
Grinnell wrested himself from the restraini
grasp, and rushed down the slope to his gate
hide himself from the gaze of the world-his worl
that little group. Then remembering that it w
no longer his gate, he turned from it in an agon
of loathing. And knowing that earth held 
shelter for him but the sufferance of anothe
man's roof, he plunged into the leafless woods
if he heavily dragged himself by a power which
warred within him with other strong motives, and
disappeared among the myriads of holly bushes all,
aglow with their red berries.
The spectators still followed the surveyor and his 
Jacob's-staff, but Purdee lingered. He walked
around the fence with a fierce, gloating eye, a pan- 
ther-like, loping tread, as a beast might patrol a 
fold before he plunders it. All the venom of the
old feud had risen to the opportunity. Here wasa
his enemy at his mercy. He knew that it was lessI
than seven years since the enclosures had beef!
made, acres and acres of tillable land cleared, tlh
houses built-all achieved which converted th
worthlessness of a wilderness into the sterling valu
of a farm. He-he, Roger Purdee-was a rich  
for the "mountings," joining his little to this co,
petence. All the cruelties, all the insults, all 
traditions of the old vendetta came thronging ini
his mind, as distinctly presented as if they wer
series of hideous pictures; for he was not used
think in detail, but in the full portrayal of scei



<pb n="347"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS        347
The Purdee wrongs were all avenged. This result
was so complete, so baffling, so ruinous temporally,
so humiliating spiritually! It was the fullest re-
plication of revenge for all that had challenged it.
"How Uncle Ezra would hev rej'iced ter hev
lived ter see this day I" he thought, with a pious re-
gret that the dead might not know.
The next moment his attention was suddenly at-
tracted by a movement in the dodr-yard. A woman
had been hanging out clothes to dry, and she turned
to go in, without seeing the striding figure patrol-
ling the enclosure. A baby-a small bundle of a
red dress-was seated on the pile of sorghum-cane
where the mill had worked in the autumn; the stalks
were broken, and flimsy with frost and decay, and
washed by the rains to a pallid hue, yet more
marked in contrast with the brown ground. The
baby's dress made a bright bit of color amidst the
dreary tones. As Purdee caught sight of it he re-
membered that this was "Grinnell's old baby," who
had been the cause of the renewal of the ancient
quarrel, which had resulted so benignantly for him.
" I owe you a good turn, sis," he murmured, satiri-
cally, glaring at the child as the unconscious mother
lifted her to go in the house. The baby, looking
over the maternal shoulder, encountered the stern
eyes staring at her. She stared gravely too. Then
with a bounce and a gurgle she beamed upon him
from out the retirement of her flapping sun-bonnet;
she smiled radiantly, and finally laughed outright,
and waved her hands and again bounced beguil-
ingly, and thus toothlessly coquetting, disappeared
within the door.



<pb n="348"/>
348       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS
Before Purdee reached home, flakes of snow, tl:
first of the season, were whirling through the gra
dusk noiselessly, ceaselessly, always falling, y
never seeming to fall, rather to restlessly pervade
the air with a vacillating alienation from all th#
laws of gravitation. Elusive fascinations of thought
were liberated with the shining crystalline aerial pul-
sation; some mysterious attraction dwelt down long
vistas amongst the bare trees; their fine fibrous
grace of branch and twig was accented by the snow,',
which lay upon them with exquisite lightness, de-:'
spite the aggregated bulk, not the densely packed'
effect which the boughs would show to-morrow.
The crags were crowned; their grim faces looked
frowningly out like a warrior's from beneath a
wreath. Nowhere could the brown ground be seen;
already the pine boughs bent, the needles failing to
pierce the drifts. On the banks of the stream, on
the slopes of the mountain, in wildest jungles, in the
niches and crevices of bare cliffs, the holly-berries
glowed red in the midst of the ever-green snow- .
laden leaves and ice-barbed twigs. When his house 
at last came into view, the roof was deeply cov-:
ered; the dizzying whirl had followed every line of,
the rail-fence; scurrying away along the furthest!
zigzags there was a vanishing glimpse of a squirrel ;'
the boles of the trees were embedded in drifts; the 
chickens had gone to roost; the sheep were hud!
dling in the broad door of the rude stable; he sa
their heads lifted against the dark backgroun
within, where the ox was vaguely glimpsed. Hi
caught their mild glance despite the snow that ia
starred with its ever-shifting crystals the dark spa'



<pb n="349"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS       349
of the aperture, and intervened as a veil. They
suddenly reminded him of the season-that it
was Christmas Eve; of the sheep which. so many
years ago beheld the angel of the Lord and the
glory of the great light that shone about the
shepherds abiding in the fields. Did they follow,
he wondered, the shepherds who went to seek for
Christ? Ah, as he paused meditatively beside the
rail-fence-what matter how long ago it was, how
far awayl-he saw those sheep lying about the
fields under the vast midnight sky. They lift
their sleepy heads. Dawn? not yet, surely; and
they lay them down again. And one must bleat
aloud, turning to see the quickening sky; and one,
woolly, white, white as snow, with eyes illumined
by the heralding heavens, struggles to its feet, and
another, and the flock is astir; and the shepherds,
drowsing doubtless, are awakened to good tidings
of great joy.
What a night that was l-this night-Christmas
'Eve. He wondered he had not thought of it be-
fore. And the light still shines, and the angel
waits, and the eternal hosts proclaim peace on
earth, good-will toward men, and summon us all
to go and follow the shepherds and see-what ? A
little child cradled in a manger. The mountain-
eer, leaning on his gun by the rail-fence, looked
through the driving snow with the lights of divi-
nation kindling in his eyes, seeing it all, feeling
its-meaning as never before. Christ came thus,
he knew, for a purpose. He could have come in
the chariots of the sun or on the wings of the wind.
But He was cradled as a little child, that men



<pb n="350"/>
350       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS
might revere humanity for the sake of Him 
had graced it; that they, thinking on Him, mii
be good to one another and to all little 
dren.
As he burst into the door of his house the eli
tions of his high religious mood were rudely di
pelled by shrill cries of congratulation from his w
andher mother. For the news had preceded him.
Ephraim Blinks with his fiddle had stopped thereQ
on his way to play at some neighboring merry-mak-;
ing, and had acquainted them with the result of
processioning Purdee's land.
"We'll go down thar an' live I" cried his wife,
with a gush of joyful tears. " Arter all our scratch-
in' along like ten-toed chickens all this time, we'll
hev comfort an' plentyl We'll live in Grinnell's
good house! But ter think o' our trials, an' how
pore we hev been !"
"This air the Purdees' day " cried the grand-
mother, her face flushed with the semblance of
youth. "Arter all ez hev kem an' gone, the jedg- '
mint o' the Lord hev descended on Grinnell, an'`
he air cast out. An' his fields, an' house, an' bin,
an' barn, air Purdee's !"
The fire flared and faded; shadows of the night
gloomed thick in the room--this night of nights
that bestowed so much, that imposed so much on
man and on his fellow-man!
"Ain't the Grinnell baby got no home ?" whin 
pered the hereditary enemy. 
The mountaineer remembered the Lord of hea
and earth cradled, a little Child, in the mange4
He remembered, too, the humble child smiling iti



<pb n="351"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS      35I
guileless good-will at the fence. He broke out
suddenly.
"How kern the fields Purdee's," he cried, lean-
ing his back against the door and striking the
puncheon floor with the butt of the gun till it rang
again and again, "or the house, or the bin, or the
barn? Did he plant 'em? Did he build 'em?
Who made 'em his'n ?"
"The law 1" exclaimed both women in a-breath.
"Thar ain't no law in heaven or yearth ez kin
gin an honest man what ain't his'n by rights," he
declared.
An insistent feminine clamor arose, protesting
the sovereign power of the law. He quaked for a
moment; dominant though he was in his own
house, he could not face them, but he could flee.
He suddenly stepped out of the door, and when
they opened it and looked after him in the snowy
dusk and the whitened woods, he was gone.
And popular opinion coincided with them when
it became known that he had formally relinquished
his right to that portion of the land improved by
Grinnell. He said to the old squire who drew up
the quit-claim deed, which he executed that Christ-
mas Eve, that he was not willing to profit by his
enemy's mistake, and thus the consideration ex-
pressed in the conveyance was the value of the
land, considered not as a farm, but as so many
acres of wilderness before in axe was laid to the
trunk of a tree or the soil upturned by a plough.
It was the minimum of value, and Grinnell came
cheaply off.
The blacksmith, the mountain fiddler, and the



<pb n="352"/>
352       THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS
advanced thinker, who had been active in the sur-
vey, balked of the expected excitement attendant
upon the ousting of Grinnell, and some sensational
culmination of the ancient feud, were not in sym-
pathy. with the pacific result, and spoke as if they 
had given themselves to unrequited labors.
"Thar ain't no way o' settlin' what that thar
critter Purdee owns 'ceptin' ez consarns Moses'
tables o' the Law. He clings ter them," they said,
in conclave about the forge fire when the big
doors were closed and the snow, banking up the
crevices, kept out the wind. " There ain't no.use
in percessionin' Purdee's land."
And indeed Purdee's possessions were wider far
than even that divergent line which the county
surveyor ran out might seem to warrant; for on
the mountain-tops largest realms of solemn thought
were open to him. He levied tribute upon the
liberties of an enthused imagination. He exulted
in the freedom of the expanding spaces of a spirit-
ual perception of the spiritual things. When the
snow slipped away from the tables of the Law, the
man who had read strange scripture engraven
thereon took his way one day, doubtful, but falter-
ing with hope, up and up to the vast dome of the 
mountain, and knelt beside the rocks to see if per-
chance.he might trace anew those mystic runes
which he once had some fine instinct to decipher.
And as he pondered long he found, or thought he
found, here a familiar character, and there a slowly
developing word, and anon-did he see it aright ?-
?l,'-."     a phrase; and suddenly it was discovered to him
that, whether their origin were a sacred mystery or



<pb n="353"/>
THE RIDDLE OF THE ROCKS       353
the fantastic scroll-work of time as the rock weath-
ered, high thoughts, evoking thrilling emotions, bear
scant import to one who apprehends only in mental
acceptance. And he realized that the multiform
texts which he had read in the fine and curious
script were but paraphrases of the simple mandate
to be good to one another for the sake of that holy
Child cradled in manger, and to all little children,
THE END



