POPULAR COPYRIGHTS
New eagle Series
Price, Fifteen Cents Carefully Selected Love Stories

There is such a profusion of good books in this list, that it is an impossibility to urge you to select any particular title or author's work. All that we can say is that any line that contains the complete works of Mrs. Georgie Sheldon, Charles Garvice, Mrs. Harriet Lewis, May Agnes Fleming, Wenona Gilman, Mrs. Alex. McVeigh Miller, and other writers of the same type, is worthy of your attention, especially when the price has been set at 15 cents the volume.
ALL TITLES ALWAYS IN PRINT
1--Queen Bess 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
2—Ruby's Reward 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
7—Two Keys 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
9--The Virginia Heiress 	By May Agnes Fleming
12—Edrie's Legacy 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
17—Leslie's Loyalty 	By Charles Garvice
22—Elaine 	By Charles Garvice
24--A Wasted Love 	By Charles Garvice
41--Her Heart's Desire 	By Charles Garvice
44—That- Dowdy 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
50—Her Ransom 	By Charles Garvice
w—Thrice Wedded 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
66—Witch Hazel 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
70—Sydney 	By Charles Garvice
73—The Marquis 	By Charles Garvice
77—Tina 	By Mrs. Georgic Sheldon
79—Out of the Past 	By Charles Garvice
84—Imogene	..	.	By Charles Garvice
85—Lorrie ; or, Hollow Gold 	By Charles Garvice
88—Virgi	Inheritance 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
95—A Wilful Maid 	By Charles Garvice
98—Claire 	By Charles Garvice
99—Audrey's Recompense 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
102—Sweet Cymbeline 	By Charles Garvice
109--Signa's Sweetheart 	By Charles Garvice
111—Faithful Shirley 	By Mrs. Ceorgie Sheldon
117—She Loved Him 	By Charles Garvice
119—'Twixt Smile and Tear 	By Charles Garvice
122—Grazia's Mistake 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
130--A Passion Flower 	By Charles Garvice
133--Max	...	.	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
13G—The Unseen Bridegroom 	By May Agnes Fleming
138--A Fatal Wooing 	By Laura Jean Libbey
141—Lady Evelyn 	By May Agnes Fleming
144—Dorothy's Jewels 	By Mrs. Georgic Sheldon
146—Magdalen's Vow 	By May Agnes Fleming
151—The Heiress of Glen Gower 	By May Agnes Fleming
155—Nameless Dell 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
157—Who Wins 	By May Agnes Fleming
1661---The Masked Bridal 	Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
168--Thrice Lost, Thrice Won 	By May Agnes Fleming
174	Hi Guardian Angel 	By Charles Garvice
.277--A True aristocrat 	By Mrs. Georgic Sheldon
NEW EAGLE SERIES
282.--The Forsaken Bride 	By Mrs. Georgie
283—My Lady Pride 	By Charles
287—The Lady of Darracourt	By Charles
288—Sibyl's Influence 	By Mrs. Georgie
291—A Mysterious Wedding Ring 	By Mrs. Georgic
292—For Her Only 	By Charles
296—The Helr of Vering	By Charles
299—Little Miss Whirlwind 	By Mrs. Georgie
300—The Spider and the Fly	By Charles
303—The Queen of the Isle 	By May Agnes
304—Stanch as a Woman 	By Charles
305—Led by Love 	By Charles Garvia•,
309—Time Heiress of Castle Cliffs ...	By May Agnes Fleming
312--Woven on Fate's Loom, and The Snowdrift. By Charles (warvie
315—The Dark Secret 	By May Agnes Fleming
317—Ione 	By Laura .lean Libie, y
318—Stanch of Heart 	By Charley Gurviee
322—Mildred 	By Mrs. Mary J. Holm s
326—Parted by Fate 	By Laura Jean Lilee y
327—He Loves Me 	By Charles Larvae
328—He Loves Me Not 	Charles (Garvice
330—Aikenside 	By Mrs. Mary J. Holmes
333—Stella's Fortune 	By Charles Gars,
334---Miss McDonald 	P,y Mrs. Mary J. Ilohnes
339—His Heart's Queen 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
340--Bad Hugh. Vol. I	By Mrs. Mary J. Hofr-s
341—Bad Hugh. Vol. II	By Mrs. Mary J. Holmes
344—Tresillian Court 	By Mrs. Harriet Lewis
345—The Scorned Wife 	By Mrs. Harriet Lewis
346—Guy Tresillian's Fate 	By Mrs. Harriet Lewis
347—The Eyes of Love 	By Charles Garvice
348—The Hearts of Youth 	By Charles Garvice
351—The Churchyard Betrothal 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
352—Family Pride. Vol. I	By Mary J. Holmes
353—Family Pride. Vol. II 	By Mary J. Holmes
354--A Love Comedy 	By Charles Garvice
360—The Ashes of Love 	By Charles Garvice
361—A Heart Triumphant 	By Charles Garvice
362—Stella Rosevelt 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
367—The Pride of Her Life	By Charles Garvice
368—Won By Love's Valor	~	By Charles Garvice
372 A Girl in a Thousand 	By Bird. Georgie Sheidea
181---The Baronet's Bride 	By May Agnes Fleming
188—Dorothy Arnold's Escape	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
199—Geoffrey's Victory 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
203—Only One Love 	By Charles Garvice
'210--Wild Oats 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
213—The Heiress of Egremont ~	By Mrs. Harriet Lewis
215—Only a Girl's Love 	By Charles Garvice
219—Lost: A Pearle 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
222—The Lily of Mordaunt 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
223—Leola Dale's Fortune 	By Charles Garvice
231—The Earl's Heir	. By Charles Garvice
233—Nora 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
236—Her Humble Lover 	By Charles Garvice
242—A Wounded Heart 	By Charles Garvice
244—A Hoiden's Conquest 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
250—A Woman's Soul 	By Charles Garvice
255—The Little Marplot 	By Mrs. Georgic Sheldon
257—A Martyred Love 	By Charles Garvice
266—The Welfleet Mystery 	
	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
267—Jeanne ..	.	By Charles Garvice
268—Olivia; or, It Was for Her Sake 	By Charles Garvice
272—So Fair, So False 	By Charles Garvice
276—So Nearly Lost 	By Charles Garvice
277—Brownie's Triumph 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
280—Love's Dilemma 	By Charles Garvice
Sheldon Garvice Garvice Sheldon. Sheldon. Garvice lirvice Sheldon Garvice Fleming Carves)
NEW EAGLE SERIES
373—A Thorn Among Roses.
Sequel to "A Girl in a Thousand"	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
380—Her Double Life 	By Mrs. Harriet Lewis
381—The Sunshine of Love.
Sequel to "Her Double Life"...	—	By Mrs. Harriet Lewis
382—Mona 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
391—Marguerite's Heritage 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
399—Betsey's Transformation 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
407—Esther, the Fright 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
415—Trixy	..	.	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
440—Edna's Secret Marriage 	By Charles Garvice
449—The Bailiff's Scheme 	By Mrs. Harriet Lewis
450—Rosamond's Love.
Sequel to "The Bailiff's Scheme"	,	By Mrs. Harriet Lewis
451—Helen's Victory 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
456—A Vixen's Treachery 	By Mrs. Harriet Lewin
457-Adrift in the World.
Sequel to "A Vixen's Treachery"	By Mrs. Harriet Lewis
458—When Love Meets Love 	By Charles Garvice
464—The Old Life's Shadows 	By Mrs. Harriet Lewis
465—Outside Her Eden.
Sequel to "The Old Life's Shadows"	By Mrs. Harriet Lewis
474—The Belle of the Season 	By Mrs. Harriet Lewis
475—Love Before Pride.
Sequel to "The Belle of the Season"	By Mrs. Harriet Lewis
481—Wedded, Yet No Wife 	By May Agnes Fleming
489—Lucy Harding 	By Mrs. Mary J. Holmes
495—Norine's Revenge 	By May Agnes Fleming
511—The Golden Key	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
512—A Heritage of Love.
Sequel to "The Golden Key" 	By Mrs. Georgic Sheldon
519—The Magic Cameo 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
520—The Heatherford Fortune.
Sequel to "The Magic Cameo"	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
531—Better Than Life 	By Charles Garvice
542—Once in a Life 	By Charles Garvice
548—'Twas Love's Fault 	By Charles Garvice
553—Queen Kate ...Charles Carvice
554—Step by Step 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
557—ln Cupid's Chains 	By Charles Garvice
630—The Verdict of the Heart	By Charles Garvice
635—A Coronet of Shame 	L'y Charles Garvice
640—A Girl of Spirit 	By Charles Garvice
615—A Jest of Fate 	By Charles Garvice
6.48—Gertrude Elliott's emit-Hilo 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
650—Diana's Destiny 	By Charles Garvice
655—Linked by Fate 	By Charles Garvice
663—Creatures of Destiny 	:	By Charles Garvice
671—When Love Is Young	By C'lharles Garvice
676---My Lady Beth 	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
679—Gold in the Gutter 	By Charles Garvice
712—Love and a Lie 	By Charles Garvice
721—A Girl from the South 	By Charles Garvice
730—John Hungerford's Redemption	By Mrs. Georgie Sheldon
741—The Fatal Ruby 	By Charles Garvice
749—The Heart of a Maid 	By Charles Garvice
758—The Woman in It 	By Charles Garvice
774—Love in a Snare 	By Charles Garvice
775--My Love Kitty 	By Charles Garvice
776—That Strange Girl 	By Charles Garvice
777—Nellie 	By Charles Garvice
778—Miss Estcourt ; or Olive 	By Charles Garvice
518--'1he Girl Who Was True 	By Charles Garvice
826---The Irony of Love 	By Charles Garvice
896—A Terrible Secret 	By May Agnes Fleming
897--When To-morrow Came 	By May Agnes Fleming
Mad Marriage 	, 	By May Agnes Fleming
NEW EAGLE SERIES
905—A Woman Without Mercy 	By May Agnes Fleming
912—One Nights Mystery 	By May Agnes Fleming
918—The Cost of a Lie 	By May Agnes Fleming
920—Silent and True 	By May Agues Fleming
921—A Treasure Lost 	By May Agnes Fleming
925—Forrest House 	By Mary J. Holmes
926—He Loved Rer Once 	By Mary J. Holmes
930—Kate Manton 	BMay Agnes Fleming
• 931—Proud as a Queen 	By May Agues Fleming
935—Queenie Hetherton 	By Mary J. Holmes
936—Mightier Than Pride 	By Mary J. Holmes
940—The Heir of Charlton 	By May Agnes Fleming
941—While Love Stood Waiting	By May Agnes Fleming
945—Gretchen 	By Mary J. Holmes
946—Beauty That Faded 	By Mary J. Holmes
950—Carried by Storm	By May Agnes Fleming
951—Love's Dazzling Glitter 	By May Agnes Fleming
954—Marguerite 	By Mary J. Holmes
955—When Love Spurs Onward 	By Mary J. Holmes
960—Lost for a Woman 	By May Agnes Fleming
961- Ilis to Love or Hate 	By May Agnes Fleming
964—Paul Ralston's First Love 	By Mary J. Holmes
965—Where Love's Shadows Lie Deep 	By Mary J. Holmes
968—The Tracy Diamonds 	Mary J. Holmes
969—She Loved Another 	By -Lary J. Holmes
972—The Cromptons 	By Mary J. Holmes
973—Her Husband Was a Scamp 	By Mary J. Holmes
975—The Merivale Banks 	Mary J. Holmes
978—Me One Girl in the World 	By Charles Garvice
979—His Priceless Jewel 	By Charles Garvice
982—The Millionaire's Daugher and Other Stories.By Chas. Garvice
983—I)octor Hathern's Daughters 	By Mary J. Holmes
984—The Colonel's Bride 	By Mary J. Holmes
988—Her Ladyship's Diamonds, and Other Stories.By Clias. Garvice
998—Sharing Her Crime 	By May Agnes Fleming
999—The Heiress of Sunset Hall 	By May Agnes Fleming
1004—Maude Percy's Secret 	By May Agnes Fleming
1005—The Adopted Daughter 	BMay Agnes Fleming
1010—The Sisters of Torwood 	By May Agnes Fleming
1015—A Changed Heart 	By May Agnes Fleming
1016—Enchanted 	By May Agnes Fleming
1025—A Wife's Tragedy 	May Agnes Fleming
1026—Brought to Reckoning 	By May Agnes Fleming
1027—A Madcap Sweetheart 	By Emma Garrison Jones
1028—An Unhappy Bargain 	By Effie Adelaide Rowlands
1029—Only a Working Girl 	By Geraldine Fleming
1030—The Unbidden Guest 	By Mrs. Alex McVeigh Miller
1031—The Man and His Millions 	By Ida Reade Allen
1032—Mabel's Sacrifice 	Charlotte M. Stanley
1033—Was He Worth It? 	By Geraldine Fleming
1034--Her Two Suitors 	By Wenona Gilman
1035—Edith Percival 	By May Agnes Fleming
1036—Caught in the Snare 	By May Agnes Fleming
1037—A Love Concealed 	By Emma Garrison Jones
1038—The Price of Happiness	By Mrs. Alex McVeigh Miller
1039—The Lucky Man 	By Geraldine Fleming
1040—A Forced Promise 	By Ida Reade Allen
1041—The Crime of Love 	By Barbara Howard
1042—The Bride's Opals 	Emma Garrison Jones
1043—Love That Was Cursed 	By Geraldine Fleming
1044—Thorns of Regret 	By Mrs. Alex McVeigh Miller
1045—Love Will Find the Way 	By Wenona Gilman
1046—Bitterly Atoned 	By Mrs. E. Burke Collins
1047—Told in the Twilight: 	By Ida Reade Allen
1048—A Little Barbarian 	By Charlotte Kingsley
1049—Love's Golden Spell 	By Geraldine Fleming
1050—Married in Error 	'..By Mrs. Alex McVeigh Miller
NEW EAGLE SERIES

1051—If It Were True ...	. By "Tenon, Gd c . a
1052--Vivian's Love Story 	By Mrs. E. Bur4-r Cm 1:s
1053—From Tears to Smiles	By lda Reade
1054—When Love Dawns 	By Adelaide Stirling
1055—Love's Earnest Prayer 	By Geraldine Fleming
1056—The Strength of Love 	By Mrs. Alex McVeigh Miller
1057--A Lost Love ...	By Wenona Gilman
1058—The Stronger Passion 	By Lillian R. Drayton
1059—What Love Can Cost 	By Evelyn Malcolm
1060—At Another's Bidding 	By Ida Reade Allen
1061—Above All Things 	By Adelaide Stirling
1062—The Curse of Beauty 	By Geraldine Fleming
1063—I3er Sister's Secret 	By Mrs. Alex McVeigh Miller
1064—Married in Haste 	By Wenona Gilman
IOG5—Fair Maid Marian 	By Emma Garrison Jones
1066—No Man's Wife 	By Ida Reade Allen
1067—A Sacrifice to Love 	By Adelaide Stirling
1068—Her Fatal Gift 	By Geraldine Fleming
1069—Her Life's Burden 	By Mrs. Alex McVeigh Miller
1070—Evelyn, the Actress 	By Wenona Gilman
1071—Married for Money 	By Lucy Randall Comfort
1072—A Lost Sweetheart 	By Ida Reade Allen
1073—A Golden Sorrow 	By Charlotte M. Stanley
1074—Her Heart's Challenge 	By Barbara Howard
1075—His Willing Slave 	By Lillian R. Drayton
1076—A Freak of Fate 	By Emma Garrison Jones
1077—Her PunishNent 	By Laura Jean Libbey
1078—The Shadow Between Them. ... By Mrs. Alex. McVeigh Miller
1079—No Time for Penitence 	By Wenona Gilman
1080—Norma's Black Fortune 	By Ida Reade Allen
1081—A Wilful Girl 	By Lucy Randall Comfort
1082—Love's First Kiss 	By Emma Garrison Jones
1083—Lola Dunbar's Crime 	By Barbara Howard
1084—Ethel's Secret 	By Charlotte M. Stanley
1085—Lynette's Wedding	By Mrs. Alex McVeigh Miller
1086—A Fair Enchantress 	By Ida Reade Allen
1087—The Tide of Fate 	By Wenona Gilman
1088—Her Husband's Other Wife 	By Emma Garrison Jones
1089—Hearts of Stone 	By Geraldine Fleming
1090—In Love's Springtime 	By Laura Jean Libbey
1091—Love at the Loom 	By Geraldine Fleming
1092—What Was She to Him? 	By Mrs. Alex McVeigh Miller
1093—For Another's Fault 	By Charlotte M. Stanley
1094—Hearts and Dollars 	By Ida Reade Allen
1095—A Wife's Triumph 	By Effie Adelaide Rowlands
1096—A Bachelor Girl 	By Lucy May Russell
1097—Love and Spite 	By Adelaide Stirling
1098—Leola's Heart 	By Charlotte M. Stanley
1099—The Power of Love 	By Geraldine Fleming
1100—An Angel of Evil 	By Effie Adelaide Rowlands
1101—True to His Bride 	By Emma Garrison Jones
1102—The Lady of Beaufort Park 	By Wenona Gilman
1103-A Daugher of Darkness 	By Ida Reade Allen
1104—My pretty Maid 	By Ni vs. Alex McVeigh Miller
1105—Master of Her Fate	I'-- Geraldine Fleming
NEW EAGLE SERIES	7
1106—A Shadowed Happiness 	By I^ffie Adelaide Rowlands
1107—John Elliott's Flirtation 	By Lucy May Russell
1108—A Forgotten Love 	By Adelaide Stirling
1109—Sylvia, The Forsaken 	By Charlotte M. Stanley
1110—Her Dearest Love 	By Geraldine Fleming
1111—Love's Greatest Gift 	By Effie Adelaide Rowlands
1112—Mischievous Maid Faynie 	By Laura Jean Libbey
1113—ln Love's Name 	By Emma Garrison Jones
1114--Love's Clouded Dawn 	By Wenona Gilman
1115—A Blue Grass Heroine 	By Ida Reade Allen
1116—Only a Kiss 	By Mrs. Alex McVeigh Miller
1117—Virgie Talcott's Mission 	By Lucy May Russell
1118—Her Evil Genius 	By Adelaide Stirling
1119—In Love's Paradise 	By Charlotte M. Stanley
1120—Sold for Gold 	By Geraldine Fleming
1121—Andrew Leicester's Love 	By Effie Adelaide Rowlands
1122—Taken by Storm 	By Emma Garrison Jones
1123—The Mills of the Gods, 	By Wenona Gilman
1124—The Breath of Slander 	By Ida Reade Allen
1125—Loyal Unto Death 	By Mrs. Alex McVeigh Miller
1126—A Spurned Proposal 	By Effie Adelaide Rowlands
1127—Daredevil Betty 	By Evelyn Malcolm
1128—Her Life's Dark Cloud 	By Lillian R. Drayton
1129—True Love Endures 	By Ida Reade Allen
1130—The Battle of Hearts 	By Geraldine Fleming
1131—Better Than Riches	By Wenona Gilman
1132—Tempted By Love	By Effie Adelaide Rowlands
1133—Between Good and Evil 	By Charlotte M. Stanley
1134—A Southern Princess 	By Emma Garrison Jones
1135—The Thorns of Love 	By Evelyn Malcolm
1136—A Married Flirt 	By Mrs. Alex McVeigh Miller
1137—Her Priceless Love 	By Geraldine Fleming
1138—My Own Sweetheart 	By Wenona Gilman
1139—Love's Harvest 	By Adelaide Fox Robinson
1140—His Two Loves 	By Ida Reade Allen
1141—The Love He Sought	By Lillian R. Drayton
1142—A Fateful Promise 	By Effie Adelaide Rowlands
1143—Love Surely Triumphs 	By Charlotte May Kingsley
1144—The Haunting Past 	By Evelyn Malcolm
1145—Sorely Tried 	By Emma Garrison Jones
1146--Falsely Accused 	By Geraldine Fleming.
1147—Love Given in Vain 	By Adelaide Fox Robinson
1148—No One to Help Her 	By Ida Reade Allen
1149--Her Golden Secret 	By Effie Adelaide Rowlands
1150—Saved From Herself 	By Adelaide Stirling
1151-- The Gypsy's Warning 	By Emma Garrison Jones
1152---i'a ught in Love's Net	By Ida Reade Allen,
1153- The Pride of My Heart 	By Laura Jean Libbey
115-1 - - t Vagabond Heiress	By Charlotte May Kingsley
11: ' ,liar Terrible Tomboy 	By Geraldine Fleming
LOVE'S KINGDOM
BY
CHARLOTTE M. KINGSLEY
Author of "The Love Knot," "The Serpent and the Dove," "A
Vagabond. Heiress," "Love Surely Triumphs," etc,
STREET & SMITH CORPORATION
PUBLISHERS
Copyright, 1903
By Norman L. Munro
(Printed in the United Stater Of L 0186X).
FROM DREAMS TO WAKING.
CHAPTER I.

A DISMAL PROPHECY.

June Drayton had come to a standstill under the blossoming apple trees, and stood looking with proud, admiring eyes over the brilliant scene that lay opened out before her.
"I love it. I love it,
And who shall dare Chicle me for loving
A home so fair !"

she softly murmured, adapting the words of the old poem to the requirements of the occasion as her gaze rested with loverlike affection upon the grassy slopes, the cool, shadowy groves, the far-reaching lawns, and the brilliant flower beds of Suncliff.
"Yes, I love it," she went on in a low, sweet voice, her (lark eyes glowing with tenderness and a smile curving her lovely scarlet lips. "I love it, and I am proud of it too; for there is not another such a beautiful home in all Canada—in all the world, I verily believe—and I would sooner be June Drayton, the heiress of Suncliff, than share a royal throne as the consort of a king."
It was a trifle extravagant, of course, that remark, but then youth is given to such things always; Suncliff certainly was a glorious place, and the heiress of it a most fortunate young lady.
The petted only daughter of a rich manufacturer—who had been born in "the States," and was therefore entitled to be called a "Yankee"—endowed with youth, beauty, enormous wealth, and surrounded by servants
to wait upon her hand and foot, indulged by a father who idolized her, June certainly had little to desire in this lower world that was not hers already.
In age, she was about seventeen; in beauty, she was peerless—a radiant brunette with fawnlike eyes and dark, curling tresses; and in disposition she was like a ray of. incarnate sunshine.
For a long time she stood there, regarding with looks of affection the grand old home over which she reigned like a fair young queen, and which stood upon an eminence, with walks and drives leading down to the river wall, along whose base the waters of the blue St. Lawrence rushed; then with a happy laugh, sweet and musical as the trilling of a linnet, she turned and ran lightly down the slope to where a picturesque arbor jutted out beyond the edge of the river wall and half overhung the swirling stream.
"Hard at work still, Finette?'' she queried, as she thrust aside the drooping vines that hung over the doorway of the arbor and fluttered into the presence of a trim French-Canadian maid, who was seated upon a rustic bench, with her back turned riverward, engaged in the task of darning some rare old lace, much to the annoyance of a curly little King Charles spaniel who frisked about her and occasionally tugged at her gown, as though impatient with her for not laying aside her work and indulging in a morning's romp.
"Hard at work still, Finette, and able to resist such an appeal as that?"—indicating the antics of the spaniel. , "Mercy ! how could you? Nap, you little rascal, come and have a romp with me, then, if Finette is so hard-hearted !"—catching the spaniel between both hands and holding him at arms' length above her head.
Then, unmindful of her dainty gown, with its rich
A Dismal Prophecy.	7

embroidery, down she plumped herself upon the floor of the arbor, and, tossing aside her hat, proceeded to give Napoleon Bonaparte the gambol for which he yearned. "
"Horrid old Finette, not to play with him." she said in laughing sympathy with the dog.
"I couldn't spare the time, Mees June !" responded Finette, herself, glancing up from her work and looking at her mistress with beaming, affectionate eyes. "Since you are determined to wear upon your ball dress this lovely lace which was upon the wedding gown of madame, your mother—peace to her ashes !—I must have it ready for Madame Mirabeau when her assistant calls for it this afternoon. Ah ! it will look lovely, lovely, that ball dress, and mademoiselle will he a picture—a symphony—a dream—all rose-pink silk and pearls, and these yards and yards of rare old point, as delicate as an embroidered mist. Ah! such a dress ; it will be beyond compare."
"And it's to have a train, Finette—don't forget that !" exclaimed June, looking up with eyes alight and face aglow. "I never wore a train dress, you know, in all my life, and as this is my coming-out ball, and papa said I was to manage it to suit myself, and do just as I like about everything, I particularly ordered Madame Mirabeau to make the train two yards long, and not a finger's length less. One doesn't have a coming-out ball but once in one's life, you know, so it's a very, very important occasion. Besides, it's a birthday ball, too, and I shall be seventeen years old that very night. Just think of it, Finette—seventeen! Mercy me, but I'm getting dreadfully old !"
"Dreadfully !" agreed Finette, who was herself close to thirty, as she glanced up from her work with a laugh. "Seventeen and not a wrinkle nor a gray hair—not. even one lover—yet !"
"Yes, I have; yes, I have—I've Nap !" exclaimed June, as she caught up the curly spaniel and pressed his flossy little body against her warm, soft cheek. "Beyond papa, this is the only lover I shall ever want or ever care a fig for, the little dog! and so—yah ! you horrid little beast! Go on about your business! I hate that!"
Then giving Nap a shake and a fling, she pulled out her handkerchief and fell to rubbing the spot where he had licked her cheek and put an abrupt period to her enthusiastic praise of him.
"Poor little Nap !" laughed Finette. "He only claimed the privilege of an acknowledged lover and stole a kiss, and if you adopt the same course with another kind of a lover when he comes along, mademoiselle	
"I certainly shall, if he, too, has an ice-cold nose and insists upon rubbing it against my cheek," interrupted June with a delicious little pout and a blithe, sweet laugh. "But, bother lovers !" she added gayly. "It's only a waste of time to talk about such things anyway. They're a great nuisance and cause no end of trouble—judging by what few novels I have read
	and I don't want to have anything to do with the
horrid things."
"You won't talk like that when the right man comes along, Mees June. You've only been six weeks out of boarding school, and you don't know your own heart yet."
"Don't I, indeed ! Well, I know enough to be sure that there isn't a man in the world for whom I would give up Suncliff and papa. They're lovers enough for nle, and I don't mean to give them up for anybody or anything that was ever created."
Finette darted her an anxious, half-pitying look, sighed so fitly and resumed her mending.
"There may be others who would like to rob you of both, mademoiselle," she said timidly, as if aware that she was venturing -upon delicate ground, and wasn't quite certain how her young mistress would take such a remark from a servant. "It is whispered that the grand English miladi up at Quebec, who was down here with her daughter during the Christmas holiday, has cast an envious eye upon Suncliff and its master."
"What! the Lady Valencia Thornhurst, that odious creature who was always talking to me about the `advantages of birth,' the blessings of social status and the `inalienable and unpurchasable honors of a pedigree which far outbalances any empty show of newly acquired wealth and stands paramount over all earthly things !' "
June had said this with such a capital imitation of Ladv Thornhurst's cold, placid voice and patronizing manner, that Finette laid back her head, and laughed heartily.
"That is the one, Mees June," she said. "I see you remember her, cherie."
"Remember her ! I should think I did, the detestable creature ! She spoiled all my holiday—she and her equally detestable daughter. Goodness me! I don't know what they call manners in England, Finette, if hers are a specimen, for it can hardly be considered eitquette even among the Hottentots to accept an invitation to visit the home of the wealthiest man in all Canada, and then talk to his daughter about the `vulgarity of mere wealth' and the `superiority of birth over riches.' I dare say that her ladyship and her daughter would like to have a few layers of gold leaf laid over their aristocratic bodies, for I hear that they are as poor as church mice, and only consented (hem!) to come over to Canada and be the guests
of her ladyship's sister, the Honorable Mrs. Dalroy, in order to economize by renting their `ancestral halls' and being able to make their last season's dresses in London do for this season in Canada.
"Do you know"—drawing up one knee and clasping both hands about it and growing suddenly and unmistakably serious—"do you know that I never knew what it was to actually hate anybody or anything until I met that woman and her daughter. I don't know what caused it, nor why, but from the moment I first saw them I turned cold all over—and when her lady-ship began to talk to papa about my approaching graduation and the necessity of my having a proper chaperon, as soon as I was ready to come out in society, I just hated her—yes, right down hated her! And when she said that papa's sister—dear old Aunt Prue, who has taken care of him and the house and me, and been a mother to me ever since my own clear mother died—when she said that she was by no means a proper person to be intrusted with the training of a young lady whose wealth would entitle her to such a position in society as I would eventually fill. 1. felt as though I could have flown at her and scratched out her horrid, cold-gravy colored eyes, right there and then. But there! don't let us talk about that odious creature any more; I'm only sorry that etiquette compelled us to invite her and her daughter ti, my coming-out ball ; but we had to do that, of course. out of compliment to Mr. and Mrs. Dalroy. And to think that her ladyship should be setting her cap for papa ! It makes me laugh, Finette—honestly and truly it does !"
"As why, mademoiselle? Meester Drayton is still young, is rich, handsome, distingue, and
"And not in the matrimonial market !" struck in June, with a laugh. "I have heard him say over and
Dismal Prophecy.
r I
over again that his heart was buried- in mamma's. grave, ,and that he could never love any woman as he had loved her; so, you see, there is very little hope for her ladyship after all, in spite of her high family connections and her gorgeous pedigree.
"But speaking of papa, Finette, did you know that 1 had a letter from him last night and that he tells me we are to expect him home at any day now, as he has concluded the business which called him away two weeks. ago? And just think! he wrote me from Niagara Falls, and all the time I thought he was at St. Catherine's—where his factory is. Whatever could have taken him to Niagara, do you think? And at this season of the year?"
"I don't know, mademoiselle, I am sure. It is only in midwinter or midsummer that the Falls are especially attractive, and this is only the month of May. But does not monsieur give any reason in his letter?"
"None whatever. He merely says,: `You will see by this that I am at present located at Niagara Falls,' and then goes on to tell me that when he conies home he is going to bring me something which he hopes and believes will make me very, very happy. Oh, I wonder what it can be, Finette? He never was so mysterious concerning his gifts to me before. Try and help me guess, there's a good soul, for you are always so clever at that sort of thing, and—I'11 tell you what, you shall have three guesses, and if, when papa comes home, it turns out that you have guessed correctly, you shall have a week's holiday and your rare to Quebec and back, so you can go home and spend seven whole days with your mother. Now, then, go ahead and let us hear what you think it is."
'Well, for the first guess, I should say it would be a set of lovely pink pearls to wear with your charming' ball dress."
"Divine! But it can't be that, you know, because papa doesn't know that . I am going to wear pink. Now, then, for the second guess."
"Well, for the second, it will be	 Let me see, now! What do you say to a pair of diamond ear-rings, or a necklace, or, perhaps, a splendid bracelet with a tiny little watch in it, all set around with precious stones ?"
"Delightful! But that's three guesses all in one, you shrewd old humbug, and besides I am too young to wear diamonds."
"But when you grow old enough, cherie."
"Why, then there are dear mamma's—the handsomest diamonds in the whole Dominion—and papa will have those reset for me, you old goose. Now, then, for the third' and last guess of all. What do you think I am really going to get?"
"Will the pretty lady let Wan-na-see-bee answer that question for her?" croaked a hoarse voice from the opposite side of the arbor, and turning with a little start of surprise, June saw the bent figure of an aged Indian squaw who had pushed her canoe up to the river wall, and mounting the stone water stairs, now stood looking in upon her with small, bright eyes. "Wan-na-see-bee can read the future as the lovely lady reads the printed book," went on the squaw, "and for a silver shilling she will tell what the Fates have written in the lady's palm."
"Jolly !" exclaimed June, springing up. "I never had my fortune told in all my life, Finette, and here's a perfectly splendid chance to find out all about my-self. Yes, come in, come in, do"—beckoning to the squaw—"and as I've heard that the more one pays the better fortune one gets, why, there are two shillings and here's my hand."
The old squaw pocketed the money, then took the
I
.,
A Dismal Prophecy.	13
shinty hand held out to her, and gazed long and earnestly into its pretty pink palm.
"Not all the silver nor all the gold in the world can make a bright fortune out of this, for the line of life is tinged with blood," she said dolorously, as she shook her old gray head. "I see here shadows many `and thick, and they are approaching thee fast, poor fated one. I see here a broken heart, a broken life, and a man, aye, two men are the cause of it !"
"Mercy !" exclaimed June, with a suppressed giggle. "I'm going to have more than my share, Finette. Two men! Just ' think of it! Perhaps I shall be married twice and have fourteen children, like poor old Peggy Bareau."
"Thou wilt drink to the dregs the cup of bitterness and sorrow," went on the squaw, not noticing the interruption. "Thou hast laughed, but soon thou shalt weep, and weep forevermore. The shadow of two women lies like a curse across the bright morning of thy life."
"Goodness ! I thought you said just now that it was two men! How very disappointing. But perhaps they are my two mothers-in-law, Finette, and I'm going to fight like sixty with them."
"Two men and two women will soon enter thy life and be to thee as a curse," continued the squaw. "Thou wilt love, and' thou wilt break the heart of him thou lowest. Thou wilt sin against him and against thyself~ and out of that sin there will come misery, bloodshed. death ! I see here a father, broken-hearted, a life laid. desolate, and thou reddened with blood, kneeling be-side the corpse of one who loved thee, only to be slam: like that. I see thee crouching in a felon's cell, with that man's blood still reddening thy wasted life. I 'e the judge, the jury, the scaffold, the cap; I see the
hangman's hand upon thy shoulder, and thou the most accursed of women	
"Stop !" cried out June sharply, her lips trembling, and her face grown pale. "Stop, I tell you, you are carrying a jest too far."
"It is not a jest—it is deadly earnest—it is written there and thou canst not escape it !" protested the woman. "This day, within the hour, the curse will begin to fall upon thee and peace leave thee for ever-more. Wan-na-see-bee has spoken, and it is to he !a'
Then dropping June's trembling hand she walked out of the arbor, trudged down the water stairs, and, stepping into her canoe, went speeding down the dark, swift river.
CHAPTER IL
FROM DREAM TO WAKING.
"Nonsense!" remarked June, with a faint little laugh which, in spite of her, had an uneasy ring that betokened its spurious metal. "It would be the sheerest folly to give it a moment's serious thought, and yet it (lid seem--odd, -didn't it, that she should talk about two women bringing evil to me when we had just been speaking of two whom I particularly detest? But there! I am not going to think any more about it, I'm going off for my morning's walk, Finette, and if that horrid old slow coach, Peter, should come back while I'm gone and bring any letters for me, you just take care of them, will you? I sent him over to the post office more than an hour 'ago to see if there were any replies from my old schoolmates (I've invited bushel, of them to my coming-out ball), and he hasn't show], the least sign of returning yet."
"Perhaps he has fallen asleep on the way home, Mees June," suggested Finette. "You know what a sleepyhead he is, that Swede, always dozing off the moment he sits down to rest."
"Perhaps," acquiesced June, with a smile, thee stooping to inspect Finette's work and to compliment her upon it, she picked up her hat, pushed aside the vines, fluttered out of the arbor and ran lightly up the grassy slope.
Her way lay through the apple orchard, across the smiling lawn beyond, and thence through the side gate to the picturesque highroad, and by the time she hats: reached that, all recollection of Wan-na-see-bee an4 her gloomy prediction had vanished from her mind. and thoughts of the ball, that glorious event of which
16	From Dream to Waking.
she dreamed constantly night and day, reigned there instead.
"Oh, what a lovely, lovely time I shall have," she said to herself as she tripped along, gathering wild flowers from the wayside and singing little snatches of song. "It will be the grandest ball that ever was, and I shall dance—oh, until daylight, for I love it so! Yes, and I shall-do my best, too, to outshine that de-testable Maude Thornhurst in every way—the horrid, stuck-up, sneering thing.
"Yes, I will outshine Maude Thornhurst if I possibly can," she went on determinedly, giving her small dark head an emphatic twitch. "She is a beauty, I know, and they say that she has been the belle of every ball she has attended since her arrival in Canada, but"—with a still more emphatic twitch of the head—"she shan't he the belle of nay ball if I can help it--and that's flat, and if she brings that latest catch of hers, Captain Philip Lexboro, of the Troopers, along with her as escort, I'll do my best to win him away from her for that night, at least, if I have to throw myself at the wretched little monkey's head. I've never seen him, but I know he must be a wretched little monkey to care anything about such a nasty, sneering, malicious little cat as Maude Thornhurst.
"And they say he does care for her, too, and that she's just heels over head in love with him," she went on, "for papa himself told me that they hung about each other like a couple of lovers, and it was reported everywhere that it would certainly be, a match. And a mighty good thing for Maude Thornhurst, too, if she did catch him, for he's immensely rich, is heir to. a title of some sort (I don't know what, and I don't care either!), and only exchanged into a Canadian regiment for the purpose of being near her, and so of course	
And there June stopped—stopped with a suddenness that was quite startling—and stood stock-still, staring at something which had just caught her eye.
That "something" was the lick of a masculine head just visible above the long soft grasses and the tall weeds that clustered about the base of a small apple tree.
"There! Finette was right after all," said June, with a mild sigh of despair. "It's that lazy Swede, Peter, and he has fallen asleep, as usual. I'd know that yellow head of his anywhere, especially if it was attached to anything asleep. And perhaps he has my letters in his pocket at this very moment—perhaps he hasn't been to the post office at all, and i f so	
She didn't stop to complete the sentence, but springing to the apple tree, seized a low-hanging branch, and shaking it with all her might, sent a shower of dewy petals raining down upon the sleeper's face.
"Wake up !" she cried out laughingly, as the shower of dew and blossoms came pouring down. "Wake up, you lazybones, or the first thing you know the cows will come along and eat you, for goodness knows _you're green enough, and that shock of yellow hair looks enough like a bunch of hay to deceive even a billy goat with	"
And there she stopped—stopped with a gasp of terror, for the owner of that "shock of yellow hair" —who was not asleep, by the way, but simply reading —had suddenly sprung to his feet and exposed to her mortified gaze the tall erect figure, the blue eyes, the luxuriant blond curls of the very handsomest young man she had ever seen.
"Oh !" said June with a little gulp of mortification and a countenance as red as a full-blown peony. "Oh, excuse me, I didn't know it was a stranger. I fancied it was a ser—that is, I thought	
"That it was some other party who had a `shock of yellow hair' and was `green enough for the cows to eat?' " he queried with an amused twinkle in his hand-some eyes. "That ought to be a lesson to me never to lie down in the grass again no matter how tired I may be ; especially"—with a laugh—"if I don't want to be bathed in dew and have my hair and neck filled with apple blossoms."
"I—I didn't mean it, and I wouldn't have done it for the world if I had known !" stammered June, growing redder than ever. "It was an embarrassing mistake and I can only beg your pardon."
"Which I freely grant, I assure you," he responded with a courtly bow, his eyes dwelling the while with a rapturous sort of admiration upon her beautiful, blushing face. "If you expected to find some one else here" —half questioningly this—"the mistake was only natural, and only a boor or a madman could possibly take offense."
"You are very kind," said June, "and I regret that I disturbed you. Good morning;" then, with a graceful inclination of the head, she turned and went back toward Suncliff.
But not the fancy-free, heart-whole June Drayton she was when she came up that leafy, tree-shadowed path. Ali, no! Fate's fiat had gone forth already, and to the end of her life she would never be that again.
Meantime, the handsome young stranger, with his hand resting against the gnarled bole of the apple tree, the blossoming boughs arching above him, and in his heart and eyes that gladness which comes to a man bait once in a lifetime, stood and watched her as she went slowly down the road and passed out of sight in the green dusk of the clustering trees.
"Who is she ?" he murmured, with a thrill of cc-
stasy in his full, rich, masculine voice. "I might have asked her—I wish I knew some one who could present me to her in the proper way, for if there be any truth in the theory of love at first sight, I have looked this morning upon the face of the woman who holds all heaven for me."
Under the shadow of the arching trees, with the sunshine striking down between the boughs and flecking her path with golden light, June went slowly home-ward.
What was it, she asked herself, that made the birds sin, so much sweeter this morning than she had ever heard them sing before? What was it that made the sunshine seem brighter, the odor of the wild flowers sweeter, and the roar of the rushing, distant river sound like music in her ears? Nothing had happened to make such a wonderful change in the world; she had only met a stranger, that was all.
"How handsome he was—how very, very hand-some!" she murmured. "Who is he, I wonder, and where did he come from? I wish I knew somebody
J
that knew him, and then I could invite him to my corning-out ball. How superb he must look in evening dress, and how heavenly it would be to waltz with him, if only just for once. Oh, if I only just knew him and could invite him to the ball—oh, if I only could ! I should make Maude Thornhurst and her wretched little ape of a captain turn green with envy and wish they had stayed in Quebec, where they be-long. Oh, I hate that creature---I mortally hate and despise her and her mother, and if—"
If what, she never made known; for, while speaking, she had passed through the side gate of Suncliif, through the apple orchard, and out upon the lawn, and then a voice that made her very pulses leap sang out cheerily:
"Here she is at last, by Jove ! Come here, you precious little wanderer, and give your old dad a welcoming kiss, and tell him that you're glad to see him home again !"
"Oh, papa, papa, you dear old love, how glad I am to have you back again," shouted June, as she sprang into the speaker's arms and "bear-hugged" hint with all the enthusiasm of joyous youth. "You dear, dear old papa, when did you get home, and why didn't	"
Then she stopped short, startled by the rustle of silken skirts and a faint purring sound from an adjacent summerhouse, and realizing that they were not alone, released her father, and turning, was just in time to see two ladies—one a tall, aristocratic personage of five and forty, with pale eyes, pale hair and a little, squirrellike mouth ; the other a dazzling blonde of twenty summers, and both sumptuously arrayed in. spick-span carriage dresses of the very latest mode—issue from the summerhouse and come toward her with a dignified strut not unlike that of the glittering peacocks on the lawn.
"Lady Thornhurst and Miss Thornhurst," ex-claimed June, masking her chagrin as best she could, and holding out her hand to them as they advanced—for she held a guest as a sacred hostage, be it friend or foe. "This is quite a surprise—quite a coincidence —your coming to visit Suncliff upon the very day of papa's return. Or did you meet him at the station and drive tip here with him?"
"Not exactly, although we did drive up from the station together, my dear," returned her ladyship in her gentle, condescending way. "John, have the kindness to explain matters to Miss Drayton. I think she has been kept in ignorance quite long enough."
"Yes, Valencia, you are right, so she has," returned
stand."
Then, as a faint inkling of the truth burst in upon her:
"Oh, papa !" she cried, growing pale as death and laying a nervous clutch upon his arm, "oh, , papa, you don't—you surely—surely don't mean	"
"That I have brought you home the best and the most valuable gift my motherless little girl could possibly have, now that she is growing up and about to enter society—a new mamma !" responded her father, as he took June's face between his palms and looked tenderly into her eyes.
Mr Drayton, with a breezy laugh and a sudden deepening of color in his. handsome, florid face.
"John! Valencia !" repeated June, glancing front one to the other in a puzzled way. "I—I don't undr-
CHAPTER III.
THE LADIES' BATTLE,
For a moment June stood as though stunned—all the color gone out of her bright ' young face, all the gladness gone out of her fond young heart—stood -and stared at him with blank, horrified eyes, and took not the slightest notice of Lady Valencia's extended hand.
It was a pitiful stare—full of mute anguish, mute horror, and dumb despair—then, like the breaking of an ice-locked stream:
"Oh, papa! oh, papa ! don't tell me it is true!" she cried, throwing herself into his arms and clasping her hands about his neck. "Don't tell me that you have given my mother's place to another—don't tell me you have done anything so wicked, so cruel as that! Tell me you are only jesting, papa; tell me you are only saying this dreadful thing just to tease me, for I would sooner be dead—dead and in my grave, papa, than have this thing be true !"
"Why, June, dear, I—I thought you would be pleased—I thought it would make you happier, child. and so
"Happier !" she struck in stridently. "It is more bitter to me than death, and it makes me afraid of myself, 'papa—afraid of myself and the future. Oh, papa—papa ! I would sooner they had brought you home to me in your coffin than that you had come to me thus !"
And then, dropping her head upon his bosom, she burst into a storm of sobs and tears that shook her as the tempest shakes a young tree.
"Truly a pleasant welcome home for you, mamma," dropped in Miss Thornhurst, with a sneer ,and a shrug
The Ladies' Battle.	23
of her silken shoulders. "After all, there are pleasanter things, it would seem, than coming home from one's wedding tour, if this is the reception one is to expect."
"So I perceive," returned her ladyship frigidly. "Miss Drayton is scarcely complimentary, considering what pains I have been at to make her introductory ball a complete social success."
"Don't be hard on the child, Valencia," exclaimed Mr. Drayton, glancing up with a look of mingled surprise and reproof at her ladyship and her daughter, both of whom had been the soul of gentleness, tenderness, and seraphic sweetness in his presence hereto-, fore. "Naturally she feels a trifle grieved at seeing her dead mother's place filled, and she does not as yet understand what benefits are to accrue to her from your guidance, your advice, and the association with refined and highbred gentlewomen like you and Maude. Humor her a little at first, and all will be right in time."
"Never, never, never!" blazed June, lifting her head and stamping her foot. "I won't be a hypocrite if she has been, papa, and I tell you frankly I hate her and her daughter, as. they in their hearts hate me. I utterly detest and loathe and abominate these two creatures, and, before I would suffer either of them to guide me, advise me, or bend me to their will, I would cut off my right hand !"
"June !"
"I mean it, papa, and I say it openly—before them —before you! I will never acknowledge this woman as filling my mother's place. I will never he guided by her, and I will never yield her obedience, because T cannot give her respect. She scoffed at my fortune, and she has stolen it from me; she sneered at my stead mother's memory (you never knew it. but she
did), and she has been content to crawl into her place like the serpent she is, and coil herself up in ease and luxury ; she jeered at your past; and she has taken you from me. I tell you again that I hate her—hate her—hate her—and I will pay her for this—her and her scheming daughter—if it takes every drop of blood in my body to wash out the score !"
Pale with wrath, her nostrils dilating and her light eyes emitting a gleam like the flicker of burning salt, my lady turned upon her husband.
"John Drayton, will you permit me to be insulted like this ?" she demanded, in a voice that shook with suppressed fury. "Am I to understand that you countenance this treatment of your wife?—this lowbred, vulgar exhibition of malice—and that you mean to allow my daughter and me to be subjected to this tirade of abuse ?"
"Hush, hush, for Heaven's sake, Valencia !" he ex-claimed, in tones of agony and despair. "Look! here' is my sister approaching. Let us, at least, patch up a truce before her, whatever must occur afterward."
Her ladyship merely responded by a frigid inclination of her head, and then glanced at the approaching figure of her sister-in-law.
A typical Vermont spinster, tall, lank, masculine, with her gray hair twisted up in a little knob at the back of her head, and falling in corkscrew curls upon either side of her narrow face, her "skimpy" calico skirts stiff with starch and guiltless of either spot or speck of any sort, onward came Miss Prudence Dray-ton with the stride of a grenadier.
"John Drayton !" blazed she as she halted before her brother. "Be this thing a fib as I've just heern tell on from the butler? or be it true that you've gone and made a fool of yourself by marryin' ag'in."
"It—it is quite true, Prudence," stammered her
brother confusedly. "Allow me, my dear, to present you to the Lady Valencia Drayton, my wife."
"How do, mum?" exclaimed Miss Prudence, bobbing a stiff little curtsy. "Hope yer well. And so, John, you've sot a wife at the head o' the household, have you? Waal, now, there's just one thing I want to say—that no new wife o' yourn is a-goin' to take the keer o' June Drayton out o' my hands as long as I'm a livin' woman. There! I've said my say, mum, and stood out for my rights, so I'll say `good-mornin',' and tell the upstairs gal to set a couple of brooms and a dust brush in your rooms, so's you and yer daughter kin set to work a-cleanin' 'em out and arrangin' to suit yourselves."
Then with another comical little curtsy she flounced about and stalked off in the direction of the mansion.
"Insolent!" exclaimed her ladyship, glancing after the spinster's retreating form. "Truly, my home-corning to Suncliff is a circumstance to be remembered, and"—with a nervous, sidelong glance at June—"you may be sure I shall never forget nor forgive it."
Like a flash June turned upon her.
"If that is meant as a threat toward me, Lady Valencia Drayton," she exclaimed passionately, "I accept the challenge and declare open war !"
"As you please," retorted her ladyship with an in-different shrug of her shoulders. "I came here pre-pared to be your friend, but if it is your will that I should become your enemy	
"Valencia! June !" exclaimed Mr. Drayton in shocked surprise. "My dears, my dears, this is terrible. You, my wife, and you, my daughter, to enter into rebellion like this when I had hoped and believed that my marriage would be a blessing to all concerned !"
"And it has been a curse to me!" struck in June half hysterically, "a curse which will darken all my life, and make me as bitter and as heartless as the foes with whom I have to deal. Again f say it, Lady Valencia Drayton : I accept your challenge, and hence-forth it shall be war between us. You have cheated me of my inheritance, robbed me of my father, deprived me of my every joy and every hope, and as you have struck, so will I strike in return. If you have one dear hope in your life, that hope I will discover, and never rest until I have made it as desolate as you have made mine. it is spite for spite and heart for heart, my lady, and if	
But there her stormy wrath broke and failed her. and all the rebellious fire within her changed suddenly to peace, to sunshine, and to sweetest melody.
It was a little thing to work so wonderful a change. merely the figure of a than issuing from beneath the blossoming apple trees, and striding across the lawn to where she stood, but one look at that kingly head. that handsome Saxon face and those bonny blue eyes
as sufficient to tell June that it was her "knight of the road," the herd of the morning's adventure.
"Hilary !" exclaimed Lady Valencia, hastening to-ward him with outstretched hands. "Oh, this is a surprise indeed. When did you arrive, and how did you find me? But, oh, pardon me, I had forgotten. This is my husband, Mr. John Drayton, Hilary, and his daughter, June. John—Miss Drayton—permit me to introduce my brother, Sir Hilary Chilton, of Chilton Towers!"
THE GLASS OF TIME.
Had a thunderclap suddenly rent the clear and cloudless sky above her, June could not have been more startled than she was by Lady Valencia's words.
Her brother !—this handsome man, whose open countenance, frank smile, and honest, steadfast eyes betokened a noble soul and a character wholly free from even the slightest approach to malice, envy, or petty spitefulness—this man the brother of Lady Valencia, her detested and detestable stepmother? Oh, it seemed too bitter, too terrible, too wildly improbable to be true !
"I think that I have had the pleasure of meeting Miss Drayton before, although she does not seem to remember me," Sir Hilary said, after he had exchanged greetings with his new brother-in-law. "But perhaps," he added, with a smile that made June's heart leap an 1 flutter with a strange new feeling that was part ecstasy and part pain—"but perhaps the meeting did tint make such an impression upon her as it did upon me, for I have still some fragments of the dewy apple blossoms and a twig or two from the tree down my hack as a reminder of the circumstance	
June colored like a peony, and laughingly held out her hand to meet the warm clasp of his.
"I remember it perfectly well, Sir Hilary," she responded laughingly. "I mistook you for our Swedish servant, Peter, whom I had sent to the post office to inquire for letters."
"Highly complimentary to my brother, I must say," interpolated Lady Valencia, with a faint curl of her short upper lip. "Set that down in your diary, Hilary,
28	The Glass of Time.
as one of your American experiences, but don't tell it at your club when you return. The richest heiress in Canada mistook you for one of her father's servants ! What a charmingly unconventional admission, to_be sure, Miss Drayton. May we compliment you upon your perspicacity?"
"The mistake was not at all unnatural, Lady Dray-ton," retorted June with a flash of angry resentment. "Sir Hilary was lying in the grass reading a book of poems, and as nothing was visible but the back of his head, and his hair is precisely the same color as Peter's
"Pray do not trouble yourself to explain," cut in her ladyship with biting sarcasm. "I appreciate the situation and—your lack of discernment, Miss Dray-ton. Under such circumstances it is, of course, quite natural that Sir Hilary Chilton should be mistaken for a drunken servant or something equally flattering."
Then, deliberately turning her shoulder upon June, she added smilingly :
"When did you arrive, Hilary? I had not the slightest idea that you contemplated visiting Canada."
"Nor I," he answered. "The fact is, I never took the notion into my head until last Wednesday week, when Entwright—you know Guy Entwright, of Ours, Valencia—asked me to run over with him and be best man at his wedding. He married a Canadian beauty day before yesterday. And as I'd a fancy to see you and Lilia" (Lilia was her ladyship's sister, the Honorable Mrs. Dalroy), "as well as to do something in honor of my twenty-fifth birthday, I tossed a few things into my suit case, and—here I am. I called on Lilia 'yesterday, learned of your marriage and that you were expected to arrive at your new home to-day, found out the name of the place and how to reach it, and as a result—behold me!"
"And glad we are to do so, I can assure you, Sir Hilary," struck in Mr. Drayton. "Of course, you'll stop a while with me before going back, if only to do honor to June's coming-out ball. It will occur a week from next Thursday night, and I know that this little girl of mine will be proud and happy to have you honor it with your presence. Let me send a servant over to your hotel and have your effects transferred to Suncliff at once."
It was not in human nature for Sir Hilary to re-fuse this offer, particularly as it, would bring him into daily communion with the girl who had ensnared his heart, and as her eyes echoed the invitation which her father had extended, he accepted it upon the spot.
"And now, as luncheon will soon be served, Valencia, suppose you and I and Maude go indoors where you may suggest such alterations in your own apartments as you deem necessary, my dear, and select the rooms you wish prepared for Sir Hilary and Maude," suggested Mr. Drayton. "While we are doing that, June can entertain your brother by showing him over the estate and pointing out all its points of interest. You won't object to that arrangement, will you, Sir Hilary ?"
"Object to it?" he repeated, bestowing upon June a look which made her pulses thrill and sent the warm blood flying to her cheeks. "I can think of nothing that would be one-half so delightful. Come, Miss Drayton, will you play the role of guide and show the over this beautiful place?"
"If you like—yes," she answered, dropping her eyes in maidenly confusion, as they encountered the ardent gaze of his; then with cheeks aflame and heart throbbing with some new bliss as delicious as it was strange, she slid her hand through the arm he proffered and he led her away—into the cloud or through a world
-36	The Glass of TiMe.-
"Time ? Ma foi! mademoiselle, it was ready at one o'clock, and it is now after two !"
"After two !" gasped June, springing to her feet. "Oh, Sir Hilary, and we have been sitting here talking ever since before noon, and I haven't shown you around the grounds at all. Come, let us go to the house as quickly as possible. I had no idea it was so late."
"Nor I," he said as he rose and followed her. "Time flies on golden wings at Suncliff, Miss Drayton, and we have been laggards indeed."
Then they fell to chatting gayly, as they hastened across the lawn, and up to the big stone mansion.
Surrendering Sir Hilary to the charge of a servant who was waiting to conduct him to his apartments, June ran down the broad luxurious hall, and sped up-stairs to bathe her face and hands and to add a few touches to her toilet ere she appeared at the lunch table.
CHAPTER V.
BETWEEN THE ACTS.
Who shall write the history of those ten bright days which intervened between the time of Sir Hilary Chilton's arrival at Suncliff and the night of June Drayton's corning-out ball ?
So happy they were, those days—so wondrously, so strangely happy ! for was not Hilary by J,une's side Lroughout every hour of them—he, the most tender of lovers, the handsomest and most perfect of men ? In those days June was learning woman's sweetest lesson, and her heart, like a rose unfolding, was hourly expanding to the warm sunshine of a great and perfect love.
So they wore on, those happy -days, which were to stand out forever as the brightest spot in all June Drayton's life, and even though the lovers themselves were entirely ignorant of the fact, the way hi which matters were shaping themselves was apparent to every one under the rooftree of Suncliff.
Mr. Drayton, who had conceived a strong liking for Sir Hilary, viewed with satisfaction the gradual unfolding of this tender love story, and openly ex-pressed it to his wife.
"I shall not like to lose my little girl, of course, Valencia," he said to her ladyship, "but as it is only natural that she should some day marry and brighten the life of some other man, as she has always brightened mine, I think I would rather that man should be your brother than any other that I have ever met. Sir Hilary is a noble fellow, and I feel persuaded that he would make my little girl the best of husbands, Valencia."
Between the Acts.
"I thank you in his name for the compliment implied," responded her ladyship, with the air of a queen dispensing gifts to the most humble of her subjects. "But at the same time permit me to suggest that Sir Hilary Chilton is no `fellow', John. He is an English baronet, and a term which one would apply to a creature of the masses is scarcely complimentary to a representative of the classes."
"I am sure I meant no offense, Valencia," returned Mr. Drayton, coloring a trifle under this unmerited rebuke. "I merely wished to say that I am fond enough of your brother to look with approval upon his very evident affection for June, and that as my little girl seems to care as much for his society as he for hers, I shall not withhold my consent to a union of their hearts and hands should he ever ask me for her."
"I should think not, indeed! Girls in your daughter's position do not get an opportunity every day to obtain admission to a family that holds birth and breeding far above vulgar wealth acquired in trade! The Chiltons have always married titles, Drayton, and mine, I assure you, is the first marriage that any member of the family has contracted out of that line. If Sir Hilary chooses to make my example an excuse for doing likewise, I can only say that June ought to consider herself a most fortunate girl, and you, as the father of Lady Chilton, should be proud and grateful !"
"I consider only my little girl's happiness," returned Mr. Drayton, with some slight show of spirit. "And if a king sought her hand I would not give her to him if he were not worthy of her, and she willing to accept him of her own free will !"
Then catching her ex-ladyship's cold stare, and the echo of Maude's low derisive laughter, he sulr_;ided
Between the Acts.	39
like any other henpecked husband, and said no more about the matter either one way or the other.
But not so Miss Prudence Drayton when she first became aware of how matters were progressing between Sir Hilary and her beloved niece, for if there was anybody in the world who did not stand in awe of her ladyship, the Vermont spinster was that per-son.
It was the evening prior to that upon which the ball was to occur that Miss Prue astonished her lady-ship by suddenly appearing in the drawing-room, in her best brown silk, her lace mitts, gold earrings as long as her forefinger and a brooch as big as a saucer, and which, being fashioned like a miniature picture frame, inclosed a highly colored portrait of her late father at the age of twenty-five.
Now as Miss Prue had never, since the hour of her ladyship's arrival at Suncliff, shown the slightest inclination to join these nightly family gatherings in the drawing-room after dinner was over, and never approached her new sister-in-law save to discuss some household affair, it was only natural that Lady Valencia should be startled by her appearance now and —when the spinster sailed over and plumped herself down in a chair beside her—should fall into the error of believing that her presence had to do with some hitch in the domestic machinery.
"This is an unexpected pleasure, Miss Drayton," said Mrs. Drayton in her usual frigid, semisarcastic tones. "Pray may I ask if there's anything wrong?"
"That's what I've come to find out for myself, mum," responded Miss Prue with a bob o f the head that made her long earrings jingle. "Mebby there ain't, and then ag'in mebby there be, and that air's the p'int I've come' to settle. I've just heern tell about the goiti's on of my niece and your brother,
mum, and bein's I hain't sot eyes on him nlore'n onct sense the critter arrove here, I kalkerlate that as the nateral gardeen of June Drayton—it's my duty ter hev a .good square look at him. And of he's a bit like you or that shiftless, lollopin', good-for-nothin' darter o' yourn, I'll set down 'my foot in a way that'll make the hull r'yal fam'ly of England wish thet they'd never raffled off no titles at their coronation bee, and never fit no battles with the grandfather of Prudence Dray-ton, mum!"
Lady Valencia gasped and looked the disgust she felt; Miss Thornhurst stared, then shrugged her shoulders and, gathering up her silken draperies, walked out of the room with her lips curled and her nose elevated at an angle of forty-five degrees; Mr. Drayton colored and emitted a despairing sigh like the meek little hen-pecked man he was, and then—so suddenly and so unexpectedly that everybody, including Miss Prue her-self, started and looked around—a masculine voice trolled forth a rollicking laugh, and Sir Hilary Chilton strode forward and stood before Miss. Drayton with his hands outstretched and his handsome face all aglow with merriment.
"Pardon me," he said, "I didn't mean to play the role of eavesdropper; but as I just stepped in to get June's shawl, I couldn't help hearing what was said. This is Miss Prudence Drayton, is it not? I am Lady Valencia's brother, Miss Drayton. I am not a bad sort when you know me, and as I hope that you will know me a good deal better, as time rolls on, let us try and start in as friends, and see how long we can retiain so!"
"Hilary !" gasped Lady Valencia, unutterably ,_shocked by this democratic proceeding.
Miss Prue had been silently regarding the young baronet over the steel rim of her spectacles.
Between the Acts.	41

"It's a surprise for me, I kin assure you, mum, to find him and you belongin' to one family. Waal, waal, waal! I never would think as you was a relation of hern, young man, no more'n I'd 'a' believed that John's full-blooded bosses was twins to a passel of nanny goats."
Then, without further preface, she arose from her seat, gripped the hand Sir Hilary held out to her, and shook it as though she were working the handle of a pump.
"I hain't got no more objections to offer agin' it, Sir Hilarious!" she said, in her strong nasal tones. "You're an out-and-out good sort, I kin tell that by the look e' your face, and the way you holds up your head and looks a body straight in the eye. I never sot much store by menfolks at no time in my life, but I reckon if a chap like you had come dancin' attendance on me when I was June's age, I'd a been a married woman forty year ago, as sure as eggs is eggs. 'I-Tarnsome is as harnsome does,' ses the proverb, and if you does half as harnsome as you be, June Drayton'll be a lucky gal."
And then, not waiting for him to reply, she dropped Sir Hilary's hand, shook out the voluminous drapery of her best brown silk, and marched out of the room, fully satisfied with the turn affairs had taken.
HOW THE BALL BEGAN.
It had come at last, the night big with fate and brightened by a thousand hopes—the night of June's coming-out ball—and from the first falling of twilight to the hour when the moon lifted its luminous face above the horizon, and soared majestically up into the purple sky, Suncliff was in a state of bustle and confusion that passes all telling.
From dawn to dark the decorators and the home gardeners had been busy transforming the drawing-room into a bower of beauty and the grounds into a veritable fairyland.
Upstairs in the sanctity of her own maiden bower, June, with the aid of Finette, had been busy arraying herself for the ball ever since the beginning of night-fall, and surely no bride ever spent more time over her toilet or was at greater pains to look her best than did she this evening. For were not twenty of her old schoolmates—beattties, every one of them—domiciled under the same roof with her, and it would not do—oh, perish the thought !—to have any one look fairer than herself to-night when she was to experience for the first time in her life the delight of waltzing with the man she loved.
"Oh, make me look like a dream, Finette,'' Shr had said to her faithful ally when she surrendered herself into her practiced hands, and like a dream slice was—a dream of fair girlhood—when she at length came out of them.
Her gown—the wondrous and sumptuous arrange went of rose-colored silk and point lace—which had occupied Madame Mirabeau's sole and undivided a±-
tention for the past ten days—fell about her in lustrous splendor, and added grace and dignity to her slight figure. About her white throat she wore a double row of pearls of great value; long gloves of palest rose-colored kid reached to within two inches of her shoulders; pearls were in the dark abundance of her perfumed hair; and when at length Finette fastened at her waist a marvelous fan of rose ostrich feathers, mounted upon sticks of gold, and put into her hand a great bunch of American Beauty roses shrouded in maiden-hair fern, she made a picture fair to see.
Already the first carriage had arrived, and the noise of others approaching could be heard through the balmy stillness of the spring night; already her school-mates and Lady Valencia and Maude Thornhurst had gone below to meet the arriving guests, and, flashing one last glance at her mirror, June threw open the door and ran out and down to the beginning of that glorious hall.
"My ball—my coining-out ball—and it has really come at last !" she said to herself with a little thrill of ecstasy, as she fluttered down the broad staircase. "Oh, Hilary, Hilary! will you be proud of me to-night, I wonder, and will	
Then she stopped and all her face grew rosy with sudden blushes, for there at the foot of the steps, with his arms outstretched to her, and on his handsome eager face a look that told her he had guessed her words, Sir Hilary himself was standing, with one foot upon the lower step, as if about to rush up and clasp her to his heart.
"Ah, how beautiful you are, my sweet, how peerlessly beautiful you are to-night !"
"Hush!" she answered with a happy laugh, and then, fluttering by him, she glided into the drawing--room, and so burst upon the sight of Lady Valencia
and Maude, as a revelation of just how beautiful it is possible for a girl to be.
"Oh, June !" burst forth all her schoolmates with one ' accord, "oh, June! how perfectly lovely you are, and what a beautiful dress! Oh, you dear, dear old love! you'll carry everything before you to-night."
"I mean to, for the ball is in my honor," retorted June, her face flushing with indignant color, and her eyes emitting a sparkle of angry resentment as she glanced down the shining room and saw that Lady Valencia, in sapphire velvet and diamonds, had taken her proper place—upon a raised dais under the canopy of roses where the guests were to be received—and with matchless impertinence had established her slaughter in the post of honor beside her.
Sailing down upon the pair with the dignity of an outraged princess (and womanlike, noting even then, how radiantly lovely Maude was and how well her costume of white satin and silver embroidery became her delicate blond loveliness ), she paused before the dais and motioned Miss Thornhurst to descend.
"Have the goodness to step down and take your proper place—with the other guests, Miss Thorn_ hurst !" she said indignantly. "If you have been counting upon my ignorance of social customs to bolster your daughter into the post of honor, Lady Valencia, permit me to state that you have made a most egregious blunder. It is true that you are the
mistress of this house	
"Exactly !" struck in her ladyship frigidly, "and as Miss Thornhurst is my daughter, her place is by my side."
'If you chose to abdicate- the post of honor and join her in mingling with the guests—yes!" retorted June spiritedly, "but if you elect to perform the duties of the mistress of this house—no! Permit rue
How the Ball Began.	45

to remind'you, Lady Valencia, that this is my ball; that it is your duty to introduce the debutante to society, and my privilege to receive the congratulations of the guests before they are presented to your daughter or to anybody else. Pray do not betray your ignorance of the post you are to fill this evening, Lady Valencia. Hark! the butler is announcing the first of my guests—illy guests, Lady Valencia—and if it is not your wish that I should remain here and apologize to them for the ignorance and impertinence of you and your daughter, Miss Thornhurst had better step down this instant and give me the post of honor !"
Pale with fury, and quivering with malicious hate, Lady Valencia turned to her daughter.
"Maude, clear, humor this barbarian, or she will make a sere and disgrace us," she said.
"No. I shall take measures for preventing either you or Maude from disgracing me!" retorted June, with smiling serenity, as Miss Thornhurst stepped down from the dais and turned upon her a look of malignant hate; then with a bland composure she took her place by Lady Valencia's side and smilingly turned to receive her guests.
So the ball to which she had so long looked forward, and which was fated to bring her so much happiness and so much sorrow, began with a quarrel and a signal victory for the beautiful debutante.
'.Y
CHAPTER VII.
"THERE'S MANY A SLIP," ET CETERA.
For perhaps the only time in her life Lady Valencia Drayton prayed that night that failure would be the result of an entertainment over which she presided, and so bitterly resentful did she feel toward her husband's daughter, so eagerly would she have welcomed anything that would have rendered the ban a fiasco, that she would gladly have seen a fire burst forth and lay Suncliff in ashes if only to have the affair terminate disastrously.
But "the prayers of the unrighteous," et cetera—you know the proverb—and here, as elsewhere, its truth was made manifest; for June's debut was the most signal of successes, and the ball rolled merrily on, without a single incident to mar it from first to last.
Never in all her ladyship's recollection had she participated in an entertainment more successful, nor witnessed a debutante score a more complete triumph than did her detested stepdaughter.
June practically carried everything before her, and so completely did she eclipse Miss Maude Thornhurst that that disappointed beauty, who had been wont to reign queen of every ballroom heretofore, found her-self crowded into the rear ranks, and felt as though she would have liked to assassinate her successful ival.
"'Pon honor, Miss Thornhurst, I never knew be-fore this that there was such a superbly beautiful girl as Miss Drayton in all Canada," said, in strictest confidence, Ensign Morley, of the Troopers—a hand-some, gallant, well-to-do young man, who possessed the unhappy faculty of always saying the right thing
in the wrong place. "Stunning creature, isn't she? 1 So full of vim and life and sparkle, you know. Makes all the other girls seem Hem ! Shall I fetch you an ice, Miss Thornhurst?` You look a trifle warm, I fancy."
"No, thank you," responded Miss Thornhurst, in a tone which assured him that fetching an ice to her was equivalent to carrying coals to Newcastle.
"Then may I—er—have the pleasure of---er—erclaiming a dance when that part of the entertainment begins ?" stammered the ensign, anxious to atone for his blunder.
"If you like, yes," returned Maude, eager that her rival, as well as other people, should see her led out upon the floor by as many different partners as possible, so that she might appear as popular and as much in demand as ever. "The first of the unclaimed (lances is a waltz, I believe, and you may set your name down against that."
"Done!" responded the ensign as he scribbled his signature in the place indicated ; then he glanced up with an expression of innocent amazement, and again exhibited his unfortunate propensity for saying things in the wrong place.
"By Jove! but here's an odd caper and no mistake,' exclaimed he. "Has anybody been having a lark win your dance card, Miss Thornhurst? or has Phil Lexboro engaged places by telegraph? Blest if `Captain Lexboro' isn't written against every waltz on the list. and the beggar hasn't made his appearance on the scene as yet. More than that, he told me this afternoon that he wasn't sure but what he'd send in his regrets at the last moment and join Edderly and Bangs in their fishing trip to Lachine. `Fishing trip,' indeed !"
"And you say that there is a possibility of Captain Lexboro not coming here tonight?" queried Maude.
overlooking all other points in the ensign's rather pointed remarks, and experiencing a pang of mingled wrath and regret as she remembered a certain very ardent note of acceptance which had caused her no end of happiness when it came, and which lay up-stairs in her writing desk at that very moment. "You say that Captain Lexboro asserted the possibility of his not visiting Suncliff to-night. Did he give any particular reason for such a step, Mr. Morley ?"
"Yes," returned the ensign, with an inane grin. "Said that these `coming-out' affairs were a deuced bore, that he'd attended dozens of 'ern, and that they were all alike—nothing more than big nursery parties, where a man was expected to waste his time in talking complimentary nonsense to a simpering schoolgirl who ought to be making dolls' clothes instead of thrusting herself upon a suffering public that didn't care two straws whether she `came out' or stayed in for half a dozen years to come !
"Fancy," he added, glancing across the room to where June stood receiving her guests with the dignity of a young queen, "fancy calling her a 'simpering schoolgirl'—glorious creature that she is! Well for Lexboro if he doesn't come, say I,' for half the mars riageable men in the rooms are raving over her al-ready, and he'll be sure to swell the list by one. She's just the sort of girl to take a fellow like Lexboro by storm and knock all his five senses endways if	
But here the tactless ensign suddenly halted, for, as he turned to glance at Miss Thornhurst he became aware that she had vanished, and glancing around the crowded room in quest of her, beheld her in the act of hastening toward the doorway upon whose threshold stood the figure of a tall, blond-haired. blond-bearded man of apparently two-and-thirty years of age—a man whose handsome face bore the
?unmistakable signs of dissipation, but whom It was easy to see nature had intended to be a gentleman.
"Lexboro at last, by Jove !" muttered the ensign; then as Miss Thornhurst's smiling countenance and her eagerness to reach the newcomer's side recalled to this unfortunate young man's mind a certain fact which he had heard whispered at the barracks, but had entirely forgotten until now: "Egad! what a dok.key I've made of myself to be sure!" he added dolefully. "I'd forgotten all about her being sweet on Lexboro, and vice versa, and as I've `put my foot' in it about as badly as a man could, I suspect that the best thing for me to do is to keep out of her way the rest of the evening."
Meantime, with face aglow and pulses throbbing, Maude hurried straight to Captain Lexboro and lost no time in appropriating him for her own.
"So you have come at last, have you, Sir Laggard?" she said as she slid her hand through his arm and bore him in triumph to a seat at the far end of the room, "and is this the way in which you keep your promise to come early? Why, it is after half past nine, and the ball will open in real earnest presently. Come, sir, give an account of yourself. But, no, you needn't. Ensign Morley has been telling me about that wretched fishing party and how near you came to joining it. And after promising to come here!
"It was most unkind of you to even think of going away with those horrid men, when you knew how anxiously I would be watching for you, and how tire-some it would be if you did not come."
"So Morley told you that, did he?" said the captain with a laugh. "Well, ungracious as it may seem, :Maude, it's the truth; and if it hadn't been for you I'd have succumbed to the temptation, sent my regrets at the last moment, and cast my lot with Edderly and
Bangs. I detest these `coming-out' affairs, and a simpering debutante is of all things the most nauseatin... Confound the sapheaded little idiots! why can't they stay in their nurseries until they've learned to say something that's worth a man's -listening to, and have got over the suggestion of bread and butter and weak tea that clings to every one of them? I've seen a hundred in my day. and I suppose this one isn't a bit different from all the rest of the species."
"Not a bit--excepting, possibly, that she's a shade more disagreeable," returned Maude. "Positively, Philip, she is the most arrogant, impertinent, and thorough detestable girl I ever met in all my life. Nature intended her for a fish wife, I imagine; and, if I were a man, I believe I would fly her presence as I would a pestilence. Not but what she is rather hand-some, you know—after that extremely healthy type which no art can render delicate and refined."
"I see—a regular stall-fed young woman, eh, with a figure like a milkmaid's and cheeks like ripe tomatoes," responded the captain with a laugh. "I f there's any way of getting over the necessity of presenting me, do so by all means. Perhaps she won't notice the omission and may not even see me in the crowd. A.t any rate, I'm not anxious to see her, so it's just as well to make the omission."
"Then let us go into the conservatory—there's no one there as yet—and absent ourselves until the dancing begins," suggested Miss Thornhurst, only too well pleased at the ease with which he fell into her trap and made it possible for her to have him all to herself for at least half an hour before he met June—and in that half hour, oh, what possibilities there were for her.
"Come, Philip, let us go in where we may enjoy a quiet little chat among the flowers, and leave this
detestable Miss Drayton to attend to her guests with-out us. Ah, such agony as I have endured since I came to this place—such insults as have been heaped upon me by that girl ! Do you know that if I thought I should be compelled to remain here long and suffer as I have suffered during the past ten days, I should actually do something desperate. I can't stay here, and I won't, and if something does not soon happen to change my mode of living here I shall take ship for England and procure a position as governess or companion in order to escape the horrors of this house."
Decidedly this was a daring step, a boldly baited hook, but Miss Thornhurst had already resolved that she would bring matters to a crisis this night, and force the captain into a proposal of marriage if it were within the range of human possibilities to accomplish it.
And apparently Fate meant to smile upon her efforts, for she had no sooner begun the bold attempt (and supplemented it with an upward glance like the appealing look of a tortured and helpless child) than Captain Lexboro stepped into the net with all the artlessness of unsuspecting man.
"Something may happen. to change your mode of living sooner than you suspect, Maude," he said in an undertone, as lie bent over her and spoke with that significance which no woman ever misunderstands. "Come, let's walk in the conservatory, or, if any one is there, up and down the terrace where we can talk without fear of being disturbed. I'd like to tell you about some—er—plans that may interest you. Will you come and listen to them?"
Would she? Almost before he had ceased speaking,, Maude was. upon her feet—the, certainty of approach-. ing triumph sending the bright color to her cheeks and making her senses whirl in joy—her little hand fell
52	"There's Many .a Slip," Et Cetera.
lightly on his sleeve. Lexboro tookait, drew it through his arm, turned to lead her from the room and then—there was mischief!
The first that Miss Thornhurst knew of that—or even suspected it—was when she felt a slight movement of the arm upon which her hand rested, and lifting her eves, found him standing like a stick or a stone beside her, so motionless he was and so (leaf and blind to her presence. She looked at him again to make sure that her.eyes had not deceived her, and a sharp throb of jealous wrath wrung her heart when she realized that they had not.
The crowd which heretofore had clustered so thick about the floral canopy under which June stood that it had been impossible to catch even a passing glimpse of her, had now fallen back to make room for some new arrival who was coming forward to be presented to the debutante, and at that vision of rare and radiant loveliness Captain Lexboro was staring with vide admiring eves, and on his face that look which comes but once into the face of any living man. IIe felt rather than heard the movement that Miss Thornhurst made, and, turning, looked at her, half bewildered, wholly under a spell.
"Who is she ?" he uttered, with a strange thrill in his voice—a thrill which Maude had never heard there before. "You know whom I mean, do you not? That girl. Why, look! see! Lady Valencia is introducing Jack Enderby to her, and in that case she is—she must be--the debutante herself. Is she? Is she?"
"Yes," responded Maude in a smothered voice, as she vainly endeavored to lead him toward. the door. "That is Miss Drayton. I told you that she was not at all bad looking, you know, and	
"And I find her the loveliest girl that ever drew the breath of life!" he struck in enthusiastically. "\Vait
"There's 1\'Iany a Slip," Et Cetera.  	53

—wait! I cannot go out yet—it would be discourteous —the very essence of bad breeding—and, as her guest, it is my duty to suffer your mother to present me to her, and my blessed privilege to receive a word of welcome from those lovely lips."
And then before Maude could stay him or even breathe a solitary word, he surrendered her hand, and forcing his way through the crowd, presented himself to Lady Valencia.
"Ah, Captain Lexboro! delighted to number you among our guests this evening," smiled her ladyship graciously, and with a look of genuine welcome as he bowed before her. "How well you are looking, to be sure. But permit me; this is my stepdaughter, Miss Drayton. June, let me present Captain Philip Lexboro, an old and valued friend of mine."
CHAPTER VIII.
THE MEETING.
Sir Hilary, who was standing close beside the dais, could not but see and understand the look which lighted the captain's handsome, dissipated face, and a sharp pang of jealousy pierced his heart. Not for long, however, for he soon saw by the expression of June's eyes that in spite of his pronounced admiration of her, and the delicate compliments with which he punctuated his remarks, the handsome captain bored rather than amused the debutante, and she was only too anxious to get rid of him.
"Permit me to introduce Sir Hilary Chilton, Lady 1 Drayton's brother, Captain Lexboro," said June, hoping thereby to put an end to the captain's too personal remarks, as well as to find an excuse for continuing her interrupted conversation with the man she loved.
"Delighted to meet you, Sir Hilary," exclaimed the captain, as he took the hand which the young baronet extended to him. "Heard Miss Thornhurst and Lady Valencia and the Honorable Mrs. Dalroy speak of you no end of times, but never expected to have the pleasure of meeting you—upon this side of the herring pond at least. Delightful affair this, is it not? I was just telling Miss Drayton that hers promises to be the most successful debut of the season, and that, unless all signs fail, she will be enrolled as the queen of the debutantes."
"She will be that by royal right, I fancy," responded Sir Hilary, a trifle stiffly, and with that air of partial resentment which a man in love feels toward another man who presumes to offer compliments to the object of his affection, and which told Captain Lexboro at once how the land lay.
"Quite so," returned the captain ; then he measured the young baronet as though he were about to fight a duel with him, and realizing that he himself was understood and disliked even as he disliked and under-stood the man before him, he gave Sir Hilary a- half-defiant, half-resentful look, and turning again, ad-dressed himself to June.
"May I claim the privilege of writing my name against one waltz, at least, Miss Drayton?" he said, eyeing greedily the ivory tablet which hung from her bouquet. "As you are a queen, be generous to the humblest of your subjects and grant him that small boon."
"The waltzes are all taken, Captain Lexboro," responded June, smiling graciously, but wishing all the time that this handsome, blond-bearded man, who was. for some peculiar reason, particularly obnoxious to her, would take it into his head to go in quest of his fair-haired inamorata of other days—Miss Thornhurst—and not insist upon lingering where he was not wanted. "I am very sorry, of course, but you are exactly one hour too late, Captain Lexboro, to secure any one of the waltzes upon the.entire programme."
"One of the polkas, then."
"There is only one on the programme, and that also is engaged."
"Then give me one of the square dances, as a sop to Cerberus."
"Pardon me, but I have promised not to participate in any of those this evening."
A scowl darkened the captain's handsome countenance and gave June an opportunity to see just how this big blond trooper would look when he was furious.
"Promised," he repeated, darting Sir Hilary a look of savage resentment, "promised to whom, pray?"
56 -	The Meeting.

"Pardon me, but I dispute your right to ask that question, Captain Lexboro," retorted June, stiffly.
` 4 meant no offense, 1 assure you," stammered the captain, coloring confusedly. "Pray, forgive my presumption, Miss Drayton, and believe that it was an unintentional error."
tune's only response was a dignified inclination of the head, and then, hearing her name pronounced in Lady Valencia's metallic tones, she turned and found herself looking into the jovial, smiling, lovable face of a woman who was to exercise a powerful influence over all the rest of her life.
A small, elegantly clad, aristocratic woman of perhaps forty years of age she was—a charming little woman, gowned in a sumptuous arrangement of white moire and point lace, with a necklace of diamonds `around her throat, a tiara of brilliants in her fair, soft hair, and by her side a tall, lean, soldierly looking man of fifty odd, with clusters of gray hair worn very thin at the top, a fierce cavalry mustache that was liberally streaked with white, and the general appearance of a statesman and a soldier.
"Geoffrey! Lelia! How glad I am to see you!" exclaimed Sir Hilary, springing forward delightedly, the moment he caught sight of them; and by those names June knew, even before they were presented to her, that the newcomers were the Honorable Mr. and Mrs. Dalroy, the sister and brother-in-law of her de-tested .stepmother. "By Jove! but this is a pleasant surprise and no mistake. Valencia said that she hadn't the slightest hope of your coming at all."
"Did she? Then Valencia was never more mistaken in all her life !" responded Mrs. Dalroy with a breezy little laugh. "As if I would forego the opportunity of meeting this paragon of womanhood, whose praises you sang to the extent of five solid pages
in your letter to me last week. Now, then, stand out of the way, you big overgrown boy, and permit the Lamb and me to be presented to this wonderful debutante."
"Then let me do the honors upon this occasion !" exclaimed Sir Hilary laughingly. "June, permit me to introduce my sister, Mrs. Dalroy, and that most henpecked of men, her husband."
"He looks anything but that," returned June with a winning smile, as she held out her hand to hint Then she turned and looked at his little wife, and, following the example of everybody else in the world, fell in love with her at first sight.
For one moment they stood looking into each other's faces, then heart went out to heart, soul leaped to soul, and in the twinkling of an eye they were in each other's arms.
"Oh, you clear, beautiful, lovable girl! you're worthy of all Hilary's praises ten times over !" exclaimed Mrs. Dalroy as she took June's face between her palms and, reaching up, kissed her on the lips. "Oh, how glad I am to know you, my dear! and how very, very glad that you weren't young in my day, otherwise this timid Lamb of mine might never have led me to the altar, the dear old stupid. Lamb, bleat something complimentary to Miss Drayton, can't you? and not stand there as though you hadn't a word to say for your-self."
"Can't!" responded Mr. Dalroy in a deep bass voice that was like the muttering of distant thunder. "I've frequently told you, Lelia, that you talk so much your-self there's no room for a man to get a word in edge-wise."
"A man!" repeated Mrs. Dalroy gayly. "You hear him, Miss Drayton—he actually calls himself a man, and all the while he hasn't the spirit of a mouse.
Just imagine, my dear, I've spent twenty years of my life trying to get that creature in a temper, or to make him jealous, but it is impossible. I ought to have married a man with a temper like a fiend, but instead of that—behold ! I have only captured a lamb that hasn't spirit enough to do anything but stand still and have his wool shorn like any other lamb, and positively won't forbid me to do anything that I want to do. Now what do you think of that, my dear?"
"I think it must be just delightful," retorted June with a laugh, "and if I were in Mr. Dalroy's place, I. should do the very same thing."
"Deserted even by my own sex. I wouldn't have believed it of you, Miss Drayton. I know ,that the Lamb will worship you for defending his course, but as for me	 Well, I suppose I shall have to do the same thing, for he won't quarrel with me whether 1 agree with him or not."
What response June might have made to this caul never be told, for at that moment, the orchestra in the ballroom struck up the first number on the programme. and with a thrill of wordless delight, the debutante realized that the duty of receiving her guests was over and the ball had begun at last.
`Moonlight and Roses'—the opening waltz, and it. belongs to me !" exclaimed Sir Hilary, as he turned a glowing face to June, and with a bow tendered her his arm. "Come, June; come, Geoffrey ; come, Lelia, and let us open the ball ! But, no! I suppose such a staid old married couple as you two are above that sort oi thing at your time of life."
"Vandal!" exclaimed Mrs. Dalroy, striking hint with the pearl sticks of her fan. "Lamb! take mv tablet and set your name down for every waltz on the program, and then challenge that wretch to mortal combat for calling me an old woman."
The Meeting.
"Didn't hear him say it, my dear."
"You wouldn't fight, of course not, you spiritless old noodle?" struck in his wife, with a groan of mock despair. "Oh, was ever an ambitious woman so bitterly disappointed before? A Lucretia Borgia wedded to a modern St. Anthony—a tigress married to a poodle—a woman with the spirit of a tomcat bound for life to a little white mouse! Oh, my cross is heavier than I can bear ! Lead the way, Miss Drayton, and if this apology for a man won't fight, he shall dance if I have to drag him on the floor and keep him waltzing until daylight."
June's only response was a sweet, low laugh, then she slid her hand through Sir Hilary's arm, and, "like one who treads in dreams a path of roses," ;vent with him to the ballroom.
For one moment of delicious expectancy she stood there with his arms around her waist, waiting to catch step with the rhythmic time of the music; then off they went whirling down the room with beating hearts and feet that seemed to tread on air, the light of happiness in their glowing eyes, and in their happy hearts that holier light which never yet has shone on land or sea!
1
CHAPTER IX.
WHOM THE GODS WOULD DESTROY.
Ah, that delicious first waltz! Although many followed it before that night of bliss had half worn itself away, none equaled it, and always throughout the measure of her earthly life it stood out in June Dravton's memory as something sweeter than all the joys she had ever known, or ever would know so long as that life lasted.
Dance followed dance in rapid succession, and June, missing not one of them, was deaf and blind to the fact that Captain Lexboro stood aloof and followed her with his eyes whenever she was on the floor, and, deserting Miss Thornhurst, joined the little court of admirers who clustered about her when she rested.
"Oh, it is like heaven !" she said to Sir Hilary as they whirled over the floor for the sixth time this evening. "Was ever ball so delightful before, I won-der, or ever girl so happy as I am?"
"I do not know," he answered, experiencing a thrill that set his pulses leaping. "I only know that I can-not believe it possible there was ever a fairer one, and that your happiness must be infectious, for I feel to-night as I have never felt before—so happy that I am almost afraid."
"Afraid !" she repeated innocently. "Afraid of what ?"
"I don't know, I can't tell—at least not here. May I try to do so somewhere else?"
She understood him now—she had scarcely been a woman if she had not	and, shyly dropping her eyes, answered with a timid blush :
`If it will please you—yes !"
"It will please me," he murmured in response. "Shall we go now or do you prefer to finish this waltz? We can dance at any time, you know, but we may not have another such an opportunity to talk of what I wish to say—must say—to-night. Look through the window yonder. The moon is high. the garden deserted, and the river like a path of silver. The world is like a poem to-night, and Nature's poem is in my heart, June. Will you come out with me, dear, and listen to it? But, no! You cannot !"—with a pang of jealous regret in his voice—"for that infer	 That detestable Captain Lexboro is watching us, and he would be sure to follow if we were to leave together. Confound the fellow! I never saw a marl before for whom I conceived such violent dislike !"
"Nor I," responded June. "How can Miss Thornhurst like him? He makes my very flesh creep. and if I were at all superstitious I should feel as though that man were fated to exert some evil influence over my life."
"He can never do that, dear, if you will come and listen to what I have to tell you," whispered Sir Hilary. "See! we are close to the door. If I leave you here. will you slip out when you can conveniently do so and meet me on the walk of the river wall, June ?"
She did not answer him in words, merely by a shy upward glance that told him what he wished to know. and breathing a tender word in her ear, he slipped away and left her.
For one brief moment she stood there, trembling with happiness, and conscious of the blessed fate that awaited her when she should keep that tryst on the river wall, then very abruptly a voice fell upon her ear, and glancing up with a start she beheld Captain Lexboro standing beside her.
"Like young Lochinvar in the poem, Sir Hilary
Chilton seems to be `a laggard in love and a braggart in war,' Miss Drayton, and not conscious of the boon you have granted him," he said, "for he has deserted you in the midst of a dance and flown to pastures new. May I crave the remnant of this watz, and profit by his loss?"
"Thank you, but I have no desire to finish it," re-turned June coldly. "Sir Hilary relinquished me at my own request, Captain Lexboro. Pray, pardon me."
Then, with a frigid inclination of the head she walked away, and passing into the conservatory, closed the crystal door behind her. Not that she meant to remain there for a minute. Ah, no! for here was a door at the other end which led out into the illuminated garden ; and with the quickness of thought she hastened to that, slipped through it, and, gathering up her silken draperies, fluttered down the slope to the shining river.
June gave the river not one thought, not even one passing glance, else she might have seen, resting like a shadow upon its shining sur face, an Indian canoe, in which the aged squaw. Wan-na-see-bee, sat, watching her with a fixed and steady gaze as she came trip-ping down to the river wall, with the moonlight on her beautiful, radiant face.
But of this she did not know -did not dream—for all her thoughts were of him, her hero, her handsome kingly lover, who was waiting to tell her what she longed so much to hear—and lo! as her foot pressed the broad walk of the river wall, he rose to meet ,her —rose from the shadow of the vine-wreathed arbor —and boldly took her in his arms.
"Oh, Sir Hilary !" she uttered, in a startled tone, but ere she could say more, he bent his head and stopped her mouth with kisses.
"Sweet, this is the tale I have to tell," he said, as
he gathered her to his bosom and looked down into her blushing face. "I love you, June; I love you, my darling, and you have known it from the first ; your dear eyes have told me that, and in the telling. bidden me love you still. I want you, June—I want you for my wife, and if your eyes have not belied your heart, speak to me with, your lips, now, and tell me the same sweet story. Tell me that von love me. June—tell me that you will be my wife."
And again only her eyes answered him, for a foot-step crushed the gravel walk, and springing out of his arms with a low, startled cry, June saw—then both saw—the figure of Captain Philip T.eNboro coming slowly down the slope.
"Confound the fellow!" began Sir i i ilarv, in a savage whisper, but before he could say wore, June put tip her hand and laid it over his lips
"Hush!" she said in a suppressed tone. "Ile has followed us, the contemptible spy! Hut. thank for-tune, I can manage to get back to the house by a path of which he cannot possibly be aware. l f you can do so, keep him here for a time, or he may out of pure spitefulness make us the butt of everybody's laughter for the rest of the evening. 1 eet rue in the ballroom half an hour froaui n:,vv ; until then act as though it didn't concern von what had become of me!"
Then flashing a last glance in the direction of the captain's approaching figure, she darted behind the vine-draped arbor, and plunging into a path so thickly hedged with shrubs that her movements were entirely concealed, she ran up it like the wind and made her way back to the door of the conservatory.
"Oh, that wretched. odious, detestable man ! Why couldn't he have kept gut of the way for just five minutes longer?" she cried out, as she stole in and,
crimson with embarrassment, hurried to a rustic seat shut in by a tall, thick growth of broad-leaved palms, and, sinking down, covered her blushing face with both hands. "To think that he should have come along just in time to see Sir Hilary—I mean, dear Hilary—take me in his arms and kiss me. Oh, dear! I never was so mortified in all my life. I feel ashamed to go back into the ballroom and look people in the face now, .and if I hear anybody laugh while I'm in the room, I'll feel like sinking through the floor, for fear that horrid big-bearded monkey has told what he saw, and people are laughing at inc. Not that I'm ashamed, of course, for I'm just as proud as a pea-cock to think that dear Hilary really wants me to be his wife, but	but	 Well, no girl wants any other
man present when her lover is proposing to her—especially i f he does it so perfectly lovely as Hilary did. Oh. I love him, I love Lim, I love him! There! I don't care a fig who knows of it. But I'm mighty sure I don't want that horrid old wretch of a captain to go breaking the news to everybody before I'in
actually engaged, and if	 Oh, there's somebody
coming in here, and I wouldn't be seen just now for all the world."
Then sinking back among the palms and holding her breath—in mortal dread of being seen before she had thoroughly composed herself—she sat quite still and silently prayed that the somebody, whoever it might be, would fail to detect her presence.
Onward came the intruders—there were two of them, and undeniably women, by the swish of their trailing skirts upon the marble floor—onward until they paused beside a twinkling fountain, and sank down upon a rustic seat, with nothing but that wall of palms between them and June Drayton.
"Oh, I can't stand it, manmma—I can't—I can't, I
tell you!" burst forth the stormy voice of Miss Maude Thornhurst. "Don't you think I can hear what is, being said by everybody present? Don't you think -I can see how blindly, madly, disgustingly infatuated he is with that coarse, ill-bred creature? He has scarcely taken any notice of me since he first saw her, and j before that he almost as much as said that he was going to propose to me. And now he has neither eyes nor ears nor thoughts for anybody but that wretched June Drayton. Oh, how I hate her—how I hate her! —and if she robs me of Philip Lexboro I believe I shall go mad !"
"Don't be absurd, Maude," dropped in Lady Valencia's cold, metallic voice. "She will never take Philip Lexboro from you, as you put it, and even though he go mad for love of her, what good will that do him? Her love for Hilary is so apparent that he who runs may read, and she must marry him at any cost."
"Then you must do something to hasten it before Philip's infatuation for her makes it impossible for me to catch his heart upon the rebound !" cried Maude. "Must I tell you, mamma, that I really love him? Yes, love him, and the bitterest disappointment I could suffer in life, the cruelest blow that could possibly befall me, would be to lose him, now that I have set all my heart upon the hope of becoming his wife. I tell you that this affair between June Drayton and Uncle Hilary must be brought to a focus as expeditiously as possible and their marriage hastened by some means—no matter what !"
"Nothing would give me greater joy than to see it solemnized to-morrow," returned her ladyship fervently. "My dearest hope is to see Chilton Towers redeemed from the clutches of the money lenders and restored to its ancient grandeur. It is my dearest
hope in life, and if I might live to see it accomplished, I should ask nothing more of Heaven. Yes, decidedly, June Drayton must marry Hilary, for it is his only hope of clearing the mortgage, and my only hope of seeing the home I love preserved to future generations of the family from which I sprang. June's dower will suffice to do that, and June's dower he must have —shall have—if I move heaven and earth to aid him in accomplishing it !"
What was it that came over June's senses as she heard those words?
Always and ever after she remembered that some-thing like a wheel of fire seemed to crash through her brain and scorch it, shrivel it until she could feel and act and think no more, and when it passed away again —that deathly feeling—there had been a long blank of which she knew nothing, only that Lady Valencia and Maude had finished their conversation, and had gone, leaving her there in the cool dusk of the leaves, pale, desolate, terror-stricken, alone.
"Fools !" she said as she dragged herself to her feet and began to pace up and down the conservatory. "God have pity on me—help me—guide nee—direct me, for I am afraid of myself—afraid—afraid--afraid! Her dearest hope is to save the home which my dower will bring him. I must marry him ! Must! Not because I love him, but because it will grati Fy her; not because he loves me, but because my money will pay off his debts and give him back his home. And they think me a mere puppet, these people; they think me a brainless and powerless creature who can he bent to their will. Well, they shall see !"
With that she turned abruptly, and walking with firm unflinching steps to the door which led back to the ballroom, threw it open and stepped smilingly forth.
A murmur of welcome greeted her reappearance, and Sir Hilary, who had been awaiting it, sprang forward with a glad cry to greet her. But her smile was not for him just then, but for the group of three —Lady Valencia, Maude, and Captain Lexborostanding hard by, and serenely chatting under the shining lights.
"Just in time, June !" exclaimed Sir Hilary. "They are about to strike up `Manola,' and that waltz is mine, you khow."
"Is it?" she answered, lifting her white shoulders and glancing straight at Maude Thornhurst. "I `hear it whispered that you have had more than your share of tile waltzes, Sir Hilary, and that, as a debutante, fi must be impartial in granting favors, and so—Captain Lexboro!"—lifting her voice, and holding out 11.n-tablet to him with a smile that made his senses reel--"Captain Lexboro, you asked me for a waltz this evening, and I declined, because they were all engaged. Since then I have canceled all that remain from this time forth. Here is my tablet—choose as many of them as you care to. claim, and if you particularly desire a square dance as well, I will consent to forego my promise and grant you one—two--three, if you like—of those also!"
CHAPTER X.
RULED BY MADNESS.
Sir Hilary made no movement, uttered no sound.
It was as though this reckless and incomprehensible step of June's had paralyzed him with astonishment, and he stood and stared at her with wide, bewildered eyes—eyes in which a shadow of infinite pain and sorrowful reproach Went- oddly with the fires of a jealous resentment—as she smilingly proffered her tablet to Captain Lexboro, and he, with the look of a man gone daft with happiness, feverishly scribbled his name against the dances he desired.
It was a dramatic tableau, lacking in nothing—not even the tragical element—to make it wholly theatric, for that was supplied by the black looks of Lady Valencia and the pale, malicious countenance of Maude Thornhurst, who, torn with rage and jealousy, and burning with an almost uncontrollable desire to spring upon her victorious rival and, catlike, dig her nails into that lovely, smiling face, clung tremblingly to her mother's sleeve and watched with glittering, vicious eyes the whole unexpected and inexplicable proceeding.
Perhaps that look of savage hate and terrified despair which met her eyes as she lifted them and en-countered the fixed gaze of these two women did more to strengthen June's resolve and to sweeten that moment of triumph than anything else in all the world could possibly have done.
At any rate, a smile of mocking defiance curved her lovely scarlet lips, a sensation of almost barbaric joy wrenched her rebellious heart and sent the crimson flush of delight into her rounded cheeks, the thrill of a savage and unnatural bliss tingling through all
the fibers of her being, and the light of a fierce unholy triumph glittering through the slumberous darkness of her fawnlike eyes.
She knew that she had wounded them, hurt them, stabbed them as bitterly and as remorselessly as ever they in their unwarranted spitefulness had stabbed and wounded her; and all that was human in her intensely human nature laughed for very joy as she saw my lady glance forlornly, appealingly, half despairingly at her brother, as though imploring him not to let all her hopes of redeeming Chilton Towers, and wedding Maude to the man of her choice, be put to the sword like this.
It had all_ happened within the space of one half minute, this dramatic affair and these wild thoughts that went teeming through June's fevered brain; but in that single half minute a seed was sown that not all the tears of all the world could drown, nor a life-time of regret stamp out after it had taken root—for the seed was Folly, the soil upon which it fell was a Woman's Heart, and the King of Tempters the gardener who planted and fostered it.
Captain Lexboro was the first to break the silence.
"There!" he said as he surrendered June's dance card and glanced up with such a look of ardent and undisguised admiration that for the moment the girl's rebellious soul burned with resentment and grew sick with loathing and disgust. "There, the deed is done, Miss Drayton, and I have laid claim to more dances than you will be pleased to accord me, I fear; but if I have taken too great an advantage of your generosity and claimed too many
"Too many indeed !" interrupted June, with a laugh, as she glanced at her tablets. "Too few, I fear, if the truth must be told, Captain Lexboro, for you have only claimed five waltzes and	
" June!"
The voice was Sir Hilary's. It was the first time he had spoken, the first time he had made any movement, offered any protest against this cruel and unwarranted proceeding, and as he came forward now and looked up at her with eyes of reproach and a face as pale as death, June's heart winced and something of the glory of her triumph seemed to steal away and leave her as she looked into those reproachful eyes.
"June, what is the meaning of this?" he said in a voice of deepest agitation. "You are treating me cruelly, shamefully, and without cause. Why are you canceling all your obligations to me? Not one dance that was mine before is left to me now. What have I done to deserve this treatment? Why have you changed your mind in this sudden, cruel, utterly in-comprehensible manner ?"
"It is a woman's privilege to change her mind, Sir Hilary," she answered, forcing a smile. "Other women do it, why not I?"
"But you are not like other women, June. It is your difference from the rest of your sex that constitutes your chief charm, and if	
"And if I am out of harmony with the rest of my sex I must lose no time in rectifying the error," she said, finishing the sentence for him. "I can imagine nothing so tiresome as an oddity, Sir Hilary, and an eccentric woman is of all things the most trying."
"You know I did not mean that."
"Perhaps not, but	- Well, what does it matter,
one way or the other? I choose to be like other women in future, Sir Hilary—all is said in that. Mrs. Dray-ton and Miss Thornhurst are models of propriety, 1 am told, patterns of all that is laudable in womankind, and henceforth"—lifting her eyes and flashing them a look of deepest significance—"I intend to be like
Ruled by Madness.
them, to act like them—to feel like then and to be their counterpart in everything. But, hark!" she suddenly added, as the band struck up the opening bars of that pearl of waltzes "Manola." "The dance has begun, Captain Lexboro, and as `Manola' is a favorite waltz of mine, I would not miss one bar of it for anything."
" `As the queen wills,' " quoted Captain Lexboro, as he held out his arms to her, but ere she could glide into his embrace, Sir Hilary stepped between them.
"Pardon me," he said, flashing Captain Lexboro a look of angry resentment, "pardon me, but I claim a prior right, sir, and I am not disposed to relinquish it like this. June, this waltz is mine, it is the one I chose of all others on the program, because yolk said it was your favorite—the one I have looked forward to, waited for, dreamed of all evening, and you shall not deprive me of it like this."
"Shall not, Sir Hilary 'Chilton? That is strong language, sir!"
"This cruel and utterly inexplicable situation calls for strong language," he made answer. "I know not what madness has come over you since last we met, June; I know not why you choose to insult me, humiliate me, wrong me in this cruel and uncalled-for manner, but I do know that you, of your own free will, gave me the right to claim this dance and that by the terms of that grant you, are under obligation to me!"
For one moment, June's heart flew back-to him, and leer fixed determination wavered.
Ah, how handsome he looked, how grand, how noble, she thought, with a thrill of conscious pride in the knowledge that this king among men loved her with the one great passion of his blameless life.
Then, while that feeling of tenderness stirred her
heart and drew it back to him, she caught the eyes of Lady Valencia fixed upon her with an expression of boundless hope mingled with a silent sort of mockery , that seemed to say : "She loves him, and she will not throw him aside, dare not throw him aside, so there is no longer cause for fear !"
At the sight of that look, all the chastening fire vanished from June's heart and left it cold again—all the tenderness and all the sweetness died out within her, and one feeling--a bitter and unholy resentment toward this woman who had robbed her of her home, had usurped her dead mother's place, had come between her and her father, and now sought to make of her the instrument that should restore the fallen for-tunes and the ancient grandeur of the race of Chilton —fired her soul and awoke the vengeful passion of her rebellious heart. Of course it was unreasonable, absurd, far-fetched—all this childish resentment! June was acting like "a simpering schoolgirl," indeed, not as a sensible and dignified young woman would do.
A momentary silence had fallen after Sir Hilary's last words, and now he broke it again.
"You hear what I say, June ?" he said to her as he took a step forward with arms outstretched as if to take her into his embrace and whirl her away to the lilt of the joyous music. "This dance belongs to me, and I hold you under obligation."
"I have canceled all obligations to you !" she answered fiercely, as she thrust aside his extended arms and passed him like a flash of flame. "If you desire so much to participate in this particular dance, turn to your niece, Miss Thornhurst, who doubtless has manv vacant places on her tablets now! A fair ex-change is no robbery. I have taken Captain Lexboro from her—let her take you instead, and be as merry as she can. No man—and no woman, either—bends
June Drayton to his or her will, Sir Hilary Chilton, and if any present cherish such a hope, let all read their answer—thus !"
Then like a flash she was in Captain Lexboro's em-brace, his arms were about her waist, his detested face was smiling down into hers, and together they went whirling down the room, under the blossoms and the glowing lights, to the rhythmic strains of her favorite waltz.
And Sir Hilary?
Like a man who had just heard his death warrant read, after life and hope and freedom had been promised him, he, poor fellow, like a statue stood and watched her as she whirled away, and every note of her ringing laughter stabbed him like a two-edged sword !
So the play that had begun as a comedy took a tragical turn, and the two men and two women, of whose coming Wan-na-see-bee had warned her, entered into the story of June Drayton's life, and cast the first shadow of that dreadful prophecy across its bright young morning.
CHAPTER XI.
AN UNCONVENTIONAL PROPOSAL.
How long he stood there staring after her, with that pale face and those pained eyes, Sir Hilary Chilton never knew, for a sort of stupor had fallen upon him, and locked all his senses in an icy spell, but it seemed to him that hours must have elapsed since she whirled away from him and went drifting down the room in the arms of Captain Lexboro—that he must have stood and watched them for an eternity, as they-glided hither and thither in the mazy movements of that endless waltz—ere the sound of a well-known voice fell upon his ear, and a gentle tap on the shoulder from the pearl sticks of Mrs. Dalroy's closed fall startled him out of his stupor and recalled him to himself.
"A penny for your thoughts, Hilary—if they're worth such an extravagant sum," laughed she: "Goon} gracious! are you contemplating assassinating some one, or have you already done so? Do you know, 1 positively couldn't resist the temptation to send thr Lamb hunting for some neglected wallflower witl whom to finish this waltz, while I made it my busines, to come over here and find out what can be the matter with you."
"He has been most scandalously treated, most shamefully, most barbarously, most unpardonably in suited by that miserable savage, my stepdaughter Lelia," broke in the splenetic, voice of Lady Valencia, and then before Sir Hilary could forestall it—anal. indeed, before he could resent the epithet she had applied to the girl he loved—her ladyship launcher: pellmell into the subject. and gave her sister a glowing account of the whole proceeding.
"A more wanton act of insolence, or a more willful or deliberately planned insult I never witnessed in all my life, Lelia," she concluded, her thin, sallow face flushing, and her eyes emitting a vicious sparkle as she caught the sound of June's mocking laughter, and glanced up in time to see her and the captain go whirling by for perhaps the fifth time since the waltz begun.
"It is very strange," returned Mrs. Dalroy soberly, a puzzled expression creeping into her pleasant eyes. "Are you quite sure, Hilary, that you have done nothing to merit such treatment at her hands?"
"Quite!" he answered with emphasis. "Good Heaven! would I—could I—do aught to give her offense, after what I wrote you, Lelia? I at fault? I in any way accountable for this cruel and incomprehensible thing? W1i t--, we never had one misunderstanding, one cross word, and had you asked me ten minutes ago what was my positive belief, I should have told you that, had not an untimely and unforeeen accident prevented her answering the question I had asked her, and putting into actual words the reply which I read in her dear eyes, she would have been my promised wife at this very minute."
"Oho! it has gone that far, then ?"
"Yes, I told her that I loved her, I asked her to be my wife not more than half an hour ago, and if she is not the irfost heartless of flirts, the most unprincipled of women, and the basest of deceivers, her conduct then can only be explained by the word love. She left 1e in hope, she went from me with smiles upon her lips and the unspoken promise of my future happiness in her dear eyes, and she meets me again like this. Oh, I cannot fathom it, Lelia—I cannot understand this dreadful change ! She knows that all my hopes are in her hands, that all my happiness lies in the possi-
76	An Unconventional Proposal.
bility of winning her for my wife, and if, as I believe, she really does love me	"
"Love you !" struck in Maude Thornhurst with a laugh of derision that was broken in its midst by a sob of angry despair. "She loves no one but herself, and she cares not how many hearts she breaks so that she gratifies her own callous nature. She is a flirt—a soulless, heartless flirt—and I have known it from the first. She has wrung from your lips the confession she desires to hear, the confession she has been planning to have you make, and now she wants no more of you. She has dropped you as she intended—as she will drop Philip Lexboro when she has made him do the same thing, and has succeeded in estranging his heart from mine forever. Do you want an explanation of her conduct? She hates me, she is jealous of me, and has taken Philip away from me out of a spirit of revenge."
All this Miss Thornhurst verily believed=for she had no means of knowing the truth; but in spite of her vehemence, her angry assertion only elicited a smile of derision from Mrs. Dalroy.
"Don't be absurd, my dear," said that practical and sharp-sighted little body. "The idea of June Drayton being jealous of you, after such a triumph as she has scored to-night! Your star has set, my dear, and June Drayton's has just risen. Whatever her motive for this sudden and singular change, never for a moment believe that jealousy of you has anything to do with it."
"Then what has caused it?"
"I don't know, my dear—I wish I did, and then, perhaps I might prevent her doing something that may ruin her whole life; for I have taken a fancy to the young girl, and Hilary's love for her only serves
An Unconventional Proposal.	77
to make her more dear to me, and to fill me with a determination to have her for a sister."
"Lelia!"
`There, there ! For pity's sake, don't hug me, you impetuous boy ! for there are at least a dozen persons looking in this direction, and I wouldn't. have you make a laughingstock of me for worlds. Now, then, be rational for a moment, and don't make poor June any more miserable than she is already by embracing any other women in her presence."
"Miserable !" he echoed, with a laugh of bitter in-credulity. "Does she appear very miserable at present? See how she looks up into that insufferable puppy's face and drinks in the words he is saying to her as they dance ! Look how she smiles at him—listen to her laughter ! Can any woman be miserable who acts and laughs like that?"
"Oh, you men, you men, how little you know of us after all !" exclaimed Mrs. Dalroy, with a groan of despair. "And to think that such gullible, short-sighted, unsophisticated creatures as you are called the lords of creation ! The `lords,' indeed! Better call yourselves the loons and have done with it!
"Can't you see that she is merely acting a part that is highly distasteful to her? Wretched? Of course she is wretched. I see it in her face, in those very smiles which she bestows so lavishly upon Philip Lexboro ; and this I tell you, Hilary : What you read in her eyes to-night was and is still the truth. She loves you and you only, and, blameless though you may be, and doubtless are, for this sudden and inexplicable change in her actions toward you, there is a cause, and a deep one, for all that she has done and said since last you met her. She is not a girl to take such a decisive step, make such a desperate move, without some strong motive for it, and, unless I amn
as blind as a mole and as fanciful as an old woman, that motive has to do with you."
"With me? Why, how? In what way !"
"Oh, ,dear ! How in the world should I know when you don't. I can only tell you what I suspect, and only advise you how to act under the circumstances."
"And that is ?"
"To go away," she made answer. "To take your departure from Suncliff this very night, and keep yourself hidden for a week or ten days. There's nothing as potent as absence to teach a woman how dear a man is to her, and nothing like the flight of a blessing to make it look brighter and better and more worth the having. Go away. That's your best plan—go away at the very beginning of this difficulty, and I'll wager you anything you like that you'll nip it in the bud and make June so thoroughly- wretched and ,o utterly sick of the part she is playing that she'll be ready to leap into your arms the moment you come back and hold them out to her. But see! there is the Iamb making straight for that odious Miss Tod-hunter, with the evident intention of asking her to lance with him, and I'd die a hundred deaths sooner than have him put his arm around the waist of that notorious flirt. You really must excuse me unless you want to see me go into hysterics and create a scene. (o away, Hilary, take my advice and go away from Suncliff this very night, and, depend upon it, all will come right again !"
Then, like the blessed little ray of human sunshine that she was, she flashed him a smile of encouragement and fluttered away to join her liege lord at the other end of the room.
Meantime the waltz sped merrily, and June, the wretchedest creature in all the crowded room, laughed and danced and chatted with such reckless abandon
An Unconventional Proposal.	79
that she heard people remarking upon her unusual gayety as she whirled past them in the embrace of the big blond trooper, whose inflammable heart she had ignited with her rich, dark loveliness, and set blazing as though it were so much tow.
She did not calculate the amount of damage she was doing in that direction, for to do her justice she gave him not so much as one small corner in her thoughts, and not heeding—scarcely hearing—the tender and complimentary things he said as they circled about to the rhythmic measures of the music and the gay laughter of a hundred happy couples, sht laughed because her feelings must have some vent, talked because her tortured heart would continue to rebuke her with a still, small voice; whose accusing words she vainly hoped to drown, and smiled because she was afraid—horribly afraid—that if she did not do something to keep herself keyed up to "concert pitch" she would break down and begin to cry.
And Captain Lexboro was not insensible to all thi, —no, not he !
That he had fallen hopelessly in love with that dark-eyed siren who, in a fit of pique, was making cat's-paw of him and a football of his heart, there could be no possible doubt, for his was of those in-flammable natures that leap to love or hate with the swiftness of a lightning flash and touch the highest heights of the one or the deepest depths of the other in the very moment of its birth.
That this beautiful, reckless little pagan was in love with Sir Hilary Chilton, he was aware. but he als( knew—by reason of this sudden favor shown to hill) at the expense of his rival—that some difficulty ha(: suddenly risen between them, and, being unscrupulous. he resolved to make capital of it and to push his own desires to the front.
$o	An Unconventional Proposal.
Hearts are best caught upon the rebound and women easiest driven into madness when they are wroth with those they love, he recollected, and so, with his soul aflame with passion and his heart bent upon satisfying its own desires, he took counsel of himself and re-solved to profit—if profit were possible, be the means ignoble or otherwise—by the chance which fate had given him.
"Do you believe in love at first sight, Miss Dray-ton?" he whispered to her as they whirled on to the lilt of the rippling music and the storm of the fierce and widely different passions that rocked their two hearts. "Ah, yes, I see that you do !"—as she lifted her dark eyes, thinking of her first meeting with Sir Hilary. "Laugh at my madness if you will, sneer at my presumption if you must, but I love you, Miss Drayton—I loved you from the first moment my eyes fell upon your face—and if it be possible, I mean to win you for my wife."
It had come so suddenly, so abruptly, and upon so brief an acquaintance, this startling declaration, that June actually gasped for breath, and a shade of deeper pallor fell upon her upturned face.
"Captain Lexboro ! .Are—are you mad?"
"Yes," he answered vehemently, and with his lips so close to her ear that his breath seemed to burn her cheek. "Mad for love of you, June—mad enough to hope that I may one day win you, to believe that such love as mine must command success, and to feel that it cannot, must not, be in vain ! I want you for my wife, June—oh, give me hope, I beseech you !"'
"I cannot, for your hopes are vain, and no power on this earth could ever tempt me to link my life to yours."
Those were the words that sprang to June's lips, but never to be uttered ! For ere she could speak
An Unconventional Proposal.	S r
them, her glance, flying to the spot where she had seen Sir Hilary—but now saw him no more—encountered the black looks and the anxious but threatening stare of Maude Thornhurst and Lady Valencia, and once again that spirit of absurd rebellion stirred her heart, that spell of madness warped her reason, and that insane desire to baffle the ends of those two women, let it cost her what it might, took possessiou of her, and bent her to its will.
"Give me hope, Miss Drayton," continued Captain Lexboro ardently. "Ah, give me hope, I beg of you.,,
"I cannot at present, for—I do not know my own heart yet," she answered in a strangling tone. "Oh, do not ask me more now, but dance—dance—dance, and pray with me that this wretched ball will soon be over !"
CHAPTER XII.
THE LITTLE RIFT WITHIN THE LUTE.
How she ever managed to complete that wretched and seemingly endless waltz, June Drayton was never able to understand, and afterward when she looked 'back and recalled her mental sufferings during those wretched twenty minutes before the music ceased, and the dancers sought their seats or indulged in a promenade up and down the long brilliantly lighted ball-room, it was always a source of wonder to her how she ever managed to resist the temptation to tear herself out of Philip Lexboro's embrace and rush shrieking out of the room.
But it came to an end at last, that waltz which she had looked forward to so eagerly, and which had turned out to be such a terrible infliction, and suffering Captain Lexboro to lead her to a quiet seat amid the flowers in the green dusk of the conservatory, where she would be out of sight, if not out of sound, of the gay throng in the crowded ballroom, where the lights seemed to hurt her eyes, the sounds of merriment seemed to pain her ears, and the sight of so many happy faces wrung her heart to its very core, she dispatched him for an ice—not because she wished one. but because she desired to be alone—and covering her face with her hands, gave way at last to a fit of weeping.
"Oh, what a fool I am—what a fool I am !" she cried out in her despair. "What are these women to me that I should wreck my own happiness for the sake of defeating their plans, and what is all the revenge in the world compared with Hilary's love? If they have injured me. why should I make. him suffer for it? . Ile is
not to blame for their misdeeds; why, then, should I visit the punishment of them upon his dear head? Why crucify my own heart for the sake of smiting theirs, and why cast from me a love that will glorify my life simply to come between Lady Valencia and the goal of her ambition? Ah, no, no! I will not! I have had enough of this despicable business—enough of Captain Lexboro's odious attentions, and more than enough of this detestable part which I am playing. I will throw it up, abandon it, be myself again and, choosing love instead of revenge, will go back to Hilary and ask him to forgive me for my cruelty, pardon me for my madness, and beg him to take me to his heart again and save me from the consequences of my own mad folly !"
So it had come at last, that reaction upon which Mrs. Dalroy had counted, and the girl's true nature was again asserting itself; for the fires of wrath had burned out in her rebellious heart, the storm of resentment had passed away and once again love reigned supreme.
Ever a creature if impulse, she sprang up the moment that that resolution took shape within her mind. and, unmindful of her red and swollen face, hurried out of the conservatory and went in quest of Sir Hilary.
Almost the first person she encountered was the Honorable Mrs. Dalroy.
"Aha! she has come to her senses, and much sooner than I fancied," said that lady to herself.
"Ah, my dear, I am so glad that I have found you!" she said, "for I didn't want to take my departure without making my adieus in person, and thanking you for this charming evening. Your debut has been a perfect success, Miss Drayton—the success of the season, I may say, dear—and the ball so de-
84	The Little Rift Within the Lute.
lightful that I would gladly stay to its close instead of tearing myself away like this."
"What, going away, Mrs. Dalroy ?" cried June, sincerely disappointed. "And so early, too? Oh, you really must not do it, dear, dear Mrs. Dalroy. Why, it isn't midnight yet."
"I know, my dear, but the Lamb is sleepy, and if I don't get him home at once he'll fall asleep and disgrace me, and so I must fly in order to avert it. Now, then, good night, my dear, and the happiest of dreams after the ball is over. Dream of love, the best and brightest gift that God. can give to woman, and re-member that there is nothing like it, nothing half so precious in all the whole wide world. A happy marriage is the greatest blessing that can befall a woman, my dear, and that can only be secured through a union that is blessed with love and crowned by the coupling of two perfect hearts !"
Then dropping a tender kiss upon June's blushing face and giving her an effectionate squeeze, away she fluttered and left the debutante to follow the dictates of her own heart.
"Bless her for that suggestion," murmured June, smiling through the tears that welled up and dimmed her eyes. "I will dream of love to-night, and" no shadow of a paltry and ignoble revenge shall dim the glory of it, for I shall be Hilary's promised wife, and the folly which came so near to wrecking our two lives shall be put behind me forever !"
And having arrived at that conclusion—and giving not one thought to Captain Philip Lexboro or the ice for which she had dispatched him, away she went in quest of the young baronet, determined to confess her error, to ask his pardon and to save herself from future folly by giving him her plighted word.
But finding Sir Hilary was a more difficult task
than she had imagined; for, although she searched the rooms and the halls and even the terrace, no sight of his beloved face greeted her eager eyes.
"If any one knows where he is, Lady Valencia will he the one," she said to herself, and so to Lady Valencia she went. She found her pacing up and down the west terrace with her arm about her daughter's waist, and obviously engaged in the task of trying to aid Miss Maude in overcoming a threatening attack of hysterics.
"Pardon me, if I intrude, Lady Valencia," she said, as she glided forward. "But will you have the goodness to tell me where I may find Sir Hilary?"
The reply came, not from her ladyship, but from her half hysterical daughter.
"\Vhat ! have you come back to try and make a fool of him again, you unprincipled little wretch ?" almost shrieked she, as she whirled out of her mother's arms and planted herself like a young fury before June. "Have you drawn Philip Lexboro and all the rest of the men in the rooms into your net, and are you anxious to drag him back into it, too, so that you can exhibit him with the rest of your dupes?"
"Maude, Maude, my darling, pray be still !"
"I will not he still, mamma—I will not stand calmly by, and let this low-lived barbarian flaunt her disgraceful triumphs in my face, without telling the creature what I-what you—what every honorable woman thinks of her and her abominable conduct to-night !"
The blood flamed up into June's cheeks.
"Have a care, Miss Thornhurst !" she said, in a sharp, stinging voice. "You and your mother have robbed me of enough already; do not increase the debt of hatred I owe you 'by robbing me of my good name!"
Your good name—yours !" cried Maude, with a
burst of splenetic laughter. "What witty things are sometimes said by accident! Delilah trying to pose as a saint ! The creature who sets herself to the task of stealing other girls' lovers to satisfy her own inordinate passion for being flattered by every Tom, Dick and Harry she meets, resenting the scorn of honor-able women, the very latchet of whose shoes she is not fit to fasten !"
"Miss Thornhurst !"
"I say it again! You are not fit to fasten the latchets of any honorable woman's shoes, Miss Drayton, and thank God my uncle has at last discovered it. If you want Sir Hilary Chilton, seek him at his hotel. He has left Suncliff, and in the morning his luggage will follow him!"
"Left Suncliff !" gasped June in amazement. "Sir Hilary left Suncliff and without one word to me? Impossible !"
"It is not impossible; it is true!" blazed Maude, furiously. "Such men as Sir Hilary Chilton do not dance attendance upon the whims of such girls as you when once they have found them out."
Under ordinary circumstances, this statement would have evoked nothing more than a smile of calm derision from the object of Miss Thornhurst's spleen, but under these, it fell like a drop of oil upon a burning ember, and June's temper—that swift rebellious temper, which was her besetting sin—flamed up, and tore her heart with the pangs of a fierce resentment"
So, then, they were so sure of their game—these de-tested offshoots of the race of Chilton—so certain of her love for Sir Hilary and her ambition to wear a coronet, that they hoped, like this, to scare her out of her determination to defeat their plans for saving Chilton Towers from falling under the hammer?—hoped like this to force her to give up Philip Lexboro, that Maude might win him back to his allegiance, and so set the seal of success upon both of their pretty little schemes?
Ah, how little they knew her—how little---how little !
And they would have her think that Sir Hilary was a party to those schemes, would they? they would have her believe that he, too,. was so certain of her love for him and his power over her that he had gone away without a hint or a warning to lessen the blow and to have his abrupt departure shock her into a sudden realization of how frail was her hold upon him after all, and how possible it was for her to lose this valuable opportunity of writing herself "my lady ?"
Worse than that, they would have her believe that he—he of all men in the world—had left that dictatorial message; nay, say rather, that lordly command, and left it to he delivered to her by them?
Again she said to herself : "How little they know me !" and again her passions rose to fever heat, yet not one word escaped her lips, not one movement disturbed the rigidity of her pose and not one trace of color darkened the marblelike pallor of her countenance.
Surprised, and not a little startled by her silence and the frigid calmness with which she received that lying message, Maude Thornhurst made a gesture of angry impatience.
"You don't answer !" she cried out in a sharp, eager voice—a voice that had a touch of derision in it, as though in her secret heart she felt that her scheme was one that could not fail of success, now that she had adopted such heroic measures to force June into dropping Captain Lexboro and seizing the opportunity to grasp a coronet before it passed beyond her reach forever.
"You don't answer, Miss Drayton, and your silence means—what? Shall I tell my uncle that you utterly disregard his message and refuse to abandon your disgusting flirtation with Captain Lexboro, or shall I say that you have come to your senses and have determined to behave yourself in future?"
"No," said June, breaking her silence for the first time and speaking in a voice that was as hard and cold as the lines of her rigid face. "If Sir Hilary Chilton had dared to send me such a message as that, I am quite capable of answering it in person, Miss Thornhurst, without condescending to make a mouth-piece of you. But Sir Hilary Chilton did not send me such a message—for I am not his servant, not his slave, and he has neither the right nor the privilege to issue orders to me. Who is he, pray, that he should issue orders in a house where he is simply a guest,
and who are you that are so willing to play the part of a lackey and carry those orders for him?"
"Miss Drayton, you forget yourself !" blazed Lady Valencia, drawing herself up, after the manner of a tragedy queen when portraying the imperial wrath of an outraged empress. "You are not addressing your low remarks to a person of your own sphere, but to a lady of gentle breeding, who is the daughter of one baronet and the niece of another. Never lose sight of that fact again, and never forget who and what Miss Thornhurst is."
"It would be difficult to do that," retorted June, with a contemptuous smile, "when I am forced every day of my life to recollect how you and she wormed your way into this family, and that this highborn. high-bred, immaculate daughter of a baronet is de-pendent upon my father for the roof that shelters her, the clothes she wears, and the very food she eats. No! do not trouble yourself to make any coarse reply, Lady Valencia, or to say anything disparaging of a family into which you were only too glad to get. Must I remind you that when one is hungry it is very bad taste to sneer at the food which one has begged for and eaten? What is good enough to crave is good enough to be thankful for, your ladyship, and the mendicant who asks alms should never backbite the man who gives them !"
"Wretched, lowbred barbarian !" spluttered her lady-ship in a voice of seething wrath. "How dare you—how dare you? Oh, I will never forgive that insult—never !"
"It will be time enough to do so when you are asked," returned June calmly. "You have not spared me, and I shall not spare you, Lady Valencia; and as for the lies your immaculate daughter has uttered
"Lies, Miss Drayton ?"
"I said lies, Miss Thornhurst ! And I call them by that strong term because a weaker one would not do credit to your base and venomed assertions. You understand to what I allude, don't you ?—that trumped-up yarn of Sir Hilary's departure, and that lying message which you have been base enough to declare that he had the audacity to send to me."
"He did send it !" bleated Maude in- a voice that palpitated with rage and terror. "He did send it! he did—he did !" .
"He did not !" retorted June spiritedly, "and I will compel you to acknowledge that he did not—thus!"
With that she stepped to the open doorway, reached forth her hand, and instantly there sounded the sharp tinkling of a distant bell.
"What do you mean to do?" demanded Maude with an angry sneer.
"Set the slanderer and her victim face to face!" responded June, whirling and confronting her with a smile not good to see. "You have chosen to utter a lie in the name of Sir Hilary Chilton, and that lie you shall repeat in his presence if you dare. You and your mother have not spared me at any time, when there has been an opportunity to humiliate or mortify me, and now that the tables are turned	 Ah, Peter, that is you, is it ?" as a servant appeared in answer to her summons. "Go at once in quest of Sir Hilary Chilton—he is somewhere in the house or about the grounds—and when you have found him ask him to come here at once, and say that I desire to see him upon a matter of vital importance."
Contrary to her expectations, the man did not Ily in obedience to her command, merely gave a sudden start, dropped his lower jaw, elevated his eyebrows, and stared at her iii blankest amazement.
"Goodness me, Miss June ! exclaimed he, in tones of wonder. "Why, it can't be possible that you don't know ?"
"Know," repeated June, • "know what ?"
"Why, that Sir Hilary has gone, ma'am!"
"Gone?"
"Yes, Miss June—gone these two hours. Springer and Roberts took him and his trunks over to the hotel, and I thought that you knew that, miss; for certainly the master and my lady did, as they both shook hands with him, at the time he went away!"
Something that was like a wheel of fire seemed to crash through June's brain, and a sound as of rushing waters swirled about her ears. She tottered for a moment as though some one had dealt her a heavy blow, and then, without one word, without one sound, waved Peter away, and so, laying her hand upon the carved rail of the porch, leaned there, looking out into the darkness and breathing heavily.
Gone! Sir Hilary gone ! Gone without one word of farewell to her—without waiting or caring to wait for the answer to the question he had asked her down there on the river wall !
So then it was true, was it, what Maude Thornhurst had told her? All true, perhaps—that message with the rest, since he had gone like this and taken his effects with him—and, after all, he was no better than these other members of his detested and detestable family, He whom she had thought so far above the ,,ordid motives of the world; he who had told her that he could not dream of permitting her father to lift the mortgages from Chilton Towers, but would re-move them by money of his own earning or not at all; he, then, was no better than other men! And all the while she had been enshrining him in her heart as a hero, a god, a man whose principles were of the high-
est, and whose love was a. thing above price, while he simply had been acting out a cleverly conceived part, simply playing upon her credulity and her romantic and impressionable nature that he might make her love him, and so win the money of which he stood in need.
"Oh, God ! oh, God !" her aching heart cried out, "is he that? can he be that? Ah, no, no,- no! I don't believe it! I won't believe it ! If that were his aim—the mere winning of my fortune—why, should he leave me? why abandon the field before his game was won, and before he seized that which was so nearly in his grasp?"
The voice of the fiend gave answer to that query, and such answer as made her heart grow sick.
Like a flash, the recollection of that brief sweet moment on the river wall came back to her memory and stabbed her with a cruel doubt.
"I want you, June—I want you for my wife, my precious—and if your eyes have not belied your heart, speak to me with your lips and tell me the same sweet story !"
Those had been his words, and sweet as they had sounded then, she recalled them now with a sense of heartsickness and shame.
He had been certain of his game, and that was why he left her. He had read her love in her eyes, he had known that her heart was his, he had believed—as did this detestable sister and this equally detestable niece of his—that his title had dazzled her, that she was eager to marry him, eager to be called "my lady," and to hurry her into grasping the golden opportunity and naming the day, he had, taken this step, sent her that humiliating message, and had left her in the certainty of being instantly recalled.
In one moment of time—and before Peter's re-
treating footsteps had ceased to sound upon the marble pavement of the hallway—all this had passed through her mind and Ieft its dreadful sting, and so Mrs. Dalroy's advice—wise enough at the time it was given, but bitterly bad in the light Maude Thornhurst's unexpected interference and unscrupulous efforts to cause a rupture between June and Philip Lexboro—bore evil fruit, and instead of curing, only aggravated June Drayton's miserable folly.
CHAPTER KIV.
A LEAF IN 'I'VE STORM.
P'eter's footsteps bad died away into the distance and a stillness, reigned over the scene.
Miss Thornhurst, flushed with triumph, and seeing in June's pallid face and spiritless attitude a promise of her scheme's ultimate success, turned a radiant countenance upon her lady mother and winked yes, actually winked—in a manner whose significance was not to be mistaken, for this highly bred and highly fed daughter of the aristocracy had certain coarse streaks in her composition which in creatures of a meaner clay would have been set down as evidences of vulgar birth.
For a moment Miss Thornhurst stood and surveyed that half-drooping figure from under the long light lashes of her close, heavy-lidded eyes ; then, with a soft purring little laugh, she walked forward, and leaning her back against the rail of the porch, placed herself in such a position as would command a full and uninterrupted view of June's pale, drawn face, and with much the same spirit as that of the tigress who plays with her victim ere dispatching him, looked alp to see how her rival took this crushing proof of her threatened defeat.
But if she looked for any traces of anxiety, any ,igns of an inward despair, she looked in vain, for the moonlight, shining upon that pale,, beautiful face. Ahowed her only a countenance that was as hard and white as a mask of stone.
There was no despair in the resolute lines of those compressed lips, no anxiety in the fixed gaze of those cold, fearless eyes that looked unflinchingly into the grim and unlovely future.
Passion, pride, a resolute will and an inflexible determination—that was what the stern young face hove stamped upon it, but of the pain that was in her heart, and of the tempest of despair that raged within her soul, it bore not one trace, and rather surprise, at this —and being far too shallow and shortsighted to understand the reason of it or to realize the mischief she had done, and still was doing—Maude, in her eagerness to clinch the nail she had driven home, and in the hope of forcing June to cut loose from Philip Lexboro without an instant's hesitation, planted yet another sting in the rebellious heart of her dreaded adversary.
"You see that I have not lied—as you so delicately phrased it, Miss Drayton," she said in that slow, sneering tone of hers, a smile of mockery and derision lifting the crimson curves of her lips until the gleam of pearly teeth showed between. "Sir Hilary Chilton has left Suncliff, you perceive, and left it in the manner and for the precise reason of which I told you."
June's face turned slowly to the face of her smiling tormentor, and a queer orange light flashed from her tawny eyes—nothing more.
"You don't answer, or perhaps you won't answer'." pursued Miss Thornhurst, with suppressed laugher "You have preached so much of etiquette this evening. and of the things one ought to do under certain circumstances, that it seems almost superfluous to remind you that you owe me an apology for your insultin
words of a few moments since."
"If I do, it is a debt that I shall never liquidate Miss Thornhurst," returned June placidly, and with--out turning her head or shifting her gaze from t c distant river. "It is a luxury to feel that I owe something to one who owes so much to my father and his honestly acquired wealth—it helps to equalize-
96	A Leaf in the Storm.
matters, you know—and for your sake I shall not attempt to cancel my obligation."
Like any other narrow-minded, spiteful woman, Maude lost her temper when she realized that she was vanquished at her own game, and fell back upon the circumstance which she believed was her own certain power over June Drayton.
"I will not bandy words with a person of your caliber," she said in a voice of seething wrath, "but as my uncle has made me the bearer of his message to you, I suppose I have a right to ask what message you will send him in return, since it must be sent through me."
"Through A'ou!" said June, in a voice that stung ?Miss Thornhurst with the wordless contempt that was in it, and brought the hot blood rushing to her cheeks and brow. "When I choose to send messages through the agency of any one, Miss Thornhurst, I will select my lackey for myself, not deliver them through the medium of such an institution as you!"
"Canaille!" snarled Miss Thornhurst, in a voice that palpitated with passion. "I wonder that my uncle can lower himself to even dream of mating with such a barbarian as you !"
"He is Lady Valencia's brother, and therefore willing, I presume, to mate with anybody who has money !" retorted June, with biting sarcasm.
"Barbarian!" sputtered Lady Valencia herself. "Is that then the message you would have us return to him? That insult which a man of his position—a man whose wife will be able to take her place among the very flower of the British nobility—will never forget and never forgive. Answer me, Miss Drayton, is that the message you wish to send to Sir Hilary Chilton ?"
"No !" responded June, throwing back her head after
A Leaf in the Storm.	97
the manner of a defiant stag and looking her ladyship straight in the eyes. "I have no message to send Sir Hilary Chilton, madam—no message of any sort whatsoever."
Then, with a frigid bow, she swept by and walked toward the door.
Lady Valencia caught her breath with a sudden
gasp.
For the first time--for the very first time—she realized what Maude's bold effort to retrieve herself was likely to bring upon them, and a species of dumb palsy seized her in its sudden grip.
But Maude, blind before and blind still-to the hopes she was periling and the fierce passions she was spur-ring into life, rushed forward like a bird of prey and planted herself directly in June's path.
"Have a care, Miss June Drayton," she said in a sharp, excited voice. "Men of Sir Hilary Chilton's caliber do not grow upon trees, and there are not so many noblemen in the world that a girl of your station should throw away what is perhaps her only chance of ever winning."
The click of a footstep upon the marble pavement of the hallway attracted June's attention, and glancing up she beheld Captain Lexboro hastening toward her with the ice, of which she had sent him in quest.
"Indeed?" she said, turning and looking back into Miss Thornhurst's flushed and excited face. "Must I really give him an answer? And will his actions really depend upon what I choose to do and say to-night? Very well, then, you may tell Sir Hilary Chilton, from me, Miss Thornhurst, that as I am not speculating in real estate at present, I have not the slightest desire to lift the mortgages from Chilton Towers or purchase a title even at a bargain price, and so— Ah, my dear Captain Lexboro, come at last, have you? I
A Leaf in the Storm.
do hope that we have not missed any of the dances for which we were engaged. Have we ?"
"Not yet," he answered, "but we shall do so if we loiter, for I have spent such a deuce of a time trying to find out what had become of you, that I	
"That you shall be rewarded with the privilege of canceling all my obligations and claiming every dance on the list from now to the end of the ball," struck in June, with a smile that made his heart leap and his pulses thrill !
"And the ice?" he, queried. "What shall we do with that?"
"Give it to Miss Thor nhurst to cool her temper and settle her fevered brain !" she answered, mockingly. as. she took it from his hand and set it upon The broad coping of the rail. "Feast and be merry, Mantle clearest, and if your charming uncle has left any of his. effects behind, ring for Peter and have rhern sent over to him without an instant's delay !"
And then slipping her hand through Captain Lexboro's arm she bore him away in triumph to the.-ballroom, and left my lady and her daughter standing in the starlight, pale, speechless, and alone.
CHAPTER XV.
WHEN WORDS ARE COLD.
The ball rolled on, and June, true to her promise, set all the male element to scowling and the female element to indulging in whispered comments and shoulder shrugs, by deliberately canceling all her engagements with the several gentlemen whom she had al-lowed to write their names upon her tablets, and transferring every dance upon the program to Captain Philip Lexboro.
She did not plead fatigue or headache or any of the numberless excuses that were at her command had she cared to avoid the consequences of her unprecedented folly, or to escape the comments which she knew that this open expression of favor to the big blond captain had called forth from everybody in the room; for a feverish sort of madness had taken possession of her, a reckless spirit of defiance had seized upon her heart and brain, and she had but one thought or wish: To show Lady Valencia and Maude —aye! and all the world, if need be—how little Sir Hilary's presence or absence mattered to her, and how well she could get along without him.
It was a wretched business, this trying to deceive herself, this keeping up a fictitious merriment before others, and this attempt to find balm for her own lacerated heart by taking away Mande Thornhurst's lover, and returning spite for spite and wrong for wrong.
But she never swerved from the path she had marked
out for herself, never flinched before the task she had undertaken, and never ern missed one dance that remained upon the program.
When the mac struck up, she was the (first to take
ioo	When Words Are Cold.
her place upon the floor and hers was the laughter heard most frequently, hers the face oftenest in smiles,
And never for a moment did she allow Philip Lexboro to stray from her side, but kept him hovering about her like some poor moth about a dangerous flame, and when, at last, the final waltz was done, the ball over and the guests went home through the fragrant dawn of the young morning, his was the hand in which hers rested the longest, and hers the last eyes that looked up into his face.
He did not know how much it cost her to stand there and smile up into his eyes as he said good-by to her, he did not know that but for the close proximity of Maude and Lady Valencia he would have received but a curt dismissal instead of that intoxicating smile, for he had fallen wholly under the spell of this impetuous girl, and he would not have cared either had he known, so long-as he got the smile and the clasp of her warm, soft hand.
For in his own fierce and selfish way he was mad for love of her, wild to win and own her as he would have been to win and own some blooded horse or valuable dog whose "points" had excited his envy; and his passion would last just so long as she was not his, and possession could not cloy.
"May I call soon, Miss Drayton?" he said to her as he held her hand and looked down into her face with eyes whose ardent glances filled her with a secret feeling of disgust. "Be kind and say that I may."
"Call soon ?" repeated June, knowing well that every word was distinctly audible to the ears of Maude. "Yes, certainly—to-morrow, if you choose, and the day after and the day after that again. Call as soon and as often as you like, Captain Lexboro ; there will always be a welcome for you at Suncliff."
Then she let him go out into the dawn, not knowing,
When Words Are Cold.	Tor
nor thinking, nor even caring how her words rang in his ears and kept him whistling all the way home; for he vanished from her thoughts the moment he left her, and tired out alike in mind and body, she turned and climbed wearily up the stairs, followed by her schoolgirl friends.
"Oh, dear! I never spent such a perfectly happy evening in all my life, June !" said her especial favorite—Minnie Ray. "And now it's all over forever! Isn't it, June ?"
"Yes, all over forever, Min," she answered, gulping down a sob. "It was sweet while it lasted, but—it is done for now, and we can't recall it ever."
"After the ball is over, after the break of morn,"

sang softly Miss Natty Hyde, another of the girls, as they trooped up the stairs to the rooms they were to occupy (luring their brief sojourn at Suncliff
"After the ball is over, after the break of morn, After the dancers' leaving, after the stars are gone, Many a heart is aching, if you could, read them all. Many the hopes that have vanished, after the ball."

"Good night!" said June, in a' stifled voice.
Then she put forth her hand, wrenched open the door of her own room, and, with the words of that song ringing in her ears, tottered in and closed the door behind her.
"Many a heart is breaking if you could read them all, Many the hopes that have vanished, after the ball!"

she repeated bitterly. "Oh, how true ! how true! for mine have vanished, mine have crumbled into ashes, and my heart is breaking now. Oh, the pity of it—oh, the shame of it ! I believed in that man ! I gave him my heart unasked,_ and he, the last of a sordid, mercenary, money-grabbing race, only wanted my fortune and believed that I was willing to sell myself for a
title, believed that I loved him so well that he could bend me to his will and call me to him at pleasure!"
A faint red light glimmered through the east. touched to crimson the restless bosom of the river and glinted along the level surface of the wall—that wall where he had taken her into his arms and told her that he knew she loved him. She looked at it for a moment, that spot which she had once thought would be holy to her forever after, as the place where he had taken her into his arms, but which she felt now must stand out in her memory as a place accursed with the memory of her abasement and of his treachery.
A mad desire came over her to go down there and trample upon it, to stamp it beneath her feet as she meant to stamp her love for him, and, hesitating but a moment, she caught up a fleecy shawl, threw it over her head, hurried to a rear staircase, and so went down and out into the dim dusk of the early dawn.
Over the dewy grass and down the slope she went with the feeling of resentment in her heart, that wild belief that in trampling upon the spot where she had revealed her love, she could stamp that love out of her heart; but when once she reached it, to ! all her strength and all her madness vanished, the weakness of love—the weakness of woman—swept over her and, falling on her knees, she bent and kissed the stones that his dear feet had pressed.
"My love !" she cried, "oh, my love ! how could you ?"
"June," rang forth Sir Hilary's voice, as he sprang from the arbor, and hastened toward her. "Oh, my love, I was a coward, and I could not stay away. Speak to me, dear tell me what strange madness has come over you, what strange shadow has come between us, and so that you love me, dear, I will forget and forgive how cruel you have been !"
CHAPTER XVI.
A CALM DESPAIR.
It would be difficult to define the state of June's feelings at that moment, for the fires of resentment still burned in her heart, the rankling sting of a wounded pride still tortured her woman's soul.
But through them and over them she was conscious of a tenderer, truer, holier feeling—a feeling of death-less love for this man, a feeling of joy in the privilege that was granted her of again looking into his eyes, again listening to the tones of his voice, and again standing in the sunshine of his presence—that presence from which she had believed she had exiled her-self forevermore.
"Oh, June, what cruel trick are you playing upon me now, dear? What whimsical folly prompts you to sport with me thus—as a child with a toy that has no heart to feel as I do the pangs of jealousy when it is tossed aside. in a moment of caprice, and should be satisfied that it has fulfilled its mission if it has given its mistress even a moment's pleasure?
"They would have me—my sister and Maude—believe that you do regard me only in that light, clear, but I can't believe them, I won't believe them, for I have looked down into your heart and read its true womanliness. I have looked into your eyes and seen there the mirrored image of a pure and noble soul, and to believe you a coquette after that, seems like sacrilege. That is why I have scorned the advice and disobeyed the injunctions of those who have my welfare at heart, June ; that is why I have come hack to you in spite of everything and everybody, my darling, for T know in my heart that you are not a coquette,
and that you are far too true a woman to win any man's love for the mere gratification of tossing it aside."
For a few seconds June gazed at him in silence.
Ah, how hard—how bitterly hard—it was to think him that most despicable of men, a fortune hunter, when he stood there before her, looking of her with the eyes of truth, speaking to her with the voice of love, and bearing upon his countenance that honest expression which was so like the stamp and seal of an unquestionable sincerity.
Like a flash of flame that, catching the draft. flies whither it is borne by a strength which is greater than its own, her heart went out to him, her doubting soul shook off its cruel fetters and leaped to his again, and an impulse—Heaven-sent or born of a mere human desire, judge it as you will—came upon her then and there to throw herself into his arms, to abandon her revenge, to forget what she had heard of him. Under the glamour of that evanescent desire, she had surely obeyed that impulse had she not glanced toward the house and saw limned upon a window blind the shadows of Maude Thornhurst and Lady Valencia engaged in an angry altercation with old John Drayton, her father.
One glance at those three shadows silhouetted upon the silken blind, and all the weakness vanished from her heart, all the womanliness fled from her soul, and all that suddenly reawakened tenderness and compassion fell dead within her.
They were upbraiding him, those women—she was certain of it as though she had heard the words they spoke—upbraiding him for her misdeeds, hectoring him like a pair of sirens, and perhaps exerting all the power of their viperish tongues to urge him into using his influence to compel her to abandon her
warfare against them, and by accepting Sir Hilary Chilton, to yield Philip Lexboro to Maude and so set the seal of success upon their own ambitious schemes.
In the space of a second, in the twinkling' of an eye, all this had flashed through June's mind, and these impulses, good and bad, had crossed and re-crossed her rebellious soul, filling it with sweetness and tenderness one instant, only to make an arid desert of it the next.
"You are right," she said, in answer to Sir Hilary's last remark—and her voice when she spoke was so cold and hard and bitter that it sounded strange in her own ears—"you are right, I am not one who would make a football of any man's heart, not one who would lower herself to play at love for the simple sake of gratifying a despicable desire. I would not and could not lower myself to the level of a flirt, Sir Hilary Chilton, and if anybody has accused me of such a contemptible motive, it was but right and just for you to refute the slander as you have clone."
As he had done! No words of mine can ever vaguely portray the bliss which swept over Sir Hilary's soul as she said that; for to him they could have but one significance, one meaning, namely: that he had done right to come back to her, for it was only by coming back to her that he had refuted the slander and given proof of his unwavering belief in her womanly worth.
To do June justice, she had no thought of this when she spoke, and had not then—did not now dream of how he would interpret her words, nor of the feeling of boundless relief and wordless joy which they had awakened within him.
"Oh, my darling, it is very-good of you to say that !" he cried out rapturously. "I might have known—I
ought to have known that you had some good and just reason for your strange conduct to-night."
She knew now the construction he had put upon those meaningless words, and drew back from him a step, her face grown paler than before, but in her heart a great pity for him and a great hatred of her-self, knowing that she had only reawakened a hope which she must trample under foot and again destroy.
He noticed that backward step, but in the light of this new understanding, misinterpreted the meaning of it, and laughed a short, sharp laugh of utter happiness.
"Oh, precious little trickster," he blithely said, "are you still unwilling to relinquish your role, and still bent upon playing with me in this incomprehensible fashion? Ah! well, as you will, my sweet. So that I know—as I do know now—that it is all in jest and not ,in earnest, you shall sport with me until your soul is satisfied, you precious little tease. But, frankly. dear"—with sudden seriousness—"I cannot see the sense of it, nor yet fathom the meaning of this little farce. Surely we were happy enough under the old
l
rule, June, surely it were better enjoyment to live i ii love than to play at love in a mist. I cannot under-stand avhy you elected to change so suddenly and so completely in your bearing toward me as you did last night when you threw me over for that puppy Levboro, and canceled all your dances with me. Oh, that was cruel, June—most cruel and most uncalled for. dear—and I pray Heaven that you may never be made to suffer such pangs as your capriciousness brought to me.
"But then," he added, with another short, crisp laugh, "I will not blame you for it any more, my sweet, for now that it is all over, we will follow Longfellow', excellent advice. and 'let the dead past hiiry its dead.
A Calm Despair.	107

and be happy thinking of the blessed future—shall we not, my darling ?"
Still June did not speak. That great. pity, which somehow would mingle with the contempt she felt for him, was tugging at her heartstrings now, and making the words which she knew she must say to him when she did speak more bitter and more hateful to him with every passing moment.
Be he never so low—never so base and mercenary, she knew that she loved him—must love him always, to the end of life, and womanlike, she shrank from wounding that which was dear to her.
"Why do you stand aloof from me, sweet?" he asked, holding out his arms to her. "Surely you can-not mean to keep up this little farce, now that I have discovered how unreal it all is! Come into my arms, my darling, and tell me what you would have told me—here on this very spot—last night but for the wretched interference of Lexboro. Tell me that you love me, June, tell the that my hopes are not in vain, and that you will one day be my wife! Hark, clear ! the lark has hushed its song to hear you say it, the sun is lifting its rim above the horizon to steep the world in glory the very instant you shall say the words that are to crown my life; and I, your lover, I, who hold your love the greatest boon tharearth can give or Heaven offer, am waiting to clasp you in my arils and seal our bethrothal with a kiss."
Ah, how well he played his part, how sweetly he told the story of a love that did not exist, and how daintily he cloaked the sordid motives of the eager fortune hunter, June said to herself as she stood there, like a statue—so still, so cold, so unresponsive she was —and listened to the poetry of his impassioned pleading.
And to think, after all, that he only wanted her for
her money—only wanted her money to clear off the mortgages which weighed down his estates—that grand old estate of which Lady Valencia was sQ inordinately proud—to think that he was pleading like this for a thing like that, and to think—oh, the shame, oh, the disgrace, the deep humiliation of it! to think that she loved him—loved him in spite of all.
Loved him! No ! she did._not love him—she would not love him. She would hesitate no longer to strike him as he deserved, and to show him how bitterly she loathed his base motives, how utterly she had freed herself from the degrading passion which he had in-spired her with. She would uproot it from her heart, she would tear it from her bosom—tear it up and stamp it out, let the cost to her be what it would.
"Come, my sweet, come tell me that you love me," went on Sir Hilary, unconscious of the storm that was raging within her. "Tell me that you love me and will be my wife, June, as you would have told me last night, but for Philip Lexboro's coming."
"Fortunate June, and thrice blessed Philip Lexboro, then !" she answered with a short, derisive laugh. "Why change your opinion of the matter, Sir Hilary? You have called it a farce—and it was a farce. Why seek to make a tragedy of it after that, and why waste time in regilding that which we have tasted, and now know is gingerbread? `Sufficient unto the clay is the evil thereof.' Why rake up last night's madness to make fuel for a burned-out fire?"
Sir Hilary's outstretched arms dropped suddenly, a dead weight. He fell back a step, and stood staring at her—not saying one word, not making one sound.
CHAPTER XVII.
THE PARTING.
What had she said, what had she done to make that awful change in him? June asked herself. She had not spoken one-half so bitterly as she had intended, she had not put into words one tithe of the scorn she felt that he merited, nor dealt him—nay, not him, but his mercenary game—a blow one-tenth so crushing as she had meant to deal, and yet, for all that, the change which had come over him was positively appalling.
All the color and all the happiness had vanished like magic from his handsome, eager face, and left it as hard and white as a marble mask.
For a moment that seemed an eternity he stood there in that rigid attitude, with that ghastly countenance, and stared at June with a look that haunted her dreams, waking or sle/zping, all the days of her life.
"I don't think I understand you—I hope I don't understand you," he said. "Put it clearer, please, for I am afraid that I have been misunderstanding from the first. It was foolish, perhaps, but	 Tell me what you mean—tell me plainly, please, and let me be in doubt no longer. `Thrice blessed Philip Lexhoro,' that was what you said, I think. But why thrice blessed, may I ask? Because he came in time to interrupt?"
"Yes," said June coldly.
"You thought it a hardship then, but you are glad of it now. Is that it?"
"Yes."
"Then it was not a jest—that sudden change in
your bearing toward me last night—this coldness in your bearing toward me this morning?"
"No !"
There was a moment's pause. The lark overhead resumed its interrupted song and went caroling upward into, the fast-brightening empyrean.
Sir Hilary glanced at the sky, glanced at the rippling river, then passed his hand across his forehead and glanced at June again.
"Will you tell me why you have done this cruel thing?" he asked. "You say you are not a coquette, and yet if ever woman in this world lured a man on to We her, you lured me; your every tone, your every look was one of love—such looks and such tones as make men mad with bliss when their hearts are en-snared as you ensnared mine; and yet, having done.. all this—nay, more than this, for you suffered me to hold you in my arms and kiss you—you tell me now that it was all a farce, and that I must be content with what I have had and expect to have no more. That is what you mean me to understand, is it not?"
"Yes," responded June desperately, "that is what I mean, Sir Hilary Chilton. I was a fool last night, I am wiser this morning, for the madness of yesterday is put behind me forever !"
For a moment he looked at her, deeply, silently, reproachfully.
"Will you tell me what has wrought this sudden change, Miss Drayton ?" he asked in a strange, hollow voice. "Surely I have a right to ask it after I have been granted so many favors, have endured such happiness and such misery and have loved you—nay, still do and ever will love you—with all the strength of the heart which you have so idly cast away. Will you tell me what wrought that sudden change in you last night, _'miss Drayton. and why you left me with love in your
The Parting.	r t i

eyes to meet me again with looks and words .of scorn and resentment ?"
"No," responded June, averting her eyes. "aI spare you the humiliation of hearing that from me, Sir Hilary, and I leave your own conscience to answer that question for you."
"My conscience?" he repeated, drawing himself up.. after the manner of a proud man who has been unjustly reviled, and ¶peaking in a tone that had a touch of angry resentment in it. "My conscience has nothing to rebuke me with, Miss Drayton, and, for your own sake, I hope that yours has not, either. But if, as your words would seem to prove, you have given ear to the malicious utterances of some vile slanderer who has attacked my name, vilified my character, and	"
"Acquit me of that !" she struck in sharply. "What I have done, I have done of my own free will, and I have not acted upon the secretly imparted knowledge of talebearers."	,
"If you would have me believe that, you must first make me believe that you do not love me, and that you are breaking with me thus because you have suddenly discovered that."
"Then believe it so !" she said desperately.
"Not with the evidence of my senses before me!' he made answer hotly. "Some shadow has come between us, some wrong has been done me; but while that shadow and that wrong have conspired to make you shrink from a marriage with me, they have not blotted out your love, for you yourself have given the proof of it. Do you ask me how I know this? Then listen: It was here I told you of my love, here I held you in my arms; and it was here, when you thought me miles away, you returned."
"To trample on the spot !" she struck in excitedly. "To stamp it under my feet, Sir Hilary Chilton !"
"Possibly !" he made answer. "But (lid you do it? Ah, no! a thousand times no! Instead, you fell upon your knees and kissed the insentient stones ; and was not that a mute avowal of the love that still lingered in your heart for the man whose feet had pressed them ?"
"And more than one man's feet did that last night," responded June, in a gasping voice of desperation. "Philip Lexboro was here also, recollect."
"And for Philip Lexboro you had previously avowed an open dislike, amounting almost to disgust."
"But a first dislike is often the forerunner of future fondness."
"Not such dislike as yours. Nor does it come, that fondness, so suddenly as did the change in you last night. You love me and you cannot deny it ; you love me—vou shall not cast me out from the sunshine of that love, for this I tell you : God made you for me, and me for you, and God's will shall he done though all the world come between us.
"You are mine—do you hear me ?—mine !" he went on passionately, as he sprang forward and, laying both hands upon her shoulders, looked down into her face with a look that held her senses enthralled, and terrified her with the evidence it gave of the man's masterful strength of will, and the dominion he held over her rebellious spirit. "Fight against it as you will, you cannot help but love me, cannot help but give me heart for heart and soul for soul, even though we walk with hands divided through all the days of our lives. Oh, little cheat! oh, precious cheat! Mine shall be the will that shall save you from wrecking your own hopes and mine through this mysterious folly which has seized upon you and come like a
The Partin'.	t r 3
shadow between us. You shall love me, in spite of yourself—love me to the last day and last hour of your life, and even though all the world stood between us, I swear to you that I will win you, swear to you that my love will compel your love, and in spite of every obstacle, you shall become what Heaven in-tended you to become—my loved and loving wife !"
"Never!" she cried out with a burst of angry tears, as she tore herself from his grasp and stood off, pale, panting, full of wild determination as foolish as it was fierce. "I am not a puppet, as you and your de-testable sister seem to think, Sir Hilary Chilton, and sooner than marry you I would throw myself into the arms of the next unprincipled fortune hunter who c':ines along with an empty title and a mortgaged estate and makes a bid for my dowry."
To the end of her days June never forgave hersel f for that brutal remark, and never forgot how Sir IIillary Chilton took it.
Pale as he had grown in that minute, when she had given him to understand that she had meant to break with him, his pallor then was as nothing to the whiteness which settled down upon his features now. He did not start hack from her, did not give ally sign of pain, any cry of reproach—merely drew himself up as a king might do if accused of petty larceny by one who had the power to speak against him, and every softened line vanished from his face, every trace of tenderness faded out of his eyes and gave place to the stern and relentless evidences of a proud man's insulted dignity.
For one moment he stood and looked at her without speaking a word, without stirring a muscle; then in a voice whose scorn and contempt cut her to the very core :
"So that is what you think, is it?" he said slowly.
"Well, then, continue to think it until some one else enlightens you upon the subject. In the meantime it is my privilege to pity you, Miss Drayton, and to re-move myself from the possibility of any further insults!"
Then, like a flash, he was gone up the slope and over the lawn, and the last June saw of him was when he plunge±l out of sight under the apple trees, and, with-out even once looking back, strode away in the direction of the gate where he had secured the horse which had borne him over from the hotel upward of an hour ago.
Crushed and more deeply hurt than she would have cared to acknowledge, she crept back to her own room and, feverishly tearing off her ballroom finery, threw herself upon her bed and mentally reviled herself for having spoken those cruel words.
But afterward, when she reviewed those words in the light of a calmer reason, she remembered that he had not denied the insinuation, he had simply ignored it and	walked away !
CHAPTER XVIII.
LIGHTS THAT LEAD TO GLOOM.
What the Honorable Mrs. Dalroy had predicted upon the night of the ball came to pass, and fashion-able Canada, charmed by the grace and beauty (to say nothing of the vast possessions) of the debutante. lifted June at one bound to the topmost wave of social success.
No shadow ever haunted a substance more assiduously than did Captain Lexboro haunt June, after she had so unwisely given him permission to call upon her; but if the truth must be told, while it is true that not one of her dozen admirers was half so distasteful to her as he, to not one of the many did she accord such frequent favors, or grant such privileges.
While other swains sighed for a single smile, Philip Lexboro was frequently bathed in them, and where other and better men would have done battle for the privilege of- holding her fan, or her bouquet for a moment, he was frequently permitted to hold the former in his coat pocket for half an hour at the time, and - to wear a blossom from the latter in his buttonhole.
Of course, all these favors were bestowed with a full appreciation of the close proximity and watchful eyes of Maude and Lady Valencia, and as grudgingly withheld- when those two spiteful and envious creatures were out of sight, but in the main people knew nothing whatsoever about that feature of the program; and so, little by little June's name began to be associated with that of the captain until no one thought of inviting one to an entertainment without including the other.
Of Sir Hilary's whereabouts June had now not the,
slightest knowledge, for he had vanished completely after that affair upon the river wall, and if Mrs. Dalroy—who had lately closed her establishment at Quebec and hired a charming house so near to Sun-cliff that she and June were enabled to see each other almost every clay—knew any more than the rest of the world upon that subject, she kept her own counsel regarding it, and parried so skillfully all June's efforts to "pump" her that Miss Drayton at length gave up trying and settled down to the conviction that, having lost all hope of ever winning her fortune, he had sought fresh fields and pastures new.
So matters ran on for one whole month, and June, who was never without an engagement of some sort nowadays, found herself running the gamut of a fashionable woman's experience, and, with a fashionable woman's customary aim, to kill time and forget in the froth and bubble of society's frivolities the hungry heart and empty life that stared nakedly at her when-ever she gave herself time to think.
Night after night she was either giving entertainments or attending them, and day after day a wistful shadow crept into her eyes, a mournful pathos shone through her smile, and the aching void in her heart grew hollower and more hungry.
"You are in love, my. dear," said Mrs. Dalroy to her as they sat one night in Lady Montjoy's rooms enjoying one of her ladyship's monthly musicales.
"Don't attempt to deny it now, for I know the symptoms and I tell you plainly that you are in love with some worthless hulk of a man who isn't worth for you to waste a thought upon, and you're just pining away by degrees for a sight of the wretch's face. Just look at her, Lamb, and tell me if you can't see heart-hunger in those eyes—the poor child !"
"Can't say I do, Lelia," responded in his customary
Lights that Lead to Gloom.	_ 11 i

double-bass voice the Honorable Mr. Dalroy. "But if you do, why, I suppose it must be there, and if it is there, why the dickens don't you wind up your little dodge and send word to	
"Hem ! hem! Ahem !" struck in his better half, growing suddenly excited. "Quick, Lamb, fetch me a glass of water; I've swallowed a bit of swan's-down from the top of my fan."
"From the top of your fan !" blurted forth, with masculine dullness of perception, her amazed and unsuspecting husband: "Good Lord, Lelia, how could you when it's in my inside pocket, and my coat's up-stairs ?"
"Well, I've swallowed something—your wits perhaps !" retorted his wife with a withering glance. "But whatever it was, it's gone down now, so please keep still, for I want to hear this perfectly entrancing number which the young man with the long hair is executing at present. Exquisite thing, isn't it, June, dear? Something new, I fancy. Lamb! if you say another word I'll strangle you. Lovely air. Do you know the name of it, dear?"
"Yes," returned June with an amused twinkle in her eyes. "And so do you—if you'll only listen, and not pretend to be doing so! It's `Home, Sweet Home, With Variations,' and I'm quite sure you're familiar with that."
"Ought to be, at any rate," put in Mr. Dalroy with a chuckle, "for she has lately added some astonishing variations to one home, sweet home, by smuggling in her	 All right, all right ! my dear, I won't say
another word. Your Lamb hasn't another baa left in him, and he's absolutely dumb until to-morrow night, when, as the `lord of the manor,' I suppose I may be permitted to say that my soul's my own in the presence of your dear five hundred."
"Your sornrl, indeed—my so 1, you mean 1" retorted his better half. "You've got nothing of your own but that bald head, you stupid old noodle, and dear knows you're welcome to all of that."
"Thank you, my love, I'll have it frescoed in honor of your reception to-morrow night. And, oh, I say, Miss Drayton, talking of that reception, you don't know what a big surprise there is in store for you. and what a wonderful change it is going to bring into your life when	- Eh? What? Oh, yes! certainly, my dear. Mum as an oyster, love, and silent as the grave !"
.Then under his wife's warning glances he lapsed into silence and never suspected what a prophecy he had really uttered. For to ! a wonderful change was to come into June Drayton's life through the medium of Mrs. Dalroy's reception, but just how wonderful a change it was to be, neither she nor June nor, any-body else dreamed, and it was well that they did not
CHAPTER XIX.
THE RULES ARE CONTRARY.
Lady A/fontjoy's musicale, like everything her lady-ship attempted, was a complete success, for the artistes she had engaged were the very best that money could procure, and the program was, in consequence, Of a very high order of merit, and thoroughly enjoy-able from beginning to end.
Under ocher circumstances June would have been charmed by the entertainment—for she was passionately fond of music—and would doubtless have enjoyed every number upon the program ; but, as it was, she could not fix her attention upon any of the selections, for her heart was heavy to-night, and for some strange reason, thoughts of Sir Hilary Chilton had been in her mind ever since she opened her eyes in the morning, and that was why she gave so little heed to Mrs. Dalroy's small talk, and utterly failed to notice Mr. Dalroy's decidedly pointed remarks regarding the "surprise," et cetera, which his clever little wife had planned as a part of her to-morrow night's reception.
Perhaps had she not been so distraite, June would have been able to draw her own conclusions as to what that surprise really was, for Mr. Dalroy's blundering allusion to it, and his better half's constant endeavors to check him and to turn the conversation into a different channel, were suspicious to say the least, and June, not being any duller of comprehension than most People, might easily have guessed the truth if her thoughts had not been filled with other things.
In her secret heart she felt that she ought to despise Sir Hilary Chilton, as all honest women do despise a fortune hunter, he lie of high or low degree, but
somehow that heart seemed weak and cowardly tonight—had been weak and cowardly all day where he was concerned—and every throb of the music, every song that was sung, and every poem that was recited, awoke some tender recollection of him, and brought back to her memory a phantom of those vanished days and that sweet time of roses, when all the world was one vast garden of delight and he the monarch of it.
Viewed in the light of these sad days which had followed it, that time seemed like the dream of a _hashish eater—deliciously sweet but, after all, as false as it was fair—for now she had awa1ened, now she had thrown off the glamour which had enthralled her senses then, and memory had added a sting which even love could not quite blot out.
That sting was an absolute conviction of Sir Hilary Chiltons worthlessness, and it was based upon her own baseless charges and his failure or refusal to refute them.
In her youth and her ignorance of men, she had said to herself that if he were guiltless he would surely have entered an indignant denial when she charged him that morning upon the river wall with seeking to win her fortune for the purpose of clearing his mortgaged estates, and his failure to do that appeared in her eyes to 1)e proof positive of his guilt. No honest man would have utterly ignored such a charge as that and walked away from her as he had done, she said to herself.
"If you think that, continue to think it until some-body else enlightens you. upon the subject, for I never shall."
Those were the words—the only words he had spoken, in response to a charge which should—which must—have cut him to the quick, if he had any pride, any manhood in him, and with those words he had
walked away and left her to draw her own conclusions.
And this was how she drew them :
It was all true; he did desire to win her only for her fortune's sake, and he had walked away not be-cause he was too proud to answer a charge which was an insult to him, but simply because she had taken him so much by surprise that he could not at such short notice hatch up any plausible falsehood to meet the exigencies of the case, and because, knowing that she was aware of his purpose, he saw that his game was up, and not knowing who had betrayed him, or from whence she had obtained her information, he was unable to attack the source of it, and so, like a coward, being unmasked, had thrown up his hand and beat a hasty retreat.
That was the conclusion which, in her youth and her ignorance of men, she had leaped to, and that the construction she had put upon his movements then and his complete disappearance since, and it was because of that and her inability to tear his image from her heart and trample out a love which she believed debasing in the sight of Heaven, that she grew to loathe her-self and to detest more bitterly than ever the source of her information, namely, Miss Thornhurst and Lady Valencia.
It was absurd, of course—more than that it was absolutely unjust—to hold them accountable for this particular sorrow which had crept into her life, how-ever much they might be to blame for those which had preceded it. But youth is illogical always, and June, feeling that but for these two women she might have gone on living in her fool's paradise for yet a little longer, hated them the more, because through them this realization of Sir Hilary's worthlessness had conic to her; and her resolution to be revenged upon them
and to rob them of their hopes as they had robbed her of hers grew stronger and stronger with every passing hour.
"I will repay them in their own coin," she said to Herself, perhaps twenty times a day, and down deep in her heart she was saying it now as she sat there in Lady Montjoy's crowded drawing-room, and feigned to be listening to the performance of a long-haired signor who was executing a brilliant and difficult violin solo to the unspeakable delight of her ladyship's many guests.
The solo ended with a florid passage that literally sparkled" with brilliancy, and a small tornado of applause swept through the room.
"Divine! superb! magnificent !" exclaimed enthusiastically the Honorable Mr. Dalroy. "Best thing I've heard in many a day. Don't you think so, Miss Dray-ton?"
"I?" exclaimed June, starting out of the reverie into which she had fallen, and coloring confusedly as she saw how many people in the immediate vicinity turned to hear what was her opinion of the signor's performance. `Must I confess my lack of good taste. Mr. Dalroy, by acknowledging that 1 wasn't paying attention and scarcely heard a note of the entire selection ?"
"Good gracious ! is it possible? And you were looking straight at the signor all the whole blessed time!"
"Don't be stupid, Lamb," said in a -whisper his better half, as she slyly poked him with the closed sticks of her fan. "Must I forever remind you that we women are so constituted by nature that we can look at one man and think of another without the slightest degree of inconvenience? Don't ask so main-questions. and don't express surprise at anything a
woman does—particularly under existing circumstances."
"Eh? What? Oh, I see !" responded her liege lord in what passed muster for an undertone with him, but was by reason of his heavy bass voice about as soft as the growling of a watchdog. "Never thought of that, my dear—'pon honor, I didn't." Then elevating his tones: a trifle : "Beg your pardon if my inquiry was ill-timed, Miss Drayton," he added. "Wouldn't have caused you a moment's embarrassment for any-thing in the world."
"And, indeed, you haven't caused me any, either," responded June with a smile. "I could hardly say the same, though, if Lady Montjoy were to ask me what my thoughts were during the signor's performance; for, charming as her ladyship's musicale really is, I was wondering all the time if she would be offended were I to ask to be excused and allowed to go home."
"Go home !" repeated Mr. Dalroy, in blank amazement. "Good gracious ! why, the affair isn't half over vet, and after this part of the program is completed, there's to be a dance, you know, and
"And I am down for two waltzes, Miss Drayton," ,truck in anxiously Captain Lexboro, as, overhearing these remarks, he leaned forward and laid a deprecating hand upon her sleeve.
"Yes, I remember all that," responded June wearily.. "But I shall have to ask to be excused, I fear. I do not think I shall remain to the dance ; my head aches and I am very tired. Besides, we will have plenty of time to Glance as much as we please to-morrow night at Mrs. Dalroy's reception, and a rest now will make me feel more like participating in the gayeties then."
It is almost needless to say that the captain demttrred a great deal at this, and strove lry every means
in his power to persuade her to change her mind about going home. -
But June was very fixed in her determination to go, and .but for unexpected interference would have taken her departure then and there.
That interference came from Lady Valencia, who, with her husband and daughter,' was sitting close at hand.
"June is right, John." she said to her liege lord, "she has had too much gayety of late, and it is be-ginning to tell on her. She looks pale and ill, and as she has Lelia's reception to attend to-morrow night, it, would be highly politic for her to husband her strength by resting now. Pray order the car and take her home immediately, and in the meantime I will make her excuses to Lady Montjoy."
All this her ladyship' had said- with such an evident desire to gratify the whims of her stepdaughter that neither June nor Mr. Drayton could believe their ears, and indeed so surprised was the former that she actually turned and stared at her in deepest amazement.
Was the world coming to an end, she wondered, that Lady Valencia should do this thing for her?
That her ladyship was enjoying the musicale she well knew—having heard her voice her sentiments upon that score several times during the course of the evening—and that Maude was averse to leaving in this abrupt manner was very evident by the sullen expression of her countenance and the looks of angry resentment she flashed upon the cause of this unwelcome break in the arrangements, and to have Lady Valencia disregard her own feelings and those of her (laughter for the sake of humoring her whims, almost took away June's breath.
"Very well, my dear, I will do as you say," announced Mr. Drayton, as he rose. "Perhaps a timely rest will do my little girl good, so I'll order the car brought around at once, although it does seem too bad to spoil your enjoyment of this splendid entertainment."
"There is not the slightest necessity for doing that," responded her - ladyship serenely, "and, besides, it would be discourteous toward Lady Montjoy. Maude and I cannot be of the slightest assistance to June ; so it would be absurd for us to leave at the same time. You can accompany her home and then return with the car for us. In the meantime we will throw our-selves upon Captain Lexboro's good nature until you return and relieve him of the charge!"
This bold stroke almost made dune gasp, and instantly changed Maude's scowls to the sweetest and sunniest of smiles.
So, then, this was the true inwardness of her lady-ship's sudden change of tactics, was it? This was the crafty little game she was playing to get rid of her detested stepdaughter—to throw Maude back upon Captain Lexboro's attentions, and to compel to dance attendance upon her for the rest of the evening.
For one moment June sat speechless, breathless, utterly motionless, and all the rebellious fires of her heart flamed up anew and refilled her with a fresh resolve to defeat this detested and detestable woman's schemes, no matter what it might cost her. Then in a calm, cold voice and with a smile that made her ladyship hate her worse than ever :
"Sit down, papa," she said. "If you will be discourteous to Lady Montjoy for all of us to go, it would be more than discourteous for you, the head of the family, to be the one chosen to escort me home.
I waive my objections, Captain Lexboro. We will dance our waltzes to-night, and I will remain to the close of the entertainment, headache or no headache—now ! No! do not speak. The signor is about to respond to the encore, and I intend to hear every note of his selection this time."
CHAPTER XX..
In spite of her avowed determination to pay strict attention to the next selection, it is extremely doubtful if June really heard one whole bar of it from first to last, for a tempest was raging in her heart and brain. and a noise like that of rushing waters constantly echoed in her ears.
She had again defeated the plans of her wily step-mother, but now as ever before, the victory brought her little joy, for it had thrown her again into the necessity of accepting the undivided attentions of a man whom she detested and whose very touch inspired her with a feeling of deepest loathing, and throughout the remainder of the musical part of Lady Mon t j oy's entertainment, her heart did fierce battle with her brain and her desire warred with her resolution.
The resolution won, and when at length the band repaired to the ballroom and dancing took the place of song, June was among the first to take her place upon the floor.
There were only ten dances upon the card and she had not meant to dance half of them; but lo! as she entered the ballroom leaning upon Philip Lexboro's arm, she found herself standing side by side with Lad) Valencia and Maude, and in a spirit of reckless bravado, caught up her tablets, glanced at them and then extended them to the captain.
"There are but ten dances in all, and you have. claimed only four of them," she said. "It is not sufficient for so good a dancer as you. Save me from the possibility of getting a poor partner by claiming all of them, and filling nn: tablets at once."
128	On the Terrace.
"May I?" he asked, looking down into her face with eyes of eager happiness.
"I mean it—really!" she answered with a smile that set all her senses in a whirl, and, hastily grabbing her pencil, he took her at her word.
"Disgusting !" exclaimed Miss Thornhurst in a distinctly audible tone, and June, catching the word, looked her straight in the eyes, and laughed a low, sweet laugh of derision and mockery that made Maude long to spring upon her and tear her limb from limb.
In another moment the music burst forth with the bars of the opening waltz, and June, with Captain Lexboro's arm about her, went whirling away as though she danced on air.
The spirit of bravado which had impelled her to give Philip Lexboro every dance on the card—so that Maude could not claim his attention even for a moment—also impelled her to stand by her guns and dance every one of them, let the cost be what it may ; and the most natural result was that this unexpected favor set the captain fairly beside himself with happiness and hope, and spurred him on to even greater lengths than he had ventured to approach since his daring attempt upon the night when first he met her.
Dance followed dance in rapid succession, until only two remained of the entire ten.
At this juncture, the captain, who had made frequent attacks upon the champagne, until his eyes were unnaturally bright and his breath unnaturally odorous, proposed "a brief turn up and down the terrace as a breathing spell."
June, only too eager to get a breath of fresh air and to escape the fumes of the champagne—which the heat and the closeness of the rooms rendered disgustingly apparent—willingly consented to this move. and
On the Terrace.	129
suffered him to lead her out upon the marble terrace which was one of the chief charms of Montjoy House:
If she had followed her inclination, she would have dismissed him the very moment they reached it, but she had determined that Maude Thornhurst should not have him for even one half minute's conversation this night; and so, acting upon that idea, kept him with her even while she was chafing to be rid of him and to be alone, if only for a moment's time.
The breeze, sweeping up from the river, was as welcome as a breath from paradise, she thought, as she stepped out upon the terrace and inhaled the dewy fragrance of the night, with its mingled balm of flowers and the fresh odor of the rushing stream.
full moon shed a pearly light upon the river's turbulent bosom, and the scene was so lovely, and the night so perfect that it seemed like a poem—a sweet and tender poem, profaned only by the presence of this man.
Involuntarily her hand slipped from his arm and fell to. her side. Instinctively she crept away from him, and unconsciously, all that was good and pure and noble in her character awoke under the magic influence of this divine night, and cleaned her soul of all its petty spitefulness and its ignoble desires.
In that one moment she saw the dark and unlovely side of her character, saw herself as you have seen her —cruel, revengeful, foolish, ignoble, unjust—and seeing it, shrank from herself in horror and dismay.
But to Captain Lexboro, no such picture was discernible. All that he saw was a wonderfully lovely girl framed in drifts of snow-white roses—a girl whose beauty, etherealized by the moonlight and poetized by some delicate arrangement of white satin and gold, seemed almost immortal, and his passion, inflamed
by that picture, drove him to the very verge of madness.
For one moment he stood and feasted his eyes upon her—breathless, intoxicated, enthralled—then with a sudden vehemence that startled and filled her with a sense of unutterable disgust, he sprang forward and, like a hungry animal, seized her white hand and pressed it to his burning lips.
"I love you," he uttered in a voice that was husky with passion. "How I love you! You are beautiful, June, and I would give my life, my soul—all that I have in this world or may win in the next—to know that you belong to me alone !"
She plucked her hand from him with horror and shrank back among the roses.
"Do you hear me ?" he cried. "I love you. Will you marry me, June? I love you—I want you—I must have you! I want you for my wife—I want to feel and know that you belong all to me, and if there is a power on this earth or in the heavens above us that can make you mine	
Then he stopped—not because his passion had spent itself or words had failed him, but because of a sudden and most unexpected interruption.
Quite without hint or warning a shadow lengthened suddenly across the moonlit terrace, and Lady V a-!encia stepped out from the ballroom and stood before him. She, had heard nothing, for the captain's voice had been so husky with passion that it was barely more than a whisper, but that she had come expecting to hear something, and intending to interrupt it, the quick glance she gave the pair left no doubt in the mind of either.
"June, I am astonished at you !" shy began in her frostiest and most cutting tones. "I saw you leave the ballroom and hastened after you without an in-
On the Terrace. .	13j
stant's delay. Have you no delicacy, no womanliness, no sense of the proprieties, that you do a thing like this? In my girlhood it would have incurred social ostracism for a young lady to leave a ballroom and go off without her chaperon for a moonlight conference with any man, excepting her father or her brother, and if you were not lost to all sense of decency, you would never have permitted Captain Lexboro to out-rage the proprieties as he has done to-night."
In the twinkle of an eye, June's passion rose again and all weakness and sweetness, all remorse fell from her like a discarded mantle.
"Stop right there, Lady Valencia !" she cried, in a tone of just indignation. "You are not talking to a charwoman or a milkmaid, but to the daughter of the man whose name you bear, whose money both you and your (laughter thought good enough to win. When you speak to me of `decency' you insult me and belittle yourself, and when you address my father's child as an object of pity, you disgrace your husband and defile the name he gave you. What is good enough to accept is always good enough to respect, madam !"
Lady Valencia's face assumed a sickly drab hue, save where two bright vermilion spots burned like tongues of flame upon her high cheek bones.
"We will not discuss that part of the question !" she said with a sneer. "I have simply come to tell you that your conduct to-night has been most reprehensible, and, in order to escape further criticism, your father has, at my request, ordered the motor car, and we are now about to depart immediately for home. Be pleased, therefore, to prepare yourself for instant departure."
"Pardon me, but I am afraid I can't !" responded June, with a shrug of her shoulders and a smile of bland defiance. "It would be highly discourteous, you
132.	On the Terrace.
know, to rush away and leave dear Lady Montjoy's charming entertainment before it was actually over, and as I stayed in deference to your opinion, I am afraid that your ladyship will now have to stay in deference to mine! Besides, there are still two dances on the program, and	 Ah ! there is one waltz be-ginning now, captain, and I would not miss it for any-thing. Come, we must not miss a single bar of that delicious music. Au revoir, your ladyship, I will be ready to depart after the last dance is over, and—not before!"
Then sweeping her stepmother an exaggerated bow, she slid her hand through Captain Lexboro's arm and bore him back in triumph to the ballroom.
CHAPTER XXI.
THE TIME OF ROSES.
'After that it is hardly necessary to state that she kept her word, and danced those two remaining dances before leaving Montjoy House.
Not that she enjoyed them—far from it—for the memory of that moment in the terrace—when Philip Lexboro had told his love and looked at her as she had read in Oriental romances of Turks looking at some beautiful white captive in the slave mart—stood like a hideous grinning skeleton between him and her, and she was only too glad when the dances \were over and she could escape from his detested presence.
Two or three times during the course of those dances he endeavored to broach again the subject of his love, but she had managed to evade it and to turn the conversation into other channels, and so it fell out that her second offer of marriage was like her first—interrupted in its midst, and neither accepted nor declined at the time it was made.
Tired out and heartsick, June bade adieu to her hostess, climbed into the waiting limousine and was driven home.
Quietly. and with becoming decorum, June bade the other members of the family good night when they alighted and entered the sumptuous hallway of Sun-cliff, and, wearily climbing the stairs to her own room, gave herself into the hands of Finette.
Then her eyes filled with tears, and, as she had done every night since that wretched hour when they two parted, she fell to staring silently and dejectedly at the river wall, where Sir Hilary had told her he loved her, and to dreaming long over those vanished mu-
ments before she crept into bed and sobbed herself to sleep.
Upon Philip Lexboro and his proposal she wasted not so much as one thought, either waking or sleeping, and if she had done so she would have said to herself that he must have known what his answer was to be, from the way in which she plucked her hand from him and slunk back among the roses. So through all the livelong night the memory of a man, whose image she had sworn to tear from her heart, clung about her pillow and, in sleeping as in waking, Sir IIilary Chilton was constantly 'in her thoughts.


The morrow came bright with sunshine and sweet ~t itl~ the breath of flowers—that fair but fateful morrow which was to change the whole current of her life and mark the turning point of her destiny.
Worn out after last night's experiences she slept late and, having no wish to meet either Maude or Lady Valencia, breakfasted and lunched in the seclusion of her own room. The day wore itself away and the dusk of the evening began to fall; but still she did not stir—only sat there by the window and stared apathetically at the river and river wall, and waited for Finette to come and dress her.
Six o'clock struck before the Frenchwoman made her appearance, and by that time the dusk had deepened and the room was full of shadows.
"Mademoiselle! Why did you not ring for me?" exclaimed she as she came in. "I fancied you were sleeping, and there you are sitting at the window as when you sent me away at two o'clock. I should note. have come even now, only that a most remarkable thing has happened. Two messengers called almost at the same moment, and each left a box for mademoiselle."
The Time of Roses
"Two boxes for me, do you say, Finette?" repeated June in a tone of surprise.
"Yes, mademoiselle, two cardboard boxes, and both light in weight. I know not what they contain, al-though I dare say that Mees Thornhurst does, for she took them to her own room—at least so Peter says—and I did not even dream that they were for mademoiselle until Mees Thornhurst delivered them to me, saying they were for you. There ! I have the gas lighted at last and the curtains drawn, and now if mademoiselle desires a cup of chocolate before beginning to dress, I will run down and procure it while she inspects the boxes."
"Do so," returned June, as she arose and walked over to the table where the two boxes lay, and waiting only until Finette had left the room, she lifted the lid of the first and looked into it.
White roses—that was what it contained—white roses and a note addressed in a masculine hand which she instantly recognized as that of Philip Lexboro. She took it up with a shuddering feeling of repulsion and slowly read it through :

"MY DARLING ; Perhaps I frightened you by my vehemence last night, but, oh, how could I help it, you were so fair with that moonlight on your face, and those white roses around you. These are from the same bushes—i begged them from Lady Montjoy this afternoon, Oh, June, if you have any pity for a poor devil who can't help loving you, wear them to-night at Mrs. Dalroy's reception, and so give me the answer Z crave to the question I asked you under them last night. Yours devotedly,	PHILIP LExi'oRo.
"P. S.—Perhaps you'll be glad to hear that one of my horses—Starlight Bess—broke the Canadian trotting record all to Hinders this afternoon, and I'm going
136	The Time of Roses.
to ship her over to the States and match her against the present champion, if I can arrange matters satisfactorily. For my sake, let your answer be yes, and wear those roses to-night.	PHILIP."

Without a word, without a single exclamation, June crushed the note into a ball, cast it from her, and lifted the lid of the other box.
Roses again—great, ruby-hearted, damask roses, such as she knew grew about her own little bower on the slope by the riverside—red roses and a little slip of paper bearing these simple words :

"Perhaps I was wrong not to defend myself from that unjust accusation, and perhaps after all you were right to believe it. I never meant to-see you again, but love is stronger than pride and I have come back to tell you all. I shall know when you leave the house to-night, and if I may come and tell you how much I still love you and how cruelly, how blindly you misjudged me, wear these roses on your bosom and believe in	HILARY."

And June slid, what? Not for one second did she pause, butt, flinging the white roses after their sender's note, she gathered up the red ones and pressed them to her lips.
"I will wear these!" she cried. "I will be true to myself, true to the dictates of my heart and just to him, let the end be what it may! I will wear red roses to-night, and Maude Thornhurst may take her worthless lover and keep him if she likes !"
CHAPTER XXII.
LOVE'S VICTORY.
"He who is true to himself, rewards himself, and he that giveth a sheckle unto his neighbor giveth the value of twenty sheckles unto himself," runs a quaint old Arabian proverb, and in June Drayton's case, as in many another, the truth of the adage was splendidly exemplified; for having once determined to be true to herself, and to put all thoughts of a paltry and ignoble revenge behind her, she reaped the benefits of that resolution in a light heart and a clear conscience.
Like a mantle that is discarded, all her gloomy forebodings fell away from her, all her dejection vanished, all her spiritless apathy fled, and in the twinkling of an eye, she became her old, buoyant, light-hearted, sunny self again.
As she stood there with that bunch of crimson roses pressed to her lips, it seemed to her as though some spirit of mercy had suddenly poured balm upon her aching heart—as though the river had found again the power to murmur music as it flowed, the evening birds to add that lost note of glad sweetness to their vesper songs.
"Yes, I will be true to myself," she repeated, with a thrill of happiness in her voice and tears of happiness in her dark eyes. "I will wear these red roses on my bosom to-night, and so give Hilary the privilege he asks—the privilege of vindicating himself, and proving to me that I have cruelly misjudged him.
"And I have misjudged him—something in the deathless love which he has awakened in my heart and which, in spite of everything I have done to uproc: it, will not be stamped out, proves to me that I have,
138	Love's Victory.
for I cannot—I will not believe that Heaven would inspire me with such love for a man who is base, ignoble, utterly worthless! No, no, no ! I have wronged him, something stronger than mere conviction tells me that I have! In my hatred of his sister and her daughter, I have misjudged him, believed him as mercenary and as despicable as I know them to be. and forgotten that in a garden that is filled with weeds, it is still possible for some flowers to grow.
"Oh, fool that I have been--blind, besotted fool! Could I not have remembered that Mrs. Dalroy, who is the soul of honor and of truth, is as much his sister as is my detested stepmother, and that if it is possible for one pure life to spring frotn the race of Chilton, it is also possible for two ! See what I have done in my blindness, see how nearly I have wrecked my whole life's happiness by my folly. I have judged the whole flock by the one black sheep I have found in it, and God, out of mercy to me, has put it into Hilary's heart to forgive me for my cruel injustice and to come back to me after all.
"Oh, my darling—oh, my heart's own darling—i f you really love me (as I believe now that you do you shall never regret this act of tenderness and mercy, if a lifetime of penance can atone for it or the. adoration of a woman who loves you with her whole heart and soul can make your future blessed. I will wear your red roses, Hilary—wear them, over my heart, my darling—and let Miss Thornhurst have the man whose worthless love she craves."
Miss ThornhurSt !
The very name brought with it a spell of evil, and even in her joy, sent a train of dark suspicions teeming into June's mind, as she recollected what Finette had said about how, and by whom, these two boxes of flowers—Sir Hilary's and Captain Philip I_exboro's—
Love's Victory.	139

had been received from the messengers who had brought them to Suncliff, and the recollection cast a sudden cloud over her new-born joy.
It was unfortunate that June should be of a suspicious nature, and it did not tend to add to her attractiveness.
Nor were the suspicions which had so suddenly entered June's mind entirely without excuse, as you shall presently learn.
It was an old and hackneyed idea—as old as literature itself—this story of two lovers sending different-colored flowers to the girl they both adore, and then taking their answer from those she elects to wear.
June herself remembered having read it many times in her short experience, and always with the one time-worn incident attached thereto of the inevitable scheming beauty who loved one of the young men, and in obtaining possession of the flowers before they reached her more fortunate rival, wrought no end of mischief by exchanging them and making the heroine wear blossoms that said "No" to the one particular man to whom she fondly believed that she was saying "Yes," whereupon that deluded young man would instantly pack his trunk and start for parts unknown without stopping to settle up his business affairs or say good-by to the object of his affections.
It was as old as the prehistoric hills, that trick, and June had smiled pityingly and derisively over the short-sighted victims of it more times than she had fingers and toes ; but now as she recalled it all, and putting her-self in the position of the heroine, and Miss Thornhurst in that of the inevitable scheming beauty, it did not seem one half so absurd, improbable and wholly unnatural as she had once held it to be.
For Miss Thornhur.st did love one of the two men who had taken this particular means .of putting their
fate to the test, and by Finette's own showing Miss Thornhurst really had taken those two boxes of flowers to her own room (and retained them there long enough to do something with them, had she so chosen) before allowing them to be carried to their rightful owner.
What then had the "scheming beauty" of this case clone? Simply read the two notes, or actually changed the flowers after the manner of her oft-repeated prototype in the novels?
The thought had no sooner entered June's mind than she dropped the bunch of red roses as though they were so many hot coals, and grabbing up Sir Hilary's note breathlessly reread it:
No, there was no allusion there to the color of the blossoms he had sent, and so, therefore, any treachery was possible. She threw that note from her, and pouncing upon Captain Lexboro's—lying crushed into a ball beside the empty fireplace—smoothed it out, and eagerly reread it.
Before she had read half a dozen lines of it, she saw how impossible it was for Maude to have done the thing she feared, for here Captain Lexboro plainly spoke of his offering as being a bunch of white roses gathered from the very vines under which he had told her last night, at Lady Montjoy's musicale, that he loved her and had asked her to be his wife.
What, then, had Maude done?
"Why, simply been guilty of a contemptible act, and read two notes that were not intended for her," decided June, "and much consolation she must have found in this one"—indicating Captain Lexboro's note--"to re-ward her for her petty manners. It must have cut her to the very quick to read this offer of marriage to -me from a man whom she loves so desperately, and whom he would give her head to win; but let the anguish she endured then be her punishment, for henceforth I
will not waste another thought upon her, either one way or the other. I have had enough and more than enough to do with revenge, and from this hour forth I mean to be true to myself and loyal to my womanhood. As for Captain Philip Lexboro
She took his note between her fingers, tore it into fifty pieces, then tossed them from the window, and tossed the bunch of white roses after them.
"There !" she said, with the air of one who has at last freed herself from some dreadful incubus which had weighed upon her like a nightmare—"there! that is his answer—the end of his hopes, so far as I am concerned, and thus I wash my hands of him and his odious attentions forever. Henceforth I will be true to myself and true to you, Hilary, my darling, and to-night I shall wear red roses on my bosom as a symbol, of my love for you! On speed the hours, Heaven, that I may soon stand in his dear presence again, and tell him—tell all the world—that I love and believe in him again !"
Then gathering up the blossoms that were to be the messengers of that sweet faith which had again found lodgment in her .heart, she passionately kissed each fragrant flower, and bursting into happy song, made the room ring with melody as she flitted about, making such preparations as were necessary for the beginning of her toilet.
And so Finette, coming in a few minutes later with the chocolate for which she had been sent, found her flitting about the room like some blithe and airy bird—now romping with Nap, and anon trilling some snatches of a love song, and all the while wearing on her lovely face such a look as no one had seen there since the night of that eventful ball.
"Mademoiselle, what marvel is this?" exclaimed I'inette excitedly. "I leave you one moment since sit-
ting silent and forlorn like some cloistered nun, and I return the next to find you all life, all sparkle, all loveliness as you used to be one month ago. Ah! what good angel has wrought this blessed change ?"
"Happiness, you dear old fogy—happiness !" cried June, as she threw her arms about the Frenchwoman and impulsively squeezed and kissed her. "Oh, Finette! I do believe that I am the happiest girl in all the world to-night, and that I'm going to be a still happier one when I come home from Mrs. Dalroy's reception."
"I hope so, mademoiselle."
"I know so. Now, then, dress me quickly, Finette, and make me look just as lovely as you know how, you dear old love, for I want to outshine myself to-night, and look as glorious as I feel:"
CHAPTER XXIII.
FRAMING AN ENIGMA,
'Ah! it does my heart good to see mademoiselle-her old sweet self again !" exclaimed Finette, with a smile, as she gently threw open the swinging doors of a large, cedar-lined closet, and brought forth the sumptuous gown which June had had made expressly for Mrs. Dalroy's reception.
It was a dainty costume of pale amber-colored satin and chiffon embroidered in marguerites, and nothing daintier nor more becoming to June's dark, tropical type of beauty could possibly have been chosen.
But at sight of it the girl gave a little cry of dismay. and glanced forlornly at the cluster of roses lying in their box upon her dressing table.
"Oh !" she said, with a little pang of natural regret at being obliged to decline a costume which she had had made expressly for this event, and in which she 1:1n\ she would have appeared to the very best advantage. "Oh, they don't harmonize at all, and they would make a shocking combination. Put it away, Finette—I ca>>' possibly wear that dress to-night."
"Mon Dieu! not wear it, mademoiselle. when v had it made for the reception? Mademoiselle is surely jesting, and besides, she has not in her entire wardrobu a costume in which she will look one half so well."
"I can't help that," responded June, "I couldn't posibly wear red roses with a yellow gown that is all embroided in daisies, Finette, and red roses I am determined to wear this night, even if I have to put on one of my oldest and least-becoming costumes."
"But, mademoiselle, roses are entirely out of fashion and corsage bouquets have become pascF.
144	Framing an Enigma.

"I don't care a fig whether they are or not, I'm going to wear one, and it is to be composed of roses at that," returned June decisively. "So get out a gown with which I can wear red blossoms, Finette ; for they are more to me to-night than all fashion's dictates or all the pretty dresses in the world."
Finette being wise in her day and generation saw in a glance just how matters stood, and, with a smile and a gentle arching of her brows, briskly gathered up the sumptuous gown and restored it to its hook in the closet.
"This will go most admirably with a garniture of red roses, mademoiselle," she said as she brought forth a charming costume of heavy ivory-white satin with gold-embroidered gauze draperies. "And it is a be-coming costume, too; for mademoiselle looked like a young queen the night she wore it at Lady Brankstone's silver wedding."
"Very well, then, try and make me look like another young queen in it to-night," returned June with a laugh. "And please be quick about it, too, Finette, for I want to be all ready to start the very instant the car is announced."
"Mademoiselle's wishes shall be obeyed," returned Finette ; and then, foreseeing the trying task that was before her, she set about it without an instant's delay.
And it was a trying task, really; for no bride could possibly have been more particular about her toilet than was June to-night.
Thrice she made Finette put her hair up and take it down again, before she finally decided that it was arranged in a becoming style ; and at least forty times she had the draperies of her skirt looped up here and let down there, and arranged in a different fashion somewhere else, until a less patient creature than Finette would have lost her temper and perhaps her place.
But Finette was patience personified, and as her taste was faultless, the result was that June, when she at length glided out of her hands, was a sight good to see.
The rich creamy hue of the lustrous satin contrasted splendidly with her olive complexion and her gold-embroidered draperies of gauze lent an Oriental picturesqueness to her type of beauty.
Ropes of mingled pearls and topazes clasped her slender dark throat and banded her perfectly molded arms ; a topaz star that was like a golden flame flashed in the dark abundance of her almost blue-black hair, and a broad band of gold, thickly studded with large gleaming pearls, secured to her corsage the fragrant bunch of blood-red roses that lent a touch of vivid color to her costume and were emblematic of that re-vivified hope which sent other roses to her cheeks and made the fire of happiness glow in her eyes.
"Oh, you are divine, mademoiselle !" .exclaimed Finette enthusiastically. "Even the pink satin and chiffon could not have been one whit more becoming. You are a dream, Mees June—a dream, and nothing else."
"And some dreams are very unattractive affairs," returned June, with a gay laugh. "Now, then, give me my fan and my wrap and I will go down to the drawing-room and keep papa company until the car is announced."
In obedience to this request, Finette handed her a fan of white ostrich feathers mounted upon sticks of fretted gold, and a long white velvet opera cloak lined with pale-yellow brocade, and, throwing this latter over her arm, June went out and down to join her father in the drawing-room.
But as fate would have it, Mr. Drayton had not yet put in his appearance there, although his wife and her daughter had, as June speedily became aware.
Passing from the hallway into the front drawing-room she walked toward the archway which separated that from the rear one, but had scarcely gone a dozen steps ere her progress was checked by the sound of some one speaking her name in a manner that arrested her attention.
That some one was Maude Thornhurst.
Engaged in a confidential chat with her mother, neither she nor Lady Valencia had heard the soft foot-falls of June as she advanced over the thick pile of the Persian carpet, and, as both were seated in such a position that the heavy folds of the half-drawn velvet curtains completely screened them, they saw nothing of her either as she glided into the front drawing-room.
"And you believe it will succeed, mamma, you believe that June will do it?" Miss Thornhurst was say--mg.
"I am positive of it, my dear," responded Lady Valencia. "Once let them meet in the light of this understanding, and a reconciliation will be certain to ensue, and Chilton Towers be saved from the hands of the money lenders."
"But if the truth should come out—as it must, mamma ; for, at the very first word that is spoken, Uncle Hilary will detect the true state of affairs, and then what?"
"Nothing that we need fear and nothing that can interfere with your efforts to win Philip Lexboro back to his allegiance," returned her ladyship. "He will be prepared to take his conge, and will take it without a word. As for your uncle Hilary, even if he does detect the truth at the very first word—as you suspect, my dear—he will be shrewd enough not to betray it to her, and being only too glad to have a reconciliation effected by any means, will hold his peace regarding
it in her presence, and, perhaps, suspecting the truth, will come to me and bless me for what I have done."
If her ladyship said more than that June never heard it, for at that moment the sound of the car rushing up the drive from the garage was heard, and turning abruptly she stole out of the room and fled to the farthest end of the corridor.
So, then, something treacherous had been done in reference to those two notes—she could no longer doubt it, after what she had just heard—some under-hand scheme really had been concocted between these two women, and that scheme, that treachery, was—what ?
Instinctively June put up her hand to tear off the red roses that she wore; but as her fingers touched them that impulse was checked and her hand fell again.
No, the flowers could not have been changed. What-ever Lady Valencia or her daughter might have done, they certainly had not done that, for Philip Lexboro's note had clearly described white roses as the sign of his success, and his success in this wooing was a thing she knew to be the last of Lady Valencia's desires.
"No," she said to herself, "I will not tear off these flowers, I will wear them, and so detect the truth. I f they are the message of hope to him, I shall know it when I look into his dear eyes ; if, on the contrary, I see him start and grow pale, I shall know then that the treachery of those women has to do with these, and I will tear them off and discard them before his very eyes."
Then hearing her father descend the stairs and enter the drawing-room, she hastily folded the cloak over her shoulders and went in after him as though she, too, had just descended.
Lady Valencia, looking very imposing in a gown of
148	Framing an Enigma.

maize-colored moire and diamonds, and Maude in a dainty costume of pale-blue satin and chiffon, embroidered with silver chrysanthemums, glanced eagerly at her as she entered, and at sight of the red roses that she wore the faces of both grew visibly brighter.
But if June remarked this she certainly gave no evidence of it, and the limousine being announced at that minute, the little party trooped out and entered it, and were soon on the way to the solution of the enigma which had cost June so much thought.
The ride to the splendid mansion in which the Dalroys had located themselves since removing from Quebec was not a long one, and promptly on the stroke of nine the Drayton car rolled into the grounds and halted under the illuminated porte-cochere.
Early as the hour was, Mrs. Dalroy's rooms were already crowded, and the sounds of music floated out through open windows where, through a web of lace and a mist of lights, one could catch glimpses of moving figures, sparkling jewels, and the usual adjuncts of one of society's rich jams.
"Now I shall know—now I shall know !" murmured June to herself, as she alighted and passed through the flower-wreathed portals of the mansion. "He is here—under this roof—my heart's own darling, and in spite of these women I shall know the truth whether the signal that guides me to it be red roses or not! I shall know that I misjudged and maligned Hilary, for his dear lips will prove it to me, and on his dear breast I will ask pardon for my sin and, knowing at last that he is above such baseness as I once accused him of, will beg him to take me back to his heart and lift me again into the sunshine of his love !"
It was a sweet and womanly thought, and sanctifies by it, her face wore an expression of almost holy grace as she went slowly upstairs to lay aside her wrap and
add some necessary touches to her toilet before appearing in the crowded drawing-rooms.
"Last night at Lady Montjoy's musicale, Mr. Dalroy said that a great change would come into my life to-night, and so it has—so it has !" she murmured in an undertone that thrilled with the wordless rapture of her full heart, and then, as ignorant as any babe of how Mr. Dalroy's. prophecy was yet to be fulfilled, she touched tenderly the red roses that lay upon her bosom and breathed some low sweet words above them
THE ENIGMA DEEPENS.
The band in the gilded gallery of Mrs. Dalroy's ballroom had ceased for the moment to discourse its melodious din when the Drayton party made its appearance in the drawing-room, and so it became possible for June to hear the stifled exclamation that somebody uttered as she entered.
That somebody was Philip Lexboro, and glancing toward him, as she heard the sound, June saw him standing near the archway which led out to the ball-room, and glowering like a disappointed fury.
His countenance bore no sign of either heart sickness or despair, but rather that savage and resentful sort of disappointment one sees upon the face of a man who has staked his all upon the turning of a card or the winning of a horse, and has lost it.
She knew that the red roses on her bosom had given him an answer to his note, and, in giving it, had awakened all that was coarse and savage and resentful in the man's nature; but while that look was upon his face she could not pity him, even though her heart to-night was full of tenderness and humility, and she was rather glad than otherwise when a few moments later she saw Maude go up to him, and after a brief conversation bear him away in triumph.
"The queen is dead, long live the queen," she muttered, adapting the phrase to the requirements of the occasion. "Such love as that ! Bah! what is it worth? He has lost the woman whom he adored last night, and in losing her has gone back to the one he loved long ago, and voting half a loaf better than no. bread at all, has taken the goods the gods provide."
The Enigma Deepen	151

"A penny for your thoughts, my dear, provided of course that they are worth such an exorbitant figure," struck in the voice of Mrs. Dalroy at this juncture. "Do you know that you have been standing there for more than a minute and not making the slightest effort to pay your respects to your hostess? Where are your manners, you shocking young barbarian? Come this minute and tell me that you're glad to see me and that I'm looking well and the rooms are very much crowded and all the other highly original things that I've heard over two hundred times to-night already. Where are your thoughts, I should like to know, if you can't recollect what's expected of you?"
"Wool gathering," responded June with a laugh.
'What! after my Lamb, are you? And you dare to confess it before my face? Come and kiss me before I fly into a temper and scratch out your eyes. Oh, I'm so glad to see you, June—so glad, my dear, for I've got the greatest kind of a surprise in store for you, my pet!"
"I know—he is here—Hilary !" responded June with an enchanting blush, as she embraced and kissed her hostess. "And I suspect that he has been here all along, you precious old humbug !"
"Goodness gracious ! who told you? That stupid old Lamb of mine, I'll be bound, for he never could keep a secret even from me. Did he tell you—did he ?"
"No, dear. My information came from an entirely different source, from Hilary himself in fact."
"The wretch ! And he never told me a word about it, and he must have known that I was dying to hear it, or would have been had I suspected. But there ! I might have known how it would be, after he refused to tell me the cause of this difficulty between you and him, and what that mysterious `something' was that he confessed von had said to him, and he could never
forgive. I think he told Valencia, for they had a long and serious private interview the day before he went
away."
"Went away ?" gasped June, growing suddenly pale. "I—I don't understand you, dear Mrs. Dalroy. I thought you said that he was here and had been here all along."
"No, you said that—I merely acquiesced. He is here. In fact, he returned not more than half an hour ago, and is upstairs dressing. You see, my dear, I never said the least thing about this reception to him—meant it as a surprise, you know—and meant to have you two meet in spite of yourselves, and judge of my dismay when upon my return from Lady Montjoy's musicale last night I discovered that he had gone away (luring my absence—'gone in response to a telegram that was connected with some Australian business of the gravest importance' was the message he left for me—and I was just in the depths of despair over my failure to perfect my plans for to-night, when back he came about half an hour ago, and out of consideration for my feelings (at least so he said), consented to dress and come downstairs. And to think that all the while he knew that you were to be here, and had actually written you a note. Oh, the perfidious wretch, to spoil my beautiful surprise."
June's face had grown pale, and something of the hard, bitter expression came back and again marred it.
"Tell me, Mrs. Dalroy," she said. "Was not Sir Hilary here at all to-day?—in this neighborhood, I mean ?"
"Dear me, no !—of course not. Haven't I told you that he left while I was away last night, and only returned a few minutes ago ?"
"Yes; but he might have been in this neighborhood, might he not?"
"Gracious sakes, child! whatever are you driving at ? In this neighborhood? Of course not, for my coach-man drove him over to the railway station last night, and saw him go aboard the train, and that, when he came back to-night, he returned by the same means, there can't be the least doubt, for he rode home in one of the railway company's abominable cabs, so there can't be the least doubt about that."
\ sick sensation swept over June, and she turned away to prevent Mrs. Dalroy seeing her face; for a fearful doubt—a dark and terrible suspicion—was in her heart, and she felt that some shadow of it must surely be written upon her countenance.
"Good Heaven! could it—could it be possible that note was a forgery, the work of Lady Valencia, who, in ignorance of her brother's absence, had made a bold but ill-timed effort to bring about a reconciliation and effect the marriage upon which her whole hopes were set?
That was the thought that came to June just then, but she put it from her as wild, improbable, wholly false.
It was well for her, perhaps, that just at this moment the sudden entrance of other guests claimed Mrs. Dalroy's attention, and gave her—June—an opportunity to steal away and think out the problem apart from the presence of her sharp-sighted friend.
Making her way from the salon to the ballroom, she crossed this latter in the direction of a row of French windows which gave access to a broad terrace hedged upon the outer side by a double row of flowering pink oleanders in painted tubs.
Passing through the nearest of these windows, she paced up and down the pavement and tried to reasoti the enigma out.
"No, no! I can't believe that Lady Valencia could
be so clever, even though I know her to be base enough and desperate enough for such a step," she said to her-self at length. "It is true that I have never seen more of Hilary's writing than the signature he scribbled upon my dancing card, but still I can't believe it possible even ix the face of what I have heard about his absence. Mrs. Dalroy may have deceived herself about his not being in the neighborhood since last night, and then again he may have written the note before his departure and intrusted some one to deliver it to-day. Ah! I shall know the truth about that the very instant he beholds me; for if he did not write that note he will be unprepared to meet me here, and will start with surprise when he beholds me; but if he did write it, he will expect to see me here, and so I shall know the truth before he speaks a single word."
As she spoke she came to a halt before a door which gave access to a flight of stairs leading to the upper part of the mansion, and barely had the last murmured word passed her lips ere the door opened and Sir Hilary Chilton, arrayed in full evening dress. stepped out and met her face to face.
There was no start of surprise, no sudden recoiling, and at the knowledge of this Ji4ne's heart gave a great and joyous bound. Clearly he expected to meet her, clearly, too, the enigma was not yet solved, for he was as cold as marble and his face as pale.
"This is most fortunate, Miss Drayton," he said, with a cold, sedate bow and in an utterly passionless voice. "I had feared that I might be put to the necessity of searching the rooms to find you, but this has simplified the matter most agreeably."
For one moment June stood as though turned ti stone, and looked up into his face; then, with a smile of sudden recollection, she tore off the roses and threw them far out over the hedge.
"If-not with these, then without them," she said impulsively. "See! do I please you better thus, or is there any other flower of any color that you would have me wear ?"
For an instant a puzzled expression knotted his brows and clouded his handsome eyes.
"It is a matter of perfect indifference to me one way or the other," he said coolly. "The flowers were very becoming, if you really wish my opinion upon that score; but you look equally well without them, and if you desire to wear others of a different color you should be a better judge than I of what best becomes your attire. But, pardon me, I have not met you to discuss frivolities, Miss Drayton, or to indulge in a moonlight flirtation. Our meeting has a reason, a purpose—let us stick to it and cast all idle matters to the winds!"
THE ENIGMA SOLVED.
Had Sir Hilary lifted his hand and dealt her a blow in the face he could not have hurt or surprised June more than he did by those words.
So then he meant to assume that tone, adopt that role---the role of a stern, unyielding master—toward her, did he? He had won her into openly admitting —through the medium of those wretched roses—that she still loved him well enough to become his wife, if he were again to ask her, and feeling now that his power over her was absolute and his victory certain, he meant to assert his lordly masculine authority, and give her to understand, in the beginning, that he purposed being the master, and would brdok no more of what Lady Valencia termed her "shameless flirtation and her disgusting assumption of independence."
That was how June read those cold, dispassionate words of his; that was the construction she put upon his austere and unloverlike bearing toward her, and his utter indifference to the fate of the roses she had worn as a badge of her affection for him; and, as she leaped to that conclusion, all the fires of her rebellious heart kindled anew, and inspired her with a spirit of passionate resentment and furious wrath.
The red flush of a moment since was gone from her countenance now, and her face appeared deathly pale in the light that streamed out from the windows and fell upon it as she lifted her eyes to his with a look of absolute defiance.
"Pardon me," she said in a slow, sarcastic voice—a voice that had a sting underlying its level tones—"pardon me! but I, like yourself, have a decided dis..
inclination to indulge in what you are pleased to term 'frivolities,' Sir Hilary, and if you have for a moment imagined that I desire to indulge in a `moonlight flirtation,' as you so delicately put it, pray disabuse your mind of that absurd notion at once and forever. I never was given to that sort of thing; I never had the slightest inclination to participate in it, whether by moonlight, gaslight, daylight, or any other light that could be devised, and least of all with you."
"If you mean that to be sarcastic, the effort is quite thrown away," he made answer in a voice that had a quiet touch of scorn—not to say contempt—in it. "In some roles one cannot always admire you, Miss Dray-ton, and in this, one is, I believe, privileged to pity you.
"Pity, Sir Hilary Chilton ?"
"I said `pity,' Miss Drayton, and I say it advisedly, for in attempting to vindicate yourself in this instance, you are unconsciously convicting yourself in another. Heaven knows I have no desire to rake up topics that have to do with a past which I find it impossible to forget, and more difficult to forgive, but if you never indulge in `flirtations,' Miss Drayton, I should like to know what you call your conduct with Philip Lexboro, what you call your conduct toward me that night on the river wall? The most practiced coquette in the world could hardly have drawn a man on more will-fully than you did me; and when you had brought me to the point at which you were aiming—namely, a proposal of marriage—your subsequent actions were and are only compatible with those of a common flirt."
"You forget yourself, Sir Hilary Chilton."
"Would to God I could," he made answer, "for then I should be freed from the torturing recollections of you and of that mad time when I was fool enough
158	The Enigma Solved.
to become your dupe. No, I can no more forget myself than you can forget me, Miss Drayton, and therein lies my revenge, lies your retribution. You flirted with me in those old days—deny the charge, if you like—but as I said before, your subsequent actions convict you—you flirted with me shamefully, cruelly, abominably, but it is the fate of all coquettes to one day experience the very passion which they have so long laughed at and made sport of, and, like the pitcher that is carried too often to the well, to be shattered at last, and irredeemably so.
"That you entered into the game of hearts without the least idea of what the consequences would be to you or the least care regarding what they would, in the long run, be to tile, I can very well understand; but even you yourself are not more thoroughly alive to the fact that I am, Miss Drayton, and, as I said before, therein lies your own punishment and my revenge.
'That you love me I know as well as I do that I any living at this minute, for your eyes have betrayed your secret in the past—they are betraying it even now —and even though you have fought to uproot that log e, and continue to fight it to the day of your death, I tell you that you cannot dethrone it, cannot conquer it, cannot trample it underfoot, for it is your retribution, your destiny, your doom, and a Higher Power than yours has willed it so.
"So long as you live you will love me, Miss Drayton --W ill have to love me in spite of yourself—and you know it as well as I ; you hear me say it, do you not? You will have to love me, and when that love has worked its refining influences upon your cruel and -unconscionable nature, when it has softened you, chastened you, humanized you, and brought out all that is yet lovable in your callous nature--"
"Then I may confidently hope to acquire the honor
The Enigma Solved.	159
of Sirs Hilary Chilton's favor, I presume?" struck in June- with a sharp, sarcastic laugh, which could not, however, veil the wrath which . tore her sour and reddened her cheeks with the fires of shame and resentment.
"Truly the prospect is an alluring one,. and in the hope of one day. bringing you to my feet, I suppose I ought to begin at once a preparatory course in this study of `chastening' and `humanizing' myself. Oh. Sir Hilary"—with a mocking laugh, and an exaggerated bow—"I am crushed to death by this overpowering possibility; I am bowed down to the dust by this proof that there is still hope for me, and still a reward awaiting this amazing love whose existence nobody—not even myself—was aware of until now. Oh, kindest and most generous of men, be yet a little kinder, and tell me how long I shall have to wait before you will come and claim your property and lift me to the topmost pinnacle of all earthly bliss by asking me to become your wife? Oh. when will you, do this, nn hero, my demigod, my priceless and only love'
when, oh, when?"
"Perhaps never," he answered in the same calm dispassionate voice, and with an utter disregard of her mocking jeers. "It is not your fitness, but mine upon which that must depend now, for until I can come to you in a manner which it will make it impossible for you to again insult me as you did that morning after the ball, you need never again expect to behold me in the light of a possible suitor for the hand of the 'daughter of the richest man in all Canada.' The abominable charge which you once laid at my door, neither you nor any other living creature shall ever prefer against me again, Miss Drayton, and until I am in a position to claim you without that suspicion cast into niv teeth	
"To claim me !" struck in June, in a voice of furious wrath. "You speak as though I were your property—a mere automaton—a thing without a voice to protest\ or a will to exercise in her own behalf. If that is your belief, alter it at once, and if this is what you have to say to me, I fancy we have wasted time enough on this interview already."
"It is at your pleasure," he answered with a stiff bow. "I knew it could offer little that is pleasant. so far as I am concerned—so little that I almost shrank from granting it—hut if this is all you wished to say to me, it would, perhaps, have been far better had I declined."
"You declined—you?" repeated June. `Upon what grounds could you decline when that privilege was re-served alone for me? It was not I who sought this interview, be pleased to recollect, Sir Hilary Chilton !"
"I don't know what you call seeking it, then, i f your note to me wasn't an absolute step in that direction."
"My note to you ?" repeated June, in the blankest amazement ; then, after a momentary stare and with a sharp, derisive laugh : "Pardon me," she added, "hut is there insanity in your family, Sir Hilary Chilton, or are you merely afflicted with the habit of reversing the order of your personal pronouns?"
"Oh, let us put an end to this mummery !" he responded impatiently. "You can scarcely have the hardihood to accuse me of having sought this interview—for that is what your last remark would seem to imply; I repeat, it would have been better had I declined your request and escaped the instilts which--"
"My request? What request? Do you mean to charge me with requesting this interview ?"
"Why not? You won't attempt to deny that, will you, in the face of the note which you wrote me?"
"I wrote you a note?" began June, in a tone of amazement, then she stopped suddenly, her whole face crimson with indignant blushes. "Tell me the truth, do you hear? Did you or did you not send a bouquet and a note to me this morning, Sir Hilary Chilton?"
"I am not so mad," he answered, smiling contemptuously at what he believed her efforts to get out of the affair now that the interview had failed to realize her expectations; then drawing from his pocket a daintily scented and daintily written note; "Will this fix the responsibility beyond the possibility of evasion?" he added as he drew it from the envelope and smoothing out the sheet, handed it to her. "It is not half an hour since my valet gave me this, stating that he had received it from one of your servants with the request to deliver it to me in person and with your compliments."
Tune snatched the written sheet, bore it nearer the light, and with scorching cheeks and angry eyes read these words:

"HILARY : I hope I am not outraging the proprieties by this step, but, after all, what are the proprieties compared to love and the making or marring of a whole life? I have lived to know my heart—lived to regret the rashness which caused me to throw away my happiness and yours in a moment of foolishness, and if it is not yet too late I want to retrace that step and regain that vanished happiness. I shall be at Mrs. Dalroy's reception to-night, and shall, as a sign of that love which still lingers in my heart, wear upon any bosom a cluster of roses from the little bower where we once spent so many happy hours, and where I first became aware of how dear you really are to me.
162	The Enigma Solved.
1
Oh, if you have any love left for me in your heart, lead me out of the rooms when you see those roses on my bosom to-night, for T must have a private inter-view with you or I shall go mad. Grant it to me, Hilary, and, if my hopes are not all in vain, take me to your heart and tell me again that you still love
"Your foolish but repentant	1-LINE'
CHAPTER XXVI.
A DEED OF MADNESS.
For one moment after she had mastered its contents, June stood as though turned to stone and stared at that forged letter; then, with a sudden cry of rage and shame, she tore it into fifty pieces and, casting the fragments upon the marble pavement, stamped them beneath her feet.
She knew now what Maude Thornhurst had done during the time she had those boxes of flowers in her own room—one of which, it was now clearly evident, had been the offering of some unknown friend whose gift the crafty girl and her equally crafty mother had purloined and replaced by a bunch of red roses from Tune's bower, and the forged note which purported to come from Sir Hilary—she knew now the meaning of that interview between Maude and Lady Valencia which she had partially overheard when she came down to the drawing-room all dressed and ready to start f ( 0 Mrs. Dalroy's reception; and the knowledge only served to reawaken her slumbering passion and ins ii her with a stronger, fiercer, wilder desire to revenge herself upon those two women, let it cost what it would.
"And you believed that I wrote that? you dared to believe that I wrote that ?" she panted.
"Why not?" he made answer. "Does it not voice the very sentiment which I tell you I know to be in your heart ?"
"You know? you know?" she echoed with a jarring, mirthless laugh. "Oh, yes, you are a man! you are a lord of creation, and your wisdom passes all telling! You know that I love you, you know that I will have
to love you all the rest of your life, and you know also that it is my retribution to sit like Patience on a monument, waiting for you to come and toss your glove to me as a sign that I am at last worthy to be-come a member of that glorious and immaculate race from which my father's wife, Mrs. Valencia Drayton, sprang. You know all this because you are wise beyond the rest of your sex, beyond your generation. But what a pity it is that, being so wise as all that,. and knowing so much of me, you could not also have known that that letter was an abominable forgery !"
"A forgery ?"
"Yes, a forgery, in spite of your incredulous smiles a base, unpardonable forgery, the perpetrator of which ought to be flogged through the streets as they did with slanderers of old !" cried June excitedly. "I can forgive your conceit—that conceit which makes you think that you are the most desirable man that ever drew the breath of life—I can forgive that because_ you are a Chilton and know no better than to believe that every woman in the world has an envious eye fixed upon your title and an unconquerable desire to become a member of your glorious family—a family of bankrupts, tricksters, forgers, Sir Hilary Chilton, and fitly represented by such honorable women as Miss Thornhurst and Lady Valencia.
"All that I could have forgiven you—would have forgiven you—but I never can—never will forgive you for insulting me, by believing for a moment that. I wrote that letter to you._ How dared you do it—oh,: how dared you ?"
"It requires no especial amount of courage to do-that, I fancy," he said with a shrug of his shoulders;:: and a curl of his upper lip. "Must I again remind you-of what your eyes told me long ago, and what I then . hoped—what I hope still—to one day hear from your
lips, when I am in a position to ask you to tell it to me without fear of being again misjudged and insulted as I once was?
"You love me, and the letter acknowledges that; you came to me with those bower roses in your bosom, and a look of allurement in your eyes, as the letter had warned me you would, and the inference is very plain."
"Is it?" she answered, thrusting her hand into the folds of her gown, and drawing forth the note which had come with the box of crimson roses. "Is not that very plain, also? Take it, read it. It bears your name and it came to me to-day."
"To-day? I was not in this neighborhood to-day. I was miles away attending to some business which has to do with—no matter what—you shall know if it succeeds (which it promises), and J can wait until then. I could not have written you a letter to-day, and you must have known it."
"No, I have not your powers of discernment—not your happy faculty of knowing the inmost thoughts, hopes.. and motives of other people whom I have not seen for a score of days. Here is the letter—take it—read what it says—read why I came here to-night, and so learn	• No! No! You must not—shall not !" she suddenly added, as she recollected the request contained in it and realized what her act in wearing those red roses to-night would reveal in the light of that disclosure. "You know so much—you need be en-lightened upon nothing further, lest the weight of so much knowledge should overburden your stupendous brain. The letter bears your name and asks me to grant you an interview to-night. That is all that you need know about it."
"Bears my name? Asks you to grant me an inter-
view ?" he repeated indignantly. "Let me see the wretched forgery."
"It is not necessary," responded June, as she thrust it into her bosom again. "My letters are my property, Sir Hilary Chilton, and I decline to exhibit them even to so fascinating an individual as you."
"If it contains what you say, I have a right to see it, Miss Drayton."
"If it contains what I say! You doubt my word then? Very well—continue to doubt it—you shall not see the letter and there's an end to it."
"Not if your refusal to show it gives me a right to believe that the one which I showed you was not a forgery, and that this is only a ruse to give color to your own denial, and to assist you in backing out of the affair, now that this interview has failed in its object, and you realize that you can no longer make a dupe of me!"
June started as though stung, and a wave of indignant color stained her face from brow to chin.
"You dare not believe that !" she asserted haughtily. "Even your overweening conceit must have its limits, and you dare not believe that of me."
"I shall believe it, then, if you will.not show me the letter," he responded. "I shall believe it, and feel that I have the right to believe it, if you choose to be less just, less generous, toward me than I have been toward you."	•
Her eyes met his eyes, boldly, unflinchingly, and with a look of outraged womanhood. Her soul cried out to her to vindicate herself, let the cost to her pride be what it might ; but as she remembered what that letter, and the fact that she had complied with it, would reveal to this man who was not disposed to forgive her or to ask her for her love under the present
A Deed of Madness.	6

conditions, she put the impulse behind her and yielded to the dictates of her woman's pride,
This man had told her that he knew she loved him, and that in time, if all went well, he meant to again ask her for that love, but all the same he should receive no open acknowledgment of it now, let the result be what it would.
"Think what you please," she said doggedly, "I de-cline to show you the letter."
"I might have known it," he responded, with a gesture of repudiation. "You insulted me once, and I ought to have known better than to give you the opportunity to do so again. When I read that letter which lies there in fragments, do you know what I said to myself? I said: `It is a siren's snare, and you are a fool, Hilary Chilton, if you give it one serious thought, or take one step toward meeting the writer of it	"
"And you have not met the writer of it."
"Pardon me, but I have no proof of that. My good angel said to me : `This woman loves you, it is true, but she will not yield to that love until you compel her to do so by asserting man's mastery over the heart that you have won, and if you attempt to do that now, while you are poor, and it is still possible for her to insult you, as she did before, by charging you with seeking her fortune to clear off your encumbered estates, you can only do so at the sacrifice of your self-respect. She does not come to you to-night with tenderness in her heart, although her letter would seem to promise that, my monitor said to me, "for, although she loves you, her vanity is stronger than her love, and that vanity you have wounded by withdrawing your-self from her presence. She comes to coax, to cajole, to lure you 'back to your place in her train of admirers, and to exhibit you side by side with Philip Lexboro,
whom she took from another woman, not because she cared for him, but because it gratified her vanity and	" ''
"Who told you that that was my reason ?" struck in June, with a jarring, reckless sort of laugh that vaguely echoed all the desperation of her rebellious soul. "Who told you that I cared nothing for Philip Lexboro? Who told you that I have not accepted his attentions because they were agreeable to me?"
"Yourself, for one," he answered, "and reason, for another. No woman can love two living men with the same affection; and though you deny it until doomsday, I shall always know your heart belongs to me. As for Lexboro, with your own lips you told me that the man was repulsive in your sight and his bare touch inspired you with a feeling of loathing and disgust."
"Oh, but I know him better now, and time works many changes of feeling."
"It has not changed yours—it never will change yours. Your heart is wholly and solely mine, and it will remain mine until eternity. Some day I may come to claim it, and when I do I shall find it purified by suffering, cleansed by the fires of adversity, but still awaiting me. It is mir)-e to have and to hold, it is mine to claim when I will/and it shall be mine to keep so long as life endures."
"Don't make too sure of that," responded June in a voice of desperation as a faint ripple of laughter drew her attention to the ballroom ; and glancing in the direction of it, she beheld Maude and Lady Valencia indulging in an animated conversation with Captain Lexboro. "The surest things fail sometimes, my friend, the brightest hopes crumble to ashes, and the happiest dreams have a rude and terrible awakening. It is the exception, you know, that proves the rule."
A Deed of Madness.

"Then this will be the exception," he answered. "For it is your retribution to love me, your destiny to wait for me, and your fate to be true to me so long as your heart beats. I am your destiny, your retribution, your fate, Miss Drayton, and you cannot exorcise me, do what you will."
"Can I not?" she cried out in a tone of passionate resentment, and with a look of almost maniacal wildness. "Come, then, and you shall see me do it; you shall see me avoid my destiny, avert my fate, and evade my retribution ; and, in doing these, avenge myself upon those who have brought this curse upon me."
With that she plucked him by the sleeve, and half led, half dragged him across the terrace and into the semi deserted ballroom; and he, vaguely comprehending her drift as she turned toward the spot where Maude and Lady Valencia and Philip Lexboro stood, nervously caught at her wrist and strove to stay her.
"June!" lie tittered in a gasping voice, "for God's sake—for mine !"
"No, for my own this time !" she made answer with a strange wild laugh; then she broke away from him and, utterly disregarding his cry and the faint exclamation of surprise which broke from the lips of Maude and Lady Valencia, rustled sharply forward and paused before Philip Lexboro.
"Captain Lexboro, if you can get some white roses I will wear them now."
"June!" he cried, his whole face lighting suddenly as he sprang forward with both arms outstretched. "June, my darling, do you, can you mean	
"It was a mistake," she struck in excitedly, "a terrible mistake, and I have just discovered that I threw away the wrong roses. You asked me to-day if I would be your wife, and I am come to-night to tell
you that I will. There is my hand, Captain Lexboro, and if you will promise to claim it in a fortnight's time and to take me away from Canada and out of the presence of these two infamous women forever, I promise to become your wile and go with you' where you will!"
CHAPTER XXVII,
COUNTING NOT THE COST.
It had all come about so suddenly, so like the crashing of a thunderbolt falling out of a clear and cloud-less sky, that Maude and Lady Valencia were actually,. stricken dumb, and even Philip Lexboro himself could do scarcely more than gasp out his delight and cover
i th kisses the hand which June had given him.
Maude, pale with surprise and despair, was the first to recover from that stupor of astonishment, and consequently the first to speak.
"Oh !" she gasped as she recoiled a step, and laid a nervous clutch upon her ladyship's arm, "oh, mamma ! Flo you hear? Do you comprehend what the bold creature has done and said? and in public, too! Oh, this is horrible—horrible!"
The response to this came not from Lady Valencia, hut from June herself.
"Yes, I should imagine it would be to people of your caliber," she said, addressing herself to both ladies. "You played a clever trick with those roses while they were in your possession to-day, Miss Thornhurst—or Lady Valencia (whichever it was who committed that clever little forgery), but even the cleverest tricks fail sometimes, you know, and the most desperate of women make blunders in their little schemes."
"Schemes, Miss Drayton," replied Lady Valencia, glancing nervously toward the spot where Sir Hilary stood, as pale and rigid as a figure of stone. "You use strong language to-night, but I utterly fail to grasp your meaning or to comprehend the nature of your coarse remarks."
"Do you?" responded June. "Then ask your (laugh-
ter for an explanation, and blame your own mad over-eagerness for the wrecking of her hopes and your own. I have discovered that there were not only one but two forged letters delivered to-day, Lady Valencia, and that's the meaning'of it. You comprehend me, do you not? You and your daughter have overshot the mark, and, like my fate and destiny yonder, have been too sure of your game and gone too far with me."
My lady's only response was a smothered gasp, but she need to utter no more, for Sir Hilary spoke for her.
"Hush—hush !" he hoarsely said, as he advanced toward June. "If you are dead to all human pity, at least be dumb to slander. I comprehend your drift, Miss Drayton, but this is my sister, and you shall not malign her or shift the burden of your own misdeeds upon shoulders less responsible. Captain Lexboro, I congratulate you upon your newly acquired honors, and I should have to hate you worse than I do not to pity and feel sorry for you !"
Then with a stiff bow to Captain Lexboro, and a glance of unspeakable contempt for the pale, desperate, young creature whose hand the captain was holding, he turned on his heel and walked out of the room.
"Curse your pity! keep it for those who want it !" called out the captain after him. "It was a fair field and an even fight, and, as you've lost, it wouldn't be a had idea to save a little of your sorrow for yourself. Oh, June !" he added, turning again to her, "oh, June ! have I really won you after all? and may I announce our engagement at once?"
"Yes," she answered, experiencing an almost barbaric joy in the faint shudder which she saw run through Maude's frame as he spoke. "The sooner it is announced, the better ; and recollect, please, that I want it all over as quickly as possible, and the wedding
Countin'7 Not the Cost.	173

must either take place in a fortnight's time or not at all."
"To-morrow wouldn't be any too soon for me," responded the captain, "so if you really are anxious to have it occur at once
"No, no! I must have a fortnight at least before I sacri—before I can get ready to be married—a fort-night, Captain Lexboro—not a day less and not an hour more. Now go find my father and break the news to him, while I exchange a few private words with these two human fiends."
"Eh? What? Why surely, my dear, you don't mean Miss Thornhurst and Lady Valencia by	
"Oh, go away, go away, or I shall feel tempted to shriek presently. Find my father, tell him, and then go home and leave me to myself for the rest of the evening. Come to Suncliff to-morrow, and we can talk it all over then, but just now leave me—leave me, if you would not drive me mad !"
His only response was to lift her hand and press it to his detested lips; then, without a word, he turned and rushed out of the room to find Mrs. Dalroy's butler first and then to break the news to John Drayton.
June waited only until he had taken his departure, and then, turning to Maude and Lady Valencia, she fixed a look of wordless and implacable hate upon their pale, malicious faces.
"I lave settled with Sir Hilary Chilton and settled with myself," she said in a bitter, biting tone. "Not to settle with you two treacherous serpents, and so even up my score and pay you back shame for shame, blight for blight, and blow for blow !"
CHAPTER XXVIII.
TOTHING BUT DEATH SHALL T MART.
Lady Valencia did not reply. She comprehended that this, interview with her irate stepdaughter was not likely to be a very pleasant experience ; in short, that June was in a mood to speak her mind clearly, and call a spade a spade. And nervously tapping Maude upon the shoulder with the closed sticks of her fan, her ex-ladyship motioned toward the door.
"Come, Maude dearest," she said in a slightly unsteady voice. "If this barbarian has no more respect for her hostess than to endeavor to create a scene at such a time and in such a place as this, let us at least show that we have, and by removing ourselves at once from the creature's presence, spare your aunt the mortification of having to apologize to her guests for an affair which can only reflect upon all concerned there-in. Come, dear, let us go. Fortunately, no one but ourselves has as yet entered the ballroom, but there is no telling when somebody will; so it is better we should take advantage of the situation and go while there is still time."
But for once Maude was not inclined to give ear to her mother's advice, or to study the feelings of any one but herself ; and, white with wrath, quivering with disappointment and blind with passion, she turned upon her ladyship with a small, young fury and determinedly stamped her hoot.
"I will not go, mamma!" she cried out in a voice that shook with the fury of her temper very much as the flame of a candle splutters in a strong draft. "Do you hear what I say? I will not go—I will not !"
"But, Maude, my darling, consider where we are--consider the feelings of your dear aunt."
Nothing but Death Shall Thwart. 175
"A fig for my `dear aunt'—for all the dear aunts in Christendom!" responded Miss Thornhurst, furiously. "I tell you I will not- stir one step until. I have told this barbarian—this savage—this thief who steals other girls' lovers—what I—what every honorable woman in the world—must think of here after this. You can go if you like, but I, shall not. She says that she means to settle her score with us, and I say that I mean to give her a piece of my mind before we leave this room."
"You shall do nothing of the sort," responded Lady Valencia determinedly. "If you dispute my pleasure, then I must assert my authority and order you to follow me from the room."
"If she does, both you and she shall be made to regret it," struck in June resolutely. "I am not in a mood to be trifled with to-night, Lady Valencia, and I tell you candidly that if you will not grant me this interview here, I will follow you wherever you go—even among Mrs. Dalroy's guests, if you drive me to that extremity—and have it there. I am desperate. you see—as desperate as the savage and merciless beasts of ingratitude with whom I have to deal—and I tell you plainly that I will have an interview with you now and here, let the consequences be what they may."
"But, why 'now?' " responded her ladyship agitatedly.
"Because it is my pleasure," responded June shortly. "I have something to say to you and your daughter that will not brook delay."
"But surely you can wait until we reach home. It is a more fitting place—an eminently more fitting place—than the house of a friend in which to discuss family differences. and I can see no reason why you should not wait' until then."
"Do you not?" returned June. "Well, then, I do,
and if you wish me to tell you in plain terms why I choose to have the matter settled here I will do so. It is because after this hour I never intend to exchange another word with you upon any subject whatsoever, so long as we both live, and because I do not intend to go home with you to Suncliff either to-night or upon any other night, so long as you are mistress there and have the right to' say that this treacherous, crawling. venomous snake"—pointing to Maude---"shall remain under my father's roof.
"You understand me, do you not? Either you pro-vide some other home for your daughter, or I refuse to return to Suncliff, and the whole world shall know the reason why.,"
A pale drab shadow settled down upon Lady Valencia's countenance as she heard this, and her lips curled. inward until her mouth appeared like a slit in her small, colorless face.
"You would not dare take such a stand as that !" she said in a wheezing voice of passion. "You would. not dare publicly disgrace me in that fashion, Miss Drayton."
"Would I not? Well, put me to the test and see, retorted June. "It matters not to me if you be fifty times my father's wife. You have made me a demon like yourself, you see, and this I tell you: Either you find some other home for your daughter—and find it to-night—or I decline to return to Suncliff, and every man, woman, and child shall know that I do so because I absolutely refuse to live under the same roof with a woman who clandestinely opens and reads other people's letters, and who has forged my name to a missive which I would have died sooner than write."
"It is false !" exclaimed Lady Valencia, two bright vermilion spots coming out upon her otherwise color-less face. "I never was guilty of such an action, and
Nothing but Death Shall Thwart.	i 77
I never penned that note to Sir Hilary- Chilton which	
"Aha ! you admit, then, that you were cognizant of the forgery to which I allude?" struck in June exultantly. "In your eagerness to resent the charge, you have trapped yourself, my lady, and fastened that act of infamous treachery upon your daughter. You are not guilty, eh? For surely the aider and abettor in a crime is less guilty than the actual perpetrator thereof ! Surely the woman who allows her daughter to write forged letters and assists her to deliver them, and to keep the matter secret, must always be held guiltless of any share in that daughter's misdeeds, and surely, too, my father would be proud of his wife if he ',vere to learn of this and be given proof of the 1.,seness of the woman whom he chose in his blindness to Le the inonitress of his child."
"Proof !" responded Lady Valencia in extreme agitation. "No such proof exists, and I hold my husband too honorable a man to condemn me upon hearsay."
"And I hold my father far too sure of my integrity to doubt my word, were I to tell him of the damaging admission you have just made, madam," replied June. "Besides that, there is the testimony of Sir Hilary Chilton's valet, to establish the fact that one of the Suncliff servants delivered that letter to him, with word that it came from me, and it will not require the services of a skilled detective to discover who that servant was, and make him tell who put that letter into his hands. Ah, you grow pale, my lady, and well may you do so; for proof of your rascality does exist, you see, and at one mention of this from me—my father would put you from him like the loathsome and dishonorable wretch that you are. Answer me at once: shall I speak that word—shall I publicly denounce you or the shameful part which you have taken in this
1 73 Nothing but Death Shall Thwart.

affair, or will you find some other home for your worthy daughter ?"
Lady Valencia seemed to be strangling, and it was several moments ere she could find voice to speak.
"I—I will ask my sister to allow her to remain here for a time," she gasped at length. "After that I will find some more congenial home for her, and—and	 Oh, how I hate you—how I hate you, you miserable lowborn wretch!"
"The feeling is mutual, I assure you !" retorted June, with a bow. "Now one word more, Lady Valencia, and I am done with you forever. Your schemes to secure my fortune to your brother, that he might, through a marriage with me, clear off his mortgaged estates and redeem Chilton Towers from the clutches of the money lenders, are well known to me and have been ever since the night, of my coming-out ball, when you and your daughter discussed them in the conservatory, not knowing that I overheard every word. But for that they might have succeeded, but for that I might have been mad enough to fall a victim to the wiles of a fortune hunter, and so become a member of your detestable family.
"But they have failed—those schemes—and the fool of those mad times is a wise woman now—wise as the serpents with which she has to deal. I have said that I have become a demon like yourself, I have said that it is my purpose to blight your hopes as you have blighted mine, to come between you and your heart's desire as you came between me and mine, and to pay you back in your own coin. And what I have said, I will do, let the cost be what it may.
"You took from my father's daughter the home over which she presided and the place which her dead mothei- left for her to fill, and in return she now takes it from your daughter t1i -he m av strike you even
Nothing but Death Shall Thwart. 179
as she has been stricken, blow for blow. You ruined my hopes and I in return will ruin yours. You defeated my purposes and I in return will defeat yours, though I sacrifice myself to do it. ou had set your heart upon securing my fortune to your brother, that he might save the ancestral home you love and are proud of, but you shall not do it! You had set your heart upon securing to your' daughter a fortune almost as large as my own, and with it the happiness of a union with the man she loves, and you shall not do that, either; for, as you struck I will strike; as you came between me and my ambition I will come between you and yours, and, let the cost to me be what it will, I will marry Captain Philip Lexboro two weeks from to-night as surely as I am a living woman. As his wife I can never fall into the clutches of your brother; as my husband he can never belong to Miss Maude Thornhurst, the schemer and forger, and so by one stroke I shall avenge myself upon her and even my score with you!"
"You hateful wretch!" panted Maude, vvho had fast been growing hysterical. "You shan't have him! you shan't take him from me! you shan't become Philip Lexhoro's wife, in spite of all your vile designs. I'll thwart you yet, you savage, just see if I don't !"
"Nothing but death shall thwart me," responded June, with dogged determination. "My mind is fully made up, Miss Maude Thornhurst, and, if I am a living woman two weeks from to-night, I shall be Philip Lexboro's wife, as surely as there is a God above us !"
HOW THE PROPHECY WAS FULFILLED.
She had made that declaration with the determined air of one registering a solemn and irrevocable vow, and, by the fire in her eyes, the resolute expression of her countenance, and the stern ring in her impassioned voice, Lady Valencia felt assured that she meant to keep her word, let the consequences be what they might.
Still, as she knew that June not only disliked, but absolutely abhorred, Philip Lexboro, she tried to persuade herself that the girl's mood must of a certainty be an evanescent one, and that, ere the time rolled around for the fulfillment of that rash bethrothal, her better nature would surely revolt against the thing she purposed doing, and prompt her to be true to herself.
But, at the same time, her knowledge of June's character warred with this hope and warned her not to pin too much faith upon it.
As for Maude, she had by this time become so hysterical that her condition was pitiful to behold, and the chances of giving June that "piece of her mind" which she had once been so determined to exploit, were very slim indeed.
"Come, my darling, come!" murmured her ladyship. as she wound one arm about her, "let us leave the presence of this barbarian at once, and seek the companionship of those who are our equals. After this" —making a virtue of necessity—"I would not permit a child of mine to live for one day under the same roof with such a malicious and evil-minded creature. and I will tell Mr. Drayton so as soon as I can find him. Come, darling, let us seek my husband and ac-quaint him at once of our determination."
How the Prophecy Was Fulfilled.	1$ r
With that she turned toward the door which led back to the crowded drawing-rooms where Mrs. Dalroy's dear five hundred friends were assembled, but barely had she taken three steps toward it, ere the heavy velvet portieres which draped it were swept to right and left by the hand of an excited man, and the necessity for "seeking" Mr. Drayton was at an end.
Pale and trembling with agitation, he strode into the almost deserted ballroom with Captain Philip Lexboro at his heels, and, as if blind to the presence of his wife and stepdaughter, stalked with long swift strides to the spot where June was standing, and halted be-fore her.
"June!" he exclaimed in tones of the greatest agitation, "June, my child, what is this thing I hear, this strange and utterly incomprehensible thing which this man"—indicating the captain—"has been telling me? I will not believe it true until I hear it from your own lips, child. You bethrothed to Captain Lexboro—you insisting upon becoming his wife in a fortnight's time? Speak, dear, and tell me: Is the man drunk or dreaming?"
"Neither," responded June, in a low, level voice. `He left me in possession of his sober senses and there has scarcely been sufficient time since then for him to indulge in sleep or become intoxicated, I fancy What he has told you is the truth, papa, the truth, pure and simple. I have promised to become his wife, and have stipulated that our wedding must positively take place two weeks from to-night !"
The blow fairly staggered Mr. Drayton.
"What !" he gasped, falling back a step and staring at her as though he could not believe the evidence of his senses. "You acknowledge it? You tell me that what Captain Lexboro says is true ?"
"Perfectly true, papa," responded June calmly.
"Captain Lexboro has done me the honor to ask me to become his wife, and I have accepted his proposal —with the proviso mentioned."
For one moment Mr. Drayton did not reply—merely stood and stared at her in blank, bewildered silence; then in one swift wave of crimson the color swept back into his pale face and stained it a hue which comported well with his knotted brows and flashing eyes.
"I will not consent to such a thing !" he exclaimed in a voice which made Lady Valencia catch her breath with a faint gasp of reviving hope. "I do not desire this man for a son-in-law, and I absolutely refuse to countenance your marriage to him. June, are you mad? Do you know the character of this man?"
"Perfectly," responded June, with the same unruffled countenance. "Captain Lexboro has the reputation of being a hard drinker, an. inveterate gambler, and a devoted lover of horseflesh, I believe. Well, what of it? He has the means to gratify his tastes in these things if they suit him, therefore he cannot be accused of seeking to marry me for my fortune, papa ; and I have every reason to believe that he would still desire me for his wife if I had not a penny to my name."
"I would—I swear I would !" struck in the captain himself. "If you doubt my word, Mr. Drayton, disinherit June, give her to me without a single copper to bless herself with, and I'll marry her to-morrow morning, if this will suit you."
"It will not suit me, sir !" flashed Mr. Drayton indignantly. "I tell you that you are not the kind of man to whom I would willingly give my child for a wife, and I absolutely refuse to listen to this thing even for a moment, Captain Lexboro."
"And I absolutely refuse to listen to anything else!" exclaimed June doggedly. "It is my intention to marry Captain Lexboro; and no one else, papa, and I do not
IIov, the Prophecy Was Fulfilled.
r ~'3

see why' you should ask me to study your feelings in my marriage, when you never studied mine in yours."
Mr. Drayton flushed at this, and the flush deepened on his florid countenance.
"That is a different thing, June," he said confusedly.
"To you, perhaps, but not to me, papa," she answered. "You chose for yourself—why not let me do the same? I wish to marry Captain Lexboro, and that is all there is about it !"
"But, June dear, this does not accord with your former conduct. I thought—I fancied—that is, I was sure that Sir Hilary Chilton	"
"Leave 'Sir Hilary Chilton's name out of the affair altogether, papa," cut in June vehemently. "I know what your feelings were in that direction, but they are as distasteful to me as mine now appear to be to you, and this I tell you : I mould not marry Sir Hilary Chilton if he were the `last xnan upon earth, and the penalty for refusing him were death by hideous torturer
"June .
"I mean it, papa--I solemnly and sacredly swear that I do. 'My one desire is to marry Captain Lexboro, and as you have never yet denied me anything which has been in your power to grant, I beg of you not to begin now. My life at Suncliff is distasteful to me. My days in the old home where I was once so happy, are now so many hours of torture and bitter heart-sickness, and I cannot--will not endure them longer ! Give your consent to my immediate marriage to Captain Lexboro, or if you will not--"
"And if I will not, Jane, what then?"
"Then I shall forfeit . all claim upon your love and respect, papa," she answered, "and disgrace the name I bear ' by eloping with Captain Lexboro at the very first opportunity "
184 How the Prophecy Was Fulfilled.

"June!"
"I mean it, papa. My life at Suncliff has become so hideous to me that I am determined to escape it, let the means of my release be what they will. I am under age, I know, and you have the right and the power to prevent my running away with Captain Lexboro by locking me up at home, or sending me to a convent, where I shall be as good as buried for the next four years, but if you do either I swear to you that I will surely kill myself at the very first opportunity !"
The cry of horror which her father gave at this terrible declaration ought to have touched her heart, would have touched it under other circumstances, but at present she was deaf and blind to everything but the desire to avenge herself upon Maude and Lady Valencia, and the mad resolve to prove to Sir Hilary Chilton that she still had power to trample under foot that love which he had told her was her doom, and would compel her to be faithful to him, let her struggle against it as she might.
"Give your consent, papa, and save me from my-self," she went on in a strange, half-defiant, 'half-suppliant voice. "I wish to marry Captain Lexboro two weeks from to-night, and if you care for me you will tell me that I may."
"But, June, you do not love this man—I know that you do not, my child; and a marriage without love is almost sacrilege."
"Did you love the woman whom you put in my mother's place?" asked June with terrible directness. "No! you merely married her believing that it was best for me, and that it was your duty to sacrifice yourself for the welfare of the child you love. Then for the same reason give your consent to my marriage with Captain Lexboro, papa, and save me from my-self."
For a moment or two, as though he dimly foresaw the dreadful future, John Drayton hesitated, then he caught his daughter to his bosom, kissed her passionately, and murmured in a voice broken with sobs :
"Have your way, then, my darling; but if it results evilly, cast no blame upon me."
And so, like this, the matter was decided. and Captain Philip Lexboro and June Drayton became formally engaged, and so also the prophecy of Mr. Dalroywhen he told June that his wife's reception was to bring her a wonderful surprise and change the whole current of`her bright young life—came true in a way which nobody had suspected.
A rl'ER 7'I4'E 'YET R0T -Ai..
Lady Valencia's hopes, high indeed when gr. Dray-ton had so positively refused to sanction June's mad betrothal, fell dead when she heard his consent given, and she was scarcely less able to restrain her disappointment and chagrin than was her hysterical daughter, who forthwith began to sob and weep and tear her blond hair.
"Take me away, mamma, take me away, and never let me see that lowbred creature's face again," she cried in tones of the deepest distress. "Oh, why was I ever brought to this dreadful Canada, and why was I ever born?"
"Hush, Maude, my darling," soothed her ladyship. "Thank Heaven there are some people of our own class—of our own family—still left, and you need not again he contaminated by contact with canaille. Mr. Drayton, I hope I need not state that, after this, I cannot suffer my child to cross the threshold of Sun-cliff and enter a house where her mother has been insulted, until your daughter has left it, forever. In-deed, sir, I might say that my own dignity and self-respect forbid me to again enter your home until that same happy event shall transpire, but as I have done you the honor to marry you, I feel that it is incumbent upon me to consider that respect which a woman should show her husband, no matter how far he may be beneath her in social status; and for that reason I spare you the scandal which my refusal to return to your home would necessarily entail. Allow me, therefore, to wish you and Captain Lexboro a very good evening: and to retire from your presence without further de-lay."
After the Betrothal.	187
And then, as nobody responded to her ill-tempered and ill-timed remarks, she walked out of the room with the air of a tragedy queen, and led her hysterical daughter with her.
"God forgive me if my marriage has really forced you to take this step,, June," exclaimed Mr. Drayton huskily as her ladyship vanished, and Captain Lexboro, with a laugh of utter happiness, came forward to join his betrothed and receive the regular paternal blessing. "Heaven knows I meant it all for the best, dear, and even after I knew that it had been a sad and sorry disappointment to you, I fancied that as it had been the direct means of bringing Sir Hilary Chilton into your life, it had not been quite a failure after all. But now that matters have taken this turn, and you have asked me to sanction your union with a man whom I am free to confess to you—and to him, also—that I can neither like nor respect, I shudder for the consequences. Oh, June, June, my child, what madness has driven you to this length? Confess to me, my child, for I know in my heart that you do not want to marry this man, and that there must be something back of your sudden determination to do so. You don't want to marry him, June—oh, tell me that you don't!"
"If I did so, I should only tell you a falsehood, papa !" she responded. "I do want to marry him, and my mind is so firmly set upon it that I am in haste to have the ceremony performed. If I were not, do you think I would accept him and set the day so very soon? I want to become Captain Lexboro's wife, I mean to become Captain Lexboro's wife, and nothing but death can prevent me now."
"God be good to you, then, and God'pity him if he isn't good to you also!" exclaimed her father, at first with sadness and finally with spirit.. "I know not by
what means you have managed to persuade her into this madness, Lexboro, but this I do know, if you are not good to her you shall answer to me and answer with your life."
"I love her, Mr. Drayton—love her madly, and that's my only answer," returned the captain. "Satan is never as bad as he's painted, you know, and I'm not half such a bad sort as people make me out to be."
"God knows I hope not," said Mr. Drayton, "for I tell you frankly that the stories I have heard about you do not redound to your credit, and to give my child to such a man as I have heard that you are	
Jtine herself interrupted the speech. "\Vhy say more, papa ?" she interjected. "I have chosen, and I alone must be to blame, since I have done this thing with my eyes open. Now be the same dear old generous papa that you always were, and leave me w itll Philip, for I have something to say which must be for his ears alone."
Mr. Drayton breathed a heavy sigh. "And the first exchange of confidences between an engaged couple ought to be considered sacred," he said, affecting a smile. "Well, God bless the pair of you, since this thing is to be, and may you find this hasty marriage the gateway to an everlasting happiness."
Then, catching June to his bosom, he kissed her with passionate fervor, put her from him and, stifling a sob, walked out of the room.
For one moment after his departure there was a silence, broken only by the music of the orchestra in the gilded gallery; then Captain Lexboro glanced around, saw that there was nobody in sight and, throwing out his -arms, sprang toward June.
"My darling!" he began, "my wife that is to be, let me seal our betrothal with a kiss, and tell you how
much	"
"Stop !" she struck in hoarsely, as she fell back be-fore his impassioned advance, and threw up one hand .to ward him off. "Don't touch me—don't come near me—don't even make an effort to lay the weight of one finger upon me until you have the right to do so. Philip, I hate you, and bitterly I loathe myself for being what I am."
He stopped short—as though her words had stabbed him—and his brows gathered in a sullen sort of frown.
"So that's the caper, is it?" he said after a monent's pause. "I'm to worship a marble statue that takes all my love and gives nie nothing in return? Well, it's hardly a fair deal, but the marble statue is very beautiful, and I can wait until it is endowed with life."
"If by `life' you mean a responsive thrill, you will wait until doomsday," responded June. "It is your privilege to love as much as you like, and as long as you like; it is my privilege to keep you at your distance so long as there is no actual tie between us, and to hate you always, if I so elect."
"Ah, is it so? Then perhaps you have only made a fool of me once again, and perhaps you do not mean to marry me after all. Do you?"
"Yes, I do !" she answered doggedly. "But it is not to be a marriage of love—at least, upon my part—you can hardly be blind enough to believe that.."
"Never mind that," he made reply. "My passion is enough for two, and so that I win you for my wife, the rest doesn't matter much."
"You are right there," responded June, wincing, as she became aware that the band was playing "Manola" —Sir Hilary's favorite waltz—and wildly wishing that she might be stricken with sudden deafness. "`Nothing matters so that our marriage is consummated
190	After the Betrothal.

at the time set—two weeks from to-night. Yours will be the right to dictate then, but now that right belongs to me, and I will not relinquish one jot or tittle of it. If you do not wish to marry me you have only to refuse to live up to the conditions which I am about to propose, but if you do wish to claim me as your wife, you must and shall comply with the demands which I am about to make. Tell me, Captain Lexboro, are you or are you not willing to do that ?"
AN ANTENUPTIAL AGREEMENT.
"That depends upon vwhat those demands are," repeated the captain somewhat sullenly. "You can't ex-peel a man to say `yes' to a thing before he knows what it is. If your demands are reasonable I will comply with them, of course, but if you are going to propose some outlandish conditions which In) man would care to live up to, why, that's a different thing altogether, and I'll have to ask you to give me time to consider them before I give my answer."
"My demands are not at all unreasonable, and you can grant them without the least inconvenience to yourself—since that seems to be your principal fear." returned June, with a sarcastic curl of the lip. "It is I that will be the sufferer by them. I fancy, since it is always the desire of a woman to have her marriage solemnized with all possible eclat, and to he more resplendent as a bride than upon any other occasiuti in all her life. The demands I mean to make will entail no sacrifice upon your part that I can see, so you need not hesitate to consent to them."
"Very well, then, lire ahead, and let's hear them," returned the captain, "and if I can grant them, I promise to do so. That's fair enough, isn't it? Now, then. go ahead, and let's hear what you have to say."
"In the first place, then, I wish our wedding to b strictly private and severely simple. I wish the ceremony to take place at Suncliff, and to be as simple and unostentatious as it is possible for a wedding to be. If I can dispense with display, surely you can, and it is my desire—my determination, to make it more forcible—to have no reception—no elaborate wedding breakfast, no bridesmaids or groomsmen, and, in fad 1 nobody present but our own immediate relatives."
Contrary to her expectation, the captain entered a sudden and vigorous objection to this.
"But, hang it all, I haven't any `immediate relatives'—at least upon this side of the herring pond," exclaimed he. "But that's not the only objection. There are the `boys' at the barracks—fellows of my regiment, you know—they'll expect to be invited, and expect it with good reason, too; and I'll be hanged if I feel like leaving them out, no matter who else goes by the board."
"Very well, then, you will have to choose between them and me," retorted June with a shrug of the shoulders. "Either the members of your regiment remain absent from the ceremony, or I do—take your choice !"
Captain Lexboro's brows contracted in a heavy scowl, and for perhaps the first time in his life he felt like boxing the ears of this beauti ful, headstrong creature whom he had fought so unceasingly to win.
"You're deuced hard on me !" he said grumblingly, "and I can't see either the sense or the justice of it, any way you put it. A man doesn't get married every day, and when he is about to conduct to the altar the belle and beauty of the season, he naturally wants to do it with a flourish of trumpets, and with all the fellows he knows there to see it and to envy him his good fortune. Besides, it is customary when any member of the regiment `steps off,' to invite all the fellows of his company to the wedding, and as I'm the captain of mine	
"I repeat, you will have to choose between them and me," interjected June with frigid calmness. "You have the privilege of doing just what you consider preferable, and I may add that it is a matter of perfect indifference to me upon which you fix your choice. Only this I positively and emphatically declare—this thing shall be my way or not at all. It will be your
privilege to dictate terms after we are married, Captilin Lexboro, but at present I am in possession of that right, and I will not yield it, let the consequences be what they may."
Captain Lexboro looked at her steadily, closely, and a queer smile—a smile not one whit more attractive than the scowl his countenance had worn a moment since—played about the corners of his bearded lips.
Yes, she was quite right. After marriage his would be the right. to dictate terms, and when once that right was his	 Ah! well, she should see what she should see! He'd take some of that infernal willfulness out of her—he'd tame her—he'd teach her which was the master and which the slave, and he'd make her (lance to a lively tune for compelling him to bow down to her stubborn demands like this—yes, by Jupiter! he would! If she wouldn't bend, then he'd break her, that was all, and she'd live to rue the day when she tried to rule it over him.
Such were the thoughts which were going on behind that smile, and such the resolutions that Captain I.exboro made. But June, unhappily, wus in ignorance of this, and, being in haste to have the matter decided forthwith, eagerly pressed the point.
"You have heard my demands—now have the goodness to tell me whether you are or are not willing to comply with them," she said haughtily. `I am in no mood to dicker or to trifle, Captain Lexboro, and I tell you frankly that if this thing is ever to occur, it must be decided now, and all that has to do with it be permanently settled, since from this night to the hour set for the ceremony we are not to see each other again.
"What, are we to have. no meetings, no lovers' confidences, no pleasant antentiptial evenings such as other engaged couples have ?" cried the captain, half
angrily, half aghast. "It seems to me"—with a sneer —"that you are making a businesslike affair of this, and trying your best to force me into giving you up, by the hardness of the conditions which you propose."
"Perhaps I am," returned June cold-bloodedly. "Perhaps, as you suggest, it is a businesslike affair, and I desire to have everything arranged beforehand upon a perfectly businesslike footing. Now, then, for the third time, if you please : Will you or will. you not comply with these terms?"
Captain Lexboro bowed, but rather too deeply to impress one with its being anything but a sarcastic.' salute.
"Since I hold you too well worth the winning to be lost at any cost, and you can only be won upon the terms you impose," said he with a slight sneer, "I can only yield to your demands and trust to time to soften you toward one who loves you well enough to deserve better treatment than this. Yes, I accept your terms, and I promise to do all that you desire."
"Sacredly promise it, Captain Lexboro."
"Sacredly promise it, June, So you may rely upon my living up to the word I have pledged you if, in return for that promise. you will allow inc the privilege of mapping out our wedding tour."
"Do as you like upon that score—all places are alike to me and I. care not where we go," returned June with a slight shudder. "I only demand that you consent to all that has to do with our wedding being strictly without demonstration of any sort, and that promise you have given me. As for our wedding tour I care not where nor how you plan it, nor what is to be its objective point. Let us go to the north pole, i f it suits you, or to the uttermost regions of the ant-arctic circle."
t shan't wish to go quite ti,, far as that," returned
the captain, with another odd smile. "My plans are not so elaborate nor my desire to absent myself from civilization pronounced enough for a honeymoon of that description. But now, having arranged these preliminaries, suppose we step into the conservatory (the guests will be coming in here to dance in a minute or two) and settle all the other matters, such as the day and the hour when the wedding is to occur, since you are determined to send me from you at once and exile me from your presence until the day when I am to call you mine. Come !, the conservatory is convenient, and at this early hour it is not probable that we shall find anybody there."
"But still somebody may come there at any moment. and we not be aware of their presence on account of the density of the foliage," returned June, with a lively recollection of her own experience in the conservatory at Suncliff upon the night of her coming-out ball. "1 prefer to have no one but ourselves hear what passes between us upon this subject, Captain Lexboro; and, to that end, I think it would be more advisable if we were to have our interview upon the lawn, where we could easily discern the approach of any one who might or might not have an interest in listening to what we say."
"Very well, then, let's go out by way of the window opposite, and then descend the terrace steps to the lawn," suggested he. "The moon is not very full, to be sure, but it is bright enough for our purpose, I fancy, and if you will accept my arm	
June checked him by a gesture, and then having signified her willingness to follow if he would lead the way, walked out after him, to participate in a scene which was to be terribly remembered in the (lark after days of her life.
CHAPTER XXXII.
COMING EVENTS.
The path which Captain Lexboro chose led to a pretty fountain, and halting here, with the tender moonlight falling in a silvery sheen about them, this ill-assorted couple proceeded to make their arrangements for a wedding which, if ever consummated, promised to be the maddest and the saddest marriage that ever was.
June involuntarily shuddered, knowing not why, and experienced an almost uncontrollable desire to rush back to the ballroom and leave the day of that abominable wedding forever unset.
"Let us hurry and get the thing through as speedily as possible," she said with a faint, unsteady voice and with a nervous trembling of her whole body. "The air is unusually damp and raw to-night, and I feel chilled to the bone already."
"Nervousness—merely nervousness," replied the captain serenely. "For my own part I find the night uncomfortably close, and the odor of these jasmines is simply intolerable! I never like jasmines, anyhow. They always remind me of a scene which Well, never mind, that doesn't interest you !"—shuddering slightly and growing a trifle paler. "I never smell the detestable things but what I think of something which I want to forget, and I hate the very sight of them because of that."
"And I shall never smell them again without thinking of something which I want to forget also," murmured June under her breath, as she thought of that cruel scene upon the terrace, and of this wretched one which was the direct outcome of it, then, impatient
with herself, and in,haste to put her self-torture to an end, she plunged without further preface into the subject in hand, and recklessly pursued it until the end was obtained.
As briefly as possible all that had to do with the arrangements for that wretched bridal was settled, the day was set, the hour was decided upon, and nothing now remained for the bride and bridegroom-elect, but to follow out their original plan, and to say "good-by" until they met again at the altar.
"Good night, I must go now," said June with a sigh of relief, as she rose from her seat upon the broad ledge of the fountain's marble brim. "Remember that from now until Friday morning two weeks hence I am mistress of my own actions, and that if you at-tempt to break your promise or even once try to force yourself into my presence, all is over between us for-ever."
As she spoke, she turned her face toward him, and one stray moonbeam falling upon it, etherealized it, just as its fellow beam had done last night at Lady Montjoy's, and again that species of intoxication seized upon him, and made his pulses thrill, as though his veins were filled with liquid lava.
"June, how beautiful you are—how beautiful !" he cried out in a species of delirium, as he sprang toward her. "Don't send me from you like this! Can't you see that I am half mad for love of you? Give me one kiss—one kiss—ere you banish me from your presence as though you were a sultana and I the meanest of your slaves."
The passion in his voice—the passion in his eyes—startled and terrified her, and she fell back from him with a slow cry of horror and disgust.
"Stop !" she panted, throwing up one hand to wave him off. "Go! leave me! leave me! My freedom is still
my- own, and if you wotild not driV'e me to retract my promise and so make it my own forever, go—go—in pity, go and leave me to myself !"
"I can't—I can't! Your beauty has maddened me. and my soul seems all afire !" he hoarsely answered. "Kiss me!"
It is impossible to say to what lengths his furious passion might have driven him, had not the sudden sound of an approaching footstep checked him when in the very act of disregarding her warning words.
Turning, he saw by the faint, uncertain light of the young moon the outlines of a human figure—a woman's figure—advancing swiftly in the direction of the fountain. He was too excited to note the fact that she came, not from the direction of the mansion, but from that of the gates which gave entrance to the grounds, and fancying, somehow, that it was either Lady Valencia or Maude, and that if he remained he would be subjected to a torrent of reproaches and abnse, he muttered a curse and drew sharply back.
"Your wishes shall be obeyed," he said to June—making a virtue of necessity—as men are so apt to do. "A kiss unwillingly given is not worth the having from the lips of one's bethrothed, and so—good-by until to-morrow fortnight, and the hour when I meet you at the altar."
Then, with an angry fling of his left shoulder, and with an oath muttered in his beard, he turned upon his heel and stalked away with his long, swinging, soldierly stride, and left her standing by the fountain—pale; panting Malone.
For one moment she stood there—weak and trembling, and gazed in the direction where she had seen him last; then, with startling abruptness she, too, be-came aware of those rapidly approaching footfalls, and turned just as the author of them came plunging
Coming Events.	1 99

through the clump of cape jasmines, and revealed the unmistakable features, black hair, and swarthy skin of an Italian woman of perhaps fifty years cof age.
"Do you want aid?" began this newcomer in tones of excitement as she hastened to June's side. "I could not see clearly from down there by the gates, but I fancied that I beheld some man about to treat you rudely and	 Per Dior—with a sudden start of
surprise-"the signorina is a lady and not a poor serving maid, as I hoped and believed."
She spoke these last words in such a tone of mingled regret and dismay that June coud not repress a low exclamation of surprise.
"I never saw you before, my good woman," said she, "but I suppose from your presence in these grounds that you are one of Mrs. Dalroy's servants, and you seem sorry at learning that I also am not one.
"Sorry!" repeated the woman bitterly. "Yes, very sorry, signorina, very, very sorry; for the man that was here appeared to be a gentleman. He was a gentleman—he whom I seek—but that did not prevent him from paying attention to a pretty serving maid, and I hoped that I had at last found him. Ah, this disappointment, after I have come so far and have tracked him all across the ocean !"
"Whom?" queried June, with sudden and unaccountable interest.
"It does not matter," returned the woman. "You would not understand if you were told. Women of your class know nothing about such things, and, be-sides, I am not going to tell you, anyhow. It is my secret—mine and his, curse lhimim  	and we shall have
our reckoning when we meet. It-a~,.l be von know him
aoo	Coming Events.
—since you are of his class—and if I were to mention my name you might put him on his guard and assist him to flee again.. Addio, signorina, I am not of this land nor yet of this household—that is sufficient for you to know. Perhaps we may meet again and perhaps not. My mission is to find one who is of thy accursed class—an aristocrat—a handsome and mighty milord, one of the salt of the earth—and yet who has been guilty of shameful treachery and the -basest of wrongs !"
"Against whom? Yourself, or some other in whom you are interested ?"
"It does not matter," she answered doggedly. "I am interested in no one-no one; I am alone in the world—all alone, and I have but one thought, hope, wish, prayer—to find the author of my sorrows, though I must hunt him until doomsday. I am on his track, that is enough for you to know, and enough for me to tell. Once more, signorina, addio, and God be with thee. Thou art beautiful enough for an angel; but beauty is not always a blessing, and, to the poor, it is ever a fatal gift."
Then, before June could speak, she stepped back quickly. waved her dusky hand, and like a swiftly gliding shadow was gone.


\\'hat subtle spell chained her to that spot, or how long she stood there after the woman left her, June Drayton never knew.
When she looked back upon the circumstance after-ward, all that she was ever able to remember was that she awoke suddenly from a sort of stupor, to find her-self sitting upon the marble ledge of the fountain, that the dew and the spray had entirely ruined her pretty gown and almost soaked her to the skin, that
her head was hot, her eyes ached, and her limbs were cramped and cold, and that by the music and the rapid panorama of humanity which passed by the brilliantly lighted windows of the ballroom, it was very evident that the dance had begun, and other belles were engaged in dancing, while she sat here, desolate and alone.
"And Lady Valencia and Maude will say that I am afraid to face the consequences of my step to-night," she muttered, "afraid to show myself in public lest anybody should see how wretched I am, and he will say—he—Sir Hilary Chilton—that already the proof of his mastery over me. is beginning to assert itself, and my love for him makes me ashamed and afraid to acknowledge in public my engagement to Philip Lexboro. Well, they shall see. all of them, all of them, how little afraid I am, and how desperate is my re-solve to cross Lady Valencia in every hope, and pay her hack misery for misery and blow for blow! I will (lance, I will laugh, I will be the gayest of the gay and the maddest of the mad, and, whatever happens to-morrow, this night I will be the life of the ballroom, to all intents and purposes the happiest woman present."
Fired by this reckless resolve, she sprang up from her seat upon the fountain's brim and ran like some niad thing to the terrace which led to the ballroom ; but barely had her feet pressed the marble pavement ere there sounded a sudden joyous cry, a little knot of people surrounded her, and she found herself surrounded by the pale faces of her father and Mr. and Mrs. Dalroy.
"Oh, my poor child! thank Heaven you have at last returned,: exclaimed the little hostess with a sudden burst of tears. "Oh, how white you are, my precious! how white and haggard and wet! Look, Mr. Drayton !
she is as pallid and cold as a corpse, and I can tell by her eyes that she has suffered terribly."
"No, no !" protested June vehemently, "I have not suffered—why should I? I am happy—wildly, deliriously, insanely happy—as befits a woman who has just been betrothed to the man of her own choice."
"Oh, June, don't say that—please don't say that, my darling!" cried Mrs. Dalroy, catching her to her bosom. "Say it is all a mistake, all a mad blunder, which will soon he rectified ; and say what is true—what I know to be true : That you love Hilary too well and have too much respect for yourself to do this dreadful thing. Say that you love Hilary, and will be true to him and to yourself, dear ; and that-	"
"I am happy, I tell you—happy---happy----happy--and I have come back to dance and laugh and sing as betokens a girl so blessed. Who are my partners? want to dance, I tell you, to dance—to dance—to (lance !"
And then with that last word upon her lips, she rushed toward the window of the ballroom, reeled suddenly, and but for her father's quickly interposed arm, would have fallen to the ground.
"June!" he gasped in terror, "June, little girl, tell papa what this madness means."
But June never answered. With his arms about her, she had fainted away upon his breast.
CHAPTER XXXIII.
"TO BE OR NOT TO BE."
As soon as the stricken girl could be borne upstairs and turned over to the charge of Mrs. Dalroy and her maid, brandy was forced down her throat, her feet steeped in hot water, in order to stave off a chill, and as soon as such a thing was practicable, the Drayton car was summoned, and she was borne away at all speed from the scene of her torturous experiences.
Mrs. Dalroy was for having her put, to bed and kept there until all danger of taking cold was past and she was stronger and better able to attempt the journey home; but June herself was set against this, and so wild were her entreaties to be taken away from the place where she had endured so much mental agony that her father yielded to them and lost no time in conveying her back to Suncliff and the little room which she had left so full of life and hope a few short hours before.
And there, under the tender nursing of Miss Prudence Drayton and the watchful care of Finette, she lay for several days ere the danger which threatened mind and body was successfully averted, and it was known for a certainty that no dangerous results were likely to follow that night's experiences.
A week had spent itself ere she again presented herself below stairs and took her seat at the family table ; but during that week the news of her engagement and forthcoming marriage had been spread broad-cast, and had even found, its way into the public prints.
That it created a great social sensation goes without saying, and, contrary to her wishes or expectations,
June was showered with congratulatory letters; and Suncliff was besieged by callers.
Not the last of these was the Honorable Mrs. 'Dalroy, who called every day to inquire after the health of her favorite, and in the hope of being ushered into her presence; but June steadfastly refused to see her, as she did to be "interviewed" by any of the other callers; and so persistently was her little friend re-buffed that she at length grew to realize that June did not wish her to call, and s) ceased her visits entirely.
"If I were to see her I should have to remember that she is his sister, even if she did not torture me by speaking of him, and upbraid me for the shameful thing I am about to do," June said to herself in excuse for sending down word that she was "indisposed" every time Mrs. Dalroy called. "I am determined to marry Philip Lexboro and thwart the plans of Lady Valencia and the aim of Sir Hilary Chilton, and it is no use making the task any harder or more hitter than it is already."
Of Sir Hilary's present whereabouts she had not the slightest idea, and except that she learned through her father that he had left Dalroy House upon the night of the reception and had never since returned, she knew nothing whatsoever of his movements since the hour When he congratulated Captain Lexboro upon his conquest and then walked out of the ballroom.
True to the letter of his promise, Philip Lexboro carefully refrained from calling at Suncliff or, even in writing, to intrude himself upon his fiancee, but by the magnificent betrothal ring which he sent her and the numberless gifts of fruits and flowers which his man conveyed to the house every four or five hours, June knew that he was eagerly awaiting the dawn of their wedding day.
And as the time steadily advanced and she made
"To Be or Not to Be."	205
not the slightest preparation for her wedding and purchased not so much as a single ribbon for her trousseau, Lady Valencia smiled a smile of quiet satisfaction and wrote a confidential letter to Maude—who was still stopping with Mrs. Dalroy—expressing her private opinion that it had all been a piece of mere bravado, that it would never amount to anything and that it was her private opinion that June had not the slightest intention of ever marrying Captain Lexboro and would surely back out- at the last moment.
But if that really was June's intention, she certainly carried it to an unwarrantable length, for she turned a deaf ear to all her father's prayers and entreaties and. was as adamant to all Miss Prue's railing and lecturing and as ice to her hot reproaches.
• "I'm scandalized—I'm shocked—I'm flabbergasted, that's what I be !" exclaimed the indignant spinster. "The idee of a gal with half an ounce of brains in her head (which I ain't sure as you have) a-chuckin' over a prize package like that air Sir Hilary Chilton, fur a good-fur-nothin' Capting Lexboro. My land's sakes. June Drayton, you'd ort to be whipped—that's what ort to be did to you. Why, the man hain't got a shred of a reppytation, and he hain't drawed a sober breath sense the day he sot in to cut his back teeth. He's a rooy and a turpentine, that what he be, if all I've heern tell on him is correct. The idee o' you a-dreamin' of marryin' sech a critter as that ! The idee of a chit like you a-darin' to set herself up again the opinion of grown folks like your poor dear par and me. My Land o' Hope! I wonder what the world's a-comin' to arter this !"
"I don't know—I don't care !" was June's invariable response. "If it were to come to an end to-morrow I should be just as well satisfied. I only know that 1.
206	"To Be or Not to Be."
have promised to marry Captain Philip Lexhoro next Friday morning, and if I live I shall keep my word."
And how often she prayed that she might not live long after that, and how, in her secret soul, she shrank from the ordeal of that fatal day, I think I--need not tell you.
"If only I had said a year, instead of a fortnight--if f only the time would never come and I might live ingle to the end of my life."
That was her constant cry, her constant regret, and o clearly was her reluctance to keep her promise visible in her eyes and face, and her nervous deportment, as the days advanced, that really there seemed some
likelihood of Lady Valencia's hopeful prophecy corning true at last, and some excuse for her again writing.
to Maude:
"The affair will never amount to anything, for he'll hack down at the Iast moment—mark my words, if she doesn't !"
And so, in this state of uncertainty, the last week 4)f waiting slowly rolled away; Thursday came and: Thursday went, and Friday, the day set for the wed-ding. dawned at last.
CHAPTER ?XXXIV.
BEFORE THE BRIDAL.
It was a miserable day—dull, foggy, threatening rain—a wretched day, with damp vapors lying close to the earth and shrouding the river's bosom, a sunless sky, gray and cheerless enough for November weather, arching overhead; and a general air of dreariness, sullenness, and gloom stamped everywhere upon Nature's unattractive face.
"And this is my wedding day," muttered June, as she arose from bed and looked out upon the dismal prospect, straining her eyes in a vain endeavor to penetrate the fog and catch even a glimpse of the river. "Nature could not have managed to put on a drearier nor less attractive face if this thing had been planned for years. Drizzle and fog, dampness and gloom, and if matters go on as they promise, it will rain be lore long, and so add the last thing that is wanting te. make this the wretchedest and gloomiest clay we have had since Easter.
"Ah, well, what does it matter ! It is only happy brides and superstitious ones that care to have the sun shine and the world look bright upon their wed-ding day, and I am neither!
"Rain or shine, my fate would be the same, for the future can offer but little that will be attractive to, Philip Lexboro's wife. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof, so what is the use of mourning over the state of the weather?"
Very philosophical that, no doubt; but, nevertheless. she did mourn over it, for she was just woman enough to have all her sex's whims and weaknesses, and I venture to say that with the possible exception of Mother Eve there never vet was a bride who did not
t3 .
Before the Bridal.
pray that her wedding day would be fine when she launched her craft upon the sea of matrimony.
That, even in the face of_ that unhappiness which she knew awaited her, June, had she been given her choice, would have selected a day of cloudless skies and radiant sunshine, there can hardly be any doubt; but as this was not granted her, she put the best possible face upon the matter, and actually began to sing as she went on with her dressing.
Not that she felt in the least degree like singing, but that she was woefully afraid that she would break down and cry if she did not do something to relieve the pressure; and so for that purpose, and for the additional reason that she knew Lady Valencia would hear her and might possibly fall into the error of believing that the bride-elect was happy in the prospect of her new relation, she sang the jolliest and the liveliest songs she could think of, albeit there was, at times, a suspicious quaver in her voice which, to a shrewd ear, might easily have revealed the true state of affairs.
It was not until she had completed her toilet and thrice refused admission to Finette, who had as many times knocked at the door and begged to be allowed to come in and assist her with her dressing, that she at length gave over this desperate effort and put an end to her singing; and when she did this, the sight which her mirror showed her was not calculated to set her mind at rest.
For her face was pale—unnaturally pale and distressingly haggard—and there were bister circles about her eyes that mutely told of sleepless nights and hours of silent weeping. Good Heaven! Was she really so ghastly as that? Was the anguish of her heart really so visible to all as that frightfully candid mirror would have her believe?
Before the Bridal.	209
It would never do to go down to breakfast and brave Lady Valencia's sharp eyes with that pallid countenance and those bloodless lips and haggard eyes.
There were rouge and Blanc de perle and belladonna and dear knows what else in the line of "complexion mending" on her stepmother's dressing table, she recollected, and as the breakfast bell had rung ten minutes ago, it was certain that their more or less fortunate possessor was already downstairs, and here was an opportunity to beat her at her own game.
So without hesitation June flew to her ladyship's dressing room, injected a drop of belladonna into her lusterless eyes, pomaded and powdered the dark circles that surrounded them, rubbed a soupcon of rouge into her cheeks, and a drop of vin des roses upon her blood-less lips, and having hidden thus all traces of her in-ward woe, slipped out of the room and ran downstairs to breakfast.
It was a gloomy meal, for her ladyship sat like a sphinx behind the coffee urn, and made not the slightest attempt to draw her liege lord into conversation, and every time June glanced up she met her father's eyes fixed upon her with a mingled look of reproach and entreaty.
Only once—and then for a very, very brief time—was there anything like animation in this little break-fast party, and that was when the butler brought in the morning's mail and Mr. Drayton opened the solitary letter which had come to him.
"Would you like to look at it?" he said, lifting his eyes to June's, as he finished reading it. "It is from Captain Lexboro. I was over to see him yesterday in reference to the settlements, etc., and he writes me to say that everything is now arranged and he will be here promptly to-day at half past ten. He wishes you to retain absolute control of your own private fortune,
210	Before the Bridal.
June, and has allowed two thousand pounds a year additional as pin money. Would you like to read his letter,, June?"
"No," she answered. "Since you have told me its contents, papa, it would be superfluous, and, besides, I have not the time to waste. It is almost ten o'clock now, and I must be off to my toilet presently."
At this juncture her ladyship set down her coffees cup rather smartly. The loss to Maude of that two thousand per annum was more than she could bear, and her envious heart was stung to its very core.
"If you will permit me, Mr. Drayton, I will with-draw now and send word to Roberts to have my pony phaeton brought around to the door as expeditiously as possible," she said frigidly. "I am going over to Dalroy House to spend the day with Maude, and if no unforeseen difficulty arises I shall return in time for dinner."
June lifted her eyes and glanced over at the speaker. Nrot once since the hour of their last quarrel had so much as a syllable passed between them—nor did she mean that one should pass between- them now—but she knew that this was a direct stab at her, knew that it would be bitterer than death to Lady Valencia to have to stay and be a witness to her union with Captain Lexboro ; and knowing that, she resolved to stab in return and make her ladyship face the ordeal in spite of everything. So:
"Papa"—she said, in a tone that was distinctly audible to the butler and the other servant who was in waiting upon the table—"papa, have the goodness to give your wife some lessons in etiquette, and, if that is not sufficient, set your foot down and forbid her to insult you. The marriage of your only (laughter should and must be graced by the presence o F our wife, and I beg of you to order her to remain oo of
respect to you and the position which you have given her."
Lady Valencia grew white with repressed fury., and foreseeing a storm, she discreetly stepped in and filled the breach.
"Your pardon, Mr. Drayton, but I had quite for-gotten that this is your daughter's wedding day," she said, darting a murderous look at June from the corners of he'r heavy-lidded eyes. "I will remain at home. of course, now that my memory and not my manners —has received this delicate spur. An hour more or less can hardly matter, and Maude will not be in the least put out by my failure to come at the appointed time."
June pushed back her chair and rose.
"Mercy! look at the time, Au revoir, papa—I must be off to my dressing, or the minister will be here be-fore I am ready, and I wouldn't be late on my wedding day for all the world !"
Then, dreading a private interview with her father. and fearing that if she lingered longer he might re-quest her for one, she darted out of the room and flew upstairs at the top of her speed.
But, alas ! for her avowed eagerness to begin her dress, and, alas ! for her assertion that she would not for worlds be late at the ceremony; once inside her own rooms, she threw herself upon her couch, buried her painted face in the rumpled pillows, and for over an hour lay there thinking—thinking—thinking until head and heart alike ached.
Four times in the succeeding hour Finette came up. and reminded her that it was time to begin her toilet. and four times was dismissed with the order :
"Go away and let me alone! I'm not ready to dress yet, and that's all there is about it !"
212	Before the Bridal.

All there was about it ? Ah, if it only had been! Surely no one would have been more grateful than the wretched bride-elect herself ; for now that the time for living up to her rash resolve had come, it seemed more than ever hateful to her, more than ever hard to bear, for her better self was warring with the evil passions that ruled her, and her womanhood was revolting against the senseless sacrifice she was about to make.
For a long time they were equally matched contestants—sometimes one wavering and sometimes the other—but in the end, as in the beginning, the desire to repay Lady Valencia and Maude and to prove to Sir Hilary Chilton that he could not mold her to his will nor compel her, as he had asserted, to wait for him and fly to him when he wanted her—in the end the desire to do this trampled all other desires under-foot, and egged her on to her own ruin.
"I will marry Philip Lexboro—I will, I will !" she cried out resolutely. "They shall not bend me to their whims, these hateful and deceitful people; they shall not drive me back from the path which I have mapped out for myself ; and this day I will come between them and their hopes and their ambition, and crush them, crush them, crush them !"
So the battle ended—and so, all that was sweet and tender and womanly within her shrank away before the fierce fires of her senseless pride, and left her like a rudderless ship upon a wild, tempestuous sea.
It needed but one thing more—the sound of a carriage rolling up from the gates, a carriage which she knew instinctively contained her prospective bridegroom—to add the last drop to the cup of her madness; and springing to her feet, she rang wildly for Finette.
"Dress me !" she exclaimed hoarsely, as that worth\
Before the Bridal.	213
creature made her appearance—"I have wasted time enough—dress me as quickly as you can."
"Ma _jai! how wildly you act, mademoiselle. Oh, Mees June, you look more fit for a coffin than for the altar, and if	- Oh, pardon, pardon, I will say
no more, of-course, if it offends mademoiselle. Dress you? Most certainly, Mees June. Since you have pre-pared no wedding robe, which gown will you be pleased to select?"
"Any. one—any one! " responded June petulantly. "What does it matter to me what I wear or how I look? I f I have a black gown that will do as well as any.. But stay! Give me the gown I wore at my corning-out ball—the pink silk with the point lace. He admired that, and I told him that night, that I meant to keep it sacred as a memento of that happy time. Y ow he shall hear from his sister that I wore it to the altar with Captain Philip Lexboro, and so What are you staring like that for, and why are you standing there like a stick when I have told you what I wish you to do? Dress me in .my coming-out gown—dress me as I was dressed for my birthday ball and leave nothing off that I wore then—nothing, do you hear me? Not even a ribbon or a jewel—and send word to the gardener to prepare me a bouquet the exact counterpart of the one Sir Hilary Chilton selected for me to carry upon that night."
Finette's only response was a gasp; then, obeying her young mistress' command, she flew to her ward-robe, brought forth the gown in question, and proceeded to array her in it.
Nothing was omitted to the veriest detail of a pin, and, although a maidservant came up thrice ere the bride's toilet was completed to notify her that bride-groom and clergyman both were waiting, and it was long past the hour set for the ceremony, June would
not permit the omission of even one small point that would go to make her wedding toilet an exact counter-part of that which she had worn upon the night of her coming-out ball. When all was finished she walked forward and looked at herself in the mirror.
All—all was as it had been upon that unforgotten night—from head to foot her toilet was the very same, and she alone was changed.
"And changed wonderfully—wonderfully !" she muttered under her breath, and then a faint spasm wrung her heart and twitched her features; for, in spite of her, a phantom of that happy night arose be-fore her, and with it came a memory of that tuneful ditty which her schoolgirl friends had sung as they climbed the stairs to seek their separate couches after that fateful night had faded into the grayness of dawn:
"After the ball is over, after the break of morn, After the dancers leaving, after the stars are gone, Many a heart is breaking, if you might read them all, Many a hope has vanished, after the ball,"
CHAPTER XXXV.
THE HEIGHT OF FOLLY.
A rush of tears—evoked by the memory of that song and the circumstances under which she had heard it—dimmed for a moment her beautiful dark eyes, and back to her heart—like the peri that haunts the gates of Paradise in the hope of one day seeing them swung open—there came again that womanly spirit which bade her take counsel of her heart, not of her ignoble passicrs, and be true to herself.
What might have been the result of this sweet weakness, had nothing occurred to revive her flagging pas-ions, it is impossible to say, for in that moment all that was true and noble in her sadly warped nature had risen to the surface and shown her how paltry, how mean, how unworthy of her was the spiteful act which she was about to commit, the shameful sacrifice which she was about to consummate, and all her soul was quivering with self-hate, and shuddering away from this unpardonable deed of self-degradation.
But, unfortunately, something did occur to change all this, and that something was, as usual, supplied by Lady Valencia.
"Mr. Drayton has sent me up to ask if your lady-ship won't have the goodness to come downstairs again, as Miss June has sent down word that she will he ready presently."
June heard one of the housemaids say this in the cuter hall, and it was the reply to the query which banished all that tenderness and weakness from her soul.
"No," responded Lady Valencia tartly. "I refuse to be made a fool of any longer. T have been sitting
2 z Ei	The Height of Folly.

downstairs for more than an hour past simply twiddling my thumbs in expectation of an event which is not at all likely 'to happen. I have known from the first that there would be no wedding here to-day, and you may tell Mr. Drayton that I say he would better send the clergyman away and ask Captain Lexboro to stay to lunch."
June waited to hear no more. Like a flash of flame she crossed the room,'flung open the door and stepped into the hall.
"Lucette," she called out to the girl who was standing at her ladyship's door. "Lucette, fly at all speed, tell Captain Lexboro and the clergyman to hold them-selves in readiness to begin the ceremony immediately, as I am coming down this instant."
Without a second's hesitation Lucette flew to obey, and waiting only until such time as the girl could transmit the message she had been sent to deliver, June took up her bridal bouquet and followed her.
At the foot of the first flight of stairs Captain Lexboro, in faultless morning attire, and a wretched bad temper—the latter due to the fact that'it was now an hour and a half past the time originally set for the ceremony—was pacing up and down the hall, and. muttering things that would not look well in print. But as he caught sight of his bride-elect approaching. all his ill-humor fled, and springing toward her, he opened his arms with the very evident intention of treating her to an ardent lover's embrace.
"My darling! do I really see you again after all these long days of exile ?" he cried. "It is our wedding day at last, June, and I shall soon know the joy of calling you mine !"
But in spite of that impassioned greeting, and in spite of his loverlike intentions, a white hand was
lifted commandingly as he approached, and checked all further advances.
"Keep your distance !" exclaimed June, with an air of frigid hauteur. "I do not belong to you as yet, Captain Lexboro, and so long as I am a free woman it is my command that you hold aloof, sir."
A dull-red stain came out upon his handsome face, and his lips shut tightly behind his blond beard.
"Humph! still riding that hobbyhorse, are you?" he said a moment later, and in his voice there was a tone of sullen, partly veiled passion, in his eyes a look of malicious resentfulness. "Not a very pleasant greeting this for a man who, in ten minutes' time, will be your husband. But then, as you have my promise, I suppose I must be satisfied, and bide my time until you will permit me to touch you with my finger-tips. And you're not in bridal array, either," he re-marked, eyeing with scowling disapproval her rose--colored gown and her pearl jewelry. "I've been dreaming for a whole fortnight of how beautiful you would look in your white satin splendors, your bridal veil and Virginal orange blossoms, and, lo! you come up to the post in an old ball gown—and a pink one at that. Surely you've had time enough to get a costume fit for a bride instead of coming out in a rig like this."
"It is my own business what I choose to wear," returned June stiffly. "Must I remind you again that I am not as yet answerable to you for my actions? I choose what suited me—if it does not suit you, you have only to decline to have anything further to do with the affair and to call our marriage `off.' "
"Thanks ! but I have no such wish," he answered. "It is you, not your clothes, I want, and if	 Hello! there goes Lady Valencia, and—yes, by Jove! all the servants are assembled in the lower hall. They're all ready and waiting for us to put in an appearance in
21 8	The Height of Folly.

the drawing-room. Will you take my arm, and let,us go below?"
It was upon June's lips to decline his proffered arm and to walk into the presence of the minister without aid of any sort; but recollecting that Sir Hilary would be sure to hear of this and to guess something of the true state of her feelings toward this man to whom she was about to give herself, she reconsidered "that determination, and, slipping her hand through his arm, walked with him down the staircase to the half-deserted drawing-room.
It was the dreariest and most dismal sort of a wed-ding procession imaginable. No music greeted their approach, no eager throng of invited guests smiled upon them as they advanced; only the servants—glum and silent as mutes at a funeral—were about them as they passed down the stairs and along the lower hall: only Mr. Drayton and Lady Valencia and Miss Prue and the grayhaired clergyman awaited them in the long, broad, high-ceiled drawing-room. and only a sigh of despair disturbed the silence and the gloom as they walked forward and paused before the minister.
White as death—but hoping even to the last that something would occur to interrupt the wedding—Lady Valencia rose and nervously gripped the back of a chair.
"It cannot be—it must not be !" she kept saying to herself. "Something will occur to prevent it, I feel	 I know that it will! Hilary will come and stop this dreadful thing, or June will back down at the last moment and refuse to go on with it, and after all, Maude will become Philip Lexboro's wife."
Vain hope! Idle delusion ! Fate itself seemed set upon having this awful mesalliance consummated.
A breathless hush fell over the little gathering as the bride and groom paused before the minister: then
The Height of Folly.	219

there came the faint rustling sound of a book being opened and leaves turned, then a mild preparatory cough upon the part of the clergyman himself, and then—the ceremony began.
Slowly and impressively the solemn charges were given and responded to, slowly and impressively the words were uttered that were to bind these two lives together for better or for worse, for richer or for poorer, until death should divide them ; and then, while yet my lady's hopes lingered and her prayers for some interruption—no matter what—were upon her lips., the last words were spoken, the ring was on, the benediction uttered, and June Drayton was Philip Lexhoro's lawfully wedded wife.
CHAPTER XXXVI.
ONE HOUR TOO LATE.
That this was an ill-starred marriage, and would result in no good to the object of their love and interest, both John Drayton and his sister seemed to realize, and while they clung about June and covered her face with tears and kisses—and the latter covered the bridegroom with reproaches, as though he alone were to blame—Captain Lexboro stood apart and smiled triumphantly, as he tugged at the thick ends of his blond mustache.
"Now, then, it is my turn to do the ordering about and to say what shall or shall not be," he muttered in his beard. "You've made me dance to the tune of your fiddling long enough, my pretty wife, and here-after you'll have to dance to mine. Those were the terms of the agreement in the first place, and I'll take devilish good care that you live up to them."
Meantime, in utter unconsciousness of the thoughts which were filling the head of his now son-in-law, old John Drayton was doing his best.to put a good face upon the matter and to check his sister's oft-repeated assertions of what she'd do to "the rapscallion"—meaning, of course, the bridegroom—"if ever he made this 'ere pore child sorry fur what she'd gone and done," and this sort of thing was growing rather monotonous when Captain Lexboro dropped in with the suggestion that, as the ceremony had been per-formed almost two hours later than the time originally set, he and his bride had better make haste and get into traveling costume and start off to catch the train which was to hear them away to the beginning of their wedding tour.
At the mention of that, June's face grew deathly pale, and for the first time she realized that her days of freedom were over and she now belonged wholly to this man whom she so bitterly loathed and de-tested.
The realization of it brought with it a sick sensation which well-nigh drove her to tears, but, deter-mined to die rather than display even a moment's weakness or regret before her detested stepmother, she affected a gayety she was far from feeling, and, breaking away from her aunt and father, ran upstairs to prepare for her wedding journey.
"Ah, what have I done—what have I done?" she cried out brokenly, as she staggered into her room and feverishly began to tear off her wedding finery. I have taken a terrible means to accomplish my end, but I swore that I would be as base as Lady Valencia, and I have only kept my word. What I have done I must abide by, but, oh, God, grant I may soon die, for so long as I live I shall never cease to hate myself."
At this juncture, Finette came up to aid her in changing her costume, and discreetly mastering her grief and despair, she gave herself into the French-woman's hands.
In half an hour's time her toilet was completed, and nothing remained but to pack up such articles as she would be likely to need on the journey.
"Sit down and rest, Mees June—I should say Ma-dame Lexboro," said Finette, "and while you are doing that, I will arrange your dressing case and pack the one small trunk you are_ to take with you. Ma for, how white you are, cherie. A little rest will do you so much good."
"All the same, I cannot take it here," returned June, who felt a longing to run away and be alone, if only
222	One Hour Too Late.
for a little while. "I am leaving this dear old home never to return, and before I say good-by to it, I want to pay a farewell visit to my own little bower."
Then precipitately quitting the room, she hastened to that rear staircase, of which mention has frequently been made before, and hurrying down it, crept out into the damp and dismal gardens. The dense fog still hovered about the earth, and prevented her seeing anything a dozen feet distant, but she knew her way perfectly, and, flitting down the slope, ran with swift feet to the arbor.
The rose vines which covered it were still starred with clusters of fragrant bloom, buthe thick vapor prevented her seeing them and shut her in, as though with an impassable wall. Even though she could not discern the blossoms, she could smell their heavy odor, and that in itself sent her thoughts teeming back to that forged letter and the box of ruby roses which had been the indirect means of forcing her into the wretched position which was hers to-clay.
"Oh, if only he had sent them, how different my li t e ",v ould have been to-day !" she sobbed, as she sank down on her knees, and, laying her hands upon one of the pretty rustic seats, buried her face in them and u ept, as though her heart would break. "Ah, he told the truth—he told the truth, and I realize it in spite of everything. I do love him—I always shall, and always must love, and he is indeed my doom. Oh, Hilary, Hilary, why weren't you worthy, my darling? or, if you could not be, why was I not left in ignorance of it? Oh, to have been able to feel that it was false, and that you did not want me for my money alone; oh, to he sure and	"
"Be sure at last, then, for I am come to prove it, tune!" broke in a voice out of the dense white fog. And, as she uttered a feeble cry of terror and stir-
prise, Sir Hilary himself sprang forward and wrapped her in the warm clasp of his strong young arms.
"Love, I have come to claim you, as I said I would," he went on with a happy laugh as he drew her to him and rained kisses on her eyes and lips and hair. "You have suffered and I have suffered, but, thank God" it must all pass over now, for you cannot doubt me evermore. See ! I have come to claim you, and to hear the good news to you even before I carry it to Lelia. My Australian speculations have turned out to be an amazing success, and my fortune is made. I am rich. June. Chilton Towers is saved, and the money mine to clear off the mortgages, even though they were twice as heavy. So you can never fancy now that your fortune is anything to me, and I have come for you. my darling, come to speak the word `forgiveness' and claim you for my own."
CHAPTER XXXVH.
SOME HEART DOTH BREAK.
"Don't touch me, don't come near me !" she panted in a voice that choked and wavered with excitement and terror. "Ah, why have you come here? How dare you come here after—after what has passed?"
Sir Hilary shrugged his shoulders with one of his breezy, old-time laughs.
" `Let the dead past bury its dead,' " he quoted with a smile of infinite affection. "We both were wrong, both were foolish in the sad old clays that lie behind us, clear, but what does that matter now? What is done is done, my darling, and henceforth we will for-get the past and live only for the future."
"The future !" she echoed in a tone and with a look of dreadful terror. "Oh, if only there might be no future! If only the story of my life might end to-day! You must not come near me, you must not speak to me even ! There is no future for us, the past is all we have— all we may hope to have so long as time endures. We can never be anything to each other, Sir Hilary Chilton—never—never! I told you that two weeks ago—why do you force me to repeat it to-day ?"
"Why does the sun shine when one prays for rain? Why does the rain fall when one prays for sunshine?" he answered. "It is because a Higher Power than our own has ordained it, June, and even though you struggle against fate and mock at my love, I know that that same Higher Power has destined us for each other, and I have come because of that."
She answered him only with a .feeble wailing moan and shrank farther from him—ashamed of herself, ashamed of what she had clone, and afraid to tell him
Some Heart Doth Break.	225
what an insurmountable barrier now stood between their two lives.
"Will you still deny that you love me in the face of the confession which I have just heard?" he went on smilingly. "But it did not need that to assure me that your heart was wholly mine, sweet, for though you are an adept in the arts of deception, June, even when your tongue spoke bitterly and repudiated me with words of scathing contempt, your eyes belied it and I have felt—ay, and known—that your love be-longed to me forever and aye.
"Had I been less proud, perhaps I might have taken advantage of that knowledge and forced you to spare us both many an hour of bitterness and heartsickness, by asserting my authority over your heart and compelling you to abandon the wretched and distasteful part into which your blindness and recklessness had forced you. God knows I wanted to do that when you came to me upon the night of Lelia's reception; for even then I was longing to clasp you in my arms and to tell you how dearly I loved you. but my pride for-bade the step and impelled me to hold aloof until I could come to you with a fortune in my hands and so clear myself of the cruel charge which you had brought against me.
"Never should you have the power to twit me with my poverty again, I said to myself; never should you have the slightest ground for doubting the sincerity of my affection even for one single moment, I resolved ; and until the time came when I could ask you to share a fortune with me and reign mistress over a home which was saved by my money, I.wore to my-self that I would never willingly enter your presence to make the least effort toward winning you for my wife—let this wretched misunderstanding darken and desolate my life as it would.
226	Some Heart Doth Break.
"It was a rash vow, perhaps, but, thank God, the necessity for living up to it was not prolonged until our youth was spent and our chances of happiness wasted, for the fortune is already won, June, and the news of my ability to settle all my indebtedness and to save Chilton Towers from the clutches of the money lenders is already on its way to England.
"That sweet news I have riot yet broken to Lelia—to V1alencia—to anybody in all the wide world but you, beloved, for yours was the first right to hear it, and to you I have come first of all. It is but a minute or two since I stole into the dear place where first I realized that you loved me, sweet—intending only to rest myself and feast my eyes upon a spot that must forever be sacred to me—and had not some blessed chance led you here, I should, ere this, have gone up to the house and sought you there, and I might have broken the happy news to you and laid at your feet the hand and heart which now, thank God, I have the power and the right to offer you."
As he spoke he made a movement toward her-as though to gather her in his arms—but she, with such a cry of wretchedness and despair as only the most miserable of women can give, retreated before him, and feebly flung out one trembling hand to ward him off.
"The right!" she repeated in a gasping voice of wretchedness. "Ah, if only you knew ! you have no right—no power—no privilege to offer either or to Speak like this to me."
"Ah, but I have !" he answered with a happy laugh. "Love makes the right, love gives the power, love grants the privilege, and if I had doubted before, out of your own sweet lips I have now heard the confession that you love me still. Who that loves as I love. asks more filar that? Who that knows what T know
Some Heart Doth Break.	227
needs more than that to assure him that the thing he craves the most in life is at last within his grasp? Dear heart, you cannot deny me now, cannot unsay your own sweet words, nor undo your own precious doing, and by that blessed right	
"It gives you no right—no right, I tell you !" she struck in wildly. "Ah, Sir Hilary, will you never comprehend, never understand? Think of what happened when last we met; think of what was said and done in the ballroom of Dalroy House, and let all your love for me crumble into ashes and be a thing forgotten. Can't you remember? Won't you remember? I was mad with recklessness, blind with passion, and I plighted my troth to Philip Lexboro then and bade him claim me in a fortnight's time."
"I remember it—yes," he answered with a laugh. "But you do not love him—you never did love him—and what was done in madness then can be undone for true love's sake now."
"But there was only a fortnight to wait."
"What does it matter, so that you love me? What does anything matter, so that the word forgiveness has been spoken between us and I have come at last to claim you ?"
"To claim me?" she echoed, with a terrible cry o i heartsickness and misery. "You never can claim me —never while that man lives !"
"June!"
"It is true. The fortnight of waiting has expired—expired to-day---expired not half an hour ago—and you have no longer a right to speak to me of love, n• longer a right to talk of winning me for your wife, for that right belongs to another now, and—I am a wife already!"
He fell away from her with a cry of horror, and, throwing one curved arm about his head as if to ward
228	Some Heart Doth Break.
off some descending blow, leaned back against the trellised vines and the frail woodwork of the bower, and looked at her with a face like death.
"A wife !" he muttered hoarsely.
"Yes, a wife !" she gave answer, with a sudden out-ward fling of both arms, as though baring her bosom to some death-dealing stroke, which, in her self-abasement and her utter abandon, she gladly welcomed as a means of .release from her defiled and self-hating self. "Do you hear me? Philip Lexboro's wife—and being that, you cannot raise me into a heaven from which I have already exiled myself, nor plunge me into any deeper hales than that which my own mad folly has dug, and my own evil passions have made my everlasting grave !"
His only answer was a wailing, heart-wrung cry, and a sudden falling of that one curved hand—a dead falling, as though all strength, all feeling, all life had been rudely stricken out of it.
For one moment June stood there with her out-reached arms and her upturned eyes—then with a sudden impulsive movement, a sudden passionate cry, she moved forward and sank, a kneeling, abject figure, at his feet.
"If you love me, kill me!" she uttered in a voice that was strident with passion and despair. "It would be sweeter to (lie by your hand than to live by his ; better to spill my blood at your dear feet than to lay my life at his. Kill me, I beg of you; kill me if you love me—if you care anything, be it ever so little—for a creature so debased—a woman so miserable as I. Kill me, I implore you—or if you will not—if I am not even yet vile enough to be slain—listen, and let me debase myself still further. I love you—I love you—with all my heart, with all my strength, with all my soul. I love you—you, and you only, and vet I am
another man's wife. Now kill me if you will-	kill me
if you have any pity—if you have any wrath—or i f you have not, kill me in hatred, and so divorce my soul from a body it abhors!"
Hilary made no reply—not even by look or sound—but turning suddenly, as though impelled by some wordless horror of her, he rushed away, and the fog, taking him into its thick but impalpable embrace, blotted him out of her vision and left her kneeling there.
From the wet grass, no echo of his footsteps came back to her, and through the thick vapor there sounded neither word nor cry.
For a little time only stillness reigned	a queer,
uncanny sort of stillness, broken only by the gurgling sound of the unseen river, then a footfall rang faintly out, crushing the graveled walk, one voice and then another floated through the fog veil to her ringing ears, and recognizing them, she arose with a strange and terrible calmness.
"This is the way to the bower, Captain Lexboro," she heard some one say in the unmistakable tones of Lady Valencia, "and if Finette has spoken truly	"
"I most certainly have. Mademoiselle—pardon, I should have said madam—announced her intention of coming here while I was busy with packing her trunk."
"Very well, then, we shall find your wife here, captain, provided she has not eloped with one of her father's grooms, or done something else equally in keeping with her charming character," resumed her ladyship in her jeering, sarcastic tone. "Don't flatter yourself—unless you are the most conceited of men—that you have the ability to cage the bird that you have caught, or that it is not at all possible for your marriage to turn out a most terrible fiasco, and your wed-
2 30	Some Heart Doth Break.
ding tour to take the shape of a journey without a wife !"
Hearing this, June made a characteristic reply.
"I am here," she said simply. "If it is time for us to start, I am quite ready, Captain Lexhoro; and. despite the brutal remarks of the spiteful and ill-bred woman with whom you are conversing, you will not: have to take your wedding journey alone."
As she spoke, June came out from the dense foliage and stood before her husband and Lady Valencia, her garments damp with the fog and soiled with the mold in which she had been kneeling, and her drawn face white as pearl—whiter .than any living face they had ever seen.
"I am ready," she said, not waiting for either of there to speak. "It was scarcely necessary for you to come in quest of me as though I were a runaway slave, Captain Lexboro, and still less was it necessary for you to appeal to others to aid you in searching for me. Finette knew where I was and why I came here, and you had only to send word by her, if you needed me or were in haste to start."
"Oh,. come now, don't blame me for what isn't my fault," he made answer, half sullenly. "Lady Valencia and I were talking when we caught sight of Finette leaving the house and stealing down here, and as we both thought it was odd for her to be rushing about the grounds when we thought her uptairs assisting you to get ready for your wedding journey, we hastened after her and questioned her upon the subject. What she answered you can guess, since we are here with her, and as our anxiety was very pardonable under the circumstances, T don't see that it is at all necessary to take us to task."
"Particularly when it is rather odd for a bride to run away and hide herself when her husband is on thorns to catch the train and he off upon his honey-moon," dropped in Lady Valencia with a sneer—albeit ;he did not address her remarks to _lime (iirecth "Put,
232	A Piece of Treachery.

then, such peculiar customs prevail upon this side of the Atlantic, and in this household in particular, that one should never be surprised at anything, I suppose."
June totally ignored this remark, and never even glanced at the maker of it.
"If you are ready, I am ready," she said, addressing Captain Lexboro, "and whenever you see fit to start upon our wedding journey, I am prepared to accompany you."
"I am ready now," he responded, proffering her his arm. "The carriage is waiting to convey us to the train, and as Finette says that your effects are all packed, there is scarcely any necessity for delaying."
To this June made not the least reply. She knew that Lady Valencia, watching her, and eagerly looking for some sign of reluctance, some exhibition of regret, and feeling that she would sooner (lie than betray the true state of her feelings before this de-tested and detestable woman, she-meekly slid her hand through the captain's arm and suffered him to lead her back to the house and the ordeal of saying farewell to her father and Miss Prudence, ere she left forever the dear old home.
Upon that scene of parting it is not necessary for us to dwell, and so, with your permission, I will pass it by. and move on to other but not less happy scenes.
Suffice it, then, that in due time this ill-assorted pair entered the carriage that was waiting to convey them to the railway station, and, bidding adieu to Suncliff, started off upon their wedding tour.
A calmness horn of utter despair had settled upon June, and throughout their long ride to the cars she sat like a statue and stared out at the fog-blotted landscape. She might have been alone for all sign she gave of any knowledge of her husband's presence, or f any notice she took of him, and he—piqued by her in-
attention, or perhaps scorning to intrude himself upon a woman who evinced so little interest in his existence —lighted a cigar without asking or caring whether it was distasteful to her or not, and smoked away until the atmosphere of the carriage was blue and as foggy as the world without.
After a long drive they reached the station and hoarded 'the cars, and it was not until they were well upon their way that June evinced enough interest in their _journey to inquire their destination.
"You left all that had to do with our wedding tour to me," responded Captain Lexboro, smiling grimly ns he reminded her of their compact, "and if the place to which we are going does not entirely suit you, you must not blame me for that."
"I will blame you for nothing, since it has all been my own doing," she answered bitterly. "You have lived up to your part of the agreement by holding yourself aloof until our wedding day and allowing our marriage to be solemnized without any demonstration of any sort, and I am now quite willing to live up to mine. I go where you see fit to take me. Still, it cannot interfere with your plans to tell me where you purpose going, Captain Lexboro."
"Not a bit," he answered, with an odd smile. "But by the way, would it not be as well to remember that I am now your husband, and you have every right to call me `Philip' instead of the more formal title o E `Captain Lexboro?' We are going to Lachine, since you take the pains to ask it, and if that place doesn't suit you	
"Why shouldn't it? All places are alike to me now. Lachine or the world's end—it is all one to me."
"Glad to hear it," he responded sententiously. "But as between Lachine, and `the world's end,' I very properly chose Lachine, and for two very decided
234	A Piece of Treachery.

reasons : The first, because it was within easy 'distance from Montreal ; the second, because I happen to -own a splendid piece of property there—a handsome mansion with superb and ample grounds, which I purchased at a bargain six months ago, where I propose to spend the first month of our honeymoon. To that end I have engaged a retinue of servants and sent them out there to look after the place; but if it does' not suit you, that is not my fault, and, I repeat, you must not blame me, since you left me to do what pleased my-. self."
"That was at your pleasure," returned June coldly. "I merely asked that you keep faith with me, and in return for that I am willing to keep faith with you."
Then she turned, her shoulder upon him and fell to staring out at the dismal fog-bleared landscape past which the train was speeding.
Captain Lexboro looked at her for a moment from the corners of his half-closed, thick-lidded eyes, and a smile not good to see played about his bearded lips.
An odd smile it was—a smile in which a subtle sort of mockery was queerly blended with the triumph of conscious power—then he too lapsed into silence and fell to studying the pages of a quasi-respectable sporting paper.
So the train rushed on, and speedily the nine mile, that lay between Montreal and Lachine were covered. and the end of that brief and semisilent ride yv a reached.
Calmly and quietly—and cold as any statue—June arose when the train steamed into the station at La-chine, and her husband beckoned her to follow hum. and calmly and quietly went out with 'him into •t-1i fog and drip and drizzle; but if Philip Lexboro coil;:; have looked into her heart as she stepped hut upon the narrow platform of the little station and. turning,
A Piece of Treachery.  	235

stared after the train as it steamed away, even he might have pitied her.
"It goes as all- the brightness of my life has gone—rapidly flying into an unseen beyond," she mused, as she watched the train disappear. "God help and pity me, but what a wreck I have made of my chances, what a desolate and detestable thing I have made of my life. For spite's sake I have bound myself to a man I abhor, and closed forever the gates of love behind me, and now nothing is left me but the curse which I have brought upon myself. Oh, Hilary! oh, my own lost love, even you cannot despise me one-half so bitterly as I despise and loathe myself. I am a wife—I am Philip Lexboro's wife! and a greater horror than that I would not wish to befall any woman. But as I have sown, I must reap, and if I were not afraid of the dread hereafter, I believe—nay, I am sure—that I would find courage to kill myself, and so escape the consequences of my own miserable folly."
Meantime, unconscious of this piteous cry of her tortured and repentant heart, Philip Lexboro drew her hand through his arm, and led her to the motor car which stood in waiting to bear them to the house which for the first dreadful month of their honeymoon ~w-as to be their home, and as she suffered him to hand her into it, it seemed to June that a thousand mocking devils laughed in her ears and taunted her with ti:e agony she had brought upon herself.
Away through the fog and drip and drizzle the car rushed—away past field and flood and hill, until the town itself was left behind, the quaint old building; and queer steep streets gave place to foggy meaclo s and winding roads, and then, after a long, swift drive along a hedge-bordered pathway, the vehicle swun
through the broken gateway in a broken wall, and rolling up an unkempt, unleveled, long-neglected dri ee-
236	A Piece of Treachery.
way, halted before a vast stone 'house standing in the midst of ample grounds and half-embowered in ivy that must have grown and flourished since the days of
Jacques Cartier. From the open windows and yawning doors of this splendid but isolated residence the sounds of music and the hoarse guffaws of masculine laughter—semidrunken laughter—floated out as the car drew near, and June had scarcely overcome her astonishment at this ere the vehicle halted, the music and the laughter ceased, and Captain Lexboro, handing her out, was surrounded by at least two dozen men, all comrades of his and fellow members of the regiment to which he belonged.
CHAPTER XXXIX.
"WE FELL OUT, MY WIFE AND I."
"Welcome, Phil—welcome old chap—and a million welcomes to the blushing bride," hiccuped one who seemed by tacit consent to constitute himself the spokesman of the party, as the whole noisy, half-drunken crew rushed down the steps and surrounded June and the captain. "Been waiting for your arrival a deuce of a time, old man, and the whole batch of us are almost bursting with impatience to greet the bride and give three cheers for the new fille de regiment."
"Have you, indeed?" responded the captain laughingly. "Mighty good of you, I must say. How do, Enderby? How do. Blake? How do every one of you? Gentlemen, permit me. My wife, Mrs. Philip Lexboro, nee Drayton, the belle and beauty of whom you all have no doubt heard. June, my dear, these are the `boys' of my regiment, and the best set of fellows in all the great big world."
"Huzza !" sang out the "best set of fellows" in one loud. and semidrunken chorus. "Three cheers and the rest of it for Lexboro! and three times three for Lexboro's bride !"
Then there arose a deafening yell that must have made the very echoes reel as those four-and-twenty semi-inebriated troopers manifested their delight in lusty cheers.
"This, so far as I am concerned, is an unexpected pleasure, Captain Lexboro," said June, in a voice that choked and shook with indignation and outraged womanhood. "Tell me—did you know of this, or is it as much a surprise to you as it is to me ?"
"A surprise !" he exclamed wth a laugh. "Deuce a
bit of it, my dear. I expected the boys to meet us here, and they expected us. We had the quietest and dullest sort of a wedding it is possible to conceive, and that finished that part of the agreement ! But as no man yet ever stepped out of the barracks and tied himself up into a matrimonial bowknot without asking the fellows of his `company' to have a jolly good time in honor of his wedding it's not to be expected that I would be the first, in spite of all the foolishly exacting women in the world."
"But you promised that there should be no demonstration in honor of our wedding and no festivities of any sort connected with it," said June in a tense, low voice, so low that only he could hear. "That was, part of the contract, Captain Lexboro, and I expected you to live up to it."
"No doubt," he answered in a voice as low as hers; "but wedlock is an institution that is full of surprises, and this must go with all the rest. As you told me once, it was your privilege to dictate terms before marriage, but after that it would be mine, I have merely taken you at your word, Mrs. Lexboro, and' now it is my turn to say what shall and what shall not be !"
She did not answer him—merely stood for a moment and looked him straight in the face—a deep, steady look that seemed to pierce his very brain and master the thoughts that lay hidden there; then, with a strange and terrible calmness :
"Yours is the right to command now," she said, "and mine only the privilege to supplicate. Under that privilege, may I ask to be presented to the person who acts as your housekeeper here, and shown to the rooms assigned me?"
Captan Lexboro bowed and a smile of peculiar significance curved his bearded lips.
"I have no housekeeper here," he answered, "for, as a married man, I have looked to my wife to fill that post. Still, if you wish to be shown to the rooms which under my supervision have been prepared for you, it will give me great pleasure to escort you there."
"Then take that pleasure," she returned coldly. "It matters not to me who shows me to my rooms, so that I reach them as quickly as possible."
For all answer the captain excused himself from his colleagues, then beckoning June to follow him, led the way indoors and up a wide luxurious staircase to a suite of superbly appointed rooms.
"Here you are," he said, as he ushered June in, but he had scarcely crossed the threshold ere she turned upon him like a tigress.
"Stop!" she cried out with an indignant gesture. "Do not cross that threshold, Captain Lexboro. For if these rooms are mine, you never• can and never shall enter them so long as I am a living woman or you a living man. You have lied to me—deceived me—broken faith with me, and from this hour I divorce myself from you, refuse to acknowledge you as in) husband, decline to acknowledge myself your lawful wife."
CHAPTER XL.
FAST BIND, FAST FIND.
For one full minute Captain Lexboro neither spoke nor-moved.
- Startled by her declaration, he had fallen back a step, and now stood looking at her as though he found it difficult to credit the evidence of his ears—his teeth tightly set, his nostrils expanded, a heavy ridge standing vertically between his gathered brows, and his whole countenance blanched with a pallor that betokened an inward fury.
The silence had grown oppressive,, and June—standing like a statue before him, with one hand resting upon the back of a chair, her pale, calm face uplighted and her dark eyes looking fearfully into his—was wondering why he did not speak, and what form his reply would take when he did, when the long-smoldering volcano burst forth with startling and terrible violence."
Lifting his hand, Captain Lexboro seized the door, banged it shut, and striding forward gripped her wrist so fiercely. that his fingers bruised and discolored her flesh and wrung from her a faint breath of pain.
"Nov. then, what am I to understand by this declaration of yours ?" he demanded in a low, tense voice —a voice which had a wavering guttural note in it, like the snarl of a vicious dog.
"What I have said !" she responded fearlessly, throwing back her head, after the manner of a defiant stag, and looking him straight in the eyes. "You have broken faith with me, therefore I intend to break faith with you, and to divorce myself—soul and body —from a liar and poltroon.
Fast Binj

me in particular! You I -vow fall• out of it and again, for I not only de by this boasted `will' of to accord you even the fi that of husband—and, a I now tell you again th from all allegiance to yi" •'
"And you will do tl~; sneer.
"That remains for y "If you wish to escape f and the disgrace of hav to me repeated in the r this room, dismiss thos go quietly to Europe, and to keep the secre wretched failure our rr not wish that, then I ready to face a scandal and mire of a divorce ck this instant—and retu father. It is for you tf adopt, for upon that chi our divided lives."
"But suppose I choo4 unpleasant courses? listen to either of them'
"The question is it two courses open to follow the first, or I second by leaving you to my father."
"Impossible, my dea r ,ception to-night, and supper ordered and the
Fast Bind Fast Find.

"I married you with the distinct understanding that our union was to be devoid of festivities of any kind—that there were to be no guests, no display, no assemblage either before or at or after the ceremony—and after giving me your sacred promise to live up to that agreement, you have deceived me thus. It was a coward's act, and it deserves a coward's reward. If I was ever dear to you, be haunted by the thought that I am lost to you through your own baseness, and that even though the laws of church and state have united our hands and made our two lives one, I am now less to you than on the day when first you met me, and never will be more to you, never, so help me Heaven!"
"The deuce you won't !" he responded, with a short, sharp laugh that quavered with suppressed passion. "Come now, put an end to these infernal melodramics, and don't make a confounded fool of your-self just because you happen to know how. You didn't enter into this affair blindly, you're not a child, you're a woman, and you know enough of the world to understand that all the sentimental stuff a fellow says before marriage is all rot, and no man in the world ever lived up to it, or ever meant to, at the time he said it. I let you have your way before we were married, and I always intended—I intend now—to have mine afterward, and that's the whole of it!
"There was a time, and not so long ago, either, when I would have gone to the ends of the earth to please you and would have delighted in doing your slightest bidding. But that time is past now—past and dead—and that feeling died on the night when you told me that you hated me, and let me understand that you were only marrying me to spite yourself upon Maude Thornhurst and her mother and uncle. I think T hated you myself in that minute, and for one brief
242

moment before I yielded you the abominable prom upon my tongue to tell yo cat's-paw of, would not 1: you proposed, and woulc circumstances--"
"Would to God you he hollowly, "would to God such a blessed impulse !"
"Nevertheless I did rep a mocking laugh. "I rep( and are still the most bf beheld—because I wanted you—to make you bend my will; because I wante humble your infernal pr of me, and make you rue me that you hated me an presence until the hour A the altar and so assist yc those you hated.
"You had no considera care for my future, or might not suffer. I was in your eyes, and that Heaven you should attai curse."
"And you thought that June, with a sweeping gc laugh of open derision—' treat me as though you .` in your harem! Yau tho was and is possible to ben me to kneel and submit might he pleased to put t who know, nnthiiur of a
Fast Binc
a hundred of my friends are coming here to be presented to my wife, she must, and shall, be here to receive them."
"I would die first !" protested June indignantly.
"And only by (lying can you escape doing it," he responded with an exultant laugh. "It is not your turn, but mine, to make conditions now, and this I tell you : Either you will do this thing willingly or I will compel you to do it by force !"
"You would not dare to attempt such a thing."
"Wouldn't I? Well, then, try me and see. I have married a wife, and I mean to have a wife, and I mean, too, to compel her to obey me in all things, even if I am obliged to resort to violence to prove to her that I am her husband and her master."
hor one moment June stood and looked at him, her bosom swelling with indignation, and her face growing steadily whiter, then :
"You coward !" she cried out in a strident voice. "I retract the offer I made you and I now absolutely refuse to conceal the truth about this horrible marriage. The w hole world shall know you as I now know you, the story of our wretched union shall be paraded in the columns of every paper in the whole Dominion, and though I bear forever the stigma of a divorce court, I will never rest until the consequences of my folly have been publicly aired and the law which has made me your wife has dissolved the bond which unites us. What I did in madness, I will undo in perfect sanity, and pray God the awful results of my folly may prove a warning to other women, and save them from taking vengeance into their own powerless and unworthy hands. Oh, coward ! Oh, miserable, contemptible, pitiable coward ! all my life I will b, thankful to God that your hideous _character was so
Fast Bind Fast Find.

"I married you with the distinct understanding that our union was to be devoid of festivities of any kind—that there were to be no guests, no display, no assemblage either before or at or after the ceremony—and after giving me your sacred promise to live up to that agreement, you have deceived me thus. It was a coward's act, and it deserves a coward's reward. If I was ever dear to you, be haunted by the thought that I am lost to you through your own baseness, and that even though the laws of church and state have united our hands and made our two lives one, I am now less to you than on the day when first you met me, and never will be more to you, never, so help me Heaven !"
"The deuce you won't !" he responded, with a short, sharp laugh that quavered with suppressed passion. "Come now, put an end to these infernal melodram tics, and don't make a confounded fool of your-self just because you happen to know how. You didn't enter into this affair blindly, you're not a child, you're a woman, and you know enough of the world to understand that all the sentimental stuff a fellow says before marriage is all rot, and no man in the world ever lived up to it, or ever meant to, at the time he said it. I let you have your way before we were married, and I always intended—I intend now—to have mine afterward, and that's the whole of it!
"There was a time, and not so long ago, either, when I would have gone to the ends of the earth to please you and would have delighted in doing your slightest bidding. But that time is past now—past and dead—and that feeling died on .the night when you told me that you hated me, and let me understand that you were only marrying me to spite yourself upon Maude Thornlnirst and her mother and uncle. I think I hated you myself in that minute, and for one brief
242	Fast Lind, Fast Find.

moment before I yielded to your demands and gave you the abominable promise which you desired, it was upon my tongue to tell you that I would not be made a .cat's-paw of, would not listen to the conditions which you proposed, and would not marry you tinder such circumstances--"
"Would to God you had-done so," interposed June hollowly, "would to God you had never repented of such a blessed impulse !"
"Nevertheless I did repent of it," he answered, with a mocking laugh. "I repented of it, because you were and are still the most beautiful creature I had ever beheld—because I wanted you—to own you, to master you—to make you bend to my pleasure and bow to my will; because I wanted to break your high spirit, humble your infernal pride, trample on your scorn of me, and make you rue the hour when you had told me that you hated me and forbade me to enter your presence until the hour when I was to meet you at the altar and so assist you to wreak vengeance upon those you hated.
"You had no consideration for me, no thought, no care for my future, or for how much I might or might not suffer. I was simply a means to an end in your eyes, and that end I swore before high Heaven you should attain and in attaining live to curse."
"And you thought that I would stand that ?" queried June, with a sweeping gesture and a hard, mirthless laugh of open derision—"you thought that you could treat me as though you .were a sultan and I a slave in your harem! YQ,u thought, and still think, that it was and is possible to bend me to your will, and force me to kneel and submit to whatever indignities you might be pleased to put upon me? How like a man who knows nnthiiig of a woman in general, and of
me in particular! You have lived in a fool's paradise —vow fall. out of it and come crashing down to earth again, for I not only decline to be ruled and crushed by this boasted `will' of yours, but I absolutely refuse to accord you even the first of your self-given titles—that of husband—and, as plainly as I told you at first, I now tell you again that I mean to divorce myself from all allegiance to you from this hour forth."
"And you will do that—how ?" he queried, with a sneer.
"That remains for you to decide," she made answer. "If you wish to escape the scandal of an action at law, and the disgrace of having what you have to-day said to me repeated in the public courts, then walk out of this room, dismiss those drunken roysterers, and then go quietly to Europe, leaving me to -live here alone and to keep the secret of the miserable fiasco, the wretched failure our marriage has begun. I f you do not wish that, then I am ready to brave the worst, ready to face a scandal, and to wade through the mud and mire of a divorce court by leaving you this hour—this instant—and returning to the protection of my father. It is for you to choose which course I shall adopt, for upon that choice depends all the future of our divided lives."
"But suppose I choose neither of these two very unpleasant courses? Suppose I absolutely decline to listen to either of them—what then?"
"The question is irrelevant. There are but these two courses open to you, and either you consent to follow the first, or I will compel you to follow the second by leaving you on the instant and returning to my father."
"Impossible, my dear. In the first place we give a r ception to-night, and as the orchestra is engaged, the supper ordered and the invitations out, and at least half
a hundred of my friends are coming here to be presented to my wife, she must, and shall, be here to receive them."
"I would die first !" protested June indignantly.
"And only by (lying can you escape doing it," he responded with an exultant laugh. "It is not your turn, but mine, to make conditions now, and this I tell you : Either you will do this thing willingly or I will compel you to do it by force !"
"You would not dare to attempt such a thing.
"Wouldn't I? Well, then, try me and see. I have married a wife, and I mean to have a wife, and I mean, too, to compel her to obey me in all things, even if I am obliged to resort to violence to prove to her that I am her husband and her master."
For one moment June stood and looked at him, her bosom swelling with indignation, and her face growing steadily whiter, then :
"You coward !" she cried out in a strident voice. "I retract the offer I made you and I now absolutely refuse to conceal the truth about this horrible marriage. The whole world shall know you as I now know you, the story of our wretched union shall be paraded in the columns of every paper in the whole Dominion, and though I bear forever the stigma of a divorce court. I will never rest until the consequences of my folly have been publicly aired and the law which has made me your wife has dissolved the bond which unites us. What I did in madness, I will undo in perfect sanity, and pray God the awful results of my folly may prove a warning to other women, and save them from taking vengeance into their own powerless and unworthy hands. Oh, coward! Oh, miserable. contemptible, pitiable coward ! all my life I will be thankful to God that your hideous .character was so
soon revealed to me, and the mask of manhood torn from your brutal nature."
With that she hastily caught up the wrap which she had, upon her first entrance to the room, discarded, and throwing it about her shoulders, moved toward the closed door.
But ere she reached it Captan Lexboro barred the way, one hand upon his hip and the other, with the palm turned outward, elevated above his head.
"One moment," he said sharply and decisively. "You have listened to my conditions and I have listened to yours. Now, then, if it's not too much trouble—what do you intend to do?"
"Return at once to my father."
"Pardon me, but you won't do anything of the kind."
"Pardon me, but I most decidedly will."
"Oh, no, you won't, either—and for two very good reasons : First and foremost, because you are my wife, and no longer under his control, and, secondly, because this being my house, you cannot leave it without my permission, and that I absolutely refuse to accord you."
"You would make a prisoner of me ?"
"Yes—if necessary. But as it is not necessary, you will stay, here and do the honors of your husband's home to your husband's guests, just so long and just so frequently as he requires you to do so. The period of your stay in this house is to be limited by me, not by you, and you will stop here a day, a week, a month, a year—a lifetime—if it suits me to will it so. and your father will not only be denied the privilege of seeing you until it is my will that he shall do so, but he will not even hear from you to the day of your death if it suits me to keep you hidden from him so long."
"Hidden?" repeated Jude, with a low, unsteady
''46	-Fast Bind, Fast Find.
laugh. "You speak as though it were possible for you to bury me here and keep my father and my friends in ignorance of my whereabouts until you saw fit to disclose my position to them."
"So it is !" responded Captain Lexboro with a smile that made her heart grow sick and faint with sudden dread. "You left the matter of arranging all that had to do with our wedding tour entirely to me,- Mrs. Lexboro, and even you yourself did not know what was to be your first stopping place until after we had left Suncliff and boarded the train which ultimately brought us here. As I told your father privately that we would start for Europe without delay, he will not expect to hear from you under a fortnight's time, at the very least. He knows nothing of my purchase of this place, and still less of your presence here, and if he never hears from you, or still worse, if within a month's time he should receive a newspaper containing an account of your death abroad—say by drowning, or as the result of a railway accident, and I should in due time return to him with a trumped-up story that had to do with the details of your sudden taking off, how many years might you remain here under the care of jailers of my hiring, and your estimable papa 'be not one whit the wiser? Ah! you grow pale, do you, my dear Mrs. Lexboro? Then perhaps you realize, at last, how completely you are in my 'hands, and how utterly impossible it is for you to escape."
A sudden rush of color, the hot flush of outraged \vomanhod, flamed out upon June's face at this, and then fading slowly, left it deadly pale.
"You would not dare attempt such a high-handed proceeding as that !" she uttered in a voice that would tremble in spite of 'her. "There are limits to the daring of even such a desperate and despicable scoundrel as you, and you would not dare to shut me up in this house and let the world. believe me dead."
"Wouldn't P" he responded, with a short, sharp. sinister laugh. "Well, just put me to the test, then, and see if I wouldn't. You've run things to suit yoursel f long enough, my dear Mrs. Lexboro, but it's my turn now, and I tell you candidly that you shall either bend to my will, or T will break you, that's all!"
A deathly sensation swept over June, and her very heart grew sick and faint with awful dread. She knew that he was quite capable of doing what he threatened, knew, too, that she was wholly in his power, absolutely at his mercy, and it was quite possible for him to carry out that barbarous threat if he so elected.
"God have pity on me !" she silently prayed. "I must escape from this horrible house before the night is spent—escape and fly to my father, even though I make my way back to Montreal afoot. Oh, fool! what has my madness not cost rue, and how bitterly my boasted `revenge' has recoiled upon my own head."
"Come now ! don't stand there mumbling to your-self, but dress and come down to greet our guests, for night is beginning tO fall, and at eight o'clock the
248	Driven to the Wall.

rest of the company will arrive and the festivities will begin," exclaimed the captain roughly. "It's no use shilly-shallying and trying to evade the resp.onsibilites of your position, Mrs. Lexboro. You are my wife, and, as such, I tell you that you shall do the honors of my house and shall receive my guests."
"And I tell you I will die first !" responded June desperately. "You shall not drag me downstairs and force me to face those half-drunken men—whose very presence under this roof is an insult to me—an insult to any self-respecting woman—and once for all I demand that you stand out of my way, Captain Lexboro, and suffer me to leave this house."
"And once for all I refuse to do it," he answered with an oath. "You are here, and here you shall re-main until I see fit to liberate you and allow you to apply to the courts, not for an annulment of our marriage, but a divorce from your husband. You cannot leave this house, and shall not leave it, even though you shriek yourself hoarse and pray yourself dumb, Mrs. Philip Lexboro. You are here and here you are going to stay until it is my pleasure to give you your liberty—that is as fixed as fate. Now, then, will you yield gracefully to your destiny and come down and greet our friends, or	
"No !" struck in June resolutely, as she tossed aside her wrap and dropped into a deep, soft chair. "If I must stay in this house I will not leave this room or go down to meet your friends even for one brief instant. You have your answer—now do what you like —do what you dare."
"You mean that?"
"Yes, I mean it ! I will not leave this room, and you shall not drag me from it—that is final, sir !"
"Very well, we will simply have to change the scene of the festivities from the, drawing-room to the bou-
doir," he said with an uncanny gleam in his tawny eyes.
"What do you mean by that?"
"If you will not go below stairs to greet your husband's friends, I will bring them up here and force you to receive them in your boudoir."
"You coward! You cur !" she panted excitedly. "You would not dare to subject me to such an insult, you would not dare to put such an indignity upon me."
"Get over that trick of repeatedly telling me, `I would not dare' do this, that, or the other thing," he responded with a sweeping gesture. "I tell you I would dare anything if I thought it to my own interest or the interest of my plan to make you understand that I am your master and my will the law by which the woman I have married must and shall be governed. Now take your choice: Either you receive my guests in the drawing-room or, so help me Heaven, I will bring them upstairs and force you to receive there here."
For a moment June made no reply—simply dropped back into the chair, and stared at him with wide, horrified eyes, and a face out of which every trace of color had entirely flown. She realized that he was in earnest—and was quite capable of doing what he said, and knowing to a positive certainty that there was now no way of escaping the indignity which he meant to put, upon her, wisely—and for a purpose which will be revealed later—resolved to yield to his unmanly demands.
"Come, now, let's hear which you prefer," resumed the captain, "for I haven't any time to waste in beating about the bush, when my friends are waiting for me to join them below. Will you come downstars and act the part of hostess there, or shall I invite the
gentlemen up here to feast and make merry in the bridal chambers ?"
"Spare me that indignity, at least," responded June, with a shudder of repulsion at this exhibition of the man's coarseness. "Since it seems that Im.ust meet these half-drunken ruffians, I will choose the other means and will go down to the drawing-room to do so.
"I thought you would!" exclaimed the captain, with a laugh of triumph. "Nothing like a firm hand and an indomitable will to break in a stubborn horse or master an obstinate woman. You might as well have yielded at first, you see, for you were bound to yield in the end, whether you liked it or not. Now, make yourself presentable and get into a costume becoming to the occasion, and at eight o'clock. when the guest of the evening is to arrive, I shall come up to escort you downsairs, and shall expect you to do credit t my taste in selecting a wife who is far and avvav the most beautiful woman of her clay. Get yourself up as stunningly as you know how, my clear, and let my friends see what a lovely woman you are when arrayed in gala attire."
"Pardon me, but your friends will have to accept me as I am and consent to be introduced to me in my traveling costume," returned June haughtily. "The ()Ile small trunk which I have brought with me contain, no evening dresses, Captain Lexboro, so you will, thank Heaven, be obliged to dispense with that part of your program."
"You think so," he returned, with a smile of triumph. "Then think so no longer! When I heard that you were preparing no bridal trousseau. I suspected that just such a contingency as this might possibly arise, and took means to prepare for it. No matter who gave me the name of your modiste, you'll learn
all that in good time; suffice it that I ordered Madame Mirabeau to make to your measure an elaborate and costly reception gown, and that gown you will find hanging in the closet there, and in the drawer of your dressing table suitable jewels to wear with it. That gown and those jewels you will put on, Mrs. Lexboro, if you do not want me to invite my guests up here; and you will have them on, and be arrayed in a measure to do credit to yourself and me when Y come up at eight o'clock to escort you to the presence of our guests. Until then allow me to bid you adieu, and to assure you that as these rooms are exactly thirty-seven feet above the earth and there are no vines, balconies, or stairways leading up to the windows of them, escape from the house is practically impossible."
And then, before June could utter a word in reply--if, indeed, she desired to do so—he stepped to the door, opened it, closed it after him, and locking it upon the outside, pocketed the key and ran downstairs.
CHAPTER XLII.
THE LAST DROP IN THE CUP.
Once freed from his hateful presence, all June's artificial strength seemed to forsake her and, in a sort of collapse, she slipped out of her chair and fell face downward upon the floor.
"God have mercy and let me die !" she cried out in a broken voice, "for my mad folly has wrecked my life, destroyed my happiness, broken the heart of the man I love and bound me to a human brute who has not an instinct of manhood or one spark of human pity in his coarse and callous nature ! Oh, God of the friendless and the helpless, don't desert me—don't let my plans go astray—don't let my hopes prove futile, and don't let me fail in this endeavor to undo the evil I have clone !"
It was a penitent prayer—an earnest and heartfelt prayer—but how it was answered the future alone can reveal.
For a long while she lay there, hoping, dreaming, praying, planning, while steadily the moments flew and the darkness of night settled down upon the outer world; then, realizing that her only hope of allaying her husband's suspicions and throwing him off his guard sufficiently to admit of her escape in the way she had planned, lay in appearing to have abandoned herself entirely to her fate, she arose, and, lighting the gas, proceeded to array herself in the costume he had prepared for her.
Whether it was Madame Mirabeau's taste or his—no matter—the gown which she found hanging in the closet was a superb and sumptuous creation and suited her dark, tropical loveliness to perfection.
Arrayed in this magnificent toilet, June realized with despair that she had never looked more beautiful in all her life, and she was just wondering if it were not possible to do something to destroy the splendor of the effect, when the clock on her dressing table struck eight, a key rattled in the lock, and almost simultaneously Captain Lexboro stepped into the room.
A single glance was sufficient to betray the fact that he had been drinking, for his face was flushed and his eyes preternaturally bright; but he had ex-changed his traveling suit for the regalia of masculine full dress, and as he was one of the few men who do look well in that abomination, June found time to remark even then that he had never appeared to better advantage nor looked handsomer in all the days of his life.
"By George ! you are stunning—you are superb—you are a dream !" he exclaimed, as he caught sight of her, and once again there came into his face and eyes that look which she had seen there upon the night of Lady Montjoy's reception. "How beautiful you are—how wondrously beautiful ! And to think that you be-long to me by every legal and moral right ! June, let me hold you in my arms—let me kiss you once—and I will be your slave forever."
"Don't touch me—don't come near me !" she cried out as she retreated before him. "So help me Heaven, if you lay a single finger upon me I will throw myself from yonder window and escape, by death, the pollution of your hideous touch."
The flame of passion went out of his face and eyes as -if extinguished by some magic touch, and the old look of bitter and malignant hatred settled down upon his features.
"Don't be so blamed melodramatic !" he sneered. "Better women than you die every day in the week,
254	The Last Drop in the Cup. -
and men don't break their hearts over them, any more than I shall break mine over you. If you are dressed and, ready, let us go down to the drawing-room, for the guest of the evening has arrived, and as she hasn't long to stay we mustn't let her waste her time in vain and useless waiting."
In her excitement June utterly failed to note the gender of the personal. pronoun he used, and waving him to precede her, walked out of the room after him and went slowly down the stairs.
The strains of music and the loud laughter of men floated out to her ears as she reached the doorway of the drawing-room, and scarcely had she crossed the threshold of it ere she stopped short and straightened as though through an electrical shock.
A murmur of surprise and admiration had greeted her appearance as her husband's colleagues turned and saw her standing there in all her peerless beauty, but it was not that v~-hich caused her to start so violently and made the blood recede from her cheeks and lila.
The real cause of it was the sight of a woman the
-woman present	and as she met the insolent gage of that woman's malignant eyes, heard the low lilt her derisive laughter and saw the mocking smile,, which illumined lied pretty face, June Lexboro under-stood at price how bitterly her husband had planned re insult and humiliate her, and how desperate was the ordeal which she was now compelled to face.
The woman was Maude Thornhurst—her detestable stepmother's equally detestable daughter
A BRUTAL PROCEEDING.
For a moment those two women eyed each other like a couple of trained duelists about to engage in hostilities, then the low lilt of Maude Thornhurst', mocking laughter rippled through the room, and with a slow, undulating movement she advanced to meet her hated rival.
Involuntarily June glanced toward the door through which she had just entered—hoping to find a means of escape that way from an encounter which she h,:ems had been planned .for the express purpose of
iating her before her husband's guests--hut evidently Captain Lecboro had been on the lookout for some such move as this, for he had deliberately closed the door, and now stood with his hack resting Iga:iist it, watching with a sardonic smile the discomfiture and embarrassment of his unhappy wife.
In despair June glanced at the throng of uniformed and half-drunken men t vho lounged about the brilliantly lighted room, and stared at* her with such open and insolent admiration that her cheeks burned with shame and her heart swelled with indignation, and her eager eyes, traversing the ranks of the captain's guests, wildly sought for some face that she knew or had seen before, in the hope of finding some one to champion her cause and assist her in escaping from the clutches of the shameless and conscienceless monster she had married.
It was a vain quest, however, and evidently the. captain had selected his guests with a view to making: it so, for not only was there no one present June had ever met or ever seen before, but the gatii m ing was made up of the very scum and sweepings of
the barracks—men of such low birth and low instincts that they were shunned by society, and only tolerated in the regiment because they were useful as "fags" to the officers and the better class of privates, and who, never having been invited out to (line and make merry at anybody's house before, were all the more ready to swear secrecy and promise absolute fidelity to one of the officers of the regiment for honoring- them by asking them to his.
It needed but a glance at them to determine their social status and to convince June. that they had not only never seen but in all probability had never even heard of her before, and as this knowledge forced itself upon her and brought -With, it a sense of her utter helplessness and the vanity of hoping to find a champion in their ranks, she involuntarily uttered a sigh of complete despair and for perhaps the hundredth time cursed the mad folly which had led her
_ into such a loathsome position as this.
Meantime, Maude Thornhurst, secure in the knov,1-edge that the men around her had never seen her before, and in all human probability never would see her again, cadre gliding clown the room like the pretty, venomous snake that she was, and, pausing before June, greeted her with an extravagant deferential bow and a trill of soft, exultant laughter.
"Good evening, Mrs. Philip Lexboro, the happy bride," she mockingly and jeeringly said as she fixed her blue eyes upon June's face with a look like that" of a hungry wolf at the sight of a stray lamb. "So we `meet again at Philippi,' my dear, and, despite your queenly edict of a fortnight ago, I again have the pleasure of standing in your august presence, and am again admitted to the sanctified halls of the place you call your home! Such a pity that you could not I i
up to your declaration never to permit inc to again
A Brutal Proceeding.  	257

stand under the same roof with you, isn't it, my dear? And such an awkward thing—for you—that you have married a man who insists upon inviting whom he pleases to visit his house and make merry on his wed-ding night. ,I have traveled a long way to gratify his desire to have me partake in these festivities and witness the unalloyed happiness of his charming bride, and, as I must soon return, I beg of you to let there be as little delay as possible in the beginning of the festivites, that I may carry back with me a memory of how happy and how blessed you really are. Shall we have the opening dance at once, Mrs. Lexboro? There are a few members of the regimental band present, and if they are sober enough to know how to perform upon their instruments, pray give them the signal and let the long-delayed dance begin."
To this taunting speech June did not deign to reply, but totally ignoring the maker of it, she turned and lifted an indignant gaze to her husband's face.
"Some indignities I will stand, and some I will not. Captain Lexboro," she said, cresting her little dark head with an air of imperiousness, and speaking in a low, level tone, which, nevertheless, was distinctly audible to everybody in the room. "You have now insulted me to the last limit of endurance, and if you would not make me a demon like yourself, I demand that you instantly dismiss this person—this creature—from my presence and forbid her to ever again cross the threshold of this or any other room to which your wife may have access so long as she is your wife."
"There's a contradiction in that sentence to which I can't reconcile myself," returned the captain with a laugh, "for we've had a mutual understanding, Miss Thornhurst and I, and it's already agreed between us that as soon as I am off with the new love, I'm to be on with the old; or, in other -words, as soon as you
258.	A brutal Proceeding.
have the good luck to get out of this house and procure a divorce from me, a second marriage venture is to make Miss Thornhurst Mrs. Philip Lexboro number two, and so give her the rights which you at present claim."
It was like the sudden extinguishing of a flame, the way in which the indignant color flashed out of June's face at this brutal remark, and comprehending at last the full extent of the man's brutal nature, she stared at him as though he were some hideous and accursed thing whose very breath bred pestilence and death.
A moment she stood thus—with both hands thrust out before her as though to ward him off, then, with the fury of a cornered panther, she sprang at her husband and struck him upon the lips with the back of her right hand.
"You beast! take that from the woman you have insulted !" she hoarsely cried. "Since there is no one here to strike a blow in. my defense, I will be my own champion, let the effort cost me what it will !"
"And it shall cost you dear, you devil !" roared the captain, as he sprang forward—his face white with fury, and his lips gashed and bleeding from the rings with which he had forced her to load her hands--anal, like an infuriated savage, clutched her by the shoulder, and gave her a wrench that hurled her headlong to the door; then, in his blind and seinidelirious fury, he caught. up a chair and whirled it aloft with the evident intention of smashing it over her head, when an exclamation from his companions and a wild shriek from Maude Thornhurst, as she threw herself before him and wound her arms about his neck, checked what would in all probability have been 'a deathblow.
"Don't Philip—don't!" she wildly panted. "Think of yourself—think of me—think what would be the result if you killed her!"
A Brutal Proceeding.

"Blast the result !" he savagely responded. "I will kill her, the infernal jade! I'll let no woman go so far as she has gone with me. I'll let no wife of mine strike me a blow and live !I
The wine he had imbibed had got into his head, bringing out all the savage instincts of his depraved nature, and for the time being he was little better than a wild beast, inflamed with a beast's passion to have blood for blood.
Maude Thornhurst saw that, and screamed out to his half drunken companions to come to her assistance and aid her in preventing the committing of a crime.
"Tear the chair from his hands and disarm hini or there will be murder done !" she wildly cried. "For God's sake, men, think of yourselves, think of me, and act for our mutual welfare. Would you have us all arrested and dragged into court as accessories to a crime? Never mind if he is your host, never mind if he is your superior officer (he will thank you for saving him when he comes to his proper senses again), think only of yourselves now, and act in your own defense."
This appeal to their own interests spurred the men to instant action, and with the single exception of one burly Scotchman, who was already deep in his cups, and too much absorbed in the duty of draining a bottle of champagne to interest himself in anything else, or to care how the affair terminated, the entire crowd rushed to the rescue, and surrounding Captain Lexboro, tore the chair from him, despite his threats and curses.
And just here—while this disgraceful melee was in progress, and the thoughts of everybody were distracted from her—June saw the chance for which she
26 0	A Brutal Proceeding.
waited and for which she had so long and earnestly prayed.
Quick as a flash of light—quick as thought itself--she sprang to her feet and r.ushed like some mad thing toward the most available of the three French windows which gave access to the gardens of the mansion.
It was closed and locked, but this did not deter her; for her intention was to throw herself headlong through the glass and risk anything—permanent disfigurement, even death itself—sooner than remain a single night, in this house of horrors; and what she aimed at doing would probably have been accomplished in that minute had not fate stepped in and baffled her plan.
- Catching sight of her as she darted down the room, Captain Lexboro yelled out to the burly Scotchman :
"`Stop her, Dougall, you fool, or I'll break every bone in your infernal body."
And Dougall, being too far from the window to intercept her, but knowing full well a woman's inborn dread of firearms, instantly whipped out a revolver, sent a bullet crashing up into the ceiling, and then as June, with a little scream of terror at the explosion, stopped abruptly and involuntarily recoiled, he again cocked the revolver and leveled it straight at her body.
"Dinna ye tak' anither step, my braw dookie," hiccuped he drunkenly, "or by the guide Lord above us I'll wing ye and put a stop to your flight that way, and then, dinna ye ken, as yell be wusser aff no ever wi' a brucken arrum or a shatteret ankle, mebby, and ne'er a chance o' leavin' the hoose for aw yer desprit doin's !"
CHAPTER XLIV.
TURNING THE TABLES.
With a low wail of despair June cowered down before that leveled weapon, and what little hope had lingered in her heart now forsook it entirely.
As has already been said, she was willing, when she started to throw herself through the window, to accept even death itself as a means of release from the clutches of the inhuman monster she had married, and her action now—in halting before Dougall's cocked revolver—was not se inconsistent as it might at first glance have seemed.
For, if she had been certain that the man would kill her if she disobeyed his command-, or if he had even threatened to do so, she would have continued her flight to the window and accepted death as a blessed release from the revolting plans of Philip Lexboro.
But Dougall 'had only threatened to maim her, not to kill, and she knew that if she were merely disabled she could not even hope to baffle her husband's de-signs, and would be more at his mercy than ever.
So with a wailing cry of despair she cowered down 'before the burly Scotchman, and womanlike, being baffled at every point, burst into a flood of tears.
"Good for you, Dougall—you're a brick!" sang out Captain Lexboro, "and hang me if I don't make you a present of a five-pound note for that little trick. An-other minute and the jade would have made her es-cape, and perhaps have brought the authorities down upon us by rushing through the grounds and shrieking like a fiend."
"Aye, captain dearie, but noo she'll do her shriekin' indoors," responded Dougall with a maudlin laugh.
Turning the Tables.
"I loot, Ilion! but dinna ye ken as there's ne'er a thing in the worl' a lassie's so freetened of as the sight of a wee bit of a pistol pointed at her ain bonny sel' ? A verra guide trick it was, as ye say, mon—a verra guide trick, indeed-and I'm thinkin' it's ne'er amiss for me to drink to my ain guide health for playin' it. So here's to ye, Sandy Dougall, ye clever mon, and nmckle good luck attind ye aw the rest o' yer days, rIy laddie."
So saying, he lowered the hammer of his revolver, thrust the weapon into his hip pocket, and pouring out a fresh bumper of champagne, lifted it with an unsteady hand, and dipping his thick red mustache into the foaming glass, poured the wine down his throat.
Meantime three of his companions had taken the precaution to place themselves on guard before each of the windows—lest June should make a second at-tempt to escape—and Captain Lexboro, under the
v ice of his associates and pleadings of Maude Thornhurst, had cooled down and come out of his murderous frenzy.
"Don't you see it is better not to make yoursel f amenable to the law by inflicting any serious injury upon her, Philip?" said Maude soothingly. "If you had killed her or done her any desperate harm (and had you laid hands upon her when you were so blind with passion, you would surely have done that) your liberty would have been jeopardized, and instead of the triumph we have planned to score over her, you would have been forced to undergo a long term of imprisonment, and our ultimate marriage might have been postponed for years.
"What we seek is not her death, but her humiliation, her complete degradation, in revenge for the insults 'she has showered upon my mother and me,
Turning the Tables.	263

and the shameful way in which she made capital of your brief infatuation for her, and was willing to sacrifice your whole life to the furtherance of her own ends and the venting of her wretched spite upon women whose rank and station are far above her. .he loved and still loves my uncle, but she threw even him over to carry out her schemes against us; but now that his Australian investments have turned out to be a gigantic success"—June knew by this remark that when Sir Hilary rushed away in horror and despair, and left her in the little arbor by the riverside, he must have gone straight to Dalroy House, where Maude was staying, and broken the news to his sister Lelia—"now that he is rich in his own right, and her fortune is no longer necessary to save Chilton Towers from the hands of the money lenders, neither my mother nor I have the least interest in what becomes of her, save that we would like to have the satisfaction of seeing her humbled to the very dust, and repaid a thousandfold for the indignities she heaped upon us.
"Philip"—she put her arms around his neck and boldly kissed him as she spoke—"Philip, it is in your power to give us that satisfaction, and if you would have me love you better than I do already--- But, do! that is impossible! If, then, you would have me say, when you make me your wife, that I went to the altar without one single wish ungratified, or a single
grayer unanswered, humiliate the detestable creature you have married; trample on her pride, shatter her hopes, insult and degrade her until she loathes herself as I loathe her, and make her curse the day that she ever came between you and me and tried to put our lives asunder."
Her blue eyes glittered like a snake's as she uttered this, and her pretty face became roe a moment so hideously distorted .,. i~11 malice tit r",,-~ n Philip Lc,-
264	Turning the Tables.
boro must have shrunk from her had he been looking at that diabolical countenance.
"Trample on her, crush her, degrade her until she feels herself debased forever, and curses the day that she ever insulted me and trifled with your affection !" went on this modern Jezebel. "It is not her death but her disgrace you want, to even up your score with her, and pay your debts and mine ; and all the happiness it is in your power to give me I have a right to expect at your hands in payment of my forgiveness of you and the promise you are to claim when a divorce frees you from the creature who is now your wife !"
"Then what you have a right to ask of me, I swear that you shall receive !" he made answer with a vehement emphasis. "The train which is to bear you back to Montreal will leave within two hours' time, and as your stay here can only be a brief one, no time shall be lost in giving you the pleasure you desire. You would see this woman whom you hate humbled, would you ? You would see her humiliated to the dust before You leave this house and return to the aunt who believes that you have gone to spend the evening with Lady Penny Montjoy? Then you shall have your way, my radiant Maude, and have it thus !"
With that he gently disengaged her clinging arms, strode to that end of the room where the champagne—several baskets of it was awaiting the pleasure of all who cared to drink (and where Sandy Dougall was rapidly reducing himself to a state of helpless and hopeless intoxication), and deftly opening bottle after bottle, set them before his already half-drunken aides.
"Fill up, my boys, fill up, and drink to the bride that is, and the jolly good head of the bride that is yet to be !" he cried, as he filled first one glass and _then another and tossed off three of them, with scarcely a breath between. "I've invited you here to-night to
Turning the- Tables.
have a rousing good time, and all the sport the law allows, and before the hour comes for you to say `good night,' and leave Mrs. Lexboro and me to lock up the house after you and wish you a safe return to the barracks, we'll start the ball rolling with a good-old-fashioned dance. Selden, Spriggins, Hone ! tune up your instruments there—you and the rest of the chaps who belong to the band, and play us the liveliest thing you know."
A cheer greeted this—a cheer of semidrunken hilarity—then the whole mob made a hasty rush for the champagne, filled and drained and refilled and re-drained the dozens of glasses, and presently there arose strains of discordant music, as the members of "the band" obeyed their leader and launched forth into the lively measures of a wild gallopade.
"Partners—partners—partners!" sung out Captain Lexboro, as he filled and drained two more glasses of champagne. "Remember, you rascals, that that lady" —pointing to Maude—"is sacred property, and will dance with no one but me, so hands off there, if you don't want to get into serious trouble."
"But the bride, captain?" hiccuped one of the drunken crew. "She's the only other lady present, and Who's to dance with her?"
"All of you !" he answered, with a wild and discordant laugh. "As your hostess, she won't see her guests go begging for partners, and as there are not enough ladies to go around she'll take a turn up and down the room with every mother's son of you and the first come first served, my lads."
A yell of approval greeted this announcement, but ere it had ceased to sound, June was on her feet—erect as a statue and scarlet with indignation.
"Philip Lexboro !" she cried out excitedly, "so help me Heaven, if you are vile enough to subject me to the
266	Turning the Tables.
will of this lawless and lowbred crew, I will never rest until I have found a time and a place to kill you like the dog you are !"
"Kill and be dashed to you!" he answered, with a laugh. "Now, my boys, make a rush for first honors in dancing with the bride, 'and remember that first come first served is the rule of this event."
With that he flew to his own willing partner, and catching her in his embrace, whirled her down the room to the strains of the rollicking music, and if Maude Thornhurst wished to see her hated rival humiliated to the dust, her heart was satisfied then.
With a wild yell, the whole drunken crew—with the single exception of Dougall, who seemed to have no interest in anything but the champagne which he was steadily imbibing—rushed upon June, ignoring her indignant cries and fierce battles to escape their polluting • touch. She was seized by at least two dozen pairs of hands, dragged this way and that, and finally borne down the room and hack again, at a fierce and furious pace, by twenty- drunken wretches, who insisted that each of them had the first right to dance with her. and only compromised by all dancing with her al , once !
In vain she struggled—in vaiii she sent up cries of indignation and wrath ; they only clung to her until one, stronger than the rest, claimed her for himself, and so, by main strength, galloped her at a furious pace up and down the length of the room, to the fan-fare of the music and the jeering laughter of Miss Maude Thornhurst.
Wilder and wilder the music grew, fiercer and fiercer waxed the shameful revel of these low-lived wretches. and ruder and ruder grew the treatment to which June was subjected.
Like hungry wolves'rushing upon a defenseless lamb,
Turning the Tables.	267
the members of that drunken mob seized and tore her one from the other, and passed her around from hand to hand, and man to man, until there was not one in the lot who had not danced with her, saving the now maudlin and thoroughly intoxicated Scotchman who had prevented her escape from the house.
Captain Lexboro himself was the first to remark that circumstance, and to claim that no partiality should he shown.
"Dougall hasn't had his turn !" he cried out in the midst of the shameful proceedings. "Fair play and no favor, Maclntire"—addressing himself to the man who was at that time galloping the half fainting Julie up and down the crowded room. "Pass her over to Dougall and give him a chance to foot it with the bride as well as the rest of you, and take a drink while you're waiting for your turn to come around again."
"Orders obeyed!" shouted MacIntire in response to this. "Here, Dougall. shake a foot with the bride for luck's sake, you jolly old fellow."
And then being too drunk to realize how much force Le used, he actually flung Tune at the bibulous Scotch-man who was just then in the act of lifting another bottle of wine from a freshly opened basket.
The result was unexpected.
Hurled as if from a catapult, June reeled across the room, her body struck first the table upon which the glasses and the empty bottles stood, then the bent figure of the drunken Scotchman, and amidst a crash of glass, and a scream of laughter, the last act of this wild drama was performed.
Losing his balance, Dougall pitched forward upon his face and fell, like a dead man, upon the floor—his coat tails flying over his head, and the empty bottles showering down upon him—and at the same moincot
2C8	Turning the Tables.
June, spying the butt of his revolver, stooped and plucked it from his hip pocket.
Shrieking with drunken laughter, the whole mob rushed to the assistance of the fallen man, but ere they reached him there sounded a sharp metallic click, June's stooping figure flashed erect, and the glistening barrel of a leveled revolver shone before their eyes.
"Stand back !" cried June in a desperate voice. "The tables are turned, you demons, and it is my turn to rule now. I am a desperate woman, and the first man who advances will fall dead in his tracks !"
11
CHAPTER XLV.
SHORT BUT DECISIVE.
The result was what might have been imagined. They fell back before that leveled weapon as though they saw certain death staring them straight in the face, and, with cries of amazement and consternation, scrambled over one another in a wild endeavor to find a place of shelter from the infuriated creature whom they had insulted and debased. But June's purpose was not to fire upon them, not to do anything, but make good her own escape, and seeing, at last, a chance of effecting it, she sprang toward the nearest window.
"After her! seize her! don't let her get away !" roared Philip Lexboro, as he & saw how the hand in which she held that :eveled revolver trembled with excitement and a woman's instinctive dread of touching firearms. "Get up, you fools ! get up and rush upon her! She dare not fire—she is afraid to do it
if you only act quickly	
. "Back !" struck in June gaspingly, as she turned the muzzle of the revolver toward him. "I told you that if ever the chance offered itself, I would kill you for what you have done to-night, Philip Lexboro, and as I am a desperate woman now, so help me Heaven, Y will fulfill that threat if you take another step toward me. It is my liberty or your life, and if you dare to approach me now, as God hears me, I will go to my grave with my hand reddened with your murder. Pack, I tell you—back if you would not die this instant, for I swear I will fire if you advance another step."
In spite of the fact that her hand was trembling
270	Short hut: Decisive.
terribly, and he knew that if she lived up to her threat to fire, her aim must necessarily he defective and the bullet range wide of its mark, Philip Lexhora hesitated ere springing upon her, and, cowardlike, called upon his companions to do what he dared not do himself.
"Out with the lights! out with the lights, somebody ! and then let us all rush upon her !" he cried in a palpitating voice.
And, in answer to his demand, Maude Thornhurst sprang to the center of the room, and reaching up turned off the jets of the chandelier.
Instantly darkness shut down upon the scene, and almost at the same moment there sounded the crash of glass as June, in a panic of terror, threw herself against the window, and breaking it outward reeled, w.w. ilh cut hands and lacerated shoulders, upon the ter-lace beyond.
Stung with pain and half crazed by excitement, she lost her grip upon the revolver and let it drop at her feet, and realizing that she was now absolutely defenseless, uttered a wild cry, for help and reeled toward the short flight of shallow steps which gave access to die gardens; but ere she reached them, Captain Lexboro—like a demoniac spirit—sprang through the shattered window after her and clutched her by both shoulders.
"Help"—she shrieked—"help! help ! for God's sake!"
And in the midst of her wild cries there came a sudden flash of flame, a sharp detonation, and a shrill and awful scream that haunted her to her dying clay, and in the selfsame instant a heavy body lurching for-ward, struck against her chest and fell a dead weight at her very feet.
The sound of that shot and that awful cry reached
Short but Decisive.	27
i

the ears of Maude Thornhurst and the half-drunken crew in the drawing-room of the old house, and some one—nobody was ever able to tell who—turned on the gas and lighted it.
A cry, wild and horrible, rang out upon the night air as that light flamed suddenly forth and revealed to June the awful and appalling truth; _then other cries rang out, and like an echo far down near the gates of the mansion, and still others swelled forth and made the scene hideous as Maude Thornhurst and the semi-drunken crew came rushing out upon the terrace and viewed the ,Appalling spectacle before them.
For 'there, like a figure of stone, June was standing. literally bathed in blood and entwined by a thin spiral of bluish smoke that oozed from the barrel of a smoking revolver which lay close to where she stood, and-at her feet—stone-still, stone-dead, shot through thw, brain and forever beyond the power of doing another evil deed—lay the limp, inert figure of Captain Philip Lexboro !
CHAPTER XLVI.
AN UNHERALDED PRESENCE.
Like a drove of panic-stricken sheep the half-drunken men looked upon that ghastly dead thing lying there, with its upturned face all bathed in blood, and its dead eyes staring.sightlessly up at the night sky ; then rushed away and huddled together, with mingled gasps and cries indicative of a horror too great to put into words, and all the while June, paralyzed with terror, stood like a stick or a stone, incapable of movement, incapable of sound, and looked down upon the awful spectacle with eyes that seemed starting from their sockets.
It was only momentary, that spell of silence, for suddenly, with a cry like some doomed spirit rushing down to the abyss of darkness and yielding up its last hope evermore, Maude Thornhurst sped across the blood-spotted terrace, and dropping on her kiTees be-side the murdered man, threw her arms about him.
"Philip !" she shrieked. "Philip, speak to me ! Tell me you are not seriously hurt—tell me she has not killed you, dear! Oh !"—with a sudden piercing shriek that rang far out through the darkness, as she realized the awful truth—"oh, he is dead—he is dead! The wretch has killed him—as she swore she would !"
Then there arose from her white lips such a series of appalling shrieks that, for one awful moment, those who heard them and looked upon her wild white face and distended eyes as she knelt there, swaying back and forth and beating her bosom with her clenched hands, feared that the shock had turned her brain and made her a raving maniac.
Not until that moment had it dawned upon June that anybody could possibly suspect her of having fired
An Unheralded Presence.	273
the shot which had taken Philip Lexboro's life, and with a cry of mingled horror and amazement, she re-coiled before her accuser, and falling back a step clutched the low rail of the terrace to steady her trembling frame.
"It is false," she gasped, in an awful voice—so weak and faint with excitement that it was quite lost in the tumult of wild cries that issued from Maude's lips and were echoed by the hoarse voices of men far down the highroad beyond the distant gates. "I did not kill him!"
But no one save God and her own wretched self heard the words or knew that she had spoken, even once, since the appalling deed was committed.
The shock of the thing had by this time completely sobered every man of the whole boisterous and low-lived crew, and as their senses rallied from the partial-stupor which had so long enthralled them, they heard the clamor at the gates.
Alarmed by the prospect of being apprehended upon a charge of complicity in the tragedy, most of the men were for fleeing at once. And, indeed, several of them went so far ds to dash down the terrace steps, with the intention of i.79king their escape from the scene under cover of the da.'rness and the trees; but fortunately there were cooler heads among the company, and their advice prevailed.
"Come back, you fools !" shouted out one, constituting himself spokesman for the rest. "Do you want to be caught running away as though you had a hand in the shooting, you blockheads? Not one of you would be able to leave town without being spotted, and even if you did, it would all come out when the affair is investigated by the police, and you'd be dragged back to face the judges, anyhow. Stand your ground, and make the best of a bad bargain. We're in a mess
2 74	.\n Unheralded Presence.
as it is, so don't make it worse .by running away and leaving the women to tell of your presence here to-night. Hark! those chaps—whoever they are—are coming fast, and they'll be here in a twinkling. Stand your groOnd, you fools! we're innocent, so there can't be anything done to us !"
This wholesome advice brought about the desired result, and all, returning to the terrace, clustered closely about the two pale women and the stark-dead thing between them, which less than ten minutes ago had been a living, breathing man in full possession of all man's faculties, and had been their companion and leader in the wild and disgraceful orgies which every man of them was to remember to his dying day.
"Hush ! be quiet—don't shriek so," said one of them, addressing himself to Maude. "Things are bad enough already without your adding to them by yelling like a madwoman. Be still, can't you? or do you want people to believe that there's another murder being corn-nutted ? Don't you hear? Can't you understand? There are men coning—officers, perhaps. And if	„
Before he could complete the sentence she sprang up before him like some wild thing and frantically clutched his wrists.
"Officers!" she repeated in a strange, wild way, and v, ith a look in which a barbaric sort of joy was oddly blended with the anguish of despair that racked her heart. "Officers ! Thank God for that ! Then the murderess will be captured red-handed, captured before her victim's body has grown cold. and dragged away to justice!"
And then, before the man could reply, or June utter one word in refutation of the charge, she sprang to the edge of the terrace and, leaning out over the vinewretehed rail, waved one white hand over her head
An Unheralded Presence.	27
and shouted until the darkness rang back with her cries and the echoes blabbed them as though endowed with a million tongues :
"This way, the assassin is here, this way !"
Again and yet again—scorning all advice and re-pulsing all who endeavored to approach her—she shouted forth that wild appeal, and ever and anon there arose above the feebler tones of her strained and palpitating voice the fast-increasing sound of horses' hoofs and the answering cries of excited men.
Onward they came, those wild night ridels, onward with furious haste through the veil of the darkness and the gloom of the trees, their horses' hoofs beating a rhythmic accompaniment to the woman's never-ceasing cries; then like a clarion note—so clear, so wild, so full of spirit it was—there rung out a man's voice. saying:
"Faster, my lads, faster! Do you not hear her voice calling to us to hasten and snatch her from the clutches of that murderous beast who has so vilely entrapped her? Courage, June—courage, my darling, I am corning to your rescue, dear."
And then, just as June and Maude Thornhurst recognized that voice and uttered in concert one long, wailing cry, there came a sudden clatter of hoof along the drive and around the side of the building. and then, followed closely by a dozen mounted police. Sir Hilary Chilton galloped up to the terrace steps, flung himself from his horse, and rushed like a mad-man into the midst of that excited throng.
"June !" he cried, as she reached out her trembling arms to him. "June, my love, I am come to save you —I and your father, dear—come to tear you from the clutches of that inhuman monster, and so	
The sentence ended with a sudden awful gasp.
270	An Unheralded Presence.
His eyes had fallen upon the ghastly body of the man who lay stretched out on the stones, and putting out both hands as if to ward off some threatening presence, he staggered blindly back just as Mr. Dray-ton and the officers reached the terrace steps and, dismounting, came rushing up and joined them.
CHAPTER XLVII.
THE POISON O_F ASPS.
For one moment there was a scene of the wildest confusion—a scene that literally beggars description—as the rescuing party awoke to the awful realization that the crime which they had hoped to prevent when they first heard Maude Thornhurst's cry of "Murder!" had already been committed, and instead of the victim of it being the wife whose life they had believed to be in danger, it was the husband who now lay dead before them on the bloodstained stones.
For an instant both Sir Hilary and Mr. Drayton were so overcome that neither could utter a word nor take any action in the matter; then, with a sudden cry, both rushed to where Philip Lexboro's ill-starred bride leaned faintly against the terrace rail, and, in another moment, June was lying on her father's bosom, and his protecting arms were tightly wrapped around her.
"My little girl—my poor foolish little girl, thank God that no harm has come to you !" he sobbed, as he bent his head, and rained tender kisses upon her stark white face. "Oh, child, my heart grows faint when I think of what horrors you must have endured in the few hours which have passed since I bade farewell to you, and let you go with the villain who now lies dead before us. Oh, June, how near your folly came to wrecking your life, and desolating Hilary's and mine. Oh, how could you do it, child, when you had so much to live for ?"
Her startled eyes lifted to his with a look of unutterable dread, ,as she mistook his, meaning, and he felt her shudder in his arms.
8	The Poison of Asps.

"I didn't do it, papa !" she gasped. "You mustn't believe it of me—you nor Hilary either. I didn't do it—as God hears me, I didn't. I threatened to do so, it is true, but I did no more than threaten, and as there is a Heaven above me, I swear to you that -I did not kill him, papa, clear !"
"Hush, dear, hush, I did not allude to that when I spoke," murmured her father soothingly. "Of course you did not kill him, nobody suspects you of such a thing, dear, for we all know you too well for that, and all comprehend that the wretch committed suicide in order to escape my wrath when he knew that I was coming to rescue you and
"A suicide! Who dare to profane his memory by calling him that? Who dares, I say, who dares ?" It was Maude Thornhurst who spoke.
Overcome with astonishment at this unexpected appearance upon the scene of the two very last persons upon earth whom she anticipated meeting to-nig.t—`ir Hilary and Mr. Drayton—she had, upon their arrival, slunk back like a whipped and shamefaced cur, and so held her peace; but now, realizing that her presence here to-night need not and could not be kept a secret either from them or from anybody else in all
e wide world, she rustled sharply forward, and all the spleen and malice and the inborn savagery of her vicious nature flamed forth from her eyes as she Ii fted them to John Drayton's face.
"Who dares to call it suicide? Who dares—who dares?" reiterated she, her voice broken with malignant passion. "A suicide, did you say? Ask these men, as!!: this woman, ask me the proper name by which to call it, and they will tell you, as I will tell you, that it was a murder!"
"Peace !" struck in Sir Hilary, as he divined the
The Poison of Asps.	279
awful thing she would say, and springing forward clutched her wrist and wrenched down, with more violence than he meant or realized, the uplifted hand, whose accusing finger she was about to level at June. "Peace, you demon, if you are not wholly corrupt and there is, just one spark of womanly feeling left in the thing you call your heart! Wretch ! have you not clone enough evil as it is? Are you not vile enough in the eyes of [leaven, and the eyes of men, without adding fresh infamies to your list and making your name an everlasting reproach to the sex which you have disgraced ? Von monster ! you fiend ! to plot and plan a thing like this, and with a fellow like that wretch lying there ?	dead, as he deserves, and only less in-
falnous than your own shameless and treacherous self."
She cowered before the flame of his eves, the sting-
contempt of his tone and the passionate fury writ-ten in his dead-white face, cowered in fear for half a moment, then rose, like any other unscotched snake, and spat her venom at him.
"Love is glorious !" she uttered, with a horrible guttural sort of laugh, and with a look that made him loubt for a moment her complete sanity, "love is glorious! love is divine! But mine has been put to the sword, mine has been crushed and beaten and stamped out by the heel of a revengeful woman, and so must yours be, also. 1_Ie who was all the world to me lies there murdered, as you see him, butchered in cold blood, and she wvlionl you love shall expiate it by the rope and die cursing the hour when first she took	
"Silence !" he cut in hoarsely. "I wish you were a man, that I might strike you as you deserve, and make you as loathsome to the sight as is the dead face or that vile wretch whose infamous promises spurred you on to attempt this shameful and unwomanly thing.,,
28o	The Poison of Asps.
"What thing?" she uttered. `You're talking like a madman, and I don't understand you. What promises? What thing?"
"Bah! what a reptile you are !" he cried, as he gave her arm a fling which sent her reeling back a step or two. "Do you need to be told more than that the letter which you received to-day from that fellow"—pointing to Philip Lexboro's body—"was found by me shortly after you left Dalroy House this evening?"
She started a trifle, and her white lips curled inward as he spoke, while a burning blush—a blush which proved her a woman, after all, and still capable of feeling ashamed—rose over her pretty, treacherous face and scorched it from brow to chin.
"If you were vile enough to consent to do a thing like that, why were you not thoughtful enough to destroy that letter, and so cover up all traces of your hellish work? And why not shrewd enough to lay your plans perfectly, and tell a lie which could not in an instant's time be found out? Perhaps you do not comprehend my meaning? If so, then listen:
"When you left Dalroy House this evening you did so with the avowed intention of visiting Lady Mont-joy, who had—so you said, invited you to attend the theater in company with herself and Sir James. Oh, but that was a witless lie, you snake! for you had barely been gone half an hour ere Lady Penny herself drove up to make an evening call upon Lelia, and it needed but a dozen words to determine the fact that her ladyship knew nothing whatsoever of your absence from the house, and not only had never invited you to attend a theatrical performance with her, but was due to-night at nine o'clock at the wedding of a distant relative.
"I don't know what put it into my head to imagine when I heard that your mission in leaving the house
The Poison of Asps.	281

had to do with June—perhaps it was because I knew that you hated her and loved Philip Lexboro, and that the gayety and lightness of your spirits to-day were hardly compatible with the feelings a woman ought to have when she knows that the man she adores had just a few hours before been wedded to her de-tested rival. Perhaps it was that, perhaps it was the will of God—no matter. the cause—the fact remains that I went in quest of your maid, determined to learn from her if she knew where or why you had gone, and after repeatedly knocking at your door with-out eliciting any response, went in, and found crumpled up in a ball and lying beside your dressing table Philip Lexboro's letter.
"In that letter, the wretch detailed all his schemes to degrade and humiliate .the woman he had married, and asked you—you to participate in them and to share his infamy by becoming his wife after a divorce had freed him from the poor creature whose blind folly had led her into his loathesome clutches.
"I don't know what happened to me after I read that letter and realized, through the lie that you had told when leaving the house, that you had actually consented to do the horrible thing set down in it	
for the moments that followed the reading of that terrible thing will always be a blank in my life.
"I only know that all my brain and heart seemed suddenly to be wrapped in a consuming fire, and that when I became myself again I- was lying upon the floor of your boudoir, that Lelia was bending over nee, and that that hideous letter—torn in a thousand particles—lay scattered all about me.
"Crazed with the horror of the thing, and with the shame and degredation which I then knew awaited the woman I loved, I first told Lelia of the awful discovery, then rushed like a madman out of the house
282	The Poison of Asps.
and, throwing myself upon a horse, bore the awful intelligence to Mr. Drayton.
"If you are not as utterly devoid of common intelligence as you are of common decency, the rest you can guess.
"By the very- next train that left Montreal for La-chine, we two set out to rescue June from the clutches of the brute she had married, and to save her from the consequences of her dreadful folly.
"To fly to the police immediately upon our arrival at our destination, and to lay the awful truth before them, was our first step, and our next to lead them here as fast as horses could bring us. And so your devilish scheme and his"—pointing to Philip Lexboro's corpse—"has failed in its purpose, been blasted in its bud, and the rash won an, upon whose head your malice would have involved an awful curse, is snatched ftorn the clutches of both. Death has freed her from the man she wedded, and made it once more possiLlc for her to redeem the past and find happiness with the man she loves, and death has also balked your de-signs and turned your vengeance back upon your own head!"
"Has it?" shrieked Maude, with a shrill outDUTst of maniacal laughter, as she flashed by him and, dropping on her knees beside the murdered man, lifted his gory head and pressed it to her bosom. "Aye, but the law will have its vengeance, even though all others fail ! Philip, they would have your murder go tan-avenged, and your murderess go unhanged, but I who loved you—I who have lost you, will have justice!"
Then she bent and kissed his ghastly face—with a fervor which made those who witnessed it shudder. and rising, turned her white face toward the police.
"Officers," she cried, "you have come here in the cause o f justice, and in the name of the law, and in
The Poison of Asps.	283
the interest of that cause and that name I demand that you now act. A murder has been committed, and there are half a hundred witnesses here to prove that Captain Lexboro did not die by his own hand !"
"Nay, that he. didn't!" exclaimed Sandy Dougall. "He wor murterit if iver a anon wor—murterit in caul.d bloot !"
"You hear, you hear, officers?" cried Maude wildly. "He will testify—they will all testify that Captain Lexboro was murdered, and that that woman there" —leveling an accusing finger at June—"that woman, who was his bride to--day and is his widow to-night, is the wretch who shot him down !"
"No! no ! no ! Don't believe her, gentlemen !" cried June in a voice of horror. "It is a wicked and infamous falsehood. I did not kill him	I swear that I did not. It is the truth I am telling you—as God hears me, it is the truth !"
"It is a lie !" retorted Maude in a shrill, piercing Dice. "She snatched the revolver from that man yonder. She threatened before him—before rye—hetore all of us—to kill her husband if he did not l::-t her return to her father, and when he refuse 1 to (1) so, and when he followed her as she defied him and rushed away, she shot him—shot him dead!"
"I did not!" shrieked June. "As God hears me, l slid not!"
"And as God hears me, you did !" retorted Maud impiously raising her hand to call Heaven as a witness to her shameful perjury. "I was at his heels when he lashed out after you." (She spoke the truth in that at least.) "I was on the terrace when you turned and thrust the pistol into his face, crying, `Thus I free myself—thus I undo my mistake!' and I saw you shoat him—before God and all the angels above I swear that I did!"
CHAPTER XLVIII.
A FOREGONE CONCLUSION.
Stunned into speechlessness by that impious oath, June fell back against her father's bosom, and stared with horrified eyes at the pale, malignant face of the woman who thus called Heaven to bear witness to a lie and, around her as she leaned there—breathless, strengthless, utterly dumb—there swelled the awful cries of her father and Sir Hilary, blended with the murmurs of the police, and the hoarse exclamations of the men whom Philip Lexboro had chosen to be his wedding guests.
"Aye, that's the truth—Guid's b!essin' ! but it's the verra truth," asserted Sandy Dougall, nodding to the officers.
"It is a lie, and I'll stake my life upon it !" cried Sir Hilary excitedly. "She did not, she could not do that awful thing, officers. If you know her as. I know her, you would not need even her own denial of this fearful thing to be sure that she never committed the crime of which she stands accused."
"And I never did—never, never !" protested June wildly. "Oh, Hilary! oh, papa ! don't let them believe that I did. As God hears me, this wicked woman is lying, and I am as innocent of bloodshed as a babe unborn. I didn't kill him, gentlemen ! I swear to you that I did not !
"It is true what that Scotchman tells you about my snatching the pistol from him and threatening to kill Captain Lexboro if he dared to molest me, but I didn't do more than that—on my honor, on my soul's salvation, I swear to you that I did not do this dreadful thing!"
A Foregone Conclusion.	285
"And I swear to you that she did !" reiterated Maude Thornhurst. "I swear to you that she not only killed her husband, but I saw her do it !"
"It is false—oh, it is false !" protested June, hysterically. "Oh, listen, gentlemen, listen, and let me tell you what agonies I have endured in this horrible house and how unworthy of belief this infamous woman is."
With that she launched forth into the story of her experiences, from the hour when she discovered how treacherously Captain Lexboro had acted and how shamefully he had deceived her and broken his ante-nuptial promise, and in a wild, hysterical way told of all that had happened from the time when her foot first pressed the threshold of that fatal house to this, the moment when they found her accused of her husband's murder.
"And there was no one but you two upon the terrace at the time?" queried the chief officer.
"No one !" responded June. "It was not until the lights flashed up again, and I saw Miss Thornhurst standing in the window, and Captain Lexboro lying dead at my feet, that I realized what had happened."
"And you do not believe—do not even suspect that Miss Thornhurst herself fired the fatal shot?"
"Oh, no! no! no! The flash came from beside me—right here on the terrace steps—and Miss Thornhurst was at the time almost six yards away," responded. June. "She could not have fired the shot, nor would it have been to her interest to do so; for all her hopes lay in Captain Lexboro's life, sir. Besides, his back was toward her at the time, and he was, as you can see, shot straight between the eyes."
"And he was facing you?"
"Oh, yes, yes, facing me and looking me straight in the eyes, I saw them glittering into mine, those awful
286	A Foregone Conclusion.
eyes of his, as that bright flash rose up beside me, and they were still staring at me when he screamed and fell dead. But, oh, I did not shoot him, sir—as God hears me, I did not. Please believe me—please do, and don't arrest me upon this shameless woman's charge."
"I am very sorry, but I am obliged to do my duty !" he responded. "A murder has been committed; you have been accused, Mrs. Lexboro, and the accusation hacked, tip by the testimony of witnesses."
"But, sir	
"There is only one course left open to me," he inter-posed. "I must arrest you upon a charge of murder and put this woman and these men into custody as witnesses. Officers, do your duty. Stand aside, Sir Fliiary Chilton; stand aside, Mr. Drayton. I arrest this woman in the king's name, and upon a charge of murder!"
I
CHAPTER .MIX.
THE LAW AND THE LADY.
It would be vain to attempt to describe the scene of wild excitement which followed this announcement of the chief of police; fQr, as those terrible words passed his lips—words which dashed every hope from June's heart, and told her that she must henceforth be held up to public scorn and public horror as that vilest of criminals, a murderess—one wild shriek left her lips. and trembling with terror, she clung to her father and Sir Hilary, and wildly beseeched them to save her from her threatening doom.
"Don't let him arrest me, papa !" she panted in wild affright. "I am not guilty! I am not guilty ! Oh. don't let him tear me away from you and drag me to prison. Papa! Hilary! don't let him do it!"
Then, in a panic of terror, as she saw the officer approaching with hand extended to take her into custody, she gave one piercing shriek, wrenched herself from her father's embrace, sprang from the terrace, and rushed off into the darkness like a hunted hare.
. It was a vain endeavor—a foolish step, fur - he could not hope to outrun those brawny, strong-1iini men, and besides, her very act in running away an( trying to evade arrest only served to give color to the story of her guilt.
But June never thought of that, never stopped to reckon the chances of her success or failure.
Like a hunted animal that sees only death awaiting it if it turn or fall or fail to reach some refuge where the hounds cannot follow and tear its palpitating throat. she fled, because no other course seemed left open to her, and because only in flight could she see a hope nt escaping the horrors of her impending ,loom.
288	The Law and the Lady.
One thought, one impulse, one solitary idea filled her reeling brain—to get away—somewhere—anywhere—and to elude the revengeful malice of the woman who stood ready to swear away her life and to pile perjury upon perjury so that she obtained her horrible desire to see her hated rival done to death and the destruction of her own vile hopes avenged—so, with madness in her brain and terror in her heart, June fled, and hoping against hope, sprang to where the officers' horses stood, and pouncing upon the nearest, wildly endeavored to mount its back.
"After her! seize her! don't let the murderess es-cape !" shrieked Miss Thornhurst in a panic of alarm as she witnessed this desperate endeavor. "Out with your pistols, riddle her with bullets, before you suffer her to get beyond your reach !"
There was hardly any necessity of resorting to such desperate measures as that—measures more fit to em-ploy in dealing with an escaping lioness than with a weak, hysterical, fear-maddened woman; and perhaps, under other and lesst. gruesome circumstances, Miss Thornhurst's suggestion might have been greeted with jeers of derision.
But as it was, the officers contented themselves with vaulting over the terrace rail and pursuing the fugitive empty-handed ; and this they did with such alacrity and with such good purpose that, in less time than it has taken to record the fact, they had completely surrounded June and put an end to all her hopes of getting away.
Hampered in her efforts to mount the horse by her trailing reception gown, and the entire absence of a stepping stone to assist her in getting her foot into the stirrup, the half-crazed girl was wildly endeavoring —and with efforts which would have been ludicrous had they not been pathetic—to climb into the saddle
1
The Law and the Lady.	289
and make good her escape, when half a dozen pairs of hands seized her and dragged her rudely back.
"Let me go !" she madly shrieked. "I am not guilty ! let me go! help ! save me ! Papa ! Hilary! they are putting the dreadful handcuffs on my wrists! Oh, save me! save me, in pity's name !"
Sir Hilary Chilton had been less than human had he been able to withstand that piteous appeal.
In that one moment of agony he only remembered that the woman he loved was struggling in the hands of enemies, only knew that she called out to him to save her, and before he realized what he was about to do, he had cleared the terrace rail. Two sounding blows sent the men who stood between him and her sprawling upon the earth, and June was in his arms, her dark head lying on his shoulder, her tumbled hair streaming over his bosom, and her cold white face upturned to the night sky. She had swooned, poor child, and had he not caught her then, she must have fallen to the earth.
"You hounds ! You cowards ! to deal like this with a woman!" he hoarsely cried as he faced the staring and astounded officers. "Have you no hearts, no conscience, no spark of manly feeling, that you handle her as though she were some savage beast, and not a delicate creature whom the weakest of you could c!-ush between his hands? And look ! look what you have done to her. Manacled her as though she were the most desperate of criminals. If any man among you dares to lay another hand upon her in violence, and without due respect to who and what she is, he shall render up his life to me !"
"And look sharp that you don't render your liberty up to us !" struck in the chief angrily. "The law is like death—is no respecter of titles, Sir Hilary Chilton, and he who breaks, must pay. A repetition of this
290	The Law and the Lady.
high-handed proceeding will cost you what I am at liberty to take from you now—your freedom."
"You are not at liberty to do anything of the sort," protested Sir Hilary hotly. "And even if you were, I would willingly make myself amenable to the law before I would suffer this outrage to be repeated."
"There has been no outrage," asserted the chief vigorously. "A murder has been committed, this woman has been accused—and very probably, justly accused, from the aspect of things—and it is therefore my duty to arrest her."
"Not without a warrant, sir, and you have none!" "A warrant is not necessary under these circumstances."
"Possibly you are right ; I do not know the. law, but--"
"But I do, and I tell you that' if it is my pleasure to enforce my authority—even now and without any further demonstration upon your part—I am at liberty to march you off to jail to-night and have you up be-fore a judge to-morrow for assaulting officers and aiding a prisoner in resisting an arrest !"
"I have not done even that !" he answered stoutly. "For, see ! I am—unhappily--willing to admit your authority and ready to surrender this dear girl into your hands. As for what I have done, you could not find a judge in all the world who'd hold me guilty of a single wrong. It is you who are guilty—you and your men—not I ! Guilty of using undue violence in apprehending a weak and helpless prisoner; guilty, guilty, as officers, in brutally overstepping the limits of your authority. See! she has fainted, poor child—fainted, and is unable to lift even one hand in her oWn. defense. So I yield her up to you and bow to the majesty of the la«-. Take her	not roughly ; for I.
The Law and the Lady.	291
swear I'll kill the man who lays even a finger upon her rudely—take her and bear her away as gently and as mercifully as you can, and let your actions toward her be those of men, who realize that they are dealing with a hapless gentlewoman !"
He could have used no stronger argument, found no charm more potent than this appeal to their chivalry as men—not as the mere machines of the law—and this he understood when next the chief spoke.
"Haskins, Simmons, Lyle, away, all three of you, and procure a vehicle of some sort to convey the prisoner to jail !" exclaimed that functionary. "And mind you 1)e as brisk about it as possible, and get as good a conveyance as you can. And while they're about it, Sir Hilary, permit me to unlock and remove the gyves from the pris—from Mrs. Lexboro's wrists; and to assure you that I acted both hastily and thoughtlessly in putting them on. No ! don't thank me, Sir Hilary. I am simply doing my duty as a man, not an officer, and in this instance, at least, putting my official character behind me until a later day. But to resume it in another quarter"—turning to his assistants—"men, take charge of those soldiers and this woman"—indicating Miss Thornhurst—"and hold them as important witnesses for the crown. To you, Laycroft, and to you, Blenkam, I assign the post of guarding the body of the murdered man, and keeping watch over the house until the coroner is notified and arrives with his deputies to release you and your charge, to investigate the case, and—in accordance with his majesty's laws—to seal up the house and its contents, and to re-move the body of the deceased."
"Aye, aye, sir," responded all the men addressed; then in answer to his command, all the now thoroughly sobered crew of reprobates whom Captain Lexborc had invited down from the barracks to participate in
292	The Law and the Lady.
his wedding festivities, were marshaled into line and marched solemnly away under guard of the police.
A few minutes later a closed vehicle made its appearance, and into this June--still unconscious—was ceremoniously conveyed .and most unceremoniously driven away, in company with Sir Hilary Chilton, John Drayton, Miss Thornhurst, and the chief of police.
CHAPTER L.
THE SLUMBERING SNAKE.
"Oh, wretch ! wretch! wretch ! Cursed be the day you crossed the 'threshold of my home and first lifted your evil eyes to my darling's face !" exclaimed John Drayton, turning to Miss Thornhurst as the vehicle rattled away through the starlight and turned in the direction of the old prison at Lachine. "You have re-turned evil for good, treacherously bitten the hand that fed. you, and may God repay you for your baseness as you deserve."
Her only answer was a queer, gurgling laugh—which, for one moment, made him doubt her complete sanity, and wonder if to-night's tragedy had not partially unbalanced her reason; then she turned her glowering eyes upon the hapless creature who lay unconscious in his arms, and a look of bitter and malignant hate distorted her pretty features.
"If God can forgive her, it is more than I ever can !" struck in Sir Hilary hoarsely.
"Wait until I ask you to !" she snapped, transferring her indignant gaze to his face. "I do not know that you have ever been so essential to my happiness that I should languish under your displeasure or care to win your favor in anything, my sweet uncle. But for you I should have won my love and been his happy wife even now; but for you this wretch who took him from me would have repulsed his advances from the first, and that miserable wedding would never have been solemnized; but for you she would not have taken his life, and	"
"It is a lie !" he interrupted hotly. "She never took his life—never—never, and you know it !"
t
The Slumbering Snake.
"She did!". responded Miss Thornhurst vehemently. `She slew him in cold blood—slew him without any excuse for the barbarous deed, save that she regretted her union with him and wanted to be free again to marry you—slew him like the cold-blooded and unprincipled wretch that she is, and not all your protestations, nor hers either, will serve to alter the fact that I saw her do it."
"And you will swear to that before the judges," he uttered huskily, "knowing that it is a lie? You will go into court and swear to that?"
"Yes, a thousand times, yes !" she answered with passionate, vehemence. "And why should I not, when it is the truth, and	
"It is not the truth. Before God and man, I pro-claim it an infamous lie !"
"Rut it will not be enough for the judges, my, confiding uncle, and, even though you refuse to accept my statement in preference to hers, the law will not be quite so, lenient, for in the eyes of that my word is just as good as hers. And you base your absurd belief—or is it only a pretended belief ?—in her complete innocence upon her simple denial of the charges brought against her, do you, Sir Hilary Chilton.' Bah !"—with a jeering laugh and a gesture .of derision—"how very like a man! Since when did anv murderess fail to protest her innocence? Since when did any criminal establish a precedent by proclaiming her guilt from the housetops and inviting the executioner to mete out to her the punishment her crime had merited? Innocent, is she? Then let her prove that innocence, for I who saw the deed committed, swear by all that is holy that she is guilty, and that Philip Lexboro's blood is upon her perjured soul. His dead eyes appeal to me to avenge him, his dead lips call out to me for justice, and in response to both, i
The Slumbering Snake.
answer with living voice, `Blood for blood and li i e for life ! This woman shall hang !—this woman shall hang!' "
"Good heavens! and you, a- sister woman, have set yourself the hideous task of accomplishing that?" he cried out in a voice of indescribable horror. "Yon. who have broken her father's bread—aye ! even been rescued by him from a life of pinching poverty an,' wretched want ; you, who should, even if she were guitly, be the first to shield her and the last to do her evil; you, my sister's child and my father's granddaughter—will go into a public court and swear her precious life away?"
"Aye ! and to fifty public courts, if it be necessary," she answered vindictively. "She slew my ambition, she slaughtered my hopes, she killed the man f loved with all the passion and all the ardor of my woman's heart. Her life I want in payment for the li to she took, her hopes I demand in payment for the hopes she blasted, and her blood I will have in payment for-the blood she his spilled. Yon can't save her, even though you offer up your life in place of hers—for the law is my avenger. and the law shall have its due —I swear it !"
As she spoke she turned upon him a face that vV as like the countenance of an incarnate fiend and shod: above her head her small clenched fist as if to give emphasis to her vindictive speech.
For a moment Sir Hilary sat as though stunned, and stared at her in speechless horror, then:
"May God deal with you as you deserve, and punish you as such infamy as yours merits !" he cried out indignantly. "You are not a woman—you are a fiend, Maude Tho-nhurst, and if you succeed in this hellish plan of yours, this I tell yon: V, nu will live to regret
296	The Slumbering Snake.
this night's work—live as an accursed perjurer should —through years of agony, shame, and remorse."
"But she will not !" responded Maude, with a jeering laugh, as she pointed to June. "She will not live for even one year longer, for they will have her up before the coming assizes to answer a charge of willful and deliberate murder, and, as there was an eye-witness to her guilt, her (loom is sealed beyond the power of fate itself to alter. .You know our English law—our good and expeditious English law, my worthy uncle ! A murderer has but two Sundays to live after being convicted, and as her conviction is as certain to come as the night is sure to follow day, in two months hence there will be no such being as June Lexboro in all the world! All that will remain of her then will be a mere name, a simple record of the crime for which she was executed, and a body rapidly decaying in quicklime under the pavement of the prison where she died !"
A man's hoarse cry of agony greeted this brutal speech, and when Sir Hilary, startled by it, glanced in the direction whence it came, he saw that old John Drayton had fallen back among the cushions of the carriage, and now lay in a swoon beside his unconscious daughter.
CHAPTER LI.
THE BREAKING OF THE BOND.
"No news travels like ill news," says the proverb, and when the morning dawned every paper in the Dominion had a full and complete account of Philip Lexboro's tragic death, and ere another nightfall had darkened the land, all Canada knew that his hapless / bride lay in the grim old prison at Lachine, charged, with the awful crime of murder.
There were distressing and authentic reports in all the public prints of the heart-rending- scene which had occurred at the prison after June had recovered consciousness and was compelled to part from her father and Sir Hilary Chilton, and, following these, there were long and harrowing accounts of how the accused was borne away in a wildly hysterical condition, and locked in her prison cell ; of how old John Drayton had to be restrained by the police when he heard her calling upon him to the last to save her from the clutches of her jailers and to save her from her threatening doom ; and of how—when all this was over—he and Sir Hilary had rushed out of the prison and telegraphed, ere they sought shelter at the hotel, to the most skilled and most famous lawyers in all the Dominion—and all the States, as well—and had retained them for the defense of the unfortunate accused.
Crazed with excitement and despair, both Sir Hilary Chilton and old John Drayton really had telegraphed to every noted lawyer upon this side of the Atlantic, . and retained him for the defense, and then realizing that they could at present do no more in June's behalf, had sought the best hotel that Lachine boasted of,
?c,~	The Breaking of the Bond.
and forthwith engaged a suite of apartments. for their mutual occupancy.
'or (lid their solicitude for the welfare of the. girl whom they both loved cease here ; for having applied to the proper authorities for privilege to render the place of her incarceration less dreadful and less cheer-less than it was—a privilege readily granted when there is money to oil the ways—ere dawn had broken they had wrought a wonderful change in the cell which their darling was forced to occupy.
But upon Miss Thornhurst—detained as a witness for the crown—neither man wasted a thought.
The forenoon had brought Miss Prudence Drayton and Mr. and Mrs. Dalroy to Lachine by the earliest train, and—wild with excitement, profuse in their declarations of their belief in June's innocence—had found them visiting her in her cell, and assuring her of their faith in her and their determination to stand
–by her to the end; and the afternoon had brought to Mr. Drayton and Sir Hilary Chilton an excited and furious visitor in the person of Lady Valencia.
Pale with agitation and trembling with nervous excitement, her ladyship had been shown into the presence of her husband and her brother, and between these two. been told the full particulars of the tragedy . and of what had been clone in behalf of the unfortunate accused.
"It is all very well to tell me what you have' (l(no for your daughter, Mr. Drayton," cried she, as shc rustled forward and confronted her trembling spouse "But what have you done for mine, sir:' As her mother, T stand ready to place myself at her side and to array her cause against that of your (laughter."
"Throughout her excited speech her husband had remained silent, but now he turned upon her with a passionate contempt and a gesture of ineffable scorn.
The Breaking of the Bond.	299
"Be it so !" he cried out excitedly. "Go to your daughter—the worthy daughter of such a mother as you—go to her now, and in going, remember that you take with you the contempt of the man who rescued both you and her from desperate poverty, and who now and forever after repudiates the pair of you."
"Ah, but you can hardly do that !" she .answered, with a shrug of her silken shoulders. "Remember that even so lowly a creature as you are,- I did you the honor of marrying you and that, being your wife, I have a claim upon your fortunes and estates."
"A claim which I will advertise to all the world that I gladly pay in order to be rid of your detestable presence!" he responded, with a sweeping gesture. "My lawyers will attend to your case in future, Lady Valencia; as for me—I am done with you from tli i w hour forth."
CHAPTER LII.
THE LAST ACT OF THE TRAGEDY.
Lady Valencia kept her word in every particular, and having once cast off all allegiance to her husband, and announced her intention to champion her daughter's cause, forthwith set out to render Miss Thorn-burst's enforced captivity less irksome, and her surroundings as pleasant to the eye as were those of her detested rival.
Following out the plan which her despised husband had adopted in his daughter's behalf, she lost no time, and spared no expense in transforming the dingy apartment in which her own child was detained, and actually went so far as to take up her abode there, and to share her daughter's lot.
That her husband could not do this with his child ( for Maude, you must recollect, was only detained as a witness for the crown, while June was a prisoner charged with a heinous crime) was a source of the greatest satisfaction to her ladyship, and not giving a thought to the widely different positions which the two girls now occupied, she saw in this circumstance—as she saw in everything—"merely another proof of the immense superiority of people of birth over the offshoots of the common herd," and so became imbued with a greater idea of her own importance, and a greater contempt for what she was pleased term that powerless and unbred herd of riffraff called "the masses."
In vain Mrs. Dalroy—who flew to Lachine on the wing of love, the very instant she heard of June's trouble—endeavored to persuade her sister into a more rational state, and to overcome her blatant egotism.
"humbug!" sniffed the practical little lady with a
The Last Act of the Tragedy.	Sot
shrug of her silken shoulders. "I'm out of all patience with you, Valencia, and your ideas are at least three hundred years behind the times. Can't you see that you are making a laughingstock of yourself ? Can't you understand that the majority must always rule, and that even kings have no longer the -power to chop people's heads off for daring to look at them, and nowadays only hold their thrones by sufferance, and are merely the speaking trumpets of the very `masses' over whom their ancestors used to tyrannize?
"And you talk of the superiority of your child over the child of the man you have married! Good Heaven, they are no more to be compared than daylight with darkness—virtue with vice—truth with falsehood, or pearls with pitch. Your daughter has disgraced her-self and disgraced you—disgraced even the name of woman—by her shameless act in going to Philip Lexboro's house in the way she did, and though she were to swear before Heaven to the guilt of the girl she has accused, I would not now accept her oath upon the Bible, or hold it one-half so worthy of belief as June Drayton's simple, unsupported word! That is what I think of your daughter, Valencia, and this I tell you plainly: If -you uphold her in the shameful course she has adopted and assist her in her abominable determination to go into court and perjure herself by swearing June Drayton's life away, I will disown the pair of you, and neither you nor she shall ever darken my doors so long as I am a living woman!"
As her ladyship was firm in her intention to stand by Maude, and her belief in the superiority of the aristocracy was not to be shaken while life lasted, there could be but one result of this strong language and that result was, that she and her sister parted in anger and went their separate ways from that day forth.
From Lady Valencia's presence Mrs. Dalroy «vent
ro
302	The Last Act of the Tragedy;
immediately into that of June, and remained with her as long as the authorities would permit.
The meeting between the two was affecting in the extreme, and although June had always loved the little lady whose mission on earth seemed to be to bring sunshine with her wherever she went, she had never loved her one half so dearly nor so fully appreciated her worth as when in this hour of sore affliction she came with words of love and sympathy—with forgiveness in her heart and sunshine in her face—and tried in every way to inspire Philip Lexboro's widow with hope and courage to meet the ordeal that was before her.
"Oh, Mrs. Dalroy, I don't deserve this !" sobbed June remorsefully. "I have been a wicked, spiteful; malicious girl, and I don't deserve this after the way in which I treated you when
"Tut, tut! Don't talk rubbish!" interrupted this good little woman smilingly. "You are not a `wicked' girl, and you never have been a `malicious' one, my dear. You were merely a willful, headstrong, impetuous voting woman who thought she knew how to conduct her own affairs a great deal better than any-Oody else could conduct them for her, mid after making such a stupid blunder—as you did in engaging yourself to Captain Lexboro and insisting upon an almost immediate marriage—I don't wonder that you declined to see me whenever I called, for I should have done the same myself had I stood in your shoes.
"You knew that if you saw me I would certainly give you a right-down good scolding (as you deserved, you headstrong girl) ; you knew that I would espouse Hilary's cause, and tell you in plain language that you were wrecking your life by your madness, and taking
step which no self-respecting woman would ever permit hersel f to take if she hoped to hold her position
The Last Ac.t of the Tra>-edy.	303
in the world's esteem; and as nobody likes to hear plain truths about herself, your reason for refusing to see me, when I called at Suncliff, was, as I have said, a most natural one.
"But there, now !" tenderly patting June's pale cheek and smiling down into her mournful eyes—"let us say no more about the wretched affair, my dear. You have been a foolish girl, June, but this terrible experience will be a good, wholesome lesson to you : and, now that death has severed the bond which united you to Philip Lexboro
"Oh," interposed June excitedly and appealingly "oh, Mrs. Dalroy, you do not believe that I killed him? Oh, tell me that you do not, dear !"
"Believe it?—certainly not!" responded she. "What-ever else I know you to he capable of tinder the stress of strong excitement, I know that you are not capable of committing murder, June. As for Maude Thorn-burst's infamous perjury, T believe that heaven will punish her for that, by baffling her wicked ends, and restoring you in safety to the arms of those who love you."
"Oh, if I could only believe it---if I could only persuade myself that that hideous prophecy would not he fulfilled!" returned June trembling with terror and growing deathly white. "It is that which haunts me constantly, that which makes my very soul grow faint with horror; and every hour, every minute, since they brought me to this dreadful place, one hideous fear has held possession of my brain : `What if Wan-na-seebee's prophecy should be fulfilled? What, if, having come true in every particular, it should also come_truc in the ending, and my life be forfeited because of niv madness and folly?' Oh, Lelia—Lelia, T never told you of it, but, oh, an awful prophecy was made
304	The Last Act of -the- Tragedy.
- "A good-for-nothing Indian squaw who told your` fortune upon the very day when you first met Hilary. Yes, I know all about it," interrupted Mrs. Dalroy. "You told Hilary and your father about it last night, and they told me this morning. Upon my word, June, I gave you credit for better sense than to attach any importance to such absurd mummery."
"I did not at first," she answered half hysterically. "I laughed it to scorn—dismissed it without a thought, and in time forgot it; but last night it forced itself back into my memory, and I could not but tremble with horror when I recollected how strangely it had thus far been fulfilled. Am I not the inmate of a prison cell to-day, and does not the awful charge of murder already hang like a threatening curse above me?"
"Ah, well, it won't hang there for long, my dear," responded Mrs. Dalroy reassuringly. "I don't pretend to understand by what freak of fate the lines of your life have so remarkably shj)ed themselves to the predictions of that woman, but I do pretend to say that if you are going to be absurd enough to believe that any human being has the power to read the future, and. that your fate is to be determined upon the lines laid down by that abominable squaw, you must also be consistent and believe that if the completion of the prophecy was interrupted at that point, in the telling, it will also be interrupted at that point in the fulfillment.
"There, now! that's a sensible view to take of the matter, isn't it? At any rate, you may rest assured, my dear, that we—meaning, of course, your father, Hilary, myself, and the `Lamb,' who is willing to beg-gar himself, the dear old darling! if money has any power to get you out of this predicament—you may rest assured, I say, that we will not suffer you to h(:. hanged for a crime which you never committed. my
The Last Act of the Tragedy.-	305
dear ; so don't you worry over the result of your arrest for another moment.
"The end of that absurd `prophecy' has been reached —remember that; for the day after to-morrow the coroner's inquest is to be held, and by that time either the truth of this mysterious affair will be brought to light, or something will be discovered which will establish your innocence, and you will go scot-free, in spite of Miss Maude Thornhurst."
And with that happy assurance, this little human sunbeam left her and fluttered away to gladden other eyes and other heavy hearts.
Two days later the coroner's inquest was held, but i'ist.;ad of a complete vindication of the accused, the j iu-v —without even so much as suggesting "extenuating circumstances"—found a verdict against her, an-1 ere nightfall all Canada knew that June Lexboro had been remanded to stand trial at the January assizes for "willful and deliberate murder."
CHAPTER LIII.
THE CURTAIN FALLS.
Throughout the whole length and breadth of the Do-minion the story of the crime had long since spread, and when the verdict of the coroner's jury went out after it, there was universal consternation ; for John Drayton's fame as the richest man in all Canada served to put everybody in touch with the case and to make it one of almost national interest.
Those who knew June, and those who had merely met her, were loud in their protestations of her innocence, but those who knew her not were entirely in-different, while those who cherished an inborn grudge against capital and capitalists of all sorts were loud in their acclamations regarding the verdict, and full of the praise for "the good old laws of England, that respect no station, admit of no delay in the furtherance of justice, and only allow a convicted murderer to live over two Sundays after the verdict of `guilty' has been brought in."
So, under this ruling of "money's no object," old John Drayton found all his wealth of no avail to grease the grim machinery of , British law, and even Sir Hilary Chilton was powerless to effect any change in its course, when he appealed to the governor general.
So in heartsickness the days came and the days went, the long weeks linked themselves into weary months, the summer gave place to autumn, the autumn to win-ter, and January came round at last.
The Lexboro case, the third upon the calendar, was the topic of the hour, and when at length the day came for its beginning the courtroom was so densely packed that standing room was at a premium.
Pale, hollow-eyed. woe fully changed 1)y her months
The Curtain Falls.	30
of imprisonment, and looking but the ghost of her former self, the prisoner was led into the dock, and, with her father and Sir Hilary, and Miss Prudence and the Dalroys sitting as near as the law allowed, was exhibited to the jury, duly acquainted by the clerk with the full particulars of the crime with which she was charged, and, after answering, through her lawyers—for British law does not allow the defendant to testify in his or her own behalf—that she was "not guilty" as charged in the indictment, the trial at length began.
For three long, dismal, torturous days the poor,_ pale prisoner was kept there listening to the swearing in of the jury, the objections of her own counsel, and the objections of the prosecutor for the crown; then the case really opened and the struggle for her life began.
Hour by hour she listened to the testimony of the men whom Philip Lexboro had bidden to "the wedding feast" upon that awful night, again she heard the incidents of that never-to-be-forgotten time rehearsed, but with little semblance to thei?awful reality and less evidence of the murdered man's bestial conduct (for the men who testified were ashamed to admit how infamously they had lent themselves to their captain's base designs, and how miserably they had suffered drink to overcome their manhood, and (leaden their hearts and minds to the appeals of a helpless woman), and then, after all these had come and gone and been more or less roughly handled by the defense. there came a momentary pause, a momentary hush of expectancy and—Maude Thornhurst was called to the stand.
With a rush and a bound, she sprang toward it; her eves met June's eyes, her pale, malicious face actually blazed with malignant triumph, and then,
just	`11e \E; as S`.vo'l-11 11.1 '
"May it please your lordship," interposed June's principal counsel, "we claim that this woman is insane, ,.and therefore incompetent to testify."
"Insane, am I?" returned Maude, with a laugh. "Well, put me on the stand and see how insane I am, and how very sane your client was upon the night when Captain Lexboro was murdered."
"I object, your lordship," began again June's counsel, but his objection being overruled, Miss Thdrnhurst took the stand.
Silently and in horror June listened as this fearless perjuror swore her life away, breathlessly she drank in her lying testimony, and when at length the last vile word had been uttered :
"It is a lie !" she cried, springing to her feet despite the order of the court, and ignoring the astonished cries of all the spectators. "She did not see me fire the shot, because I never did, your lordship, and if she swears to that, she perjures herself before high Heaven. I am innocent, so help me God !"
In an instant there was a furore.
Those who believed in June began to cheer and applaud ; those who did not believe in her began to hiss; and those who believed in upholding the dignity of the crown began to expostulate and to add their cries to the authoritative command of "Order—order —order!"
But through it all, and over it all, there rang Miss Thornhurst's excited and splenetic voice, shrieking like a fiend:
"It is true! it is true ! I swear before Heaven that Philip Lexboro met his death at that woman's hands, and I saw her fire the fatal shot!"
"It is a lie!" rang forth again over the tumult.
But this time it was not June who spoke, for the voice which uttered those words,came from the rear
The Curtain Falls.	309
of the courtroom; and as they rang forth, all other sounds ceased and every eye was turned toward the doors which,•just then, had opened and closed with a clash behind this daring speaker.
"It is a lie !" reiterated that same voice.	"The
woman you accuse is not guilty, and I can prove it."
For one moment she stood there—this newcomer—like a figure of wax or an image of graven stone; then onward she came, with a queer, faltering step, until she advanced to where the light could fall upon her slim, poorly garbed figure and reveal her face—all pinched and drawn and pale as the ghastly face of one who lingered upon the threshold of death.
A dead silence had fallen now, but as she advanced into the light and turned her ghastly face toward the prisoners' dock, June Lexboro uttered a low cry of sudden recognition.
"You remember me then, signorina?" she said, turning her head and smiling queerly. "I am she who accosted you that night by the fountain, and who believed—nay, who hoped—that you were only a serving maid, and that your struggle with the gentleman in evening clothes might mean the end of my long search. You remember me, do you not?"
"Yes," responded June huskily, "yes, I remember you well. You came to me in the gardens of Dalroy House—upon the very night when I engaged myself to Captain Lexboro, and Oh, what do you mean —what can you mean, by the words which you tittered just now?"
"What I have said," responded the woman, in a queer, unnatural sort of voice. "You did not commit the crime of which you are accused, and I can prove it."
"You can't prove it—you can't, you can't !" shrieked Maude Thornhurst excitedly. "This is some
10	The C'nr'-a u s~~a11s.
trick of the defense, some Iie invited by Tune Lexboro's Ihwvers, for I saw the crime committed, and I accuse the woman whom you declare to he innocent. I saw her kill her husband—saw her level the pistol at his breast and fire, and in seeing that	-"
"In seeing that, did you see me?"
"No	 certainly not! I never saw you before, woman, and I know not who you are. Who are you? What are you, that you dare call my word a lie ?"
`;.Only a murderess !" she answered, "only a woman who has avenged her child, and through whose veins a subtle poison is now coursing—only a bloodstained and accursed creature, who, ere she pays the penalty of her vengeful deeds, has yet the strength to cry out against your perjuries, and to say before God and man: `Take me and have done with it, for I killed Philip Lexboro, and I would kill him again were the wretch here to face me in this, my dying hour!' "
CHAPTER LIV.
HOW IT ALL ENDED.
In a moment all the courtroom was in an uproar, and confusion of the wildest kind reigned in every quarter of it.
It was some moments before the excitement sub-sided, and even the judge was able to recover from the panic of surprise into which the woman's startling announcement had thrown them, but when at length order came out of chaos, and it was again possible for a single voice to be heard :
"Swear me !" cried out the stranger as she reached forth her trembling hands toward the judge. "Swear me quickly, your lordship, for a poison which will cheat all your British hangmen is now coursing through ni veins, and I wish to testify before it is too late. I am the assassin of Captain Philip Lexboro—I and not the woman you accuse—the woman who is his latest dupe. Swear me, I tell you, before it is too late for me to disclose all."
ITer request was not disregarded—particularly as it was but too evident that what she declared was true and that her death could only be a matter of a few minutes, and after having given her name as "Giuglia Vlazzeroni, and her birthplace as Palermo, Italy," she was allowed to testify thus
"I killed Captain Lexboro, and I would that I might kill him fifty times over, for he died too easily to atone for my misery or to pay for my Paola's sufferings. Good gentlemen, I cannot tell you all the details, for my time is short, and to escape your E itis?, justice I have taken an Italian poison whose work is ever swift and sure.
312	How it All Ended.
"So, then, to the point : I had but one child—a daughter, who was my hope and joy—and that child, my Paola, 'came home to me disgraced, and, in dying, told me that the author of her shame was one Inglese signor named Philip Lexboro. I laid her in her grave just a fortnight after she came back to me, but over the little mound which covered her desecrated clay I swore that I would kill that Philip Lexboro if it took all the rest of my life to keep my word!
"From Italy I tracked him to England; from England I traced him to Canada; but I was not sure of my man until after he had married the Signorina Drayton, and had borne her away--to Lachine. I followed him close and fast; I tracked him to the end of his journey, to the house to which he conducted his bride—then I waited for hours, pondering over the situation, and wondering how I was to wipe out my score against the man who had worked her ruin and The death of my beautiful Paola, and while I waited, trouble came to the bride whom he had so lately married.
"-What need to tell you of that trouble, since the signora herself has already told it in words that ring with truth ? He threatened her—that beast whom she had married—threatened her with a fate as horrible as shame itself, and while all his comrades laughed and jeered at the poor bride's helplessness—aye, and even that shameless creature on the stand yonder mocked at her misery and laughed at her despair—she sprang to where one of Captain Lexboro's wretched allies had left a revolver lying upon a table that was littered with wine bottles, and after tremblingly holding it out in defense of "herself and threatening to kill any man who dared to follow her, dashed through the window and wildly endeavored to escape. She was not quick enough to do that, and not courageous
How it All Ended.

enough to carry out her threat, for as she sprang Rthrough that window and glancing backward perceived ' her husband following her, she gave one cry of terror, and the pistol she held dropped from her nerveless hand. In another moment Captain Lexboro was at her side, and then—then as the pistol was within my grasp, I stretched forth my hand, grabbed the weapon, fired it quickly and killed him as he deserved!"
"It is a lie !" shrieked Maude Thornhurst wildly.
"No, I am speaking the truth!" responded Ciuglia i\Iazzeroni as she staggered and caught hold of the witness box. "Just God! the end is here, and I must soon face Thee, and in Thy blessed name, I swear it is the truth !"
Then with a sudden backward lurch she dropped over, and writhing in her death agony, moaned and wailed—but spoke no other word until she died.
"Liar, liar !" shrieked Maude Thornhurst, as she leaned over and shook her clenched hands at her. "Liar, you have cheated me ; liar, you have balked my revenge, but still—aye, still and still and still, Philip clear—yes, that's the word—still we will be happy, still we will be married, still we will escape, June Drayton, and still we will fly to the uttermost end of the earth, where there is bliss, Philip, bliss—bliss !"
And with that final word, there rung forth from her lips a peal of maniacal laughter, as she (lashed out of the witness box, and threw herself at her mother's feet with screams and shrieks of senseless merriment.
The shock begun by Philip Lexboro's tragical death had been finished by the knowledge that her revenge was thwarted, and her plot against June Drayton had at length resulted in naught, and she was now a hope-less, raving maniac.
"My love, you are vindicated !" cried out Sir Hilary as he sprang to June's side, and, scorning all the ma..
314Iow it All Ended.

jesty of all the laws in Christendom, leaped into the prisoners' dock and caught her to his bosom. "Oh,' love—oh, life! you have been purified by suffering, redeemed by fire, and you are mine at last, sweet, mine at last and mine forevermore !"
"Yes, for vermore !!" she answered with a sob; and then, like a tired child, she raised her arms, wound them about his neck, and, with a smile of infinite sweetness, fainted on his bosom.
That June in time married Sir Hilary—and in marrying him was as happy as the day is long—I suppose I need not record, since you must have known it fromthe very first.
Shortly after their union they set sail for "Merrie England" to take up their abode at Chilton Towers. and to that `blessed bourne," not only old John Dray-tort and good Aunt Prue, but the Honorable Mr. and Mrs. Dalroy soon followed them, and after that "all ,went merry as a marriage bell."
A wild and hopeless maniac, Maude Thornhurst raved for many years in her padded cell ere death at last put an end to her sufferings, and throughout all those years her mother stood by her with a devotion worthv of a better object, and out of the money furnished her by old John Drayton, kept the lunatic sup-plied until her latest hour with every luxury that wealth could give or devoted love suggest.
After the death of her daughter, Lady Valencia re-turned, in time, to London, and there--still supplied by her husband's money—established herself in' Belgravia Square and (being as powerless to change her nature as a leopard is to change his spots) again entered the lists of the "subdued nobility" and became the queen of that sort of aristocracy which has a large opinion of itself and, despite a small prestige in court circles, an overweening idea of its own importance.
From some of these, her ladyship often hears the remark :
"By the way, Lady Valencia, aren't you related to the reigning belle, Lady June Chilton, whose beauty is so famous throughout the kingdom at present? Seems to me that I have heard that you are grand-mother, or something of that sort, to Lady Chilton's two little boys and something of a relation to her ladyship herself."
And to this Lady Valencia has always and invariably the same answer:
"I don't know Lady Chilton, and her `.boys' I have never seen. They are not people of my class, and I don't even pretend to know persons who are beneath me."
But, as all the rest of the world does know Lady June Chilton, and as she is the belle of the day, and the happiest woman alive, it doesn't matter whether so small a personage as Lady Valencia recognizes her or not.
TIIE END.

The NEw EAGLE SERIES will next contain a fascinating tale of romantic love in the Philippines, by Laura Jean Libbey, under the title of "Sweet Kitty Clover." No, 1203.
Rudyard Kipling
Robert Louis Stevenson
A. Conan Doyle
These three names are known to every reader, but does every reader know that some of these authors' best works may be had in the Select Library at 15 cents the copy.
In these days when the national horn of plenty is overflowing we are very apt to regard any-thing that does not cost much money as hardly worth while, but so far as literature is concerned the Select Library proves that this is a fallacy.
It offers lots of treasures for very little. A study of its list of titles will prove this.
STREET & SMITH CORPORATION 79 Seventh Avenue	New York City
