<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
This scan appears to be of good quality - the contrast is decent and there isn't too much overt skewing of the text - but it did not OCR very well, and even the pages with relatively good confidence indexes were slightly garbled.

poor OCR sections:
pages 13 - 46 are, for the most part, poor. There are a few relatively good pages in this section, including 16, 22,39 and 41.

pages 180 and 181, you can see the text on the other side of the page behind the surface text.

between pages 189 and 227, and 289 to the end, there are scattered pages that did not OCR well - the text from the reverse page seems to have bled through a bit.

<pb n="13"/>
CHAPTER        I.
TE ADVANCE GUARD.
S4t"i early spring of 1847 a body of armed men were
on the west bank of the Missouri River. It was
b Missouri of to-day, spanned by railroad bridges,
styeaers, its shores bordered with fertile farms,
it?-        w cith cides and villages, but the Missouri-of
_!-  s|        .agot. wending its tortuous and solitary
bltEsU that echoed to the howl' of the
t. lbmiispuni dreis of the pio-
: _'il'*dibh/ tihe bucklskn suits adopted by
'               An-'i" *'Bsesides the rifles in their hands,
Mtl    .l ttEa*l &d  company carried small arms in their
tut, ,osad to a naa theirfaces expressed a grim and fierce
.IW etin'artion.
''VieVwitg them thus, as they stood there in the early
oatriug, the solitary bluffs of the Missouri on their right,
tieborudless, silent prairie on their left, the spectator, had
:here baen one to note this extraordinary group, would
^Nt carried the picture away in his memory as that of a
tband of outlaws about to start on some desperate errand,
|with but faint chances that so many as half their number
*ould ever return.
'Still, there were accessories to the picture which forbade
hq supposition that they were ordinary brigands, bound on
expedition of robbery and murder.
'A fewrods distant about fifty wagons were ranged, some
1iled with supplies for a long journey, others load-



<pb n="14"/>
14     THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
ed with farming implements and sacks of grain, and near
these wagons more than three hundred horses and mules
were picketed.
*The men, about a hundred and.fifty in number, were
leaning on their rifles and listening to one of the band, who
was evidently their leader.
He stood on a little hillock, a few feet above his auditors,
.wlomhis fiery wbrdt held spell-bound. - He was' in the
frimw of life, 6f medium stature, but powerfully built, and
''irihi bore the wabtp of an irhi;Owill to which all must
bi.d,I'Add( that ibteiibility af purpose which annihilates
il obs   est;. 'tHis. deepset eyes told of greed, both of
money. and power, ;s. plainly as the square mouth and
htavy jaws revealed, the savage in his nature, at once en-
sual and cruel                      :    . ' -  .'
He talked' rapidly, and his diction was thatof a mia of
the people-unpolished, uncultured, and ignorant' of ean
the.alphabt of such- earning as ib garnered in' books; save
ich as he might glean from the-Scriptures; but his rude
*.,ld:fiit' eloquence, swayed his listeners as a northern
gale bends the pines, and when from time .to time he ex-
doaimed;' You who are with me, raise .your right hands,"
all haidd; were uplifted simultank usly; as thbugh some
secretspting moved the whole company like one'man.
* Pointing -eastward, he denounced in scathtnglafguage
the .rtion whose frontier settlements lay beyoiadthe river,
and invoked upon the people the curse of famine and pes-
·tileice, of fire and sword.    :
A deep " Amen" from all his listeners answered him.
Theaf stretching out his hand toward. the West, 'he ex-
claimed,'                    *
" Yonder, a thousand miles beyond 'the borders of this
accursed people, lies the land that is. given to us for an
inheritance, and there we will build cities, and p'ant vine-



<pb n="15"/>
SF: '7rft ADVANCE GUARD.                      15
hef-in peace,! while the vials. of wrath are
ift upon the nations of the earth."
'tb talk in this strain for a few minutes
4Geh jlifting his hands, pronounced a benedic-
tbhd that had echoed his curses. The
.Vi reanty. a preliminary of the real busi,
:;-*'wi.ch- now began in earnest.
and attached to the wagons; sin-
- !    -aibidas and ammunition looked to, and
~     .      ~~.'i't ;rdter, the men being divided into
i   th9ee again into squads of tens,
_ -       t. ,j, whmn the orders of the chief
j^  t S'ke tinie the sun was wel
5HA'e -the     -their oute ; but
_W      i in -their leader,
_  *      l   1~k-d~4ter. tirim o ~ bregard them-
'of Heaven, sustained
_~ ~t'...bi-,ti the imajority of the
b.+ttk,  w*hose presence civiliza-
'.nd to them the wilderness oflered
-_eB     t aIf tW  4tohe least of the offences
M an, if not. all of those thus out-
Se4&rkr trimes of bigamy, trea-
tda;f ei joieers of the border,
i, etcie-*and punishing glaring out-
.*Silrfrtthem from their midst.
_imatiitl attempt to cover or palliate
_ * 8 * /'-' a country where 'the courts
£.-ua rile, any criminal may be
4   ro the established forms of
t*Iwinto their own hands are inex-



<pb n="16"/>
i6   -THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
cusable-and yet the peculiar circumstances attending the
expulsion of this band of outlaws from the community on
which they had preyed make one hesitate to condemn with-
out reserve those who drove them out.
The company leaving the banks of the Missouri this
morning had no fixed destination. They were scouts
whose business it was to discover and-take possession of
some tract of land that would furnish a refuge for them-
selves and those whom they represented, and a home for
their families. A few of them may have believed that their
chief would be divinely guided to the spot that Heaven had
set apart for them-some Promised Land, flowing with
milk and honey-but the greater number relied on the
sagacity of their leader, and on a certain trapper and plains-
man in their ranks who knew the country.
The'first month brought them no hardships. The well-
watered plains of Nebraska afforded abundant pasture for
their animals, and favorable camping-grounds for the train.
There were no hostile demonstrations on the part of the
Inmnss. Game abounded, and good'rifles, in the hands
of ifa who knew how to use them, kept the company sup-
plied with meat.
They reached the crossing of the Platte in advande of
the June freshets, and were therefore able to ford the
stream without serious difficulty.  The river, not more
than three fourths of a mile wide at the crossing, and but
little more than two feet in depth at this season of the year,
is yet a formidable stream to ford, for two reasons. It
runs with extraordinary swiftness, and the fine white sand
in the bottom, packed hard by the action of the water,
forms a thin crust over the treacherous. depths beneath-
shifting, dangerous quicksands, in which the wheels of the
loaded wagons sink and cannot be withdrawn. Footmen
and horsemen may cross without danger, but if the loaded



<pb n="17"/>
TI'   B ADVANCE GUARD.                t7
allowed for any reason to halt, the wheels break
the thin crust of the river-bottom, and the wagon
'* ink-continues to sink until, in a little while,
can extricate it.
present company there were plasmsmes familiar
' e crossing, and the method dictated by their experit
was adopted. The teams were unhitched from all
ten of the wagons. To each one of these wagons foir
were attached, and a spot previously tested by the
n was selected for crossing. The teams entered
'jJf    later in single file, the drivers walking on the upper
,~    with a horseman for each team riding the stream be-
-F-~j  All the speed that the swiftness of the current would
I 'i~r was now made, to avoid the quicksands, and when
t*.L.tast of the ten wagons was safe on the opposite bank
'-1   eams were unhitched 'and driven back to aid in bring-
N-the other wagons across.
...4onducted in this. manner, thefording of the stream occu,
·;d itearly the whole of two days.
'- !-The teams attached to one of the last wagons at the
t srossing becoming unmanageable in the middle of the cur-
jHhtt, the driver, who walked beside them,. was thrown
t ;;mon, and as he rose to his feet the blood that trickled
u-fwm a wound above the temple mingled with the stream,
-Wias it a foreshadowing of the day, not many years later,
When, tracked and followed by his" brethren" tothis same
@.t er, his life-blood should stain its waters, and the treach-
Littt sands beneath become his grave ?
i' nhen the train resumed its march, aftercamping for the
[night on the bank of the river, the one man in the somr
*ywhoe trapping expeditions had led him into Mhe re-
ons beyond, was made their guide across the ast. ex-
se of rolling prairie stretching westward to the Rocky
.untains.         . ;



<pb n="18"/>
8       THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
No pilla of cloud by day or pillar of fire by night was
vouchsafed to lead them; but, as before stated,. the ma-
jity of this band of scouts were men uninfluenced by
fanaticism, or any other motive beyond that of placing a
safeditance between themselves and civilization, and the
bukrin-clad trapper who guided them served their pur-
pme quite s well as an angel going before them to point
osethe l way.'
* Six years before the time of which we write, emigrant 
trais-had begun to cross these prairies, and the mountain
goins beyod, on their way to the coast, and four years
previous to the date of the present exploring expedition the
regular annual overland emigration to Oregon and Cali-
fornia began, so that a trail which could be easily followed
was already marked out,* and the trapper, who had accom-
paied such trains more than once, was able to assist the
leader of the band by suggesting the principal features of
the "vision" which was to decide the company in their
choice of a location. It was the first of June when they
rehcbed the South Pass, a park or mountain valley many
thousand feet above the level of the sea. Here, within
three hundred yards of .each other, are two springs, the
one the source of a little creek that, flowing eastward, joins
itself to streams that become tributary to the Missouri,
finding thence an outlet by way of the Mississippi to the
Gulf of Mexico; the other, the head-waters of a rivulet
that widens and deepens as the snows continue to melt
and other rivulets join it, until it becomes a river, and its
waters, by many and devious channelsat length reach and
mingle with the Pacific.
In these springs the leader of the band found an omen
of the destiny of himself and his people.
* See Appendix, Note A, page 328.



<pb n="19"/>
jPVANCA      GUARD.             '9
M,4w leave the East forever-leave it
"dolow the waters of this stream,
.ba.West. There .is our inherit-
'Wll set up a kingdom that shall yet de-
_a        'a.l'the -nations and kingdoms of
:  n, and woe to the man or the
_it hrn us.  We will never be
.niluefsrth it b/saOgs to us to
: eempaey these words were a
To the others they
4.Io  of.. their leader,
pan   of   ct, et gohasv-
at'a plan so
cmtsrtained by
of that leader,
e a~led, and ask
sre- -than a qarter of..
th- t r.ak made excellent time.
it!at coQld be desired; game
in pood condition, and as it
o Mlthers was no scarcity of water
. _},~ ,the -route the Indians
b    yut ,,   the sagacious man-
*       mk~ Vwa a avoided.
Ja ,Juley when they entered the
'.604 sCeea River.   Here the main
s. ,m "j    :aadozen picked men, guided
were sent out to prospect
-    _ -~  m the advantages of water and a
~~~~~~of          I



<pb n="20"/>
to     THE FATE OF MADAME LA .TOUR.
Aft* a:few days' absence the scouts returned with good
ewa .They had found the very spot which their leader
natS    them he had seen in a vision-the site of the future
oli-o m. 
N Ndtle was now to be lost. On the very day that the
ebuts -returned the train was again- put in marching
iafer, and on  e twenty-fourth ot the same month the
*tde o'opan' entered the Promised Land through a wide
pass leading by a gentle descent into the valley.
·* ';f.eyiwn  l ut, egh tlui pass ii the mwning, and be-
A*giWflItheyhad pitched their camp, taken formal
iabtjti 'of tim oquntry, and. commenced breaking the
sofUbrthe autuma crops:that hy proposed to put in.
The valley was watered by a score of mountain streams,
wdti vwre fed by the melting snows. The soil was eep
ed: rich, needing only irrigation to make it immensely pro-
dutite, ahd with. a promptness and energy which prom.
ised well for heir future asess, a dam was-bilt at once,
Mdi dittes tugs soon -as the seed vas-put in.
: lTh  as. tfl thduand miles or moe which they had
traveled must be retraced before winter set in, the main
M     hSlrty prepard for their homeward jouftey, leaving
·tiMMt tNtyof theirwrnmber to hold possession of the coun-
t; A   do; What they could toward building houses for the
'hhalies that *ere to come on the next year.
Thete was no timber for building purposes nearer than
the talons, and to these the roads had yet to be made;
but the settlers, profiting by Ihe experence of their Mexi-
ca nweighborf, made use of an excellen building material
thalt they fomt  ready to thet, hands.' In many places near
theS'le of t* 4 :eitye' their leader ha laid out, there were
Ikaatfaets:t of delayused for makrldg dWb6ss or suadried
blrti.is '.Thee bicks were easily molded, nd; :in that
climate, soon dry enough for use; and in the abeace'of



<pb n="21"/>
_ p ADVANCE GCUARD.          21
maortar was made by mixing sand with
pits, and in a little while, to the sur-
who came down from his tepee in the
nf new arrivals, the walls of a dozen
r-~  %":ct6isistence under the busy
pioneers were experiencing all
-tma~. p,~atjqans: qver the plains
_. Th Igrass. that made
)jV, t9. wbhered! mauy of
* thfj thieirpjourpey
* :t'btem Wree
_iwlty on.their
w. na, smtole
tblossof a
._-*t' -&pin, on the
4_ri^ .!L ¼
_4 1; ·t- 4
tt'b4) 'A'
_eX 451 ?&n' 
* . 1~fi 8:i .  s
S-N~tv,! 



<pb n="22"/>
CHAPTER II.
MADAME LA TOUR
'ltaMo has come again in the valley of the Missouri.
Tihe'*t treeles prairies on the western shore are a ten-
rlerfteen. · As far as the eye can reach, north, south, and
*itt,-the rassy sea extends until it meets and blends with
tklkiie of the clear May skies.
About a mile west of the bluff, and on the north bank of
a small stream that empties into the river, there is a settle-
ment which, from the nature of the buildings and the char-
acter of the surroundings, is evidently temporary, being
little more, in fact, thin the camp of a people who for
years have had no certain dielling-plaee. -There are a
large number of rude log-cabins, bearing every mark of
the haste with which they were constructed, and of the
indifference with which their owners regard them, The
logs, obtained from the cottonwood grove on the river-bot-
tom, a little to the north, are still incased in their native
bark, and the buildings are roofed with poles and brush,
held down and made water-tight by a coating of earth. The
circle of cabins is interspersed with tents, and in the rear
of each one stands a covered wagon, its white top visible
above the low roof, so that at a little distance the whole
settlement presents the appearance of one of those canvas
towns which, a few years later, sprang up everywhere
throughout the West in the wake of miners and railroads.
The cattle belonging to the encampment are feeding on the
prairie beyond in the care of the herders, but, with the ex-
ception of the men thus engaged, the whole population of



<pb n="23"/>
to the band of scouts
the herbt of -the desert a
This prophecy he re.
Ithousaed souls, men,
are to break camp
., o regard their
'  q. whim to the
oan the
- *liv    wh   , a only be 
_..  ~ .'t ben  { lief  in
~ _ W-   re them.
mnerit that title, are
.i. ~. -of women in the
because their husbands
.l   is about to conduct
a    e other women-
le.der and his sated
so Openly in a civil-
are children, to
_llra# presets itself in the
d_ babes in arms, happy
_of up into the unclouded
__                                          ferbsad



<pb n="24"/>
a4     THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
·t"l4heF sp.keaoctoncluded his addrebs, the ' Amens"
-rrhll;axft#an   nd general than when he spoke to the
band of picked men who were to go before the people and
pvtlparet ieat . Many of the present company were
Snry    eWtie under a' despotism  which .they foresaw
OM hbem.t absolute, when the proposed colony should
bde WdNied:a t husand miles from civilization; but what
tM tbtdey    . - Some of them were already outlawed by
ti'P ow'sQKl    thmrs had surrendered all their posses-
SA iM0ththdsd    s of those who controlled the organiza-
tion, and even among the diSatemed the feeling prevailed
t   ftithi y 'trddiwv gone too far to retreat
'Aler (Be assembly :brke up, the speaker, disengaging
himself from those who pressed around him with eager
questio,: walked toward the open door of one of the 
cabins, which, while it differed in no Wise from the others
twardly, within was comfortably and in some respects
evenre 4 riously furnished.
A tomimeu carpet hid the rough floor, a silken coverlet
was qPdd o     ter the bedthat ecupied one corner, and the
'bi*cbHaii h&ith.e '   romom were of costly make and
AtteMi , thotgh bearing unmistakable marks of having
been brfh tto their present destination under difficulties.
Tb; ' tboly-eoupant of the place was a lady, still in the
prte of Hfe, and with a facerwhose beauty must once have
been of no common order, though stamped now with the
inefaceable marks of yearsof suffering. Her dress, like
the furniture of her room, was strangely out of keeping
with her rude surroundings.
She was in deep mourning. A robe of soft cashmere
trimmed with heavy folds of crape trailed on the carpet as
she paced the floor with slow steps.
A widow's cap covered the heavy coils of hair, once jet
black, but now thickly sprinkled with silver.
*i]



<pb n="25"/>
Wlti*liiu bit colorless as tough
_y;/^^^^.Bm^and thin and worn, as though with
perhaps both. The eyes,
4 t      cat down and halt hidden
*   ,theoffspringof aspirit
_ . w.BInjlad both her face and her
l _^mlKMKstt.'l an4rised for a moment the
t iseloas that, once roused,
-t -her door, she in-
eho.her sign of being
_ ~brnmd~ It was not
t'it b! t mastering
on him,
_;tister  La Tour.
...thi..s 'l'b. o'she was known in
. -her dark eyes full upon
_l     he saiied for an instant;
slyhe added,
_ : few. wonts to you in private, and by
come in ;' stepping across the threshold
Idhsg the door after him.
_teith er answered nor turned her head.
; ~ .? i ; ,!>tpmee the floor with 56w stepS   her eyes
'"bidden guest seated himself in.the nearest chair,
ng an effort to appear unconscious of her man.
he again :
Latr La Tour,.we start at an early hour in the! mornm
tAl our arrangements are made,;and- every one ex-
.ourself is ready. You are not going to rebel against



<pb n="26"/>
26     THE FATE OF MADA ME LA TOO. R.
th  Spirit of the Lord, and at the last hour refuse to go
with u?"
l spite of his assumed ease, there was an undercurrent
oftauiety in the tone in which he put the last question.
The woman stopped suddenly in her walk and faced him.
4 Tell me fiat," she said sharply and sternly, "what
yo have done with my daughter."
" Yeur daughter is in good hands," was the reply. " I
M^ jayseff be responsible for her safety."
"You r
It .would be impossible to describe the concentrated hate
.ad scorn in her voice as she spoke. this single word. She
crossed the room again once or twice, then, pausing before
him; changed her tone.
"Only give me back my child," she said, clasping her
hands imploringly, " and you may keep all else that you
have taken. Will not my money satisfy you-all of it?
Why should you rob me of my daughter ? What have I
ever done to deserve it '?
The man's deep4set eyes flashed, and his cruel mouth
clmd;.firmly. For some moments he regarded the ago-
ulsed face, the suppliat attitude.of the proud woman be-
.in, him, with savage satisfaction.' When he spoke again,
it ws to say, in his coldest tones,
" Whether you ever see your daughter again or not de-
pends entirely upon yourself.. She is going with us, though
not in this company, and if you give over your sinful oppo-
sition to what the Lord has revealed, and join the train to-
morrow, you will meet her in the place that He has given
to us for an inheritance. As for your money"-here he
dropped the hypocritical cant which he knew was thrown
away upon his listener-" your offer is liberal, very, consid-
ering that I have got it already, and that you have nothing
to show for it."
/



<pb n="27"/>
ICA roUR.              27
reply. Her fae settled Into
the entrance of her una
ne ced  her walk across
of him. He sat a few
/ opened the door and
liotebb evening."
t 't:tea door of the next
_iapped     and, glancing
.'on, Sister La
neer be right
bespoke.
tedy.
sice her
tr* Inquired
_woman.
answered, hesitat-
afugh to-ascertain who
fwa considerable talk at
p peared to convey a meaning
lderstood, for she raised both
S Merrit," and then relapsed into
it is, Sister Merrit," interposed the
:ad not yet spoken, " I think she sees
b er boys going off with that Gentile
thad' about anything else."
: "Siter 'Prdy," answered Sister Merrit
-abe's glad to have her boys get away. If they



<pb n="28"/>
s8    ·THE FRt4'E OF MADAME LA TOUR. 
altr¶t joawdthe..traip she would have sent them blck '
h-sBo   tj8Canadt. and she'd be on her way there herself 
Mwtrf itwasal'4for.this trouble about Louise."
r M       itLouise ?' asked the talt woman.
;;. IlQat yeo knmow ? I thought you did, or I wouldn't
have said anything. Louise was her oldest daughter, and
a protud, .; stmong piece she was too; but 4 great
buaenl as they sy her mother used to be in her young
a    ,fIMn; A  su   La Teur died his widow was obliged  :
to go to St. Louis on business, and while she was away
LCduBibamdedi,.i Briuer JsepWp's fmaily.  When the
M* wter eme blwka   ogt it 'into her head somehow that
tm waemsaometi I-Mwrg; but the Prophet was kiled
that same month,:'ad we all had too many troubles of
our own to think much about Sister La Tour's sairs.
For the nest two years, and until we 4eft Naavooq the
girl stayed with her mother, and seemed somehow greatly
changed. She was only fifteen when her fathr died, and
not muc more than seventeen when I saw her last; but
itasmmed-   if she had grown old in two years.  Her
r was. more wrapped up in her than ever, and would
hauly allow her out of her sight a moment but when we
left Nauvoo (Sister Purdy can tell you what a time we had
rossiw g the river on the ice, and what hardships we went
through .fterwa), a good many families were separated
for a while on account of the confusion and trouble.
Among the rest, Sister La Tour and her daughter were
parted accidentally, and," lowering her voice to a whisper,
" she as never see the girlfrs  tdt.day t to this  but
she. has got it into her head that Brother Brigham has her
hid away somewhere, and that's why she never speaim to
him if she can help it." 
" But, Sister Merrit," interrupted Siter Purdymaniously,
"you.know the poor woman is out of her mind." 



<pb n="29"/>
-UiVr~t.            29
rbSodblet' Sister Mer.
to drive a mother
'many queer things
lnown bd'e I left VerI
't be hdre."a
iistadue finished her
omof the others, -
a.u -one of this
iit hearing dis-
y   ivil " Good-
wowman who
a   in a low
but
We
m orning it's
.tagain. I
tl turn back,
'*tMh heads of the
we start on this journey
asewred, "I should
Mmi" d you persuade
4f4o&md&ie a reso-
rn shrwaw confronted
iss swof.
u t it," sheuaid evasively
dridopped, and
juft .bwas -walking
'4iluding coanstactad,



<pb n="30"/>
30     THE FATE OF MADA ME LA TOUR.
ilbs the ethers, of logs, but larger than any of them, and
dividd into several rooms. His face expressed the con-
sciousness of a hard-won victory, and as he passed out of 
tbjie.*eag of the women to whom he had spoken, he said
abud to: himsef, 
"She will go.'-'
: Thefront door of his own house was open, and within a
,.pkl4ooking woman was busily engaged in packing.
4'., passed her without speaking, and knocked at an
imer door. It was opened by a tall; handsome,.well-
drmmed woman, whose face indicated in a marked degree
the same traits which his own looks revealed-pride, am-
bition, and uncdnqueable self-will.
This woman, who had forsaken husband and children,
and thrown position and reputation to the winds for his
sake, had meant to rule the man who ruled all others: but
while she was conscious thatshe had failed in this, she was
wise enough to make the most of his confidence, and of
the degree of influence she pesessed.
Ashe closed the door behind him, she asked, with evi-
dentianxiety,.
"Haveyou succeeded ?"' 
" I have," was the answer. "She will go with us to-
morrow, and, what is of more consequence, her money and
her family go. I have no wish to see her return to Canada
to spread an evil report; but still she will always make
trouble, and we could have spared her better than we can
spare the children or the property."
"What do you want with the children ?" she asked,
eying him keenly.
"What does any one want with children ?" was the re-
joinder. " How could the kingdom be built up without
thei ? Philip is a likely boy, who will be a man in three
or four years ; and, boy as he is, he would cut off his right



<pb n="31"/>
;i'TOUR,.              3
gl wll be women by the
i ..-have their mother's
act her temper."
a study as she pro-
you manage to get
ughte :in Zion, but
*i     an swer, but her
'iWe used to think
AMan y of us
_2tl woman
?- T t how
ugh to
bad the
~aot to be
ae tany risks."
--succession of
shifted upon
g was a-busy
d, tents taken
I   aset all the prep.
c*nmepbeed. Their
,with them, were
- p*J ted outside, so
_a th. .lmorning.
~, oensisting of a boy of
.,.and a couple of
ad by. the time



<pb n="32"/>
b3     THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR. .
drkhiess settled down on the encampment nothing :
tietisdin their house except the bed, which the m
occupied. ot this last night with her little girls; Pt
te: sea, slept in the ambulance in which they were
travl, ad.the servants, Pierre Roche and Joan his 
who had come with the La Tours from their old home
Qjeboe, kept guard over the goods in the wagons. 
Biedre follewing the fortunes of the emigrants any
ds, it becomes necessary that we should give a brief 
wryef this faily, whose members will occupy a promie
place in the present narrative. 
Francis La TmOr was a descendant of one of the old
French families who were among the founders of Quebe
and for nearly two hundred years there never lacked 
of his name and blood to fill the honorable place which h
ancestors had made for themselves. The family were
Catholics, and in his youth Francis, at that time their only
male represetative, was strongly inclined to a monastid
life; but the beauty of a neighbor's daughter won him
from his resolves, and after his marriage, as sometimes
liappos, he passed' from one extreme to the other; and
whereas he had begun by yearning for a monk's cell he
.eNa4d by 'asting off the faith of his fathers altogether.
The consequence was that a coldness grew up between
himself and his old friends, and he decided at length ta
seek .a home elsewhere. The point he selected was St:
Louis; and when he settled there he had already a family
of six children, three sons and three daughters, growing upa
around him. His children were bright, handsome, 
affectionate; his wifewas devoted to him ; he had every
good that wealth can bestow, and yet Francis La Tour wu
an unhappy man.
In casting off the faith in whicli he wad reared, he ha.l
bh no means cast off his refiiocs aspiratione, and his



<pb n="33"/>
_ .  an 1JMADAMe    LA TOUR.              33
*    hJIti~ of a man seeking rest and finding none in
'IH    .pajtiie when his mind was in this state which I
ptrieZd to describe. that the emissaries, sent out by the
_ caling themselves "Latter Day Saints," found
i a willing heawr. He was disquieted by doubts.:
.o.*rked bhim a certainty. He was tired of comparing
.lv claipns 9f the systems of religion that were taught
: they. would lead him at once to a living prophet,
pgh whom Divinity would speak directly to him. His.
wtas pmet.
..ttever faults these missionaries.may hav had, diffi-
{    and hesitation were not among them, and the cer-
2*M'  x .that they a, qle, the boldness tith which they
f.eand wthe #pmDe s. with whica they actedi had their
.effect 'Francis'La'Tour was amoig thelr earliest con-
r verts, and within six months after his baptism he removed
.to Nauvoo, and like one of old, sold all his possessions, and
:ilaid the price at the feet of those who did not display the
FAreast unwillingness to receive it.
i' Strangely enough, however, as soon as his property was
In the hands of the Church, his health began to fail, and he
i died after a short illness, leaving his widow, whose faith
- was by no means as strong as his own, to make the best
terms she could for the support of her children with those
who held her property in their hands.
The two older sons were, like their mother, only partially
convinced of the truth of the New Gospel; bat Louise, the
-oldest daughter, and Philip, the third son, shared their
father's faith, and looked up to the Prophet Joseph as
-almost divine. It is true that Philip was little more than a
child, but he was one of those who are religiously disposed
Wglmost from the cradle. Louise was differently constituted,
but her father was her idol, and anything that he believed



<pb n="34"/>
34     THE FA T     OF MADAME LA TOUR.
was sacret in her eyes. It was her own wish to board 
th family of the Prophet after her father's death, and 
,oithI  gave, a reluctant consent only when Louise urge
sa"Inal aigument,      . 
.i' "- father could speak, he would say that was the plac4
ic'ie."                         - .   :
'       he business which called Madame La Tour to St. Louik
.^'hned her nearly six months, and when she returned to6
4Wf.s tie ait wasrtife with whispers of strange doctrines. 
* 'Ttef indMt repulsive of which was thatof Celestial MaiL.
iqe; fqr it was in the State of Illinois, and as early as the
'ya.i,$ that thls'octtne bcamne one of the cardinal fea-
tuirs i  the teltgIon of the Saints of the Mormon Church',
and here is abundaint'eiidence to prove that the practice
antit edd 'the pioinulgation of the doctrine by half a donte
years at least.
; "''' '  .  ..
.      .                                 .        .-
-. 
f  ~' ;  .  .    · -  ' 
!;:'. 'i .'-. .    ..  ·             '
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.:.. 



<pb n="35"/>
IB?    CHAPTER III.
PiLGRIMAGE OF THE SAINTS.
'  ism TO-UR; like most persons reared. is the
ltitt ;had exalted ideas of tie saeredness of the
fi, ,awhein the report (only too well authest-
'i:to:h*r eats that the Prophet Joseph had taken
r of young girls as his spiritual wives, antd that b
fb4adl~h hla'tdy ntrie d  tad bee A' seated" to
irffibidJnld'iifoliuik-theo^^  pcef the
B~      fIlm& tot Wh or her h     -
I l fe..;' a.-lain^tet, Lf liolbtge anr Itnate of
.-'Shdi.'Sx tia'Kdltihe ' bnti, dt tiIhe d ash re-
ae, h Sd W   fsiet ct n4er'f tid hiad been e clued
bztrfl'b fddratiuha.i. Thib dmnfort, howeniW,
ta6hixateir herreturi,'the NPophet. Xaspexrted
J^af    Mafdid<rA 6Lta ) Wtas t bi W ab tot t   to eV
withlWtiMihflfi th&e pet pose otienounefit' %hh,
iywrSb^1Z*^s^   i-tatYp c   Whikh vasttidt'she
8'tl8fWSi6 id'\hishe -plehstd, 1eiut she coudM not
*y'lii^' 'iiid4ji rD- 'fealea"to.. hniind iuule,
tlfiiHiel ^ffi tiresseA*r, /dnti(dly.  -
W1664h tl     6 ie ieiCdtWfflfIk telstthing
Sl3^I'sizSj  -it &P6tfffiitis Htsri
mt^' lthk^fbttC eYfs6*nW;t ba trlg
whom she could never look in tIeb-fa.*!*tSW2 tr



<pb n="36"/>
36     THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
mother yielded so far as to consent to remain in Nau
until they could find some retreat far from all who 1
known them in the past.
The one thought of both was to hide forever from
world; and the mother, thrown back in her grief and 
<t .. spair upon the faith of her childhood, vowed herself to a li
of prayer and penance in the refuge that she hoped to fi
rS;At this time, however, all their property was in
*i     *fs ,tbe. eu!rit ies of the Church. Indeed, if ith
4. ,bwn for a smallianuy which Madawe La Tour 
w.4 ,    ,ber owa :,w$tgtt b*Y, wguld not haye had
mest    liv fom k ai yrto dqW.
.Mmars wer in, tis #tat.when the Prophet Joseph, .wi
severalp his cwunsesrs, was.arrested by the civil.authop
.ties od convlyed to.the prison, where he met.hii dept.*
the hands f anpinfuriated mob. I:is murder had the eec
.thatmiht have bee...antiSipate4, In theeyes'of his d
,voted foiowers it crqwnue him. with twe glories of marFa
,4dm  a:dd ..,,whol -peoReg, cetjng it, ,s thegage.of
open war between themselves and the world, saw the
,;pOm  yq. f A   r, ur, nio, amgog .*euslye, and .
*to*- forwad tpg4he etablishmnpt pf cPmonwealth
.tir o    . *.ae . afe dP e frpm,,theireneu  .  ,,
.   M.a::  ap   La.TXur toud. er em barraments gratly il
greaed by theqrpet' death and tlb copsquepclK  sta
enuped.. .Heronly home was amoVg hi followrs, andi
the eyes, qf the world. sh. W.a i4 fied .wivsem., je
daughter~ fefsd 4to rpturn to their former' liens,,apd he
property, was stjl bhld .by dte. t urnh4  Beuidds all 
the mnu   who fr, he  rst i d, . deteminedto scce
t t  dea4 Prophet, aqdwrho alreadyithjn sic mon4,hs o
hise 4h,.eerqied , A gter, pwer ovw    r & the npe *
.JpWph.hd #ttainqd tp in a lifetie, was we  be
,uaryql ting enemy... 
·~~~~~~~~~~~~~; 



<pb n="37"/>
PILGRIMAOE OF THE SAINTS             37
By means best known. to himself, he-had become the
trustee of her property, and conceiving the idea of securing
it as his own, proposed to make her his spiritual wife.
The unmeasured scorn and indignation with which she re-
pelled the first intimation of his purpose, he could neither
forget nor forgive, and while outwardly .patient and con-
siderate in his manner toward her, he only bided his time
to wreak on her such a vengeanceas she never dreamed of.
Long before they left Nauvoo, he began to prepare for
the accomplishment of his purpose by throwing out art-
fully-worded hints regarding her insanity.
He intrusted the abduction of her daughter to other
hands, upon his established principle of taking no personal
risks; but it was his'act nevertheless, and only-the begin-
ning of his vengeance.
At first, Louise's separation from her family was so
arranged as to appear accidental, and her mother hoped
to find her somewhere in the company of fugitives who were
making theirforced and perilousmareh to the next halting.
place chosen by their leaders.  It was not until they
reached the western bank of the Missouri that she learned
the truth. There, in an Indian country, where redress
was impossible, and where her enemy had already
strengthened himself by an alliance with the chiefs of the
savage tribes around them, he sought an interview with
her, and obtained it by the promise of giving her news of
Louise.
The substance of his communication, when made, was
that the spirit she had lately shown rendered her an unfit
guardian for her daughter, who besides being the child of
the Church, left in its care by her father, was the wife of
their martyred Prophet, and as such the especial charge of
his successor.
The bereaved mother did not break out into ravings, as



<pb n="38"/>
3& , THE PfATd S W MADAMS LA TQOUR.
W*tomaieoir hped she -wduld ; the blow was to-direct
and',?unating;. For a time all her faculties seemed 
nUWbed,:tndtd!uring -most of the years that followed. she:
appjned, aswe have seen her on the day preceding the'
depAlr!of the emigrants for their new home in the heartq
otidevl wildness. 
,,r.*. ,*'*'**    *      *      *      *»  .«.. ;.* 
·.t!'w , be jercevedihat Brigbam Young, in the charac- 
tiwe of stassortnhe murdered Prophet, assumed powers 
tMn tie fruwnerver prmuended to. hAlready, within less .
than a year fromtiO. 4einm.that his caim.t the office Z
whtd  be idmsibed *as confirmed by the people, he had
tenedutponthWetbrce     f;that abSbilte tenporal pOwezf
which aftrwavd irew to such propor     at hhe ftlt hitn-
self able to defy the Government of the United State. .. :
: And-yei not one of all those who have attempted to
analyte hs chaacter has gve  a satisfactory ,solutj tot,
th aseem of hitgraotordiary aseendency over his follow
eMlii A'manof the pecple Borm and nurtored in povet
.Ialy )able to read and .write, living in bbscurity 
hMne.mforty yearsof age, and moreover quite destitute, 
penbrwul M6rwagQt for nearly a quarter of a cetury.
hMlk the lives, iberty, and property of the Saints inb
hihat, aln eatstised in all things the powerof an aol
ati4nbspmible despot. At the time of which we wri
his complete 'domination over his followers (umbe
many thousands in both hemispheres) was shown byi
fact that, while e led in person the 'small company of
* See Appendi, Note B, page 33. .
t The presen writer hmsee BrIWhm Young in the bands of
'Federl asutoritdlPe ple, Qembling,  d ^quffie ng. all the a
extre phyidcal cowardice; and It 'i noitdious tat in tbezenitii
power he never ventured outside his own gate witout ai
i  d  .t                    '     ' 



<pb n="39"/>
PILGRIMAGC      OF THE SAINTS. 
thousand souls which composed the van of the moviag
army of pilgrims, the marching orders which he left behind
him.were obeyed to the letter by the Saints who were set-
tled in comfortable homes, as well as by those who tarried
in camps, and thenceforward the plains were white with
the wagons of the emigrants, who came at the call of their
leader from almost every country and clime, to gather
round the standard which he had set up in the wilderness
The first company, with which the Prophet traveled, was
provided with everything necessary for a speedy and pros,
perous journey, and as many of the men in this company
were already under the ban of the law for various offenses,
the Zion toward which they journeyed was to them a qity
of refuge, which it was desirable to.reach.as soon as pos-
sible.  .
There was another reason which operated stiU more
powerfully with their Prophet to urge forward -the com.
pany he led. Among the spiritual wives who bad beme
sealed to the Prophet Joseph 'were a number of married
women, whose husbands knew nothing of their relations to
him. In some cases the deceived husband was absent:on
a foreign mission, which would keep him from his family
four or five years. In other instances, though the, hbsband
continued to live with his wife, concealment had been so
successfully practiced that he did not even suspect her o
infidelity; but in either case a discovery which could not
fail to be attended with unpleasant consequences was to be
guarded against just now.*
Injured husbands had made much of the trouble which
resulted in the downfall of Nauvoo, and the Prophet Brig-
ham, who in the character of Joseph's successor claimed
and appropriated a number of his wives, mieant to estab.
See Appendix, Note C, page 33x.



<pb n="40"/>
40     THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
lihI dself 'securely in the mountain fastness which 
t6'be the seat of his kingdom, before the husbands of
i   eialUearned the truth. Then, being clothed with a
lui power, he would acknowledge them openly as
'iAVes, and make them members of his household. 
'*   .          « i  *  *  *  F    *     *
Madame La Tour felt keenly the degradation of beinj
ffted to make her journey with this company'of outlaws 
ala of women who had sacrificed truth, honor, and virtue
otl't-'iltar of their 'false faith; but there were otherS
·'i "r t'he emigrants whose sufferings in thlii'respect were 
fa igriater than her own.    '     "
Polygamy had been secretly practiced, not only by the 
leaders of the people; but by many of their followers, fol
six years past, and now, having left the farthest borders of 
civilization for a home in the wilderness, all disguises were
thrown 6ff, and women who had been wholly igiorant of
the Icceptance of polygamy by their husbands were con-
fronted with the " spiritual wives" (and insomne cases with
tliei children also), and requested to receiVethem' as mem-
b"b of the family ! 
'W tiauvoo, women who refused to accept what was
Jciion there  a' the spiritual wife doctrine could only be
subj'ectd to ecclesiastical penalties, and threatened with
eternl -punishment; but here,'in the heart of the Indian
country; with no human tribunal to which appeal could'be 
made, with no 'help at hand, the penalty which the Mor-
mon code prescribed * could be visited on offenders by
abandoning them to the tender mercies of savages and
wild beasts.
*If a woan refuse to give other wives to her bubaid it saH be:
lawful for him to take them without her consent, andshesallbe dsrey
dfOr hr disorbidM.--Rv LVATION ON CELESTIAL MARIIAG, .
Secdoa 5.



<pb n="41"/>
PILGRIMAGE OF THE SA'ZTS.'             41
There were many wives in that company who could tiot
otherwise have been brought to submit to the indignitims
heaped upon them; and among these there were some
who would have chosen to perish in the wilderness rather
than to continue their journey with the women who had
robbed them of their husbands; but these wives were also
mothers, many of them with babes at the breast, and for
their children's sake they endured all things.
It was for her child's sake that Madame La Thur had
undertaken her dreary pilgrimage across the plains, in the
company of those she despised and loathed. The word of
the Prophet alone could not have convinced her- that
Louise was to be taken to the place to which the emigrants
were bound; but what he had said to her was dnly a con-
firmation of what she had learned from other sources, and
she had now no reason to doubt that her daughter, if not
already in the mountains, would be carried there some
time during the present summer.
A mother's love triumphs over all difficulties, and per-
ceives no impossibilities. She did not ask herself how she
should rescue her child when found. Surely; after all her
sacrifices and sufferings, God would provide a way.
There was no one near her in whom she could confide,
or of whom she could ask counsel.   Her son Philip,
though affectionate and obedient to her, looked up to the
Prophet as a divine being, and the latter spoke truly when
he said that the boy would cut off his right hand for him.
Catherine, her second dapghter, inherited her mother's
spirit, and if she knew the truth about her sister, would
say or do some rash thing which would bring trouble
upon all of them; and Blanche, the youngest, was only a
child.
Her servants, it is true, were faithful and attached to
her; but they were stolid specimens of the Canadian peas-



<pb n="42"/>
4      THE FARTE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
aty. wbhoslow.wits were of little use in any mntti
sao.oosd with their daily tasks. 
:,She had- one friend in the company outside of her."'
family, bt.-ust now this friend had sore burdens otf
Ms to bne. p
, l.e, Woodford was the wife of a high priest w
pI: was-- ear the Prophet, and whose counsel anu&
had been of the greatest value. to the Saints in their.
Zdiicutesnd aeril.             , 
·* ,iHo wrasu-sam o rf are .thaordinary ability, and by f
*ntipir of *eire dJder in. birth and culture, but he 
.w of t.ef ew i*hor merited the, title of fanatic. He 
.alreo  acrifieed foriune, friends, and social position
the sake of his faith, and the event proved that he w
ready todo much more than this at the command of 't
.Prophet.                                        E
He' ad always been proud of his wife, who was
woman of fine mind and .noble presence, and apparentj
.tMheir  owriaowas in very. sense a happy one.
.,!They ad tbree boys, bright, handsome children,idoliz
tby both pa.rent, and so far as their friends knew, the
domestic sky.was without.a cloud; but in. reality, the sto
,wti&taly wrueckWd their home began to. gather as
J,bak as he days when the Prophet Joseph first whispes
4o those nearest him that he had a" revelation" commanj
ing the. Saints to take unto themselves many wives.
Woodford, from the fact that he occupied a position 
trust and confidence, was one of the first to hear of t
"revelation," and although the immediate effect of 
disclosure was to shake his faith in the new religion ah
.its Prophet, he was finally brought to accept the doctrin
of celestial marriage as true. Still his affection for
,wife, and perhaps also a little wholesome fear of coiSI
.qumces (for it must be remembered that at this time an



<pb n="43"/>
PILGRIMAGE OF. TLE SAINTS. -
ifr some years afterward he Saints were, to a dertaihn 
tent, amenable to the civil law), kept him from putting his
belief in practice.
It was not the will of the Prophet's successor, however,
that the " revelation" should remain a dead letter, and a
strong pressure was brought to bear upon the leading men
of the Church who had still some love for their wires, and
some regard for decency and good morals, to bring them
to practice its teachings.
Woodford was aong :the number of those who,, as a
test of their loyalty to the Churclh were nquired to lake
more wives, and in the end he consented to do so, and twro
young girls were. sealed to him oe the same d4yi ' or time
and eternity." 
The need of Wsmrqy, however, was still aeqoenited, and
for many montbI H. en Woodford knew nothiang of the
irreparable wrong done rher,
When her suspicions were at length awakened, her hus-
band was absent on a rissionary, tour, fron which he did
not return until the day when the first -cnpany;e f emi-
grants were preparing for their march acoss the plains.
Long before this the quick eye of the wifehad discerned
a change in him for which she was at a bss to account;
and now, while he was, if possible, more tender -in- his
manner toward her than ever before, she could not help
perceiving that he was ill at ease, and oppessed by some
unusual anxiety. 
Still, strangely enough, the fears which st: had begun to
entertain during her husband's absence didnot now trou-
ble her, and after they started on their jouney she did not
once suspect the true cause of his gloom aid restlessness, 
until the day came which he had determinel upon for end-
.ing all concealment. 
The emigrant train had now been abouta week on the



<pb n="44"/>
44     THE PA TE OP    MADANME LA TOUR.
road, and was a little more than a hundred miles west of
,the Misouri. It was near sundown, and they had camped
for the night, when Woodford entered the tent in which
his' wife sat, accompanied by two young women, one of
ther carrying a baby in her arms, and the other leading
byithlwband a child a little more than a year old. Helen
rose-with a feeling of surprise, but still with no premoni-
tiod;of what was coming, and at the same moment her
husband led forward the woman on'his right, saying,
"Thi is mywife Mary, and thisis our child."
'then taing immediately to the one on his left he
added,
" This is my wife Emily, and the little one in her arms
is our child."
Helen did not break out into reproaches, nor did she
scream or faint. She walked quickly and silently out of
the tent, and continued to walk until a little rise of ground
hid the camp from her sight. She wks following the
course of the stream that ran near the teit  Somewhere,
perhaps, it'might be deefi enough to afford her -a resting-
place under its waters. Still farther. She was now a mile
itrn camp, and yet the peaceful stream, creeping between
its grssy banks, was so shallow that she could touch the
bottom with her hand. She sat down beside it, and gazed
into the water.
"There are other ways," she said aloud, remembering
the pistol that was lying in a corner- of her trunk, with a
sense of disappointment that she had' not brought it.
How long she sat there she did not know. She was not
thinking; she was not even conscious for a' part of the time;
but at last her trance was broken by a voice that she knew
-the voice of her first-born.
"Mother ! mother !" the boy called, in accents of agony
and terror.



<pb n="45"/>
PILGRIMAGE OP THE SAINTS.             4S
He did ot see her. Darkness was settling down, and
the fringe of willows on the bank hid her from view.
"Mother ! mother ! where are you ? Oh, she is lost '"
and then sobs drowned his voice.
That sound called the mother back to life. She rose
slowly to her fet.  "Here, my son," she called, and in a
minute more the lad as clinging about her neck.
"Oh,- mother,. why did you goso far ?" he said through
his tearsb  " Edward, and I have hunted everywhere lo
you, and the .ndians are all around.. oor little Arthur is
alone in the tent crying for you. Come, mother ," and
leaning on her son, henceforth her only stay in life, Helen
retraced her steps. Half way to the .camp .they. met the
second boy sobbing and wringing his hands, while he can
tinued to aU  r..r her, .and little Arthur, her baby, had
cried himsdflsteleep in:tt tent.       . 
She lifted the little fellow, sobbing even in his slumber,
from the cold grdmd .on, whih. he lay. Of, what bad she
been thinking ? Was her life her own .to end when it be-
came unbearable ? .No. ;It belonged to her childien, and
for their sakes she would live it out.
She sat down on.the side of her bed, with her. boy in her
arms, and rested the litte sleepiSn  head on her bosom.
There was healipg inthe touch of the baby hands. There
was balm in -the sot breathing., lose toher.bruisedaad
bleeding heart.
|   The oldertbbysaoved.bout quietly. building the camp-
fre . and cooklig Ibe. jupper, .and when al was ready,
Robert, the.eldest, said, .   :'
,:.' Shall go and eall. fthlr?" 
;   No,". the. mother nplidwroaderiA at herself that she
S.uold speak so calmly; "le has somethig to attend to,
wil acome by and by.'. "        ' 
llt he did not ask the boys whether their father had sent



<pb n="46"/>
40     THE. I£ OP. MADAMS LA TOUR.
mn to March, for her; and It was well perps that she
knew nothing of iwhat passedI in the tent after she lekf
ribt,the.youniger of the two women, looking at her as
she passed out, was terrified by the expression of the
shitejst face.
, ,G Boihte;al erqicly., Brotherq ,   Woodfoid," she.siid ,
"she means to put hersel out of t.e way."         ;
rii ,ttcu .d d»ot hnow Helen," he answered. "This is a
tdayjry'ti  eB htmr rand she wants to -be alone for a little
ikiim/nS.tiieeeds to. ray for help to reorve you in the
right' tupiuit ;      ..            . .
'q Yoau: don't mean to say," elaimed Mary, "that she
knew.noqhing about usmntil: you briigt us right ih before
Iher;?"   .   ,                      *     · ."
. .rlbther Brigham tounsele- us to reval nothing ibefore
the appointed time," was the aswer, "n d [.I bha  obeyed
hL^'-        . *.· ,     .-  -.    -  *
:..       Ien i  .'muSt say; Bmther .Woodwi d' ; dont tronder
*tItFshti;wentot ionitheiwaN sab di/andfoviyl p part I
.lwindabthieastiaretLS raep tb colde he&b!ItIght ii.'d
known that she had neanti bein,!told a,!w.efbefoe.. it
f¶tMh'U a rsaititob    , Woodbid i sevdry, "ichr. -a-.
-gm     in;tefetrdeu to; thb ooueM , hat is gwea uis mit
ubeMming; r,-.  I .anqt...alwiit i aanytmrnbri ofmny
family."                                     ,, 
Mdary looked sbdued. It i-wahpAli thLt he stood
gaLteabyin-a&oHtfi:hr  bid, vhae accsidig ib the teaching
she had received held her salvation inbihis ; 'd :  - .
Both she and Emily wert'iil sn i inded ti, nppb&ated
girls,; *bse; cteduitr Lad ..bsaItMir adoi   'atnd/ they
weanset;so   , ito oadlwoaa iy' feehg;ias to Wishtofbrce
their presence upon the wrong*eWdtdotttra  dLif. i .;,t
had beh Wbodfoins putpoe trollowi the exarpl dothe



<pb n="47"/>
PILGRIMAGE OF THE SAINTS.             47
Prophet, and make them members of his household at
once; but they both refused to remain that night. They
had made the journey thus far with a relative, and they
announced their intention of returning to his camp for the
present. " We will give Sister Woodford a little time to
get reconciled; I know I shouldneed itia:her place," Emily
said, with a touch of genuine feeling.



<pb n="48"/>
·-  'CHAPTER IV.
'. -.-.      -YSTERY BEGINS.
THE days lengthened into weeks, and the weeks into
months, but the emigrant train had not yet come in sight
of the mountains that girt the Promised Land.
Incumbered as they were with women and children, with
flocks and herds, and with heavily-loaded wagons carrying
all manner of supplies for the new settlement, their prog-
ress was necessarily slow, but there was little sickness and
no .death in the company, and the savages who had
annoyed the scouts did not show any disposition to molest
the train-a fact which the devout believers in the new
gospel regarded as a sign that Heaven had interposed
specially in their behalf.
At length, late in August, and near the close of a long
day's march, dim, bluish masses began to appear upon the
western horizon. They might have. been taken for clouds,
so faint and far'away they looked; but as the sun sank
outof sightamong them, their jagged outlines were clearly
defined, and the light of the next morning showed plainly
what they were-the rocky peaks of the mountains about
whose base wound the trail followed by the scouts the year
before-the mountains which were to be as a wall between
the inheritance of the Saints and the world with which they
were at war.
About a dozen men, mounted on the best horses in the
train, were now dispatched in advance of the main body to
give notice to the colonists in the valley of the approach of
the emigrants. The difficulties of traveling with so many



<pb n="49"/>
MYSTERY BEGINS.                 49
incumbrances increased greatly as they enterecdthe mount-
ains, but the certainty that they would reach the end of
their journey in a few days at the farthest lightened all
burdens, and the whole company seemed cheered and in-
spired by the near prospect of rest from the fatigues of
their toilsome march.
It was the first of September when the train reached
Emigration Cation, for so the pass leading into the valley
had been named by the scouts. The day was one of the
loveliest of the year, and the scene that burst upon their
view as they emerged from the cation was such as to leave
no doubt in the minds of the faithful that their Prophet had
been divinely guided to the spot, while the large number
of his followers, to whom a remembrance of the world they
had left was unpleasantly associated with the idea of
sheriffs, prisons, and the penalties of violated law, regard-
ed with the greatest satisfaction the defences which nature
had built up around this new stronghold.
The improvements made by the colonists in the valley
were not very extensive. About a dozen adobe houses, and
as many more log-cabins had been built; the fall grain put
in the year before had been reaped and threshed, and a few
acres of ground planted with potatoes and other vegetables.
The square set apart for the Prophet (a plot of ten acres
in the heart of the city) had been partly surrounded by a
rude fence, and an adobe house had been built in the cen-
ter. In one corner of this square was an inclosure known
then (and ever since) as the Tithing Yard. Into this in-
closure those wagons whose freight was most valuable
were driven, and a guard was placed over them " that the
Indians might not be tempted to commit depredations:"
so the owners were told.
The wagons loaded with Madame La Tour's goods were
taken to this place, and also the ambulance in which she



<pb n="50"/>
*      TME FATE OF MADAME ILA TOUR.
had made the journey. A smaller wagron, contanining t
camp outfit and a few necessaries for- daily use, was 
loaded at the door of the cabin which was designated b
the Prophet as the one they were to occupy. 
Madame La Tour had been ill duriing the last week
the journey, and when her bed was madde up in the
and her children had done what they xcould for herco
fort, she sank into a stupor from whicth it was difficult,
arouse'her. She continued in this statte much of the ti
for ten days, and Philip was obliged too go to the Tithin
Yard in search of nedicines and otherr necessaries whi
were in the wagons left there.
*The Prophet, who supervised the smaillest details as e
as the largeit undertakings of the commnunity, was the pe
son to go to-so the man on guard informed Philip wh
he made known his errand. Accordinpgly the boy wait
on his Prophet-master, who received hidm very kindly, b
told him the wagons must not be uenpacked until hi
mother was able to look after her own bbusiness.
"And meantime," he added graciouusly, "I will len
you anything and everything you may meed."
With Philip the word of the Prophbet was law, and
accepted this arrangement without qquestion. When
mother was able to sit up, she learnedd for the first ti
where her property was, and immediattely sent Philip
Pierre with a written order for the waggons and their
tents. This orderwas received as civililyas Philip's ver
request of the week before; but the IProphet assured 
young disciple that they could not deeviate from the 
they had adopted, which was not to ddeliver up anthi
until identified and claimed by the ownner in person.
"In a few days at the farthest your i mother will be a
to come herself," he said; "and, as II told you before,
will see that you have everything you naeed."  "



<pb n="51"/>
MYSTERY BEGINS.                  5F
Madame La Tour made no comments on this message
when she received it. It was, to her, sufficient evidence
that her enemy meant to hold everything and reduce her
to a state of complete dependence on.him; but no good
could come of talking to her son about anything that she
felt or feared. Now, when it was too late, she saw that
she had placed herself wholly in the power of the man
whom she knew to be an unrelenting tyrant-cruel as
death, remorseless as the grave.
Only a single faint gleam of hope lighted the dark pros-
pect before her. Her elder sons, who had rebelled against
the Prophet's rule, and who hated everything that per-
tained to this false faith, might yet be able to help her. As
before stated, they had gone through to the coast with an
emigrant train in the spring. To their mother, who was
ignorant of the geography of the country, it seemed that
the place to which they were bound could not be very much
farther west; perhaps it was just on the other side of the
mountains. If it were only possible to communicate with
them, they would find means to bring her out of this val-
ley, the air of which seemed already poisoned.
And yet, even if a way of escape opened, she could not
avail herself of it until her daughter was found-her
daughter whose fate she dared not conjecture.
Louise was not in' the valley: It is true, her mother at
first entertained a suspicion that the pioneers had taken
her with them the year before, but she had given up this
idea months ago. A much larger company of emigrants,
composed chiefly of those fugitives from Nauvoo who had
remained east of the Missouri, was now on the way.
It was expected that the train would arrive some time in
October, and from information furnished by Mrs. Wood-
ford, Madame La Tour was confident that her daughter
would enter the valley with this company.



<pb n="52"/>
S5     THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
Yet, supposing this to be true, her mother might never
see her face. The valley of Great Salt Lake, the site of
the city the Prophet had laid out, was by no means the only
spot selected for settlement. Even now, before either men
or animals had recovered from the effects of the long
march across the plains, scouts had been sent north and
south to prospect the country. The colonists who came in
the year before had wonderful stories to tell of the beauty
and fertility of other valleys farther south, while the trap-
per who had acted as their guide, and who still remained
with them, assured the new-comers that there were thou-
sands of acres of rich grass lands a little to the north.
It was the policy of the Prophet to take possession of
these lands and settle them as rapidly as possible; and
about twenty families in the present company had already
been detailed to colonize the valleys lying south of Great
Salt Lake, while a still larger number of the company ex-
pected in October would be sent north as soon as they
arrived.
Fortunately for the prosperity of the new settlement,
many of the colonists were practical farmers, and this year
as well as the year before a number 'of the wagons in the
train were loaded with agricultural implements, and with
seed for the ground that was already broken to receive it.
Necessity is a ster taskmistress, and under her com-
pelling hand the settlers worked as probably few of them
had ever worked before. Buildings went up as if by
magic, irrigating ditches were dug, and a large area of
ground was ready for the fall planting by the time the sec-
ond company of immigrants arrived.
Meanwhile the La Tours continued dependent on the
Prophet, who under various pretexts delayed the surren-
der of their goods; and while their neighbors were break-
ing ground to plant the grain for the next year's bread, or



<pb n="53"/>
MYSTERY BEGINS.                  5
building themselves comfortable houses, they remained
in the cabin which had been assigned them on the day of
their arrival, without the means of improving their present
condition or making any provision for the future.
Pierre Roche and his wife had been ordered to accom-
pany the colonists sent south, and they had gone, taking
with them, by the Prophet's direction, the wagon and ox-
team which were the only vestiges of Madame La Tour's
property outside the Tithing Yard. Soon after they left,
the Prophet sent for Philip, " to talk matters over," as he
said. Assuming a most fatherly look and tone, and put-
ting his arm around the shoulders of his young disciple,
the leader of the people began.
"My dear boy, what I have to say to you to-day is of a
very painful nature, and because 'it is painful I have fool-
ishly put it off from time to time; but now I feel that
something must be done, and for this reason I have sent
for you. You know that your mother's health has been
failing for two years past ?"
"Yes."
"You have also noticed that she is greatly changed in
other respects; but you are so young, and the change has
been so gradual, you do not see as others do that her mind
is quite gone."
" Are you sure it is so bad as that ?" The boy's face
was white with distress and fear. " I know she is not as
she used to be; but she is not-my mother cannot be-
mad ?"
" I could not bear to say the word, but that is just the
truth. She is mad, and unless she is watched very care-
fully she will do something dreadful to herself or other peo-
ple. You cannot be with her all the time, and your sisters
are not old enough to take care of her, so I have engaged
Sister Purdy, who, you know, is'a very good woman, to
F



<pb n="54"/>
54     THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR. 
stay with her and watch her, and help your sisters about;
1the house.  For yourself, though you are so young, you
,:must be a man, and take a man's place. The support of .
your mother and sisters and a great many cares besides :
vill now fall upon you, and because I love you for your
'ather's sake as well as your own, I want to help you.
You have proved before this that my counsel is worth
:something."
Beginning in this strain, the Prophet detained his lis-
tener for two hours, while he poured into his ears " coun-
·sel" upon every possible subject connected with his present
or future life.
When Philip at length started for his home the sun had
set, and he felt a little troubled at the lateness of the hour.
He never left his mother and sisters alone after dark;
but he comforted himself now with the thought that Sister
Purdy was already at the cabin, as the Prophet had assured
him that she would go there before night.
Still, in spite of this assurance, he was uneasy, and as
the shadows settled down upon the valley he quickened
:his steps. When he came in sight of the cabin no light
was visible, but this did not seem strange to him, as he
-knew his mother usually hung a blanket inside of the one
window, in which a square of muslin did duty in the place
of glass. He hurried on, and was soon opposite the
door.
Here he stopped, as though a strong hand had arrested
him. The door, which opened outwardly, was swinging i
on its hinges, and there was neither light nor sound from 
within. At another time this might not have alarmed him;
but now, with the Prophet's words, " Your mother is mad,"
still ringing in his ears, he stood rooted to the spot by. a
vague terror. Then, before he could collect his scattered
thoughts, two figures, *hich in the increasing darkness he



<pb n="55"/>
MYSTERY BEGINS.                  55
- did not at first recognize, ran toward him, and in a minute
his sisters stood beside him.
"Oh, Philip !" Blanche exclaimed' breathlessly, "we
have run so fast, and we were afraid mother would be
angry with us for staying so late; but indeed we could not
help it."
" Why, where have you been ?" he asked.
"Oh, only for a ride with Brother White and George
and Dolly. We had gone around the corner just for a lit-
tie walk, when Brother White came along with his wagon
:and told us to jump in. We said we must ask mother first,
but he told us he stopped at the house and asked for us,
and she said we might go. Then we rode-oh, ever so far;
-and when we got back to his house he took us.out and
told us to run home as fast as we could."
" You did very wrong to go without asking mother your-
.self," Philip said severely, and yet hardly knowing why he
blamed his sisters. "Come, let us go in. Poor mother is
~alone, and has no light. The candles must be all gone.
'I forgot to ask this morning-;" and with a feeling of self-
:reproach, much too poignant for the apparently slight
kcause, he led his sisters to the open door.
- Within all was silent and dark.
- "Mother," he called gently.
There was no answer.
"Mother ! Oh, mother ! Where are you ?" all three
icried, this time, aloud, and in terrified tones.
Still there was no response.
' Where can she be ?   Oh, something dreadful must
have happened !" Catherine exclaimed, and Blanche began
cry.
"Hush, girls," Philip said authoritatively, though his
-wn voice trembled a little. "I have a match in my
*ket, and will make a light. Catherine, you feel for



<pb n="56"/>
56     THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR. 
some paper on the box by the door, while I gather a& 
splinters." 
In a couple of minutes, and with the exercise of 
care lest the one match should go out, the splinters 
lighted, and Philip, taking a couple of them in his ha
entered the cabin, followed by his trembling sisters.
Everything was just as when they left in the afteria
Their mother's bed was undisturbed, and her hood
shawl hung on a nail above it. Philip drew aside 
'blanket which served as a partition between the front roo
and the shed in the rear. That, too, was silent 
empty.
" Mother is lost," Blanche said, still crying.
" You talk like a silly child," Philip answered sharpi
"We all stayed away so late she did not like being alon
and she has gone to Sister Woodford's."
"Then," said practical Catherine, " why did she leav
her hood and shawl ?"
-Philip was about to answer when he made the discove
that 'the splinters he carried would not burn a minute long
and Catherine, who thought she remembered seeing a ca
die in the box that served them for a cupboard, began 
search for it.
" Here it is," she exclaimed presently. " Now, at
rate, we shall not be in the dark."
When the candle was lighted Philip said,
"Girls, you must stay here quietly while I run over 
Sister Woodford's. I will not be gone long, and you cal
fasten the door till I come back."
The words were scarcely spoken when they heard a 
outside, and Sister Purdy appeared at the open door
began to make hurried excuses for being so late; b
noticing Philip's pale face and his sisters' frightened lo
she stopped short, and exclaimed, 



<pb n="57"/>
MYSTERY BEGINS.                 5y
Why, children, what on earth is the matter, and where
ur mother ?" glancing past them into the empty room.
Mother has gone to'Sister Woodford's, I think," Philip
She has not, for 1 stopped in there myself as I was com-
down; I don't see what you were all thinking of to
eher."
ilip checked the incautious woman by a whispered
,and then said aloud,
Sister Purdy, if you will stay here with the girls, I will
and find my mother."
e spoke quietly, but his heart throbbed so it almost
ed to him that the others could hear its beating; and
-daring to trust himself to utter another word, he hur-
out into the darkness.
was only a boy, and he loved his mother dearly, If
had come to her, was he not to blame for taking so
care of her ? Why did he not beg the Prophet to
Pierre Roche and the faithful Joan to stay with them ?
_Prophet loved him like a father, so he kept saying to
f, and would not refuse anything he might ask.
rself-reproach mingled with the grief and dread
ressed him; but he never for a moment dreamed
roaching his leader, to whom he was now hurrying
as his trembling limbs would carry him. To-night,
every other trouble of his life, he turned to this hard,
eless man, who, to him, was always so tender, and
he regarded as almost divine.
e Prophet listened with an air of profound solicitude
Ulip  hurried and agitated recital, and as he finished
heavily.
t which I have feared so long has happened at
tie said. "Your mother has wandered away, at
time when I was planning to guard against such



<pb n="58"/>
68     THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
a thing. Sister Purdy is much to blame for not
her at an early hour as I directed; but, my dea
don't be too much cast down. I will have the set
searched thoroughly, and will send parties of men be
the limits to look for her in every direction."
"Will some one start out with me now ?" Philip
"You could not do a great deal to help," was
answer. " You lay your trouble too much to heart.  l
home and take care of your sisters, and leave the seal
me. You know I will do everything that can be done.:
With this assurance Philip was forced to content
self. .He had never disobeyed the Prophet or ques
his decisions, and he could not begin now; so with a
heart he returned to the cabin to wait and watch
through the long hours of the night, after his sisters
sobbed themselves to sleep; for Sister Purdy left as
as he came in.
There was nothing for her to do there, she said,'an
-might learn something by inquiring around.
The night.seemed endless to the lonely watcher.
was so young, barely sixteen; and though he had
sorrow before, he had never been called to bear an
so hard as this. Long before dawn the single c
burned low in the socket that held it, and went out.
he watched the stars and waited for day, his ear st
meantime to catch every sound.
With the first hour of daylight a messenger came
the Prophet's own household. The settlement had
thoroughly searched long before midnight, he said,
daylight parties of men had gone out in every die
through the valley in the foot-hills, and toward the Jo
As soon as either party found any trace to follow,
would send a man back to the settlement with 



<pb n="59"/>
MYSTERY BEGINS.                 59
meantime the Prophet especially required Philip not to be
anxious or alarmed. They were all doing their best, and
without doubt his mother would be home before many
hours.
The messenger brought a basket of provisions and other
necessaries, and added many kind and sympathizing words
on his own account. Philip needed all the comfort that
was offered him. He looked haggard and ill after his long
night-watch, and when his sisters waked and found their
mother still away, he had all he could do to soothe and
quiet them.
Blanche cried incessantly, and Catherine made remarks
quite in keeping with her temperament, which shocked
and distressed her'brother.
"Mother hasn't been ten steps from the door since we
came here," she declared, "and she wouldn't go away
from the house unless somebody took her. Besides, if she
went out of the settlement she had to go past some of the
houses; and don't you suppose they would notice her,
walking bareheaded, and with her silk wrapper on ? That
was the dress she wore yesterday, and all her other dresses
are here, and her shawl, and everything. There's nothing
gone except what she had on when she sat in that chair,"
pointing as she spoke to her mother's empty seat, at the
sight of which Blanche's sobs grew louder.
Catherine was three years younger than her brother, but
tall and' well developed; almost a woman already in ap-
pearance. Her mind, too, seemed of late to have matured
rapidly, and she often surprised those around her by the
expression of ideas quite in advance of her years. She had,
moreover, as we have previously noticed in these pages,
her mother's spirit, and she had imbibed from her a dis-
trust of the Prophet and his teachings. Now, in spite of
her brother's efforts to check her, she continued to express



<pb n="60"/>
60     THE FA TA OF MADAME LA TOUR. 
her opinion that her mother never left the house alone.
that nobody had taken much pains to find her.  '
"Catherine," Philip said at length, when at the en
'all patience, " if anybody is to blame it is yourself. I 
you here to take care of mother. You knew she was 
and needed you, and you ought not to have gone out
the door until I came back."
This reproach silenced the girl, who loved her mo
above everything, and who had all the time been secr
blaming herself for leaving her alone, though when s
went out with Blanche the day before, it was at 
mother's request.
Meanwhile the day was passing, and there was no n
from any of the parties who were supposed to be sear
ing the valley; but late in the afternoon Philip was ag
summoned to the Prophet's residence. This time he 
received with expressions'of the deepest sympathy, a
with an exhortation to lift up his heart in prayer
strength to bear whatever might come.
"It was not until past noon," the Prophet said, " 
we got the least clew to follow. Then Miles Hayward,
trapper, who was leading the search in the direction of 
river, came upon foot-prints here and there. The ma
were those of a woman's foot, small and delicate, but 
track was not easy to follow, on account of the bunch-gra
and the loose sand. Still, as all the marks seemed to po
toward the river, they thought they could not do be
than to follow it up and down, and in the willows near
bank Miles found this."
He took something from the table, unfolded it, and 
it up before Philip's eyes. It was a fine cambric han
chief with a monogram in the corner. Philip knew it
too well, and reached out his hand for it with a cry
anguish.



<pb n="61"/>
MYSTERY BEGINS.          6.
"Stop," the Prophet added, retaining the frail token;
" I have more to tell you.
"Near the place where the handkerchief was found,
there were more foot-prints, and just at he water's edge
the bank was broken, as though by some person slipping
down.
"Now, my dear boy, I have done my dy. I shall pray
for you, and all the people are praying nrw that you may
have strength to bear your affliction : bwu more than this
we cannot do. A dozen men are alreaty dragging the
river, in the hope of recovering your motler's body, but if
they fail (and I own I fear they will fll), try to be re-
signed to the will of God. It is in times oltrouble that the
true Latter Day Saint shows the strength f his faith. Go
home now to your sisters, and comfort then, and let every-
body see that your religion is worth somehing."
I'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="62"/>
CHAPTER V.
CELESTIAL MARRIAGE.
MEIANTIME, where was Louise La Tour, the daughter
whose sake the mother had risked all, and, as it see
lost all ?
She was not in the valley, nor had she been there.
had remained with those followers of the Prophet who
temporary homes east of the Missouri; but in order 
understand her condition and surroundings it will
necessary to go back to the time of her father's death.* 
To-day, men and women who were among the discip
of the Prophet Joseph in his lifetime, but who have sin
then renounced Mormonism, account for the influence
this man, coarse, ignorant, and wicked as he was, over
multitude of followers of a far different character, by
ing that he possessed wonderful mesmeric powers.
While he lived, his strange gifts were supposed by th
to be supernatural; and men whose sense of right co
pelled them to denounce the wickedness which they 
ward discovered in him were at a loss to account for 
had seemed miraculous powers, conferred on him 
above.
Whatever may have been the secret of this power,t
fact, which cannot be disproved, remains on record, that
many years he exercised an almost unlimited influ
over persons who were greatly his superiors in mind 
See Appendix, Note D, page 333.



<pb n="63"/>
CELESTI.4L MARRIAGE.              63
education, and whose previous lives had been irreproach-
able.
When the doctrine of Celestial Marriage was first taught
by him, many of those who listened to his teachings sup-
posed that they referred to .a union purely spiritual; and
when the truth at length came out, numbers forsook and
denounced him, but among those who remained his adher-
ents there were hundreds whose motives and character had
hitherto been above suspicion. And, stranger than all,
many of the women who became his plural wives were of
good families and, up to that time, of unblemished fame.
Wives whose fidelity to their husbands had never been
questioned, and young girls who had been watched over
from infancy by Christian mothers, were among his earli-
est victims.
When Louise La Tour became a member of his house-
hold she was only fifteen. She had been carefully brought
up and tenderly watched over by both parents, and in:
heart and mind was still a child, as ignorant of evil as her
five-year-old sistet Blanche. In stature, however, she was'
a woman, and already the perfect outlines of her supple
form, the contour of her lovely face, the soft rose-tints of her
cheek, and the liquid luster of her dark eyes made a-pic-
ture so fair to look upon that, had not the mother been blind
to the fact that the child who was but yesterday in the
nursery was no longer a child to any except herself, she
would never have risked such priceless treasure unguarded
for an hour.
Louise, who saw the Prophet only through the medium
of her father's faith, was all docility and obedience when
placed in his care, and at first received whatever he taught
without question.
When he told her that, to secure her future salvation, she
must be " sealed" to him for eternity, and that it was her



<pb n="64"/>
64     THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR. 
father's dying request, she consented to the ceremony,
without understanding in the least what it meant.
When she received the first intimation of the Prophet's
real designs, she was in a room in the Endowment House, 
to which she had been carried in a fainting state. The
barbarous rites in which she was forced to participate, and
the fearful oaths she was compelled to take,* had the effect
of paralyzing her faculties, and long before the conclusion
,of the ceremonies (which lasted eight hours without inter-
mission) she was nearly insensible through fatigue and
terror.
Even to her mother Louise could not repeat the history
of the weeks that followed that dreadful day. She was in ·
the power of her destroyer. It seemed to her that he held
her, body and soul, and when her mother came to take
her away, she had sunk into the lethargy of despair, and
prayed for nothing but death.
Madame La Tour saw that her child was ill and
wretched, but she had not the faintest suspicion of the true
cause until the day when the Prophet claimed Louise as
'is wife. Then, as we have seen, her plans for escaping
from Nauvoo with her family were frustrated, and they
were compelled to remain with the Mormons until they fled
westward.
On the day that the fugitives crossed the Mississippi, the
greatest confusion prevailed in their ranks, and no better
time could have been chosen for the abduction of Louise,
which had been resolved upon mpnths before.
It is a historical fact, perfectly well authenticated, that
the large number of women who were sealed to the
Prophet Joseph during the last two years of his life were
* See Appendix, Note E, page 334.



<pb n="65"/>
CELESTIAL MARRIAOG.                6S
divided after his death among those nearest him in office,
and that such as were thought most desirable were appro-
priated by Brigham Young, the Prophet's successor, and
by Heber C. Kimball, his First Councilor.
The unhappy Louise was apportioned to KimbWll, a
coarse, brutal wretch, whose name deserves to be handed
down to everlasting infamy. The promise from Brigham
Young, that he should be allowed to add her to the num-
ber of his wives, was quite sufficient to induce him to take
all the risks attendant on carrying her off, and months
before the exodus from Nauvoo he had a place prepared
for her in Iowa, where many of the fugitive Mormons found
temporary homes.
Louise's prison (for such it proved to be) was a three-
roomed log-cabin in a small clearing. The building, though
rudely constructed, was tolerably comfortable and well
furnished, and she was told that her mother and the'chil-
dren would make it their home for a time.
For a couple of months she saw nothing of Kimball, and
knew nothing of the motives of those who brought her to
the place. Like her mother, she at first supposed that her
separation from her family was accidental, and as she was
kindly treated by the couple who had charge of the cabin
she felt no uneasiness except that caused by not seeing her
mother as soon as she expected.
When Kimball at length found time to visit his captive,
and the knowledge of the fate to which she had been con-
signed burst upon her, the shock was too much fqr her rea- A
son, and for many weeks she raved in delirium.
The brute to whom, according to the decree of the new
Prophet, she was now b9pnd for life, took a savage pleasr
ure in making. her feel that he was her master, and that
she was wholly in his hands, without the fantest hope of
escape or redress.



<pb n="66"/>
66     THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
During the whole time that her mother and 
msined in the Mormon settlement on the west bank i
Missouri, she lived in this cabin, not fifty miles from
as ignorant of their fate as they were of hers.
visited her frequently during the first year, but long 
the end of the second year he grew tired of her, andwh
the summer of 1848 she was taken across the Missouli
join the second company of emigrants to Salt Lake va
she had not seen him for months.
The unspeakable fear and loathing with which she lo
forward to his coming never failed to make her ill 
the time at which she expected him drew near, and at
close of her first year's imprisonment no one would
recognized in the pallid, hollow-eyed, wasted woman
still answered to the name Louise, the beautiful girl w'
her mother remembered so fondly.
Now, however, six months' respite from his hated vi
together with the dawning hope that he had grown
of her and would come no more, seemed to have given
a new lease of life; and with returning health a lit
her old beauty and spirit came back also. ' 
Kimball was not in the company with'which Louise
to cross the plains. -He had gone on with the first t
taking several. of his wives with him.
As those who knew him best will testify, he had
good trait-that of providing abundantly for the ph
comfort of all dependent on him. His numerous fa
were always well housed, well fed, and well clothed,
Louise's custodians, John Burch and the woman whl
the relation to him of fourth wife, were supplied
everything necessary for themselves and their charge
the journey, When they reached Salt Lake they 
comfortable quarters ready for them; but Louise 
a closer prisoner than when in Iowa. Kimball 



<pb n="67"/>
CELESTIAL MARRIAGE.                6
come near her that autumn, nor the following winter, and
for many months she saw no one except her jailers. She
was still ignorant of the fate of her family, and knew noth-
ing of what took place in the settlement.
The slow months followed each other, with nothing to
mark their lapse except the change from autumn to winter,
and from winter to spring-changes which she watched
wearily from the one window of her Poom. Once a day,
when the weather permitted, she took a short walk with 
her keepers along a solitary path leading to the bench
north of the settlement. She met no one during these
walks, and had she done so she would not have thought of
making any appeal for help. She knew that she was in the
heart of the wilderness, a thousand miles from the borders
of civilization, and that the only human beings near her
were the slaves of the Prophet, whom she believed to be the
author of her past sufferings and her present imprisonment
All hope of escape had long since died within her, and she
had nothing left to look forward to except the possibility of
meeting her mother, whom she felt sure the Prophet would
yet find means to bring to the valley, if he had not already
done so.
The winter which, mild and short as it was, seemed in-
terminable to the captive girl, came to an 'end at last.
With the opening of spring the whole settlement was alive
with the work of preparation for planting a large area of
ground. An additional immigration of several thousand
souls was expected early in the summer, and as the colony
was forced to depend mainly oh the season's crop for food,
the entire laboring force of the settlement was taxed to its
utmost during the process of breaking ground and putting
in the seed.
At this time Louise's keepers were also fully occupied
with outdoor work, and as she showed no disposition to



<pb n="68"/>
6B     THE FA T    OP MADAME I;A TOUR.
Wander of, she was allowed the liberty of the house and
lot The ground belonging to the cabin was not inclosed,
end there was nothing to mark the existence of a street
near it except the path mentioned before, which led up to
the fodt-hills. Late one afternoon in March, when Burch
and the woman who kept the house were away, Louise was
sauntering listlessly about the borders of the spot of ground
that had been plowed for a garden, when she saw a
slender, girlish figure hurrying down the path toward the
cabin.
There was something strangely familiar in the outlines
of this figure, in the poise of the head, and the free, alert
movements-something that made Louise's heart beat
quickly, and drew her toward the path.
The person she was watching came a few steps farther
in the direction of the cabin, then turned and seemed
about to take another way, when Louise, hardly knowing
what she did, called,
"' Catherine !"
The girl stopped abruptly, turned round and looked to
wee from whom the M11 came, then moved toward the
speaker in a hesitating manner.
" Did you call me ?" she asked.
Louise, without a thought of consequences, sprang
across the ditch that divided the garden from the common,
and hurried to the spot where she stood.
"Catherine ! Sister I Don't you know me ?" she said,
holding out her hands.
"Louise I Ma belle swr /"
The language of their childhood sprang unbidden to the
lips of the younger girl, as with a glad cry she threw her-
self into her sister's arms.
It was some moments before either spoke again. Then
Louise, with a caution born of experience, cast her eyes in



<pb n="69"/>
CELESTIAL MARRIAGE.                69
every idirection in search of a possible witness of their
meeting. No one was in sight, and winding her arm
about her sister, she said,
" Come, chArie, let us go into the house. I am all alone,
and I can see from the window if any one comes, and let
you out of the back door."
"Poor sister I Then you have to watch and listen too.
I am learning to do so; but I don't like it one bit. When
I begin to talk about anything, Philip says,' Hush 1 some
one might hear you,' or ' Look out I there is somebody
coming ! '"
By this time the girls had reached the cabin. Louise
drew her sister into her Qwn room, carefully closing both
doors after hera iWhen' they were seated.she clasped
Catherine's handsi nd with her whole heart in her face and
voice asked,, X
"Our mother?- Is she here  Is she well ?"
It was a hard question, but Catherine answered it more
wisely than many an older person might have done.
" I believe mother is here and well; yet I don't know in
what house she is. But see I I did not know in what
house you were until now."
"Tell me all that you do know," Louise urged, with
feverish eagerness, holding her sister's hands so tightly
that she hurt them.
" I will, but first-you do not believe in the Prophet; as
Philip does ?"
"Believe in Him? No !"
Something of her old spirit flushed Louise's cheeks and
gleamed in her dark eyes as she gave this answer.
" I am glad of that; and now, I'll tell you what I know
and what I think. We came here with the train from win-
ter quarters early last summer. Mother was sick at first,
but she got better, so that she could walk about the house



<pb n="70"/>
70     THE FATE OP MADAME LA TOUR.            U
and tk    We were not very comfortable, for our things
*wre al in the tithing-yard, and they would not let us have
them. Philip had to go up every day, nearly, and ask for
aittle something that we were obliged to use.
"One day, when he' was gone, mother told me to take
Blanche out for a walk. We meant to be back in half an
hour, but when we were out of sight of the house Brother
White came along with his children in a wagon, and told
us mother said we might ride with him.
"I thought then that hetold thetruth; but nowI believe
it was something made up, and you will see why. He took
us a long way from the settlement, and did not bring us
back till after dark. When we got home we met Philip at
the door (the. Prophet had kept him till after dark too), and
mother was gone. They pretended to believe that she was
out of her mind, and had wandered away to the river and
been drowned-said they found her handkerchief on the
bank, and I don't know what else. I did not believe it at
the time, and the next week little Benny Spiers said to me,
'" I was playing below the hill when your mother went
away, and I saw her. Brother Atwood was with her.'
"I hushed the child up, for I knew it would be a bad
thing for him and for me if it was found out that he had
told'me such a thing.
"I have never breathed a word of it to Philip nor
Blanche; but in my heart I am sure that mother is alive
and somewhere in this country, though maybe not in this
settlement; and I mean to keep looking for her till I find
her, if it takes years and years."
Louise heard her sister through without attempting to in-
terrupt her. When the story was finished, she sat silent,
her face white and rigid, her large dark eyes unnaturally
bright.
"Why do you look so strangely ?" exclaimed Catherine.



<pb n="71"/>
CELESTIAL MARRIAGE.                !I
"You need not feel as though what the people say might
be true. Mother is alive, and we shall find her."
"Yes, you are right, petite saer. Mother is alive, or
if-"
Louise stopped. The dark suspicion that had crossed
her mind must not be breathed to any one, least of all to
her young sister, who was comforted and upheld by the
hope of finding the mother alive and well.
" Tell me something more," she said, after a moment's
hesitation, " I cannot understand why mother came here.
Surely it was not her own wish."
" No, it was not. I know something about that which I
cannot tell to Philip. On that last day at winter quarters,
when everybody was getting ready to start, the Prophet
came to our house. Mother was alone in the front room,
but I was in the little shed at the back, and I heard-him
tell her that she might see you here, but never anywhere
else. That is why she came."
" And our brothers, Charles and Francis, are they here
too ?"
"No. They left winter quarters before we did. They
are somewhere west of this place, with the Gentiles. They
think of the Prophet just as you and I do."
The sisters talked for a few minutes longer, Louise evad-
ing a direct reply to any of Catherine's questions relating
to herself. Then, as the sun sank lower, and the time of
her keeper's return drew near, she repeated her caution not
to let any one know of their meeting, and sent her sister
away by another path in the rear of the cabin.
Catherine was to come up the hill again the next day if
possible, and Louise was to let her know, by a sign agreed
upon, whether it would be safe for her to venture near the
house.
That night, as it happened, John Burch was to spend
L



<pb n="72"/>
2'.    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
wiit one of his other wives, and the woman Hanaad 
home alone, and in a rather despondent mood. She
srihple-minded creature, who had been sealed to BuiJ
cause she thought her salvation depended on him,and
manifested a dog-like attachment and fidelity to the mil
who treated her much as he might have done if hEl
bought her in the market-place. She had been hart
work all day with him in the field, and would have co
it a privilege to cook his supper and wait on him 'at ni
buitf eourse it was quite right that he should go 
the other house, where Abigail and Sarah were living
his fist wife. Abigail had one boy, and Sarah two&,
poor Hannah bewailed her own childless condition as'
and Louise sat alone at supper.              :
" Brother Brigham says it's want of faith," she obse
"He was a-preachin' only last Sunday in the Bowery, 
if a woman hed all the faith in plurality that she orter h
her reproach would be took away, an' she'd be-
mother o'- thousens. I've prayed an' prayed fur i
faith, an' I've tried an' tried to be reconciled to Bro
Bareh's stayin' over to t'bther house so much as he d
lateil, but some way my heart ain't right." 
Louise felt called upoh to offer some comfort to the
ciature whohad always been kind to her. 
"You are doing the best you can, Hannah,'t she
"and I would not worry. There is Eliza Snow, whom
all look up to. She has no children, and nobody bl
her for want of faith." "
"Oh, but, Sister Louise," the woman answered, lo
ing her voice as though there might be listeners even
" You don't know all that I do about Sister 'Liza. 
see she went into plurality when everybody was
an' when the Gentiles an' the law an' all was 
That was a time when it took a power o' faith to 



<pb n="73"/>
CELESTIAL MARRIAGE.                73
an through, an' Sister 'Liza bed faith; but in them
the sisters that was in plurality didn't dare to own
r children, an' the trouble that Sister 'Liza went
gh, no tongue could tell. It ain't a mite of wonder
tshe hain't hed no children sense."
;Hannah was growing unusually communicative, and
e thought that by drawing her out she might learn
ething to her own advantage.
"On these lonesome' evenings," she suggested, "I
dlike to sit with you, if you are willing, and to pass
time you might tell me something of the sermons at the
-ty, for you know I have never heard one."
' I'm sorry I didn't think of that afore. 'Twouldn't
n near so lonesome for neither of us. But after this
're goin' to the Bowery on Sundays. Them was the
rs Brother Burch got yesterday."
uise did not know whether this change boded good or
'If she was to have her liberty, the time might come
she could meet her brother and sisters unhindered
lsuch meetings, if allowed, might be used to entrap
'or herself in additional difficulties.
or her own part it seemed that she had. little more to
Her enemy had done his worst, and she could think
no deeper pit that might be dug for her. But the
rs ! She thought with a throb of fear of Catherine's
uty. She was growing tall and womanly too. Oh, why
she ever been brought here ?
our after hour, during the long night, Louise turned
her sleepless pillow, calling up and dismissing one
after another for escaping from the valley with her
did not share Catherine's belief that their mother
lved. Indeed she was not sure that she wished to be-
t. Better, far better, that she should be dead and



<pb n="74"/>
74     THB FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR. 
safe in heaven, than alive and in the power of the
less, unpitying tyrant who had already brought su
eries upon them.
-But the girls, her innocent sisters ! It seemed
though she could hear her mother's voice bidd
watch over them,
Then another Voice, one that had saved her from d
whispered,
i Fear not, for lam with thee."
In the darkness and silence of the night, in that
cabin, the helpless girl, cut off from all human suc
herself or those she loved, turned toward the u
mighty Helper.
She had drifted far, very. far, but not beyond the 
of the Hand that built these mountain walls, which
seemed to shut her in, away from hope or help.
" am with thee."
It was as though all the resources of heaven and,
had been placed within her reach. A great peace fell
her, and, laying her head once more upon her p
Louise slept as she had not slept since the day she le
mother's roof.



<pb n="75"/>
CHAPTER VI.
FORTY-NINERS.
THE sunny August day was wearing to a close. The
scattered clumps of fir and mountain-laurel cast long
shadows across the rocky trail, up which a heavily-loaded
wagon-train was slowly winding.
* A couple of women and half a dozen very young children
sat on rolls of blankets in front of the canvas covers, but
with this exception, all belonging to the train-men,
women, and children-toiled up the steep ascent on foot.
It was a rough way to climb, and a long one, but all
Were cheerful and hopeful, for the fertile valleys of Oregon
lay just beyond, and the stout-hearted pioneers, who had
versed the prairies and forded the rivers west of the
issouri when the snows began to melt, crossed the Rocky
lountains before summer had softened the winds that
wept down from their peaks, encountered the perils of
e Desert, threaded with alkali streams-of the Snake
!ains-and the bands of alert and dangerous savages on
eir borders, were not to be discouraged by any difficul-
so near the journey's end.
Moreover, the summit was close at hand, and the sun yet
o hours high. If they pressed forward steadily they might
w the land of promise from that Pisgah before the dark-
hid it, although it was not promised by a " Prophet."
.The women of the company fell a little in the rear of the
gons. The children made frequent excursions into the
pparal, returning with their arms filled with flowers
branches of blossoming shrubs. About half of the



<pb n="76"/>
76     THE PATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
men were occupied with attending to the teams and loose 
cattle belonging to the train. The remainder walked,
some of them in advance of the wagons, and some a few
yards in the rear, with their rifles in their hands.
At the head of the advance guard two young men paced
side by side. They were of the same height and build, and
performed the difficult feat of keeping step along the
ugged trail with military precision.
Of the two who walked behind these, one was a tall,
oise-jointed Missourian, clad in jeans, and carrying a gun
as long as himself. The other was a small, wiry man,
whose grizzled locks were covered by a cap of panther-
skin. The tail of the panther depended from the rear of
the cap, serving .the double purpose of an ornament and a
trophy.
His buckskin shirt and breeches were trimmed with a
profusion of beads and fringes, and in addition to such
arms as the others carried, a tomahawk with a handle two
feet in length was fastened to his belt. Just now his keen
blalekeyes were fixed. on the summit before him, as he ob-
sevted to his companion,
" t mought be a bad job for us to git over thar jist
dark, with al these wimmen folks on our hands. Ef I was
alone on the trail, I wouldn't see a mite of trouble about
the time of day, but with wimmin an' babies to take care
on, I'd like a few hours more o' daylight to look for Injun
signs."
The Missourian, who answered to the name of Long
John, gave a backward glance toward the men nearest the
wagons.
"'Twouldn't do no good to broach that idee to any of
them," he said. "You an' I an' the boys ahead, bein'
single men, hain't so much to lose if the Shastas should
cut up rough, but them that owns the wimmen an' babies



<pb n="77"/>
FOR TY.NINERS                 77
are a borrerin' trouble enough without our sayin' a word
to help the thing along.
" That's so," assented the other; "but it mought be as
well to speak to the boys about bein' on the look-out; I'll 
jist mentiof it to 'em anyhow;" and raising his voice a little
he called,
"La Tour!"
Both heads turned simultaneously.
" Thar, I knowed it," he chuckled. " It's jist the same
as pullin' the string that ties'em together."
In response to his signal the young men now halted for
him and the Missourian to come up with them.
As we have said, they were exactly of a size, and one
face was so like the other that it seemed as if their own
mother would not have been able to distinguish between
them. There was the same clear olive complexion, the
same liquid black eyes, soft as a woman's, and the same
features. Their comrades had long since given up the
effort to tell them apart in any other way than by their
dress. Both wore gayly-braided hunting-shirts, but the one
was blue and the other gray. As they stood side by side,
tall, erect, with their rifles poised lightly over their shoul-
ders, the trapper's eyes dwelt on them admiringly.
"If them two was gals now, what a fortin' they'd have
in their faces," he observed sotto voce to the Missourian.
"Yes," answered Long John; " but neither on 'em car-
ries a gal's heart under all that braidin'. There ain't a
man in this train that I'd rayther have with me in a life-an'-
death tussle with Injuns or any other varmints."
" That's so," replied the trapper heartily, ignoring the
fact that his own merits as an Indian fighter had been
passed over. " They're clear grit, both on 'em, an' long-
headed too, for youngsters."
By this time they were within a rod of the young men,



<pb n="78"/>
78     THE FATE OP MADAME LA TOUR.
who advanced a little to mtet them, still keeping side by
side.
" What is it, comrades ?" asked the wearer of the blue
hunting-shirt.
"The matter is, Francis, my boy," answered Long
John, " that we want to take a observation from the peak
without makin' any stir in the train. Carter, here, thinks
that ef the Shastas air goin' to cut up at all, we kin look
out for 'em in these mountaings, an' wefour kin push on a
little ahead an' watch fur signs."
" All right"-it was still Francis who Was spokesman-
"but see the sun. We have no time to lose. Shall we
lead on ?"
" Go ahead, boys," answered the trapper. "We'll be
right with you."
The little party quickened their steps until a bend in the
trail hid the wagons from them.
"I don't deny," said the trapper, " that I'm some oneasy
about this late crossin' of the divide, but jist at this time
the Shastas is more likely to be on their huntin'-grounds
than on the war-path, an' they hain't troubled last year's
emigration, neither on the way nor sence they've took up
their land."
" Mebbe that's because there was nigh onto three hun-
dred rifles, an' three hundred good shots to use 'em, in last
year's emigration," observed Long John. " An Injun hez
as much sense as a white man about takin' too many
chances."
"There's somethin' in that, I know," answered the
trapper; " but then, Injuns hez other kinds of sense too-
more'n they git credit for. They don't, ginerally speakin',
go on the war-path for nothin', an' they know what good
treatment is. Now, most folks thinks that all the good Inb
juns is six foot underground, but I've. lived alongside of



<pb n="79"/>
FORTY NINERS.                 79
'em too many years to believe that. Jist to show you what
I mean; I'll give you a little experience I had last winter.
" I was trappin' on the Rattone Mountains, an' I'd built
me as tight a cabin as you'd wish to see, an' had every-
thing comf'table. One night, jist as I was cookin' my
supper, two Injuns come to the door, an old one an' a young
one. They looked more beat out than I ever'see Injuns
look afore. They'd been out a follerin' elk, an' had the
worst kind of luck, an' the old Injun had had a fall an'
hurt his leg.
" I took 'em in, cooked 'em a good supper, give 'em my
two best bar-skins for a bed, an' sent 'em off in the mornin!
with a tip-top breakfast an' provender enough to last 'em
that day.
"Well, about a month afterward the same thing hap-
pened to me. I was out after elk; follered 'em all day
with no luck, made the best shift I could for the night, an'
next mornin' started for my cabin, but lost the trail some-
how.
" I tramped all day, till late in the afternoon, an' I kin
tell you it wa'n't much of a pleasure trip. At last, when I
was about to give out (for to make bad wuss, the weather
had turned colder 'n the North Pole, an' it was a snow-
in'), I struck a wickiup that was by itself in a little gulch.
"I didn't know what kind of a welcome I'd git, but the
smoke a-curlin' from the top was sech a temptation that I
jist walked right up to it-an' what do you think ? it.was
the lodge of the old Injun that I'd took in a month afore.
" Well, you may say what you like, but that thar Injun
'peared as glad to see me as ef I was his brother. He
brought me right in, give me .the best he had to eat, kep'
me over night, an' sent his boy with me for a guide next
day."
"I don't dispute that there's good Injuns-a few of 'em



<pb n="80"/>
8p     THE FAT      OaF MADAMIE LA TOUR.
-above ground, though, bein' so scattered like, they must
have a powerful lonesome time," remarked Long John.
"I can't say as any of 'em ever put theirselves out to
cook my vittles for me; but I've seen the day when they 
-moughta' took myskelpas easy as fallin' off a log, an' they
Aidn'tdo it. It's nigh onto two years ago that it hap-
pened. I was with the ox-train that was haulin' freight to
Santa Fd. Me an' Tom Bradshaw was the extry hands
that trip, an' we was full three miles behind the train,
a-drivin' the animals, that had got to be tender-footed.
-" We was joggin' along careless like, thinkin' mostly of
'camp an' our supper, when all of a suddent we heard a
noise like thunder or the tramp of the biggest kind of a
herd of buffaloes, an' lookin' away off to our right, we see
a terrible cloud o' dtst a-risin.' A minute afterward a
band of twenty-five or thirty Injuns galloped out of the
dust an' made for us. Behind 'em, as fast as the dust
cleared away, we could see more Injuns, all of 'em ridin'
like mad, straight onto us. If ever any fellers' hair stood
up, it'was mine an' Tom Bradshaw's jist then, an' when
the head Injuns got to us, they jerked their ponies up till
theya'most stood straight on their hind feet, an' give a
yell-seems as ef I could hear it now! The screech of a
thousand painters would be the softest kind of a hush-a-by
alongside of that Apache whoop; for they was Apaches,
as we found out afterward; somewhere near a hundred
young warriors. Our poor, tender-footed cattle, that could
hardly creep along, was that soared that they broke into a
gallop, an' Tom Bradshaw an' me jist stood stock still,
a-waitin' to have our hair lifted, it seemed like; but after a
bit we found out that the Apaches was only havin' a little
fun of their own.
" They jabbered a few minutes in their own lingo, then
treated us to all the English they knowed, which was the



<pb n="81"/>
FORTY-NINERS.                  Sr
cuss words they'd picked up from the freighters, an',
wheeled round an' galloped off as they'd come."
By the time that Long John's narrative was finished the
party stood on the.summit, about a quarter of a mile in ad-
vance of the train. The trapper's keen glance swept the
horizon, and rested finally on apeak to their right. A less
practical eye would have perceived nothing there, but Car-
ter had spent twenty-five years in the mountains and on the
plains, and his sight and hearing were those of an Indian.
He descried a thin blue column of smoke rising skyward,
and announced to the others:
"A signal-fire ! The Shastas air a-givin' notice to the
bands to the north an' west that we're a-comin'."
"That means war," Long John remarked, though more
in the tone of one putting a question than asserting a fact.
The trapper shook his head.
"No, not for sure, by no means. You see, Injuns
don't go much on station-ary, an' post-offices is scurse be-
twixt here an' the line; consequently they does their letter-
writin' by lightin' a little brush on the peaks, an' consid-
erin' that any one on 'em kin see that thar smoke fifty
miles as the crow flies, it ain't a bad way."
" Then you do not think the Shastas are hostile ?" in-
quired one of the young men.
" No; an' I'll tell you why. Ef you look sharp, you'll
see the tops of their wickiups a-showin' in the chapparal
down there on the foot-hills. Now when Injuns is hostile
there ain't nary lodge in sight, an' you won't come across
no warriors neither, except it's a little party of three or
four that meets you an' makes a show of bein' friendly, to
find out how many men there is in the train; but when you
see their tepees right along the trail, you don't need to bor-
rer no trouble, for there won't be no fightin'."
Long John confirmed this statement, but added, as a
i,



<pb n="82"/>
b      I THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
conclusion deduced from his own experience, that the sav-
ages were " onsartin critters," who might be friendly to-day
and on the war-path to-morrow.
By this time the men who were acting as the advance
guard of the train had reached the summit. These men
were husbands and fathers, who had lives' far dearer than
their own to protect, and one after another approached the
trapper with anxious inquiries as to the look-out ahead.
His cheerful assurance that there was no danger, and that
good treatment would keep the Indians friendly, was re-
ceived with expressions of relief and thankfulness, and the
whole party, freed from the apprehensions that had kept
them on the look-out for signs of trouble, directed their
attention to the view before them.
The valley, which lay almost at their feet, stretched
away to the north as far as the eye could reach. On the
south it was bounded by a spur of the range on which they
stood, and twenty miles to the west a succession of grass-
covered benches led- up to another chain of mountains,
whose sides were hidden by a heavy growth of fir and
cedar. The sun was already dipping behind these western
peaks as the rear guard of the train came up, and it was
agreed on all hands to defer further observations until
morning, as, according to Carter's reckoning, they had
barely time before dark to reach a spot of which he knew,
that would afford a favorable camping-ground.
The whole company began the descent in good spirits,
and the animals, as though they realized that plenty of
grass and water would be their reward, behaved admira- 
bly, so that by the time the first stars began to twinkle
faintly in the sky, the train entered the park or mountain
valley in which they were to camp for the night. On three :
sides of this park the rocky peaks of the range rose like a
wall, and through the pass. by which they entered, a clear



<pb n="83"/>
FORTY-NINERS. 
stream, fed by unfailing mountain springs, leaped and
rushed downward on its way to the valley below.
These emigrants were not outlaws fleeing from just
punishment, or fanatics seeking some spot in the wilder-
ness upon which to erect the altars of a faith at war with
the spirit of the age and the genius of civilization. They
were the sturdy yeomanry of the Mississippi valley, them-
selves the children of pioneers; bred on the frontier, and
trained to combat the difficulties and face the dangers of
border life. The wonderful reports that had reached them
of the beauty and fertility of the valleys of Oregon, together
with the inducements offered by the Government to settlers,
were to them a sufficient reason for undertaking the peril-
ous overland journey of more than two thousand miles,
with their wives and little ones.
Brave, hardy, and adventurous, the very children par-
took of the spirit of the enterprise, and talked wisely of the
land that father was going to take up, and of the way they
would work to help him put in the crops; and if the young
mother with hei baby at her breast quaked inwardly at the
thought of the savage bands, the original lords of the soil,
who still roamed over the fertile valleys in which their
cabins were to be built, she gave no sign of her fears.
Thus far all had gone well with the train. Sickness
had not thinned their ranks, and they had escaped the. bul-
lets and arrows of the red man. Now the goal of their
hopes lay before them: the beautiful valley stretching away
to the north, the richness of its soil proved by the tall
grass which waved over it, the foothills clothed with luxuri-
ant pasture, the cantons and mountain-sides covered with
timber and abounding in game, and the streams stocked
with fish. The land was theirs. They had nothing to do
but enter in and possess it, and they well deserved this
goodly heritage. As we have noticed previously, all of



<pb n="84"/>
84     THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
them except Long John, the trapper, and the brothers La
Tour, were Ien of families, and they brought with them
the wish and the determination to rear their children as
worthy citizens of a great and free country. To-night, as
they sat round their camp-fires, they talked not only of the
farms they were to acquire and the homes they would build,
but of the churches and school-houses they hoped to see in
the valley before ten years rolled round; and those who
know the history of the State they felped to found, know
too how nobly the men of Oregon have redeemed the
pledges of those early days.
The La Tours had joined the company, not so much for
the land they might acquire as for the sake of escaping
from the bloodhounds that the Mormon priesthood set
on the track of their recalcitrant followers; and the emi-
grants, with ready sympathy for refugees from tyranny of
any sort, had received them with open arms. Their bear-
ing since they joined the train had been such as to make
them general favorites, and honest Dick Bradley, the
happy owner of a pretty little wife and a sturdy year-old
youngster, expressed the sentiments of the whole company
when he said,
" Better boys than them thar never saddled a horse nor
drawed a bead, an' ef the redskins sh'd pop me over, I'd
trust 'em to bring Jinny an' the baby through safe."
Yet the brothers, though outwardly cheerful, and always
ready with an encouraging word for the despondent, and
a smile so sunny that the youngest toddler in camp would
run to meet them, carried a heavy load of concealed anxiety
under the brave exterior they maintained. They were
"mother-boys," both of them, to the very core of their
affectionate hearts, and " La belle mire," whom they wor-
shiped with what has been truly and beautifully called the
fairest type of first love, was a prisoner in the hands of her



<pb n="85"/>
FORTY-NINERS.                 85
enemies. They had meant to carry her with them, but all
their entreaties had been powerless to move her to take a
single step without Louise. They thought of her still as
on the banks of the Missouri, not dreaming that she could
be induced to accompany the Mormons to their new home;
and their hope, a faint one it is true, but still something to
cling to, was to make a home here to which they might yet
bring all of their scattered.family.
The number of acres which a single man could take up
was only half the liberal grant made by the Government to
the head of a family; but the two brothers had been as one
ever since the days when they lay in the same cradle in the
old home in Quebec, and the land of both would make a
noble farm-a little kingdom for the mother when they
should bring her here. So, comforting themselves with a
dream that was never to be fulfilled, happy in their love
for each other, and pleased with the life of freedom and
adventure that opened out before them in the new North-
West, they joined heartily to-night in the rejoicing that filled
the camp.
"Tell ye what," observed the trapper, as he poised a
slice of venison on the end of the sharp stick that answered
for a spit, " this here valley is jest as nigh bein' the Gar.
ding of Eden that the Good Book tells about, as any land
that lays out door. I was raised in Vermount, an' I hate to
speak disrespectful of the country on account of the old
folks, that lived an' died thar, so I alwuz make a pint of
sayin' that Vermount is a mighty nice State to emigrate
from; but when I look at this here country, an' then think
of the rocks an' itumps an' stohe-heaps that had to be
plowed around for every bushel of corn that was raised
back thar, seems as ef the old folks, ef they know it, won't
blame me for advisin' everybody raised thar to emigrate
young. You see, the old man was a deacon, an' never said



<pb n="86"/>
86     THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
nothin' worse in his life than 'I declare,' besides bein' one
of the patientest fsouls that ever drawed breath; but I've
seen him look as ef it would a' bin a powerful relief to his
mind to make some onscripteral remarks when he was a
plowin' the side-hill above the barn.
" You've heerd the story, most likely, of the traveler in
Vermount that seen a man a-scoopin' somethin' out of a
crevice between the rocks with a long-handled hoe, an'
sked him what on arth he was a doin'.
- ' Doin' ?' says the man, ' why, I'm atryin' to gether up
dirt enough to kiver them pertaters. You don't s'pose
they'd grow ef I left 'em bare to the sun ?'
" Now I ain't a-goin' to say I know that to be so, because
its somethin' I didn't see myself, but there's enough that I
hev seen to make me thank the Lord that the way opened
for me to move on toward sundown as soon as I got to be
a man. I'd ruther have a hand-to-hand tussle with the
varmints in this country than with the rocks an' stumps
back thar; an' seems as ef I relish the game I shoot out
here more'n I used ter the sheep an' cattle we killed on the.
'farm. I alwus pitied the poor things, they had sech a hard
tlime a-pickin' their livin' where there was two stones to
-one blade of grass, an' it seemed cruel to kill 'em after
they'd made out to grow up on such pastur."



<pb n="87"/>
CHAPTER VII.
THE BROTHERS.
THE emigrants, safely sheltered by' the walls which na-
ture had built around their camp, slept the sound sleep
they had earned so well, undisturbed by dreams of their
savage neighbors in the carons below, and rose when the
earliest signs of dawn appeared in the sky, to prepare for
the last stage of their journey.
Daybreak in these primeval solitudes seemed -like the
birth of light in a new world. All the shy wild creatures
whose haunts are in the forest and the mountains came out
from their coverts. The deer bent their beautiful necks to
drink of the little lake that lay in a basin half way up the
gorge. The rabbits nibbled the short, sweet herbage, or
sat soberly on the bare hillqcks, gazing about as if admiring
the landscape. Every leafy shelter was alive with birds,
whose chirpings and twitterings, beginning before the stars
faded, swelled gradually into a triutnphant chorus of song
as the sun cast his earliest rays upon the fleecy patches of
cloud that hung over the mountains.
No human sound came up from the valley below. No
sign that man had invaded this corer of nature's domain
was visible from the spot where the new-comers had rested
for the night; but as they left the park and began to descend
the pass they perceived tiny spirals of smoke, curling up-
ward from unseen fires, and in another half-hour the deer-
skin lodges of the nomads of this western wilderness were
in plain sight.
The Shastas, the emigrants' nearest neighbors for the



<pb n="88"/>
88     THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
present, seemed to have confidence in the peaceable inten-
tions of their visitors, for the village beside the trail was
tenanted only by the women and children of the band, who
showed a mild curiosity with regard to the appearance and
belongings of the pale-faces, but manifested no signs of
fear or displeasure. Through the .trapper they communi-
cated the information that their braves had gone to the
hunting-grounds, which were five suns distant, and that if
deer.and elk were plenty they would be home before two
moons. A little trading was also done, a few well-dressed
skins being exchanged for the trinkets dear to the savage
heart, and a bright brass kettle, which was regarded by
numbers with covetous eyes, was left in the chief's lodge
as a gift. Then the train moved on, followed for a mile or
more by a procession of scantily-clad, dusky juveniles, who
were loath to lose sight of the wonderful pageant.
By the middle of the afternoon they reached the end' of
their journey, and camped in what seemed the richest por-
tion of the valley. There were about one hundred and fifty
families in the company, and it was necessary that they
should keep together as closely as possible for mutual help
and protection. Their claims were staked out in the best
way for the accomplishment of this object, and in the center
of the land thus taken up, a fort, surrounded by a stockade,
was erected while the cabins of the settlers were going up.
Long John was a millwright, and the wagons in the
train belonging to him were loaded with the necessary
machinery for a saw-mill, one of the first wants of the new
settlement. The useful trades were well represented
among the colonists, and not only every man and woman,
but every child in the company above the age of seven,
knew enough of farm work to lend a hand in some depart-
ment of what was to be the principal industry of the settle-
ment.



<pb n="89"/>
THE BROTHERS.                  89
Thirty years ago, and on the frontiers, life was simple,
and artificial wants were few. It is really surprising how
much comfort and happiness our colonists managed to ex-
tract from a mode of living whose details would appall the
stoutest-hearted of those philosophers who are wont to
advise their friends to "go west."
If in the press of work attendant on breaking ground for
putting in the crops, no time could be found to have lum-
ber sawed for flooring, the good housewife got along very
well with a floor of earth, hard packed and well swept. If
glass was wanting, a doeskin, dressed thin and oiled, took
its place in the window. If the supply of dishes fell short,
the youngsters of the family ate with excellent appetites
from blocks of wood nicely hollowed and scraped smooth.
When the small store of groceries they had brought with
them began to fail, and the nearest trading-post was more
than two hundred miles away, the honey which the bees,
with commendable forethought, had laid up in hollow
trees for just such an emergency, supplied the place of
sugar, and if the women missed their cup of tea they did
not say so.
Spinning-wheels and hand-looms, which had already
grown obsolete in the East, were among the most valued
possessions of the colonists; and as the years passed and
their flocks of sheep increased on the range, and acres of
flax blossomed on their farms, fathers, mothers, and children
were clothed from head to foot in suits, by no means to be
despised, that had been " raised on the land."
Game and fish abounded almost at their doors; wheat
that was sown the first autumn yielded a bountiful harvest
that was ready for the reaper by the following June; and
the crops of all sorts that were gathered from the ground
planted in the spring filled their bins and granaries to over-
flowing.



<pb n="90"/>
90     THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
And while outward prosperity attended the colonists, the
roofs of their lowly cabins sheltered scenes of domestic
peace. No baleful shadow, the outcome of a faith that
crushes the purest instincts of humanity, sat at their hearth-
stones. No tyrannical priesthood made the people its
slaves. No " blood-atoner" dogged the steps of those who
saw fit to go elsewhere.
. The next year and the year following witnessed a still
larger immigration, the beginning of that steady influx of
population which, in the course of a decade, covered the
whole country with farms, and built up scores of busy
towns where only a little while before the red man had been
the sole tenant of the soil.
Early in the fall of 1852 a small train from the States ar-
rived, which had come by a different route from that taken
by the'first settlers. They had encountered many difficul-
ties on the way, and by the time they reached Echo Caton
their animals were so jaded and footsore that they feared
they would not be able to get through. They turned aside,
therefore, into the Mormon settlements, to exchange their
nearly worn-out teams for fresh ones, and to get such sup-
plie&as the settlers might be able to furnish.
They represented the Mormons as numerous and appar-
ently thriving, but by no means disposed to entertain stran-
-gers. However, by the exercise of a little strategy, which
Ward, the captain of the company, skid he thought entirely
justifiable under the circumstances, they obtained what
they needed by paying two prices for everything, and went
on their way unhindered.
"I don't think'natute intended me for a hypocrite,"
Ward said, " for the bit of acting I went through with in
Salt Lake was the hardest work I have done in twenty 
years. You see, as soon as we struck the settlements, we
could tell by the atmosphere of the place that we were not



<pb n="91"/>
THE BROTHERS.                  91
welcome. The men gave us black looks, and the women
disappeared in-doors as soon as the train came in sight
No one would talk with us, until after a time I got a small
boy to direct me to tie Bishop's house.
I knocked at the door boldly, and the man who opened it
proved to be the Bishop himself. I stated our case to him,
enlarged on the reputation of the saints for hospitality and
generosity, said we knew if we could reach their settle-
ments we should be cared for, and finally begged of him a
letter to President Young.
"The old fellow was completely won over. He ordered
his people to let us have the supplies we wanted (for which,
by the way, we paid a big price), and invited me to break-
fast in his own house. After breakfast he made up his
mind to go with us to Salt Lake, and through him I ob-
tained the privilege of paying my respects to the Prophet.
"To him I praised everything that I saw in Utah, and, as
I flatter myself, made so good an impressinm that I had no
further difficulties. I think if the folks at home could know
what diplomatic abilities I developed out there I should get
a foreign mission at any rate."
"But with all yer diplomatic abilities, ye didn't git
ahead of that old coon on a bargain," drawled Jim Badger,
one of the party. "Our hosses an' cattle wor blooded
stock, wuth a mint of money, ef they wus tender-footed, an'
we hed to trade 'em fur mustangs an' the orneriest horned
critters that ever lifted a hoof; an' fur the garding truck
an' other provender they sold us, we paid 'em in hard cash
more'n would hev bought a good-sized frmnn out here."
" That's all so," answered Ward, " but I saw we were
in a place where it was Hobson's choice. One of these
days I'll get even with them on the animals."
The La Tours, as soon as they heard that the strangers
had stopped in Utah, paid a visit to their camp, in the hope



<pb n="92"/>
93     THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
of learning something of their relatives, of whom they had
never been able to hear anything since the day that they
' parted with them at winter quarters. Though they did
not think that their mother and the younger children would
go with the Mormons except upon compulsion, they were
by no means so sure about Philip, and they believed also
that Louise was in the Prophet's power, and that she was
in Utah, if alive.
Captain Ward could give them no information, but while
they were talking with him another of the company came
up-ran Illinoisan named Spencer, who had relatives among
the Mormons.
" Here is a man," said Ward, " who had a better chance
than I to look around, and he may be able to tell you what
you wish to know."
As the brothers stepped forward to meet Spencer, he ex-
claimed,
" I have surely seen one of you before; but no-stop.
It was a younger man; only a boy, in fact."
"Where did you see him ?"   In their eagerness the
brothers both spoke at once.
" In Salt Lake. He was a youngster of about eighteen,
I should say, but as tall as either of you, and so like you
that the resemblance quite startled me at first."
" Did you talk with him ?"
"No. I did not even hear his name mentioned. You
see, the Mormons don't encourage sociability between
their people and outsiders. I know them of old; and when
they are fixed so that they can have things their own way,
it won't do to ask too many questions about their affairs.
I would have liked to question my own relatives, especially  1
the women, who looked downcast enough to make me sure
their lot was a hard one; but I was certain that I should
- make trouble for myself and for them too by doing so." 



<pb n="93"/>
THE BROTHERS.                 93
"The fact is," interposed Ward, " we found ourselves
in the hands of the Philistines, and were forced to remem-
ber that discretion is the better part of valor. A little im-
prudence would have cost us a great deal more than the
garden truck that Badger tells about. We none of us
dared to appear as. though we were inquiring into their
concerns, but if you have relatives there and wish to find
out about them, I think I know of parties to whom in-
quiries could be addressed.
" You know we came in by the southern route, and in
Shasta valley we met some old friends of mine on their way
to the diggings in Yreka Flat. There were half a dozen
apostate Mormons with them-fellows who had got tired of
Prophets and polygamy and all that sort of thing, and left
Salt Lake without bidding anybody good-by. From the
stories they told I should say they had a lively time getting
away. They started out to hunt stray stock, and it appears
they managed to have the animals stray a good ways, and
timed their search so as to fall in with a train bound for
California. They were young fellows, all of them, and
from what I saw of Utah I can't blame them for leaving."
That night, when the brothers were alone, they talked
long and earnestly about the advisability of disposing of
their land and going over into California, where they might
possibly hear something of their family. There were many
recruits from Oregon in the army of California miners, and
the La Tours had more than once been on the point of
going; but now, as on many other nights when they had
talked the matter over, they went to bed without reaching
any conclusion.
The brothers still slept side by side, as they had done all
their lives. Their claims adjoined each other, and a cabin
built upon the line answered the legal requirements of a
dwelling upon each farm.



<pb n="94"/>
94    7THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
The unexplained physical and mental sympathy that
often exists between twins was so strong in their case that
in many respects they could hardly be said to have a
separate existence. They dropped asleep together, waked
at the same moment, and even their dreams were alike.
To-night, going to bed at a late hour, they slept until long
past midnight, then both waked with a shudder of alarm.
" Dear brother," said Francis, "I have had such a
dreadful dream."
"And I," answered Charles. "I dreamed that I saw
our mother in a little room, cold and bare like a prison-
cell. She sat on the edge of a narrow bed, and when she
tried to rise I saw that there was a chain about her waist
that fastened her to the spot. Her hair was white as snow,
and her face pale as the dead."
" I saw all that too," interrupted Francis, " and yet in
spite of everything there was a peaceful, almost a happy
look in her eyes, as they met mine. What can it mean ?"
" I do not know any more than you, and. we shall not
find out by staying here. Let us not wait any longer, but
start for California at once. If we cannot sell our land, we
can rent it."
I was thinking just the same. If we meet those young
men from Salt Lake we can at least find out whether our
mother and the little girls are in Utah. Philip is there,
without doubt. It could have been no one else that this
man Spencer saw."
"And the little girls are almost women now. Think
what a place that must be for them, with no one able to
protect them !"
The brothers slept no more that night, and the next
morning set about making the necessary arrangements for
leaving. It was not a difficult matter to find a purchaser
for their land among the late arrivals, and with the price



<pb n="95"/>
THE BRO THERS.                 95
of it safely stowed away in the leather belts which enabled
the men of the Coast in those days to become their own
bankers, they started on their journey, carrying with them
the good wishes of the whole settlement.
In I852 the road over the Siskiyous was not what
it is to-day, but it was a very good road of its kind
nevertheless. Up and up the steep sides of the moun-
tain, now winding to the right, now making a sharp
turn to the left, here creeping along the edge of a preci-
pice, and yonder sinking almost out of sight in a nar-
row defile, the trail led at length to the open plateau
·overhung by the frowning summit of Pilot Knob. Here
our travelers caught their first glimpse of the Land of Gold
-that wonderful country whose hidden treasures are cov-
ered, not by desert sands and bare, bristling rocks, but by
an emerald carpet, embroidered with all the hues of earth
and sky.
The brothers lingered on the plateau until the declining
sun warned them that it was time to be on their way, if
they expected to reach the valley by nightfall; but the pic-
ture spread out before them was one which might well ex-
cuse delay. Who that has even looked upon it can forget
it! What traveler who has explored the valleys and
climbed the mountains of the Pacific Slope can lose the
memory of the charmed landscapes that make all other
scenery appear tame and cold I
A little way from the foot of the mountain they began to
perceive signs of human occupancy. Herds of cattle were
grazing on the slopes, trails branched off from the main
road in different directions, and finally the rock chimneys
and clap-boarded roof of a long low building came in
view. Our travelers' horses quickened their speed of their
own accord, and even the pack-mules began to move more
nimbly as they came in sight of the watering-trough, hewn



<pb n="96"/>
96     THE FATR OF MADAME LA TOUR.
out of an immense log, and filled by a pipe leading from
one of those mountain springs whose clear waters show
the form of the tiniest pebble or insect at the bottom.
The building needed no lettered sign to announce
" Entertainment for Man and Beast." More than a dozen
wayfarers were resting in various picturesque attitudes on
the porch, while in front of the stables a small band of
horses and mules were being divested of packs and saddles.
A number of the travelers were Oregonians, who, after a
prosperous summer in the mines, were returning to their
families, and among these the La Tours found one or two
acquaintances who had spent the last six months on Yreka
Flat. They confirmed Captain Ward's account of the
Mormon boys who had lately come to the mines, and were
able besides to give the names of some of them-names
which the brothers remembered in connection with the
flight from Nauvoo, and the year they had spent at winter
quarters.
The company that filled the inn was a genial one, the
supper was good, and the stories of the " diggin's" which
followed it were well flavored with the marvelous; yet the
' brothers, who were eager to be on the way, found the even-
ing a long one, and by sunrise next morning they were
ready for their journey.
A ride of ten hours through a rolling country covered
with grass, with here and there a patch of timber, brought
them in sight of their destination.
Yreka Flat, in those days, came under the head of " new
diggings." About half a dozen cabins of the rudest con-
struction were scattered around, but the majority of the
miners had been too busy during the summer to think of
building cabins; and besides, what need was there of a
house in those months when rain never fell, and the air
was as soft as a baby's cheek ?



<pb n="97"/>
THE BROTHERS.                  97
The day's work was over, and all along the gulches camp-
fires began to gleam, casting a bright glow on the faces of
the masculine cooks, who were making coffee, frying
bacon, or engaged in the more arduous task of mixing
bread in their prospect-pans.
They were a merry crew, these miners. They sang and
whistled as the cooking progressed, and when supper was
ready seated themselves comfortably on the ground, with no
complaints about the absence of tablecloths and napkins,
and ate and drank with an appetite that it was worth
crossing the Sierras to find. There was no trouble about
clearing the table after the meal, and dish-washing was a
brief and infrequent ceremony, observed chiefly out of
respect to the traditions of the past.
Our travelers were received with that open-handed hos-
pitality which was a distinguishing characteristic of the
" Forty-Niners," and before the evening wore away they
were rechristened according to the custom of the Coast.
Every man in the camp bore an appellation which had a dis-
tinctive meaning, the arbitrary title by which he was known
in "the States" having been dropped, along with other
relics of an effete civilization. Henceforth the new-comers
were to be designated as the " Turtle-Doves," and if a neces-
sity arose for speaking of them separately-a thing which
rarely happened-they were distinguished as Number One
and Number Two.
Early the next morning Christopher Columbus-so
named because, according to his own version of the history
of the Coast, he was the original discoverer of all the rich
diggings known to fame-proffered his services to the late
arrivals in the capacity of instructor and general adviser.
" This here camp is gittin' considerable played out," he
remarked.  "Diggin's was struck last spring, an' sence
then there's been nigh onto a thousand of the boys at work-



<pb n="98"/>
S9     THE FATE OF MADA.ME LA TOUR.
on the Flat. Mebbe a hundred out of the lot has made a
clean-up of from three to ten thousand dollars, an' ef you
'count alongside of them all the claims that's bein' worked
now, you can see with half an eye that the ground's bin
pooty well prospected. The pay streaks is worked out, an'
by the time snow flies these diggin's '11 be as lonesome as
a last year's bird's-nest; but I'll tell you what I'll do,"
lowering his voice to a confidential half-whisper; "I've
got a big thing on the crick, jest the other side of the
mounting.
"1 reely don't like to .tell it as big as it is, because you
mought think I was a-lyin'. I hain't done much work on
it jest staked out the claim, an' sunk a shaft eight foot, to
the bed-rock. Well, now, you heerd the boys talk Jast
night about half a dollar to the pan, as though that was big
pay. I didn't want to say anything to discourage 'em, but
ef I thought I hadn't got nothin' to look forrerd to but a
pay streak that u'd average half a dollar to the pan, I'd
throw up the sponge an' quit the country.
" As I was tellin' you, that there claim of mine ain't had
- much work done on it; but the dirt I took out of the bot-
tomn of the shaft went fifteen dollars to the pan."
" Mining is new business to us," Francis ventured to
suggest, "and we want to look about a little, and get 
what information we can before deciding upon anything."
"Well, ginerally speakin', that's the best plan; but
when a feller that's new to the diggin's has a chance to go 
in with some one that's bin on the Coast since airly in the
spring of '49, an' took out more dust than a mule-train
could pack down-hill on the ice, it's different. Now, I
don't mind sayin' that I've kinder took to you boys, an'
I'll makeyo' an offer that I wouldn't make to everybody.
Ef you've a notion to go in with me on that there claim, '
you kin have a one half intrist for five hundred dollars, or 
i



<pb n="99"/>
THE BROTHERS.                  99
a two thirds intrist for a thousand. You see, two thirds
gives you the control, an' that's a big thing for you."
At this point the conference was interrupted by loud calls
for " Christopher" from a neighboring group of miners;
and with a hasty apology to his new friends and a promise
to see them again, the proprietor of the rich placer claim
on the " crick" moved away in answer to the summons.
The young men looked after him with a mingled expres-
sion of amusement and relief. The fortunate owner of the
wonderful gold deposit was a trifle seedy in his personal
appearance. The rim of his hat had disappeared, with the
exception of a single piece which hung down behind, while
a bristling crop of sandy hair showed through an aperture
in the crown. His flannel shirt, his sole upper garment,
had evidently been fashioned from the half of a pair of
blankets which had seen long service before relinquishing
their first form and design. His breeches, skilfully patched
with remnants of flour-sacks, stopped half way below the
knees, and were met by the tops of boots that had never
been a pair.
The brothers were still following the receding figure of
the great discoverer with their eyes, when a friendly hand
was laid on the shoulder of each, and turning they con-
fronted Lucky Jim-a blue-eyed, jovial ne'er-do-weel,
who had followed up all the strikes on the Coast without
making a dollar, but who seemed nevertheless as happy
and care-free as though he had found the world an oyster
already opened for him.
"The boys noticed Columbus going up your way," he
said, " and they sent me around, not to notify you that he's
the biggest liar on the Coast, for they reckon you can find
that out for yourselves, but to tell you how to get rid of
him.
"When he comes back with an offer to sell you two



<pb n="100"/>
1oo    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
'thirds of his claim-he'll ask a thousand dollars for it at 
first, and finally drop to a hundred or less-just tell hi 
you'll take an interest if he can get the Professor to go ' i
with you. You see, he swindled the Professor out of fi' 
hundred dollars when he first struck the diggings, and
came mighty near getting the top of his head shot off when
the' Golden Treasure' turned out to be salted."
" That is a good idea," said Francis, who usually spoke
for both. "We were wondering how we should answer
him; for no doubt if we declined buying an interest in his
claim on the'crick,' he would bring forward a dozen
others, each one better than the last." Then after a brief
pause he added,
" May we trouble you to assist us in another matter ?
We came here hoping to find three young men from Utah,
who, so we were' told, were in this camp." 
Jim nodded. " I know the boys you mean," he said, 1
"but they're with a party that's gone over the mountain for
supplies. They will be back in about a month. You have
just missed seeing them, for they left only four days ago." 
i i



<pb n="101"/>
.CHAPTER VIII.
THE PROPHET'S PROFITS.
THE spring of 1853 opened with every indication of a
prosperous year for the Mormon settlements in Utah. The
heavy overland emigration to California during the two
previous years had been of great benefit to the Saints.
Many large companies were compelled, on reaching Salt
Lake, to make such exchanges and purchases as Captain
Ward's train bad made,. and it is scarcely necessary to
add that the Mormons always had the best of the bargain.
Many other companies had unwisely loaded their wagons
with supplies of all kinds that their jaded teams could not
possibly drag across the desert, and these supplies were
unloaded in Utah and sold for a trifle, or, in many cases,
given away.
There were still other small companies that entered the
borders of Utah and were never seen again. This was es-
pecially true of returning Californians, who attempted to
cross the Territory with the treasure they had taken from
the mines of the Coast.
At this time Brigham Young was at once-the ecclesias-
tical, civil, and military head of the colony. He was Gov-
ernor of the Territory, by Federal appointment, ex-ojicio
commander of the military, and he assumed also to be the
vicegerent of the Almighty. His power was that of an
absolute and irresponsible despot,* and this power he exer-
cised for. more than twenty years, without let or hindrance
from any quarter.
*Se Appendix, Note F, page 337.



<pb n="102"/>
1
102    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
To say that he held the lives, liberty, and property of the
people in his hands is to make an assertion that falls short
of the truth. He had it in his power to condemn those who
fell under his displeasure to a fate more terrible than death,
and to cause the slow years of a wretched life to drag out in
the midst of tortures such as Loyola never dreamed of.
And like the savage tribes of the American wilderness,
he punished those who offended him, not merely by causing
th'em to suffer in their own persons everything that his
cruel spirit could devise, but by putting those who were
deaer to them than their own lives to torture and shame.
Because Madame La Tour had incurred his.bitter hate,
it pleased him to sacrifice her daughter, who had never
offended him. That he might torture her mother through
her, Louise La Tour, beautiful, gifted, and refined, was
made the slave of a brute whose very presence was an in-
sult to a pure woman. Then, when this wretch tired of
her, and wished to throw her aside, he was prepared to
give her to another of those beasts in human form who
were among his familiars; but here, it seemed, his hand
was stayed. He who sent His angel, and shut the lions'
mouths; He who walked beside His chosen-ones in the fur-
nace seven times heated had heard tle cry that went up
in the silence of the night from a sotl bereft of earthly
hope: Louise was no longer alone. She realized the en-
compassing, all-pervading presence of the Helper of the
helpless; she felt that an invisible Hand was turning aside;
the shafts aimed at her. Her first encouragements were that'
about that time human friends were raised up for her in unex-
pected quarters. The first wife of Kimlall, known among
the people as Sister Vilate, whose suffirings had not yet
culminated in the madness that preceded her death, was
moved with a strange pity for the hapless girl, whose his-
tory she knew only too well. She visitrd her in Burch's



<pb n="103"/>
THE PROPHET'S PROFITS,             103
cabin, watched over her like a mother while she remained
there, and finally induced her husband to give Louise her,
freedom.
In Utah, as in Asia, a man who is displeased with one
of his many wives, or who has grown tired of her, gives
her a bill of divorce and sends her away,* and Sister
Vilate was able to persuade Kimball to give Louise such a
bill; but could not procure for her the privilege of liv-
ing with her brother and sisters. As soon as she was
divorced the Prophet had her removed to his own house-.
hold, ostensibly to act as governess for some of his children,.
but really that there might be no hindrance in the way
when he should'see fit to marry her to one of his followers.
She had now been two years in his family, and, as yet,
no further harm had befallen- her. She attended faithfully
and quietly to her daily duties, and won the hearts, not
only of the children under her care, but of the women in
the Prophet's household. She was always gentle and
patient, and, so far as those around her could see, content
with her lot.
In the mean time both her sisters had grown to woman-
hood. Blanche, at fifteen, was as tall as Louise herself,
and Catherine, though only seventeen, had the face and
manners of a mature woman. They still lived with their.
brother, and the little household, as Louise found out at an
early day, was often in straitened circumstances.
Madame La Tour's effects, which were brought to the
Territory, had never been restored to her family, but the
Prophet had continued his plan of "assisting" Philip by
furnishing him with small supplies from time to time. He
had also loaned him a team, and with this and his own
labor the young man had done his best to support his
sisters.
*See Appendix, Note G, page 34.



<pb n="104"/>
104    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
His loyalty to the Prophet never wavered, though his'
inherited pride made him restive under what seemed his
constant dependence on others. At length, one day, when
emboldened by some unusual kindness on the part of his
leader to speak freely to him, he ventured to ask some
questions about the money which his father at his death left
in the hands of the authorities of the Church, to be held in
trust for his children.
"My dear boy," the Prophet said, in his most paternal
tone, " have you ever asked yourself how much it has cost
the Church to provide for all of you, and take care of you
as you have been taken care of ever since your father's
death ?"
Philip was silent and abashed for a moment.
"I thought," he faltered at length, " that my mother had:
a small income which lasted as long as she lived. I know
she had still a little money when we came here."
"Yes, money which I loaned her," was the cool response.
"The fact is, Philip, it is now ten years since your father's
death, and he left a large, and in some respects a very
helpless family to be cared for. All of you had been used
to luxuries, and we did our best to provide for you in such
a way that you should not feel the loss of anything. We
would have been glad to take care of you without using any
part of the little sum which your father left; but that was
not possible."
"Do you know what that sum was ?" Philip wondered
at his own boldness as he made this inquiry. It seemed
to him like calling his Prophet to account.
"I cannot give you the exact figures without consulting
my books," was the answer.
" I have heard my mother say something about thirty-
five thousand dollars," Philip began, more timidly than
before.                                          i



<pb n="105"/>
THE PROPHET'S PROFITS.:            105
"Thirty-five thousand ! Why, your father did not have
one third of that sum when he came to Nauvoo. As I have
said, I cannot lell you the exact amount he left, but this
much I do know, there is only five hundred dollars coming.
to you. That was just the balance in your favor the last
time I looked over the account, and I calculate to give you
a deed for the house and lot you occupy for the five hun-
dred. To be sure, the place is worth more than that, but
you are like a son to me, and I am glad to do you a favor,
no matter what the cost may be to myself."
What could. Philip say ? In his heart he knew that the
Prophet was doing him an injustice, but he would not ad-
mit the fact even to himself. The man who stood between
him and God, who was the mouthpiece of the Almighty,
could do no wrong. Hefelt asa Christian might feel, when
tempted to question the ways of Divine Providence, to ask,
"Why hast thou dealt thus with me ?"
But more severe tests of his loyalty awaited him. Dur-
ing the summer of '53, in spite of his utmost efforts, he
could not keep want from his door. His own and his sis-
ters' clothing grew shabby and worn, and their meals were
coarse and scanty. Catherine fell sick, and their prospects
became more gloomy than ever, when a company of return-
ing Californians stopped in Utah on their way to the States,
and brought Philip'the first news he had had of his absent
brothers since the day that he parted with them. They
brought also what, in the present distressed condition of
the family, was a most welcome gift-namely, a hundred'
dollars in gold, which Charles and Francis had sent to their
sisters. The next morning, while Philip was consulting
with Catherine as to the best manner in which to lay out
the money that had arrived so opportunely, a messenger
came to summon him to the Prophet's presence.
"Philip," said his leader very gravely, as soon as the



<pb n="106"/>
o06.   THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR. 
youth stood before him, "I have sent for you and for a
good many of the younger brethren to-day, to remind you,
that the work of the Lord is standing still, Secause you do 
not bring your tithing into His storehouse. Thousands of
poor Saints are waiting to gather to these valleys of the
mountains, but we have no means to help them on their
way. We are commanded to hasten the building of the
Temple, but the Church has no money-no, not so much as
to finish the foundation. I grieve to say it, but I feel that
the wrath of God will be poured out on this people if their
tithes are not paid in full. I have looked to you to set an
example to the others; but you must know yourself that
your tithing has not been paid for many months."
"We have been so very poor," Philip began humbly.
The Prophet's eyes flashed. "Take care," he said.
"You can't deceive the Almighty. This very minute you
have one hundred dollars in gold in your possession." 
"It is not mine," Philip found courage to say.
"Yes, I know," was the triumphant answer. " It is not
yours, but the Lord's. Are you going to keep it back ?"
" That is not what I meant to say. The money belongs
to my sisters. It was sent to them."
"And you are going to make that an excuse for with- 
holding your tithing?  Ah, Philip," shaking his head
mournfully, "I did not expect this of you. I am afraid
ydur heart is not right."
" I want to pay my tithing," Philip answered, " but you
do not know how destitute we are, and Catherine is sick."
"More excuses ! I thought I had taught you to give up
everything to the Lord, and trust Him to provide for your
wants."
Philip was silenced. The pale face of his sister, the
vision of his home, so bare of comforts, and his own sense
of right availed nothing against the subtle arguments of his
\             ";',~~~~



<pb n="107"/>
THE PROPHET'S PROFITS.              107
chief, backed by the assumption of divine authority, and in,
fhe end he not only paid over all the money his brothers
had sent, but drove his only cow to the Tithing Yard to,
settle the arrears which the Prophet declared to be still
due.*
Louise knew all this, but she could not interfere in any
way, nor had she any means with which to help her sisters.
She taught the Prophet's children, and was boarded and
clothed for her services; but she had no money. Cather-
ine seemed nearer to her than any other member of their
scattered family, and the thought of her sickness and desti-
tution wrung her heart; but she was not even allowed to
visit her.
How Philip accounted to his sisters for the disposition he
had made of their money she could not learn; but she
heard enough from others to know that he redoubled his
own exertions to provide for them, so that before winter
set in they were at least saved from actual suffering.
Early in December, Philip, whom she sometimes saw at
the Prophet's house, brought her word that Catherine was
to be married at Christmas; and to her great relief, when
the name of her intended husband was mentioned, it was
that of a young man who, as she had good reason to be-
lieve, was thoroughly cured of his faith in Mormonism.
As a matter of.course, this was not a thing to be talked of
publicly. No man in Utah who valued his lifeeveruttered
a whisper of dissent in those days, except to friends whose
faith in the Prophet was as weak as his own; but Robert
Kenyon had never been suspected of heresy, and for a year
past he had been employed much of the time about some
buildings that were being erected upon the ten acres which
were set apart for Brigham Young's private grounds. In
* See Appendix, Note H, page 343.



<pb n="108"/>
10o' THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
this ay it hiappened that he often met Louise, and the free-
masonry which existed among the disaffected soon madd'
them aware of each other's views. His acquaintance with
Catherine had been short, but it seemed to be a case of love
at first sight on both sides. The Prophet, for a wonder,
had no objections to make to the marriage when Robert,
with due humility, asked his consent, and he was likewise'-
gracious enough to grant their request to be married by
him in his office, without going through the Endowment
House, Kenyon alleging Catherine's delicate health as a
- reason for wishing to put off receiving their endowments
until spring.
Soon after the marriage the Prophet, in a fit of good na-
ture, gave Louise permission to visit Catherine in her new
home. This was almost the first opportunity that the sis-
ters had enjoyed of talking freely together since the
memorable day when they met on the path above Burch's
cabin. On the few occasions when Louise had been
allowed to visit her family, Philip had been at home, and
when she and Catherine met elsewhere it was always in
the presence of others.
To-day Louise found the young wife alone. They talked
long and earnestly of their own affairs, and of their mother,
whom Catherine, with strange persistence, still spoke of as
living, though she admitted that she had never been able
to find the faintest trace of her existence since the day that
she disappeared.
" And I have tried too," she said; "secretly, of course.
One must be secret about everything in this miserable
country. I feel as though I was breathing an atmosphere
of lies all of the time, and it suffocates me; but I have
worked in the dark, and in underhand ways, like all the
rest here, because I wanted to find mother."
" And you have discovered nothing ?"



<pb n="109"/>
- THE PROPHET'S PROFITS        .     109
"No, nothing; but, my dear, I must not make you un-
happy on this first visit, by dwelling on a sorrow that can-
not be healed. Come, let us talk no more about it. I will
get dinner, and you shall help me. We will take our din-
ner alone, because Robert will not be home until long
after dark to-night."
While they were sitting at table, Catherine asked suddenly,
" Have you heard the news about Margaret Denys ?"
"No. What of her?"
" She was sealed to Apostle Woodford yesterday."
"I can't say that I am surprised," Louise answered,
"for nothing that is done here surprises me; but her hus-
band will be home in a few days, and unless he has
changed greatly there will be an outbreak that will end
just as that affairof the Penfields' ended last year. George
Denys is not the man to stand quietly by and see his wife
given away to another, even though that other may be an
apostle."
"But in this case there has been no giving away,"
Catherine answered. "It is all Margaret's own doings.
She asked for a divorce herself, and asked several times
before she got it. For my part, I wonder how a man like
George Denys ever came to love such a woman; but I sup-
pose he was taken with her pink cheeks and blue eyes, just
as Apostle Woodford is taken with her now."
" Margaret is weak, not wicked," Louise said earnestly.
"I believe she really loved her husband once-loved him
even when he went away on this mission; but he has been
gone three years, and during all this time she has been
listening constantly to such talk as we are all compelled to
listen to every Sunday; and being, as I said, weak and
easily influenced, she believes that the apostle will give her
a place in the next world that she could never reach as the
wife of plain George Denys."



<pb n="110"/>
II     THE FATE OF MADA ME LA TOUR.
" I have no patience with such folly," Catherine began;
'but she stopped short when she saw the pained look on her
sister's face. She did not know all of Louise's history, but
she had heard enough and guessed enough to be aware
that she too had once listened willingly to teachings that
afterward bore bitter fruit.
"I hope some person who has a little influence with
Denys will be the.one to break the news to him when he
comes," she said after a few minutes' silence.
"So do I," Louise answered. "I don'twant to see him
throw his life away, as he will be sure to do if he acts as a
husband would act anywhere else under the same circum-
stances."
." Louise, you know what became of Penfield. Is not
that true ?"
" Don't ask me." Louise shudderedi and her pale face
grew still paler. " What I know I cannot help knowing.
I would be ignorant if I could. I would gladly be blind
and deaf while my home .is inside those walls, but what I
- am forced to know I do not want to recall."
"I should be afraid in your place," Catherine said,
"that since I was not blind and deaf, the Prophet would
* take a sure method of making me dumb."
Louise shook herhead. "BrighamYoung fears nothing
from one like me. He thinks that I am completely crushed
-that I am his slave, body and soul, but even if this were
not so, I should not feel myself in any danger."
" And why not, pray ?"
" I believe in God."
Catherine made an impatient gesture.
"Don't misunderstand me," Louise continued. "I was
not thinking of the God these wretches worship-a God of
blood and cruelty-but of our mother's God-of the God
she taught us to pray to in the dear old home. You have



<pb n="111"/>
F
THE PROPHET'S PROFITS.              Il
not forgotten, have you, the nursery with the high windows
and the crimson hangings, and the bed by which we used
to kneel ? I could not forget it if I should live a thousand
years."
Catherine's face softened.  "I remember," she said
gently, "though it is almost like a dream now; but you
know that ever since I was eight years old I have heard
the name of God used as a shield for all manner of wicked-
ness."
"Yes, I know," Louise answered, "and I have seen
hands that were red with murder raised in prayer; but is
that a reason why I should not pray to the God who abhors
the evil that is done in His name ?"
It is not to be supposed that at the time referred to a
conversation like the foregoing could be safely carried on
under ordinary circumstances. The system of espionage
adopted by the Mormon leaders at the very outset had now
been brought to such perfection that every person's com-
ings and goings were strictly watched, and the private
affairs of every family were as well known to the priest-
hood as their place of residence. No one dared marry or
be given in marriage; move from one plaqc to another,
buy or sell, or make any business, or domestic changes
whatever, in opposition to " counsel."
Husbands and wives, parents and children, friends and
neighbors, were required to be spies upon each other, and
the secret police shadowed every man's steps.
Louise's visit to her sister, however, was made by the
Prophet's express permission, and neither she nor Cather-
ine were suspected of the slightest leaning toward apostasy.
Louise said rightly that her own spirit was supposed to be
completely crushed, and in general her master took no
more notice of her and attached no more importance to her
presence than if she had been a five-year-old child.



<pb n="112"/>
112     ItE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR. 
Robert Kenyon's house was not watched as that of ai
suspected person would have been, and the sisters, seatedj
in an inner room, with closed doors and windows, knew
there-was no danger that their low-toned conversation would
be overheard.
They would have been bold indeed if they had uttered'
such opinions or mentioned such facts where there might
possibly have been unseen listeners; for no one's life was
worth an hour's purchase who was known to question the
authority of the Prophet, or to denounce the crimes of the 
priesthood. And then, too, the Mormon hierarchy knew
how to take life with unheard-of refinements of cruelty.
Oh, if the dark recesses of the caions had a voice, if the
blood that stains the sod could speak, if the night-wind
could bear on its wings the cries that fell on unpitying
ears, what a tale of horror would be unfolded ! But the;
dead are silent  The crumbling skeletons hidden under
piles of rocks do not stir in their resting-places. The
bottomless springs of the south, in which many a victim of
priestly cruelty has found a grave, keep safely that which
was committed to them, and the cries of the tortured cap-
tives in the Black Vault have never been able to pierce the
thick walls and smite on the ear of the passer-by.
'i



<pb n="113"/>
CHAPTER IX.
PLANS FOR ESCAPE.
IT is high noon upon the Wasatch peaks. The May sun-
light, reflected from vast beds of untrodden snow, fills the
whole atmosphere with a blinding glare. The mountain
torrents, swollen by the streams that pour into them from
every gorge, rush down their steep channels, and leap from
ledge to ledge with a noise like that of an avalanche.
A few birds flitting in and out of the stunted timber
along the gulch are the only living creatures in sight. A
rough and narrow trail, rendered more uneven and difficult
by detached masses of rock which have rolled down from
the sides of the mountain, follows the course of the stream
that takes its rise at the highest point'of the divide which
must be crossed in order to. reach the valleys east of the
range.
A wagon-road could not possibly be built over this
divide, and the route would be considered impracticable
by horsemen less accustomed to difficult feats than the
pioneers of the Great Basin.
Under ordinary circumstances, travelers crossed the
range by a road several miles to the north, which was pass-
able for teams during the summer months; but the two
horsemen who could be descried a long way down the
canon had reasons of their own for choosing the southern
trail.
The foremost of the two was Robert Kenyon, the hus-
band of Catherine La Tour. He was a young man, not
over three-and-twenty, but a giant in stature, and the cool



<pb n="114"/>
114    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
and intrepid spirit which looked out from his gray eyes,
joined to his skill in the use of arms, would have made him
a formidable match for an adversary. Yet neither his
strength, his skill, nor his courage availed him anything
here, where, if he dared to assert his manhood, spies would-
dog his steps by day, and assassins lie in wait for him by
night. 
.,Hi.s companiop was tall and slenderly built, with long 
hair, .d beard, opee brown, but now thickly sprinkled with
silvr, His face was very pale,. he stooped slightly, and
his whole aspect .was that of one lately recovered from
severe sickness. This man was George Denys, the re-
turned missionary whose wife had been given to Apostle
Woodford,
About half way .up the cation the trail widened for a few
rods; and in a little opening among the rocks the travelers :
dismounted for their noonday meal. The wind blowing
from the spowy peaks made the day cold in spite of the
uspiunse  and Denys shivered perceptibly.
. "W. l.I.light a fire ?.' aIced his companion.
"Yes, if you will," was the reply. "This is as safe a 
spot as we shall be likely to find for talking over our 
ffairs,' glanci'g as he spoke at the sheer precipice that 
rose for a hundred feet above their heads, and the rushing,
roaring torrent beside the trail.
When the meal was over, the two men seated themselyes
by the fire with their backs to the rocks, and in such -a
position as to command a view of the trail for a consider.
able distance above and below. Kenyon was the first to
speak.
"If these precious scoundrels that run the Church don't
change their minds between two days," he said, " I will
be off by the end of the month-just think of it, on a mis
sion: sent by the Prophet himself to build up and exten



<pb n="115"/>
PLANS FOR ESCAPE.                l15
the kingdom in the western borders of the country that hi
claims by right of discovery. I could hardly help laughing
in his face when he blessed me last week as a special prep,
aration for this work. I wish I could get a report of the
blessing pronounced on me when the old fox finds that I
have outwitted him, and -that Catherine and I are safe in
California."
"I am glad to see you in such good spirits," was the
reply; " but I must remind you that the need of caution
will not cease when you reach Carson. A good many
brethren who are weak in the faith meet with fatal acci-
dents, or are ' killed by Indians,' even there."
"I suppose that is so; but you see, I shall not grow
weak in the faith until I have shaken the dust of that place
from my feet. I shall remain and attend diligently to all
my duties ustil the next train bound for California or
Oregon comes along, and then good-by. The only thing
that troubles me is the idea of stealing away as I must-as
anybody must who gets away at all-like a thief in the
night."
"You are a happy man to have no greater trouble."
Denys dropped his head in his :hands and was silent for
some minutes. When he looked up again there was a spot
of color on his pale cheeks, and his voice trembled slightly.
" I cannot do otherwise than wish you God speed," he
said, "though your going will leave me without a friend to
whom I dare speak. You deserve your liberty, and I pray
that you may get it. You and your wife are here only be-
cause your parents brought you into the Church when you
were too young .to act for yourselves, while I deliberately
abandoned a Christian home, and broke the heart of my
gray-haired father, for the sake of joining myself to these
wretches, and shut my eyes to the crimes they committed
in the name of religion until I was made a victim myself.



<pb n="116"/>
i6    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
That is the thought that always checks me when I aift 
tempted to exclaim, ' My punishment is greater than I can
bear.'"
" It is not a reason, though, why you should stay here
until worse comes upon you."
Denys shook his head. "For me there is nothing worse
to come," he said. "I had nothing in this life except
Margaret, and after she was taken from me I was incapa-
ble of feeling any added wrongs. When she died, killed
bythe miseries that awaited her in that polygamous house-
hold, and by her own remorse, I knew they could not stab
me again through her. If she had lived, they might have
done so, for I loved her-loved her to the last."
Kenyon's face expressed both astonishment and incredu-
lity. His companion observed his-look and went on:
"You wonder that I did not hate her. Why should I ?
The poor child only obeyed the doctrines that I myself had
taught. Like you, she was brought up in this accursed
community, and knew no other religion.- How then could
I blame her ? I did not blame her. I pitied her from my
soul, and from my soul I was thankful when death released
her from her sufferings."
" And yet, what she did or was led to do uprooted all
your faith in Mormonism."
"True, because, as I have said, when other crimes were
committed I was only a spectator; this time I was a vic-
tim. If you could know how constantly the image of my
wife was with me every day of those three years of ab-
sence, and how the hope of seeing her kept me up on our
terrible return trip across the plains ! It was late in Sep-
tember when we reached Iowa, and common prudence
warned us not to attempt the journey until spring; but the
other men had families in Salt Lake as well as I, and we
thought we would brave anything rather than stay away



<pb n="117"/>
PLANS FOR ESCAPE.               I17
from them six months longer; at least that was the way I
felt, and I persuaded the others to make the venture with
me.
" You know a little of what we suffered, but you could
not begin to realize our hardships without experiencing
them yourself. Yet, as I said, the thought that every
mile we traveled brought us nearer home kept us up, and
then-and then-the message which told me I no longer
had a home was brought to me just as I caught sight of
the house that was mine once.'
Again Denys buried his face in his hands, and shook as
if in an ague-fit. Kenyon laid his arm gently around his
shoulder.
"George, old friend, don't call that up," he said, as
tenderly as a woman.
The giant carried an affectionate and impressible heart
in his broad bosom, and the sight of this hopeless sorrow
was more than he could bear.
"Come, rouse yourself," he continued. "You are a '
man, and too good a man to stay among these cutthroats.
In the world outside you may find, if not happiness, at
least occupation that will keep you from brooding over
your troubles, and friends who will stand by you. Prom-
ise me that you will make the attempt to get away."
"I can do nothing just now. There is no chance of my
being sent west, but it is just possible that I may be
chosen to accompany the emigration to San Bernardino in
the fall."
" Now that you speak of it, I think I have heard your
name mentioned in connection with that mission. You
know, I suppose, that the Prophet"-Kenyon placed an in-
describable emphasis on this word-" is well satisfied with
your conduct, and has the greatest confidence in you."
"Yes; I know."



<pb n="118"/>
·lz8    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
i  Arind that puts you in a position to help others. Cather; '|
ie fes'; much anxiety about her sister Louise, who is not' 
llowed to go with us."                             X
"'.ouise! I thought her one of the Prophet's worship- '
'" ELoise loathes and detests him and his teachings, and
sheib borne up so well under sufferings that would kill
itE women, it seems to me she deserves to escape; but
s't hi  the way. is barred. I thihk, however, that you
may be able to do something toward helping her."
- 'I ?"  '   '
'"' es, if you o to San Bernardino.  If she could get
there it would be possible for her to communicate with her
brothers, who atr in California."
"No one could be more willing than I to help her or any-
one else who wishes to get away from here; but I cannot
do anything to befriend her while'she thinks me still i slave
of the Prophet."
" I ill 'find means to let her know where you stand, and
wIl give you the ky to the signals by means of which she
ad Caithttine are able to say whatthey wish when in the
*r:edEe !of o  ihers. Poor'girl i' She ibay need a friend
badly'enoUgh whefn we are g6ne.:'
"I am surprisetfo learn that she feels as you say she
does. The family seem 'very much attched to her, and I
sippbied she was with them from choice." 
" You do not'know her history then ?'
"No."
"Perhaps I ought tb tell you. -It can db no harm for
you to know it now."
Then choosing his words as carefully' as possible, but
still keeping back no part of the truth, Robert Kenyon
unfolded a tale which, so it seemed to bis 'listener, should
have caused the very stones at their feet to cry 'ot against



<pb n="119"/>
PLANS FOR ESCAPE.         -      i9
the stupendous system of villainy and outrage which iid
enthroned itself in these valleys under the name of religion.
" It is monstrous-incredible !" Denys exclaimed when
the recital was ended; "and yet, why should it not be
true ? There is no form nor degree of crime that the lead-
ers of this people are incapable of. Restassured, Robert,
that this poor girl will have at least one friend when you
are away, and I will make for her the effort that it seemed
not worth while to make for myself. If there Is a possi-
bility of getting her away from this valley I will find it
out."
"That is spoken like yourself, George, and Catherine
and I will go with lighter hearts; knowing that'you will
befriend her." 
By this time the sun had 'declined perceptibly from the
meridian, thefr'fire had burned out, and Denys, rising,
called his conmpaitn'sattenitiod to the factthat it was time
for them to be on their way if they did not wish night to
overtake them in the mountains.
The errand on which they were sent took them to a
small settlement which had been recently made in one of
the fertile eastern valleys. 
" See how this curse is spreading," Kenyon observed to
his companion as they came in sight of the valley.
"If the deluded Saints continue to gather to Zion at the
present rate, in ten y9ears Brighafi Young will have his
subjects scattered oret the whole cotnt6ry between the
Rocky Mountains and the Sierras."
" I hope' before that tinfe the Gotermeint will see the
necessity of laying a strong hand on hitn," Denys said;
"and if the nation does not hear something of his crimes,
it will not be my'fault." 
Two weeks after the friends returned from their journey,
Robert Kenyon and his wife: eft Salt Lake in company



<pb n="120"/>
120    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
with about twenty families who had been ordered out to
build up a Mormon colony within the limits of the present
State of Nevada. For many years after taking possession
of Utah, Brigham Young devoted much attention to estab 
lishing outposts (called stakes of Zion) beyond the present 
territorial lines,*#and the men selected as pioneers were,
for obvious reasons, those on whom he supposed he could
rely implicitly. It occasionally happened, however, that
his cunning overreached itself, and that men who wished
to be sent to those outposts, in order that they might es-
cape from his rule, were able to counterfeit loyalty to the
Church so successfully that they were chosen by him to go
on such missions without soliciting the privilege.
Apart from the hope of escape, there was nothing to
tempt even the most adventurous to those distant settle.
ments, and those who were not influenced by such hopes
went only because they dared not disobey "counsel."
The valleys of Utah are fertile, well watered and easily cul-
tivated, and the climate is delightful; but beyond the west-
ern limits of the Territory the face of the country is so
mountainous and the narrow valleys are so sterile that
even at this date few of them have an agricultural popular
tion.
The emigrant train set out late in May, 1855.  The
women of the company took leave of their friends with
tears, and the men looked depressed and anxious-all ex-
cept Kenyon and his wife, whom the Prophet praised pub-
licly for obeying counsel cheerfully.
Kenyon had found means to keep his word, both with
Denys and with Louise, and they understood each other's
true position; but for more than, two months they had no
opportunity of communicating unobserved.
* See Appendix, Note I, page 344 '.



<pb n="121"/>
PLANS FOR ESCAPE.                12
At length chance, or rather, shall we not say ? the Provi-
dence which watches over the helpless and oppressed,
opened the way for them to talk freely of the only plan of
escape that seemed practicable.  One of the Prophet's
wives living at Provo, a settlement forty miles south of
Salt Lake, sent for Louise to assist in the care of her sick
child, and Denys, who owned a good team, was asked by
Brigham to take her there.
It was not customary to make excuses when requested
by the Head of the Church to perform any service, and
Denys' ready consent awakened neither surprise nor suspi-
cion. As for Louise, she made ready for the journey with
the air of quiet resignation with which she obeyed all the
commandsof the Prophet; but she nevertheless contrived
to leave the impression that she went unwillingly.
Their road lay through an unsettled portion of the coun-
try, bare of timber, as is the case with all the valleys of
Utah, and affording no hiding-place for spies. For almost
the first time since she left her mother's house Louise felt
herself unwatched. The man beside her was her friend,
and more than this, he rejected all the claims of the system
that set spies and assassins on the track of those who dared
to think for themselves.
They rode for a little way in silence; then as the signs
of human habitation began to disappear, and they realized
that they were alone, and, for a few hours at least, free from
espionage, they began to talk over the chances of escape.
" It is now more than a year and a half since I returned.
to the valley," Denys said, " and if any one had told me at
first that I could live so long while forced to breathe this
accursed atmosphere of treachery, cruelty, and murder, I
would not have believed him."
" I wonder you did not make an effort to get away last
year," Louise remarked.



<pb n="122"/>
12s    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
UYou forget that I was sick for many months. I hoped
I should die-that seemed the easiest and shortest way out 
--but I was disappointed, and with returning health came 
thefeeitg that perhaps there might be a life worth living
Solewhere'beyond these mountains that shut us in. You
tfibw I did not come among the Mormons as a child.
ibe o;f my people were led off with me, and my father's
family would, I think, receive me even now."  .
!-"iwn thandkfut or you ftat you have such friends. I
hle no one butmy brothers, and my only hope is to reach
them.,"
Louise did not look very hopeful as she spoke, for in her
heart she was asking herself,
"How would my brothers receive me if theylcnew all ?"
Denys did not reply immediately, and when he spoke
again it was to say,  '
"I suppose you know that the company bouhd for San
Bernardind starts next month." 
'-" I have' heard'so. Are you going with them ?'
:'+" ian go if I wish. ''I hate been dffered the choice be-
tweie Sai- Benrdtino and -amission to the States."
;: aiBt yu -wlll 'go t the States, of course," Louise said,
and in spite of herself there was an undertone of disap-
paintrmet in her;voice.-
' -enys turned and-faced her. " If I ihad only myself to
think of;" hesaid, "I should go to the States, but Tprom-
ised your sister and her husband that I would help you,
.and therefbre I amr going to San Bernardino.;
"And do you think it possible to gain permission for me
to go too?"                  '
"Yes. There Is one way by which I think I can succeed
in getting you a place in the company."
"Name 'it."           - 
"I fear I may both shock and pan yoW ;- but I assiure



<pb n="123"/>
PLANS FOR ESCAPE    .           X23
you it is the only possible chance for you. You must go
as my wife."
Louise's pale face flushed scarlet, and her eyes dropped.
"You have not heard my history, or you would not think
of such a thing," she faltered, almost inaudibly.
" l ave heard your history-all of it," was the, answer,
"and the knowledge of your cruel wrongs makes me
doubly anxious to help you. Do you think that, in my
eyes, the least shadow of blame attaches to you, because
you- have been made the victim of a system which I myself
have helped to uphold ?"
"Yoir are good; and generous," Louise 'said at length,
after a long silence, " and you are the only friend I have
rmw;' but it seems like making a poor return for your
goodness to donsent to be your wife. I know nothing
abttai stch love as happler women have'experienced-such
loveas Catherine feels for her husband' -" 
Denys stopped her. "My pobr girl," he Said, "F un-
derstand-that. Neither of us can talk of marriage as men
and women do who have not passed. under this blighting
curse; but I will take the best care of you that I possibly
can, and do my utmost to bring a little brightness into
your life, and I have no fears but that the friendship be-
tween us will grow into a more tender affection."
" There is one thing you have not taken into account,"
Louise said. " If Brigham Young knows that I desire such
an arrangement, or that I consent to it even, he will never
sanction it. The only way in which he can be brought to
agree to it, will be by allowing him to think that I am un-
willing."
" I see; but I believe I can manage that. I will go to
him as soon as you return. He has already counseled me
to take a wife, and he will expect me to fix upon some one
before the company start. We all know that a woman's



<pb n="124"/>
124    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
consent is thought to be a matter of small importance, and
he will not be likely to ask me if I have secured yours.
Are you willing that I should speak to him ?"
"I am. If it is for the best I think there will be no ob-
stacles, and if it is not for the best-for both of us, I mean
-I shall pray that some other way of escape may open."
"You still pray, then ?" Denys looked at her half pity-
ingly, half inquiringly.
" Yes. I pray as my mother taught me to when I was
an innocent child, with no foreboding of misery and
shame."
There were tears in her dark eyes as she spoke, and
Denjs felt an answering moisture in his own.
"You are not altogether unhappy, then," he said at
length.  "I would to God I could pray, but I cannot.
And yet, poor child, your wrongs have been greater than
mine, and inflicted in the name of religion too. Maybe I
should feel differently if I had not once believed in this ac-
cursed system, as firmly as I used to believe in my mother's
God."



<pb n="125"/>
CHAPTER X.
THE BLISTERING DESERT.
EARLY in August, 1855, the families chosen to make the
difficult and perilous journey to the coast by the way of
Arizona, for the purpose of founding a Mormon colony;
were instructed to hold themselves in readiness to start on
a day's notice.
On the evening after receiving these instructions, George
Denys repaired to the Prophet's office, in obedience to a
message from him.
A few days before this he had signified his wish to marry
Louise La Tour, and the man who held their destinies in
his hands had answered that he would " think about it."
From present indications it appeared he had thought
favorably. He received Denys graciously, and said with-
out preface,
" I am willing to give Louise to you, but I suppose you
know it can be only a marriage for time. She is sealed to
Brother Joseph for.eternity."
" I am aware of that," was the reply.  "Have you
spoken to Sister Louise yet ?"
" I have, and she is very sullen-more so than I have
ever known her to be-but there is no question about her
obeying me. She has never dared to rebel against coun-
sel, and she knows better than to begin to do so now."
The sinister look that so many in Utah have abundant
cause to remember, darkened the face of the Prophet as he
spoke, and without another word he touched the bell on



<pb n="126"/>
126    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
his table. It was answered by one of the guards who i
always kept the door.
"Let Sister Louise know that I want her here," he said.
The man went out and returned in a few minutes with
Louise, who appeared pale and downcast enough to justify 
the account of her sullenness.
"Louise," said her master, "Brother Denys, whom I
wish you to look upon as your husband, is present."
Lguie, did not raise her eyes.
"Step this way," the Prophet commanded in his harsh-
est tones.
The girl obeyed.
"Now, Brother Denys, stand up and take her hand."
As soon as this direction was complied with, the Prophet
repeated the marriage service. Louise's replies were in- 
audible, and her master's cruel satisfaction manifested
itself in every look and tone. He believed that he was
sacrificing a reluctant and shrinking victim, and the satanic
malignity which was so strong an element of his character
made it a pleasure to him. He would add this night's
wprk p1 the list of his revenges, and yet the punishment
which Madame La Tour had drawn down upon herself and
her children would not be complete.
" Now, Brother Denys," he said, when the ceremony
was concluded, " take your wife-home with you. The trait
starts at nine o'clock to-morrow, and you have no time to
lose. Never mind about your clothes, Louise, I will have
them sent over in the morning."
" May I not say good-by to the children ?" Louise asked.
" No. You should have thought of that before."
" Have you any farther instructions for me ?" Denys in. 
quired.
"No. Brother Calder has all the necessary orders for
the company. Good-night."



<pb n="127"/>
THE BLISTERING DESERT.         ,    .127
The Prophet turned to the papers on his table and. Un
two who were thus dismissed passed out. 
Once beyond the gate and in the sheltering darknes',
Denys pressed encouragingly the trembling hand that rested
on his arm; but neither dared speak. Their prison doors
were ajar, but a single word might close them again.
Denys was boarding at the house of the Ward Bishop, 
and it was necessary that he should introduce his wife to
the rather numerous family of his host. Louise went
through this ordeal with tbhesamesad and subdued.air that
she had worn for days previous, and some of the women of
the family made commiserating remarks as she left the
room; but others were of the opinion that she ought to. be
content with her lot.
",She's .a first wife now," observed Sister Ann,.who was
herself the bishop's fourth spouse,." and .Brother Denys is
so easy-tempered she'll have her own way. in everything.
I don't know, for my part, what she's got to complain osf.
"Maybe she don't want to go on this mission," suggest-
ed Sister Emma.
"It is more likely that she wanted some one else," said
the youngest wife, who, if report could. be believed, had
looked much more kindly on a handsome stripling in the
neighborhood than on the gray-haired bishop.
Meanwhile the subject of their conversation was sitting
with her husband in a room piled half full of luggage that
should have been put into the wagons before night.
"I did not expect that we would start to-morrow,''
Denys said, " and I did not think that I should be allowed
to bring you here to-night, or I would have made some
better arrangements for your comfort. Indeed, I hardly
dared hope that I should be permitted to take you with me
at all."
"I do not believe that the Prophet made up his mind



<pb n="128"/>
128    THBE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
tlfer he talked with me," Louise replied; "but hegot
the mpression that I was very unwilling, and that decided
" 'it imagine what his feelings will be when he learns 
the truth," Denys said, and in spite of the dark past and
the difficulties and dangers that lay before them, both
smiled.
It was well indeed for them that their whispered confer-
ence was not overheard-well too that those who saw them
start out the next day were confirmed in the belief that
Louise went most reluctantly.
The emigrant train was composed of fifteen wagons,
representing as many families. The men were most of
them young, and, like Denys, recently married. Polyga-
mous families could not be colonized in San Bernardino.
The American flag yet waved over the whole of the vast
Coast region which Brigham Young claimed as a portion
of his dominions, and the day concerning which he uttered
so many prophecies-the day when all human governments
should fall before the power he represented-had not yet
dawned. The members of the company were all supposed
to be sound in the faith they professed, and in every way
fitted for their responsible mission. They had been select-
ed by the Prophet himself with especial care, and yet at
least three of the men besides Denys intended that their de-
parture from Utah should be a final one,'and it happened
eventually that not one of the fifteen families ever returned
to the valley.
The emigrants were well provided with necessaries for
their journey, not because the Church authorities had con-
cerned themselves about making such provision, but be-
cause they had sufficient means of their own to supply them
with ordinary comforts. The first stage of their route lay
through the settlements that had been made, at irregular



<pb n="129"/>
TJE BLISTERING DESERT.          -    29
distances, all the way from Salt Lake to the southern line
of the Territory. This portion of the journey was not
marked by any incidents worthy of notice, nor attended by
any hardships, but after crossing the divide south-west of
Mountain Meadows, the character of the country changed
entirely. It was near the middle of September when the
company encamped at Resting Springs-the last point at
which pure water is found before entering the desert
They remained in camp several days to rest and recruit, for
they knew that for the next hundred and fifty miles their
powers of endurance would.be taxed to the utmost.
At four o'clock on the morning of the 15th of September,
the company broke camp, and were on their way before
the first signs of day appeared in the east. It was neces-
sary that they should make twenty-five miles or more be-
fore sunset, in order to reach the next watering-place-the
Amagos, a stream so strongly impregnated with alkali
that it has been named the Poison River by the unfortunate
travelers who have tasted its waters.
The wheels of the loaded wagons dragged heavily. The
mules sank to the fetlocks at every step, and the men who
* walked beside the teams waded ankle deep in the loose,
shifting sand. As the day advanced, the sun beat down
upon them with a pitiless glare, and not a breath of
air stirred upon the face of the desert.
On every side, as far as the eye could reach, stretched an
unbroken expanse of sand, gray as ashes. Not even a
rock broke the monotonous view; not a hillock interposed
between them and the farthest verge of the horizon where
sand and sky met.
The sun sank at night in the gray waste; the stars came
out overhead, and still the train toiled on. At length, just
as the moon rose to light their way, the narrow channel of
the Amagos came in view. 



<pb n="130"/>
130    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
The shallow waters of the sluggish stream looked clear
and bright in the moonlight, and the foremost drivers
began to urge their teams toward it.
"Stop," cried Calder, the captain of the company.
"Don't you know that these waters will kill every animal
in the train ? Halt where you are. There is a spring a
little to the right that is safe."
The caution came too late. The loose cattle belonging
to the train, tortured by thirst, had pressed forward to the
brink and were already drinking.
The teams attached to the wagons were halted in obedi-
ence to orders, and a search was made for the spring,
which, when found, proved to be brackish, but not unwhole-
some; still, by Captain Calder's advice the company used
for themselves only the water which they had brought in
kegs from Resting Springs.
At starting, few of the emigrants had any adequate idea
of the hardships and perils of the journey, but a single
day's experience on the desert had given rise to grave
anxieties even in the minas if those most inured to the diffi-
culties of overland emigration.
Captain Calder had for his guidance a rude map, drawn
by one who had been over the route before, and a few notes
relating to the points at which water might be found; but
the sandy expanse over which they traveled afforded no
landmarks whatever, and it was an easy matter to miss the
sunken springs on which they depended. Their water-
casks, which had been filled before entering the desert,
held what was thought to be a sufficient supply for a four
days' journey. This included a scant allowance for the
teams, and a very small reserve to be used in case of de-
lays, but a single day's trial convinced them that there had
been a mistake in their estimates.
The heat, the fatigue, and above all thp extreme dryness



<pb n="131"/>
THE BLISTERING DESERT.              131
of the atmosphere, aggravated thirst in man and beast, and
it required all of Captain Calder's authority, in addition to
the combined good sense of the company, to prevent drink-
ing largely in excess of the day's allowance.
The second night on the desert was spent at Salt Springs.
The teams already began to show signs of exhaustion, and
it was necessary to drive carefully, for their losses from the
effects of the poisonous waters of the Amagos had reduced
their stock so that there were no relays.
The intensely salt waters of the springs would have been
quite as fatal as those of the Poison River, if drank, and at
this camping-ground the teams had to be supplied from the
rapidly-diminishing contents of the casks. The third and
fourth days' journey brought no changes, except that their
progress was slower, and the allowance of water dealt out
more scanty.
It was confidently expected that the train would reach
Bitter Springs on the evening of the fourth day, but when
the sun set on the wide waste of sand there was not the
faintest sign of water in sight
"We have traveled very slowly," Captain Calder said,
"and it would not surprise me at all to find out that we
have made at least ten miles less than we calculated upon
in the last two days. The springs are only a little way
ahead-that is certain-and it seems equally certain that
we must reach them to-night if we expect to save our
animals."
Acting upon this suggestion, the nearly worn-out teams
were urged forward for three hours longer, but when the
moon rose, nothing was visible except the same endless
stretches of barren sand that daylight showed. Their ani-
mals could be driven no farther, and with the gloomiest
forebodings they made their camp for the night.
All the lives in the company might now depend upon the



<pb n="132"/>
132.   THE RATE OF MADAMS LA TOUR.
teams; so the mules and oxen again received their share
of the ,little.water left in the casks, and at daybreak the
wagons.were lightened by throwing out the most cumbrous
articles, and the train again put in motion.
.On and on through the blistering sands they toiled till
nooan and still no water ! The fear which had been gain-
ing ground since morning now amounted to a certainty,
They.had lost their way. Whether the springs lay to the
right or the left of the route they had passed over, it was
impossible to tell. A council was called to determine
whether it was wiser to turn back and make an effort to
find them, or to push ahead to the sink of the Mohave ; and,
in view of the slight chances of coming upon the springs if
the search was made, the latter course was decided upon.
There was no accurate scale of distances on Calder's
WF^zmnap, but as nearly as could be ascertained they had at
. least sixty miles to travel. The prospect was disheartening
enough, and those who had joined the expedition only be-
cause they. dared not disobey " counsel" were loud in their
complaints, and quick to blame Captain Calder as being,
in part, the cause of their misfortunes. On the other hand,
those who looked upon the end of their journey as the door
of escape from priestly tyranny, were courageous and
calm, though by no means hopeful.
Captain Calder was not one of these. He had.been put
in' charge of the company by a power whose decrees he did
not venture to question, and his connection with Mormon-
ism was of such a nature that he had no plans of escape,
but he was the very man for the trying position he filled
-brave, determined, enduring, fertile in expedients, and
above all, patient with the murmuring, despairing com-
pany, who were ready to say with those of old,
" Why hast thou brought us into this wilderness to kill
us with thirst ?"



<pb n="133"/>
THE BLISTEBRInG DESERT.             133
Another day, and yet another, and still only the brassy
heavens above and the burning sands below. On the even-
ing of the sixth day the last drop of water was served out.
Everything that could be left had been thrown out of the
wagons, and even the weakest of the women walked by
'turns; but in spite of all that was done to save them the
teams began to drop by the way.
The tortures of thirst in an open boat at sea could not
begin to compare with the sufferings of those whose last
remnant of strength was taxed to the utmost to struggle
through the deep, hot sand on foot, without a drop of water
to moisten their parched tongues.
On the morning of the seventh day two men of the com-
pany and one woman were found to be unable to stand on
their feet. In answer to their half-despairing, half-sullen
request that the company would go on and leave them, Cap-
tain Calder had them put in the wagons that could best
bear the added load, but when the train made the next halt
their sufferings were ended.
A shallow grave in the sand received their bodies, and
the survivors looked in each other's faces, mutely asking,
" Who will be the next ?"
"My poor child," Denys whispered to Louise, "I
thought to save you; but I have only brought you into the
desert to die."
Louise's dark eyes were unnaturally large and bright,
but she raised them to his face with a steadfast look.
"Better, far better, to die here than live there," she
answered.
When the train again attempted to move, not more than
half of the teams were able to drag the wagons, and the
least courageous of the company broke out afresh into
lamentations, butvCalder silenced them with a gesture.
"Look I" he exclaimed, assoon as he could get their



<pb n="134"/>
134    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
attetio. ".Yonder are the mountains-I am certain of it,
and the river is a long way this side of them."
"What of that ?" was the despairing answer. "We
can never reach it."
" Don't give up now," and the resolute tone in which he
spoke was not without its effect; " I will tell you what we
will do. The river is not now more than ten miles from
us.: I have often heard that animals traveling over the
desert can scent water that distance. We will setours
free, and the strongest men among us will follow them,
and, believe me, before many hours we shall be back with
water-plenty of it."
" We may as well try it," one of the men answered.
" When all's done, we can but die at the worst, and we
are certain to die if we stop here another night."
"That is true," said Denys; " and I believe with the 
Captain that the animals will be our best guides. How
many are able to follow them ?"
Half a dozen men stepped forward at the summons. The
rest had sunk upon the ground in the apathy of despair.
Calder and Denys at once began the work of setting the
oxen and mules free. The poor creatures staggered feebly
forward, with their parched tongues hanging from their
mouths. The men kept behind, but without making any
attempt to drive them. When they had gone about half a
mile in this manner, the foremost mule raised his head,
snuffed the air eagerly, and started off in a straight line,
followed by the others, who, like him, quickened their pace.
The men kept a few yards behind, and were watched by
anxious eyes, that were strained to keep them in sight until
the moving figures merged into a black line, then a speck,
a point, and they were gone.
How slowly the hours of watching dragged past I The
thirst that grew each minute more intolerable seemed to 



<pb n="135"/>
THE BLISTERING DESERT.              135
parch the whole frame. Some were sunk in a stupor,
happily unconscious of their sufferings or of the lapse of
time; but to those who retained their faculties the sun
appeared to stand still in the heavens.
Still they waited and watched, cheating themselves at
times with the belief that they saw a moving speck in the
dim distance, until at length the tardy sun dropped below
the horizon, and the far-off mountains, the desert, every-
thing, faded into the dull gray of twilight. Then the dark-
ness swallowed up the landscape, and the awful stillness of
a night in the desert settled down upon them.
"Wherever they are now," said one of the women,
"they must stop until the moon rises."
"No," answered Louise, who still had strength enough
left to encourage the others, " Captain Calder has his com-
pass, and the stars are shining. They will not wait a
minute for the moon."
The event proved that she was right, for the moon was
just beginning to show its upper rim above the horizon
when the night air bore to their ears a faint sound-the 
distant hail of those for whom they watched.
They replied with the loudest shout which their parched
throats could utter, and then the women embraced each
other and thanked God, while the men staggered to their
feet and pressed forward toward their returning comrades.
There were only five-Calder, Denys, and three others-
among them a young man whose wife had begged piteously
that he would not leave her. 
It was almost like a resurrection from the dead when the
precious drops that had been carried so far moistened the
black lips 'and burning throats of the sufferers, and the
good news that was brought with the water infused hope
and courage into souls that an hour ago were sunk in the
lethargy of despair.



<pb n="136"/>
136    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
They had found the Mohave. The men they had left be-
hind with the animals were camped where there was not
6nly an abundance of pure, sweet water, but plenty of
grass, and beyond the river the country was green and
fresh. They were out of the desert.
What a night of thanksgiving that was ! The sufferings
of the past few days were almost forgotten in the joyous
certainty that in the morning they would leave the desert
behind them, and when, a few hours later, the three men
who had been left on the river bank returned with their
'teams, there was an eager bustle throughout the camp, an
activity that the night before would have seemed utterly
impossible, as every one aided or attempted to aid in the
preparation for starting.
Before noon all the company were resting in the shade
of the timber that fringed the banks of the Mohave. No,
not all, for three of their number rested under the sands of 
the desert; but even the sincere sympathy that was felt for '
those who were bereaved could not dampen the joy of the
survivors in the first hour of their deliverance.
After a week's rest in the valley of the Mohave, the
march to the'coast was resumed, and a little past the mid-
dle of October they entered San Bernardino.
As we have previously intimated, Brigham   Young
showed his sagacity in the choice of men for this colony,
by fixing upon those who had means of their own.
So it had happened that these settlers had money
enough to establish themselves comfortably on the lands
near the town; but Denys and the three others who
had decided to cut loose from the community announced
that they wished to look around a little before deciding
upon a location, and they "looked around" to such pur-
pose that within three weeks they had taken passage at San
Pedro on a steamer bound for San Francisco.



<pb n="137"/>
CHAPTER XI.
A CALIFORNIA GULCH.
THE autumn of 1852 lingered long in the northern val-
leys of California, as if to give the busy miners ample time
to prepare for winter. Late comers to Yreka Flat rejoiced
in the mild October weather, and prospecting was pushed
vigorously along every creek and gulch within the limits of
what is now known as Siskiyou County.
The La Tour brothers, who had steadily declined buying
the various " rich claims" offered them, joined this army
of prospectors in company with Lucky Jim, whose over-
flowing cheerfulness and-unflagging courage were not his
only good qualities: Jim had never made anything for
himself, but he had more than once helped others to make
something. He had a keen eye for " indications," and if
he had been so minded might have told as many stories
of discoveries as the redoubtable Columbus; but he had a
constitutional antipathy to work, and if by any chance a
few hundred dollars came into his hands, the money was
sure to vanish like the dew.
Guided' by him, the La Tours started out toward
Shasta Butte, a solitary peak rising in the form of a sugar-
loaf to the height of fourteen thousand feet, with a crown
of eternal snow. From this proud elevation the mountain
looks down upon the timbered spurs that guard the ap-
proaches to it, and the bristling tops of the firs and cedars
that fill the caftons.
Here nature showed an untamed front. No human
sound broke the silence. The hand of man had left no im-



<pb n="138"/>
138    THIE FATE OF MADAME LA         TOUR.
press upon the face of the wilderness. To the little party
of three, who were the first to invade these solitudes, the
gloom of the forest in which they camped for the night 
was most oppressive, but when sunrise dispelled the shad-
ows of the valley, and the lofty trees whose branches 
shut out the sky grew vocal with the songs of birds, their 
courage rose, and they felt themselves equal to an encoun- 
ter with the Spirit of the Mountain.
Their camp was upon one of the numerous creeks which 
are fed in summer by the melting snows of the peak, and 
whose channels even in winter contain sufficient water for
mining purposes.
Somewhere along this creek it might be that they should.
find the El, Dorado they were seeking, and immediately
after breakfast they started out on foot to explore the gulchi
through which it flowed, leaving their horses picketei
within a few rods of the embers of their fire. Each ma.
carried his gun; and the remainder of the luggage, the
chief items of which were the pick, shovel, and prospect-
pan, was impartially distributed. Lucky Jim had given
"the boys" various lessons while on their journey, re-
garding the signs they were to look for, and this morning 
he repeated and emphasized his instructions as they walked
along.
"You see that black sand," he remarked; "well, thoug 
that is not always an indication of gold, it's a pretty surer
thing, and if you don't find it you may as well try anoth
gulch. Then these boulders-they're quartz, and may
there's no gold in them; but in this country, where y
don't find quartz you won't find gold. I call the qua
and the sand together good indications; but for a  t
thing you want something like this," stooping as he sp
to pick up a rough fragment of rock which his experien
eye at once perceived to be " rich." 



<pb n="139"/>
A CALIFORNIA GULCH.              139
The brothers pressed closer to look at the bit of quait
that lay in his open palm. It needed no magnifying-glass
to show the yellow specks in its broken surface.
" You see, boys," he continued, "this hasn't traveled
far, otherwise its edges wfuld be rounded, and its sides
worn smooth. The ledge must be very near, and we will
move on a few rods until we find a favorable place for sink.
ing a shaft, and then get to work."
A little more than two hundred yards up the creek the
gulch forked, and another stream came in from the left.
" This is the place to stop," Jim said, indicating a little
flat below the junction of the streams. " The ledge may
be in either gulch, but we are quite safe in sinking a shaft
here,"
It was still early in the morning, and Jim, announcing
that he would "take the first shift," seized the pick and
went to work with a will.' Like many other people who
dislike long tasks, he could put in some very vigorous
strokes at the beginning, and the brothers, who had done
more hard work during their four years in Oregon than he
had in his lifetime, looked on and admired the rapidity
and precision of his movements, as he broke the ground
and tossed out the gravel. After about half an hour's
work he stopped, posed himself gracefully, with the han-
dle of his shovel as a support, and began to descant on the
various theories of placer-mining. Francis allowed him
to talk for a few minutes, and then claimed the pick and
shovel, and applied himself so diligently to increasing the
depth of the shaft that in less than an hour his pick struck
the bed-rock.
Jim, who had been watching as well as talking, now
filled the prospect-pan with some of the last dirt taken out
of the shaft, and proceeded to wash it.
The operation of " panning," though simple enough in



<pb n="140"/>
140    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
heory, requires considerable skill in practice. The pros.
pect-pan, which is much the shape of an ordinary milk-
pan, except that it flares more toward the top, being fairly
filled with the dirt, is held under the surface of the stream, 4
shaken from side to side, and every few moments jerked 
up and down in such a manner as to cause an ebullition
of the water, when the dirt and lighter gravel are washed
out, while the pan is tipped a little to one side and shaken
carefully to get rid of the black sand.
A miner who understands his business will go through
the whole operation in five minutes, and have the precious
dust left clean and shining in the bottom of the pan. At
the expiration of that time Jim gave a triumphant shout. 
"We've got her, boys ! Here she is ! Sing Hail Co-
lumbia ;" and with a few stronger expressions, that would 
not look well in print, he exhibited the result of his work.
" Half an ounce to the pan ! The boys will say that is
one of Christopher's strikes, but all the same we've got it."
The glittering bait, which, once seen, never fails to lure
the beholder onward through months and years of search
hi the hope of finding the hidden treasures of the earth, lay
before their eyes-shining particles of coarse gold, like
grains of sand, and in the mass a nugget the size of a pea.
The brothers felt a strange thrill, a quickening of the 
pulses, a sudden eagerness and elation. The gold fever
had not impelled them to come, but it seized upon them
now, with this etidence of the buried wealth of the moua-
tains before their sight.
Lucky Jim, to whom the experience was not altogether
new, was the first to come down to practical details, and
in a few words he. explained to the others what must be 
done in order to secure the .benefits of the discovery to.
themselves. In conformity with his instructions, fourt.
claims, each two hundred feet long, were staked out, one



<pb n="141"/>
-'  A CALIFORNIA . GULCH              14
for discovery and three pre-emption claims, and a notice
was posted beside the shaft.
" We could organize a district by ourselves," he said,
"for there's three of us, and that meets the requirements 
of the law; but the boys down on the Flat have always
stood by me, and I'd like to give them a show. One of us
will have to go back to the camp to-morrow anyway, to
get a whip-saw and a few other tools, and. the strike will
leak out. What do you say, boys ? Are you willing that
the others should come in ?"
"Why not ?" said Francis. "The gulch is not ours
They made us welcome when we reached their camp, and
I have no wish to keep out anybody who wants to
come."
This sentiment called forth a hearty response from Jim,
embellished with various emphatic expressions which we
forbear to quote. He now felt that they had done nearly
enough for one day, but the brothers were of a different
opinion, and both of them worked so energetically that be-
fore night the bed-rock was stripped for a distance of five
feet above and below the shaft, and the prospect-pan was
filled and passed to Jim a score of times.
As may be supposed, none of the dirt " panned out"
quite equal to the first sample, but at night, when Jim pro-
duced the scales he carried and weighed out the gold, the
result of their first day's work amounted to a little over
ninety-seven dollars.
"Now, that's what I call fair wages," he said, surveying
the " pile" complacently. "What shall we do with it,
boys ?"
" Put it in the company's purse," said Charles.
"Yes," added Francis, "that purse you showed us
yesterday. It will answer just as well as a banking-house
for the present."



<pb n="142"/>
1
142    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
Jim accordingly produced from one of his numerous
pockets a stout buckskin bag about sixteen inches long.
" This will hold five thousand dollars in dust," he said,
"and after it is filled we can put the balance in yeast-pow-
der cans and cache it under our fireplace."
In the morning their camp, which had been moved to the
vicinity of the mine, was the scene of unusual activity, and
soon after sunrise Jim started for the Flat, taking with him
the two pack-mules to bring back supplies.
"We may as well lay in pretty much everything we
want for the winter," he remarked, " for we are going to
have work enough to keep us busy, and there won't be
many days to spare for trips to the Flat or anywhere else."
Jim spoke in a matter-of-fact way, as though hard work
was the staple of his life, and for the moment he really de-
luded himself with the idea that he was going to turn over
a new leaf and "strike his best licks" on the Star of the
West-for by this poetical appellation the claim was to be
known henceforth.
He carried with him, in addition to the gold panned out
the day before, fifty dollars advanced by the brothers to
increase the funds of the company to an amount sufficient
to purchase the necessary tools and supplies. He was
·likewise the bearer of a message to the Mormon boys, who
were supposed by this time to have returned from Marys-
ville. His last words on taking leave of his comrades
were,
" I don't mean to blow about this strike of ours, but if
the boys find out anything for themselves, I shall take it
that you will make anybody welcome that happens to fol-
low the trail."
During the day the brothers occupied themselves, as
their more experienced partner had advised, in cutting
down a beautiful sugar-pine that grew near their shaft,



<pb n="143"/>
A CALIFORNIA GULCH.              143
and dividing its straight, smooth trunk into logs twelve feet
in length. These logs were to furnish lumber for the
sluice-boxes that they proposed to construct.
As this lumber must be whip-sawed, it was necessary
also to prepare a pit, and here their own knowledge of
wood-craft proved quite as serviceable as Jim's instructions.
Two saplings about eight inches through, and growing
within three yards of the side of the hill, were selected for
the posts of the pit. These were cut off six feet from the
ground, and one end of the logs, which were to be the sides
of the frame, rested on the stumps, while the other end was
bedded in the hill. A couple of transverse logs and the
two short, movable sticks of timber called blocks, com-
pleted the pit, and then the miners had as good a substi-
tute for a saw-mill as Northern California could furnish at
that period; or, at least, they would have when their whip-
saw should arrive.
All this preparatory work took time, and the sun set on
the first day of Jim's absence without a single shovelful of
dirt having been disturbed in the vicinity of the shaft; but
on the morning of the second day they returned to the
more fascinating employment of stripping the bed-rock
and washing out the gold.
These men of eight-and-twenty were still young enough
in heart to feel a boyish delight in being able to-day to
manipulate the prospect-pan almost as skilfully as their in-
structor, and the gold which they deposited in the safe
depths of a tin can glistened more brightly in their eyes
because they had washed it out themselves.
Jim had told them that he should start out on his return
trip long before daylight, and as the distance from Yreka
Flat was only twenty miles, they began to look for him by
the middle of the afternoon ; but the day wore away without
bringing any signs of him until near sunset. Then a



<pb n="144"/>
144    THE FAT .OF MADAME LA TOUR.
cheerful hail was borne up the gulch, and as they an-
swered it they started down " to meet the supply train,"'
as Charles observed. They had not gone many rods be-
fore they caught sight, through the trees, of the white
horse that Jim rode, and in a few minutes the two pack-
mules likewise emerged from the shadows.
Jim looked happy, but withal a little secretive, as though
he knew something that was almost too good to tell. Ia
answer to their questions, he assured them he had had tip-
top luck, but he did not get down to particulars until the
mules were relieved of their packs, and he himself seated
by the fire with a great mug of smoking coffee in his right ,
hand.                                              -
"You see," he began, " I didn't talk much when I got
to the camp, but just went around quietly buying up the d
supplies. I paid out your money first, but when it came to 
weighing out the dust, the boys began to ask questions.  i
told them we'd been at work for a while in the mountains,
and had cleaned up a few ounces, but that didn't seem to 
satisfy them, I started out before daylight, as I told you I i
should, but this horse of mine showed the way as plain as
that pillar of fire they used to tell.about in Sunday-school i
when I was a youngster, and by sunrise I could see a
black line stretching away behind me toward the Flat--
somewhere about a mile long, I should say. I didn't wait
for anybody .to overtake me and ask more questions, but
by the time I reached the timber they had got almost
within hailing distance, and-hark ! What is that ?"
All three listened intently as the night wind bore a faint
sound to their ears-a sound that grew more distinct and
increased in volume, until they recognized. the "  o-oh
J-o," the well-known hail of " the Coast, " uttered by a score
of throats. They answered it in concert, and the sound
was taken up and repeated; this time singly, until, as theyr



<pb n="145"/>
A CALIFORNIA GULC^        '       i45
conjectured, it had passed all the way down the gulcl t
the stragglers just entering the timber.
" Here are plenty of pine-knots," said Francis. " Let
us make a blaze that they can see ;" and
"On hospitable thoughts intent,"
the original pioneers of the gulch piled the fire with the
resinous material at hand, until a ruddy column of flame
shot upward to the branches of the tall trees, making fan..
tastic lights among their dark shadows.
In twenty minutes more the head of the advancing cobe
umn halted and dismounted at their camp.
"Right smart blaze, this.yer is," observed  tall, lank,
grizded individual, with a free and easy air of good comrade-
ship, "an'it was a cute idee of yourn to lightit. We
mought a' me-yandered round in this pesky timber all
ighitan' not found yer, for the rocks mixes up sounds so's
ter lead a feller ofen the trail every time."
" Are the others near enough to see the light ?" inquired
Francis.
" Some on 'em is, an' the balance 'll camp in the edge
of the timber till mornin', I reckon."
" How many are there ?" asked Charles.
" Well, now, I couldn't rightly say. There was fifteen
or twenty jest behind me an' Dick, but I looked back whent
we was on the last rise of ground outside the timber, an' it
'peared to me ez ef there was a percession that stretched
pooty much all the way from Yreka to the foot-hills."
Here the conversation was interrupted by fresh arrivals.
The new-comers scattered around among the trees, lighted
other fires, and set about cooking supper. Lucky Jim did
the honors of the camp in a style peculiarly his own, and
the bothers treated their uninvited visitors with frank cor.
diality. Small parties of ten or twelve continued to arrive



<pb n="146"/>
T4O6   THE FA T'    OF MADAME L. TOUR. 
at ierdas until after midnight, and when the  A
settled down to repose, at least one hundred i
mrApped; in their blankets and disposed in atitu
or less graceful upon the ground.       . .
With the first.rays of light the whole camp was.
Time was money, when the man who was only five min
abad bfyou might make the strike that you ought t:
.* he Missourian who was first on the gromadJ
while.the stars were yet shining, and rose so sofly
to disturb the slumbers of his " pardner" who s
balarets i but when he sought out the lowerou
the " Star of the.West," that he might locate a
jacent therto, beheld, a shadowy figure was stoop
a recently driven stake. Somebody was in the act
ing a notice on the claim that would have been his
had waked half an hour earlier4.           fi
; With a whispered ejaculation which did not in !
benediction on the early riser, he silently paced 
hundred feet, and drove his own stake. . He had-
affixed his notice (written over night on the back of 
evelope), when he heard a step behind him, and 
faced "Vermont," a'tow-headed, innocent-lookip 
from the Green .Mountains.      .
"s ."Jst a minnit too late, wa'ant I ?" he d
Curus, neaow, ain't it, heaow a feller kin make uA
I sot eaout to stake a claim jest above the Western
whatsomever they call it, an' when I got to the Wrk
led a minnit abeaout whether I'd better take the
the left, an' I calkilate that's jest where I missead 
went straight ahead, I'd a' took the left, but arts^
on it I took the right, an' blamed et I didn't stumnbb#l
a stake afore I'd went three steps. I struck a,
there was a. notice that must a' bin posted l J
the feller they call the Parson . was mad



<pb n="147"/>
A: CALIFORNIA GULCH.       --      f
I faced abeout-an' took t'other fork, an' there was Dick
Turpin jest ahead of me. 'Twa'n't no use to pick a quar-
rel with Dick, an' so I come deaown this way; but there's
a notice stuck to the bottom of the Western Star, and here
you be.".
"Thet's so," said. the Missourian with much decision;
"an' this yer camp don't go a cent on floatin' notices.
'Twouldn't be healthy, don't yer see ? I've bin in camps
afore now whar sech things was done, an' the feller what did
it dropped off mighty suddent; but, see yer now, I hain't
nothin' agin ye, an' I don't-mind yer. stakin' out a claim
ter jine this yer one o' mine.  Dick's my pardner, ye
know, an' I was kinder savin' -it for him, but bein bhe's lo-
caed his'n alfeady, ye'r welcome ter,-thi'," and with the
air of a. monarlb bestowing a principality he waved his
hawndtoward the-lower boundary of his claim.
The recipient of this offer made al haste in the direction
indicated, for it was now beinning to grow light, and mov-
ing figures appeared here and there in the timber, shew-
ing that the camp was fully awake.
Breakfast was postponed this morning in, favor'of the
more important business of staking claims, but by ten
o'clock -most of the prospectors discovered that they were
hungry, and for the next half hour they formed sociable
groups around the fires that were kindled to boil their
coffee. After breakfast Lucky Jim announced that a mi-
ners' meeting would be held at eight o'clock P.M. for the
purpose of organizing the district. 
"Christopher Columbus orter be here now ter give the
camp a name," suggested one of the new-comers, and the
words were scarcely spoken. when a gray felt hat, with a
tuft of sandy hair rising through the crown, became visible
above a boulder that obstructed -thme ':iew oi the trai-up
the gulch, and a minute -aterward the -great discoverer



<pb n="148"/>
148    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
hidled' is friends with the air of a man sure of his wlL
come. Columbus traveled usually on foot. 
"A hoss is well enough ef yer hain't nothin' ter do but,
teid on him," he was wont to remark confidentially; "buti
a man like me, thet hez other business, orter patronize Feet
an Walker's tine."
It was by the above-named line that Christopher had ar-
rived this morning. His luggage consisted of a gunny-
ack and the half of a pair of blankets. The dust of travel
still clung to him, but nothing could diminish the grand'
eur of his air or abate his cheerful readiness to advise and
instruct the camp. 
"Pootywell fur a starter," he observed, taking in thi'
gulch, the stakes, and the prospect-holes at one comp
hensive glance; " but, boys, yer orter keep ter the rig
That thar left-hand fork ain't no 'count. Color of t
rock shows it   Country rock, every squar inch. Yer
mought as well look fur a pay-streak.in wood ashes." 
Breakfast was over, but Columbus borrowed one of the
still burning fires, and proceeded to toast a very small sec-
tion of a rind of bacon.
"Yer hain't got a flapjack left over, hev yer ?" he reL
maiked incidentally to his right-hand neighbor. " I wa'a
goin' ter miss th' strike ef I never had a bite of bread;
I started off 'thout bakin' enny." 
Half a loaf was tossed to him, and the bacon rind  
now browned to the required crispness, he reached 
and touched Vermont, who was gathering up his co
utensils.
"Couldn't borrer a coffee-cup of yer, could I?" he
quired. " Kem afoot myself, an' hadn't much shot'l
pack things." 
The cup was handed out. 
Next, Columbus interviewed Dick Turpin on the 



<pb n="149"/>
A CALIFORNIA G'LCH.               149
of coffee, and got the quart cup filled with that beverge.,
Jim loaned the necessary amount of sugar, and the great
discoverer proceeded with his breakfast. By the time he
had finished his meal the prospectors were scattered up
and down the gulch, no one remaining within speaking dis-
tance except Lucky Jim and his partners, who were con-
sulting as to the ways and means of getting out the lumber
for their sluice-boxes in the shortest possible time.
"The boys that travel on foot will be along to-day by
dozens," Jim averred, " and plenty of them will be glad to
work a little while for a grub stake. I can't handle a
whip-saw myself-more's the pity. If my father had put
me to that instead of studying law, I might have been good
for something."
Christopher pricked up his ears at these words. .The ac-
complishment which Jim had neglected to acquire he was
a proficient in, or, in other words, he was a capital " top-
sawyer," an artisan much in request and not always to be
found in new camps. He sauntered slowly toward the
group, and addressed the partners with the air of one will-
ing to grant a favor at any cost to himself.
" I wuz sorter wild, ez a boy," he remarked; " an' my
old man put me ter' whip-sawin', kinder in hopes ter tone
me down. I wuz sot alwuz ter make a clean job of what
I undertook, an' I put my mind ter thet thar whip-sawin'
tell thar wa'ant a man could hold a candle to me in th'
hull kentry. Now, seein' ye'r sorter put to it fur hands,
I don't mind takin' holt fur a week, jest ter 'commodate
yer."
Jim managed to convey a hint to his companions that
Christopher could really do what he boasted in this par-
ticular line, and Francis asked him to name his terms.
"Waal, now," he said reflectively, "I hadn't consid-
ered thet thar. I sh'd like ter 'blige yer 'thout mentionin'



<pb n="150"/>
is     THE FArTS OF MADAM        LA -TOUR.
I      -'-T sl t reely now-but I wuz recknin'ter prspec
sdtnbthM s whiter, an' I sh'll want suthin' fur a grab stake.
tt d'ye say ter ten dollars a day and board ?"
iits    'a'anced toward Jim, who made an affirmative
.  .''A tfight, " he said. "You may consider yourself en.
t    Are:yow ready to go to work now?"
Col nmbus'hesitated %  oment. 
" ''rf tbreakifasut ia yther light," he said, " owin' ter
y Jiot havin' efiif show ter pack pelisions from t'other
camp. P'raps it 'ud be as wdl ter cook dinner fust."
Jim's blue eyes twinkled, but he answered gravely,
"That is so. Helpyourself, old man," at the same time
handing out a liberal supply of " pervisions," and pointing-
to the embers of their fire.
Jim and Francis now turned their attention to the work
necessary to be done on their claim before putting in the
sluices, while Charles held himself in readiness to accom-
pby Columbus to the pit. Owing to the confusion that
ha'd'ppevaiied 'eer since Jin's. aival, this was the first
opportunity Francis had found of speaking to him alone.
N"' d you see the 'oys?  Had they got back from
llysvinle r- he asked, as soon as they were out of Chris-
itpier's hearing.
Jim shook his head. " No, not the ones you mean,"' he
answered. "The train got in four days ago, but the Mor-
mon boys decided either to winter in Marysville or go far-
ther south. They made a little raise on the Flat, and they
want to spend their money."
La Tour's face showed his disappointment.  Jim ob-
served it, and added,
"You will see them in the spring, never fear. The.
will be dead broke by that time, and will come back to the
Flat to look up their. friends and go to werk- aain. i1U



<pb n="151"/>
-A' CALIFORNIA GULCH         ...
are good fellows, every one of them; but they have been
so tied down all their lives that liberty makes them a little
wild."
"I can understand that," Francis said, and then ab-
ruptly changed the subject.
In the course'of the day the stragglers to whom Jim
atluded began to arrive on foot.  They had, as a rule,
limited wardrobes and scant luggage, but they were rich
in expectations, and in every face shone the cheerful cour-
age which sustained many a poor fellow through a long
succession of reverses, until his comrades finally mnde a
grave for him in the sands from which he hoped to dig his
e'alth.
These pilgrims increased the numerical strength of the
p to one 'hunded and fifty before night, and when,
tctutally at the appointed hour, the miners' meeting was
tcaled to order, the blaze of the pine-knot flambeas lighted
a sea of faces, rugged, bronzed, unshaven, but keen, reso-
lute, and expressing in every lineament that tireless energy
and unflagging perseverance which have done so much to
'build up the great State they helped to found.
The Parson, a tall, thin, solemn-looking native of the
Middle States, who was said to have occupied a pulpit at
some former period of his life, was duly elected chairman
'of the meeting, and Jim, whose penmanship was the won-
'derand envy of his associates, was chosen secretary.
The first business before the meeting was the adoption
of a set of by-laws fixing the boundaries of the district, and
the number of feet to be included in a claim; also defining
the conditions which must be complied with in order to
hold such claim.
When the article relating to boundaries was read, Co-
lumbus rose t. his feet, and waving his hand majestically,
began: -



<pb n="152"/>
151    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
0
v 'Pears ae ef them thar lines wuz pooty narrer fur a
kentry like this. In the spring of '49 I helped ter organize
Gouge Eye districk, an' we tuk in ten mile squar, an'
'lowed five hundred foot fur discovery an' five hundred foot
pre-emption; an' when I mined in South Amerilky-"
He.e the president's mace, otherwise the-knobbed stick in
the Parson's right hand, came down heavily upon the boul-
derthat served as a desk.
*'Time's up," he announced. " Only one minute al-
lowed for remarks."
The article fixing the district boundaries was put to vote
without further argument, and adopted. Then the second
article, allowing two hundred feet for each claim, was
taken up.
Poker Bill, who reached the camp just before sunset, and
found notices posted all the wax along the gulch, wished to
offer a few remarks before this was put to vote. He
thought that by allowing two hundred feet for pre-emption
all the mining ground was virtually given over.to a few
monopolists, while poor men like himself, working-men,
who were the bone and sinew of every camp, were de-
ptived of their rights. In his opinion the claims should be
cut down to one hundred feet, that all might have an equal
show. -
This proposition brought half a dozen holders of claims
to their feet; but the Missourian, whose grizzled head
towered far above the others, was first seen by the chair,
who ruled that he had the floor.
"A pooty arrangement ez ever I heerd on," he ex-
claimed. " A few on us must go ahead and prospect the
kentry, make the trails an' take all the risks, an' then arter
we git our claims staked out, in comes a lot o' lazy cusses
that never struck a lick sence they wuz born, an' up an'
sez, ' Half o' that, ef you please.' Now wat I've got ter say



<pb n="153"/>
A CALIFORNIA GULCH.               153
is jest this: the man ez wants half o' my claim kin come
an' take it," laying his hand significantly as he spoke upon
the shot-gun that rested against the tree beside him. These
remarks were loudly applauded by a portion of the meet-
ing, and when the question was put to vote, the article was
adopted as first read, by a two-thirds majority.
After disposing of the by-laws, the only business before
the meeting was the choice of a recorder for the district,
and Francis La Tour was nominated and declared elected
by a heavy majority. If there had been any other office of
trust and profit to fill, the miners would have nominated his
brother for it; for the " Turtle Doves" had confirned the
good impression made by them on the night of their arrival
at Yreka Flat, and they had the whole camp for their
friends. Besides, the fortunate locators of claims that
prospected well felt that they owed something to those who
led the way to Shasta Butte, and the late comers who
had no claims as yet were quite sure that the brothers had
discovered diggings that it would pay to prospect to the
very head of either gulch; for, in the face of Christopher's
decision several parties had staked claims in the left-hand
fork and panned out coarse gold in considerable quanti-'
ties.
Viewed in any light the new camp was a promising one,
and the men who had just organized " Chespar District"
felt comfortably certain that they had "struck it rich."



<pb n="154"/>
.1 .  .
CHAPTER XII.
A THOUSAND .MILS AFOOT.
" FATHER, are you sure that God has called us to gather
to Zion in this way ?"
." My child, how can I doubt it? He has not left himself
without a witness in these last days. It is now as it was in
the beginning. Signs that none can gainsay follow. the
preaching of those who have counseled us,' in his name, to,
undertake this journey. Have faith and patience, my
daughter, and these light afflictions, which are but for a
moment, will work out for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory."
The person to whom this exhortation was addressed rose
lowly from theground on which she was sitting, as though
iearj that she might be doing' wrong to rest by the way.
he was. a,sl'Pder, delicate-ooking girl of sixteen. Her
dgolden brown hair fell in a mass of tangled curls almost to
her waist. Her face, fair still in spite of exposure to sun
and wind, was perfect in its outlines, though thin and pale
as if from sickness or starvation. Her violet eyes, large,
liquid, and just now full of tears, were cast down as she
received her father's gentle rebuke, and her beautiful
mouth quivered like that of a grieved child.
Had she done wrong to put such a question ? And yet,
who could help it ? Here they were-she a delicate girl,
and her old father who had never before known hardship-
far from home, friends, and country, and plodding wearily
on foot across the American wilderness, whose rugged
mountains, and sandy wastes, and rushina torrents that



<pb n="155"/>
A THOUSAND MILES APOOft              4 
must be forded, were In such'sad contrast to her drmeas of
a land flowing with milk and honey.
The company to which they belonged numbered six
hundred, and all of them, young or old, sick or well, strong
or infirm, must make the terrible journey of a thousand
miles on foot; and more than this, they must drag thir
scanty outfit of bedding and clothing and a portion of their
food in hand-carts.
They had left the Missouri River late in August., It wa
now November. But little more than half their jomey-
was accomplished, and their road, marked already by the
graves of those of the company jit ahead who had fallen
by the way, was strewed with thedead bodies of theeaker
ones, who had started. out with them full of hope and tith.
The weather grew each day mote inclement, the streams
thy 'had to wade were icy cold, and, Worse than al, their
scaity ratdons began to fail so rapidly that death by starva-
tion stared them In the face.
Jessie Wilton and her father were living happily in theti
English home when the emissaries of the Mormon Churef
sought them out, and so wrought upon the credulous, sim-
ple-hearted old man by their " miracles," " propheies,"
and " gifts of healing" that'he was induced to sell all he
had, and after placing the proceeds in the hands of the elder
who had charge of the emigration, set out with his:mother-
less child on this journey, whose goal was the Zion'hidden
in the mountains-a city fair as Jerusalem the Golden-so
the girl's dreamsand the old man's simple faith pi'tUred it.
The hundreds who had started with them en their toil-.
some pilgrimage were sustained by the same faith. Some-
where in the valleys of the mountains God had promised to
hide his chosen ones until the evil days were overpast, and
now he called-them to witness the fulfillment of his promise,
and share the security and peace of his'Saints.



<pb n="156"/>
Z56    TH4 FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
Ala for their simple trust, for the hopes that day by day:
grew weaker, as cold and starvation thinned their ranks,
and the pitiless storm beat upon their unprotected heads !
No wonder that the faith of the most devoted began to
waver, when the bitter winter of the northern Territories.
ovetoqk them midway on their journey; for those who told
them of the glories of the Zion beyond the mountains had
prophesied that " the seasons and the elements would be
controlled for their benefit, and though they would hear of
stoms on the right and on the left, not one would be per-
mitted to break upon their path."
Jessie had been dragging the hand-cart since morning,
for her father had grown so weak from exposure and hun-
ger that he was barely able to totter by her side. At Flor-
ence, where the final arrangements for the journey were
made, one hand-cart was assigned to every five persons;
but there were many little children and even babes in arms
in the company, which reduced the numberof those able to
draw the carts to three in each squad, and often there were
only two, who divided the labor between them.
Fathers put their little children, too young to walk, upon
the already overloaded carts, and dragged them until na-
ture gave out. Husbands attempted to carry their sick
wives in the same manner, and feeble old men and women
with frost-bitten hands and feet were helped as far as pos-
sible by those who were younger andcstronger; but day by
day the number of those able to help others, or even to
help themselves, diminished, until at last Death, the Friend
and Helper of a humanity that can bear no more, stretched
out the only hand that was offered to the sinking victims.
The day was wearing away, and the biting wind chilled
even the strongest to the very marrow. Jessie, who saw
that her father was every moment growing weaker, begged
him to get on the cart.



<pb n="157"/>
A  THOUSAND MILES AFOT.               iS7
"I can pIllyou a little way, father," declared the- jir,
who had eaten nothing that day except a fragment of hard
biscuit. "Look ! there is a storm coming, and we are far
behind the others. Do let me try to draw you along."
"No, my daughter," he answered. " Do you hurry Bn
and send some of the men back to help me; or, maybe I
can go a little farther ;" but even as he spoke he tottered
and fell.
"Father! father! I cannot leave you !" she cried in
anguish. " You will be frozen to death long before any
one can come for you," and with all her strength she tried
to lift him, but could not.
" Oh, what shall I do ?" She wrung her hands as she
looked in vain for some sign that they were missed by those
ahead. " If I could only build a fire; but I have nothing,
not even a match."
She pulled the scanty supply of bedding from the cart,
wrapped her father in it, and rubbed his stiffening limbs;
but his eyes were already dim with death.
"Listen, daughter," he said feebly, "for these are my
last words. The men who counseled us to take this jour-
ney were, mayhap, mistaken; but never charge their mis.
take on our covenant-keeping God. Fifty years have I tust-
ed him, and his goodness has never failed.. I commit you
to his tender mercies. Good-by, my Jessie, my little girl.
I cannot see your dear face, but I shall see you where they
hunger no more-where all tears are wiped away. I am
going to your mother. Don't cry, Jessie-4ather's little
girl."
The fluttering breath grew fainter, then ceased. The
snow-flakes began to sift down upon the face that was as
cold as they. The desolate orphan ceased to sob. Her
head sank upon her father's breast, and in a little while she
would have slept with him, but three of the strongest men



<pb n="158"/>
158    THE PATAE OF   MADAME LA TOUR.
i *e4nantany,. detailed to look after the feeble ones who 
fel behind and to bury the dead, came up at this moment
amu4ifted her, only half conscious, into the cart.
One of the men now-hurried forward with the girl, and
the Other two, after satisfying themselves that life was ex-
tinaet itth  motionless fgure before them, dug a shallow
grvma, an without oein. without funeral rites, without a
mourner (for those who laid him away in his last resting-
pla lt thd at lewas to be envied), the bodyof the old man
was commitd to the frnen earth.
A; couple' of-ourws afterward, Jessie, restored to con-
sciousness, began to ask,
"Where is-my father ?" 
"-In heaven, child," said one who sat near. "'You  '
surely do not wish him back ?"
"No. Oh, no, I remember now; but I was going with
him. Why did you hinaer me ?" 
There was little time for rest, and still less for tears, that
bitter night. The storm which began before sunset in-
weaeWd i -violence, and the howling winds blew down the
aftwit  k, it were; their only shelter, and drifte4 the snow
ift their feeble res, Morqing found the living chilled
aMdiehsteod     . with neierstengthe s  nor courage for the
day's.jomrney, and in the snow that. surrounded the camp
l   e. e:bodies of five who, during the night, had taken the
journey fim which none return. 
All the dead were hastily buried in one grave, and then 
the survivors, with little hope that another sun would rise 
on any of them, again pushed forward.
Numbers dropped by the way as they toiled slowly on-
ward, but they dared not stop, for they knew that their 
utmost exertions would barely enable them to reach a
camping-ground which would afford fuel for their firr
At length,. jst before night overtook the exhausted com 



<pb n="159"/>
A., THOUS4AND MILES AFOO       .     159
pany, they wee met by messengers who were as welcome
as angels from heaven-two men who had ridden on in ad-
vance of half a dozen wagons sent out from the valley with
provisions.
The good news they brought infused life into the perish;
ing pmultitude, and superhuman. exertions were made to
reach a good camping-ground sixteen miles ahead, where
also there were some abandoned log-cabins that would
afford them shelter. By almost incredible efforts on the
part of those who had charge of the train, this station was
reached on the evening of the next day, but twelve more
of their number were left dead in the snow.
Here it was decided to make the most comfortable camp
'poible wuder the circumstances, and wait for the relief
which was on the way; but on the first night in camp all
that was left of their, scanty rations was dealt out. The
only food now remaining in the company was a-few pounds
of rice and hard bread, which had been reserved for the
sick and for the youngest children, and for two days they
endured the pangs of starvation.
There were fifteen deaths in these two days, and when
on the morning of the third day the long-looked-for wagons
drove into camp, many more were too far gone to be.b.erer
fited by the food they brought. After a day's res',ti 
train was again put in motion; those who were unable to
drag their carts being allowed to load their effects into the
wagons, while those who could not walk were permitted to
ride.
Thus heavily loaded, the wagons, drawn by oxen, moved
slowly along with the hand-cart train, stopping every now
and then to bury some one for whom help had come too
late.
It was a noticeable fact that many'women' and young
girls kept on their feet and-continued to drag their. carts,



<pb n="160"/>
i6o    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR. 
while the men beside them dropped to the ground dying of 
dead. In some instances the young girls were the only
survivors out of a large family when the train finally 
reached Salt Lake.* Three bright young English girls saw
father, mother, and five brothers die one after the other of
cold and starvation, while they remained able to pull their
catts, and entered Salt Lake in safety.
Jessie Wilton was among the number gifted with this
power of endurance. She walked every step of the way
from the Missouri to Salt Lake valley, and for more than
two thirds of the distance dragged the hand-cart which had
been assigned to her and her father at starting. When she
reached Salt Lake she was thin and haggard from starva-
tion, but no other consequences of the terrible journey Were '
manifest.                                        r
She was ragged, shoeless, and penniless also, for her
father's little, hoard, which had been intrusted to the elder
who persuaded them to come, hid disappeared; but, unlike
many others, she had a home to go to. Her mother's
uncle, a well-to-do Englishman who had settled in the val-
ley three years before, received the orphan into his childless
household, and in a few months she began to bear some
likeness to the "singing bird," the old father's darling,
who had made his home glad for so many years.
But, for a time, it seemed almost as though she had
escaped the peril, of the wilderness only to fall into greater
perils in the Zion which she had long since ceased to com-
pare to " Jerusalem the Golden." With returning health
and strength all her winsome, girlish beauty came back,
and from the glossy braids of golden-brown hair that
crowned her shapely head to the tiny foot whose light press-
ure scarcely left a print on the earth, she was too fair to
See Appendix. Note J, page 346.



<pb n="161"/>
A THOUSAND MILES AFOOT.              i6.
know an hour's safety in that den of beasts, had, she not
been guarded as she was by her uncle, whose position, in-
fluence, and money made it a matter of policy with the
authorities to conciliate him, and by her aunt, who at
heart detested Mormonism and all things connected with it.
Though many of the leaders of the people looked upon
her beauty with longing eyes, and more than one hoary-
headed apostle with a score of wives asked her in marriage,
Brigham Young refused to compel her uncle to sacrifice
her.
" The girl shall choose for herself," was his stereotyped
answer to all petitions, until more than one came to believe
that he designed her for himself. In this, however, they
were mistaken. The reigning favorite in the Prophet's
harem at this time was herself a beauty of no common
order, and withal a jealous one, and her influence over him
was sufficient to hinder him from taking a wife whom she
would have regarded as a rival.
While matters were in this state, it happened that Philip
La Tour met the violet-eyed maiden at her uncle's house.
Philip was now twenty-four years old, and in spite of the
advice of his elders he still remained single; but possibly
this was because the girls who arrived with each year's
emigration were appropriated by gray-haired representa-
tives of the priesthood as soon as they reached the valley.
* Blanche, his only remaining sister, had lately been mar-
ried to a neighbor's son, a young man whose good heart
and sound principles had thus far survived the blighting
influences of Mormonism, and thus Philip was left quite
alone in the home that, by untiring industry, he had suc-
ceeded in making comfortable and even pleasant.
He was still as fanatical as ever in his religious belief,
and the tenth of all his earnings, together with consider-
ably more than a tenth of the money which he received



<pb n="162"/>
i62    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
from time to time from his brothers in California, was
regularly paid into the Prophet's coffers. Yet, in spite of
the continual drain consequent upon this payment of tithes;
he prospered, and in spite of Mormonism his daily life was
irreproachable, thanks to his inherited integrity and the
lessons his mother taught him in childhood.
He was a fine specimen of physical manhood-tall, lithe,
strong-limbed- and with a handsome face and a winning
smile that would have made him a dangerous rival of the
graybeards around him, had such rivalry been possible.
Jessie, who was not yet so thoroughly converted to Mor-
monism as to prefer exaltation in the next world as the
tenth wife of an elderly apostle, to happiness in this world
as the one wife of a man who loved her, found the .hand-
some youth a pleasant acquaintance-dangerously pleasant
in a community where young men and maidens were so
closely watched, but where, after a couple of months, he
told the story that has been told so many thousand times
since the first pair of lovers met in Eden. Not even the con-
cluding assurance that he had first sought and obtained
the Prophet's approval could dampen the joy that glowed
in the depths of her violet eyes and flushed her soft cheeks
as she gave him his answer.
But alas ! when the wedding-day came, there was that
to endure which not only dampened joy but well-nigh
crushed out life. By the Prophet's express command, they
were to be married in the Endowment House, and the
hideous ordeal through which the poor girl was compelled
to pass inspired such terror 'and loathing that when she
knelt for the last time in the "sacred circle," and was
ordered to repeat with the others the fearful oaths of blood
and vengeance which completed the vows that made them
the slaves of the Prophet forever, she fainted quite away,
and was carried from the room insensible. When she re-



<pb n="163"/>
A THOUSAND MILES AFOOT.             163
covered consciousness, all the other candidates had passed
" beyond the veil" except her lover, and with him beside
her she submitted to the final ceremony and was ushered
into the sealing-room. Before her own marriage took place,
however, she was an unwilling witness of the nuptials of a
plural bride, while the first wife knelt beside the altar,
silent and tearless, but with such a look of anguish and
despair on her white face that the memory of it haunted
the beholder for years.
In spite of Jessie's loving faith in the man of her choice,
the torturing question,
"Shall I ever be compelled to act such a part ?" forced
itself upon her as she saw the wretched wife place the hand
ofthe youthful bride in that of her husband, and bow her
head in answer to the question,
"Do you give this woman unto. this man, even as Sarah
gave Hagar to Abraham ?"
When it came her turn to kneel with Philip at the same
altar, the vision of that pallid face, stamped with the seal
of death-the death of hope and happiness and love-
seemed to rise between her and the man who held her hand
in a tender and loyal clasp, and at the very threshold of her
new life the sweetness of wedded love was mixed with the
bitterness of a nameless dread.
She could not say, even to herself,
" I fear that some day my husband will ask me to yield
my place to another."
She trusted him fully, she loved him wholly, and yet, as
they left the accursed mysteries of the Endowment House
behind them she felt that a shadow had fallen across their
path which the clear shining sun could not dispel.
Philip had done his utmost to make his home worthy of
his fair bride, and, on the summer evening when they .took
possession of it, it looked pleasant enough to content them



<pb n="164"/>
164    THE PATE OF MADAME LA. TOUR.
both, hid their hearts been quite at rest; but Philip, aos A
less than his bride, felt the effects of the ordeal . through
which they had. passed, and the scenes they had been corn-
pelled to witness. 
A honeymoon begun thus could not be filled with unalt
toyed happiness; but the love that had drawn them together  '
was stong and enduring, and Jessie's sunny temper and :
Philip's sterling goodness were proof against influences
that might otherwise have turned the sweetness of married
life into gall and wormwood.
Jessie's uncle, to whom the gentle orphan was as a
daughter, gave her a marriage portion of three thousand
dollars, and with this slender capital Philip became a met ..
chant on a small scale. Here, as elsewhere, he was pros- 
pered, and by the end of the year was able to enlarge his .i
business.
With the close of their first year of wedded happiness
came also another gift, far more precious than the money
that began to flow in-a dark-eyed baby boy, with his
*mother's smile lighting up his father's features. Now in-
deed.the shadow that dimmed their sunshine seemed to
melt away.
" Bab.fingers, waxen touches" drove that nameless fear 
from the mother's breast, and Philip,. now not only her
husband but her baby's father, was her king, who could do
no wrong.
For six months she lived in a dream of delight, only rous. 
ing'herself to say sometimes to Philip, as both were gazing
fondly upon the little head pilowed on her bosom,
' My love, I fearwe are too happy. Something tells me
that this cannot last."
It did not last, One night both were roused from sleep
to find their idol struggling and gasping for breath, al
when morning came nothing remained to them but a tL 



<pb n="165"/>
A  THOUSAND MILES AFOOT.             t65
waxen figure, still and cold, which neither wakened nor
stirred when hot tears and passionate kisses were rained
upon it.
After their baby was buried out of their sight, love,
sanctified by sorrow, drew their. bleeding hearts more
closely together. In speaking, long afterward, of those
days, the wife said,
" My husband was my all. I did not simply love him,
.I wrshiped him. He was more to me than God or my
own soul."
Are there not others whom sorrow has brought to cling,
in the same way, to the one dear object left in a world from
which all else that the heart delighted in has been taken ?
.Another year.passed, and then a sweet little blue-eyed
girl ame to brighten their home; but though welcomed
joyfully, and tenderly beloved by both parents, she could
not fill in the mother's heart the place of the first-born.
Another year glided away, and little Lily was just begin-
ning to totter across the room on uncertain feet, and lisp
sweet baby words, when she too sickened, and in spite of
all that love could do to save her, faded from their sight,
and was laid beside her brother.
This time, when they returned from the burial of their
little one and sat down beside the empty cradle, Philip put
his arms around his wife and said tenderly,
"My love, in some way, though I know not how, we are
displeasing God. He does not afflict willingly. I remem-
ber a text like that which my mother taught me long ago.
When he punishes us it is in love-it is because he must.
Let us try and find out what sin we are cherishing that
calls for such bitter correction."



<pb n="166"/>
CHAPTER XIII.                    I
THE LA TOUR BOYS AGAIN.
THE Shasta Butte diggings were rich-nobody disputed-
that-but the ground that could be worked profitably was'
limited in extent, and the " stampede" in the fall of '52,
which lasted until some weeks after the snow began to fall,i
brought in rather more men than the camp had any usa
for, and in the spring of '53 fully half of those who had
gathered there left, either to prospect on their own ace,
count or to follow up some of the new strikes that weret
reported on every side.
The La Tours, who had worked their claim during the
winter as steadily as the weather permitted, sold out in
May and left the gulch richer by ten thousand dollars than
when they entered it the previous October. They had no
particular destination. Wonderful stories were afloat con-
cerning the new discoveries made in Nevada County, and
they had some thoughts of turning their steps in that dii
rection; but first they must look up the young men froi
Utah, whom thus far they had not been able to find. 
Lucky Jim repeated his assurance that they would mi^
their way back to Yreka Flat in the spring " dead broke r
and partly on this account, and partly because Yreka wi
the nearest outfitting point, they rode over there the morfik
ing after bidding adieu to Chespar District. 
Yreka had met with a good many changes in eigl
months. It was now an ambitious canvas town, with '
dozen lumber buildings besides, which constituted



<pb n="167"/>
THE LA TOUR BOYS AGAIN.              167
was proudly designated "the business block."  Mer-
chants in all sorts of wares reported " lively times," there
was the usual number of saloons, and everything about
the place indicated the process of transition from a camp to
a town. The brothers put up at the Astoria, a hotel with,
log walls and canvas front, which was, as the rather
highly-colored placard beside the door announced, "The
only strictly first-class house in Yreka."
As if to prove Jim a prophet, almost the first words ad-
dressed to them by the landlord, after the conventional in-
quiry, " What will you take ?" were,
" Them Salt Lake chaps that you fellers wor a-huntin'
in the fall hez turned up. Got back last week with nary
red. Cleaned out in 'Frisco. Sech is life."
The " Salt Lake chaps," three in number, were found,
after a short search, sitting round the embers of the fire
which had served to cook their scanty supper, discussing
in a mood anything but hopeful the chances of obtaining
work in the crowded camp. They did not recognize their
visitors until they introduced themselves by name. The
lapse of years had changed the boys who left winter quar-
ters in 1848 into bronzed and bearded men, and the others
whom Francis remembered as lads in their teens were now
stalwart specimens of the California miner.
Only one of the boys, Dick West by name, really hailed,
from Salt Lake. The others were from the northern set-
tlements. Dick, at first was very communicative, rattling
off an amoqnt of news about their mutual acquaintances
which did credit to his imagination it not to his memory,
but when Francis La Tour inquired after his own family
the fluent young man grew silent and constrained. He
hardly ever saw any of them except Philip, he said. The
rest of the family kept themselves very close. Philip was
growing up a likely sort of boy, but the old boss, by which



<pb n="168"/>
z68    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
irreverent term West designated the Prophet, kept a tight
grip on him.
It was not until the next morning, when Francis found
an opportunity of speaking with West alone, that the kind-
·hearted young fellow could be brought to tell what he
bkew. His story was the one commonly reported in Salt
Lake with'regard to Madame La Tour's disappearance;
and as he with the others really believed that she wandered
to the river in a fit of temporary insanity and was acci-
dentally drowned, he gave the account with an air of sin-
cerity that convinced his hearer of its truth.
Of the sisters he had little to tell. He knew that Louise
taught the Prophet's children, and that the younger girls
were with their brother, and he believed that all were safe
and well.
" And I'll tell you what is the truth," he continued im-
pressively; "you want to keep away from there. You
could do no good to any of your family by being seen in
Utah. You are apostates, and in all the sermons..they
preach nowadays they recommend sending apostates to
t  bottomless pit by the shortest route. Philip is a sort of
favotite, and he and thegirls will do well enough, but you
woI    -be bMood-atoned without having time to say your
prayers, if you were caught inside the Territory. I. could
tell you things that would make your hair stand on end-
things that I've seen with my own eyes. It was some-
thing that -happened almost at our door that made me
think it was time to leave, and nothing on earth could per-
suade me to go back."
West was sincere: there could be no doubt of that;
and his repeated assurance that the brothers would bring
trouble upon their family instead of helping them, by mak-
ing any attempt to get them away; finally caused them to
give up the idea of returning to Utah. Here they were



<pb n="169"/>
'THE LA TOUR BOYS AGAIN.              69
freemn, and an honorable career was open to them; In
the dominions of the Mormon Prophet they could only live
as slaves, if permitted to live at all.
The most painful thing involved in their. decision
was what seemed to them the virtual abandonment of
their sisters, whose rescue they were urged to undertake
by every manly and fraternal impulse; but West assured
them that there was not the faintest possibility of succeed-
ing in such an attempt-and he was right. For twenty
years no woman left the Territory without the Prophet's
permission, unless under military.escort, and more than
one generous man who dared the consequences of attempt-
ing to release these victims of priestly tyranny paid for the
desperate venture with his life.
*      *     *      *     *      *     *
1853 and '54 were prosperous years for the brothers; so
much so that buckskin purses and oyster-cans no longer
sufficed 'as receptacles for their gold, and the books of the
San Francisco banking-house in which their surplus cap-
ital was deposited showed the handsome balance of eighty
thousand dollars in their favor. They ought by this time
to have been moderately happy, if success could bring hap-
piness, but both of them were domestic in their tastes, and
longed to end their wanderings and make a home some-
where.
*   The material for such a home as they dreamed of was
not, however, to be found in California at this period.
There were a few families in San Francisco and the
other towns which were beginning to take on the name of
cities, but a large majority of the population were men
like themselves, who had no certain dwelling-place.
In the late autumn of '55 they repaired to San Francis-
co, with their minds made upto take passage for the States.
On the morning after their arrival, Charles, who was look-



<pb n="170"/>
170    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
ing over the paper as they sat at breakfast, turned sud-
denly to his brother, saying,
"We are advertised for. I don't think anybody wants J
to arrest us, do you ?"
Francis took the paper from his brother's hand and read
aloud:
"Information wanted of Francis and Charles La Tour,
who emigrated to Oregon in the spring of 1848, and who
removed subsequently to Nevada County, Cal. Any per-
son knowing the whereabouts of the aforesaid parties will
be liberally rewarded upon communicating such informa-
tion to Rand & Co., No. - M- St."
" Rand & Co. are not detectives, that's one comfort," he
observed. " I think I'll walk down there myself and claim
the reward."
The place indicated in the advertisement was the office
of a well-known law firm. Francis betook himself thither
in the course of an hour, feeling no special curiosity with
regard to the person inquiring for him.
" Some of the boys from Yreka want to hunt us up, I
suppose," he said to Charles on starting.
It was no uncommon thing for " the boys," especially
those who were " out of luck," to hunt up the Turtle
Doves, who could never see an old comrade in trouble
without offering to help him. This time the applicant
might be Jim, whom they had lost sight of for a year or
more. When last heard from he had got rid of the five
thousand dollars that he made at Shasta, and was reduced
to his normal condition of impecuniosity.
" I shall be glad to help Jim. Hope I can find out a
way to do it without offending him," he soliloquized as he
walked along, and with this idea in his mind he presented
himself at the office of Rand & Co., and stated his name
and business to the senior partner.



<pb n="171"/>
.  TIfE LA TOUR BOYS AACIN. .           71
"La Tour? Ah, yes ;" said Mr. Rand. " Very happy,
I am sure, to find that our advertisement has reached you.
The person inquiring for you is your brother-in-law."
" Brother-in-law ! I was-not aware that I had such a
relative," La Tour said.
" The gentleman was accompanied by his wife when he
called at our office," was the answer, " and the lady cer-
tainly bears a decided resemblance to you."
Francis was startled. Could one of his sisters by any
possibility be in San Francisco ? If so, she must be the
wife of a Mormon missionary; and mpore than this, her
own loyalty to the Prophet must be above suspicion, or she
would never be allowed to travel with him. It was not a
pleasant thought; and much as he had longed to see the face
of one of his kindred, he set out to look up the address given
him by the lawyer, in a frame of mind by no means enviable.
-The name on the slip of paper he held in his hand fur-
nished no clew to the identity of his unknown brother-in-
law, for during the years that he spent among the Saints
he had not happened to hear of George Denys.
When he reached the house he was somewhat reassured
by the face and bearing of the man who offered him his
hand, saying,
" This is a far better answer to my advertisement than I
hoped for."
Francis asked at once for his sister.
"She is not very well," was the reply, "and I would
like first to have her prepared for the interview. Our es-
cape from Utah was attended with perils and hardships
from the effects of which she has not quite recovered."
" Your escape !" Francis looked bewildered. " Why, I
thought-"
" You thought nobody escaped from that. place, I sup-
pose."



<pb n="172"/>
t7r    THE .FA-TI OF MADAME LA TOUR.                ,
.' 'N;: that is not just what I was going to say.' I i
thought you were a missionary sent out by the Church." '
There was a look in Denys' eyes which the other could  I
not fathom, .as he answered,
"My last mission in behalf of the Church cost me too
nuch, and I decided never to undertake another-but I
am-forgettingthe explanation which I owe you. If you can
wait an hour to see your sister, I will try and tell you why
we are here, and what drove us from Utah."
It is needless to say that Denys had a deeply interested
auditor while he related, in the fewest words possible, the
story of the last two years. He did not allude in any way
to his wife's previous history. He knew that her elder
brothers had been kept in ignorance of the fact that she was .
sealed to the Prophet Joseph, and for her sake he hoped :
they might never learn anything of her relations to Kimball .
For himself he spoke honestly when he assured her be-
fore their marriage that in his mind no shadow of blame
attached to her. In the eyes bf the world she might be a
disgraced and mined woman; in his eyes she was, as he
hiaid; Only the victim ofa system which he had helped
toiPold; and though when he proposed to make her his
wife he was actuated solely by pity, and a wishto rescue her
from her surroundings, he had already learned to love her.
And Louise ? It is true that, as she had told Denys, she
knew nothing of such love.as happier women feel, but grati-
tude to her preserver was changing into a tender affection.
Those days of suffering on the desert had done more to'
draw them together than months of ordinary experience.
and for the first time since she left the shelter of her own
home she felt that she had sonme one to confide in and 
lean upon.
Yet there were hours when the memory of the horrors of
her past life came upon her like a flood, and threatened to



<pb n="173"/>
THE LA TOUR BOYS AGAlf.              t73
overwhelm her. At such times she could not bear to look
upon a human face, not even upon that of the husband who
was growing so dear to her, and he wisely left her to her-
self until her mind recovered its wonted tone. He knew
that she at once desired and dreaded to meet her brothers,
and it was this state of feeling quite as much as her health
which made him anxious to prepare her for such a meet-
ing.
Francis waited for what seemed to him a very long time
in the room in which his brother-in-law left him. At
length there were footsteps in the hall, the rustle of dra-
peries, and the door opened, admitting a tall, pale, dark-
eyed woman, whom Francis recognized as La Bell Louise,
chiefly by her likeness to the mother, whose face was
never absent from his memory.
The meeting between the long-separated brother and
sister was most affectionate, and on one side altogether
joyful, but Louise's happiness was alloyed by the bitter
thought,
" If my brother knew all, he would cast me off."
In thinking thus she did him a measure of injustice, and
yet it is certain that had the truth been told him she could
not have been the same to him that she was in the days
when the same roof sheltered them.
Before Francis left he learned that Catherine had also
succeeded in reaching California with her husband, and
that they were comfortably established on a ranch about
twenty-five miles from the city. -Both the brothers rode
out to the ranch the next day, and found the place so much
to their liking that the project of returning to the States
was indefinitely postponed.
Catherine had no concealments and no bitter memories,
and perhaps on this account there was something in her
welcome which they missed in that of Louise. At any



<pb n="174"/>
174    THE FA.TE OF MADAME LA TOUR. 
rate, -the unpretentious house in which the married lovers 
had enshrined their Lares and Penates came so near to re- \
alizing their brothers' ideal of a home that they begged the
privilege of sharing it, and formed a partnership with Ken-
yon, which was highly advantageous to the latter, who was
richer in good sense and sound principles than in money.
.During the winter that followed their settlement at the
ranch, the brothers talked freely with Kenyon and his wife
about their mother's disappearance. Catherine still ad-
hered to her unsupported, and, to all except herself, un-
reasonable belief that her mother still lived; but Kenyon,
when he talked with the brothers alone, put a different
construction upon the single fact on which she based this
belief.
"I have no doubt whatever that Catherine is right in say-
ing that her mother never left the house alone," he told
them; "but at the same time I feel sure that she was
drowned, and from my knowledge of that accursed band of
murderers I am equally certain that she did not drown
herself."
This was only putting into words the suspicion that both
the brothers had begun to entertain; but even if they had
positive proof that their mother died by violence, it would
be worse than useless to attempt to bring her murderers to
justice. The Mormon Prophet, secure in his mountain re-
treat, was able to defy the law, and crimes committed by
his orders would never be inquired into, much less pun-
ished. Kenyon could tell them of more than one deed of
blood done in open day, and boasted of as a meritorious
act, and the air of the valley was rife with secret whispers
of other deeds that could not be so much as named among
civilized beings.



<pb n="175"/>
CHAPTER XIV.
PRAYER AND SACRIFICE.
IN all outward things Philip La Tour continued to pros-
per. His business increased, he built a new and handsome
house, and filled it with the best furniture that the valley
afforded; his fair wife was daintily clad, and many a poor
neighbor blessed both for the bounty that was freely be-
stowed; but in spite of all this neither wore a look of per-
fect contentment.
: It was now three years since the little daughter left
them, and no other child had been given them to brighten
their home. No one but a mother who has seen her baby
carried out of the door for the last tine could understand
how Jessie longed to see a little sleeping head upon the
cradle pillow, or how she woke in the night from a dream
of her lost darlings and wept because her arms were
empty, because there was no baby at her breast.
And alas! Jessie now had sorrows which bereaved
mothers elsewhere know nothing of. Because she was
childless her husband was ." counseled" to take another
wife, and often this counsel was given in her presence, and
she was sharply reproved for resisting the Spirit of the
Lord by withholding her consent. It is but justice to
Philip to say that he did what he could to shield her from
these coarse rebukes, and that he assured her, with an air
of sincerity which satisfied her, that nothing could induce
him to do what his brethren all around him were doing.
And yet Jessie knew that he accepted the doctrine of poly-
gamy-that he believed it was enjoined by a revelation from
heaven. Only the infatuation of a blind love could bring



<pb n="176"/>
176    THE FATE OF MADAMB LA TOUR.
any feeling of security to the wife of a man who held such
a belief.
Jessie knew that her husband was sincere in his accept- '
ance of the Latter Day Gospel, and that in theory he did 
not reject even the doctrine of Blood Atonement,* which
iwas preached openly and practiced year after year without
let or hindrance. It is true that he was not selected as an
actor is any of the bloody tragedies that occurred on every
hand. The Prophet chose his instruments wisely, and he
knew Philip well enough to be aware that he would be
quite useless in the r6le of assassin, and moreover that the.
actual sight of the taking off of a Gentile or apostate would
be apt to destroy his faith, not only in the doctrine of blood
atonement, but in the divinity of the Mormon system as a
whole.
The band of cut-throats who stood ready at all times to
do the Prophet's bidding were men of quite a different
stamp-men who were villains by nature, and who did not
need the impulse of fanaticism to bring them to the point
of shedding blood.
And yet these men were Philip La Tour's brethren.
He joined with them in prayer. He invited them to his
house, and they sat at the table with him and his refined
and gentle wife. They filled offices of trust and authority.
Some were members of the Territorial Legislature, others
were judges of the probate courts or mayors of cities, but
every one of them had blood on his hands; every one of
them had been engaged in deeds of darkness for which
devils might blush.t
It happened one day that Philip brought home two of
these men to dinner. Jessie, who always shrank from meet-
ing them, pleaded a headache, and did not appear at the
See Appendix, Note K, page 346. t See Appendix, Note L, page 348



<pb n="177"/>
.PRAYER AND SACRIFIICE, R       - 
table.; but her own room adjoined the dining-room, and as
the door was slightly ajar, every word of their conversation
was distinctly audible to her.
"I suppose you think, Brother La Tour," said one of the
men, " that we ought to have accepted of this Governor
they sent us from Washington, instead of driving him out
of the Territory."
"No," was the answer, " we were not obliged to accept
of him; but still we had no right to mob him. There are
more dignified and reasonable ways of dealing with an un-
welcome official."
'' Ha  ha! That is good. Just hear him, Brother
Grove. Dignified and reasonable  Don't you wish he
could ave seen the boys laying on their ox-whips ? I tell
yow.tc; Gopvernor took some dignified steps before they got
through with him; and I guess they reasond with him' in
a way that he could understand."
Brother Grove did not appear to share his companion's
mirth.
"I don't see anything to laugh about," he growled.
' That job was managed just as I knew it would be when it
was left to boys. The fellow got away, and now we must
expect to take the consequences of the stir he will make in
the States about his treatment here."
. "And you are really afraid that President Young don't
know how to turn that very thing to our advantage ?
Brother Grove, I gave you credit for more sense. Who is
going to prove that the boys were counseled to do the work ?
It is the easiest thing in the world to fasten the responsi-
bility on them, denounce them publicly for it, and have
them arrested. That will quiet all feeling in the States,
and put President Young before the people there in the
light of a man determined to punish such an outrage on a
Government official."



<pb n="178"/>
178    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
"That's all very well," Brother Grove responded, " if the
boys don't tell their own story and put the responsibility
where it belongs."
" Never you fear, Brother Grove. The boys won't tell
anything," * and the Danite, who was also a member of
the Territorial Legislature, drew his hand across his throat
with an expression of countenance fairly diabolical.
He sat facing the bedroom door, and Jessie not only
heard him but saw the look. She turned cold from head
to foot. What if she should be suspected of listening to
this murderous revelation ? Her husband rose and moved
toward the door. She closed her eyes and feigned sleep,
trembling in every limb. He came into the room, took a
paper from his desk, glanced toward the bed, and went
out, shutting the door after him. She listened again, with
senses preternaturally sharpened, and heard him say,
" Here are the names that I promised to give you."
Did that refer to the subject which had been talked over,
or was he only trying to turn the conversation into a less
dangerous channel ?
What she had heard already she understood only too
well. The instruments of the Prophet's vengeance were to
be "taken care of," partly to punish them for failing in
their mission, and partly to insure silence with regard to
the high-handed outrage which the Church had authorized.
Was Philip a murderer too ? No, she could not believe
that; she would not wrong him by harboring the thought
for a moment. And yet, were they not all in some way
responsible for crimes which were the legitimate fruits of
the doctrines they professed to believe ? The fearful oaths
of the Endowment House yet rang in her ears-oaths by
which she, with the others, was supposed to be bound.
*See Appendix, Note M, page 349



<pb n="179"/>
BRA YER AND SACRIFICE.             179
"And I am one of them-one of this band of assassins,"
she said to herself. " Oh, God, my father's God, if thou
yet livest, make some way of escape for me."
Was there any God ? Every crime. committed here,
every deed of blood that tainted the air and stained the
earth was said to be divinely ordered, and the Bible that
she learned to read at her dead mother's knee was quoted.
daily to justify treachery, rapine, and murder. She knew that
the assassins, who were even now sitting at her own table,
would kneel in prayer before going out to arrange the de-
tails of the crime they were to commit. She knew that a
"prayer-circle" had preceded one wholesale slaughter of
mna  women, and children, and that red-haded murderers
'.d-  their. bbody knives, and said .as they looked upon
their expiring-victims, 
O i   l[tord, receive their spirits, for it is for thy sake we
dodW,'*              .                      .
' Strahe indeed that such a faith should retain any hold
upon sane minds, and yet the Old Testament Scriptures,
often misquoted it is. true, and always perverted, were
made the standard by which these acts were tried, and those
who sickened at the knowledge of the crimes committed in
the name of religion said,
" If we give'up Mormonism we must also give up the
Bible."
Jessie knew that her husband shared this feeling, and
that he dared not appeal to his own conscience or to the
customs of the Christian world in deciding the question of
right or wrong. He had not yet begun to ask,
" Is there any God ?" and Jessie shuddered at her own
thoughts as she found them taking the form of this ques-
tion.
* A fact established by the testimony of responsible witnesses in
open cort.              ....      .



<pb n="180"/>
80;:   THE PATE OF MADAM.E LA TOUR.
' " Yes-"-ahe said almost aloud, " there is a God, and he
does. not justify murder. I know the Scriptures do not
mean what they would have us believe here. The Bible
never bore any such fruits elsewhere."
There was so much comfort in this thought that she de-
termined to speak of it to her husband, carefully conceal-
ing, however, her knowledge of the conversation at table. 
- In the.couse of a  hour the unwelcome guests took
their dleparme, apd Philip came in to see if she was
awake. ...
"Have you rested, love," he asked; in the tender tone he
always used toward her.
" Rested enough to feel a little better," she answered,:
detecting his ill-concealed anxiety to know whether she -bad-
really slept while his guests were in the house.
"I was afraid we might disturb you," he continued,
looking relieved, " and I am glad you are better, because I
must go away this aftemooh,. and I mayr not be bk.for a
couple of days.     .
Her.fears instantly put a construction upon this state-
ment which almost brakedown her selfw-onttol; but calm-
iag:hetetf by a greatdort she asked him where he was
'going.
" Only to Ogden on a little business," he answered; but
though she had never doubted his word before, she did not
believe him now.
The wretches who had just left the house had brought
him some order which he dared not disobey-she was sure
of that-and he was going to execute it. And yet, even if
he was to be sent out tocommit a crime like that named in
her hearing a little while ago she must be silent. 
Can happier women in Christian lands understand the
tortures which this wife endu.red while. her husband w.s
absent on his unknown errand ? Can they conceive. the



<pb n="181"/>
P. RA YER AND SACRIFICL            18%
blsgo of other wives (and there are scores of such in
Utah) whose husbands were called from their beds at.
ldight to aid in some deed of darkness, returning home
in time to change their blood-stained garments before the
day broke ?"
Many a woman is to-day dragging out the remnant of a
miserable life, carrying always the burden of a terrible
secret, the disclosure of which would cost the life of one
she loves. Many another woman hassunk into an untime-
ly grave because not strong enough to bear the knowledge
of her husband's crimes.
And thi is not all. The men who have imbrued their
hais'm blood in obedience to cauelrhave found nothing
if'trlMrlIgiod to quenrc the fires of remoser banish
Ulortefig visons called up by remory'; and while some
fi  dft ' 4elnn to n adnes, othe  have ended their lives
WIhCitown hands, and taken a fearful leap into the dark
Mfithe valn hopeof finding forgtfulness beyond death.
Philip La Tour, as we have said, was a man altogether
unlikely to be chosen by the Prophet as an executioner, and
he was not now ordered to undertake anything that in-
volved bloodshed. Two men who had become dissatisfied
with Mormonism were preparing to leave the Territory
secretly with their families, and as they occupied farms at
some distance from the settlements, and upon the northern
route to California, they thought they had a fair prospect
of succeeding where others had failed. 
They could not sell their farms-or take their stock or
household goods with them. All that they owned, with
the exception of a light load for each wagon, must be left
behind; but this was a small prite to pay for freedom. As
they had no near neighbors, they hoped to be able to
get two or three days' start before their absence was dis-
veWred, and with good teams they. could then distance



<pb n="182"/>
t82    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
their pursuers. It was a vain hope, as the sequel will
show.
Months before, some unguarded expressions had betrayed
the weakness of their faith in the Prophet, and from that
time they had been closely watched. Now the details of their
intended- light were almost as well known to the Danites as
to themselves, and the plan that was laid to intercept them
was one that did credit to the peculiar genius of the indi-
vidual who had the matter in charge.
As soon as the exact time of their departure and their
intended route became known, it was arranged that a dozen
armed men should lie in wait for them about ten miles out.
The fugitives started soon after dark, intending to make
about twenty-five miles before daylight. It was now-No-
vembet, and the length of the nights favored them. They
thought that the weather favored them also, for a storm
was raging which no one would be likely to brave except
on an errand as urgent as their own. They had bidden
good-by cheerfully to the homes they had reared, and
turned their faces westward with unabated courage, for
was not freedom just ahead ? Full of this thought, the
men urged their teams forward as rapidly as the darkness
would permit. They knew every foot of the way, and their
horses knew it also.
They wete not in the least likely to meet other travelers;
one of the drivers was just giving expression to this thought
when the sharp crack of a rifle was heard, and a bullet
whized past the horses' heads, followed by the command
"Halt 1" spoken in stentorian tones.
It was not an order to be disregarded when backed up
by a dozen guns, and the teams were stopped.
The only men in the wagons were the two who were
driving. The remainder of the party were women and
children. Their captors surrounded them and brdered



<pb n="183"/>
PRA YER AND SACRIFICE.              83
them roughly to get down. The men obeyed in silence.
Then the women and children, who were sheltered by the
canvas covers of the wagons, were compelled to get out and
stand by the roadside in the storm.
"Very sorry to discommode you," said the Danite cap-
tain, who was no other than the facetious member of the
Legislature who had dined the day before at La Tour's;
" but we are obliged to borrow your teams; hope it won't
fatigue you much to make the rest of the journey on foot.
Good night." And before the astounded fugitives could
comprehend the situation two of the horsemen who had
,,iweepted them jumped into the wagons and drove off at
; a apid rate in the direction in which they had come, fol-
..j(|»bype others. .The little party, left standing in a
l,'i *_    l ia the middle ota-dark November night, had
l j i-~   ie  i~uit to retrce their steps. .The children
ri': !,t  U .' hla: of. the women had a babe only a few
- n.0    o 0-and they would perish before many hours un-
less they could reach shelter.
There was no house nearer than their own, and had
there been, no door would open to apostates; so with
heavy hearts they turned their faces homeward, and a little
after daylight reached the place they had left with such
different feelings the evening before.
They found no traces of their teams or wagons. These
were the legitimate prey of their captors, some of whom
found much amusement afterward in calling upon their vic-
tims, clad in the coats which formed part of the spoils taken
with the wagons.
Was Philip La Tour a willing participator in this out-
rage ?
This question might be answered in two ways. When
he was told that his help was required to keep a couple of
men. who had crown weak in the faith. from leavinr the



<pb n="184"/>
i84    THEP FPATE' O   MADAME LA TOUR.
Territory, he consented readily, for he was still fanatical
enough to believe that there was no salvation for one who
apostatized and forsook Zion.
At starting he knew nothing of the plans of the captain,
and when he found that the women -and children were to
be left on the road, exposed to the storm, he remonstrated
earnestly, but with no effect except to call out a sharp re-
proof for daring to oppose a measure that had been "coun-
seled."
He made still stronger opposition to the robbery that
was included in their arrangements, but was told that after
approving the undertaking as a whole it did not become
him to object to details.
When he reached home he found his wife ill from
anxiety. She had never had any concealments from him
before, and the effort she made to hide her suspicions and
her fears was too much for her strength. It was useless,
also; for in spite of herself she betrayed so much of what
she felt that her husband easily guessed the whole, and
finding that her fears pictured something much darker than
the affair in which he had been engaged, hethought it best
to tell her the truth.
*      *     *            *      *     * .
Mormonism blights and poisons whatever it touches, and
no one who receives it in its entirety can retain either
purity or integrity.
Philip La Tour had theoretically accepted Mormonism
as a whole, but practically he still rejected its leading
tenets. Polygamy, robbery, and murder were crimes so
foreign to his nature that not even the blindness of fanati-
cism could hide their repellant features. It is true that he
listened without comment while the leaders of the people
explained that polygamy was God's plan for peopling the
earth with a race uncontaminated by the vices of the Gen-



<pb n="185"/>
*
PRAYER AND SACRIFICE.              185
tiles. He was also silent when, by way of justifying their
own deeds of violence, they quoted Old Testament exam-
ples of the slaughter of the wicked by the armies of the
Lord, and the spoiling of the Gentiles by his chosen peo-
ple; but in his heart- he was deeply thankful that he was
not called to engage in such a work, and he never visited
a polygamous family without contrasting the discord and
misery he witnessed with the happiness that he found-in
his own home.
As for Jessie, the little faith she had in Mormonism re-
ceived its death-blow on the day she went through
the Endowment House, but for her husband's sake
more than for her own she kept silent. As long as
her home was not invaded by polygamy, and her hus-
band's hands were unstained by blood, she.would endure
all things, and some day it might be his eyes would
be opened too. If she had been older and wiser she
might have looked forward less hopefully to the future; but
she had been married when little more than a child to the
man whose image filled her girlish heart, and she was still
so young, so blindly devoted to him, and so sure of his
love and loyalty, that the possibility of .his becoming in all
things like those around him never occurred to her.



<pb n="186"/>
CHAPTER XV.
THE TEST OF LOYALTY.
THE winter of '62-'63 was by no means a quiet one in
the Mormon capital. The United States military post es-
tablished the previous autumn on the heights above the city
was regarded as a standing menace from a hated foreign
power. The new Governor sent in the place of the one
driven out of the Territory was a man not to be trifled
with, and the Federal judges appointed at the same time
actually had the temerity to talk of enforcing the laws of
the United States in the dominions of the Prophet. It
seemed that the open war between the Saints and the Gov-
ernment which had been inaugurated east of the Missis-
sippi was about to be renewed, but now as in the past
Brigham Young proved himself more than a match for his
adersaries, and by a judicious combination of force and
canning made himself master of the situation. Still, it
cannot be denied that the troops stationed in the Territory,
and the expressed intention of the Government to hold the
Saints amenable to the civil law, gave him much uneasi-
ness and convinced him of the necessity of strengthening
his position by every means in his power.
There was also another source of trouble that promised
to increase year by year. The presence of the troops gave
the disaffected courage; and as seceders from the Church
whose lives were manifestly in danger were allowed to take
refuge at Camp Douglas, the number of apostates multi-
plied without any corresponding increase in the instances
of blood atonement.



<pb n="187"/>
THE TEST OP LOYALTY.               187
It had always been the Prophet's policy to outlaw his fol.
lowers, and thus prevent the possibility of their return to
civilized society. This policy he now pursued with more
intentness than ever before, and those who were unfitted
by nature for deeds of violence were compelled to take
plural wives, in the face of a recent act of Congress which
was designed especially to reach and punish such offenses
in Utah.
Philip La Tour was among the number of those who fell
under the Prophet's displeasure on account of his refusal
to comply with what the Mormon leaders designated as
"the higher law."
He had no leanings toward polygamy. He loved his
wife devotedly, and his home was the dearest spot on earth
to him-dearer now than ever; for with the earliest flowers
of spring a tiny guest had come under their roof-a dark
ed :-bby-boy, so like the lost first-born that itseemed
almost as though he had returned to them.
For months the Prophet counseled Philip, sometime,
affectionately, sometimes sternly, to take another wife, but
in vain. At last when, as he said himself, the utmost limil
of forbearance had been reached, he summoned his diso
bedient follower to a private conference.
- t as evident to Philip as soon as he faced the leader oa
the'pWople'hattihe Prophet was very angry-too angry in.
fled -w waste; ay words-and in the most concise terms
'stib',he '.was libraed rthat he would be allowed jusl
Y-  e 'tt  lb'ochoose whether ,h would take another wife oi
be cut off from the Church anddelivered over to the buffet
itgpoSatan. 
Philip sat as if stunned. To be cut off from the Church
'For him who had never known any other faith, this was
equivalent to a sentence of eternal death. And then he
was to be delivered over to the buffetings of Satan. He



<pb n="188"/>
I8     T7miE PiAE  OF MADfAME LA TOUR.
Iniew very 'wel- what that means. His property and his
lfe Wod thenceforth be at the mercy of the Danites-and
.'theifrtlsder mercies were very cruel.
He- Was incapable of uttering a single word in reply to
thti4udston thrust upon him, and the Prophet continued:
I kv w what is keeping you back. It is the fear of
WttSur wfe.will say or do; and I want you to tell her
from me, that the judgments of God have rested on her
tdhei many yiirs because of her rebellion against his will.
Every child that has been given her has been taken away
again, because she would not hearken to counsel; and
mark my words"-here the Prophet's face grew terrible-
"the child that she holds in her arms to-day will lie in the
grave a month hence if she does not submit to the law that
has been given to this people."
" You will give me a week to decide 2"
Philip hardly knew his own voice as he pronounced the
words.                          . 
' Yes, just one week, and not a day over. You nvgo
now  l havesaid WI lthat I had to say," and with a.look -
ti fiae as hard  i e  cruel  e when, fiften years before, he
i^    Madame: La .Tur the choice of altertives which
brought her to the valley, the Prophet pointed to the door.
: Philip roped his way out blindly. The sun was shin-
ing, but he saw nothing. When he reached the street he
stopped and tried to think. He could not go home-could
not face Jessie, who sat even now with her baby in her
arms, singing a soft lullaby, while the blue-veined lids
drooped over the bright eyes.
The baby I What a 'stab went through his heart as he
recalled the Prophet's words.
Do you, whose lot has been cast elsewhere, scoff at-him
because he belived what had been said to him ? Remem-
ber that since his childhood he had heard nothing except



<pb n="189"/>
.- THr-. TEST OP LOYaLTY. ;:         z
Mormoblsta-4hat all his life, almost, the word of the
Prophet had been, to him. and all around him, the voice of
the Almighty. Remember also how in every age creeds
which .ave been banded down from father to son have
dominated the intellect and the will, no matter how false
and monstrous they may have been in themselves.
Philip La Tour, in accepting the dictum of the Mormon
Prophet as absolute truth, did only what you and I have
done in receiving without question the beliefs which 9r
parents bequeathed us. He did not use his reaso in he
matter, simply because be regarded everything cpnpcted
with yaligip as above the doaWi of reason.
ier imauscaloled aw to pa tbwsOl h an experiepce more.
'bitter than death; but if the call was indeed from.above he
.l otJi  d.r-egsrd iL                -
,,    tie t tqe hat the judgmf   of God ad rested upon
hliaft hbi wife becar of their isbedisee.e  Over and
ilrhe ,-  ed ahnsei this ;ujestion during the wretaced
day that followed his interview with the Prophet.
.Hoir after hour passed. It was almost night, and Jessie
would be' anxious and disturbed if he stayed away longer, so
at last with the courage of desperation he turned his face
homeward, resolved to speak out at once and come to a
decision before another sun rose.
"Pooi Jessie ! Was it for this I won your heart ?" he
said to himself as he canmein sight of his own house.
His wife was at he door, holding up the-baby to wel-
come him. Both faces were bright with smiles, and one
was as unconscious as the other of coming evil.
" How can I ever tell her r' he thought; and for a mo-
ment a wild wish to seize wife and child and fly far from
the cruel fate-that threatened them ai possessed him, but
only for a moment.
"I canhot fly from God."'



<pb n="190"/>
go0    THE FATE-OF MADAM& LA TOUR.
This was Ms next thought, and the Deity of the Mormon
faith--remorseless, cruel, unrelenting-seemed to his ex-
cited imagination to stand in the way with a drawn sword,
barring all escape and driving him forward to the destiny
he dreaded.
"Philip, what is the matter ? You are surely ill."
It was the sweet voice of his wife that fell on his ear, but
,the words smote him like a blow. How could he bear her
tenderness, her wifely solicitude, when he was about to
strike her to the heart ?
With a mighty effort he controlled face and voice, and
answered her calmly. She must not suspect anything yet.
Let her have another happy hour-the last she would ever
know on earth.
The minutes of reprieve which the wretched man had
allowed himself flew rapidly. Supper was placed on the
table, and he went through the form of eating and drinking.
Then baby was rocked to sleep and tucked in his downy
nest for the night.
:is wife came and seated herself on his knee, asking
again if he was ill. For a minute he strained her to his
heart covering her face with passionate kisses; then put-
ting her away from him and pointing to a chair, he said, in
a strange, hoarse voice,
"Sit down, Jessie. I have something to tell you."
She obeyed, with an amazed look on her sweet face, and
yet as plainly unconscious of the blow that awaited her as
a lamb of the uplifted knife.
Twice her husband essayed to speak, but his voice
failed him. At last, summoning all his strength, he be-
gan:
" Jessie, President Young sent for me to-day to tell me
that he had already borne too long with my disobedience
to counsel, and that I must now take another wife or be



<pb n="191"/>
THE TEST OF LOYALTY.                x91
cut off from the Church, and-he has given me one week
in which to decide."
Jessie's cheek blanched, and for a moment she could not
reply; but composing herself directly she spoke bravely,
" If we are cut off from the Church they cannot harm
us. We can go to Camp Douglas, as others have done,
and we will be safe there; though, of course," glancing
around the pleasant room, " we shall lose the house, and I
suppose the store too, but we shall befree, and we shall
have each other and our child."
As she finished speaking her eyes kindled, and the color
came back to her face. How sweet liberty would be after
al these years of bondage 1
Hetrhusband perceived her thought  He saw, too, that
,.\ aM.i. t. tu' ewn  lraced at the alternative. How should
'      M    slt? i' W .at could e say to make her share his own
dread of bringing down the vengeance of Heaven upon
a' h   ,mllbyTcotinued disobedience to a divine law ?
'! Jeaie, you do not understand me," he said desperate-
ly. "I am not afraid of them that can only kill the body,
but I fear Him who is able to destroy both soul and body
in hell."
" Philip, you do not mean-you cannot mean that-",
Speech failed, and the unhappy wife, upon whom a possi-
bility which she had never before contemplated dawned at
last, could only clasp her hands in mute appeal.
"I mean that I far we may be fighting against God.
President Young says our children have been taken be-
cause we have been disobedient, and if we continue to re-
bel our baby will be laid beside the others before another
month."
" And you believe that ?"
" God speaks to us by the voice of his Prophet. I must
believe. If I doubt one word I must give up all."



<pb n="192"/>
192   .THE MaT_ OF MADAME LA TOUR.
4 Give up -all ten. Oh, Philip, this religion is flse-
as false as it is cruel. It yields nothing but discord, and
adisey, andwickedness. Look at the families where they
sayihey have obeyed the law ot God I The wife, if she is
aot.laaged into a fury, is dying of .a broken heart; the
otbWa  women pass their lives in the midst of strife and
palousy that kills all the good in them. And then the
hliiren 1 I had far rather bury my baby tomorrow than
hare bim grew up like them."                .
"Jessie, wife, hear me. If God commands a thing, we
must not question his wisdom. .e must look beyond the
present for results. He knows that it will cost me more
than life to obey him in this thing, and he would not re.
quire such a sacrifice of me if no good could come of it."
"Philip I" She rose to her feet and stood before him.
" Answer me plainly, and at once. Do you believe that
God requires ye to take another wife ?"
"Jessie, have a little pity on me. That is the question 
amtrying te decide. I have been trying i 4day; 'I tiaed
noteome hod. :I eeotld not face ye s ,nd;l fled niw aO
though I-re    glmd." 
The stern look faded from her face, and the fire in her
eyetftened:. She wa again the tender, loyal wife.
" Fogive me, love*i she said, laying her hand on his
bowed head.   I did not mean to make the trial harder
for you."
It is needless to dwell upon the struggle, which did not
end with the nightsbut lasted throughout the week. The
result was what might have been foreseen. Fanaticism
triumphed over nature, reason, love-over everything that
had hitherto saved their home from profanation, and when
the time arrived for making his decision known to the
Prophet, Philip said,
"I will obey."



<pb n="193"/>
THE TEST OF LOYALTY.            .   93
Jessie did what hundreds of wives in Utah' haveddone-
submitted to the inevitable-and after the first .daysaid
nothing to influenceherhusband's decision. She had lived-
too long in the midst of such scenes not to know what the
end would be, and she read her death-warrant in Philip's
face before a single word was spoken to reveal the choice
he had made.
And now comes the strangest phase of those tragedies
which have been enacted year after year, ever since Mor-
momin raised its unclean altars in Utah.
Jessie La Tour did not believe in the divinity of the sys-
tem whi   called for the cruel sacrifice she was about to
n    ,a.; she-flt as she had said that Mormonism was false,
*teli ctbe-a fiorl s   structure of tyranny and crime,
resting upon a foundatdol of lust and blood'; and yet, for
f*iWhtw  d    * d     taht   for the ate of: the man she had wor-
shISat wiith a Wbl   devotio  since the day he first won
'her girlish heart, she conseied to the last, the most bar-
baroum  Ait enjoined by Ms religion (not hers), and went
with him to the Endowment House to place ih his hand the
hand of the bride chosen for him by the Prophet.
Through the days of martyrdom which she endured be-
fore the fatal time arrived, she shed no tear, made no
mfoen.
9tIy ferwhlte face showed what she suffered, even when
f titiw bride's relaties came to the house to talk the mat-
ter over with her husband, and te Prophet visited them
tffie deuhetl he Se  hth they seeded.
The same power of endurance which had kIept her alive
cdtft. t:a'  fearftl: viter March, while strong men
dtpf    d dead beside bet, enabled' her to bury her anguish
out of sight and sit calmly beside the grave of her dead
But when the daj of sacrifice came, and she walked be-



<pb n="194"/>
194    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
side her husband to the Endowment House, she felt that
she must speak once, or die, and turning her pallid face
toward him, her wild eyes glowing like coals of fire, she
said,
" Philip, I am going to lie to you and lie to God: I am
going to perjure myself before Heaven; for I must say that
I consent to this marriage, when I had rather die a thou-
sand deaths than have it take place."
"Jessie, God knows I would lay down my life to spare
you this," was the only reply the wretched husband could
make, and pity for him kept her silent.
She knew something of the terrible battle which he had
fought out alone. She saw its marks in his face, which
had grown old and haggard; in the silver threads which
had begun to mingle with his dark locks.
The bitterness which filled her soul was not against him,
but against the man who had commanded this sacrifice,
against the religion which had compelled it.
She had never crossed the threshold of the Endowment
House since the day when her own marriage took place;
but when they entered the sealing-room, all that she wit-
nessed there seven years before came back, fresh as the
events of yesterday. She saw again the wife with the
corpse-like face kneeling beside her husband, saw her
place the young bride's hand in his; and her senses reeled
as the bride of to-day, a slender, dark-eyed girl of sixteen,
took her place at the same altar.
It was surely a hideous dream, from which she would
awake by and by.
Nothing was real, not even the face and voice of the ty-
rant who had brought this curse upon them, and who now
stood before her asking,
" Are you willing to give this woman to your husband ?"
No sound came from her white lips in reply. She did



<pb n="195"/>
THE TEST OF LOYALTY.               '95
not even incline her head; and when the command was
given to place the bride's hand in that of her husband, she
made no sign that she heard it. There was a moment's
pause, and then the Prophet himself joined the hands of the
pair before him, frowning darkly as he did so, and the cer-
emony proceeded.
There were a few witnesses present, and among them
Philip's sister Blanche. When the party left the En-
dowment House Philip accompanied the bride to her
father's house.
Jessie turned from the door alone. She was conscious
of nothing but a dumb longing to fly to some covert where
she might hide her misery forever from mortal eyes.
The unnatural strength which had sustained her through
tx day was fast failing, and before she had gone a dozen
.  steps s staggered, and would have fallen but for Blanche,
' ho r;pt a supporting arm around her, and pressed her
hand tenderly, in token of the pity that she dared not ex-
press in words.
The fate which was her sister's to-day might overtake her.
to-morrow. Blanche believed Mormonism to be true, be-
cause she had never heard of any other religion, but her
woman's nature rebelled against polygamy, and her tender
heart bled for Jessie, whose silent anguish was more terri-
ble to witness than the most violent demonstrations of suf-
feaing. She longed to say something to comfort her, and
yet she felt instinctively that for sorrow such as hers there
was no balm and no healing.
When they reached the'door of the house that now, alas !
was no longer home, Jessie seemed to wake slowly as from
a nightmare.
"You are very good," she said, speaking for the first
time; " but now I want to be alone."
" I know it," and the sympathizing eyes filled with tears;



<pb n="196"/>
196.   THE PAPt     OF MADAMX LA TOUR.
" but I: i^ come tf-mortow, 'may I not ? arid to-fight-
to igt w      ill pray for you. '
" Dla't pray to the God they worship there," ard Jessie
ointed' with a trembling hand toward the building they
h   dlet,
Blanche could not reply. She could only kiss the white
faie, while her ownn eheekb were wet with tears, and turn
Jessie, left alond, nto for a toiefft irresolute and be-
wildered. Why had she come here? This Was Phiip's
house, nd Philip was the husband of that dairkeyed girl.
Would he bring hi bvide here to'morrow ? And if he did,
where should she go ? She looked away towiard the dis-
tant mountainS.
" Oh that I had wings like a dove ! Then would I fly
away and be at rest."
Where had she heard soch words ? She put her hand
to. her forehead and tried to think. It was id her homie,
the dear old English home, whose vine-coveted porch she
s        ree event a o. Her faietr used to read those words.
ID    he knelmW' ow Wo his ehlt linged tfo far fa, r away
flhworitis vaty ofdeath t
A: sttd Br6ke r tefri ce. It- w a her eild's cry, and
·niatfeil l oe, stronger than death, drew her toward the
crtdie ihi hich she had left her sleeping baby. He was
awake now, and reaching out his tiny hands for her. She
lifed him in' her arms, and pressed 'his little head against
her bosom. She had something left yet to tive for, and
somewhere in the world there might be a place of refuge
for her and her baby; or if not in the world, then out of it.
Maybe God-the God' her mother used to pray tod,-*rld
pHt flem and take then both t6 hilftef.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~,.  .  



<pb n="197"/>
CHAPTER XVI.
PLURAL BLeSSEDNESB.
" BEoR.the glass, as usual. I do believe, Ru*, that
you axe vainer than ever."
Theperson addrssed pirouetted acros the rooms, hook
her 'iiagte. sm othed opt ber drapvies., pal ettl her-
self grmieidiy ai  airi bo .reply  .
';:    " Don't be cross, Myra, there's a dear. I hiw  ko take
'  tli' » i   witha ainas   *bs^   peol* a4m 4roping in
almost every bMrnin Sale.   '.tPae  he tebri.'"
:    f .-T it' eitr ti 1   , ye r  I b  eur prdo; 'I had almost
brgotn fttoxrr   namymaoe is ;ot.over. And now, see-
ini. 'tht w e W  e ane, tell me,: i 4 ..a .honeymoon alto-
gpther ?"
" It would be, only for one thing. Philip is just as sweet
as. he can be, but then he is so awfully religious. You
know they pretend that it is a man's religious duty .to trea
all his wives just alike, and Philip actually believes that!
The' first week after we were married he stayed here, of
course; but the second week he told me it was his duty to
go Imse-rst tink of it. -Aw-rand every blessed day of
tht ,week he stayed with ;bis first wile. Last week he
wes hewr again, and saw-!he s away. That's something
that Ididn't argaia or, wd I don't mean to stand it."
"' c ,onfes I don't quitWe ne how you are going to help
yourself."
"Just wait a little, and you will see. How is it in other
families ? Don't the last wife get all the petting and all
the attention ? How is it in President Young's family ?



<pb n="198"/>
'98    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
When Emmeline was the favorite, you know he stayed with
her right along; and now since he has taken Amelia, how
many times do suppose he has spoken to any of his other
wives ?"
"Not very often, perhaps; but with you the question is,
not what other men do, but what course your own hus-
band is going to take."
"Oh, I'll manage him, never you fear. By the way,
how ugly his first wife is growing. She has changed so
within a month that I declare when I met her on the street
yesterday I hardly knew her; and I suppose now she will
go and tell Philip that t wouldn't speak to her-the spite-
ful thing !"
" You ought not to talk in that way, Ruth. The poor
woman sees trouble enough, I have no doubt."
"Well, I can't help it, and I'm sure it isn't my fault.
If she didn't want Philip to marry me, why did she give
her consent ? People ought to know their own minds, and
not agree to a thing one day and make a fuss about it the
next. And if she is growing old and ugly, I am not to
blame for that, and Philip is not to blame either for want-
ing a wife that doesn't look like a grandmother."
"Ruth, how old are you ?"
"I shall be sixteen next birthday."
"My poor child ! I pity you."
"Now, Myra, that is just like you-always trying to
spoil my good times. I don't know, I'm sure, why I
should be pitied, unless it is because Philip insists on tak-
ing rooms right here at father's, instead of giving me a
house of my own; but I'll have different arrangements in
six months, as you'll see. If I don't manage to be the mis-
tress of his new house by that time, my name is not Ruth."
" Indeed ! And what will you do with Jessie ?"
"Oh, she can have the old house. It's comfortable



<pb n="199"/>
PLURAL BLESSEDNESS.               199
enough, and she don't care anything about style. She
looks like a dowdy lately. Why, the dress she had on yes-
terday was a perfect fright."
" Perhaps she has too much on her mind just now to
care about dress."
" If she knows anything at all, she ought to know that
dress goes a great ways when you want to please a man.
Last week when Philip came over here, he looked as if
he'd just been to a funeral-I dare say Jessie had been
giving him some awful lectures-but I had studied what
to do, and I was ready to meet him. I had the new silk
he gave me made up lovely, and I wore tea-rose ribbons
-just my color, everybody says-and Jane Taylor came
over and dressed my hair. She said I looked like a picture,
and I believe Philip thought so too, for he brightened, up
wonderfully after I came down stairs."
" Well, Ruth, I am sure l want you to take all the comfort
you can; though, if I were you, I am afraid I should look
forward sometimes to the day when I would be obliged to
step aside and give place to some one else; and you know
you have just said it is the last wife who gets all the atten-
tion."
"Now, Myra, you are really too bad.  I don't think
there is another person in the world who would say such
things to me-and in my honeymoon, too."
Here an embroidered handkerchief was produced, and
the bride buried her pretty face in its folds.
"Don't cry, Ruth. I did not mean to make you feel
bad."
The face came up again from its hiding-place.
" I won't cry and spoil my eyes, for I am going down
to the store, and I want Philip to think I look lpvely. I
know he'll think it, though he won't say it-the prQyok-
ing man. How is my dress ? And do you suppose my



<pb n="200"/>
200    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
hair would look better if I should loop these curls back-
so ? D   ywm ever hear of Philip's oldest sister ? They
say she was so lovely that she couldn't walk the street
without.people stopping to look at her. Well, Aunt Mar-
garet, who used to know her, says I have her style of
tauty, and she says, too, it's my.own fault if I don't
make Philip worship me. She says he's worth o great
deal of money now, and making more every year, and if I
manage right I can -have such a house and furniture and
such dresses as I'veever adreared of."
" If those things will nake you happy, I hope you may
get them. For my part, if I ever marry, I want a bus-
band who will nbt belong to any one but me, and then -
think I could be contented with a crust of bread."
" It's no wonder, Myra, that you are an old maid, with
such notions. How are you going to get a husband who
will not belong to any one.else ? If you are the first wife,
you will never know what day your husband wvillbiag
}home a second. Aunt Margaret said to me,
" Whatever you do, don't think of being any man's fiat
wife, for you will live a life of dread before he takes his
second, and a life of misery afterward.' Aunt Margaret
has got sense. She's a fourth wife. She is petted, and
Has her own way in everything, and she knows her hus-
band won't take another; but her sister, who is a first
wife, is put off on a sage-brush ranch, and don't see her
husband once a year."
Do any of our readers object to the foregoing style of con-
versation ? If so, we beg leave to remind them that it only
exhibits the practical, every-day application of a religious.
principle which our Government has regarded as so sa-
cred that for many years it has been an effectual shield
from the penalties of a law which is openly and persist-
ently violated by a whole people.



<pb n="201"/>
PLURAL BLSSEDFb      SS. .       2
Ruth, Philip ILa Tour's new bride, was a fair spoeciroe
of the girls brought up in Utah-no better and no worse
than the majority of those around her. She believed po-
lygamy to be right because she had been so taught from
her cradle, and she regarded her own marriage as legal
and binding because no opinion to the contrary had eve
been uttered in her hearing.  f anyone had intinated
that she had wronged and outraged Philip's wife by r-
suming'the relation to him which she now'held, she would
have lifted up her pretty hands in horror, and asented :th
imputation with hot words and angry.team.
It is true. that -she was -shallo, vain, and selfish; but
then girls of that descriptmin may be found outside of
'Utah, and Momronism cannot be justl.ychaged with de-
vtMoping traits that are quite as-common -among the ad-
'terents of ohe4 esystems.
She really thought ittoo bad that she, who ws so much
youunger than Jessie, and in her own estimatioa  very
much prettier also, should have no more of her husband's
society than the first wife; and it was an unheard-of thing
that a bride with so many attractions should live irn 
couple of plainly furnished rooms, while the woman whom
she regarded only in the light of an obstacle to her com-
plete triumph had a handsome house all to herself.
She was fully resolved not to submit to such an arrange-
ment, and in the end she had her way, for though she did
not succeed in turning Jessie out of doors, she tormented
Philip until, glad to purchase peace at any price, he
bought a pretty cottage for her; and fitted it up with the
best that money could buy.
In other things, however, she found that her influence
over the man she called husband was very slight. He
still continued to spend every alternate week with his first
wife, and when Ruth ventured to speak disrespectfully of



<pb n="202"/>
202    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
her he reproved her so sharply that even she was con-
vinced it would not be safe to repeat the experiment.
After six months of married life, the opinions so confi-
dently expressed in her honeymoon were greatly modified.
" Philip cares no more for me than he would for a kit-
ten," she declared petulantly. "If I talk to him half an
hour without stopping to take breath, he never hears one
word. Sometimes he doesn't answer me at all, and some-
times he asks, 'What did you say ?' in a way that would
provoke an angel. I've half a mind to ask President
Young for a divorce."
" Why don't you ?" inquired her friend Myra, to whom
these complaints were addressed.
"Well, you see, with all his faults, Philip isn't a bit
mean about money. I don't know any other man who
would be likely to buy me such a house as this; and as for
dresses, you know yourself that half the girls in the city
are ready to die with envy when they see mine. Then be-
sides-but I forgot: I-haven't showed you his last present."
Ruth tripped into the next room, and came out with an
inlaid box in her hands.
" He gave me this on my birthday," she said, opening
it and displaying a gold watch and chain and a pair of
bracelets of elegant workmanship.
" Did you ever see anything so perfectly lovely in your
life ? I showed them to Milly Allen yesterday, and she
looked ready to cry. She was married the same week I
was, and she is wearing her old things yet, and has to live
in the house with two of the other wives, and they order
her around as if she was a little girl; but then, Milly
never did have any spirit. She couldn't speak for herself,
no matter how she was treated."
" Brother Allen treats her well enough himself, does he
not ?"



<pb n="203"/>
PLURAL BLESSEDNESS.               203
"That depends on what you call good treatment  He
isn't cross to her, but he tells her he can't afford another
house, and it's no use talking about it. You see, the
trouble is, he was sealed to Milly and Sarah Spencer on
the same day, and Sarah happens to be the favorite. She's
got a place of her own, and new things, and he spends
half his time with her, which is about all that could be ex-
pected of a man with six wives."
" I am sorry for Milly," Myra said. " She used to be a
good girl when I knew her, and she deserves a good hus-
band."
"Well, I'm sorry for her too, of course; but she ought
to have had more sense. When a man marries two girls
on the same day, one of them is going to be neglected-
anybody knows that. I told Milly how it would be, but
she didn't believe me."
"After 'all, Ruth, I think you ought to be pretty well
satisfied. You have a fine house, fine furniture, and fine
clothes-things you have always. wanted-and your hus-
band spends half his time with you. What more can you
ask ?"
" I want him to spend more than half his time with me,
and to act as if he cared for me ;" and then, to her friend's
surprise, Ruth buried her face in her hands and began to
sob-not angrily, but in a wretched, heart-broken way,
that brought Myra to her side at once, and caused her to
put her arms around her and-ask tenderly,
" What is it, dear ?"
Ruth. lifted her head and dashed away her'tears.
" I'm a fool, I know, to feel so, but I can't help it," she
said.
"Come into my bedroom, Myra. I haven't told a
single soul-not even mother-but I'll tell you."
Myra followed her wonderingly into the next room, and



<pb n="204"/>
*04    THE FA EA OF MADAME LA TOUR.
Ruth.loeed the door and locked it. Then opening a
drawer she took out a pile of tiny garments and spread
tmaom   the bed.
":Look there!" she said.   "You know what that
means.. I- am only sixteen.-fiixteen last week-and . i s*hll
be a   othe-in tree months. Philip don't care or me,
andtewone't care eikr for the poor littl baby, :tat isn't
to blame for anything, if'I Sa," Sfd again  Mth sobtb9ed
bitterly. 
Myra #Wied to oaifort her, bpt she had sees too Amt   of
polygamy in her own father's house, where four iWes
claimed a love that eodu only be given to oe, to '  able
to oonsole her with the hope that she might yet wii her
husband's heart.
"He loves that baby at home-Jessie's baby," Ruth
said, as she dried her tears. "He had it down to the
store the other day, and he looked as if he worshiped it. I
heard him say, too, ' Papas only comfort.' Just.thiuk of
that! I tell you; t is6at Jessie'sfault. If she was  t of
the way I believe I coull rmake him care for me, but as
long as she lives he will love her best; and I hate her-I
hate her."
" Hush, Ruth! Youifrightenme. Itlswicked to feelso."
" I don't care if it is. I think it is a shame for a nmai to
take a girl as young as I was and make her his wife, when
he knows she will be miserable. What did he marry me
for if he didn't care for me ?"
" I suppose he thought, as they all say they think, that
it was a religious dety to take another wife."
" Bah ! I know better. I've seen too much at home to
believe that, and I never cared anything about religion. I
just wanted to have nice things and enjoy myself, and I've
never hurt anybody, and never done anything to deserve
such trouble as I have now."



<pb n="205"/>
PLR4AL BLESSEDNESS.            .    $
It was vain to attempt to convince Ruth that she *as
not the mast ill-used of wives.
A spoiled child, petted and indulged from infancy by a
mother who had been forced to surrender her husband to
others, and who had nothing left to live for except this
one daughter, she had grown up with the idea that her in-
terests, her comfort, and her happiness should be consid-
ered first, last, in the midst, and always.
To say that she loved Philip would be overstating the
fact; but she liked him,.wanted him to admire her and pet
her, wanted to be first in his regards ;. and now, when filled
with;a ague dread of the trial that she nt pass through,
malty linged for some toien of sympathy and tenderness.
P hilip Oe his pat, regarded her as a pretty, teasing
*cfl, and .,u the passing mosths made him better ac-
pquSiRMd with her fauts, he found the weeks that he was
forced to speWd ib her ociety more and nMore irksome. It
is d'tl-i him to: ay, however, tat he did his best to con-
ceal shis kfeeing. He was always patient and gentle with
her, gratified her whims, bought everything for her that
her fancy coveted, and was considered by all her friends a
model husband.
Yet to Ruth, who in spite of her shallow nature had a
woman's insight, all this outward kindness was a very
thin mask, which failed to hide his real feelings. She
knew that he loved Jessie, and wvould never love her.
Jessie would always be irst, and Jessie's child would be
dear to the father, who woald look upon ker child with as
little tenderness as he felt for the mother.
Whe* these unwelcome truths were forced upon her,
she suffered as much as she was capable of suffering-not
enough, however, to altogether destroy her pleasure in the
ewi dresses and trinkets. with which Philip sought to buy
immunity from the hard task of smulating love...



<pb n="206"/>
ao6    THE FATE OF MADAME 4A TOUR.
Meanwhile, in the home that only a few months ago was
so peaceful and happy, an evil spirit sat enthroned. The
wife, after a season of apathetic despair, woke to a full
sense not only of her misery, but of her wrongs; and bitter
jealousy for the girl who stood between her and her hus-
band, and hatred of the tyrant who had placed her there,
seemed to change her whole nature.
She would not feel so-she might get over it all in time,
and bury the memory of the happy past-so she told her-
self-if every alternate week did not bring Philip back to
the house; if she did not see his face and hear his voice
day after day, knowing all the time that the tenderness
which he tried to show toward her would be lavished on
another woman next week; that the kisses which her out-
raged love refused would be given to that dark-eyed girl,
whom she hated with a vindictiveness that frightened her
when she stopped to reason about her feelings.
" I don't wonder they say that a wife who rebels against
polygamy is possessed by devils. I feel as though I had a
legion of them in my heart."
This was Jessie's confession to Helen Woodford, who
was her friend as she had been the friend of Philip's mother
years ago.
Mrs. Woodford was now fifty, but a stranger would
have thought her much older. Her once queenly form
was bent and wasted, her face deeply graven with lines
of suffering, and her hair white as snow.
In reply to Jessie she said, with a strange far-away look
in her eyes,
" I felt just as you do once, long ago-it seems ages
now-but I got over it."
"And how ?"
"By outliving my love for my husband. As long as I
loved him I suffered-suffered the torments of hell. You



<pb n="207"/>
PLURAL BLESSEDNESS. .              207
Kb.bw the house in which he used to keep two of his women
.i:-.  eannot so far forget what is due to myself as to call
.:lrisa wives. At night, when he was staying there, I used
BIu Whalk the floor of the room until it seemed that I must
t go mad unless I could escape from the place-from every-
;  thing. Then I would rush out into the street and go to
that house. I would walk round and round it, feeling as
though I could tear the walls down with my bare hands,
:. growing every minute more like one possessed with devils,
until my boy, missing me, would come in search of me
i- :id    m me home."*
' Ilmlow howo you felt"   Jessie's eyes gleamed, and she
_-[M[thpaod breathed hard. " I am glad Philip did
m girt into my house, because-because I
hke."
-  3.i     wtm~fre isow you will look back and wonder
iwi-r  dould; have suffered as you do to-day from
:' ;d    dffzt'Lbie. I wonder at myself-wonder that I should
M if  prized as I did the love that was not strong enough
to shield me from wrong and outrage-the love that with-
ered in a moment before the word of the man they call the
Prophet of the Lord:
"To-day my husband is nothing to me. He comes
*home sometimes-- believe I have seen him twice during
the past year'-but his coming or going affects me no more
than it does the walls of the house."
"I shall never feel so-never. I love Philip; I shall
love him till I die. I can't help it; I try to shun him-I do
speak harshly to him and turn away from him-and all the
while I am longing to throw myself into his arms and sob
out my anguish upon his breast, as I used to do in every
other trouble."
* See Appendix, Note N, page 35o.



<pb n="208"/>
a08    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
" Por child."  The older woman laid her hand tender.
ly ow the bowed head. "Is it so bad as that ? I loved
my husband too, for years after he inflicted an irreparable
wtongl upon me, but from the hour that I discovered the
utth I was no longer his wife. I would not permit so
*mth as the clasp of his hand-the hand he had given to
others. But in one sense your wrongs were less than
hine. Your husband did not add deceit to his broken
savtrage vows, while mine lied to me year after year-
lived in adultery with the women his Prophet had given to
him, while I believed myself a loved and honored wife. I
could forgive anything sooner than that."
"I cannot blame Philip, even when I try to, for I know
how he suffered. I know what agony he endured before
his decision was made, and now I know that he is un-
speakably wretched. That girl"-Jessie's face darkened
as she pronounced the words-" torments and humiliates
him with her silliness, her petty tyrannies, and her odious
temper, until he would be glad to fly anywhere to escape
fnom his life with her; and yet, according to his ideas,
hie is a wife, aid he is bhund to treat her as-as he used
to treat me. Then when his week with her is ended he
c6tes home and finds me cold, or sullen, or furious, just
as the evil spirit within me moves me to be. If my father.
could come back from the dead he would not know his
child. I do not know myself."



<pb n="209"/>
,2 ',  - ' ;'   .
^^/ ^ :CHAPTER            XVII.
B:..y 'THE DEAD TELL TALES.
WIH the fall emigration of 1863 one of Jessie La Tour's
.qcbhoolmates came to the valley with her husband, from
A^lrfa^.lp4q1i  dkng woman, often ill, and always
_U S Yip^  A4t 4nd thy fnrends she had left.
4         wf, R. ,ady ,isP Wqinted when she
"  ,    gil4 qet.!wd -wIenl so eloquently
' W4Din^dqed, her and her hus-
,         ,Jqif p9q ~ygamy in the valley
_P *fgA4S4op p     tt error to her, and she impor-
, Mlblubod to seek protection from, the troops and
leave the Territory; but he had expended most of the money
i    -they brought with them in the purchase of a house and lot,
and he was not willing to sacrifice his property for the sake
,Of getting away.
Jessie went often to see this old.friend, Mrs. Stanwix, and
.   p1 her best to put aside her own troubles for the time and
y4a    te herself to the task of cheering and encouraging her.
W' t./  he . pring her own affairs kept her at home more, and
.; i-  e P1! "not seen her friend for several weeks when a mes-
: :    e1 e ame one evening to say that Mrs. Stanwix was very
.I:.. *#Rd wished her to stay with her during the night.
,i r, -$e went at once, and on reaching the room in which
'     .t:' einvalid lay, she could not repress an exclamation of
ps astonishment and distress. The woman looked like one on
>    h---he brink of death. Her face, always pale, was ghastly,
'  *



<pb n="210"/>
210    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
her eyes were deeply sunken, and her thin hands were cold
and clammy.
"Why did you not send for me before ?" Jessie said.
"If I had known how ill you were, I would have come any
day or hour."
"My husband has been with me," was the answer,
"but to-night he was obliged to go away."
Then raising her voice with difficulty, she said to the boy
who had broutht the ihestage,
" You can go home now, Edward. This lady will stay
with me until morning."
The boy availed himself of the permission at once, and as
soon as the sound of his retreating footsteps died away,
Mrs. Stanwix said, in a.hurried whisper,
"Go down stairs, lock the outside doors, fasten all the
windows, and don't leave a light anywhere."
Jessie obeyed, with a little doubt of her friend's sanity,
and returned to the rooi -as quickly as posilble.
" Tke that chair," the sick womah said, poihting to the
one beside her pillow.
When her. reqiest was complied with, she clasped her
friend's hand in both her own.
"Thank God that I see you once more--ahd alone. I
thought that was never to be," she said.
"I would have come at any time," Jessie replied, as
before.
"You do not understand me," she said. " They were
afraid to have me talk with anybody. My husband has
stayed with me night and day since I have been sick, and
this morning, when he had to go away, he left me in
Katrina's care. She hardly understands a dozen English
words, he knew I could not talk to her; but to-night she
was taken sick herself, so I sent the boy after you, and told
her she might go home."



<pb n="211"/>
.  THE DE.4D TELL TAIrS.              2t
8   ]jp  sauPl^mot-et you talk too much eithr," Jessie said.
re excited now. You will make yourself worse." -
im .d    inuliews me to speak. Wait till you know What
II '       4te~'ae,4d0 wn to this bed, and you will not wonder
lIq kmilt me: Give me a little of that cobdial
] ,t~    ard !let Me rest. a few minutes. Then I will tell
'      olbIdt'ank .the scrdial and lay back among her pillows,
-.-   .tand-ethusted. Jessie hoped she mightsleep, but her
bat .-_i ti.eyo       remained wide open, mad with the same
i..W.tlSoif      ixprntidn. ia tem hdt at tfirst'made her
.*_R       4s~,lernleheb  tuanfeimr face toward
tI_ t bli S Wa4er edll ioh iss a den of
l^^^^|Wn bvdL ..Mdsngdefpeetedl end' startling that for a
* aM.f    -f, la^  d MMble-;d speak, - She might have an-
Ai i l  in Ahe titffirmatiie, but not wishing to do
;t,lsw  Only said,:
' ,lfWhat makes you think that ?"
" I don't think it," was the reply; " I know it, and this
rery;howse has been the scene of a crime so dreadful that
. I cannot put what I have learned of it into words."
She stopped again, panting and breathless, but recover-
, i  $l reself after a few minutes she went on:
'   ' "tYou know it was late in the fall when we bought this
place. It was sold to us by the bishop of the ward, who
..d te property, but the house had been empty a good
' white, and everything in-doors and out was going to decay.
We put off making repairs until spring. Then with the
trt fine weather we set about painting the house and put-
ting the groufids in order. In one of the rooms down-stairs
there were dark stains on thefloor; I could not wash them



<pb n="212"/>
212    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
out, so I had them painted over, little thinking what the3
were.
"The next week my husband went to work in the orchard.
Two rows of trees down the middle were dead or dying,
and he said he would take them all out and plant others.
"I liked to be out in the orchard with him while he
worked. One day I stood beside him, and-I cannot tell it,
and'yet I must-he was digging a deep pit for a large tree
he meant to set out, when his spade struck some loose
rocks. He rolled them away, and oh; the horror of the
sight! It will haunt me till I die. There were the re-
mains of seven dead bodies which had been thrown in
together, dressed in the clothes they wore in life: so we
judged from the shreds that still clung to them. They
seemed to have been those of a man, a woman, and some
children.
"I did not stop to see more, but fled to the house. My
husband followed me in a few minutes. He said he did
not try to examine the bodies-they were in such a state he
could not-but they were lying on their faces, and he could
see'that even the little children had their hands tied behind
them; and of the children there were five.
"' I'must lose no time,' he added. 'This must be re.
ported at police headquarters before night. I shall fill up
the pit as well as I can and go at once.'
"I begged him not to leave me, but he said it would not
do to wait. Then, as if struck by a sudden thought, he
told me to go to bed and stay there.
"' It may not be wise to let any one know that you were
with me,' he said. ' I will report that you are sick and
unable to leave your room.'
"I did as he bade me, and in truth I was sick: hardly
able to stand.
"He did not come in again before going down town;



<pb n="213"/>
?.;. -i.. '       THE DEAD 7'ELL TALES.                213
i4 "he got back from the City Hall he was as white
_~      ,;~i*de my report,' he said, 'and what do you think
_:*HP       Diwas ? Why, just this: " Never speak of what
Ml' elElseen, if you value your own life; and whatever
_     SN   Stlhear about your premises to-night, do not look
B    ii,. "ask no questions."   I tell you, Mary,' he con-
:''i  ,'i1this accursed discovery will end in your murder
,sand mine unless we are dumb as death itself, and I warn
to' speak of it even to me. From this hour we
memory of it.'
sa.* fay that, but impossible to do it, as he
That Fnight, when I heard sounds in
-the bed and looked out of the
^^L^^                       t]~f e'ibesibde   Pit, and half a dozen
!_~t^HdH~i't-sk1 iinto a box that stood on the
HIIeISte~',"i my husband woke and called
i; tterrikd thisper. I went back to bed, and he
'. . " ' For Heaven's sake, Mary, what makes you do so ?
You are risking both our lives. I tell you we shall be mur-
dered if the first breath of suspicion gets abroad.'
"I said nothing; indeed in a few minutes I was incapa-
ble of saying anything, for the excitement and terror
brought on one of those attacks of hemorrhage which I had
in the fall. I have not left my bed since, and he has
watched me night and day, as I told you, in mortal fear that
I will reveal something, while I have lain here feeling as
though I had abetted that horrible murder by helping to
cover it up." *
Jessie was silent. What could she say ? It would not
* See Appendix, Note 0, page 35o.



<pb n="214"/>
Z14    THE FAT'      OF MADAME LA TOUR.
lese the wJrror of h4e deed, whose shadow seemed to fill
the house where they were, to say that it was done by
a;thOniy-that it was only an example of the swift and sure
piMliahipe  which was visited upon covenant-breakers-
fwwifA Aq qfrther knowledge of the facts than she could
gleaO   fw  the recital to which she had listened, she was
certai lhakt  e viC4ims of the tragedy enacted under this
rpQf!A  fllen. ndr the curse invoked in the Endowment
HIWlue upon thw wh9 fail to keep their oaths.
: The father ad moter had revealed the iniquitous
mysteries which they had sworn to keep secret, and their
children had perished with them, because the bloody cqde of
Mormon vengeance declaes that the sin of the parents.
shall be visited upon the children unto the third and fourth
generation. Or perhaps the children had been killed, like
those at Mountain Meadows, lest they should some day
bear.testimony against the murderers of their parents.
" Why do you not speak ?" Mrs, Stnwix said at length.
''.Do you too think that I shquld keep sPlept.?"
"It was right to speak to me," was the reply, "if you
felt.that it would relieo yoyoputqo sq; but do not breathe a
wi-d to ay one else. Yur hbIqp 4 spoke truly when he
said there.was o o, flty ecept i silene, an$ to reveal
what you know could be 9ofnq pssible benefit. Crimes
committed in  bedience to 'counsel' are never inquired
into and never punished."
"I am glad that it is possible to die-glad that my own
death is so near. This valley, that I foolishly believed was
like' heaven, would be hell instead if there were no way
out, and I see none except through the grave."
"You speak truly," Jessie was about to exclaim, but she
checked herself,
"For many years there was no other way out," she said
after a little silence, " but now it is sometimes possible to



<pb n="215"/>
--     *:     THEi  DEAD TELL T4LE.,               s5S
*,   N~ft^t  h  °ope's life. Why do you not go to the fort and
.~,ves9s. All we have, almost, is in this place,
_   _ ^lap.4 pot make any attempt to sell; and now it
Aipy l liIe to be moved. Not that I am trou-
^    ;iMiRi~'mjyPself; I have only a few weeks to live at
_; ][/qlibM  t py lbusband believes I will recover, and hq
_[b, [~i_    te   p.qor fellow, to save me."
;r. a swotaok. taWu   the. god care of you that he has a right
%t  WOi .'I4t.   reW 4 sR;d i" and for the remainder of the
!t, Autf      q4ly,1 and you must not talk to me."
:Igu)p~Jte wi iin i arrangement; indeed
J-piyfflijh(.te * 4alf y1  to speak, and after
_the d^c i       tn.qf Peeing her sink
_ -gpq ,      .Wiffio loceqd anwious and
Is Qther Eptids than those
*II^ IiwkJ    ~lft~ !er; but the explana-
,       ,       'YtqrltM  w4ift her quiei maner, and the
cS~ 'l      bt        Vife N  had slept well during the night,
appeared to disarm his suspicions. When she took her
. - te     K expressed her willingness to come again at any
J         ~^g h lMr. Stanwix answered that he would send for
(   :· W4  UlR4 there be a change for the worse.
.- .i:- t q. j . he is satisfied that I have heard nothing," she
A               i'tlf4 4 as she walked away.
       ',.ayA later she was again summoned in haste to her
d; d   ',   bedside, but when she arrived life had fled.
-    Another attack of hemorrhage had silenced the only wit-
;I[;   - QWho would have had the courage to reveal the crimes
I- -sftPted under that roof.
E  et,*   has made good her escape," was Jessie's first
r;'  iht as she looked at the now peaceful face. "Is there
way open for me ?"



<pb n="216"/>
8I6    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
Truly life had become a heavy burden to her-heavier
now than ever; for Ruth lay on her sick-bed, with a tiny,
wailing babe beside her, and Philip, from a sense of duty
whidh his wife in her jealous misery mistook for love trans-
ferred from her to her rival, spent all his time with her.
It was now more than a month since he had been home,
except for an hour on Sunday. At first Jessie tried bravely
to school herself into a willingness to have him stay with
Ruth until her health was restored; but as the weeks
passed and his whole interest seemed to center in her sick-
room, to the neglect of his home, of her, and of the bonny
boy who could say " Papa" so sweetly, when, alas ! there
was no father there to listen to his call, a flood of bitter
feeling swept away her resolves.
" You have no father," she would say to the wondering
child, as he climbed into her lap and tried to wipe away
her tears. " We have lost him-you and I."
Then the little fellow, understanding only the one word
"father," would prattle over again the name he was so
proud of being able to speak, sure in his baby heart that
he was comforting mamma.
It was hard, very hard, to be thus neglected by the hus-
band who had shared her every thought for so many
years; hard that this girl should win from her the love
which was hers by right, if the unreserved surrender of
her own heart, if wifely loyalty and devotion and the self-
abnegation which had not refused even the last and most
cruel sacrifice which could be demanded of a woman, gave
her any rights.
Surely her husband must have transferred his love to
Ruth, when he could not tear himself from her side for a
single day; and then the jealous pain at her heart grew so
strong that she did not wonder at Helen Woodford,
" walking round and round the house where her husband



<pb n="217"/>
" A HE  DEAD TELL TALES.              2Ij7
ag as though she could tear the walls down
'hands."
_know all that Philip could have told her of
"nature, or of the tears and hysterics called
_ intimation of a wish to go home for a
-rb; at a time when doctors and nurses as-
the least agitation might cost her her life.
:at first all that she' considered her hus-
lgIht to ask-and more. She had gone to
:th tiny babs in her arms-Philip's
Mtb Ed l irotd Herself to speak
A·R lr.: 'In this the had taxed
_ti./'t, and when, on the
ttob:ech other, our
'O r'reitint  she. had
.  il  she' answered him
-__  .._ e.r spoken to him:
w_ ith whom you are living
i', 'deth  when she spoke, and her
%f'. vtftihs. She was in a mood in
'_ seen her, and in spite of
6__ni naowhad Jessie put her
_  '4tif notwithstanding the
fti..' ijcironed polygamy,
atk abwledge the fact even
-'6- the effects of plural
'.. rdains. bear such evil
IMft aside as a temptation of



<pb n="218"/>
218    THE F42'E O     MADAMB    LA TOUR.
Satan  but it recurred again and again with every instance
of domestic discord, every exhibition of jealousy and heart-
bprpjig which be was forced to witness.
J  ie was..wrought up now to a pitch of excitement that
de#d.. .otrol, and the feelings which, for his sake, she
hwd s !prng repressed, found utterance in words that
bu.red themselves into his brain.
"Looki at our iorsge" she cried; "the home that was
heaven once, apd tel .we what i' is now. It is hell, and
you know it; and day ap d4ay, whik you are spending
your smiles an4 your subsnce on youw  isgress, I sit here
alone enduring torments worse t howa : of a lost soul;
and this is what your religion has broqgil4pw to-your
religion, but not mine. I thank God that I c WrqWember
a religion which made a man faithful to his maiage Mows,
which did. not set up adultery aF murder as sacredl 4wies.
It is this memory, and only this, which has kept me from
taking my baby in my arms an.4fipdg rest at the bottom
of the river."
" Jessie ! Jessie !" Philip exclaimed, as soon as he could
tem the torrent of her indignant words, "if you felt in
%his way, why did you not say so at *he first ?"
" Why ? Because your mind was made up, and nothing
would turn you from your purposre  Did I not humble
myself to plead with. you-I will not say as I would have
pleaded for life, because it would have been easy to give
up my life if you had asked it; but as a woman pleads for
the last, the most precious thig left her in earth or
heaven-and what then ? Why, you put my prayers aside,
you trampled on my heart, and all because your Prophet 
bade you do so. If I had thrown myself into the river
your wedding would have gone on all the same, for that
would have been what your religion enjoins. Only yester-
day this woman right at our door, who has been driven



<pb n="219"/>
.THE DEAD TELL TALES.                     219
l iby the religion that has made her husband
right in before her face to share his bed and
_  went to Eliza Snow for counsel, and what
, ,Why this:
m said the poor creature, ' but I cannot be
_ i if &  tii  gti stays in the house I shall die.'
i     the answer. 'There are hundreds of
't 1~gg     roq inad who have' gone there be-
_jed' mgi  tothe or4er of God.'
f*GC.ou kipev6e in,-you, who
ieM e    ':r6ol suffering with
," for I too
toy life iW worth
:et', 'neither life
'' b!e 'ithhfel d when
N_~,s,  ~ i ,Fi  tbht he had striven
'    ,dolbt .whether the command
_ 4jd'a,     pat    a :t .a cost was indeed divine
_,     fl.checked his utterance.
r je a.ll, this religion in which he believed
tp be false ! What if he had sacrificed home,
, all that a man holds dear, for naught!
*b:]tween reason and superstition-the con-
kw al ages and qnder so many forms of belief
How would it end i
.t  ,:!
ia: 



<pb n="220"/>
CHAPTER XVIII.
THE LION AND THE FOX.
THE inevitable changes which time brings are not con-
fined to'any particular locality or people, and as the rapid
increase of population in the United States augmented the
tide of emigration to the yet unsettled portions of its terri-
tory, the Great Basin shared in the influx of colonists who
were attracted by reports of the agricultural and mineral
wealth of the country beyond the Missouri.
Within the boundaries of the "Free and Independent
State of Deseret," as organized by Brigham Young and his
coadjutors in 1849, the Gentiles, who were to have no part
nor lot in this inheritance of the Saints, had already settled
to the number of hundreds of thousands.
Wyoming, Idaho, Nevada, Arizona, and California-all
of them within the limits of the territory claimed by the
Prophet " in the name of the Lord"-were occupied in spite
of his dominions, and the country was rapidly filling up with
a population inimical to him and to the system he repre-
sented.             *
These unwelcome intruders already hemmed Utah in on
every side, and the day seemed not far distant when they
would lay claim to the sacred soil of Zion itself; but as yet
the Prophet held his own, and not only ruled his subjects
with a rod of iron as heretofore, but kept out the Gentile,
who was not to have so much as a place to set his foot
within the borders of Zion. It is true, it sometimes hap-
pened that an outsider was found foolhardy enough to
undertake to pre-empt land beyond the boundaries which he



<pb n="221"/>
THE LION AND THE FOX.               221
was forbidden to cross, but in such cases the rash invader
was baptized in Jordan-and left there; and his land fell to
heirs not named in his will.
The only representatives of the world they hated, who
could not readily be driven from their midst, were the
troops at Camp Douglas. General Connor, notwithstand-
ing many intimations that the Territory would be made too
hot for him, still professed himself satisfied with the cli-
mate, and his batteries continued to frown upon the city,
the Tabernacle, and even the sacred inclosure within
which the Prophet held his court.
But this was not all. The chaplain at the post, Rev.
Norman McLeod, a man of dauntless courage, as the
sequel will show, actually procured and opened a place for
Christian worship within half a dozen blocks of the Taber-
nacle. At first his congregation was drawn chiefly from
the garrison and the families who had taken refuge at the
fort, but gradually many who in their hearts had renounced
Mormonism began to find their way to the building that,
with a just conception of one of the first needs of a people
so long enslaved, was named Independence Hall.* As
might be supposed, many of those who went secretly to
this place of Christian worship were women, whose bruised
hearts longed for some message of hope and consolation:
something which would remind them that the God of whom
they had heard in their childhood-a God of infinite ten-
derness and compassion-still lived.
Who shall blame them if, borne down by the miseries
of their daily life, and cut off from hope, they had felt as
though he was not-had said, in the bitterness of their
souls,
" We sit unowned upon our burial sod,
And know not whence we come, nor whose we be."
*See Appendix, Note P, page 35.



<pb n="222"/>
a22    THE FA-l !OF MADAME LA         rOUR.
Amonl g the first t g6 openly to the hall was Jessie La
Tout. Others had gr    Veiled and disguised to the even-
ing service. She went in broad day, and without making
The leat attwpt at Concealment. The first time that she
*dfied the authority i the Church in this way the boldness
ditftle -et ieeed to paraltye those whose duty it was to
'W tch her, a: tid*thit wais :aid of done by them; but on
f te Sc6id Sibth a Ihtte was thrown into her open win-
diow afte r    ier etin. She enfolded it, and mad as fol-
lows:
"Remember your oath. Rlmemtber also What is the
penalty df disobedlenc. You have offended twiee. The
third tiin, that which you impreeated upon yourself when
yba tok your vows will surely befall you. Be. warned in
season."
Jessie's lip curled tontetmttuouly as she read, and she
made a motion as though to tear the paper in two, btn
cheeed herself and harndd it to Philip, who happened to
be at hote in the afternoen. He redd it, and tusned very
"Jessie ! hat have you tees doing ?" he said, with a
de oe of agftatibh * wdh hsliwed plainly that the missive
tttnt something-to him, at least.
" What have I been doing ?" she answered. "Why, I
thotight you and everybody knew. I went last Sunday to
Independence Hall to attend a Christian service. I have
been there again to-day, and I mean to go next Sunday."
" You must not go again. You are risking too much."
" What do you mean by that ? Does this paier, which
I should have thrown into the fire without reading, frighten
you ? I hope not; for just as surely as I am alive, and
well enough to walk there, I shall go to the hall next Sun-
day, and every Sunday."
"Jessie, listen- to me for our child's sake, if not for my



<pb n="223"/>
A'ft    LION AND THE FOX.             223
9t"1|~h. I tell you, it will hot be sale for you to
warning you have received."
__^^^^§   W  yqol think I should be dealt with as Mrs.
'_lmM    t heand put his hand on her shoulder.
_^^^^^^      ,' The said, in a voice scarcely audible,
_-^^  ' NH~giksnt A -y life, though you do not believe
_P^---l.a'tmWe you by giving my life for yours if
_            AiC tdu ma lm, 0submissien, to strngthen the
_ t_^^l            pqhil~iN *raMlit vttRdam:Chris-
"ml ftCrlt      myftM he is.
b-        wigh to defy
S'lbd~ietjery-
wilR nwwtiue to
a _       nL.,i'm been
ftlbnl tette mtim   of them ?"
_     _        d~~NI~Mf iedS bet questions, but there was
I_^^s             ;~iArOtce tif t checked her -an expres-
fi agony, but of horror and dread.
. _ ,    ,"'W _s the thought that forced itself upon
~     ~_4^,lrOnVft face grew white; for whispers of a
hat none dared name it aloud had been
_       }/ ^ ie' 'ad been accused of revealing the secret
_2      ..'wEndowment House. They had been summoned
_           W]=ssi_~e then had never been seen; but the belief
_       f mu ~~~the penalties prescribed by the bloody code
h they had transgressed had been inflicted on
_     ~.iifll.* Death, in itself, was not considered a suffi-
-7::.·  *See Appendix, Note Q, page 3S.



<pb n="224"/>
224    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
cient punishment for exposing the secrets of the Endow-
ment House.
To mete out the full measure of vengeance which the
culprit had called down upon himself, death must be pre-
ceded by tortures from which the imagination recoils, and
which no pen could describe.
Philip La Tour now held an office which made it his duty
to be present when offenders were tried and sentenced. If
he had been present when these women were tried, he surely
knew enough to make him dread a like fate for his own wife.
In spite of her fearless nature, Jessie trembled and grew
faint as these thoughts passed through her mind. There
were no crimes of which these wretches were incapable.
She dared not even conjecture what would be the tate of
one who was in their hands wholly and without remedy.
" I will not fall into their hands," she said aloud, reply-
ing to her own thoughts. "I will take my boy and go to
the fort to-day. The guard that accompanies the chaplain
is in town. I will ask protection. There are a few men,
even here, who will protect a woman."
" Jessie !" and something in his voice compelled her at-
tention.
" There is another way. Only be patient and wait a lit-
tle while. There are changes coming of which you do not
dream. Grant what I ask. Stay away from these meet-
ings for 'the present, and act as though you submitted to
the authority of the Church, and better days will dawn for
both of us."
What did he mean ? Was it possible that his eyes were
being opened to see the iniquities of the system that he
had believed was divine ? Jessie's heart beat quickly at-
the thought, which something in his face as well as in his
words seemed to confirm. If this were true, she would do
what he asked-do anything for him.



<pb n="225"/>
r.             7'THE LION AND THE FOX.            225
"It shall be as you wish," she said at length, hardly
daring to trust her voice lest it should betray all the joy
·she felt at the possibilities that opened up before her.
It was now two years since the day (never to be forgotten
by him) when the expression of a wish that she and Ruth
might be reconciled to each other had called forth the in-
adignant words which stung into life a feeling of remorse, a
sense of guilt, which could not co-exist with a firm belief
in the divinity of the system which enjoined polygamy.
Nor was this all. During these two years many facts
had come to his knowledge which had greatly shaken his
faith in the Prophet. He was beginning to see what an
impartial observer might have seen from the first-that
Brigham Young and his coadjutors were using all the
machinery of the Church for their own aggrandizement,
and that the poor were pppressed and the whole people
systematically robbed to fill the coffers-of those men.
Only one thing more was needed to complete his disen-
thrallment, and that was to be brought face to face with the
shocking barbarities involved in the rite of blood-atone-
ment. This final blow to his faith in Mormonism came at
the very time when a few Christians were making an effort
to publish the long-forgotten gospel of peace and good-will
among the subjects of the Prophet. It is true he was not
an actual witness of the sickening horrors of the Black
Vault, but he knew the victims who were taken there, and
knew the fate to which they were doomed.
Yet while his whole nature recoiled from such scenes of
blood and cruelty, and the inevitable effect of his knowl-
edge of them was to overthrow his faith in a religion whose
altars were red with human sacrifices, he had not attained
to the courage necessary to throw off the yoke of the
Prophet and take his place openly among those who were
known' as apostates.
Pi_



<pb n="226"/>
226.   THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
That better days were coming he fully believed. From
present indications it seemed impossible that the Gentiles
could be kept out of the Territory for another decade.
The mineral wealth of Nevada and Colorado, which had
attracted so many immigrants, might one day find a rival
here. Already valuable deposits of lead and silver ores
had been discovered by parties attached to General Con-
hor's command, and the report of these discoveries was
certain to bring miners from the neighboring Territories in
such numbers that they would be able to defy the Prophet.
In such an event, the disaffected element within the
Church would certainly join the foe from without in an at-
tack upon the despotism which made life, liberty, and
property dependent upon the will of one man.
There were many besides Philip'La Tour who waited for
the coming of such a day of deliverance as his hopes
shadowed forth-many who had been as sincere as he in
their acceptance of Mormonism, and who had made even
greater sacrifices for the sake of their faith.
Ever since the bloody days of the "Reformation,"* when
an unsupported accusation was sufficient to doom a man
or woman to death, or a fate worse than death, without
even the form of a trial, the number of those who only
waited for an opportunity to throw off the Prophet's yoke
had been steadily increasing.
Husbands whose wives had " disappeared," wives whose
husbands had been called out of the house in the dead of
night to meet the knife and bullet of the Destroying Angels,
and parents whose sons had been given over to the tender
* A reign of terror inaugurated in z857by the preaching of such faun
ptics as Grant, Brigham's Counselor. The Reformation was at fulltide
when the Mountain Meadow massacre took place, and that most atr-
cious butchery was'in accordance with the doctrines taught by the
Mormon press and pulpit at the period named.



<pb n="227"/>
_         ?,-  7 If.0.T LIcON AND  THE FOX.          227
OL  he Danites, could hardly be expected to remain
in their loyalty to the Church whose teachings sanc-
*mi       atrocities. Yet so absolute was the despot-
*    W!_ ,w  .thbe people lived, and so great was the
.-        iAB.r~-by the summary punishment visited on
.       ,,        , wqeyet suspected of apostasy, that but for
^- troops no whisper of dissent would
g .  og tile masses.
_q'fi* .1 '           e,did Philip La Tour venture to con-
_ R ]^^lPHH1~. of the Prophet, and his horror of the
F. ,r n; RAd though by this time
' ..q 4gewas, likewise a
'..41wA      w .,:he continued to
l pCad, half his time
-_br, ,     but because he
part of this chap-
_/#l"S:!.;M ; for though Philip
'. ka. t "the other house," she
_ _             '-i~fl 7 ^ . hbe went there reluctantly and
_            q ; . ..X * a;1nd, strange as it may appear to
,-_ ^          iW   'nthing of the domestic life of the
_          . _ . ..to," to ke unusual pains with her dress, her
Id her household arrangements, and to make the
pS.)ih:.:,r ^band spent with her wear a holiday
w"'omen who have never been within sight or hearing
ihves as hers wonder that she could forgive the past,
solace herself with the hope of a future in which her
4should be all her own ?
e'L arpscores of women in Utah to-day who have ex-
's1,.h forgiveness to husbands who cast them aside
ience to the requirements of a false faith, and
-plate repentance has involved not only the breaking
rW, .. . 



<pb n="228"/>
2Z8    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
of other ties, but the loss of property, position, andI
friends.-
When Philip at length found courage to talk freely with 
his wife, and explain his difficulties, he found her more
patient and considerate than he had dared to hope she 1
would be; and when he begged her to bear with him until 
the way opened for him to renounce polygamy and Mor-
monism together, she answered that she could bear all
things with the prospect before her of a day in which he
would be a free man.
In many respects he was better situated than others who
wished to sever their connection with Mormonism, for he
had but one plural wife, while some of his brethren had'
half a dozen whom they must give up, together with their
children. According to the teachings of the Mormon pul -
pit, when a man was cut off from the Church, all of his
wives and children were to be taken from him and given to
others. Even the first wife, with her children, could be
disposed of in this manner. There are many instances on
record where a man suspected of apostasy and compelled
to flee for his life has returned to the Territory in after
years only to find the wife of his youth in the harem of
some member of the priesthood, who claimed his children
also.
Philip knew that by the exercise of a little caution he
could provide for the safety of his wife and son, and he was
quite willing to give up Ruth, who had no children; for 
the frail baby, the innocent cause of so much bitter feeling, ',
lived only a couple of months.
Then, too, his hands were unstained by crime, while'
others who longed for freedom were held back by their,
enforced participation in some of the dark deeds " coun:-
seled" by the authorities of the Church.
When Jessie thought over the matter by herself, iit



<pb n="229"/>
THE LION AND THE FOX.               229
i   med to her as if there was really no hindrance except
their property, which must be sacrificed if they left the Ter-
ritory, and which, on her part; she was quite willing to
, sacrifice; but then, if Philip did not see his way clearly
yet, she would wait, and wait patiently.
. In the mean time, true to her promise, she kept away from
Idependence Hall, and attended the services at the Taber-
naele instead-in short, conducted herself as Philip had
i advised, so as to give the impression that she was com-
pletely subdued.
Some of her neighbors, however, continued to go regu-
larly to the meetings in spite of threats, and the Sabbath-
school proved so great an attraction to the Mormon chil-
dren that no degree of punishment availed to keep them
from it.
It is not to be supposed that such a state of things could
be suffered to continue. Mobs, armed and organized in
such a manner as to leave no doubt that they were acting
under instructions, surrounded and filled the hall at the
hour of service. The meetings were broken up, the life of
McLeod threatened, and finally Dr. Robinson, one of his
strongest supporters, was murdered in cold blood.
McLeod was not a man likely to succumb to threats or
violence, and he determined to assert his rights as an
American citizen and continue to hold religious services in
the building that he and his friends had paid for; but-official
: changes soon after called him from the Territory, and the
movement he had inaugurated, deprived of his courageous
leadership, seemed for the time at an end.
Other influences, however, were at work to change the
condition of affairs. Rumors of the mineral wealth of Utah
j reached the surrounding Territories, and hundreds of hardy
lPiners, most unpromising material for subjects of a despot-
began to crowd in.



<pb n="230"/>
230    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
At first the authorities of the Church ordered the Danitesr
to drive all prospectors out of the cations with shot-guns;
but in a very little while the Prophet discovered that the'
game was one which two could play at, and this order,
though not rescinded, became practically inoperative.
Then another foe, more dreaded even than the miners, 
was reported on the way. The iron horse was speeding
across the plains over which Mormon pilgrims dragged 
their hand-carts only a few years since. In a little while
Deseret, the kingdom that was never to be moved, must be
brought face to face with the world from which its founders
had fled, and the old strife between civilization and barbar-'
ism would be renewed.
But the Prophet proved himself equal to the emergency. 
The Lion of the Lord, as he was wont to style himself, be- 
came a very fox in cunning and duplicity; and though he 
did not succeed in keeping out the invader, he saved his
kingdom from overthrow, and made all who came from
without realize that they dwelt in Zion only by sufferance.
The only perceptible change consequent upon the new
order of things was that blood-atonement, instead of being
preached and practiced openly as heretofore, took the form
of midnight murders committed under secret instructions.
Gentiles and apostates were no longer shot down in broad
daylight; but men who knew themselves to be obnoxious
to the priesthood kept in-doors after dark, or, if compelled to'
go out, armed themselves doubly, and took the middle of
the street.
In other respects, however, the despotic rule of the Proph-'
et was in nowise affected by the presence of the Gentile .
element in his dominions. If he chose to appropriate the-
property of his subjects the courts afforded them no re-'
dress, and polygamy, instead of experiencing any checlkc
spread and increased. 



<pb n="231"/>
CHAPTER XIX.
A MYSTERY SOLVED.
THE southern portion of Utah has been the scene of
many a bloody tragedy besides that of Mountain Meadows,
but as yet there had been no attempt on the part of the
Government to seek out and punish the perpetrators of any
of the crimes committed there; and if in Salt Lake and
under the guns of the fort some feeble effort was made by
the Federal authorities to investigate the murders com-
mitted at their yery doors, the accused had only to betake
themselves south to assure their perfect safety.
The idea of arresting a Mormon in one of the southern
settlements without the aid of an armed force was so pre-
posterous that the most courageous ot the Federal judges
would not send a United States marshal on such an errand;
and even if the officers of the law should be sent after
notorious offenders with troops at their back, it would be
quite useless.
Brigham assured his people that he had prepared a re-
treat in the mountains of the south in which the whole peo-
ple might hide--a spot of which no white man knew any-
thing except those in his confidence.
this assurance was an exaggeration, like most of his
public boasts; but it is certain that in the heart of the
. mountains he described there has always been a safe refuge
for those of his followers who, after years of delay on the
part of the Government, have at length been indicted for
some of their many crimes.



<pb n="232"/>
232    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
In 1867 and '68 many persons whose names were un-
pleasantly associated with open outrages committed in Salt
Lake and vicinity found it convenient to move south, and
among these were two men who were heavily indebted to
Philip La Tour, and who had forgotten to settle their ac-
counts before leaving.
Not wishing to lose so large a sum, he determined upon
going down to the settlement in which they had located,
hoping to make some arrangements by which a part at
least of the debt might be secured.
It was a long distance-more than two hundred miles- 
and as railroads were yet unknown in Utah, and stage
lines few, the whole journey had to be made by private
conveyance. Such institutions as hotels were also yet in 
the future; but in most of the settlements there was some
house-often that of the bishop-at which the chance
traveler could obtain lodgings.
On his return trip, and when still more than a hundred !
miles south of Salt Lake, La Tour stopped for the night at
a small town, the center of a farming community, estab-
lished there in the early days of the Territory. Mother
Simons, his hostess, was a garrulous old lady, one of the
original Nauvoo Mormons, and also one of the earliest con-
verts to the doctrine of polygamy. 
She had come to Nauvoo a widow, and bestowed herself
and the property she brought with her upon an elder whose
wife, like many other women in Nauvoo at the time, waq
kept in profound ignorance of the transaction until th&
Saints emigrated to Utah.
The first consequence of the avowal of these secret polyi
gamous relations was generally a division of the domesti
establishment; and Mother Simons, who, besides bei
several years older than the lawful wife, was almo
pathetically ugly, was given a home in this southern sett



<pb n="233"/>
A MYSTERY SOLVED.              233
t  ment, while the other members of the family remained in
Salt Lake.
No sense of ill-usage or neglect, however, seemed to dis-
turb the good woman's placid content, or affect in the least
her loyalty to her master or to the Church. She was the
most devout of Saints, paid her tithing with scrupulous
regularity, and every spring and fall made the long journey
of a hundred miles to Salt Lake, for the purpose of seeing
the face of her Prophet and hearing his voice at the confer-
ence.
La Tour found tolerable accommodations at Mother
Simon's place; but as a chilly autumn rain set in on the
evening of his arrival, he was glad to exchange the uncom-
fortable temperature of his own room for the warmth of
the old lady's kitchen fire.
Mother Simons delighted greatly in new subjects, into
whose ears she 'might pour the flood of gossip which her
neighbors grew tired of listening to, and she made the
most of the present opportunity. After La Tour had sub-
mitted good-naturedly to a long catechism with regard to
his own affairs and " the news in Salt Lake," she pro-
ceeded to enlighten him upon the history of all the families
in the settlement.
It must be owned, however, that her tattle was in the
main good-natured, and she had no evil report to bring.up
until she came to the neighbor whose orchard adjoined her
own.
"They're that set up," she remarked, "that folks as
.works for a livin' ain't good enough for 'em to speak to,
hardly. They've got a two-story house-the only one in
the settlement-though what they want with such a place,
* with nary chick nor child around, nobody kin tell. Sister
Mirandy won't have the second wife in the house neither,
d she and Brother Wells and their Danish girl was
!i· 



<pb n="234"/>
234    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
reckoned for years and years to be the only souls on thai
place; but a spell ago-'tain't more'n six months, I should'
say-it leaked out that they've bin a-keepin' a poor crazy ,
creetur for nobody knows how long, in one o' the upper
rooms. 'Pears as if it's a relation of some kind; and folks
that knows how graspin' Brother Wells has always bin
says they've got her property, and that's what's set 'em up
so, and give Sister Mirandy her fine shawls and things."
Here the good woman stopped a moment to take breath;
but as her listener showed no disposition to interrupt her
by a question, she went on directly:
" Some of them that takes up for Sister Mirandy says the
woman ain't no kind of relation, but only a poor creetur
without friends, and that they're paid for her keepin' out of
the tithin', but that ain't noways likely; for," dropping her
voice a little, "things has come out lately that goes to
show that Brother Wells ain't much betttr than a 'postate;
and as for Sister Mirandy, she's always been set agin
plurality, and 'twouldn't surprise me the least mite to hear
her say she'd never had no faith in the gospel; for them
that sets up to pick and choose for themselves what part
they'll believe and what part they won't, generally ends
with believin' nothin'.
"I don't want to think no harm of my neighbors, and
there ain't nobody that kin say I go around talkin' about
folks behind their backs; but I can't !:-.lp mistrustint
there's somethin' wrong in that family. No soul in the,
settlement has ever seen that poor creetur up-stairs; an'
them that used to know Brother Wells kin tell you the
same as I, that he didn't have a dollar to his name when hi
was in Nauvoo. Now, what I want to know is, where'*
his money come from, and what made him keep that poor
creetur out of sight for years and years ?"
Again Mother Simons paused, as though expecting te



<pb n="235"/>
'  ~       A MYSTERY SOLVED.                235
elicit from some source the information she had asked fir,
but as it was not forthcoming she continued:
" But I ain't told the-hull. The way it happened to
come out that they was keepin' this poor creetur up-stairs,
she was took sick, and it 'pears like all they could do for
her didn't help her a mite, so they sent to Nephi settlement
for Sister Perkins.
" Now Sister Perkins is a master hand at doctorin' with
yerbs-I shouldn't be above ground myself to-day if it
hadn't bin for her-and besides she's one of the kindest-
hearted creeturs that ever breathed. She felt that bad
about Sister Mirandy's aunt (for that's what they give out
she was to 'em) that she couldn't keep still about her
noways. Sister Perkins thought, and we all thought, that
if the rights of the thing was told, Brother Wellses house,
and all their fixin's that they set such store by, come out of
the aunt's money; and Sister Perkins said she didn't 'pear
to her that crazy that she needed to be shut up all the time.
Kinder strange like, she was, and wouldn't speak; but
that was all. But there was more to come. Seems as if
the poor creetur kep' growin' weaker and weaker after
that sick spell, and yesterday she dropped off. The neigh.
bors that went to lay her out asked for her Temple robes,
and Sister Mirandy up and says, as sharp as could be,
"' She won't wear nothin' of the kind, for she wasn't in
the Church; and I won't put on her dead what she wouldn't
have if she was alive.'
" That was a curus speech, and if it had a' bin any one
else they'd bin called to account for it; but the bishop,
he's always bin easy with Brother Wellses folks, and he's
that easy now that he's goin' to preach the funeral to-mor-
E  row mornin', though Sister Mirandy says as plain as can
*  be her aunt never was in the Church."
Philip listened to his landlady's monologue at first with



<pb n="236"/>
i36    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
profound indifference, but finally with a degree of inte
for which he could not account, and when she finish
asked the hour of the funeral.
"Ten o'clock in the mornin'," was the answer. "Mayb
you'd like to go. The neighbors is all a-goin' to get
sight of the poor creetur that nobody's bin let to see whiW
she was alive."
When morning came, the rain which had set in the
night before was still falling, and the prospect of riding
through such a storm was not a pleasant one; but this
alone would not have been sufficient to cause Philip to de-
fer starting until the next day.
A curiosity as unusual as it was unaccountable possessed
him to look on the face of the woman whose sad story ha
ended in death. Who was she ? And why had her existi
ence been kept secret for so many years ?        *
When the hour appointed for the funeral arrived, Phili
took the way to the house alone. The place looked like
the home of a well-to-do farmer-a New England farmer,
an observer from the States would have added-for there
was an air of thrift and neatness about the grounds and
buildings which, as a rule, was corspicuously absent from
the homes of the Utah settlers at that day.
The appearance of the front room in which the fune
services were held kept up the impression of a home tran
planted directly from the hills of New Hampshire or
valleys of Connecticut to the Great Basin, and the ma
who sat at the foot of the coffin, facing the curious cro
-with grave composure, was unmistakably a son of the P
grims.
How came he in such a place and among such a peopi
But if his looks and bearing compelled this question, 
of the woman beside him contrasted still more stron
with the surroundings.                         'i



<pb n="237"/>
A MYSTER Y SOLVED.               237
A noble, spiritual face; a head tQ which the silver locks
were as a crown of glory, and a presence at once gentle
and commanding, increased every moment the wonder of.
the beholder at finding her in such a company.
La Tour, seated near the door, could scarcely take his
eyes from that face, which recalled dimly a life that now
was little more than a dream to him-a life untainted by
the deadly poison of the upas-tree that had taken fast root
in these valleys.
Like a man but half awake he listened to the rambling
discourse of the bishop, which included a reminder.that it
was the duty of the nearest of kin to be baptized for the
dead, who had left the world without receiving the gospel;
listened to the doleful funeral hymn, and rose to his feet as
the whole company, marshaled by the bishop, filed past
the coffin.
He was the last in' the line, and a feeling of reluctance
that amounted to dread held him back, until he was left
itanding alone. Then the bishop, recognizing him as the
stranger who had stopped in the settlement over night,
beckoned him forward, and he moved slowly toward the
spot where the dead lay at rest.
The body was robed in a plain shroud, tSe thin hands
were folded on the breast, and on one of them was a ring
-a ring he had seen before-and almost in the same in-
stant that it met his eyes they rested likewise on the dead
face.
Great Heaven !
His heart gave one suffocating throb, and then stood
still.
It was the face of his mother ! No chance likeness, no
resemblance that might cheat the eye for a moment, but in
very deed the face that had bent over him in infancy, that
had made the sunlight of his boyhood.



<pb n="238"/>
238    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
For death had brought back all the early loveliness of
Marguerite La Tour, and but for the snow-white hair she
looked as she might have looked if this dreamless sleep
had overtaken her upon her bridal day.
; While he stood as if transfixed, incapable of speech or
motion, officious hands closed the coffin-lid, and before he
could rouse himself from his trance they had carried it from
the room. The assembled company followed, and he was
left alone. The strong man felt as helpless as a little
child. Stunned, blinded by the shock of,that awful dis-
covery, he groped his way to the door. The wind that
blew in sharp gusts, driving the rain into his face, roused
his benumbed faculties and partly restored him to him-
self.
Mechanically he followed the path taken by those who
carried the dead; but he was a long way behind, and when
he reached the place of burial the first shovelful of earth
had been thrown upon the coffin. As his fascinated eyes
watched the rapid filling up of the grave, all the terror and
anguish of that long night-watch twenty years ago came
back to him, and with it came also the memory of every
word spoken by the man who had made him as well as his
mother the victim of his unrelenting hate.
He saw it all now-saw the deliberately-planned scheme
of vengeance which had cost him and his sisters a mother.
How much it had cost that mother herself he dared not
think.
The burial was over. The people whom curiosity had i
drawn together separated, and hurried homeward through
the rain, which was still falling. No one remained beside
the grave except the man and woman from whose house
the dead had been carried out. Philip stood opposite
them. They too were about turning away, when he stopped
them.



<pb n="239"/>
A MYSTERY SOLVED.                939
"My name is La Tour," he said, speaking across the
grave. " I saw and recognized the face of her whom you
have buried here."
"Husband," said the woman, clasping her companion's
arm, " have I not told you again and again that this hid-
den wrong would surely be brought out into the light of
day ?" The man turned toward Philip, " My friend," he
said, " come with us to our home. What you should hear
can be best spoken there."
Without another word he led the way down the path,
and Philip followed silently. When they reached the house
they entered, not by the way the dead had been carried
out, but by a side door, which opened into a room that was
warm and cheerful in spite of the storm.
"Take off your wet wrappings," said the host, " and sit
down beside the fire, for the story we have to tell is a long
one."
Philip made a negative gesture.
" Do not refuse to sit down in our house." It was the
woman who spoke this time, and her face and her voice
were full of pathetic entreaty. "We are not your ene-
mies. We were not her enemies. Only hear what we
have to tell you."
Thus urged, he seated himself by the fireside, but the
questions he wished to ask died upon his lips. The mah
turned to his wife.
" The story is for you to tell," he said; "for from first to
last you have been blameless in this thing, and remorse
will not tie your tongue."
"Fifteen years ago," the woman began, fixing her soft,
dark eyes on the face of her guest, " we were asked to take
charge of a friendless woman who had lost her reason. I
'need not tell you from whom the request came ; but when
I consented to receive the woman I believed her case to be



<pb n="240"/>
240    THIE FATE OP MADAME LA TOUR.
as I have stated. My husband knew the truth, but 
dared not refuse to do as he was commanded."
"Say also," the man interrupted, raising his hea
"that I was poor then, and the money that was offered 
tempted me."
" That is doubtless true," she went on in the same qu
voice; "but if nothing had been offered you, you must st
have obeyed."
Then addressing herself again to Philip, she continu
her narrative.
" We were not living here at that time. We were in S
Lake-within a few blocks of your home-and the house i
which the woman we were asked to take charge of h
been confined for five years, was on the opposite side of 
street."
Philip started from his chair. If this woman spoke
truth, how blind he had been-willfully blind, it seem
now.
" You cannot credit this,"' she said, " and yet it is true,
and stranger things still have happened. Your mother '.
-her voice faltered a little as she pronounced the word-2
" was in the custody,of James Sprague until he died, a
after his death she was removed to our house."
"How came she in his hands ? How could she hay
been taken there in open day, against her will, and
without the knowledge of the people around her ?" 
The woman looked at him steadily. "Surely you a
aware," she said, " that had all the people known of su
a thing, not one of them would have dared to speakr
counseled otherwise; but in this case no force was e
ployed. Your mother was decoyed to the house by a m
sage that you had been injured by a fall from a horse 
carried in there." 
" And what then ?"                          "'



<pb n="241"/>
A MYSTERY SOL£ED.                .241
"She was confined in a dark inner room: kept under
lock and key as a prisoner, and treated as a maniac."
Philip sprang to his feet, with a white face and flashing
eyes. The spirit of his race was roused at last.
" My curse rest forever and ever on the man who placed
her there," he cried; " and God do so to me and more also
if he escape my vengeance."
" Be calm," the woman said, her own face and voice un-
changed. "You do not know what you are saying. He
cares nothing for your curse, and only those who are
stronger than he can mete to him the measure he has
meted to others. Hear all that I have to tell."
"Your mother, perhaps, suffered less than you imagine.
She was not beaten or starved, as has been the case with
many a one imprisoned by the same authority, but she
was fastened by day to the bed on which she slept at night,
and during-the five years in which she remained in that
house she was not permitted to exchange a word with a
human being-not even with her keepers, who had strict
orders never to speak to her or answer her.
"You must understand 'that I knew nothing of all this
when she was placed in my care, and it was years before
the whole truth came to my knowledge; but she had not
been with us a week before I was convinced that she was
not insane; and as we had no special orders regarding her
treatment except that we were not to allow any one to sus-
pect her existence, I did my best to make her as comfort-
able as circumstances permitted, and talked with her when
' I could do io with safety.
"A year after she came to us we moved to this place.
Thi land was bought and the house built with the money
that was paid my husband for taking charge of her, and
we were again strictly ordered to let no one know we had
such an inmate, If the fact of her existence should be dis-



<pb n="242"/>
242    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
covered by chance, we were to say that she was an insane
relative.
" By this time I knew who she was, and soon after we
came here I learned the whole of her sad story; but what
could I do ? What could any one do ? Were we not all
slaves, bound hand and foot ? Had I told what I knew, no
good would have come of it, but much harm to her as well
as to us. Had I even let you know the truth, you would
have been powerless to help her."
"That may have been so in the past," Philip inter-
rupted, " but now there is a change. There are men in
the country who dare not only to differ with Brigham
Young, but to defy him."
" Have you dared to do so ?"
The question was asked kindly, but Philip's pale face
flushed.
" I have been a coward in the past," he said, " but I will
be one no longer. I am going home, to sever my connec-
tion with this iniquitous system, and to denounce the man
who stands at the head of it."
" That is well. I pray that the way may open for others
to do so," and she glanced at her husband. " I have felt
that a day of deliverance was coming, though I knew not
when nor how."
" That day may be farther from us than from you," the
husband said, addressing Philip. " You have the troops to
protect you, and the Gentiles are coming in, I hear, in
great numbers; but in this settlement there is not a man,
woman, or child who dares to disobey counsel in the
smallest thing, much less to say a word against Mormon-
ism. And yet there are those here whose wrongs 'are
greater than yours."
" Greater than mine ?"
"Yes. Deeds have been done within sight of this house



<pb n="243"/>
A MYSTERY SOLVED.               243
for which devils might blush,.and done, too, in the name of
the Lord; and the still living victims, who envy the dead,
dare not utter a word of complaint."
" As for you, the revenge that was planned against you
and yours fell short of its mark; for though.your mother
has been kept a prisoner, in all things else I have treated
her as I would if I had been her own son."
Here the woman rose and opened a door at the farther
side of the room.
" Come," she said to Philip, " and I will show you the
place in which your mother spent the last years of her life."
He followed her through a long hall, and up a flight of
stairs, but on the landing above she paused.
" I need not tell you," she said, "that I have already
put my life and the life of my husband in your hands,
and now that I am about to give you all that your mother
has left behind her, I am putting trust in your wisdom as
well as in your honor."
With these words she opened the door and admitted
Philip into a room which he entered with feelings that
were indescribable.
It was in no respect like the prison-cell he had at first
pictured to himself. The floor was carpeted, a comfort-
able bed stood in one corner with an easy chair beside it, a
table in the center -of the room was covered with books,
and a writing-desk filled the niche between the windows.
The woman went directly to this desk, unlocked it, and
took out a sealed packet.
"In this," she said, "you will find the history of your
mother's life since the day she left you. She begged,
almost with her last breath, that I would convey it to her
children, and I promised, without knowing of any way in
which the promise could be fulfilled; but see, a way has
opened already. The hand of God is in this thing."



<pb n="244"/>
244    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
Philip received the packet with irrepressible emotion.
. "Did my'mother know ? Did she hear anything of us
during these long years ?" he asked. .
: 4Until she came to us she heard nothing," was the
answer.  "If all of you had died she would not have
known ; but since she has been here I have told her all that
I could learn of you which was likely to give her any hap-'
piness, and that which I knew would pain her I have kept
from her."
Philip dropped his eyes. He knew well enough that
there was little in his own history which it would have
made his mother happier to hear.
" It is strange," he said at length, " that you should not
have known me, and that I do not recall either your face
or your name as that of one who must have been our neigh-
bor."
"Fifteen years have changed all of us," she answered;
"but I knew you again when you spoke to us at the grave.
That you did not recognize us is no wonder, for we had been
in Salt Lake but a little while when your mother came to
us, and afterward we avoided you, as we were instructed
to do."
*" And yet you have done me the only kindness possible. '-
You have cared for my mother as if she had been your
own. I will never forget that."
The woman looked out of the window. " The rain is
over," she said, " and the people will soon be abroad. For
your own sake as well as for ours, you must not linger in
the settlement. When you are a free man, remember us.
If we have shown any kindness to you or yours, that will
be the best return you can make."



<pb n="245"/>
CHAPTER XX.
THE SEALED PACKET.
"Oct. io.-Once more, after so many years of darkness,
I behold the light of day. Once more I look out upon the
sky and the earth, whose face I never hoped to see again.
"Dear God, how fair is thy world ! And how sweet is
a human voice-a kindly human voice-after the long
silence.
"This day it is five years since I had the last sight of
the faces of my children. I should not know-I could
not reckon time in that dark cell into which day never
penetrated: but this woman-no, she is not a woman, but
an angel, to risk so much for me-has given me the day
and the date; and the date of that other day-the day on
which I was torn from my children-is burned into my
brain.
" Five years ! My little Blanche, my baby, is almost a
woman now. Oh for one moment's sight of her sweet
face ! Day after day I sit at this high window, and watch
the street, and pray God to send my children this way,
but they never come.
" Once indeed it seemed to me that Philip passed by on
the other side-taller, more manly, than when I saw him
last-that must be-but the form was like my Philip, and he
carried his head as my brave boy did. His face was turn-
ed away, and yet it was he. A mother's eyes see clearly."
" Oct. 2.-My eyes are blinded with grateful tears, for
this day I have seen my little girls from my window. My
little girls! They are women now, and Catherine's face



<pb n="246"/>
246    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR. 
is like the one I used to see in my mirror years-oh so
many years ago. 
" I owe it all to the good angel who watches over me in
my imprisonment, for though she dare not speak to my
children, or make herself known to them in any way, she
has worked through others so that my daughters should
pass by the house.
" How many hours I watched, and how I feared her
plan would fail! I dread lest she should risk too much for
me; and though I long-God only knows how I long for a
sight of my lost darlings-I must not tell her all that is in
my heart, for that would move her to try again to bring
them near me; and there is danger, always danger, that
she, my only friend, may be involved in my fate."
" Nov. 12.-I have news of Louise-my beautiful, my
darling, my wounded dove. She is here, so near me,
and yet she cannot know that her mother lives ! Her
mother, who has given more than life for her!
" My good angel tells me too that Louise is not unhappy.
There is peace in her face and in her voice.
" She has learned, then, the secret that was taught me in
those years of darkness. She is not alone and helpless in
the hands of wicked men. Dear God, I thank thee !"
" Sfarck 1.-For months I have written nothing. A
slow fever, brought on, I fear, by those longings and anx-
ieties which I should not have indulged, has made me
helpless-made me doubly a burden to my only friend. And
yet she will not allow me to say that. She has tended me
like a child, she has watched over me like a sister, and
she says only this:
"'All that I can do is a poor atonement for your
wrongs.'
" I can guess what she means, and yet it is not for her
to make atonement."



<pb n="247"/>
THE SEALED PACKET.                947
" farch 4.-I have learned to-day something that, I
never knew before-learned what took place that day
after I was lured to my prison.
"My children believe me dead. They have been taught
that my reason was gone, and that I drowned myself in the
river! My helpless darlings ! They could not think that
anything but death would be able to keep their mother
from them.
" I can see the terror in their faces when they came
back to the empty house. I can realize what they felt
when that cruel tale was told them. But they were very
young, and God is good. He would not let that sorrow
shadow their lives. My friend thinks the little home
which Philip -keeps for his sisters would be a happy one,
if the man who took their mother from them did not take
their bread also.
" This is hard-and hard to forgive-but One who suf-
fered the utmost malice of cruel foes forgave them with
His dying breath."
"March xo.-More news ! My Catherine has been a wife
for two months and more, and my good angel, unable to
leave the house because I must be cared for, had not
heard of it.
" A wife's lot here is full of bitterness-of more than
mortal pain. God shield my darling !"-
"Ajril 4.--   am to go far away from my darlings.
And yet, what does it matter, since, near or far, I am sep-
arated from them while I live ?
"Still, here, at this window, I could watch, and hope
that they might pass by, and that was something. The
day could not be quite a blank when I could say in the
morning,
"'It may be that one of my children will come this
way.'



<pb n="248"/>
248    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
" And then I have really seen my little girls, and Philip
twice; Once I saw his face plainly.
"But Louise-my Louise, my beautiful one-I have not
had the faintest glimpse of her; and how can I give over
my watch for her, and go away without the sight of her
face "
" May 2.-The journey is over, and had it not been that
each hour took me farther from my children, they would
have been happy days. I breathed the fresh free air, the
sun shone on me, and whenever we were in lonely places,
far from the sight of those who would have been-spies on
us, I might feel the dear earth, the soil of God's beautiful
world, under my feet.
"How sweet is liberty!   It seemed' sometimes as
though I must break away from those who cared for me so
kindly, and run toward the mountains, for beyond them
must be freedom.
" Run ! I smile at m'yself now, for I could not walk for
an hour, and a year ago I could not walk at all. My
limbs were cramped.   They had almost grown to the
shape of the seat to which I was chained.
.' No, liberty is not for me. Yet my soul is not in
prison, and during those years of darkness, when chains
were on my body, my spirit was free."
" Aug. 20.-My friend, my guardian angel, who. has
comforted me through all my sorrows, now needs that I
should comfort her. Her home is invaded, her husband
is taken from her, and another woman usurps the name
and place of wife in the house. What are my sufferings
now compared with hers ?
"She comes to my room, to my' prison, which I may
never leave alive, as to a sanctuary. It is her only place
of refuge, the only spot where she is safe from curious,
unsympathizing eyes, or from the sight of her husband and



<pb n="249"/>
THE SEALED PACKET.                249
that other woman, who claims the rights of a wife. She
does not complain-she is one of those who would die
and make no moan-but her dumb despair is more elo-
quent than the most impassioned lamentations.
" And yet she thinks that her husband loved her truly-
loves her even now-and that he has taken that other
woman only because he was counseled to do so, and be-
cause he dared not disobey. Would a husband believe
still in the love of his wife, after she had brought another
man into the house to usurp his rights and to claim her
as his own ?
"The patient endurance of these wives, and the love
that outlives the husband's baseness and treachery, touches
me, and yet it angers me. It was never meant that any
good woman, mdch less an angel like this wronged wife,
should waste her love on a man who tramples it under
foot."
"Nov. 4.-A better day has dawned for my friend, if
indeed there can be a better or a worse to a wrong like
hers. The other woman has been sent away to a settle-
ment twenty miles distant, and the husband goes there
but seldom. He is forced to stay at home on my account
-so I am told. The man who placed me here thinks a
woman cannot be trusted to guard me, and so my friend is
not left alone.
"I cannot understand her. She seems almbst happy
when week after week passes without the expression of a
wish on the part of her husband to go to the other settle-
ment, and yet she knows that he will go by and by-
knows he calls that woman wife, and that she may be the
mother of his children. What a life ! What a fate! And
yet, it may be the fate of my own daughters."
" Dec. 30, '55.-I have heard that my Louise is mar-
ried, and married to a good man who loves her; and bet-



<pb n="250"/>
250    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
ter still, that both she and Catherine have left the Terri-
tory with their husbands, who have been sent on missions,
the one west, the other south.
" Is not God watching over my children, and doing far
more for them than I could if I were free ? Neither of my
daughters will ever return voluntarily-of that I am sure."
" Feb. I, '56.-The winter passes slowly. I find it hard
to repress my longings for liberty. Often I look to the
distant mountains, and a wild wish to fly to them takes
possession of me. I know that escape is impossible; and
yet, now that I can look out on those who pass to and fro
beneath my window, on the earth, that my foot must
never press, on the stars-the same stars that looked down
on my childhood-the thought of freedom is with me con-
tinually. I dream of it at night, and a feverish restlessness
possesses me by day.
" This is not as it should be. I was calmer in that
dark cell, where I saw nothing, heard nothing.
" Death will open my prison doors by and by. Until
then let me wait in peace."
" April o, '56.-Ought I not to be thankful and con-
tent ? Word comes to me through this dear friend, who
puts aside her own sorrows that she may serve me, and
does her utmost to get news of my children, that both my
daughters are safe in California, and with their brothers.
I have now only Philip and little Blanche to be anxious
about; and surely, since Heaven has so watched over the
others, I may dismiss anxiety even for them."
" Aug. 12.-I have been very ill again. I thought the
hour of my deliverance was surely at hand. Those who
have gone before seemed waiting for me, and in the still-
ness of the night a face like my mother's bent down and
smiled upon me.
" Liberty, and rest, and peace seemed already mine, and



<pb n="251"/>
THE SEALED PACKET7               251
when the gates that were opening closed again, and I
found myself left outside-left here-I could not help a
feeling of bitter disappointment.
" Patience, my soul ! The years that seem so long will
Tbe but a speck, an atom, when thou lookest back on them
'from the Paradise of God."
"Oct. 5.-Again I have been the witness of pangs
which make my own afflictions seem light. The woman
who has been taken into this family is a mother. The
wife whose place she has usurped is childless, and the hus-
band, when he learned that he was a father, sent for the
mother and the babe. They have been brought here, and
are in the house to-day.
"The father, proud of the little one, and forgetting
everything else in his joy, has shown plainly that the
mother of his child is dearer to him than the wife of his
youth, who has sacrificed all things for his sake; and she,
unhappy, helpless victim, after making superhuman efforts
to mask her sufferings and treat the woman and child as
though they had a right to be here, has at last succumbed
to her anguish. Yesterday she sank upon the floor of my
room in a swoon that was like death. Fortunately, I was
able to restore her without help, and in an hour she recov-
ered so far as to be able to creep down the steps, holding
on to the railings; but at the foot of the stairway I heard
her fall again.
" To-day I have been waited on by a servant, who had
not previously been permitted to know of my existence, and
who, it seems, has orders not to speak to me; so I can
learn nothing of my friend's state from her, but I fear she
is very ill. If able to leave her bed she would surely
come to me, for now, as before, my room is her only sanc-
tuary."
" Nov. 20.-To-day I have seen my friend again for the



<pb n="252"/>
252    THE FATE OF MIADAME LA TOUR. 
first time in many weeks. She is only the shadow of her.
former self, and her hair has grown as white as mine,
which was blanched in those years of darkness.
4* The woman and child have been taken away, and she
feels this to be a relief, but she no longer cheats herself
with the belief that her husband's heart is still hers. She
has talked with me more freely than ever before, and I
realize something of the daily martyrdom endured by her.
and women like her-of whom, alas ! there are hundreds
on every side."
" 7uly 9, '57.-I have heard to-day that both Philip and
Blanche are married. There is nothing in Philip's mar-
riage to sadden me, for he is like his father, and the;
woman who has given her happiness into his keeping will
never have cause to regret it. Her love will be his guid-
ing star, and his home will be the most sacred spot on
earth to him. His wife will never know a fate like that of
my poor friend, who is striving to bury her love for her hus-
band in the same grave in which she has buried happiness
and hope.
" But my little Blanche-my baby, who has grown to
womanhood without a mother's care-what will her fate
be ? Has she fallen into the handsof one who will sacrifice
her to the demands of this monstrous system, as coolly as
pagans elsewhere sacrifice a lamb ? Alas ! there are none
near her to protect her, and whatever her sorrows may
be, her tears cannot be shed on her mother's bosom.
" Aug. 12, '57.-I have not written anything of late,
because the uneventful days pass with nothing to mark
their coming and going except the rising and setting of
the sun.
"In spite of myself, in spite of all the lessons of patience
which I have learned, an unutterable weariness possesses
me when there is nothing-absolutely nothing-to break



<pb n="253"/>
THE 'SEALED PACKET.'         -. ' 
the monotony of my imprisonment; and thei ,wan-omek
thing comes to my knowledge which rouses me fromn he
stupor that is creeping over me, the old restlessness and
longing, the feeling that makes a caged bird beat its wings
against the bars of its prison, comes back to me.
"Yesterday I sat at my window, seeing for hours only
the long stretch of dusty highway upon which not a living
thing appeared, when at length, late in the afternoon, an
irregular mass came in sight in fhe dim distance, and as I
continued to watch it resolved itself into a long train of
wagons, with horsemen, footmen, and cattle-some in ad-
vance, some in the rear. The train passed directly under
my window. The animals moved slowly, as though worn
out with a long journey; the teams seemed to drag the
wagons with difficulty, and the people looked travel-
stained 'and weary; but there was something in the ap-
pearance of the company which told that they'were not
seeking a home here; and as they passed on I noticed that
persons in the settlement who were by the roadside hasten-
ed in-doors as the train drew near.
"In the evening, when I asked my friend the meaning
of what I had seen, she answered, .
"' They are emigrants on the way to California.'
"But she seemed disinclined to talk about them, and
no questions that I asked brought me any more definite
information.
"On the way to California! If I had known of their
coming I might-what might I not have done ? It seemed
to me at first that I should have let myself down from my
window in the night, and found some hiding-place on their
route, where I could lie concealed till they passed, and
then throw myself on their protection.
" But if this had been as impracticable as all my other
plans of flight, I could at least have dropped a letter as



<pb n="254"/>
254    THE FATE OP MADAME LA TOUR.
they paMme  that would have told of my fate, and begged
them to carry the word to my sons-my sons, who would
move Heaven and earth to release their mother from
prison.
" The chance that I have lost is perhaps one that will
never be within my reach again, and a feeling of disap-
pointment that amounts to wretchedness shows me plainly
how much my soul needs to be disciplined to patience-
how little I know of true resignation."
" Dec. to, '57.-An awful crime-a deed whose black-
ness might quench the light of day-has come to my knowl-
edge. I am suffocating with horror. Would that I had
remained ignorant of it.' A bloody vision follows me,
haunts me, night and day, since the fearful tale came to
my ears.
"After those strangers passed this way, and while I was
still grieving over my lost opportunity, I began to perceive
from my window the appearance of unusual idleness on
the part of the men of the settlement, who. are farmers, and
should at this season have been attending to their crops.
They were congregated in groups by the roadside, and
those who were so near that I could observe their faces, I
saw looked gloomy and sullen. Finally, one night, I heard
the heavy tramp of many feet, going in and out of this
house until midnight.
" I slept none that night. A vague uneasiness, a terror
for which I could not account, kept me wakeful, and be-
fore day I rose from my bed, and sitting down beside my
window watched the stars until they began to fade.
" When the day broke, my eyes were fixed on the high-
way, and presently a band of mounted men issued from a
little lane near the house. Many of the faces I had seen
before, as they passed day after day, and among them I
recognized my jailer, whose wife, contrary to her usual



<pb n="255"/>
THE SEALED PACKET.                255
custom, had kept away from my room the day before,
sending the servant with my meals.
"All of the men were armed with guns, and as I watched
them they rode away southward, two abreast.
" That day, and for many days afterward, I could not
help seeing that my friend was in some great trouble,
which she refused to confide to me. Thus nearly two
weeks passed, and one morning, as I was looking south-
ward, I saw the same body of men whose departure I had
watched, riding into the settlement.
" As they came near I perceived that Wells was in ad-
vance, and that he carried something on his horse in front
of him. As he reached the house I saw, to my surprise,
that it was a child-a little girl, perhaps four years old.
He dismounted at a side door, at the foot of the stairs
leading to my room.
" I heard his wife open the door-heard her exclamation,
not only of surprise, but of dismay and terror-heard the
man say,
"' Hush, for God's sake !'
"And then both seemed to pass into an inner room.
"After that I saw no more of my friend for many days,
and when' she entered my room again she was changed
more, it seemed to me, than even during those weeks of
sickness the year before.
"I knew something was wrong. An air of mystery
brooded over the house. I heard the child sometimes-
once it climbed up the stairs leading to my door, and more
than once I distinguished a plaintive cry of,
"' Mamma ! mamma ! Take me to my mamma !'
" It was a wail that pierced my heart, How often must
my own children have uttered that cry !
"When I spoke to my friend about the child, she turned
a white, terrified facetoward me, saying,



<pb n="256"/>
256    THE FATE .OF MADAME LA TOUR.
"' How did you know     Have you seen-have you
heard anything ?'
" Why protract the recital ? In the end I learned the
whole dreadful truth.  The company of emigrants had 
been followed by bodies of armed men from the settle-
ments, surrounded, and butchered in cold blood. Neither 
age nor sex had been spared. Only a few of the youngest 
children were rescued at the last by men who could not
quite forget their own children. The little girl in the
house was one of these.
" I cannot bear to dwell here. There is only one thing 
which I feel compelled to leave on record, and it is this:
" The man whom this people look up to as their Prophet
ordered the butchery, and the men who did the deed were
only his instruments. Many of them went most unwilling-
ly. Some of them took no part in the massacre, and re-
turned home with their faith in this man and his teachings
destroyed forever. My friend's husband is one of those
last named. He declares to his wife that he cannot re-
main here, and that he will watch night and day for an op-
portunity to escape.
" Should this be so, I too may yet be able to flee from
this blood-stained spot.
" Oct. 10, '58.-This day completes the tenth year of my
captivity. At times I think that the hope and even the wish
to escape has died out altogether, and that I shall wait in
peace for the Angel of Death; and then some word, some
rumor breaks in upon my quiet, and for weeks I am in a
state of unrest.
" Of late I have had news of my elder sons. They have
been greatly prospered, and they dwell among a brave
and generous people, who would aid them in any effort to
deliver their mother from prison, if they knew-but they
do not even dream that I am still among the living. Like



<pb n="257"/>
THE SEALED PACrKET.               *57
my children here, they have mourned me as dead these
many years.
"Perhaps, after all, it is better that they should not
know the truth. They might try to help me and fail, for it
seems that in these valleys the power of the man who de-
creed my imprisonment is absolute. No one even dares
call him to account for the butchery of those helpless
women and innocent children who were so cruelly put to
death last year.
"And for me, does it matter how or where I spend the
little remnant of my life ? No. Time is so short, eternity
so long, that even if I were doomed to live out my three-
score years and ten within these walls, it would be but like
tarrying for a night at an inn that did not please me.
"April 12, '62.-My sight, .which began to fail four
years ago, and which I thought I should have lost entirely,
is in a measure restored, and yet the light is painful, and I
can no longer solace myself with books or beguile the te-
dious days by watching the world outside from my window.
" At first I felt this to be a great affliction, but now I ac-
knowledge in it the same Hand that has led me hitherto.
" Cut off once more from the sight of this world, I turn
to the world of spirits-the world where my beloved, who
have escaped from the straits and burdens, the turmoil
and unrest of this present life, abide in-blissful peace.
" My eyes, closed to thy creatures, are opened to behold
thee, oh, Uncreated Good !
"I behold the love that rules and permeates the uni-
verse. I have repose and liberty, because that which has
no metes nor bounds is at once my home and my resting-
place."
" March, '65.-For the last time, perhaps, I attempt to
trace here my thoughts and my wishes. Strength and
sight alike are almost gone; but while a little of life re-



<pb n="258"/>
2S8    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
mains, I desire to make a final request of my children,
should this which I have written ever fall into their hands.
" I pray them all, and especially my sons, to harbor no
thought of vengeance against the author of my wrongs.
With all my heart, with all my soul, I forgive him, and I
ask my children to forgive.
" No real harm has come to me. That which was evil
intended has worked for good. I have peace, I have joy
within these walls, and my prison has become a sanctuary
wherein I dwell safely until the doors of my Father's
house are opened to receive me.
"Nov., '68.-For many months I have dwelt in utter
darkness; but I know in my soul that the.dawn of a per-
fect day is very near. The Angel of Death waits close at
hand. I shall welcome him with joy-and yet, something
within me pleads for my children-begs that they might be
permitted to look once more on their mother's face.
"How clearly I can see them all, here in the dark-my
little Blanche in her cradle, Catherine and Philip sitting
on the nursery floor beside her, and Louise and her brothers
at the round table between the windows. How the light
that streams in above the table shines on their faces, on
my boys' curls, on the baby's little hands !
" Dear God, wilt thou not suffer me to take this picture
with me into thy heaven ?
" It grows colder. My hands can scarce hold the pen
with which I trace these words in the darkness.
"Farewell Life. Welcome Death.
" My children, my little ones, good-by. Dear God, ktep
them-may-"
The manuscript closed abruptly. The good woman of
the house had sealed it up religiously, as she found it on the
little table.



<pb n="259"/>
CHAPTER XXI.
THE REVOLT.
IT was midnight. The rain beat against the closed
shutters, and the wind that swept round the house and
shook the leafless branches of the trees outside wailed like
a lost spirit.
Within, the fire had burned low and the lamplight fell on
two pale faces, bent together over a yellow aad blotted
manuscript, traced in a hand almost illegible.
Philip La Tour and his wife were reading the last words
of the dead-reading with difficulty, for tears had stained
the paper, and the trembling hand had more than once
refused to obey the guiding will, leaving words and sen-
tences unfinished.
Amazement and horror, fierce indignation against the
author of such wrongs, and boundless tenderness for the
patient victim, struggled together in their hearts as they
followed the record of those years of captivity; until
at last the mother's farewell words to the children of her
love quite overcame her son, and bowing his head over the
paper which her dying hands had touched, the strong man
wept like a little child.
His wife mingled her tears with his, and with those
tears all bitterness and heart-burning melted away, and
the two whom man had put asunder felt once more that
God had joined them together.
" My mother asks me to forgive her oppressor," Philip
said after a long silence. " I may forego the desire for
vengeance-I must, since she asks it--but if the law is



<pb n="260"/>
260    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR. 
ever able to reach him, I ought to aid in bringing him to
justice."                                          '
"You will, if that time ever comes," the wife replied;
"but there is little probability that his crimes will be pun-
ished in this world. During the last month, while you
have been away, he has compelled many of those who have
been attending the services at the hall to make a public
confession of their "sin" and take their children from
the school ;* but that is not the worst. Many of the Gen-
tiles are going away; and the people think there will not
be twenty of them left here in the spring. It seems as
though Brigham Young will rule while he lives, and con-
tinue to be the tyrant that he has been, unless, as I said
a good while ago, some of us right here gain courage to
defy him."
"Jessie I" Her husband spoke quickly, and with the
glow of a newly-formed resolution on his face. "To-
morrow is Sunday. Will you go with me in the morning
to the hall ?"
" You need not. ask that. I will be only too glad to go
-and what then ?"
" We will be called to account in less than two days,
and lthat will give me an opportunity of defining my posi-
tion."
"They will cut you off from the Church."
"Yes, without doubt; but I shall not wait for that to- I
Jessie, I cannot put in words what I mean, but I will not
delay the only reparation I can make you. From this
hour no one shall ever come between us. Before another
week ends everybody shall know that I call no other
woman 'wife.' "
The hour so long waited for had come at last !-the hour
See Appendix, Note R, page 353.



<pb n="261"/>
THE RE VOLZT                201
for the rending of his bonds, the beginning of a new afe,
and the hour in which to make tardy atonement for. te,
wrongs of years. 
Does the reader wonder at the wife who could accept;
this atonement without betraying by look or word any
memory of the bitter past ? Does it seem a thing incredi-
ble that in the first moments of reunion all the jealousy
and heart-burning, the anguish and despair of those miser-.
able years, should be buried out of sight ?
It may be equally hard to understand how a man could
speak without emotion of sending away a woman whom he
had called wife for five years, and who had borne him a
child; but in the present case Philip knew that Ruth cared
for nothing except his money, and that the gift of the house
she lived in and of the means to support her and to buy all
the, pretty trifles she coveted, would easily reconcile her to
the separation. Had she loved him, his task would have
been a much harder one, and in his heart he was thankful
that the woman chosen for him had proved incapable of
love.
*     *      *     *     *      *     *
Morning dawned, serene and cloudless-the morning of
the day on which Philip La Tour was to assert his newly-
acquired freedom. When ten o'clock came, and the streets
were filled with people on their way to the Mormon ser-
vices in the various wards, he set out for the hall with his
wife on his arm, and leading his little boy by the hand.
Neighbors and acquaintances passed him as he turned in
at the gate, and the policemen; appointed to watch those
who entered the forbidden.portals were so close to him that
he could have touched them with his hand, but for the first
time in twenty years he was acting without reference to the
will of another, and he scarcely noticed their presence.
Inside the small, plain building about fifty persons were



<pb n="262"/>
26t    THB FATE OP MADAME LA TOUR.
seated, baiting the hour of service. Nearly one third of 
this number were.recusant Mormons, chiefly women.
All eyes were upon Philip La Tpur as he walked slowly
up the aisle to a seat in full view of the congregation. Had
he come alone it is probable that his former friends would
have misunderstood his motives, but a man who brought
his family with him to such a place could not be a spy-
this was what the faces of those who knew him expressed
as he took his seat among them.
As he passed out at the close of the services, the police-
men placed themselves directly in his way, so that he was
compelled to speak to them and ask them to make room
for his wife.
They moved a couple of steps, and one of them made
a sign which he understood perfectly well, but which, in
his present frame of mind, did not disturb him in the
least.
Before noon the next day he was waited on by a commit-
tie of his brethren and informed that it had been thought 
best tq give him an opportunity to explain his extraordi-
nary conduct. This was an unusual act of grace, as he
1e*i,' but the way in which he improved it was not calcu-
lated to lead to its repetition.
'In the strongest language at his command, he denounced
the system which enslaved all who embraced it, and which
taught treachery, rapine, murder, and every species of
crime as sacred duties.
His wife, who was present, defined her own position
with equal clearness, and the members of the committee
withdrew in silence, but with a look on their faces that
boded no good to the rebels.
In a few days they were both summoned to trial. They
paid no attention to the summons, and the day after the
one set for their trial they received formal notice that they 



<pb n="263"/>
THE REVOLT.                 263
were cut off from the Church of Latter Day Saints and
delivered over to the buffetings of Satan.
" Free at last !" These were Jessie's first words when
her husband finished reading the notice aloud. "Such
liberty is worth any price. We ought not to think it too
dearly bought, even if it costs life."
" It will not cost life," was the reply. " The day that I
told you, more than three years ago, would surely come, is
here. You know we are not the first who have been cut
off, and our friends are still alive. Our enemies have the
will to destroy us, and, for that matter, the power also;
but Brigham Young knows that any more violence; in the
present condition of affairs, would be certain to react upon
himself; so we are quite safe-at least by daylight."
" That is what I was just going to speak about," inter-
rupted the wife, who, full of courage where she alone was
concerned, yet trembled for her husband. " I don't think
you will be attacked by day, but you must sot go out after
dark. Only the night before you came home, Henry
R      was fired at by some person in the shadow of the
trees beside his own gate."
Philip could not smile at his wife's fears. He knew,
better than she, the vindictiveness of the despot against
whom they had rebelled-knew also that if he could be
"taken care of" in such a way that the act could not be
'traced directly to the Church authorities, his life would not
be worth a moment's purchase; but he was no coward
(though when he looked back on the past he called himself
one), and he faced the dangers of his position with the
utmost calmness.
In the mean time his separation from Ruth had become
an accomplished fact, and he once more had a home.
In the domestic life of Utah that sacred word. is a
mockery, and none felt this more keenly than the man



<pb n="264"/>
i64    THE FATE OF M ADAME LA TOUR.
who had conscientiously sacrificed his own happiness an
that of the dearly-loved wife of his youth on the altar of ai
false faith. It is true that his case was exceptional, and
that the majority of his brethren who had embraced polygn 
imy had done so from choice; yet even among this class-
there were many who repented of the step they had taken,'
and who would gladly have given all the promises of future
exaltation which their religion held out to them for a little
present peace.
Women are the greatest sufferers from polygamy, but
men who transgress the laws of God and nature do not es-
cape the penalties of those laws.
Philip La Tour, pure-minded and honorable in spite of
Mormonism, and loving his wife with the first and strong-
est love of early manhood, had suffered intensely when he
was made to believe that God required him to give another
woman the same place he had given her; but he suffered
still more, if possible, in the years that followed, and the
first hour of real happiness he had known since his second
marriage was when he sat down beside Jessie to tell her
that he was free from all ties save that which bound him
to her.
Danger and death might lie in his pathi the friends of a
lifetime might become his bitter foes, his riches might take
wings, but none of these things moved him while he had
the approval of his own conscience and the restored trust
of the woman he loved.
Nor was he altogether without friends and sympathiz-
ers outside of his own family. A number of prominent
citizens had already been cut off from the Church-some
because they refused to pay the exorbitant sums demand-
ed of them as tithing, others because they had engaged in
mining, a pursuit which all good Saints were imperatively
ordered to have nothing to do with, and still others be-



<pb n="265"/>
THE REVOLT.                 265.
cause they had questioned the right of the Prophet " to dic-
tate to them in all things both temporal and spiritual"-a
right which he proclaimed publicly in the very words quoted,
as vested in him by a- decree of the Almighty.
These men who had been lately excommunicated formed
a community by themselves. They were not so thoroughly
freed from the prejudices of years as to be able to affiliate
at once with the Gentiles, whom they had regarded for-a
lifetime as their natural enemies. Many of them also still
clung to polygamy-probably, as has been said, because it
clung to them, and they could not easily let it go.
With La Tour, however, the case was diferent. As a
Mormon, he had conscientiously obeyed all the require-
ments of the Church because he believed them to be also
the commands of God, but the uprooting of his faith in
that system included a renunciation of all that grew out
of it.
Polygamy and hatred of the Gentiles belonged to Mor-
monism, and were renounced with it; there was nothing,
therefore, to prevent either him or his wife from joining
themselves to the little band of Christians who taught the
doctrines of peace and good-will to men. In their com-
munion, realizing at last that
" He is a freeman whom the truth makes free,"
Philip fopnd it possible at last to reconcile the claims of
conscience with the dictates of reason.



<pb n="266"/>
CHAPTER XXII. 
EPILOGUE.
THE summer of 1871. In a pleasant home in the Golden 
State, the abode of wealth and refined taste, a family
group awaits the return of the master of the house. The 
lady, young and fair, is a stranger to us, but the two
bright-eyed little ones who rush out upon the veranda
with a clamorous welcome for "Papa" remind us of
some one that we have seen before, and the gentleman they
have captured and are dragging in-doors has a face that is
familiar to us in spite of the changes which time has
wrought.
It is Francis La Tour, at present the happy owner of a
home which, we venture to say, fully realizes the dreams
that cheered him in the days when he wielded pick and
shovel in Chespar Gulch. He has been absent for a day
only, though one would judge from the excitement caused
by his arrival that he had just returned from a voyage
around the world.
The boy and girl, one on either side, present their cap-
tive to mamma with delighted cries. La Tour salutes his
wife in a very lover-like fashion for a man who has been
ten years married, and as soon as he can succeed in brib-
ing his small captors to leave him at liberty for a few mo-
ments, draws his wife's arm within his and leads her into
the next room, out of hearing of the sharp ears of the two
youngsters.
" What does Kenyon say '; the wife asked as soon as
the door was closed.



<pb n="267"/>
EPILOGUE.                   267
"Just what you thought: that there is no more real lib-
erty in Utah than there was ten years ago, and that there
is not the shadow of a chance that any Mormon will be
punished for such a small matter as killing a few people in
obedience to counsel. He says that while he was in Salt
Lake he never ventured on the street after dark-and you
know Kenyon is not a coward."
" And Philip-is he still determined to stay ?"
" Yes. He says that his work is in Utah, and he will
live and die there."
" He does not expect that the Government will enforce
the laws, and make Utah as safe a residence as Califor-
nia ?"
" No, none of them seem to expect that; but the Gentiles
are coming in in great numbers this year, and if the mines
of the Territory turn out as well as they promise to, the
immigration is likely to be larger each succeeding year.
He hopes, and so do others, that in ten years the Gentiles
may be in the majority, and in that case they will soon
have a new set of laws, and new men to administer
them."
The wife shook her head sadly. "I am afraid it will
not turn out as they hope," she said. " We used to hope
for the same thing fifteen years ago, but there is no change
for the better yet. My father's bones lie unburied in the
caion where they shot him, and I dare not think of my
sister's fate; but to whom can I go to demand the punish-
ment of the men who murdered my father and carried off
my sister ? I tell you, Brigham Young will rule while he
lives, and die at last in his bed, and be eulogized even out-
side of the Mormon Church as one of the greatest men of
the age. This is my prophecy, and time will prove it true."
" Nevertheless, I honor Philip for his determination to
stay and fight out the battle with fraud and oppression,



<pb n="268"/>
268    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
and I shall always be a coward in my own eyes if I do not
go to his help."
"Francis I You don't mean that you would take us to.
Utah? You know it was not the fault of those who fol-
lowed us that mother and I escaped with our lives."
"I know. But, my dear little wife, you have some one
to protect you now, and you would be in no more danger
than Jessie, who rebelled openly against the authority of
the Prophet years ago. There is a change for the better
by the incoming of the Gentiles, and even if the past is not
punished the present is less dangerous."
One October day, three months after the above conversa-
tion, the cars landed Francis La Tour and' his family at Salt
Lake. It was during the FalLConference, and the city was
filled with Saints from the outlying settlements. The streets
were crowded also with miners, who had come in from the
surrounding camps to purchase their winter supplies, and
the sleepy Mormon capital which Elsie La Tour remem-
bered seemed transformed into a busy, bustling Western
town. Their brother Philip's home was on a quiet street
at some distance from the main thoroughfares, and to
reach it they had to pass in sight of the Tabernacle. The
afternoon services were over, and at least ten thousand
people who had congregated in and around the building
were slowly dispersing.
" Look at those faces !" Francis whispered to his wife.
"There were brigands and cut-throats enough among the
Mormons when I left them, over twenty years ago, but
they must have received large accessions from those classes
since." O
In truth, it would have been a difficult matter to find any-
where among the same number of people a greater prp-
portion of men whose faces expressed an ignorant and
brutal ferocity; but there was a special cause just now for



<pb n="269"/>
EPILOGUS.      . .,          69
the scowls and black looks which had caught L& Tour's
attention. The United States Court, then in sessopi had
undertaken the task of investigating a few of the most no-
torious crimes committed by the orders of the Church au- 
thorities, and a grand jury, composed of men not bound by
an oath to obey the Prophet in all things, had been impan-
eled by the United States marshal to hear such evidence
as could be procured. As a result of these proceedings, in-
dictments for murder had already been: found against
many men in high places, and among these was the mayor
of Salt Lake, who occupied the position of Second Counsel-
or to the Prophet.
" The Gentiles think they can succeed in their undertak-
ing," Philip said to his brother the day after his arrival,
" but we who have once been in the Church know better.
The power of the Prophet was never more absolute than it
is to-day, though he is wise enough to ehange his methods.
He-knows that to resist the law openly would be the very
worst thing for him just now, but his cunning makes him
more than a match for the Federal authorities, and all
that the courts are doing will only strengthen the Mor-
mons in the end."
" I cannot understand that," Francis said.
" Wait a few months and you will understand," was the
answer. " This people have money and influence enough
to get everything which has been done here reversed, and
in that way establish theirplea that they are persecuted for
conscience sake."
The next week brought still more exciting news. The
Prophet himself had been indicted for complicity in a num-
ber of murders, and there were rumors on the street that
he had been arrested and taken to Camp Douglas.
-" At last'!" exclaimed Francis, "that wretch is to be
brought face to face with Justice."



<pb n="270"/>
270    TBE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR. 
"Don't be too sure of that," Philip said. "He has not 
been taken to Camp Douglas. He is under nominal arrest
in his own house, and you will see soon enough what that
means." 
Francis did see; for the Prophet continued to take daily
airings in his private carriage to visit his friends, and to 
attend the weekly balls with which the Saints enliven the 
dullness of the winter season. He was always accompa-
nied, it is true, by the deputy marshal who was supposed
to have him in charge, but that officer treated him with
such marked deference that strangers doubtless supposed
him to be the Prophet's valet.
The winter passed slowly away. One hundred and
twenty-nine Mormons, most of them men who held impor-
tant Territorial offices, were under indictment for capital
crimes; but none of them languished in prison, for the
sufficient reason that all the prisons in the Territory were
under Mormon control.. A few were under nominal arrest;
that is to say, they occupied quarters in some of these
Mormon prisons, in which they received hosts of sympa-
thizing friends, and had parties given in their honor; but
by far the greater number were out on bail, pending an ap-
peal which had been taken to the Supreme Court of the
United States.
During the winter Francis La Tour occupied himself in
collecting evidence against the Prophet, and though his
brother assured him that his efforts were useless, he would
not be discouraged. The memory of his mother's wrongs
was always present with him, and since he had met her
enemy face to face he felt more determined than ever not
to rest until the penalty of his crimes was meted out to
him.
Spring came, and with it the anxiously expected decision
of the Supreme Court. Philip's prophecy proved correct



<pb n="271"/>
EPILOGUE.                  a7I
in every particular. The grand jury which had found the
indictments against the Prophet and his subordinates was
declared illegal because impaneled by the United States
marshal, and in less than a month the columns of the East,
ern press teemed with strictures upon the conduct of the
Federal officers in Utah who had been engaged in " per-
secuting" the Saints.
Meantime the Gentiles and those recusant Mormons who
had aided them in their efforts to bring notorious criminals
to justice felt the full force of the Prophet's wrath. It is
true that men were no longer shot down on the streets in
broad day; but if the Danites were instructed to put any one
out of the way by poison, 'or in any other quiet manner,
they could do so without hindrance, as, no matter how
suddenly or strangely a man might die, no inquiry was
made as to the cause of his death. Moreover, now that
the United States courts were powerless, all questions re-
lating to the security of life or property were referred to
the local courts, presided over by Mormon high priests,
and the arbitrary decrees of the Prophet were clothed with
legal forms and fulfilled to the letter by his sworn adher-
ents, who held all the public offices in the Territory.
While matters were in this state, and at a time when
Francis La Tour was beginning to question seriously the
wisdom of the step he had taken in bringing his family to
Utah, Elsie discovered, by pure accident, the whereabouts
of her sister, who was dragging out a miserable life as the
neglected and abused plural wife of a man high in the
priesthood. This sister,'of whom mention has been made
in the beginning of the present chapter, had been forcibly
detained when Elsie and her mother made their escape
from the Territory, and her fate was that of many another
unprotected girl who fell into the hands of the Mormon
leaders.



<pb n="272"/>
72    nTHE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
" Poor Julia 1" Elsie said sorrowfully to: her husband, 
"  could wish that I had found her grave instead. She:
ddres not talk with me about what she endures, but her.
fce tells enough, even if I had not seen the miserable hut
in which she lives."
Elsie saw little of her unhappy sister, who was not al-
loweA to visit her Gentile relatives. She lived in the out-
skirts of the city, more than two miles from the handsome
house which Francis La Tour had bought.
Elsie went there a few times, but as her visits seemed to
distress the poor creature, they were gradually discon-
tinued.
" Julia seems more unwilling than ever that I should see
her," she said to her husband one evening, after she had
driven out to the wretched cabin that her sister called
home.
" I suppose that is because the contrast between your lot
and hers makes her more unhappy," was the anwer.
"No, I do not think that is the reason. She looked
frightened when I came in this afternoon. I dare say that
-brute had forbidden her to receive me, and I am almost
certain now that he beats her when she disobeys him.
There was a livid mark across her face to-day. She said
she-had fallen and hurt herself, but to me it looked exactly
as though she had been struck in the face with a whip."
"If I were sure of that," Francis said, " I should not
deny myself the pleasure of breaking my cane over the fel-
low's head when I meet him on the street."
"Oh, Francis !" His wife looked alarmed. "In this
place it will not do to interfere, no matter how badly a man
may treat his family. There is a better way, if Julia would
only consent to it. She has no children, as you know-
nothing to keep her here-and I am almost certain I could
get her safely out of the Territory; but she will not go."



<pb n="273"/>
EPILOGUE .                  273
A few days after this conversation Elsie heard, through
a neighbor, that her sister was sick. No word had been
sent to her, and she knew that in all probability her pres-
ence was not desired, but she started at once to go to her.
When she reached the cabin a couple of women were
standing in the doorway, and to her hurried inquiries one
of them answered briefly,
"She is dead."
Dead I Elsie clutched the broketpalings to keep herself
from falling. In that moment the years vanished away,
and she saw, instead of the miserable wreck of womanhood
that met her eyes when she last visited the cabin, the baby
sister with sunny curls, and eyes like April violets, whose
tiny hands she held while she took her first tottering steps.
And now the tired feet had ended their pilgrimage ot sorrow
at the brink of the grave, when no one who loved her was
near to stay the faltering steps. How she must have longed
for human love in the hour of mortal weakness ! How she
must have looked, through the mists of death for the sister
who did not come I
" Why was I not sent for ?" she asked of the two women,
whose stolid faces never changed. " I am her sister."
" Her husband was with her," was the only answer.
" He is not here now ?"
" No."
" Then let me come in ;" for both women still stood in
the doorway, barring entrance.
"I'm sorry ma'am," one of them answered; "but
Brother Benson left strict orders not to let you in if you
should come.".
Elsie was alone. Her husband had not known of her
coming, and with no help near she was.forced to submit to
this harsh edict and turn away without looking upon the
face of the dead.



<pb n="274"/>
274    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.                3
Weeks afterward, Philip La Tour told his brother the
story of the poor creature's tragic fate as he had learned it 
from others. " I would not have Elsie know the truth tor
the world," he said; "' but there is not the least doubt that
her sister died by poison. She was accused of breaking
her covenants, and now, as in the past, an unsupported
accusation is all that is needed in the case of one whose
death is desired. The poor girl was weary of life, and con.
sented, I am told, to take the poison.
'" It is strange that the story should have been allowed to
get out," Francis observed.
." Such reports circulate in whispers, and at last reach
ears for which they were not intended," Philip answered;
but a few years ago it would not have been thought
necessary to keep a case of blood-atonement secret."
" I might have asked last year if something could not be
done about it," Francis said; " but I have learned a great
deal since then."
"You will learn more before another year," replied
Philip. " You can see already that while our local laws are
madeand administered by'the priesthood, Brigham Young
is the actual ruler of the Territory, and that the presence
of the Gentiles and of the Federal officers has no effect ex-
cept to cause the Danites to do secretly what they used to
do openly."
*      *     *      *     *      *     *
Two more years passed, bringing no material changes to
the La Tours. Francis, who had invested a large sum in
the mines, found it necessary to stay in the Territory and
give personal attention to the development of his property.
Philip was as determined as ever to see the end of the con-
flict between theocratic despotism and republican ideas,
and as Congress had lately passed a law which made it pos-
sible for the Federal judges to resume their duties, he be-



<pb n="275"/>
EPILOGCUE.                  27
gan to hope, not that past crimes would be punibed, but
that present abuses might be checked in a measure. The
Prophet had determined to'break up Philip's business, but
for once he failed in his undertaking. The money brought
into the Territory by the Gentiles, as well as much that
was taken out of the mines, helped to enrich the Saints
(who sold freely to the outsiders, though they bought noth-
ing of them), but at the same time it.saved from ruin those
ex-Mormon merchants who had been '.'delivered over to
the buffetings of Satan."  The miners were Philip's best:
customers, and he was a far richer. man in 1875.than he
was ten years earlier, when the Prophet. declared that he
should be. blessed in basket and store .
His wife; too, had grown young again in.the five years
that had elapsed since the shadow was lifted from their
hearthstone, and;the bonny boy who was his niother's only
comfort in the days to which she could not loqk back with-
outa shudder, now led about a little blue-eyed sister, while
a rosy baby claimed the cradle in the nursery . .
Thus far the Prophet's curse had borne no fruit in their
lives; and though at first Jessie always watched anxiously
for her husband's return when business detained him after
dark, her fears gradually died away, as year after year
passed. without any.token.that. the Danites were shadow-
ing him. Still it was not usual for Philip.to be absent un-
til nine.o',cck without telling his wife where he might be
found, and when, one evening in the summer of '76, ten
o'clock came without bringing the sound of the well-known
footstep for which.the wife was listening, the old dread be-
gan to oppress her, and though she told herself over and
over again'.that she was foolish and nervous, when the
clock struck eleven she could bear.her anxieties no longer.
An errand-boy employed in the store Siept at the house,
and waking him she sent him for Francis. It'was nearly



<pb n="276"/>
276    THE FATS OF MADAMIE LA TOUR.
twdve fm is brother came, and still Philip had not re-
" I will go out at once and search for him," Francis
saw
"Where could you search ?" the wife asked, as the
hopelessness of such an attempt presented itself to her
mind. " If harm has come to him, the police have acted 
the same part that they did in the Robinson murder. You
could get no help from them; but I will not believe yet that
anything has happened. I spent a terrible night once
years ago, when he did not come home until daylight. He
was called away to the house of a sick friend, and the boy
that he sent to tell me never delivered the message. Most
probably something of the same sort has occurred now." 
Yet while she tried to speak hopefully her face was so
white that Francis rose once more to go out into the
street, saying, "I will find him, wherever he is."  But
before he finished speaking they heard the gate open, and
in a moment more Philip entered.
"I have caused a great deal of anxiety, I fear," he
said, as soon as the door closed behind him; " but I could
not help it, and it is just as well that Francis is here, for
he is as much interested as I in what I have to tell.
"It was late when I left the office, but I thought I
would stop in a few minutes to see Blanche. I have fan-
cied for weeks that she looked badly, but as, thus far, she
has always obeyed counsel, and refused to confide in any 
of us, I could not find out whether she was ill or in trou-
ble. To-night I knocked two or three times, and not get-
ting any answer I took the liberty to open the door and
go directly to the sitting-room, where I thought I should
be sure to find her. The hall lamp was burning, but
there was no light in ant other part of the house. I
struck a light myself, and there on the floor of her sitting-



<pb n="277"/>
SPILOGUE.                   277
room the poor child lay insensible. At frmst I t
her dead. Poor little Blanche I It might have been bet-
ter for her if she had been."
"Why, Philip! What can you mean ?" his wife asked
with a shocked face.
"Wait and you will hear. There was no one in the
house with her, as I found after calling repeatedly for her
husband and the servant. I tried first to restore her by
dashing water in her face, but failing in this I hunted up
some more powerful remedies, and in a little while suc-
ceeded in bringing her back to consciousness. Her first
attempt to talk to me, however, ended in a fit of hysterical
sobbing, and it was an hour more before she was com-
posed enough to answer my questions. Jessie knows how
positive Blanche has always been in her belief that her
husband would never take another wife, and I own I
shared this belief for a long time; but two years ago,
when the Prophet determined to force the whole people
into polygamy, in order to outlaw those who had not com-
mitted other crimes, I began to tremble for my little sis-
ter's happiness, and of late I could not help seeing that a
great change had come over her and her husband. It
seems Blanche has known that a strong pressure was
brought to bear upon her husband months ago, to wring a
promise from him to take another wife.  The Prophet
had managed to tie up all Richard's money in his co-
operative schemes, and of course he would never see a
dollar of that again if he disobeyed counsel; but there was
another cause-one that Blanche never learned anything
about until to-night-which operated more powerfully
than the fear of losing his money to bring him to the
Prophet's terms.
" Richard knew all the facts about Van Wirt, Clive,
and some others who died after being so roughly handled



<pb n="278"/>
27S    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
by te plice it the City Hall, and though he would
preeted those -murders if he had been a free agent,b
feels now that he is involved in the crimes of the ity aw!
dthdies, and no doubt the law would take the same view !
of his case. Blanche did not mean to tell me all this, but 1
her wretchedness had broken down her caution as Well as 
her pride, and before she knew it she was telling me her
troubless as freely as she- used to when she was a little 
girl, and 'Brother Philp' took the place of father and
mother both."' 
"I can guess the remainder of the story," Francis said, 
Jessie was silent. Her head rested on her hand, and her
face showed that the old wounds which the years had
seemed to heal were reopened.         .
" Yu may not be able to guess all," Philip sid in an,
swer to'his brother's remark. "It was easy enough to
foresee, months ago, that Richard would eventually be
forced into polygamy; but it appears the Prophet made
up his mind that Blanthe deserved a special punishment
forher 'obstinate refusal to consent to the marriage, and
so it has been decreed that 'Richard shalt take as his wife
a' seMramt girl that Blanche discharged last winter-a
bold, forward piece, who spent half her time curling her
hair and dressing up to attract Richard's notice-that is
what poor Blanche told me to-night, forgetting that she
gave a very different reason at the time for dismissing the
girl."
" And has Blanche so little spirit that she will submit to
such an arrangement ?'} Francis asked.
"How can she help herself ?" Jessie said, speaking .fo
the first time. "You forget the law under which we are
living-the law which says, 'If a woman refuse to give
other wives to her husband, he shall take them without
her consent, and she shall be destroyed for her disobedi.



<pb n="279"/>
EPILOGU..                   279
ence.' Blanche has refused her consent, but the jar-
riage will take place all the same, and her puaishmmat
will come afterward."
" I will go to the Federal authorities in the morning,'
Francis said, rising hastily. "I will lodge information
against Richard, and have this thing stopped."
" How will you stop it ?"  It was Philip who asked the
question this time. " When the courts are powerless to
punish a plural marriage after it has taken place, how can
you eNpect them to prevent such marriages.? We.know
of more than one wife who has gone to the. nited States
Court in this city to beg that her husband's second mar-
riage might be prevented, but the answer has always
been, ' We can do nothing for you.' Neitheryou nor I nor
the Federal authorities can prevent Richard from marry-
ing that girl to-morrow; but I havethought it possible that
we may save Blanche from the punishment that, as Jessie
say  is to come afterward. The Prophet has decreed.that,
to make this punishment complete, the new wife is to be
brought directly home and made the mistress of the house.
If Blanche will only institute a suit for divorce as soon as
the girl is brought there, I think the judge will be just
enough to decide that she shall keep the house in which
she lives.
"Maybe he will not grant the divorce. You say no one
is punished for polygamy."
"True, because in the first placp it is impossible to get
proof, in court, of a polygamous marriage, which takes
place in the Endowment House, and is witnessed only by
those who are bound by an oath to divulge nothing; and
in the second place it is probable that when the criminal
is tried there will be men on the jury who are bound by a
similar oath to convict nobody; but if Blanche asks for a
divorce it will be easy enough to prove that she is entitled



<pb n="280"/>
280    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR. 
to that; and the Federal judge, and not a Mormon jury, 
decide the case." 
"All I have to say, then, is, that if Blanche does 
avail herself of the only remedy the law offers her,
does not deserve our pity."
These were the elder brother's last words as he took 
leave of the others for the night. Two days afterward
Philij learned that the second marriage had taken place
but the bride had not been brought home.   Blanche,:
who in this emergency developed a spirit which had been.
latent during the happier years of her life, had barricaded
every door and window, and announced her determination
to hold possession of the place at all hazards. 
" If a few more of the women in this Territory would
take such a course, polygamy would be broken up in leasi
than three years," Francis said. 
" Wait a little and see how the thing ends," his brother'
advised. "You may not be so sure, six months from
now, that her course is the best one."
For two weeks Blanche was the sole occupant of the 
house she had 4irtified. At the end of that time she fell
sick, and the doors were opened to admit Jessie, who
nursed her tenderly, and would gladly have offered such
sympathy as Blanche manifested in her own hour of mor-
tal pain, in that dark past which she could never forget.
But the nature once so sweet and tender was embittered
and hardened by misery and despair, and Blanche turned
a deaf ear to her sister's pitying words. She did not prayfor
death, as Jessie had done, but she seemed to wish to live only.
that she might see such punishment as they deserved visited 
upon her husband and the girl who had supplanted her.
"The law cannot reach them yet," she said to Jessie,
"but I shall live to see the day when it will. I shall live
to see them both in prison, branded as felons.'"



<pb n="281"/>
EPILOGUE.                   281
"You do not wish to see your husband there?" Jessie
ventured to say.
" I have no husband." The face of the wronged wife
grew livid, and her hands worked convulsively. " I cau
not go on loving as--as some women do. My love had
received its death - blow the night that Philip found
me."
Blanche was soon to learn that the law which was pow-
erless to punish a man for breaking his marriage vows
was strong enough when used as an instrument of ven-
geance against a woman who refused to give other wives
to her husband. In three weeks from the day of Richard
Barney's second marriage, the house which his wife had
called her home for nearly twenty years was sold, and
Blanche received formal notice from the purchaser to va-
cate the-premises.*
"I will never leave the house alive," she declared to
Philip.
"You cannot hold possession after the place is sold,"
Philip answered. " The man who has bought it and paid
for it has a right to his property."
" I did not expectyou to turn against me," Blanche said
bitterly.
" My poor girl ! You know your brothers would still be
your friends if all the world should turn against you. I
am only telling you the facts. The court on which you
rely for help will send officers to eject you from the prem-
ises if you do not give up possession."
* Under the laws of Utah a wife has no right of dower; consequent-
ly, when she displeases her husband he can sell the house in which
she lives, or deed it to a plural spouse, and turn her into the street.
The occurrence reated above came under the writr's personal obser-
vation in 1976



<pb n="282"/>
m82    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
Bt Blac    would sot be convinced, and in spite of h
brother's efforts to persuade her to leave, remained in 
horstptii ;thepurthaser procured a writ of ejectment, and
ase was removed by force. . .; 
b ,ll9oher days the Prophet would have called upon the
Danites to. enforce the law which declares that a woman
who refuses to give other wives to her husband shall be 
destroyed, but now he found it wiser to make the fficers
of the United States Government the instruments ofhis
will. The wit which turned the disobedient wife into
the street.was issued by a Federal judge, and served by 
United-States marshal. When, a few weeks later, Blanche
applied for a divorce, the same judge granted it, and de 
creed her the munificent sum of six dllars jfcr no' A has 
alimony, and in less than a year the husband was released
altogether from the payment of alimony to the wife who  i
had dared to rebel against polygamy. No blame, how- 
ever, could be made to attach to the judge in this mwater,
for the husband, anticipating the suit for divorce, had put
aJiis property out of his hands, and when the case came
to trial any number of Mormon- witnesses were found
teadytotestify that he received no salary ftr his'services
in the Co-operative Mercantile Institution, but was work-
ing out a debt.
In his heart the Prophet doubtless felt that he had little
more need of the Danites, and it was a noticeable fact
that about this time the older and more trusted ones-
those who knew most of the darkdeeds of former yea--
began to drop off. They were men advanced in years, 
whose death might naturally have been epected, 'and as
they adhered to the teachings of the Churchand called no
physician in time of sickness, bu Abidlded instead on the
ministrations of the elders who possessed the gift of hea l



<pb n="283"/>
EPIZLOGUB.                 2B3
ing, no one competent to decide whether or not Adethiwis
due to natural causes was-present in their lasthot., !lIt
seemed as though the ruler of the people .had made anim
pact with Deathto keep. is secrets for him. !
But that ghostly ally, whom he had sought to propitiate
by the sacrifice of his trusted adherents, at last laid his
hand on the Prophet himself.
" The tyrant is dead ! Thank God !" In these words
Francis La Tour announced the event to his wife.
"He died peacefully in his bed, as I prophesied years
ago; is it not so ?" she asked.
" He died in his bed, that is true, but it could not have
been a peaceful death."
" And he will be eulogized, as I said. Men whose
words have weight with the nation will praise him as the
founder of a commonwealth, as one who has turned the
wilderness into a garden, and peopled this Territory with
hardy and industrious immigrants. I can see in my mind
the very sentences that will be inscribed in his praise,
while the system that he built up is proving a heavier
curse than ever to the people."
Elsie La Tour did not lay claim to the gift of prophecy,
but her words proved true. And to-day, though the
Prophet is dead, Mormonism lives, and is strengthening
itself and enlarging its boundaries year by year. Its rule
is absolute in Utah, and it holds the balance of power in
the adjoining Territories. The potency of the system is
felt in the halls of Congress, and while its high priests
are boasting loudly that the nation dares not interfere
with a religion that teaches treason and murder, thou-
sands of European immigrants are being brought to Utah
to take the oath of unquestioning obedience to the author-
ity of the Church, and of perpetual enmity to the Govern-
ment and people of the United States.



<pb n="284"/>
284    THE FATE OF MADAME LA TOUR.
For nearly half a century the Mormon leaders, have
been industriously engaged in sowing the seeds of disloy- '
alty to the Government and hatred to the nation. What
will the harvest be ? Let our statesmen answer the ques-
tir.



<pb n="285"/>
APPENDIX.
UTAH: 187o-I881.
THz year i870 may properly be characterized as the be-
ginning of regeneration in Utah, for it witnessed the'
completion of the Pacific Railroad and the commencement
of mining.
It is true that prospecting had been carried on to a limit-
ed extent for seven years previous to that date, and in Little
Cottonwood and Bingham caflons Gentile capitalists had
expended thousands of dollars in the partial development
of mining claims that promised well; but the ignorance of
many who had the business in hand with regard to the
proper treatment of silver-lead ores, the scarcity of charcoal
and coke for smelting purposes, and, above all, the want
of means of transportation (for previous to I868 there was
no railroad within a thousand miles of Utah), combined to
render the mines unprofitable.
The year 1870, however, witnessed many changes. The
completion of the transcontinental railway brought the
isolated " valleys of the mountains" into direct-communi-
cation with the civilized world. With freight across the
plains reduced from twenty-five cents to three cents per
pound, the miners were no longer dependent upon the
Saints for supplies, and the bullion which the smelters
turned out could be shipped to the States at a handsome
profit
Immediately following these changes came the discovery
of the Emma Mine and the publication to the world of the
enormous mineral wealth of the Territory.



<pb n="286"/>
286                APPENDIX. 
During the summer and autumn of 1870 the "stampe
to the new mining country was continuous, and in
spring of 1871 the Gentile residents of Utah numbered
least five thousand souls. The majority of these were,
course, miners; but in Salt Lake City there were a good
number of Gentile merchants and professional men who
had brought their families with them, and Corinne, a rail,
m4ad towan' laid out in 869, had a population of twelve 
mbndre,4 ll of whom wet Gentilqas. 
With so. lare ..  representation from the outside world
in the Territory, and with railroad communication open be .
tween Utah ad the States, the Prophet saw the wisdom of
abandrning the.shot-gun policy, adopted in former years,
to. keep ainers out of the. kingdom;, but he was by no
m.eaw at t-ie end of his resources. 
-. Every posible obstacle was thrown in the way of the
miners, and. s: the political and legislative, andto a great 
extent.the judicial. machinery of the Territory was tlto-
felher in Momomi. haads, the " possible obstacles" were
.In :te.b'winter.of 1871-72 a C. dftiatf was planned to
rid the Territory of its unwelcome guests. The Utah
l&gislatw. (composed wholly of Mormon high priests)
passedan ?act imposing a tax of twenty per cent on the
gross proceeds of the mines. This act, had it become a
law, would have compelled every mine in the Territory to
shutt.own; except possibly the Emma, which was produc-
ing ore to the amount of ire thousand dollars per day.
The Gentile Governor, being invested with the power of
an absolute veto, nipped this precious scheme in the bud;
but at every subsequent session of this inspired Legislature
bills have been framed:and presented having the same ob-
ject in view-namely, the complete destruction of the min-
ing interests of the Territory.



<pb n="287"/>
UTAH: i870-188I.              b87
In the May number of The North Americad Revsbw, Mr;
George Q. Cannon, late Delegate from Utah to theHiereof
Representatives, alludes to the current rumor of the aboe
fact, and denies it.
Mr. Cannon is hereby referred to Governor Emery's veto
of the bill to suppress the smelters in the Territory (7iwr.
nals of the Legislafref  1i76, page 261) and likewise to
his veto of the bill levying a tat on the mines and a double
tax on their products. (yorawn for 1878, page 321.) 
In that portion of Mr. Cannon's .articlewhich relates
to the mineral development of the Territory, I find the
following assertion:
" Every person was at liberty to do as he pleased about
prospecting far or opening mines." 
On the t6th dy of Octber, 1669, an article appeared in
the Uta* JhAgaine, published in Saft Lake, adfocating
theopeining o the mines that were known to exist in the
Territory. .This article was written by E. L T. Harrison,
editor of the magazine, and indorsed by Wmi S. Godbe,
the publisher. Both Godbe and Harrison were immedi-
ately summoned to appear before the School of the Proph.
ets, and there in the presence of two thousand of the elders
of the Church, Harrison was asked to rise and explain how
it was that he dared to write the article in question. His
answer not being satisfactory to the ruling powers, he was
formally summoned to trial before the High Council.
Wm. S. Godbe was next called upon to define his posi-
tion, the test question asked him being: " Do you believe
that President Young has the right to dictate to you in all
things, both temporal.and spiritual ?"
A negative answer to this question let loose a storm of
wrath on Godbe's head, and he too received notice to
appear before the Council.
On the following Wednesday the trial took place. The



<pb n="288"/>
288                APPENDIX.
two men,. both of them possessed of more than ordia
intelligence and culture, and both well known then a
now in business circles, were held to answer for the heiny
ous crime of advocating the development of the mineralr
resources of the Territory, and were cut off. from the 
Church and delivered over to the bufietings of Satan.
George Q. Cannon acted as prosecutor for the Church on ,
the occasion of the trial. And yet George Q..Cannon says 
that every person was at liberty to do as he pleased about 
prospecting for or opening mines !
And if Mormons could not venture to express the opin-
ion that the Territory would be benefited by the develop-
ment of the mines, much less could Gentiles venture to ex-
plore the mineral districts of Utah with safety to them- '
selves. General P. E. Connor, the commanding officer at
Fort Douglass in 1862-3-4, made the first mining locations
in the Territory, and he was obliged to detail soldiers to
protect the men engaged in working the mines.
As late as February, 1876, when the mining population
of the Territory numbered more than five thousand, and the
annual production of the mines amounted in value to six
million dollars, the Legislature passed an act declaring that
the smelters (who had built on unoccupied lands at some
distance from any settlement), should be suppressed as
public nuisances.
Governor Emery promptly vetoed this bill; but the fact
that it failed to become a law did not discourage its
framers, who are still bent upon driving out the miners,
and confident that they will some day succeed.
Meanwhile, in spite of all the obstacles thrown in its
way, mining has become a paying industry. There are
more than fifty organized mining districts in the Territory,
with not far from one thousand producing mines, and an
unlimited and constantly increasing number of " pros-



<pb n="289"/>
UTAH:. z867o-uSx.              89
pects," many of which promise well and are likely to be-
come paying mines in the near future.
In 1876 Utah stood third on the list of bullion-preducig
Stats and Teritories. To-day her rank should boefi
higher, for here-has been a great increase in the nuber
of paying mines ince that date, and it is confidently ex-
pected that the bullion produced the present year will
amount in value to ten million dollas.
Speaking from  personal knowledge, obtained during
nine years' residence in the midst of her mines, I have no
hesitation whatever in saying that the mineral wealth of
Utah is incalculale, and practically i usle
Take a single mmple.
Within the Hints of a square mile, n the divide be-
tween twC   loans known mepectivefy as Big and Little
oawood, a few mines, any partialy developed, have
pmdneed sile-leuad m     the amount of  e0s  mti/w
dollars in the last eight years, and from prent indica-
tions the same mimes are likely to be largely productive
for many years te come.
In the vicinity of -these mines, but on the opposite side of
the range; is the Ontario, producing gold and silver-bear-
ing ores. This mine has for four years past paid regular
mn thly dividends, aggregating three milion dolars over
and iwe all e peses.
On tbe weat si   of Salt Lake valey is the Oquirrh
range, in which-the ItUIeral discoveries were made in
r863, by parties attdd to General Connor's coluand.
The mines in this rangeonttiined immense bodies of low-
grade smelting omes*-ftt i, lead ores carrying t very
small percentage :ofd ;uv . These mines wer indis-
triously worked, and yielded large proits to their owners
until the fall in-klead 
WRan hat metd warquofed i; New Yaorkt -pices that



<pb n="290"/>
29a                 AP.  NDP X.
would pt pay for shipment, the plucky owners of 
lead mines, instead of sitting down in despair, beM
look nuqd-for something else, and the result wathat te
Oquink mage was found to be ribbed wih god, B
quMt. and placer mining have already*eooe#   ipo
indstri   hi the Oquirrh caflons, and the gold brick thlt
a .eshipped monthly to' Salt Lke ar pleasant remmdeami
of old times to the " Fartiners" in that city.    , 
The southern poveis of our. Territory was the last to
admit the miner-4ht last, indeed, to yield in any way to 
the pressu  df civilization,  Remote from  railroads,.
hemmed tit b mouatain, its valleys. inhabited by a popu '
lation ignorant and fanatical to .th last degree, with a
largiprinkling of notorious criminals who had fled from
tiW-north at he first intimation that theGovernment- p -.
posed to investigate the dark deeds of the past twentyr
years, southerm Utah possessed tew attractions for at
Gentile immigrea.
Five yeas. aeor however, the irrepmosible prospector, to
whom difficulty and danger are attractions in and of them-.
sdlves, begal to penetrate the: caftons and climb the
momutaim of the Sowuh, and at the presnt date thelargest
bediet of ilyerq ad ore yet disoovered in the Territory, or
perhaps in the world, are being qpened up in that section,.
Late explorations have also convinced experienced. 
mines that these immense ore bodies are in a mineral.blt
which extends from Colorado through Utah and southem
Nevada to the coast, and at the present writing numerom'
prospecting parties are outfitting here for an exploring e 
pedition,. which they believe will result in opening up new
and rich mining districts along. the line which separates.
Utah from Colorado 
But gold, silver, and lead are by no meas. the only 
mineral  :oducts of Utah, Copper om  .are abundant; 



<pb n="291"/>
UTAH: :S-Sft881.              291
iron exists in immense quantities; bismuth andcinwab.r
ar found in certain districts; coal ab6unds ina 4^tent
parts of the Territry; there is salt enough to supy.ts,
world, and sulphur ufficient to meet all demands iw.*
certaji quarter in the  x .
Fire-clay is plentiful; also potter's clay; there is excelt
lent buildigttone, including graaite and marble of a su-
perior quality. Black lead, alum, borax, and gypsum ue
disseminated throughout the Territory, ad in the south,
ern districts are immense beds of pasamline
Should the reader be disposed to ask why. the mineral
wealth of Utah fails to attract attention, or why capitalists
are slow. t malke..in tments in th4 Territry, the_ answer
is54 ,...,                        . .  . .
ThtsiAm    rc wider .thq baa of th pricsthoqd, and as
Church and State are here one and inseparable, th.,who
arn.  ro.^; . thexisting condition , of aai c 4clUiq to
plc themselv   under te rle of the .t  orwqn hieqrarhy
I 4  word,. the u-Aierican aspct of the Tprritory, YiCwe4
both from a social aW   a poiticl standpont, deter
American citizens from either making it their; hole or
invesing their money in its mines,
It is from this cause, and this alone, that Territories which
were petle           . ten years later than Utah have vastly out-
stripd her, and become pr9sperous State, while her
resources remain undeveloped. 4 it, then, a jiqg to bW
wondered at,, that the Up-Mornoe residnMts ,f,,Uttah have
determined upon orgqied. and un .viingopppsitioa to
priestly rule, or that they pettipti  CoqgrPs. year after year
for such legislation  s will secure to thqn the common
rights o American citizens ?
I have alluded elsewhere to the doinvM of the Vtah Leg-
islature.
W beforestated, this Legitpurq is compoed of thirty-



<pb n="292"/>
292                APPENDIX.                      '
nine Mormon high priests, thirty-six of whom an limv
in p   army. These law-makers hold their offces yewl
daertr, seldom dying and never resigning. I say th. i
Jes, for nearly every one of them fills two or three 
official positions besides that of member of the Legisla.
toe. 
They are supposed to be elected by the people, but the
election is a farce which might easily be dispensed with. 
Good Mormons, who thought they were stating a fact
which spoke wel for their people, have said to me, 
" The election is only a form ; we are atl of one mind." 
The marked ballots which are placed in the hands of
the voters by the priesthood are understood by them m a
notice that Brother So-and-so has been appointed to a eel-
tain office by the President of the Church, and that ends
'the matter.
The Head of the Church selects a man to fill a 'ertain
position, and the people hate nothing to say indeed, the
majority of them have grown so aeeustomed to the yoke
that they do not wish to hate anything to say.
When Hooper, a monogamist, was superseded as Dele-
gate to Congress by Cannon, the husband of four wives,
Brigham Young said,
" I have chosen Brother Cannon to represent us in Con-
gress, because I mean to cram polygamy down the throats
of.the American people." ·
Mr. Cannon stamps this statement, which has been often 
made, as a fabrication. A gentleman who was present
when the Prophet made use of this expression said to me
only a few hours ago, that it was one of the things which
Cannon should not have attempted to deny, inasmuch as it
was a part of a boastful and intemperate address -which 
Brigham-Young delivered in the Tabernacle in the hearing
-of many hundreds. As I was a resident of Salt Lake at



<pb n="293"/>
UTfA: &S7-88I.                n93
the time, and heard of it, probably the sme day that it
was used, from several parties, I am forced to conckhde
that Mr. Cannon's memory has again proved treacheraao
Delegate Cannon was CleCted by the Prophet; the bur-
lesque called an " election" was not in the least neoesary,
except for outside effect.
In like manner the members of the Legislature hve
been chosen to fill their present positions, and they are the
servants, not of the people they ere'suppesed to represent,
but of the Head of the Church, who ca remove them at
pleasure should they prov ddisobedient  They meet once
in two years, the Government pays them theirtr dim
and mileage, and thy spend forty day legslating indus-
triously in the interests of the Church
If it were not for the absolste veto power possessed by
the Governor, they would have legislated the Gentiles out
of the Territory long ago As it is, they are hindered
somewhat in their laudable efforts to- prify Zion, but oc-
casionally they accomplish something that pays them for
years of toil and disappointment.
For example, in 1872 they passed an act depriving the
first wife of her dower, and of any and all claims upon the
property or earnings of her husband. This act, in some
way not yet understood by the Gentile residents, obtained
the Governos approval and became a law; consequently
any man may sell his home, put his wif and children. on
the street, and leave them to shift fr themselves.  In
Mormon families this power which the husband is known
to possess is held as a sword over thhead of a wife who
is disposed to protest against the introduction of a plural
into the household.
During the same session of the Legislature a number of
bills equally outrageous were vetoed by the Governor; but
the legislators, nothing daunted, returned to the charge



<pb n="294"/>
994                APPENDIX.X
the next sessim, and when the Governor vetoed thir p
meaums they passed them over his head by what the
calledMa joint tesolution.
it is true the organic act of the Territory impaired the
effeaey of these joint resolutions, but when circumstances:
.made it possible for them to carry out their own behests
4hey punned the even tenor of their way, unhindered by
organic acts or anything elee
For instance, one of the sets passed by joint resolution
was an approprition bill which turned the entire contents
of the treasuty over to the Mormon leaders; and as the
auditor and treasurer were both good Saints, who dared
not disobey counsel, the provisions of this bill, which the. 
Governor had disapproved in a most emphatic message,
,were carried out to the letter, and the brethren emptied the
treasury in an astonishingly short space of time.
hI 1876 a bill was passed designed to shield all the per-
petrators of crimes committed in obedience to counsel dur-
ing Utah's darkest days. By the provisions of this act all
murders committed more than ten yearsago were declared
oUtewed, and prosemtio was forever barred.
The Governor vetoed the bil, in a message couched in
Vey decisive language, but the brethren betrayed no con-
seiousness of defeat. With witnesses and.jurors entirely
under their control, they felt safe for the present, and they
had aith in the future.
Previous to 1869 the probate courts, presided over by
some of the most ignorant and fanatical members of the
priesthood, claimed both common law and chancery juris-
.diction, and the district courts, presided over by judges
appointed by the Federal Government, might as well have
been located in the 'moon.
Many of the United States judges were driven from the
Territory, others were shamefully insulted and maltreated,



<pb n="295"/>
UTAHb: l17o088.                95
and under the most favorable cicumstaaces the ort had
no power to enforce its decrees             -
In I869, however, two judges were appointed whoaoon
convinced the people that they had come to stay, and that
all the power conferred on the district courts by the o
ganic actof the Territory would be claimed and exercise
These judges-C. M. Hawley, of IUlinois, and 0. F. Strick-
land, of Michigan-were lawyers of solid attainments,
and possesed likewise of judicial firmness and of a proper
sense of their obligations to the Goeraaemt they repre-
sented. From the day on which they scended the bench
the district courts began to afford redres to the victims
of M   ron tyranay, and a panic seized ape'.the blaod-
stained wretches who were known as the Destroying
Angels of-4be Chmb:      .         -
In Augurt4 *So, Chief Justiee J. . McKea arrbred in
Utah . Tiay, ater .eaih has embalmed his. uirtes and
silenced his calumniators; to-day, when his memoiyis en-
shriedin t he heartsof osadsa th at of a spotless Chris-
tian, an iaoerOuptible judge, the friend of the oppressed,
the unswerving foe of wrong,.it is possible to review i-
partially the yeasof his admiaistratioa-yeas from which
the smokef battle has barely cleared away.
The year previous to Judge Meaa's appointmet, As-
sociate ju.io tiawley and StricMand  with a fil knowl-
edge of the maner ia whie thwe executie of the law had
been defeated by grand lad petit jurieeemposed of Mor-
mons who recognited no law a.eept the will of the
Prophet, had issued orders to Otw UlesdStades narshal to
impanel juries in their respective districts. In conformity
with the order of court, United Sttes namsal M. S. Pat- 
rick proceeded to summoa grand -1d .ptit jeiesoom-
posed of Gentiles and rcuamt Moratos ef nown integ-
rity. The Saints, through their legal advisers, objected to



<pb n="296"/>
296                APPENDIX. 
these jurie s not having been impaneled aceerding to
laws of Utah. Chief Justice MeKean rendered an 
dedde,   staining the course taken by his associaes, aad
at th*trms of court held in the differett judicial district
-datrl  i87o and 187t the juries impaneled by the United.
Sttes marshal were composed altgether of Gentiles and
secedes from the Mormon Church.
·Dring these years one hundred and twenty-nne per- 
sons were indicted fmo the eommisiobn of murder, un- 
speakable mutMltu, and other attreious crines.
Brigham Young was indicted for complicity in a num- 
ber of murders. He was not, however, imprisoned, but
was allowed to remain in his own house under wnvel- .
lance.
Four indictments for murder were found against . H.
Wells, mayor of Salt Lake, but he was allowed to remain
at large upon giving bonds to the amount of ft thousand
dollars. 
In-the men time an appeal from the deisiot of the Su-
preme Cort of the Territory had been tsae- to the Su-
prefe Cnet of the United States, and n the spring of
· m2 a dedsbs was tendered reversisfg',e difew9 which
had been rendeled by Judges McKea and Hawley, and
-councumd In by Judge Sricldand.
The Mormons were triumphant. Their Prophet assured
them that Heaven had interposed in their behalf, and de-'
feated their enemies.  The district corts were again
powerless, and the probate courts claimed and exercised
the urisdictibn which they had assumed for twenty years
past
Judicial atrn in the Territory remained in this state
until June, 174, When the passage of the Poland Bill by
Congress defined the statuo of the probate courts, re-
affirmed the chancery and common law.jurisdiction of the



<pb n="297"/>
UTAH: 1870o-881.              t97
district courts, and gave a jury laW, clinsy and ineffient,
it is true, but still a little better than none.
This jury law, which is still in force at the present writ-
ing, provides that the probate judge (always a Morton
priest), shall select one hundred names, and the cleric of
the district court one hundred names, and that these two
hundred names shall be written upon separate slips of pa-
per and thrown ito a box. From this box the United
States marshal draws, in opea c6urt, a sufficient number
of names to constitute a panel. The ams  drawn are
Monnon or Gentile, as it may happen, but when the jurors
are challenged for cause, chance no longer roles. The
Gentile jaors- e  men who read, and als men who have
some regard for the sanctity of a judicial oath; hence it
happens tat moat of them, upon examinadidn, will. admit
that they 4uave read Or heard of the deae i hand. The
MbHmn ijurors, on the contrary, regard n oath as bind-
ingwhich conficts with thei Endowment oath. Of curse,
if a brother Saint is to be tried, it is their duty to get on
the jury and save him, and it is edifying to observe the uni-
formity with which they swear that they have never heard
or read of a case which has filled the newspapers and been
putlicy commented upon by all elasses for months and
years. It is due to the causes indicated that the juries
impimee to try notorious Mrmon criminals are almost
always Mormons, who are bound to aoquit the accused,
even in the faem of the mot positive evietimm  This, too,
has a bearing upon RepramwtatrtCano's article.
In spite of the difficulties which they formaw a conse-
quences bf the partial and impeor t provisions of the Po-
land Bill, the United Staes judge oneW more enteed
upon their appropriate dties, and alsogh <owing to the
features of the jury law mentioned above) it was seldom
possible to convict a Mormon of any crime, the fact that



<pb n="298"/>
298                APPENDIX.
those who had so long defied the law were now
amenable to it acted as a wholesome restraint, and 
property and lives of Gentiles and apostates became cor
paraively safe.                                '
In March, 1875, Brigham Young, for refusing to com
with an order of the Third District Court, was adjudgef
guilty of contempt, and Chief Justice McKean senteano
him to twenty-tour hours' imprisonment therefor. In obe-s
dience to the mandate of the court, the United States mar-
shal conveyed the Prophet to the penitentiary, our miles 
south of Salt Lake City, the only prison in the Territory
not in Mornmo hands.
This penitentiary, which is United States property) is
every way worthy the pencil of Nast. While Brigham
Young filled the office of Governor of Utah, Congres ap- .
propriated thirty thousand dollars to build a United States "
penitentiary in the Territory. The money went where a 
great deal of money went in those days-namely, into.the
Prophet's cofier-and a few score of poor Saints were
aUowed as a  special favor, to work out their arrers of
tithing by maiing adobes from the mud of the penitentiary
quarlteveclui , and 4uilding with' them a prison, which
the   vernmaentwas expected to regard a an equivalent 
for the thirty ttouand dollars.
Tht result of their labors was an adobe wait whichn n
enterprising woodchuck could dig through in two hours.
This wall incloses an acre of ground, in the center of 
which was a species of dug-out divided into half a dozen 
compartments.                                    :
When the United States marshal took possession of the 
promises in 1871 he found nothing inside the walls except' 
a hole in the ground, Rockwood, the Mormon warden, 
having carried off the roof of the dug-out and the bricks
which sustained it.
* k



<pb n="299"/>
UTAH: t137t-88I.             299
The marshal had no funds for building pbnitentiaries,
but Congress, when the facts were laid before that body,
appropriated a small sum to erect a block-house, a bild-
ing better fitted for a sheep-corral than for the purpose it
was intended to serve, 
Outside the walls and immediately adjoining them
stands the warden's house, a rickety three-story building
which Reekweod the Mormon incumbent, used for years
as a harem for his numerous wivei
To this place the Mormon Prephet was brought on a
certain afternoon in March, 1875, in the cartdy of the
United States marshal.
The Gentiles had at last laid an impious hand upon the
Lord's anointed I The whole city was insn uproar. A
proesn- Of about twenty arrniages illwed the one in
which the Prophet rode, but Oe reaching the penitentiary
gafhsihe oecupn ts of these carriages wee informed that
they could not be admitted.
A little later in the afternoon two wagon4lads of arms
and 'ammunition were -brought out to B&igham's factory,
about half a mile from the penitentiary, and when 'drkness
began to settle down upon the valley, seven hundred arm-
ed men, smne on horseback, some on toot, surrounded
the pin4awalls and the warden's house, bent upon rescu-
ing the Popset atany cost.
The warden 4ad fourteen prismnrs inside the walls,
and only two guards to aid .in. He had besides,4n an
upper room, his wife and his little eildre, one of them a
baby'only a few weeks old.
The threatening demntratina outside increased, but
fortunately neither the prisoner nerks. would-be rescuers
had any idea of the weakness of the garrisom
The Prophet, in considetation f his ge and infirmities,
had been allowed by the marshal to spend the night in the



<pb n="300"/>
300                tPPENDIX.
warden's oice. Eatry  i the evening one of his
servAntd who had a pass from the marshal, was ad
with the prisoner's mail. By this time the armed
were within a few feet of the doors and windows.
warden, as he returned from viewing the situation,
ased by the Prophet what he thought of the 
tion outside.
"I think," was the reply, "that a good many of
fellows stand a fair chance of etting killed. Every mas
have is at his post, well armed, and with orders to fi
upon the fit- onewho advances a step nearer."
The Prophet's notorious cowardice manifested itseif
an instant. He was in the hands of his enemies, and el
too as a hostage for the good behavior of his followe
his fears caused him to think-and with a white fam  d ak
shaking voice he exclaimed, 
" Don't let us have any bloodshed I  will order te
to disperse."
And turning tohis retainr, he added,
"Go out aad.tell the men I wish them to fall back and
rmida qiet."
TTh ordr ws given ad obeeld The ob withdrew,
antd tlough a mounted petrol, composed of the Prophet's
most trusted adherents, continued to pa  and repass until
sunrise, there were no further hostile demon tios.
At the expiration of his twenty-four hours' seatenee, the
Prophet was escorted home by a poron of the armed
crowd who had remained in the vicinity of the prison.
Days passed. The sun rose and set as usual. No con-
vulsion of nature indicated that the Gentile oourt had call-
ed down the vengeance of Heaven by its daring act; but
just as the loyal portion of the community began to hope
that the example of official firmess which the people had
witnessed would cause them to respect the majesty of the



<pb n="301"/>
UTAH: .0wi$,81.                3pi
law, .word came frpm Wahiago    that the Psii... i-r
fluenced by eonsiderations which Utah Geatles .4 wt
understand to this day, had depoed the iosorsqptible
judge, whose only fault was the aithul and fearless per-
formance of duty. 
The Sainm'were again triumphant, and the moral effect
of the President's uhwise action is still felt amog us,
though year .have passed away, a d Juge McKean has
gone to a world whee all wrngs .ae righted.
The history of the United State comrtS in Utah from
that day to this is a histeryf futile etort, of aewmigsuc-
cess and real deeat, whenver they haW  attempset AP in-
vestigate and pmih the crime -    thie Morpo.. priet-
hood.                              . 
In tuees -aanee only has cn     tioew  -bon wcgred
when he crimes soght to be pwiahed .have*4e    con-
mitted s odiee     to COaM     ! la  976 :Jh  P. LAe
was     O --noed to death lor his shar  i- thpe puptain
Meadc wsa masacS, ano n in. Mairh o the a' owwj,.year
his sentence was executed; but Loe's oviction and exe-
cution woul   aw sbees imoesusWe   f  r/g4a    Yo¥ung
had not dkuwers d t soacriice tis may to s ave imself. 
And itcpeentative Calmon's article in the North Ameri-
can acrdingly allows the respcasiiity of " this4radful
massacre" to rw- upoa Lee's sholders.
I am at a lsoto.datertine.4te reasnv wvih . halved
Mr. Canne-te iUe to sa .sattar ltat, o, hi own, ikce
and the sake of his people. should hat hen IMlpt in the
background.
In s874 seviel pensP implicatie in the. Mountain
Meadows butchery were indicted for m   ,ord Aeo  among
them Bishop (abo Colonel)- Dme o. Panwa, a town in
Southern Utah. I saw Dame while in tie. band* of the
officers of the law. I had then  aenri fariehe aarticle



<pb n="302"/>
3SO                 APP.N- . X. ·
to one of te Washington papers, giving an account If 
massaer^anadDame, aware of this act, asked: ;
d wye say anything about me ?" 
"tiNo' was the answer 
Dame. "      Do you think me guilty ?"
-l  HWiter. " I shall wait to hear the evidence
forming an opinion as to your guilt" 
- Dmsa . " Batoe God, madam, I am innooent. I 
not give the orderier the massacre, and I am not res
sible for the orders that were passed over my head."
Dame, it will be remembered, was the srurior
of John Dt Lee, who was made   scapegoat by the 
mon leaders, and sacriiced to save the t  istigatos
the massacre.  The orders which were, as Dame
"passed over his head," must have 4rmaated Irom hi
superior offieem   Lee is in- his grave, but his dyiagxona
fesiion, which has been abundantly eorroborated by t
testimon y of old residentA of the Territory, ie extat, and
contains ecuatibnsthat will not down, evn at the bi
ding ofDelegate Caano          .
.Yb fol*wingt a  seare sof e's dying otatemets 
*  Th  Mountain Meadw. Massacre was te Mssult of the
direet teachings of Brigham Yong, and it was done by
the mrder f those high in authority in the Mormon comn
munity. After the massacre I was sent toBrigham Young j
to make a reportf it. - I went and  d Aim al. I said, 
' Sustain me, Or release me from my endowment oath to
avenge the blood of the prophets.t 
"Brigham sent me away, telling me he would commune
with God and let me know the rTplt. The next mornipg 
I went back to him and he said: ' Brother Lee, the people
did just right-only they were a little toe hasty. I hae 
evidence fom God that the.act was right. I sustain.you 
and tWh bsrthra.an tthat ye m  did. All I l.fr is treao  



<pb n="303"/>
UTAH; zl7oP088z.               03'
ery on the part of the brethren. Go home, tell the brehrn
I sustain them ; and keep all as seeret as therave. Wrike
me a lettr throwing the blae on the Indians, and I- wll
report it to the government as an Indian massacre.'
" Young was fully satisfed with me then and fo years
afterwards- He- gave me three wives after that, and
appointed me Probate Judge of Washington County.
Nothing but cowardice has made him deert me now."
" It was the first plan to have none hbut dians take part
in the massacre, but as William C. Stewar, Joel White,
and Benjamin Arthur were coming to 4be Maedms' on
Wednesday night they met young, Aden and aaqhB4nan
from the emigrants' tamp goiag.o. Cedar C    fee help.
They tol A, the. Indiaa attac and oa ked aidtfum  the o t-
tiers. T.ee, ly*pr  r was a- sbhot romt  Sowrt which
killed A-M. Th otber, man, w    was wounded by-White
and ,AKhuw,.capdcand a  caied  md   te  e t e: 'amigmnts
thal tecwbhitrslhad come .to kelp the Indian. AM t  that
the authorities said there was no safety mept in Jling
all who could talk."
Lee gives the names of many men holding Eficial-posi-
tions in the Nauvoo Legion and in the Church, uwh  were
leadersi the bloody work. Five of these men, Bishops
and Pwoidents of Stake of Zion, fled to the mountains as
soon asit-wra known that the manacre would be investi-
gated, and remaied, ia iding biiuntil ater. It' ecitation.
Should any perauo he disposed o ask why Lee-ws the only
one of the fity-eight white men engaged i- the mae-acre
who was ever brought to trial, I rei r inr *S, as teswer
to the proecuting attoay at the time f qbLe'trik
Three of the men whose name are conspieuo   -among
the Mountain Meadowpuwrdmr"m.-Hig8S    Mig^se, and
* Brigbh  Young *as at that tm. O'vet/asr d Utah dad Indian
AgoMt 1       .  , * ; :   :



<pb n="304"/>
34               . APPENDIX. 
Stewart-re still hiding from justice, remaining m hl
the time. in  e mountains, but occasionally visiting
M)rmo   settlements in which there re no Getile
dents to giv information against them. Iam infonne*
the.judge who tried and sentenced Lee that these m
might have been taken at any time during the past five y
if means had been provided for their capture, but a
general government hw  not, and the Territorial
ties will not fursh money to defray the expenses of
arresting them, it is not probable that they will ever be
held to nawer Jor the atrocious crime committed by then
in obedience to the " council" of their spiritual teacdrn. ':
hI the. same ye  George Reynwlds was convited ofpo
lygamy and sentenced to imprisonment in the petetiay, !
but the execution of his sentence was delayed more 'a
two years by an appeal to the Supreme Cout of the Un*ted
States; .ad. meanwhile he continued to live penly with :hi 
plural wife, and was elected to one or mere municipal ot-
fies by his dmiring ellowbi4nts.
In the spring of 1879 one John Miles was convicted of
the saie lifee, but theonvict is still at iage, and happy
inh be blief that his appeal to the  upreme Court will
mwultfavorably  This completes the list of eoavitions.
Mr. Cannon's statements with regard to the testiony of
parties traveling through Utah, to the " remarkable sec
rity of life and property there," should be qualified stiom
what. A good many travelers who attempted to cr's tih 
Territory previous to 1870 are not now in a condidon '40
give testimony, as, for example, the Aien paltyj stbbed 
and muriderd by the Danites; the party murdered inKir*-.
ball's bans; sad many others. 
On pel 460 Io . r Arth A. dinMsf Reviw, Mr.M Cmi
non says: "The whole foudation of the c harge: abmt
'blood-atonement' is that the people believe in the BiAN



<pb n="305"/>
UTAH: I87p0-881.             305
doctrine that men who commit murder, adultery, and other
gross crimes, should be executed."
The following affidavit may serve to show just how the.
doctrine of "blood-atonement" is understood by Mr.
Cannon himself.
"UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 
TERRITORY OF UTAH,     ss. 
COUNTY OF SALT LAE, 
"Adolph Razins, a citizen of the United States, resident
in said Territory and County? deposes and sap that on or
about the first day of March A.D, S85S, at the, City of Salt
Lake, one George Q..Cannon told afiant that according
to the doctrine of blood-atonement as believed, under-
stood. and practised in and by the Church of Latter Day
Saihts or Mqrmons, it wap, and always is the duty of each
an   very member of said Church to shed tr blood of his
nif bor fob salvation's sake. That is to say, the said
Gecige Q. Cannon did at the time aforesaid attempt to im-
press upon the mind of this affiant that when any co-religion-
ist was thought to be in a state of sinfulness, or disobedi-
ence to said Church, its doctrines and priesthood, it was
thpen ad in that case the justifiable privilege, and duty. of
any qtl4e co-religionist to kill such offender. And having.
arguedand anexplained to affiant the said doctrine of blood-
atonenlent, the said Ceore Q. Cannon did then and there
inform affiapt that Alm9n W. Babbitt, Secretary of Utah
Territory, had transgressed the laws of said Church, and
had disobeyed the commands of its President in divers
ways; and that for such transgression and disobedience,
the blood of the said Allma  W. Babbitt should and must be
shed, toedeem and stveMrbulsfrdtt sin. That thereupon
the said George Q. Cannon told affiant that said Almon W.
Babbitt was then, in March, 1855, intending to go from



<pb n="306"/>
306                APPENDIX.
Salt Lake City to Washington, D. C., advising and u
affiant to accompany said Babbitt on the journey as
sdM, id: dn the journey to shed the blood of the i
AlRon W. Babbitt, according and in obedience to 
teachings of said Church. The affiant then and th t
earnestly and conscientiously refused to commit or ha
any part in the commission of the murder so advised an'
counseled by the said George Q. Cannon. Affiat further j
says that he did accompany the said Almon W. Babbitt to b
Washington, D. C., but did not return to Utah with him. :
That afterwads, in the summer of i856, the said Almon'o
W. Babbitt was assassinated on his return from Washing- 
ton, and this affiant believes said assassination was an ict 
done in accordance with the laws or doctrines of said Church 
and by agents of said Church, instigated thereto by the ad- 
vice and counsel' of George Q. Cannon as aforesaid, and 
other persons in the authority of said Church. Affiant
says that in March, 1855, as aforesaid, he was a member
of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, or Mor- 
mans, as hereinbefore stated, and that said George Q.
Caonf was a member of said Church holding office in its
priesthood at the same time. That the said George Q.
Canon is the same person who is now Delegate in the
-House of Representatives from the Territory of Utah, in
the Congress of the United States. And further deponent
saith not.
"A. RAZINS.
"Subscribed and sworn to, 
before me, this 9th day
of.March, A.D. 1874, 
"ALFRED S. GOULD,
"Clerk, Supreme Court of Uth Territry."
U. S. of Amsek. 
Supreme Court.
Ten. of Utah.



<pb n="307"/>
UTAH: 187o-188x.           . 3P7
It is not my purpose to answer in detail the artile con-
taining Mr. Cannon's statements. In Utah, it nods no
answer, for no person who has resided here for any lenrgt
of time can be deceived by it  Outside of the Ternity,
however, the history of the "peculiar people" of these
valleys is .not so well known as to preclude the possibility
of anybody's receiving a wrong iMpression. It may be
well, on this account, to notice one moe of Mr. Cannon's
positive assertions and see what fundation it has.
Mr. Cannon says (pae 48), "For many years after the
settlement of Utah, not a liquor saloon eisted in the Terri-
tory."  The es-Deleate's memory is certalhy at fault, or
possibly the plach in which liquor was sold were ot called
"saloos " in the days to. which be refers.
Wht ae the facts? In 18,, just thee years after the
Prophet took possession of Salt Le Valley ".in the name
ofi.e Lrd," the business of distii. whiskey from the
am_ nised .i the .valley was commenaedL   The next
year, 851, a peraon named Moo, a good saint, and rank-
ing high in the priesthood, established a distillery in the
First Ward in this city, and another saint, Badley by
name, started the same business in the Eleventh Ward.
Currency was scarce at the time, and the usual method of
laying in a supply of whiskey was to take a certain number
of buidbs ofIfrain to the distillery and. barter the same for
spirits.  Moa  and Bailey continued in business until
about 1855, and were growing ich. The Prophet, who
had a keen eye to business, even in those days, was not
slow to perceive that. the mosey these men were making
mightas well be made by the Chrch. Accordingly, both
Moon and Badley were snt on missis, and their distil-
leries were seized and appropriated by the city authorities.
Then as now, Church and State in Utah were one and in-
separable, and the Mayor and City Council, were creatures



<pb n="308"/>
308.               APPENDIX.
of the Prophet  The Church, as represented by the c
authorities, enjoyed a monopoly of the liquor business
momw than ten years, and coined money out of it. 
Gentile liquor dealers first came to Salt Lake, the ct
fathers, not relishing the idea of competition in a busin
which they had found so profitable, sought to drive thei
away, first by demanding exorbitant licenses, and after 
ward by sending the police to raid the saloons. Enge-
brecht, a dealer whose conflict with the city authorities:
became somewhat notorious through a suit which was
carried to the Supreme Court of the United States, had up-.
wards of twenty thousand dollars' worth of liquor emptied
into the streets at one time by Mormon policemen.  !
After the days of monopoly were over the Church still
continued in the liquor business. The present writer well
remembers some windows on Main Street in this city,
which used to be ornamented' with the inscription "' Holi-
ness To The Lord" surmounted by something intended is,
a symbol of the AU-seeing eye. In these windows, and
directly below the inscription named, stood an aray of
botles labeled severally: "Old Tom Gin," " Honey Dew
Whisey,"' " Put Up Expressly For Zion's Co-operative
Merantile Institution."
We. turn now from the consideration of Mormon pecu-
liarities to a retrospect of the social and moral progress of
the people of Utah within the last decade, under the seal-
ous labors of the "Gentiles."  Christian teachers and
laborers of every name and of no name, filled with pity. for
the masses, whose condition even to-day is unspeakablyl
wretched, have worked faithfully and earnestly o raise the
fallen, to rescue the victims of priestly tyranny, to succor
the distressed, and above all to save the children, the inno- 
cent suferers for the sins of others. It would be asserting



<pb n="309"/>
UTAH: '87o0-zS88.             309
too much to say that they have accomplished-l lthey hoped
to, but they have done a great work.
The Mormon leaders proclaim to the world that the
Gentiles in the Territory are " carpet-baggrs," " adven-
turers," and "broken-down political hacks," whose only
object i to drive out the Saints and seize their homes.
Thmsenseless cry is sometimes taken up by the Eastern
press, and I have seen similar charges in the columns of
the leading papers of the United States within the past
four years. 
Let the fats speak for themselves.  These Gentiles,
who constitute a little more than one tenth of the popula-
tion, own mines which produce six millions annually, and
mills-dtd smelters aggregating in value many hundred
thousds' of 'dollars. Only one of the nine banking-
houses In the Territory is in Mormon hands ; all the others
are owned by Gentiles. Many of the most elegant private
residences in Salt Lake belong to Gentiles, from whom
more than one fourth of the revenue of the city is derived.
The Gentiles have built and endowed three hospitals, %he
only ones in the Territory. They own many substantial
church and school buildings, and conduct the only schools
in  hich free tuition can be obtained.
There are hundreds of Gentile merchants in Utah who
have invested large sums in their business, and the Gen-
tile lawyers and physicians of Salt Lake are gentlemen
who would 'rnk high in their respective professions in any
city in the world.
I subjoin here a brief sketch of the different non-Mor-
mon religious bodies in Utah, and of the work accom-
plished by them within the past ten years. I have-taken
the utmost pains to procure a careful and trustworthy ac-
count of the risk and progress of this work, and I com-
mend the following pages to all who have been accustomed



<pb n="310"/>
3s0                APPENDIX.
to regand ie Gethe population of Utah as
chiefly of adventurers. 
CONOGRATIONAL CHURCH, SALT LAKE CIY. 
This Is the youngest, and yet, in one sense, the o
church in the city. In its present.form it Ws orgaa
in May, 1874, and yet it claims conection with a wo
that was started nine years before this, and an orgenizr&,
tion that antedates all the churches of Utah.     .
In January, 186, the Rev. Norman McLeed came to 
this city by the invitation of seveal-promiaentGentiles  
and the Young Men's Litera  Association. He labomed
under the auspices of the American Home Missionry So .
ciety, and at lirst met with great success. A soiety was
organized, with such men for trustees as Major C. H. 
Hempstead, Chief Justice John Titus, General P. E. Con. '
nor, and others. 
He organized his society:and Sunday-school in the build.
ing known as Daft'a Hall, on Main Street, provided for
him by the Young Men's Literary Assoiation.
A lot was secured and a chapel built known as ndepen-
dence Hall. This was the first rallying-point of theCGen. 
tiles in Utah.
In the spring of z866 Mr. McLeod went East to se- 
cure funds for the erection of a larger chapel. During m
his absence his Sunday-school superintendent, Dr. J. K. 
Robinson, was assassinated as described in this book, and
Mr. McLeod was warned not to return. So the work was  -"
suspended for several years. Independence Hall was used 
in the mean time, first by the Episcopalians and then by
the Methodists.                                     I
In May, i872, Mr. McLeod returned, and began the 
work anew, but the old hostility manifesting itself, he re. 



<pb n="311"/>
UTAH: i870o-881.     ,        311
mained but a year, and the work was again suspended for
six months.
On Christmas, 1873, the Rev. Walter M. Barrows arrived
from the East, having been sent here by the American
Home Missionary Society. He preached the first sermon
in Indepience Hall January l8th, 1874.   Beginning
with only fwar or five families, he was yet able, on the
23d of May of the same year, to organize a church of
twenty-four members.
This is now one of the strongest societies in the city.
The church owns a large and valuable lot on Third South
Street, and on the rear of this lot is .a comfortable hapel
in which they worship at presnt. If the society oontin-
ues to grow as rapidly as it has during the past few
*months, a new church building will be a necessity.
SALT LAKE ACADEMY.
Mr. Barrows early became impressed with the fact that
mission work in Utah resembled that in foreign lands, and
that the same reasons which influence the missionaries
in Japan and India to start day-schools in connection
with their church work would apply with equal force to
Utah. So in the winter of 1878 he went East for the
purpose of securing assistance to inaugurate educational
work.
As the result of that visit, the Salt Lake Ac4demy wai
established, being incorporated under the laws of Utah
with a self-perpetuating board of trustees.
This unsectarian academy, the only institution of the
kind in the Territory that is free from all ecclesiastical
control, opened its dqors September 9th, x878. Pr6fessor
E. Benner, of Lowell, Mass., was secured for principal,
and he has already exhibited rare qualifications for the



<pb n="312"/>
33                 APPE NDIX. 
position. He is assisted by an able corps of teachev^
the institution is in a very flourishing condition. 
THE NEW WEST EDUCATION COMMISSION,
Ontpurpose in founding the. Salt Lake Academy wt
r rise up teachers for the rest of the Territory, but thiC
'quires time. How can the present need be met ? An
ganization has been formed in Chicago for this pu'
It is called the New West Educational Committee.
Rev. Dr. Noble is president; E. W. Blatchford, E
is secretary; Col. C. G. Hammond, treasurer. 
The object of the commission, as defined in the con
tutidn, is,
"The promotion of Christian civilization in Utah ai
adjacent States and Territories, by the education of chi
dren and youth under Christian teachers, and also by 
use of such kindred agencies as may at any time be deeme
desirable." 
Under tih  auspices of -the commission flourishing 
chools ehave already been established at Park City and
We*tJordan, and others are about to be opened at looper-
ville, KayiliHe, and  jaceut towns.
THE CATHOLIC CHURCH.
The history of the Catholic Church in Utah commences 
with the year 1866, when Rev. E. Kelly was appointed 
pastor by Right Rev. Bishop O'Connel, of Marysville, 
Cal.
Inthe beginninig of 187i the Most. Rev. J. S. Alemany, 
Archbishop of San Francisco, Cal., appointed Rev. Father 
P. Walsh pastor of the Territory. Rev. Father Walsh, 
immediately after his appointment, opened a subscription i



<pb n="313"/>
UTAH: 1870-188I.              313
list to raise funds to build a church on the lot purchised by
Rev. E. Kelly in i866. The present handsome-tnd com-
modious brick structure that stands on Second East Street
affords ample testimony of his labors, and of the geners-
ity of the people of Salt Lakeand of the whole Territory.
Rev. Father Walsh remained in charge till 1873, when
he wab'succeeded by Very-Rev. Fither L. Scanlan, who is
the present incumbent.
Father Scanlah has, through persistent zeal and hard
labor, succeeded in the past seven 'years in erecting two
churches and three school tmiidings, td 'estblishing two
hospitals, of each of which we appeid a brief story.
These are St. Joseph's'Chufch, in Ogden; St. John's
Church, School, and Hospital, in Silver Reef; St. Mary's
Academy, in Salt Lake City; the Academy of the Sacred
Heart, in' Ogdea' St. Mary' School, in Silver Reef, and
the Hospital of the Holy Cross, in Salt Lake. The schools
anid' hpitals are chiefly under the direction of Sisters of
various orders; and the efforts of the early Catholic priests
in the country were so highly appreciated that Gentiles of
'all religious denominations'and of no denomination united
in giving them pecuniary aid toward erecting the buildings
for their churches, schools, and hospitals. Of the latter
an 'adifional word will be of interest.
Thie Hospital of the Holy Cross, Salt Lake, was opened
Septibier 26th, 1876, and is conducted by the Sisters of
the Hjy Cross. Three physicians visit there regularly.
During the four years of its existence ninetewe  hundred
patients iafe been cared for. Considering the many suc-
cessftl surgical operations performed in this hospital, it is
an incalculable benefit to the community at large.
' Ater the etection of the Catholic Church in Silver Reef,
the citizens aid miners held a mass meeting, and decided
upon furnishing Father Scanlan with pecuniary means, by



<pb n="314"/>
314                A PPENDIX.
voluntry oentributions, for the erection of a hospitali
mwold W-k charge of the same. To this proposit
asea b. and commenced to build in April, £879. ,
buiowg was nearly completed in June, but was used
asylum for those who were left houseless by the 
bre. 
The Sisters of the Holy Cross, five in number, 1
charge of it August ist, 1879.
There are thiry-nine Sisters in the Territory,
priests, and over a thousand communicants. Archbi
Alemany,*of Caliiforia, ba piscwpal .charge of the 
tory, and he has appointed Fater Scanlan as his re
sentative, and endowed him with the power and title of
vicar-general.
THE HEBREW CONGREGATION IN UTAH.
Samuel Kahn, Esq., of Salt Lake City, president of thl
congregation, which numbers one hundred and fifty souls.
The Hebrew citizens of Utah are generally.respected for
.their intqgrity. They are friends of law and order, and
.ae always ready to ssist,- both with money and personal
eit, in every good work.. They have two benevolent
societies, which during the past year have disbursed.over
twenty-three hundred dollars to the poor.. They are
among the most liberal supporters of our schools, and ae'
about erecting a school building of their own, in which both
English and Hebrew will be taught. 
Utah.is the only spot known on earth where the Hebrew 
is termed a " Gentile."  Our Hebrew fellow-citizens were .i
among the earliest non-Mormon settlers, and in the dark *
days previous to 1870 were among the foremost of the
trusty few on whom the representatives of the Government 
could rely for aid. 



<pb n="315"/>
UTAH: x187o-88.           '   3S
THE PRESBVTUIAN WORK.
The first poit occupied by the Presbyterian .Chwchn
Utah was Corinne, a Gentile town on the Central Pacific
Railroad.
A churcd was rogmised here in tzSo. It is supplied at
preset by Rev. S. L. Gillespie, of Brigham City.
The first missiomary effort in $tak Lake on the part of
the Presbyteriaa.Chrch was made r Aev. J. Welch, who
commenced his labors in October, x871.  A church of
twelve member was organized the fWlowig, Noveeber.
In 1873 a lot was purchased, containinga houseitable
for a parsonage, and in 1874 the church building was com-
pleted. The entire cost of house and lot was about $30,-
ooo, which, with the school building erected in. 1877 on
the same lot, makes a valuable property.
In the 4sping of 1875 the Salt Lake Collegiate Institute
was   gaoixed, with Piofessor J. M. Coyner, of Indiana,
as puiacipl.  This school now occupies a neat and well-
arranged building, with accommodations for i6o pupils.
It has three departments-primary, intermediate, and
academic-presided over by competent teachers. In ex-
celiene and efficiency this school is not surpassed by any
schoo of £ similar character in the States.
Arw :tAa   half of the pupils receive their tuitionfrsc,
either in whole or in part The importance of this stater
meat wll be understood when it is rememberd that the
Mormon population of Utah have /free schools.
Qbide of Salt Lake, Presbyterian missionaries are occu-
pyiag4wxyv point where they can gain a foothold. They
have tea congregations in the Territory, nine church build-
ings aodtchapels, and thirteen schools in successful opera-
tion, with an attendance of eight hundred and seventy-five
pupils.



<pb n="316"/>
3r6                APPENDIX.
They have eight ministers and eighten teachers
ployed, and they expect to increase this number during
preit year, and to open eight more schools fthlJ
pterttyeai. 
Their stations at present stretch along a line
from the Idaho boundary to the southern border of
County-a distance of three hundred miles-nd their
rangements are completed for establishing mission s
all the way to.St. George, the southern capital of the 
ritory.
It is only necessary to add, in conclusion, the words
one of the chief promoters of this work:
" We have come to Utah to stay." 
METHODISM IN UTAH.
The missionary work of the Methodist Episcopal Churche
in Utah was begun by Rev. G. M. Pierce, who, under apif
pointment of Bishop Ames, commenced religious services
in Salt Lake in i870, and opened a school In thl.same
year, knoWn as'the Rocky Mountain Seminary.
At the present time the Salt Lake Methodists have a
church building worth about $55,ooo. This building also 
contains the school-rooms and classrooms of the Rocky 
Mountain Seminary, which for several years had ah at-
tendance of nearly two hundrdd pupils under'the care of ,
an efficient corps of teachers. In r879 this school was temT-
porarily closed, but it has since been reopened. 
The total number of Methodist day-schools in Utah is
five. These schools have an attendance of five hundred 
and eighteen pupils, and employ ten teachers. There are
six church buildings owned by the Utah Methodists out- '
side of Salt Lake. The aggregate value of these buildings 
is $25,000. They own also three parsonages valued at



<pb n="317"/>
UTAH: z87F.o188.              317
$3500o  TMr.are seven Methodist preachers in the Terri-
tory, and two hundred and ten church members, Them
are twelve Methodist Sunday-schools in Utah, with an ag-
gregate attendance of nine hundred and thirty-four schol-
ars, and eighty-two officers and teachers. The Methodists '
also susain a monthly paper, the Rocky Mountain Chris-
iian Advocate.
The Methodists, being among the pioneers of religious
and educational work in Utah, met with much opposition
and had many difficulties to overcome. They have ex-
pended much money and more labor in thef' elorts to ben-
efit the people of the Territory, but they beginaleady to
reap the fruit of their toil, and they believe tat much of
the good -seed sown, like "' bread thatgrows in. the winter
night," will sprirg up in after years .ma g spots that
now peem as barren as the rocky peakstbat-wall in our
valHes, . 
Fair as the garden of the Lord."
THE PROTESTANT EPISCOPAL CHURCH IN UTAH.
in April, 1867, Rev. Bishop Tuttle, being in charge of a
diocese which included Utah, sent two clergymen, Rev. T.
W. Haskins and Rev. G. W. Foote, to. Salt Lake to estab-
lish a mission there. They arrived the following May, and
opened services at once. Independence Hall was secured
for their use, and within two years and a half they bap-
tized one hundied persons and admitted ninety communi-
cants, many of whom were of Mormon antecedents. 
St. Mark's Grammar School, the first Gentile school in
Utah, was opened in July, 1867; with-only siteen pupils,
but the number soon increased to one hundred and forty.
In 1871 they erected a substantial church edifice, at a cost
of abou t45,ooo. Churches were also built at Logan and



<pb n="318"/>
3I8                  APPEVNDIX.
Ogden, and sehools establihed at these places, and 
Plai City.                                         '
I ,alt: Lake a school building was erected capable
accommodating over four hundred scholars. 
Rigft Rev. D. Tuttle, bishop of the diocese, resides
Sat Lake. There are, besides, five clergymen emp
in the Territory. 
The statistics of the Church in Utah for the present
are as follows:
Communicants in the Territory......... 3oo
Salt Lake Sunday-school.
Scholars........................... 415
Teachers .............................  29
Ogden Sunday-school.
Scholars. .........        .........   140 ''
Teachers ..............  ............. 
Logan Sunday-school.
Scholari ..............................  65
Teachers .............................  5
Plain City Sunday-schooL 
Schola.....ars ...........................  3-
Teachers........................  ...   4
St. Mark's Grammar School.
Scholars..............................  46
Teachers ............................ 23      I
Ogden Day-school.
Scholars.............................. 125
Teachers.................a...........   2
Logan Day-school.
Scholars .............................  65
Teacher........;    ....................  i



<pb n="319"/>
UTAH': 187o-188.              319
Plain City Day-school
Scholar........................... ..  52
Temac er..............................  I
In all the above schools pupils unable to pay the required
rates receive free htioS. St Mark's Grammar School
was the first school in-Utah to offer the benefits of educa-
tion without money and without price.
ST. MARK'S HOSPITAL, SALT LAKE.
This hospital, established in 1872 under the auspices of
the Protestant EpisoopalChurch, was the first hospital ever
openedin Utah. During the eight years of its existence it
has been the means of an incalculable amount of good.
An efficient corps of nurses is employed, and physicians
and surgeons of superior qualifications attend the
patents.
By mutual agreement, all miners in the Territory who
wish to avail themselves of the benefits of St. Mark's Hos-
pital in case of sickness or accident subscribe and pay into
the hands of the treasurer one dollar per month. This
montdly payment entitles them to board, care, medical at-
tendance, and surgical treatment when needed.
Whenwe take into consideration the fact that Utah Mor-
monism has aways been hostile to educatin, and that the
Territory n aks -  wisuios whatever for free schools,
the work now beingdoe by the twenty-eight schools estab-
lished and conducted by Gentiles becomes specially. im-
portant. And when we remember that Utah knows noth-
ing of public charities, and that those who govern the Ter-
ritory are interested in nothing that relates to the public
good, we are prepared to appreciate the hospitals which
owe their existence to Gentiles.



<pb n="320"/>
320                APPENDIX.
Previous to the entrance of these "adventurers" into
the Teritory, the poor were left to suffer unrelieved or
pine in unvisited and untended sickness, unless. helped by
neighbors, who often had little enough to give; but now,
inm adition to every other form of good works, the various
non-Mormon religious bodies in Utah sustain benevol
societies whose work is to feed the hungry, clothe 1tM
naked, and visit and help-the sick. 
It is to these agencies mainly that Utah must owe her
regeneration. The Gentile residents have " besieged with
unavailing prayers" the law-makers of the nation, lo I
these many years  They have exhausted every form of ap-
peal to the Government and people of the great country
whose citizens they are, but help does not come from with-
out.              . 
The Mormon problem is still unsolved; the Mormnn
priesthood still rules.
A former historian of the Territory, writing in 187t1
said:
" The opportune death ofBrigham Young would simplify
qattems somewhat.'
In 187 7. Brighap Young died in.is bed, thereby cheating
the gallows, as many of his associates in crime have done i
but his successors yet rule the people with a rod of iroaw
Every year witnesses a large Mormon immigration, chiefly
from Europe, and each immigration is an accession to the
mass of ignorance and fanaticism which is so dangerous a
power in the hands of unscrupulous men, such as the pres.
ent Mormon leaders. -
'tt



<pb n="321"/>
UTAH TO-DAY.
THE gravest problem presented to the American states-
man of to-day is that which is found in the attitude of
Mormon Theocracy towards our government. There are
perhaps two hundred thousand Mormons in Utah and the
adjoining States and Territories-that is to say, two hun-
dred thousand of the inhabitants of our common country
who are bound by oaths which make them at once the
slaves of their spiritual leaders, and the sworn enemies of
the nation within whose borders they dwell.
Salt Lake City, the capital of Utah, is the centre from
which emanates the power that controls the one hundred
and thirty thousand Mormons in this Territory, and the
seventy thousand Mormons in Idaho, Wyoming, Arizona,
Colorado, and Nevada. When the President of the Church
speaks, he is obeyed as implicity by his subjects outside of
Utah as by those who dwell in sight of the Temple. The
present head of the Mormon Church is John Taylor, an
Englishman,. who on the death of Brigham Young was
elevated to that position by the foreign-born Saints, who
greatly outnumber the Americans.* Taylor has a profound
contempt for republican institutions, but, like his prede-
cessor, he knows how to make them subservient to the in-
terests of the Church. Thus the ballot, which was little
valued before the advent of the Gentiles in the Prophet's
* This remark applies to adult Mormons. Thechildren of foreigners
born in Utah give the native-born population a preponderance in the
census tables.



<pb n="322"/>
322                APPENDIX.
dominions, is now prized as the bulwark of priestly power
in Utah, and as a means by which the adjoining Territo.
ries are to be brought under Mormon rule.
In Utah the law confers the right of suffrage on men,
above twenty-one years of age who are either native born
or naturalized, and who are also tax-payers. Women en-
joy the right of suffrage without these qualifications.
-Alien women who have been less than a month in the
Territory may and:do vote, if married (polygamously or
otherwise) to a citizen:; and while the law requires that a
single woman shall be over twenty-one years of age in
order to be a legal voter; practically this qualification is:
not insisted upon when she votes for the Church candi-
date. As the' population of Utah is constituted at present,
the Mormons, who vote as one man under the direction of
the authorities of the Church, can return a majority of tei
to one' over 'the Gentiles. In nearly three-fourths of the
precincts- in the Territory, not a single Gentile vote was'
returned at the last election, and as the Saints do. the
counting,'and eount as well as vote in obedience to
*'"iunel,?' the" heaviest Gentile immigration that can
reasonably be 'expected will not affect the election returns
Much for ten years to come.
As a matter of course, with the ballot controlled and
directed by the President of the Church, the same individ- 
uals exercise both spiritual and temporal power.  All 
Territorial offices are htied by men who hold official posi-
tions in the' Church. But this fact does not begin to ex-:
press the measure of temporal power wielded by the spirit-
ual masters of the people. In order that the domination
of the Church -may be complete the whole Territory is
divided into municipalities. Nearly.every Mormon settle-. 
ment is a " city," and the authorities of these cities (sonme
of which, with a population of a few hundred, have a chart



<pb n="323"/>
UTZAH . O-DA Y.              323
ter 'overin- thirty-six square. miles), are invested with
powers only-alittle less absolute than those -f the Auto-
crat of Rpssia. It is needless to add that every city offi-
cial, from :he Mayor down, is likewise a member of the
Mormop priesthood.:
Outside of.. Utah. the President of the Mormon Church
holds the balance of power in those Territories in which
neither political party has a heavy majority. In Idaho the
Mor.rmon are already strong enoungh to control the Legis-
lature. In proof of this assertion itis.only necessary to
call attention to the recent action of that boy- in .tabling
the portion of the Governor's message which relates to
polygamy. -Mormon emigration to Arizona is continued
year by year, and in:.a little while President Taylor will be
able. t-i4kate the :course. of: that Territory in relation to
Mormoninetitutios. In. Colorado. and Nevada the suc-
.ess afthe system is not marked- as yet, but. the trusted
adherets of the Church are quietly colonizing in both these
States, that they ma be: on hand when either political
party shall make a bid for the Mormon vote.
It is a well known fact that the laws of the United States
are not, and never have been, enforced in Utah. This
fact is not a reflection upon the officers of the government,
who are doing their bestin.the difficult position in which
they ae placed. The remedy for the anomalous state of
affairs in Utah is not in their hands.
Let it be remembered that;when a ciminal is arraigned
before the court for asoffence which is the direct outcome
of the Mormon creed,. nine.teths of the people of the Ter-
ritory are pledged to defeat the ends of justice. When the
Governor performs his sworn. duty, be can: only count on
the support of one-tenth of. the population. For eight
years past Utah has been represented in Congress by a
polygamist who is shown by the records of the court to be



<pb n="324"/>
3 4                APPENDIX.
an unnaturalized foreigner. The present Governor of
Territory refused this man a certificate of election- to :
Forty-seventh Congress, holding that the votes cast for'
were thrown away because he was not a citizen of
United States, and that, as he was a polygamist, his
abilities could not be removed before the time sho
arrive for taking his seat. 
This act, performed by the Governor as a duty which 
oath of office made incumbent upon him, has arrayed
entire Mormon Church against him. 
Since 1858, when Brigham Young was superseded
Governor of the Territory by a Gentile, no Federal offic
has ever been warmly welcomed by the saints, and th
various governors, in particular, have been the objects 
a bitter animosity on the part of the Mormon leaders. 
former times these unwelcome officials were driven
of the Territory by the Danites,* but for ten years pa
they have suffered no annoyance beyond newspaper abuse
and covert threats of personal violence. It is hoped there-'
fore by the friends of Governor: Murray that his straight-
forward performance of official duty will not be followed
by serious consequences.
The monstrous doctrine of Blood Atonement (the offering.
of human sacrifices) is as much an integral part of the;
Mormon system to-day as it ever was, though masked and 
modified in its practical application through fear of the
United States laws; and Polygamy, the curse and blight'!
of the homes of Utah, instead of being on the decline, as
some of our astute statesmen suppose, is entrenching itself 
more firmly in Utah itself and spreading into adjoining
States and Territories. More  olygamous marriages were 
contracted during i88o than during any year since thoi 
The sworn band of " Destroying Angels," who perform the ex- 
treme commands of the Church authorities. 



<pb n="325"/>
UTAH TO-DA.Y.                325
settlnment of the Territory. If the vigorous treatment of
the Mormon problem, which President Garfield has out-
lined in his message, could become an accomplished fact,
there might soon be a change for the better in Utah, but,
judging the future by the past, we have little hope that'
Congress will do anything until compelled by the pres-
sure of public sentiment.
Visitors from abroad often ask, " What would be the
effect of enforcing the laws of the United States in Utah ?"
If polygamists were disfranchised, and the Territorial
Legislature superseded by a Legislative Council composed
of law-abiding citizens, there would be loud threats of
armed resistance, but in the opinion of the Gentile resi-
dents these threats would not be carried out. Mayor Lit-
tle, of Salt Lake, said to a reporter in the East only a few
weeks ago: "We number two hundred thousand, and if
the authorities at Washington are wise, they will not inter-
fere with us." The present writer has heard John Taylor
say, when addressing an audience of six thousand people:
"Let the government dare to lay so much as a finger upon
us, and we will soon show the people of the United States
what we can do."
But persons who indulge in this sort of bravado are not
usually made of such stuff as would fit them for leaders in
an armed conflict, and their threats alarm none but the
most timid. It is true that Taylor has neither the caution
nor the foresight of his predecessor, and if left to himself
he might rouse his ignorant followers to a pitch of fanati-
cal fury which he could neither direct nor control; but he
has advisers who are far too wise to risk the steadily in-
creasing political power of the Mormon Church by per-
mitting an outbreak of any sort. These men will not
counsel war until the Mormons believe themselves strong
enough to dictate terms of peace.



<pb n="326"/>
326.             A: APNIX.
'e' ts': hpe" that enlightened statesmanship will
the Mormon problem before that day arrives. 
It is the belief of those best qualified to judge of the situJ-
ation in Utah that if olygamiss were disfranchised and
made ineligible to office, the Mormons would shortly.rei;
ceitea" revelation" directing'them either togive up poiyg6;
amy or to seek " fresh fields and pastures new," outside b
the' boundaries of the United States. In any event, the
disfranchisement of polygamists would break down the-
political power of the Mdomon priesthdod, and .pave the -
way for the Congress o. the United States to "secure a
republican form of government"' in a Unite4 fStates Ter;'
ritory in which the will' of ohe man has' been the suprtehin 
law for more than a quarter of a' century.     .
It needs only the assurance that the laws of the United.
States wil be enforced in Utah and the common rights of'
American citizens guaranteed to all'residents, to bring 'tO 
the Territory that class of immigrants who must be de ..|
pended'upon for the deVelopment of the mineral wealth of
Utah. Tis weafth: i beyond computation, but while the
ten"prl'" pjwer ;of'the Mbrmbn priesbhood Is supreme,'
capital will not seek investments in it' Once let it be
kfiiwn thati thTeMriory is a ward of Congress in 'fact as
well' as In' namhe,' nd that the 'President of the Mormow  3
Church no longer holds the reins of temporal' power, and 
Utah, with'her unequaled natural advantages, will invite 
immigration and capital frbm all parts -of the Union, ahd 
in another decade will be readj to take her place among
the most enlightened and prosperous of the Pacific States.
''
..       .. :;'..



<pb n="327"/>
NOTES OF REFERENCE.
NOTE A (PAGE S8).
THE following extract is made, by. permission, from
the Salt Lake Tribune of October 2nt, 1879. The writer,
J. R. McBride, Esq., a member of the Salt Lake bar, is
well known to our citizens as one of the oldest pioneers of
the coast, and his statements can: be relied upon as correct
in every particular:
"In the face of undeniable facts to the contrary, the
priesthood ot the Saints prate of having made a garden in
the Wfderness, built a commonwealth in the Great Ameri-
can Desert, and made it blossom as the rose; of having
subdued the wilds of the savage to the use of man, built
towns and cities, tabernacles and school-houses, railroads
and telegraphs, and so on ad nauseam.
"Whenever these untruthful boasts are exposed, the
priesthood fall back on the statement of some Eastern
editot who has been duped by them into crediting the
Mortbns with Utah's progress, and again'quote. the old
lie'strited by themselves to confute the well-known facts.
'WThere are many Mormons who actually believe that
this country was first discovered by the Mormon people.
Brtgtian once, on the witness-stand, in a noted cause
pending in the courts, denied that the owners of lots in
Salt Like derived title from the United States, and boldly
asserted' that he claimed the Emporium Corner 'by right
of discover.'
"To the facts. The valley of Great Salt Lake was as



<pb n="328"/>
328                APPENDIX.
well known to travelers in the Far West-years before
Mormon chief squatted here to pass the winter of I847,
fore resuming the journey to California-as the valley
the Sacramento, or that of the Willamette. It was
desert,' but a beautiful, grass-covered meadow, waiti
to be appropriated. Its isolation was its protection, 
its 'sage-brush soil' or its 'untamed savages.' The la
of subduing it then was nothing comparatively. 
"The writer was here before the Mormon settlemen
was made, and knows that the pretense of reclaimi
'alkali soil' and subduing the Indians is utterly ground
less. From Soda Springs to the head-waters of Salt
Valley to the south, there were not a hundred reside
Indians. The Utes lived to the south and the Bannoc
to the north, and the settlers had nothing to do but to enter
into and possess the land, and work it to secure a fruit
result. One might as well talk of subduing or reclaimi
the prairie soil of Illinois or Iowa as of 'subduing' or
' reclaiming' the lands of Utah.
"There were stretches of miles upon 'miles of meadow
lands, with grass mid-sides to a horse, where even irriga-
tion was not required, when the Saints came into the val-
ley. All that was needed was ordinary industry.
" I assert that the lands were, in the early settlement of 
Utah, more eisily brought to bear fruitful returnsthan the 
ordinary wild lands of any of the Western States. All this i
talk and sentiment about the hardships of pioneering in
Utah are pure fustian.
"Those who crossed the plains when the writer did, an-
terior to the occupation of Utah, know that the real diffi- 
culties and dangers of that long journey were after we had
passed Utah; the deserts of Nevada, the: Snake Plains, 
the alkali water, the alert and dangerous Indians were all
to the west. . . They 'made the roads' forsooth ! 



<pb n="329"/>
NOTES OF REFERENCE.              329
Not less than 15,ooo people and 3ooo wagons had passed
through Utah to the West before a Mormon ever set foot
in Salt Lake Valley.
"The road from Fort Bridger to this valley in 1847 was
as plain as the road from Salt Lake City to Sandy is to-
day. This I know, for I had traveled it prior to that time.
General John Bidwell, now of Chico, California, and
Captain Bartlett, of Jackson County, Missouri, went to
California with an ox-train in 184I. Lansford W. Hastings
and A. L.. Lovejoy, both yet living, led a large party of
wagon emigrants through to the Pacific Coast in 1842. In
1843 the regular annual overland emigration to Oregon
and California began, and between that date and the time
of the Mormon arrival in the valley in 1847, thousands had
passed through Utah to, the West; while the Saints are
now boasting that 'these valleys of the mountains' were
discovered by the Lord to the Prophet Brigham, who then
by inspiration opened a ' road to Utah,' though that road
had been regularly traveled for years . . .
"TheSaints neither discovered the country, nor built the
roads, nor subdued the Indians: there was no such work
to be done. The fact was, they entered into a beautiful, un-
inhabited, inviting, and fertile valley. They were poor
and isolated, and endured the ordinary hardships of their
poverty and isolation. In that respect their condition and
surroundings were far better than those of the early pio-
neers of the Mississippi Valley. And when we consider
the advantages they have enjoyed, and their want of enter-
prise and energy, until the stream of progress from Gentile
sources has forced them into a sort of unenviable notoriety
-unenviable because of their opposition to the develop-
ment of the Territory-the reactionary tendency and un-
American character of their institutions becomes mani-
fest." . . .



<pb n="330"/>
330            .   APPENDIX.
NOT  B (PAGE 38).
I have heard men of intelligence, who in the early 
of thiisTerritory were leading Mormons, but who  -
since renounced that faith, attempt to explain Brig
Young's power over the people in the same way that 
old Naavoo Mormons accounted for Joseph Smith's ih
ence-viz., by attributing extraordinary magnetic or 
meric gifts to him. 
My own observation inclines me to a different b
Brigham Young was a man- Utterly without heart or 
science, and 'being. possessed of an iron will and 
with an extraordinary degree of perseverance, it is
strange that he was able to make such use as he did of'
engine of superstition which he found ready to his hand,
that he succeeded in bringing the ignorant and' tinthi
among his followers to regard him as God's vicegerenti
It is a significant fact that the masses whothave ' Ne
faithful to the Mormon Prophet are, for the'emost part,' 
ignorant almost beyond belief, while the ranks of!th6 apos- 
tates from 'Mormonism are behig continiially recruited
firn the more intelligent and better educated classes. 'In-';
deed, it is safe to say that at the present time the only ii'
telligent and educated'men who are to be found withil fit
pale of the Mormon Church are those who are kept the'
by pecuniary considerations, or who are bound to tht
leaders by fellowship in crime.      .
NOTE C (PAGE 39).                - ,
I have in my possession the names of a numberof married 'l
women, some of whom were "sealed" to the Prophet JEdPj
seph in Nauvoo, and were, at his death, "sealed for time"' 
to Brigham Young, while others were taken from their hast



<pb n="331"/>
NOTES'OF ' EFPRENCE.              331
bands by!Brigham after Joseph's death. A regard forthe
feelings of innocent relatives, who are still living, alone in-
ducesme to withhold these names.          ...
I will give but one instance out of many that have .ome
to my knowledge, which may serve in some degree to esx
plain thebitterfeelings with which the Mormons in Illinois
were regarded by their Gentile neighbors.
A married woman, whom I wil call: Mrs. L.-, young,
beautiful, and of hitherto unblemished. reputation, fell a
victim to the arts of the Prophet Joseph, and was;induced
to be sealed to him as his plural wife.. Her husband being
a Gentile, it was important to 'keep the matter from his
knowledge,.ad' within a few months after Mrs., L'-'s
intimacy with the Prophet began, the husband died, as it
happened many men died in Nauvoo whose presence was
not desired by the Saints. When the Mornrons fled from
Nal4Uoorfrs, ,-.   found-. home in Iowa. She had one
cild ..a daugher, the :offspring . her "spiritual" mar-
riage. S e had, a large amount of property, which her de-
ceased busband had left her, and being besides, still young
and fair, her hand was sought by one who was not of her
faith, and who knew nothing of the dark page in her his-
try              .     .
A* ,te  a few months she married Mr. C -, and was in-
ducel4ithim to promise to give over following the fortunes
of h  aints.: They lived happily together for a.few years,
and two children were born to theim. Then Mrs. C--'s
brother..(who was a Mormon elder with seven wives)
paitlham a visit, and tried to induce them to emigrate to
Uta: Fe-il^ing in this, he talked with his sister alone, and
endAiyond fo exact a promise from her to leave her hus-
banLtatigariwith the Saintsat Zipn.
In this attempt he was also unsuccessful, and exasperated
by what he called her obstinacy, he told her she would



<pb n="332"/>
332                APPENDIX.
soon be glad to claim his protection and a home among
his people. After uttering this prophecy, he went directly
to her husband, and told him the whole shameful story of
her past life, asserting that the little daughter of whom she
was so fond was the child of the Prophet.
The result was exactly what he had intended. Mr.
C-    confronted his wife with the charge made by her
brother. She did not deny it, and a speedy divorce fol-
lowed. The discarded wife fled to Utah, glad to hide her
misery and shame among a people who called crime
" virtue."  She is living here to-day, a heart-broken, deso-
late woman, devoid even of the comfort of being able to
believe in the teachings that caused her downfall.
NOTE D (PAGE 62).
The family which figures here under the name of La
Tour I have known intimately for nine years, and from the
members .of it who never believed in Mormonism I have
obtained the facts of their history. I have, of course, made
changes in their story, and have blended with it some in-
cidents (of fact) from other lives.
To-day the grave covers Louise and her sorrows from
mortal eyes; but I knew her years ago, after she had made
her escape from Mormon despotism, and I promised my- 
self then that it should be my work to denounce those at
whose hands she had suffered such cruel wrongs.
In this-book I have told,only a small part of her story;
and in deference to those who complain that the tragic
character of my former history of life in Utah is unrelieved 
by a single gleam of light, I have tried to dwell most upon
the brighter days that followed her deliverance from the
hands of her enemies.



<pb n="333"/>
NOTES OF REFERENCE.               333
NOTE E (PAGE 64).
A brief description of the ceremonies of the Endowment
House may not be out of place here. Though these cere-
monies have been changed from time to time in many par-
ticulars, the oaths which the candidate is required to take
remain substantially the same.
The Endowment House in Salt Lake is a two-story adobe
building, presenting the, appearance of an ordinary dwell-
ing-house. It is situated in one corner of what is known
as the Temple Block, a large square surrounded by a wall
twelve feet high. This inclosure contains the Tabernacle,
a large wooden structure nearly the shape of a tortoise-
shell,-which rests upon a very substantial rock foundation.
East of the Tabernacle, and also within the walls, stands
the Temple, a magnificent granite building which, after
haling just above the ground for twenty years, is now
rapidy approaching completion.
Certain days of each week in the year are set apart by
the priesthood for what they term "giving Endowments."
On the morning of the appointed day, the candidates,
perhaps twenty in number, repair to the building already
described. After giving their names, ages, etc., to the
offilating clerk, the men and women are ushered into
separate dressing-rooms.
Here they are required to disrobe, and wash from head
to foot. Then the officiating priest or priestess anoints
every part of the candidate's body with oil, after which each
one puts on the garment of salvation-an article of ap-
parel made exactly like a child's night-drawers, cut in one
piece from the shoulder to the ankle.
This garment, once put on, can never be left off. When
the wearer changes it, one arm or leg must be changed at
a time.



<pb n="334"/>
334          . ,.  APENrDIX. 
Over this garment the women put on a white skirt, 
the men an ordinaryif  ' ' Thus attired, all the candid
are uiod- into Room No. 2, where they are seated, 
moe aO   e s.ide, the women on the other. They are 
told ,ythe officiating priest that if they are not:st
nmtgi to. go forward, they may stop where they are, am
return home without their .Endowments, hit tat if thrj
rejat anything relating t the ceremonies through which 
they have already jassad,. k. throats will be cut from
ear to ear 
They are next shered into Room No. 3, supposed to rep-
resent the Garden of Eden. In former days-the scenes 
enacted in this "garden" are said to have been disgrace- 
ful beyond description, but at the present time the candi. 
dates are merely treated to a crude theatrical representa- 
tion of the temptation and fall, after which each one isf
clothed with a robe consisting of a straight piece of linen. 
four yards long, gathered upon one shoulder and belted at 
the waist. Over this robe they tie a fig-leaf apron. They
also.. put on the Temple head.gear, that worn. by .the men
being similar to a baker's cap. The women put on a cap 
aorposed of a square of Swiss muslin, one comer of which
is so arranged as to form a veil.
All good Mormons are buried in their Endowment
robes, and the veil worn by the women covers their- faces
when-they are consigned to the grave. In the morning of
the resurrection this veil is to be lifted by the husband; 
otherwise no woman can see the face of the Almighty in 
the next world.
After being thus clothed; the candidates are driven out
of Eden into Room No. 4, called the World, where they
encounter many temptations, the chief of which is the false
gospel preached by Methodists, Baptists, etc. Finally St. 
James and St. John appear and proclaim the true gospel of 'i



<pb n="335"/>
NO T7S OF REFERENCE.               335
Mormonism, which they all embrace gladly; after this
they receive the first grip belonging to the secret signs of
the Church, and are ushered into Room No. 5. 
Here.the candidate raises his right hand in -such a  an-
ner as to form a square with his arm, and swears on .the
square to avenge the death of Joseph Smith on this nation,
and to teach this vengeance to his children and children's
children unto the fifth generation.. Ae then imprecates
upon himself the following curse:
"If ever I reveal the secrets of this Hous(, may my
tongue be torn out by the roots, and my heart and bowels
cut out while I am yet alive; and if I escape in this
world, may all these enalties overtake me in the morn-
ing of the Resurrection."
The candidates now pass into Room No. 6, where all
knede.in a circle and join hands. Kneeling thus, they take
another fearful oath of eternal enmity to the Government
andipeople of the United States. They also swear to obey
the rulers of the Church in all things without question.
After receiving a little more counsel concerning the duty of
taking vengeance into their own hands, they are thought
perfect enough to pass beyond the veil. This " veil" con-
sistf a white curtain stretched across the room. The
canitdate is directed to stand with the breast, limbs, and
ai.bderttouching this veil, while a person behind it who
*rprinztsJ-Deity passes his right hand through an opening
in the curtain and cuts the mystic signs in the sacred gar-
ment.       , :..
AsoM0Das the candidates receive these signs they pass
behind the veil into Room No. 7, which is the last oom to
be entered, except by those contemplating marriage.
Candidates for marriage are ushered into Room No. 8,
which i the sealing-room. Here husbands and wives who
have been married outside of Utah are instructed that their



<pb n="336"/>
336                 APPENDIX. 
Gentile marriage is null and void, and they are offered t]
privilege of being sealed to each other for time and eterni
This offer they may accept or decline.            -,
If they decline, they are free from each other, and t
wife may be sealed to some other man.
If they accept, they kneel at an altar, and an ordina
marriage ceremony is gone through with, concluding withl
a formula of blessing which seals them to each other for
eternity.                                          '
Candidates for plural marriage kneel at a similar altar, 
and the first wife, if obedient, kneels beside them and'
places the hand of the new bride in that of her husband.
Should the first wife prove rebellious, her presence at th&t
ceremony is dispensed with. The same service that unitei
a man to his first wife is used to " solemnize" a plural.i
marriage, but at its conclusion this blessing is pronotnce :
on the pair:
"Forasmuch as you have entered into the holy covenant
of celestial marriage, all manner of sins shall be forgiven
you, and you shall inherit eternal life."
*      *     *      * '    *     *      *   .'
The above infoimation with regard to the rites of the En-
dowment House I have obtained from a number of persons
at different times and places, and in all important partier- :
lars the witnesses agree perfectly. I have purposely omi:i'
ted the grips, signs, pass-words, etc., together with the '
"counsel" of the officiating priest.
The ceremonies are very tedious, lasting fully eight 
hours, and a complete description of them would fill a
volume.
NOTE F (PAGE 101).
In proof of the assertions made in this chapter, I subjoin,
a copy of a petition which I drew up, by request, in the w/am



<pb n="337"/>
NOTES OF REFERENCE.              .337
ter of 1872, when great fear was felt by the Gentiles and by
those who had left the Mormon Church that Brigham
Young would succeed in his schemes for getting Utah ad-
mitled into the Union (in which event -the petitioners
would have been deprived of the protection of Congress
and left wholly in the power of the Mormon priesthood).
This petition was signed by nearly five hundred women,
most of whom had been residents of the Territory for many
years. It is proper to add, also; that in 1872 there were
very few Gentile women in the Territory, and women who
had once been Mormons signed the petition. at great per-
sonal risk. Many women to whom the memorial was pre-
sented said,
"Every word in it is true, and we want to sign it, but ·
we dare not."
. To the Senate and Rejresentatives ofthe United States
rin Congress assembled:
"We your petitioners, residents of the Territory of Utah,
the mothers, sisters, and wives of her loyal citizens, appeal
to you, in the name of justice and humanity, not to with-
draw your protection from us. Our sole dependence is up-
on.you. Only the strong arm of the Federal Government
can secure to us, and to our husbands, brothers, and sons,
the eqjoyment of the rights guaranteed us by the Constitu-
tion of &r'country.
" Fr mote than twenty, years, Utah, though a Territory
of the United States, and as such nominally under the
jurisdiction of Congress, has been in reality governed al-
together by the Mormon priesthood. Let history tell the
nature of their rule !
" No more bloody despotism has disgraced the earth in
modern times. Brigham Young, in the self-appointed char-
acter of God's vicegerent, has held the lives, liberty, and



<pb n="338"/>
3z. .     '    : ;"- - APPENDIX.
property of the people in his hands. Disobedience to. 
has bee acounted: a crime not to. be atoned for ecep
bloods  : .
-' No*hing that the people possessed could be called 
wn. xoept by his will. Not only were they required
pay into the Church treasry one tenth of all their prop
but they were liable at any time to be ordered to give
their homes to the P*phet; and this order none d
disobeyr Many of: yr petitioners have been robbed
in yeans past. , Womea wAh  by the labor of their
hands. have earned the shlter of a rodfr themselves 
their little ons, have been  pri vedofthat shelter by Brig&
ham Young's commands. The bread has been taken fro
the little children's mouths to swell the revenues of the|
Church and enable its rulers to add house to house anl
field to field. 
-" But these 'robberies are a little thing compared wi"' A
other enormities perpetrated by the despotic rulers oi this
people in the nane of religiu. ; During al t he yes' that
their will -ha been law in Utah, no maa's life,.no woman's
hbnorwbas been sfe; if either stood in-their way. Never,
s*r-A  wt,-d.vM th 'histiryo-theirdark and bloody deeds
be-:fay: written, for the victim and witness of many a
tragedy are hidden together in the grave. 
" For twenty years none dared lift their voices in, onm:
plaint or condemnation; and now, when liberty of speh.;:
so long; denied; is vouchsafed,,it is fitting that wmni a
voice should be heard, for woman has been most cree
wronged.                            '      --  :,;^
"Will not the representatives of this great nation
to our appeal?                               .
""We adjure you, in the name of the mothers who -bi
-you, of the wives you love, of the sisters whose honri
dear to you, not to turn a deaf ear to the cry of those .



<pb n="339"/>
NOTES OF R£fERENCE.                339
ask protettio frm the tyranny of a system .tht, through-
out its.wbole existence, has sought only to crush and de-
grade woanhood.. Thousands of women in the Territory
of Utah are to-ay in a condition of abject slavery. MnMy.
of thein would proclaim their wrongs to the world if they
daed. 'W.e appeal to iyu not to take any step that will
cut odl aI hope of their deliverance.  .        .
" -' We know it has been urged that polygamr, the curse
and blight of thehomes of Utaih, is hasteig tol) death;and
that:even if thepeople do not agree-to relinqSibjt, it will
shortly fall befre an attack' of natural forea eqeequent
upon being brought. i contact with the Christidam 4iza.
tion'of the nineteenth entury; but ao the facts which are
constanty transpirig support this assertion.?
Duringthe past three nonths polygmuous marriages 
have rather increased than diminished. Since the first.of
Navu     : sco. o  of oupgt girls have been led up to the
EifumhentHiouse, and tealed to men'who had already
fron two to fivefiilie. ' : u. · 
"Is it .reasonable to stppose that a people who defy the
'law thus openly, while under. the direct supervision of
CBivess, will order their intetnal afairs more in harmony
#teh* e Constitution when'invested with the. prerogatives
;ota ot Government ? 
it'flthe iofitinuanceof polygamy is not the only ground
uponi 'lvitybur petitioners deprecate the admission of
Utah irit"l .vtiion. There are other crimes: and other
tyrannies *l*ilit most assuredly be perpetuated in such
an event.;-. . .            ,'              "  '
"The ComiBte.of our country guarantees to every
one of its lawIfIllng citizens the rights of life. liberty, and
the pursuit of happiness. The principleswhich gioern the
majority itAluOt  .ikethese rights dependent upon the
will of.glOi, e i eM thOhas alkeadybeen guilty of incredi-



<pb n="340"/>
340                APPENDIX.
ble abuse of power. The history of his reign (for it is
ing else) is written in characters of blood. Some of
petitioners have known what it is to incur his disple
and tremble for their lives; others have had their p'
erty torn from them, and their dearest interests ruthi
trampled upon by him. Will Congress consign them 
to the tender mercies of this man and his coadjutors ?  '
"A number of your petitioners have become residents'
Utah within two years past. Relying upon the protect.
of the Federil Government, we, with our families, ha:
sought homes here; but though we, our husbands, and 
sons, have been peaceably engaged about our private
ties, and have in no way interfered with the rights of t
earlier settlers, we have been regarded as unwelcome i
truders, and have been forced to live as though in aWi
enemy's country.               ' 
"We have been told repeatedly, through the columns odf
the Deseret Nei's (the official organ of the Mormon .
'Church), that in the event of Utah's becoming a State, if
we do not choose to 'be ruled by the majority, we can
leave-the railroad is open.
" We are duly sensible of the graciousness of this permis.
sion, but there are some obstacles in the way of our avail-
ing ourselves of it. Many of us have our all invested here,
and would be forced to leave empty-handed: Still, that ,
would be preferable to remaining here under the rule of.
those who have shown themselves incapable of either jus:-'
tice or mefcy, and determined to ignore every principle ;
which lies at the foundation of our republican institutions.
Our prayer to you, the representatives of a free people, is
that you will not take such action as will force upon us
either alternative."                                .
(Signed)      Mrs. WM. S. GODBE,
and four hundred and'seventy-three other signers. - 



<pb n="341"/>
NOTES OF REFERENCE.                341
* Read and referred to the Committee on Territories, and
ordered to be printed, with the names of the petitioners and
the accompanying letter:
"SALT LAKE, U. T., March 12, 187i.
".To Jon. S. Cofax, Vice-President of the United States,
and ex-officio President of She Senate
" SIR: We have this day forwarded to your care, per
Wells, Fargo and Co.s Express,'a petition to Congress,
strongly deprecating the admission of .Utah into the Union
at the present time. This petition is signed. by more tban
four hundred of the loyal women ofthe.-Territory.  A
large majority of the signers have been: rdeents 'of Utah
arid t *Isft  of the Mornwon Church for many years, and
ntfabbes if them .have a personi and .veryibier expe-
riedf of the practical' workings of polygamy. .&ey have
every'ilseon; to believe that their wrongsiould   inten-
sified- by the admission of Utah hnto the U  iS and the
consequent accession of power to the Mor  th   ood.
In the name of these women, who have beeh-o cruelly
wronged, we earnestly request you to lay this petition at
once before the honorable bodies to whom it is addressed.
"MRs. A. G. PADDOCK,
'. '      MRS. B. A. M. FROISErH,
"MRS. O. P. MILES, 
' -  MRS. H. W. LAWRENCE,      Com    e.
"MRs. J. B. KIMBALL,
"MRS. WM. S. GODBE,
NOTE G (PAGE 103).
The facility with which divorces have always been ob-
tained in Utah is a suggestive commentary upon the pe-
culiar marriage system of the Saints. Again and again



<pb n="342"/>
34i                 AiPPVDIX. '        .
parties have been sealed to each other '" for tima .
nityp,' id:; in less than six months divorced. by the.
power that sealed them. 
It ..as been well said by one of the elders of the RAo
gdaids'CihurM (a sect which, althoiuh it accepts the Boo
dof Mormon repudiates polygamy) ,.that .,multitudes.
women in Utah have been. divorced and remaried sky
many times that they scarcaly . ow t;hemselves by pame. 
It is a commn thing to. find.: women living, in plygam. y 
who have been divored three or feur times .fo-  ah many
different hubnds..'.   ' . 
An Englishwoman who, a ew. years ago, abandpfider 
husband and children for. the.purpose of gathpring wtlvthe 
Saints to Zion, has been divorcejl and rqmarie, five $ives .
since she came to Utah. The. presentl wi.ter  livd ;4 .
within htlf a block of a woman who;, after being  ivSed ,*
from five. husbands, is now. liying in polygaqmy .itb ,he
sixth; and one of our district judges reports the  eo.an 
elderly Saintes, living .near the place in mwhich.he holds
court, who has been divozced/fr4#^ aw .
.. :;.; r' ; . .  1 ;. OT E   (: -o   .-107)  .  :
The incident related happened in the family of a per-
sonal friend of the writer, and it is an example, by no
means unusual, of the manner in which the tithing has
always been collected, and the priesthood enriched at the
expense of the people. Whatever " the Lord" calls for
must be given up at once, and while Brigham Young lived,
he was, as Heber Kimball was accustomed to say in his
sermons, "the only Lord that this people had anything to
do iith," .          -                      -
But the:collecting of tithes to the extent of taking the
poor man's last cow was by no 'means the only plan re-



<pb n="343"/>
NOTES OF REFERENCE.               343
lied upon by the leaders of the people for 'fili  their
coffers. A friend of the writer, belonging to a respbtab e
and wiltlhj family in the Eastern States, ielates thi fbl-
lowing:
" In 81&  my father was induced by a Mormon mision-
a ''tol eirate to Nauvoo. He went in advance of ,thb
family; tking a large sum:of money with him. Soon after
ms arrival he wrote for us, stting that he had boughta
house and lot, and that we wou finad a good home awAit-
ing us. We started at once, but when we.were within a
few miles of -Nauvoo we were met by the -Miisionary re-
ferred to, who told us that father had died sudealy. .
" On reaching the city we were unable to learn anything
of the dtie or manner of his death. We never found out
where he was buried, or, indeed, whether he was buried
at-il ;- and from that dayto this we have never been able to
get any information about the house and lotthat he bought,
or ibout any Of the property that he left" .
NOTE I (PAGE 120). '
The present boundaries of the Territory of Utah differ
much from those of the "kingdom" which Brigham
Young set up in the Great Basin, after taking possession
of the same " in the name of the Lord."
lrWhen the Mormon pioneers entered Salt-Lake Valley, in
1* summer of 1847, the country belonged to Mqeico, but
hijarch, 1848, five months before the arrival of the emi-
Irat company for which they had prepared the way, it
wddi~ded to the United States by the treaty of Guadaloupe
:Suh a'small matteras this treaty was, however, of no
consequence to the Saints, to whom the lands of the Gen-
tiklesi adbeen given for an inheritince, and a year after-



<pb n="344"/>
344                APPENDIX.
ward (March i8th, 1849) they met in convention and 
ganized     .
"A free and independent government by the name ,
the State of Deseret." . 
I quote from their own words, as found in a copy of 
origihal document now before me. The boundaries of
State of Deseret, as set forth in this document, embra
the whole of the present State of California, together w
half a dozen other States and Territories.
Soon after the organization of this "free and indepen-
dent State," Brigham Young sent a delegate to Washing-
ton avowedly to open negotiations looking to the admis- 
sion of Deseret into the Union; but the tone he assuimed
was very like that of a foreign power demanding recogni-, .
tion.
The following year (September 9th, 185)- Congress, 
cruelly ignoring the great State of Deseret, organized the 
present Territory of Utah within much narrower limits,' 
reserving to itself the right to cut up said Territory when
it should be deemed expedient, and annex portions of it to
other States and Territories. This.high-handed proceed-
iag en the part of Congress was, however, toned down a
little by the appointment of Brigham Young as Governor-
an office which he announced that he should hold until the
Almighty ordered him to resign it; as, in fact, he did. 
Up to the day of the death of its " founder," the State  1
of Deseret existed de facto, with Brigham Young as Gov-
ernor, and the aforesaid State still exists in spite of the
Territorial organization.
Once in two years the Utah Legislature (composed of
thiroy.nine Mormon high priests, thirty-six of whom are at
preset  living in polygamy) convenes, and the Federal
Government pays the members their per diem and mileage.
-During the life-time of Brigham Young, he, in the charac-



<pb n="345"/>
NOTES OF REFERENCE.               345
ter of Governor of Deseret, convened them as a State Leg-
islature on the day succeeding the adjournment of the Ter-
ritorial Legislature, and the business of the State was then
and there transacted.
Since Brigham Young's death, John Taylor, who suc-
ceeds him as President of Church, inherits likewise the
office of Governor of Deseret-for Church and State are
here one and inseparable. Comment is unnecessary.
NOTE J (PAGE 160).
Those who have any curiosity to become acquainted
with the details of the hand-cart emigration to Utah in
1856 are referred to the tragic account given by Mr. John
Chislett, in Stenhouse's " Rocky Mountain Sainti."
Mr. Chislett was one of the captains of hundreds se-
lecId td take charge of the emigration across the plains,
and it was due in a great measure to his heroic exertions
that so many of the people lived to reach Utah.
Mr. Chislett, in common with hundreds who left England
with him, was at that time a sincere believer in the New
GosRel; but his experiences on the way to Zion and after
'his arrival in the Valleys of the Mountains, convinced him
that Mormonism had, to say the least, no claim to a di-
viie origin, and he severed his connection with the Church
at aPtnie when such a course involved much personal risk.
NOTE K (PAGE 176).
The sermons of Brigham Young and his two counsel-
ors, Grant and Kimball, as reported and published in the
Dest/reNews, the official organ of the Mormon Church,
furnish- abundant information as to the doctrine of blood-
atonement, and it is from these sources that I have col-
lated the following: 



<pb n="346"/>
34s6                APPENDIX.                      x
Blood-atoriemt, as reached by the Mormond
and ptctieM bytMhe people, means the offering of A
"    ~,mii   remision of sins. Brigham 'Yag
"There are certain sins which the- blood of Chrlsi
vn"twh away; but when a man's own blood is shed&
the 'moke thereof ascends as sweet incense to He
then are his sins remitted."                '
He likewise taught. the people, in his published "
mons, that to love their neighbor as themselves meant thl
they should be wiling to shed theii neighbor's blood, i
order that in the .xt .wodd ,he might be exalted 
the gqds.       ..                          .   . 
j. Grant, Brigham Young' s counselor, taught th
order to make the sacrifice of blood in a manner p j
t..Heaven, altars of unhewn stone should be er. ta]
and the. victim laid thereon, and his throat cut wJi
knife, and added,                           ..    . 
" I wish we were in asituation to obey-the 1^w.  9g'  di
in this thing without hidrce"e." ,     , .: ,, 
..,C sey aUied t ..the. 4,octrinef f, bld4-aonemet is the
-nc ipe," so alle, thta     Caurchas b   right superior
titightof, thcivil ,pvernment, to inflict ,te pen4ty.of
death ppon poffenders; and this idea obtained sqo ! -a hold '
in Utah that persons either in or out of theChurch who
were accused of ,nything which the Mormon cede pro-
nounced a crime, had no chance whatever to vindicate
themselves in a court of law, but were either shot down by 
Danites who lay in wait for them, or arrested, and killed
while in the hands of officers.
I will give a single Well-known instance, the sequel of
which I witnessed myself. 
A young man named Skeen was suspected of a disposi-
tion to apostatize. Thereupon he was accused of cattle-
stealing, and upon this accusation was arrested and held-in



<pb n="347"/>
NOTES OF REFERENCE.                 47
custody by the sheriff, who was also a Moron .high
priestb  *.                           -  i '   .. ' '..  * ;.;*.' . .
The 'ltrdof his coi-f. ment was a schooltde, in
which he was guarded by-Ricks the sheriff and ,:man
; named Chambet s   Aiter Skeen lay down to sleep RiPh
sited 4t Chambers;                              i.
:' Whatever you may see to-night, your business is to
Ckeep still..t
-Not long afterward, whea the sleeper's breathing
showed his slumber to be sound, Ricks placed his -gu to
the young man's breast and fired. The victim sprang -up,
ran to the door, fell, and in a few minutes expired. It was
afterward given out that he was-killed in attempting to es-
cape, but the testimony of Chtmbers, who was an eyeM-wt-
ness of the whole affair, was corroborated by that of several
other men who ran to the school-house when the shot war
fired, and who testified that the gun which inflicted.the
fatal wound had been held so close to Skeen's breast as to
set his clothing on fire.
Yet in the face of this positive testimony a Mormon jury
pronounced Ricks "not guilty," and his fellow'saints es-
corted him home with a band of music, flags flying, etc.-
a procession which I saw and of which everybody under-
sat0d the meaning.
'itlte proper to add that the witnesses-at Ricks' trial were
arwWho, after'the murder, left the Mormon- Church. No
ltdrmon could by any means be induced to testify against
. a'ibther Saint.
:      ·-     NOTE L (PAGE 176).
Out of a multitude of cases that might be adduced in
support of this statement, I will quote two of the most no-
torious i



<pb n="348"/>
3.18               APPENDIX.
Bill Hickman, the Danite, who according to his own,
confession committed nineteen murders, was a Mormon in
good standing throughout his career of crime, and was a
member of the Utah Legislature at a time when he was
killing men in obedience to " counsel" every few months.
John D. Lee, one of the principal actors in the butchery
of Mountain Meadows, was rewarded for his share in the
massacre by a seat in the Legislature, though at the time
he held several other offices of trust and profit; for a plu-
rality of offices is allowed in Utah as well as a plurality of
wives.
NOTE M (PAGE 17&). 
The occurrence here alluded to is a matter of history. 
In 1862 J. W. Dawson, of Indiana, was appointed Gov-
ernor of Utah.  He was unwelcome, as Federil officers
were apt to be.
Brigham Young caused some charge to be made against
him, and he was ordered to leave the Territory.
A number of young men who were charged with the
business of seeing that this order was carried out, gave the
Governor a setrere beating, but either because they mis-
understood their instructions, or because of an unwilling-
ness to shed blood, they allowed him to escape with his
life. Brigham believed with Napoleon that a blunder is
worse than a crime. He caused the arrest of the young
men, and the officers having them in charge, who could
not afford to misunderstand their instructions, coolly shot
them down.
The bodies of two of the young men-brothers- were left
at their father's door with the laconic order:
"Bury them."
Brigham Young took pains to be present at their funeral.
He commanded the mother not to shed a tear for her un-



<pb n="349"/>
NOTES OF REFERENCE.                349
worthy sons, and told the women present not to offer her
any sympathy; and so absolute was the power he exer-
cised that those whose hearts were full of pity for the be-
reaved mother turned away from her without a word.
NOTE N (PAGE 207).
I have given here the exact words of a woman whom I
number among my personal friends: a woman of fine
mind and noble presence, worthy, every way, of a better
fate. It.was her misfortune, when very young, to become
the wife of a man who was afterward a Mormon apostle.
When she had a family of little children, this man was
sealed to two girls on the same day. He afterward took
eight more women as his plural wives.
He is living to-day, and is one of the strongest advocates
of polygamy.
NOTE 0 (PAGE 213).
A number of years ago, when the Government was
making some effort to ferret out evidence concerning a few
of the more' atrocious crimes committed in Utah by the
Mormon priesthood, a detective placed in my hands the
following statement:
" In the year I86-., a person who had recently come to
Utah bought a house and lot in the i9th Ward, Salt Lake
City. Soon after making the purchase, and while engaged
in uprooting some of the trees in the orchard and setting
out others, he. broke into a pit containing the remains of
seven human beings-a man, a woman, and five children.
The bodies were in an advanced state of decomposition, but
the'rawhide thongs with which the arms of each one were
bound were still in place.
"The man who made this discovery was a Mormon, but



<pb n="350"/>
350                AP. ..  4 DX.
he .we* ew to the Territory and ignorant of the doctuin.
of bkood-*aoement, and he supposed it to be his duty t 'I
put tbV eacers of justice on the track of the crime whose.
evidences    had unearthed. He therefore repaired. at
once to police headquarters, and told his story.
"He was there informed that his onlyduty with regard to
the discovery he had made was to say nothing about it,
and ask no questions.     -
" That night a detachment of the police force took up
the bodies and teburied thlia'utside of the old city wall.
" When I wi* made acquainted with the foregoifg factr s
I sought out'the spot indicated as the secohd place. ':
burial, and dug up the remains, which by this time. wer 
skeleons. The -skulls of the'children as well as of ti'.
grown persons were cirshed in, as if'from a blow wit4 '4 
bludgeon or'ciowbar. ' I also found in the kit the rawhe
thongs which had been used to bind the victims.' -  ' '
"I made a detailed report of. the matter to the Federal.
authorities in the Territory, but they were not clothed with
power uffiient to tracenr . puaisbt he perpetrr of the
c.rif, and  ifar .as my .kowlldge exteads no effort has
ever be en  ade in tht direction." 
.        (Signed,)               S. G."
NOTE P (PAGE 221).
Independence Hall was a small adobe building capable
of seating about two hundred persons. It has since been
remodeled, enlarged, and neatly furnished, and is now
known as the Congregational Chapel. It is situated. on
Third South Street, half a block west of Main Street.
While General Connor com pnded at Camp Douglas,
Rev. N. McLeod, post chaplain, conoeived what seemed
then the chimerical idea of estabolihing a Christian nis-



<pb n="351"/>
NOTEX   0 o k*FRNCXcE.            351
sidn in the very heart of the Mormon capital, and being a
man of great courage and firmness of purpose, he finally
succeeded. The building afterward known as Indepen-
dence Hall was erected by the aid of the officers at Camp
Douglas and a few others who felt an interest in the
undertaking, and, in spite of the threats of the Mormon
hierarchy, regular services were opened, followed by a
Sunday-school. In the first place, almost the only attend-
ants were the soldiers, the few Gentiles in the city, the
officers and their wives, and the families who had taken
refuge at the post; but soon disaffected Mormons began
to drop in, and the Sabbath-school proved so great an at-
traction that Mormon children went again and again,
though punished for going as often as the fact was discov-
ered.'
This state of affairs could not continue long. Recalci-
trant Mormons who had been to the hal were notified that
if they went again their lives would be forfeited, mobs
broke up the meetings, and finally the superintendent of
the Sabbath-school, Dr. J. K. Robinson, was brutally mur-
dered within a few yards of his own door and of the hall,
into which his bleeding body was carried.
NOTE Q (PAGE 223).
The penalties attached to the Endowment oaths are re-
volting beyond belief, and it would be impossible to pub-
lish the details of the punishments which the Mormon code
prescribes for offences of every degree. The simplest and
mildest penalty invoked upon covenant-breakers is that
their throats shall be cut from ear to ear, and in many in-
stances this penalty has been (mercifully ?) commuted and
the offender shot instead.
In at least one well-known instance (that of Julia H-,



<pb n="352"/>
352                APPENDIX. 
an unfortunate plural wife, whose husband at present fillm
an important office in this city), the victim was allowed
the alternative of death by poison; but in the case of the 
two women to whom I have alluded in this chapter, trust-
worthy testimony makes it only too clear that they were
sacrificed with attendant barbarities which could not be-
paralleled outside of the darkest abodes of paganism.
NOTE R (PAGE 260).
In 1867, less than a year after the murder of Dr. Robinso'
and the breaking up of McLeod's school and congregation.
Christian missionaries were found courageous enough.to'.
make a second attempt in the same direction. In tbit,
year religious services were commenced and a school
opened under the auspices of the Protestant Episcopal
Church, and in spite of opposition and threats the mission-
aries maintained their ground and continued to exercise a
-powerful influence for good among the many whose faith 
in Mormonism had been uprooted by a discovery of the
crimes of the leaders and the inherent evils of the system.
'. 1



<pb n="353"/>
THE REMEDY.
BEFORE outlining any plan for dealing with the Utah
problem, it is necessary to correct the erroneous opinions
which prevail outside of the Territory as to the effect of
stringent laws promptly enforced.
All of us who have reached middle life remember the
warnings which overflowed from the pulpit, the platform.
and the press, as to the direful consequences of the imme-
diate abolition of slavery. We remember, too, how those
warnings and arguments were swept away like chaff by
the stern logic of war.
A remedy short, sharp, and sudden was forced upon us.
It was but the work of an hour to deal the blow that struck
down wrongs of a century's growth.
Slavery left as a legacy to the government that had fos-
tered it so long, a mass of ignorance that could only be en-
lightened by years of patient instruction, of weakness that
needed protection, and of poverty so utter that among four
millions of people not one owned so much as a name; yet
where is the statesman, North or South, who to-day would
undo, if he could, the work of the Emancipation Procla-
mation ?
All over the United States we find, even among those
who assume to be well informed on this question, the im-
pression that to abolish polygamy at once would be to
bring untold misery upon thousands of helpless women
and children. '
Tl;c;1P S^IAAU« nrY- ;CPlIr the C-- k l.^,A ntl*4 n eU. -i& £S



<pb n="354"/>
354               THE REMEDY. Y
the conservatives of thirty years ago, who deplored
consequences that must ensue if four millions of slav
were deprived at once of -the care and protection of
masters.   . 
Polygamists, as a rule, do not support their families.
The masses of the Mormon people are poor, and the con
stant drain of the tithing system keeps them so; yet men
who cannot support one family in comfort are continually 
taking more wives. The consequence is that none of their
numerous families have even the bare necessaries of life, 
unless the women and children earn them.
Wealthy Mormons support their families much better
than they did before the anti-polygamists in Utah began
their war upon the system, but even among these there are
many husbands who think they are doing all that can rea-
sonably be expected of them, if they provide their wives
with shelter, fuel, and flour.
Not long ago, the wife of a wealthy Mormon in this city
complained to the Bishop of her Ward that her husband
did not support her.
" Your husband gives you a house to live in, does he
not ?" asked the Bishop.
"Yes," was the reply.
"Does he keep you well supplied with wood and flour ?"
"Yes."
"Then I think he is a very good provider, and you ought
.to be ashamed to enter a complaint against him."
From such decisions there is no appeal, inasmuch as the
law does not give either a legal or a plural wife any claim
upon the property or earnings of her husband.
If polygamy were abolished to-day, in five years the
women of the poorer classes would be far better off than
they now are, even if the law which ended their polyga-
mous relations made no provisions for them; but there is



<pb n="355"/>
THE REMEDY.                 355
not a Gentile in Utah who would favor a bill forthe imme-
diate suppression of polygamy, unless there was a clause
in it which provided some means of support for plural
wives and their children.
The Poland Bill, passed in I874, contained, when pre-
sehted to Congress, ample provisions for the support of
plural families, but all these provisions were stricken out
at the instigation of Geo. Q. Cannon, the Mormon Delegate
from Utah.
" But," urges the objector, "the question of support is
not the only one to be considered. The breaking up of
existing polygamous families would deprive thousands of
women of a husband's protection, and tens of thousands of
children of a father's care."
:To residents of Utah, who know the quality of this
"protection" and " care," the foregoing objection sounds
like a piece of grim irony.
.:Brigham Young's views with regard to the duties of a
father were frequently expressed from the pulpit, but I
cannot consent to soil my pages by reproducing them.
Their practical application may be witnessed every day
in any part of the Territory. An intelligent young lady
sald to the writer:
,y My father has seven families scattered all over the
country, and he does not know his children by sight. If
he should meet me on the street to-day he would not know
me."
A former Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the
Territory says: " Polygamy is filling southern Utah with
outlaws. The sons. of polygamous families will give our
courts abundance of.wYd  for years to come."
No one who has given the subject the careful study it
demands can doubt that the continuance of present polyg-
amous relations will result, in most cases, simply in bur-



<pb n="356"/>
356               THE REMEDY. 
dening plural wives with the support of more children, a*t
in adding to the number of desperadoes who are alreadyil
the terror of the southern country.             i-t
A few incidents, taken at random from the everyday life ,`
of polygamous households, may give our readers some idea 
of the " protection" of which a plural wife would be de-' 
prived if separated from her fraction of a husband. 
A former member of the Utah Legislature made a regu- -
Jar practice of horsewhipping those of his wives who " had
a rebellious spirit."
Another prominent citizen, who filled various important
offices, tied his fifteen-year-old wife to a post, and whipped
her with an oxwhip, because she would not say " Yes, Sir,"
and " No, Sir," to him.
The plural wife of a wealthy resident of Mill Creek left
her husband and came to my house to work. When I
asked her why she left the man on whom her salvation de-
pended, she answered: " Because there has not been a
single week in two years in which he has not whipped me
until my body was covered with bruises."
.A well-known resident of the Nineteenth Ward in this
city, a Saint in good standing then and now, tried to drown
one of his wives because she refused to take the team and
haul corn from the farm. The woman was saved by the
interference of neighbors, and at the investigation which
followed, these neighbors testified that the husband had
beaten the woman, "until her flesh was like a piece of
putrefied liver."
A Saint in the First Ward became very angry with one
of his wives because she refused to give her child some
medicine that he had prepared for it. The woman was
enceinte, but that fact did not save her from punishment,
Her husband chained her to a tree by the roadside with a
heavy log-chain, and kept her there all day. Some sym-



<pb n="357"/>
THE JEMED Y.                357
pathizing neighbors went to the Bishop of the Ward to beg
for the poor creature's release, but his only answer to their
petition was, " Let the woman obey her husband."
Another Saint in the Fourteenth Ward chained one of
his wives to the floor, in an open garret, in bitter winter
weather, without fire, bedding, or any comforts. The
woman had a baby only five days old at the time, but she
was " possessed by an evil spirit," and the husband felt it
to be his duty to resort to severe measures.
The writer wishes it to be distinctly understood that
these are not examples of drunken brutality. They are the
deliberate acts of men high in the priesthood, and the nat-
ural results of the infamous doctrines upon which polyg-
amy is founded.
There are many Mormons who are far better than their
creed, just as, in the days of slavery, there were many
masters who were better than the law; but the system it-
self if carried out to the letter, would reduce all the
women in polygamous households to the condition of beasts
of burden.
Persons whose opinions are formed from observation and
experience will not deprecate the consequences of breaking
up existing polygamous relations. Polygamous families
are broken up every week in the year, by the system of
cheap and easy divorce and transfer which prevails in the
Territory, and neither the Mormons nor their sympathizers
abroad make any ado about it. So much for the conse-
quences of a remedy, short, sharp, and decisive.
NOW FOR THE REMEDY.
The present writer, being only a woman, and therefore
incapable of generalizing or taking broad views of any
question, submits the following, subject to such amend-
ments as may occur to the comprehensive and logical mas-
culine mind:-



<pb n="358"/>
358     .THE REMEDY.                           '
Congress, which created the Utah Legislature, has
power to abolish it. Let this Legislature, which is cot
posed chiefly of notorious law-breakers, be superseded 
a Legislative Commission of not less than fifteen member
to be appointed by the President and confirmed by 
Senate. 
Let the members of this Commission be, without excep"Y
tion, citizens of the Territory, when appointed. Let the
powers of the Commission be strictly legislative, and so 
defined as not to interfere in any way with the powers and 
duties of the Governor and Secretary of the Territory, or
-with those of the Federal Judges.
A Commission, appointed in- this manner, and composed
of residents of the Territory who are familiar with all the
features of the situation here, would be far more competent
than a Congress two thousand miles away to pass laws
adequate not only to suppress polygamy, but to destroy the
absolute temporal power of Mormonism, to divorce Church
and State, and to make our elections a test of the real
choice of the people, instead of an expression of the will of
the Mormon hierarchy.
It will doubtless be urged that such a Commission might
abuse the powers entrusted to it. Why has not somebody
thought of suggesting that the present Utah Legislature,
which owes primary allegiance, not to the Government of
the United States, but to the Head of the Mormon Church,
may abuse the same vested powers ? The members of a
Commission appointed by the President may be removed
by the same power that appointed them, upon a sustained
charge of official misconduct; No one of them who abuses
delegated power can be retained in office without the con-
sent of the President, and we presume, in advance, that he
will not knowingly appoint unfit men or keep such men in
their Dositions.



<pb n="359"/>
THE REMEDY.                 359
Allow me to repeat, competent legislation for Utah must
originate in a body composed of law-abiding citizens of the
Territory, who understand the needs of the people, and.
who know, as non-residents cannot know, the obstacles
which Mormonism places in the path of justice.
Where a whole community is sworn not only to oppose
the law which forbids a plurality of wives, but to cover up
robbery, murder, and other crimes that cannot even be
named, it will readily be perceived that " special legisla- 
tion" is imperatively needed. I think it will also be ad-
mitted that the task of making laws for such a community
should be committed to men who have a thorough knowl-
edge of the peculiar difficulties to be encountered in en-
forcing the laws. While on this topic, I shall take the
liberty of making public a portion of a letter received from
atdetective employed to unearth some of the crimes com-
mitted in obedience to "counsel."
"MRS. A. G. PADDOCK,
"DEAR MADAM: Your letter of the 31st ult. is at
hand, and contents carefully noted. As to the statement
made by Mr. D-, I will say that it is, in part, correct.
The number of murders, including those at Mountain
Meadows, is five hundred and seventy-four. I have not
my notes with me, so cannot give you, at present, the par-
ticulars you ask for, but will write again.
"I have never been able, with the most diligent inquiry,
to learn the name of the family murdered in the Nineteenth
Ward,* or who were the perpetrators of that most fiendish
outrage-but why speak of it in such terms ? It is only
one of a multitude of crimes, each of which casts a shadow
upon the others. There are atrocities of which I could
make mention, that I feel a delicacy in writing about to a
* See Note 0. caee uAo.



<pb n="360"/>
360               THE REJfED Y.
lady, yet half the hellishness (excuse the expression) 
would be taken from the crime if I should leave out that ,'
which I could not write to you.
" Utah against the world for fiendish crimes !
" There is one thing I wish to call attention to, that is.
generally overlooked.  All good Mormons are equajly  !
criminal. I mean by this, that if not guilty of the crime.
in chief, they are aiders and abettors. In civilized coun-
* tries, all citizens are anxious to have crime punished; here 
the order is reversed. I have been a 'detective officer for 
many years, but I must say that Utah is the hardest
place I ever worked in. Men who have lived from boyhood
in a little settlement are 'not known' by any of the inhab.
itants. The very children who have been raised with the
man you are looking for, if asked his residente or anything:
about him, will answer 'dunno.' In fact, none of them
seems to know anything except how to commit a crime and -
sover it up.
" Respectfully,
I suppress the name of my correspondent, because 1
want him to live to finish his work. It is proper to state
that the crimes to which he alludes are religious murders ;
not homicides committed in the heat of passion or in 
drunken affrays, but assassinations coolly planned and de- -
liberately carried out in obedience to the orders of the
authorities of the Mormon Church. It may help our friends
in the States to understand the need of special legislation
for Utah, if the fact is made known that not one of these
religious murders has ever been judicially punished.
Assuming that the facts already stated are sufficient to
convince the people of the United States of the necessity of.
T oz.1.:... rav                          Po A........ 



<pb n="361"/>
THE REMEDY.                 36E
Legislature, the. only remaining question, that relating to
the work bf such a Commission, is easily answered. Our
readers will not expect to find in this chapter the full text
of bills which the law-abiding citizens of Utah would favor,
but a summary of the objects of the desired legislation may
not be out of place; the following list of much needed laws
is therefore offered for consideration :-
A law making polygamy a continuous offense, and co-
habitation and general reputation of marriage the proof
thereof.
A law disfranchising all polygamists, male or female.
A law restoring the right of dower to the legal wife.
An act prohibiting the marking of ballots.
An amended registration act.
A new jury law.
An act making provision for the establishment of free
schools throughout the Territory.
The writer ventures to express the hope that the Com-
mission, when appointed, will consist of men sufficiently
advanced to insist upon compulsory education.
While the foregoing summary may not include all the
subjects of legislation which will present themselves, it is
believed that it covers the most important points. Will
Congress give us the opportunity of testing the practical
value of these measures ?
SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH TWRR., Feb. 9th, 1882.



