<pb n="1"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHET
CHAPTER L
'THAVE you talked it over with her?' said Mr. Ferrars, as IL his little slender wife met him under the beeches that made an avenue of the lane leading to Fairmead vicarage. 'Yesl' was the answer, which the vicar was not slow to understand. ' I cannot say I expected much from your conversation, and perhaps we ought not to wish it. We are likely to see with selfish eyes, for what shall we do without her '' Dear Albinia I You always taunted me with having married your sister as much as yourself' 'So I shall again, if you cannot give her up with a good
grace.'

' If I could have had my own way in disposing of her.'
'Perhaps the hero of your own composition might be less
satisfactory to her than is Kendal.'
'At least he should be minus the children f
'I fancy the children are one great attraction. Do you
know how many there are '
'Three; but if Albinia knows their ages she involves them in
a discreet haze. I imagine some are in their teens.'
'Impossible, Winifred; he is hardly five-and-thirty.'
' Thirty-eight, he said yesterday, and he married very early.
I asked Albinia if her son would be in tail-coats; but she
thought I was laughing at her, and would not say. She ia
quite eager at the notion of being governess to the girls.'
'She has wanted scope for her energies,' said Mr. Ferrars.
Even spoiling her nephew, and being my curate, have not
afforded field enough for her spirit of usefulness.'
'That is what I am afraid of.'
'Of what, Winifred ?'
'That it is my fault. Before our marriage, you and she
were the whole world to each other; but since I came, I havo
It




<pb n="2"/>
z              1THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
seen, as you say, that the craving for work was strong, and I
fear it actuates her more than she knows.'
'No such thing. It is a case of good hearty love. What,
are you afraid of that, too T
'Yes, I am. I grudge her giving her fresh whole young
heart away to a mal who has no return to make. His heart id
in his first wife's grave. Yes, you may smile, Maurice, as if I
were talking romance; but only look at him, poor man ! Did
you ever see any one so utterly broken down I She can hardly
beguile a smile from him.' 
'His melancholy is one of his charms in her eyes.'
'So it may be, as a sort of interesting romance. I am sure
I pity the poor lman heartily; but to see her at tllree-and-
twenty, with her sweet fitce and high spirits, give herself away
to a man who looks but half alive, and cannot, if lie would,
return that full first love-have the charge of a tribe of children,
be spied and conmmented on by the first wife's relations-Mlaurice,
I cannot bear it.'
'It is not what we should have chosen,' said her husband,
'but it has a bright side. Kendal is a most right-minded,
superior man, andl she a)ppreciates him thoroughly. She has
great energy and c]eerfu!ness, and if she can comfbrt him, and
rouse him into activity, and be the kind mother she will be to
his poor clildren, I do not think we ought to grudge her fiom
our own home.'
'You and she have so strong a feeling for motherless cllil-
dren !'
'Thinking of Kendal as I do, I have but one fear for her.'
'I have many-the chief being the grandmllother.'
'Mine will make you angry, but it is my only one. You,
who have only known her since she has subdued it, have pro-
1lably never guessed that she has that sort of quick sensitive
temper-'
'Maurice, Maurice ! as if I had not been a most provoking,
presuming sister-in-law. As if I had not acted so that if
Albinia ever had a temper, she must have shown it.'
'I knew you would not believe me, and I really am not
afraid of her doing any harm by it, if that is what you suspect
ne of. No, indeed; Lat I fear it may make her feel any trial
of her position more acutely th:ln a placid person would.'
' Olo ! so you own there will be trials !'
'3My dear W\inified, as if I had not sat up till twelve last
night laying them lefre  llbiiia. I[ow sick the poor child
n;ust be of our argumenlts, v l(n there is no real oljection, and
tile is so much attached I Have you heard anything about




<pb n="3"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                  .3
those ronnexions of his ? Did you not write to Mrs. Nugent 1
1 wish she were at home.'
'I had her answer by this afternoon's post, but there is
nothing to tell. Mr. Kendal has only been settled at Bayford
Bridge a few years, and she never visited any one there. though
Mr. Nugent had met Mr. Kendal several times before his wife's
death, and liked him. Emily is charmed to have Albiuia for a
neilghbour.'
'Does she know nothing of the Meadows' family.'
'Nothing but that old Mrs. Meadows lives in the town with
one unmarried daughter. She speaks highly of the clergyman.'
'John Dusautoy? Ay, he is admirable -not that I have
done more than see him at visitations when he was curate at
Lauriston.'
' Is he married ?'
' fancy he is, but I am not sure. There is one good friend
for A lhinia any way!'
' And now for your investigations. Did you see Colonel
Bury '
' I did, but he could say little more than we knew. He says
nothing could be more exemplary than Kendal's whole conduct
in India; he only regretted that he kept so much aloof from
others, that his principle and gentlemanly feeling did net tell
as much as could have been wished. Iec has always been
wrapped up in his own pursuits-a perfect dictionary of in-
formation.'
' We had found out that, though he is so silent. I should
think him a most elegant scholar.'
'And a deep one. Hie has studied and polished his acquire-
ments to the utmost. I assure you, Winliired, I mean to he
proud of my brother-in-law.'
' What did you hear of the first wife?'
'It was an early marriage. He went home as soon as he had
sufficient salary, married her, and brought her out. She was a
brilliant dark beauty, who became quickly a motherly, house-
wifely, common-place person. I should think there had been a
poet's love, never awakened from.'
'The very thing that has always struck me when, poor man,
he has tried to be civil to me. Here is a man, sensible himself,
but who has never had the hap to live with sensible women.'
' TWhen their children grew too old for India, she came
into some little property at Bayford Bridge, which enabled
him to retire. Colonel Bury came home in the same ship,
and saw much of them, liked him    better and better, and
sculaJ to have been rather wearied by her. A   very good
B2




<pb n="4"/>
4              THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
woman, he says, and Kendal most fondly attached; but as to
comparing her with Miss Ferrars, he could not think of it for a
moment. So they settled at Bayford, and there, about two
years ago, came this terrible visitation of typhus fever.'
' I remember how Colonel Bury used to come and sigh over
his friend's illness and trouble.'
'He could not help going over it again. The children all fell
ill together-the two eldest were twin boys, one puny, the
other a very fine fellow, and his father's especial pride and
delight. As so often happens, the sickly one was spared, the
healthy one was taken.'
'Then Albinia will have an invalid on her hands !'
'The Colonel says this Edmund was a particularly promising
boy, and poor Kendal felt the loss dreadfully. Ile sickened
after that, and his wife was worn out with nursing and grief,
and sank under the fever at once. Poor Kendal has never held
up his head since; he had a terrible relapse.'
'And,' said Winifred, 'he no sooner recovers than he goes
and marries our Albinia !'
'Two years, my dear.'
'Pray explain to me, Maurice, why, when people become
widowed in any unusually lamentable way, they always are the
first to marry again.'
'Incorrigible. I meant to make you pity him.'
'I did, till I found I had wasted my pity. Why could not
these Meadowses look after his children ? Why must the
Colonel bring him here ? I believe it was with malice prepense f
'The Colonel went to see after him, and found him so droop-
ing and wretched, that he insisted on bringing him home with
him; and old Mrs. Meadows and her daughter almost forced
him to accept the invitation.'
'They little guessed what the Colonel would be at!'
'You will be better now you have the Colonel to abuse,' said
her husband.
'And pray what do you mean to say to the General.'
Exactly what I think.'
'And to the aunts ' slily asked the wife.
'I think I shall leave you all that correspondence. It will
be too edifying to see you making common cause with th:
auntr.'
'That comes of trying to threaten one's husband; and here
they come,' said Winifred. 'Well, Maurice, what can't be cured
must be endured. Albinia's heart is guie; he is a very good
man, and spite of India, first wieh, and melancholy, he does not
look amiss !'




<pb n="5"/>
THE YOUNG STEP MOTHER.                  5
Mr. Ferrars smiled at the chary, grudging commendation of
the tall, handsome man who advanced through the beech-wood;
but it was too true that his clear olive complexion had not the
hue of health, that there was a world of oppression on his broad
brow and deep hazel eyes, and that it was a dim, dreamy, re-
luctant smile that was awakened by the voice of the lady who
walked by his side, as if reverencing his grave mood.
She was rather tall, very graceful, and well made, btlt her
features were less handsome than sweet, bright, and sensible.
Her hair was nut-brown, in long curled waves; her eyes, deep
soft grey. and though downcast under the new sympathies, new
feelings, and responsibilities that crowded on her, the smile and
sparkle that lighted them as she blushed and nodded to her
brother and sister, showed that liveliness was the natural ex-
pression of that engaging face.
Say what they would, it was evident that Albinia Ferrars
had cast in her lot with Edmund Kendal, and that her energetic
spirit and love of clildenr animated her to embrace joyfully the
cares which such a choice must impose on her.
As might have been perceived by one glance at the figure, step,
and bearing of Mr. Ferrars, perfectly clerical though they were,
he belonged to a military family. His father had been a distin-
glished Peninsular officer, and his brother, older by many years,
held a command in Canada. Maurice and Albinia, early left
orphans, had, with a young cousin, been chiefly under the charge
of their aunts, Mrs. Annesley and Miss Ferrars, and had found
a kind home in their house in Mayfair, until Maurice had been
ordained to the family living of Fairmead, and his sister had
gone to live with hint there, extorting the consent of her elder
brother to her spending a more real and active life than her
aunts' round of society could offer her.
The aunts lamented, but they could seldom win their darling
to them for more than a few weeks at a tine, even after their
nephew Maurice had-as they considered-thrown himself
away on a little lively lady of Irish parentage, no equal in
birth or fortune, in their opinion, for the grandson of Lord
Belraven.
They had been very friendly to the young wife, but their
hopes had all the more been fixed on Albinia; and even
Winifred could afford them sonme generous pity in the engage-
ment of their favourite niece to a retired( East India Comrany's
servaLt-a widower with three children.




<pb n="6"/>
t6   ~      THE YOUNG STE'-MOTHER.
CHAPTER II.
'pIHE equinoctial sun had long set, and the blue haze of March
L east wind had deepened into twilight and darkness when
Albinia Kendal found herself driving down the steel hilly
street of Bayford. The town was not large nor modern enough
for gas, and the dark street was only lighted here and there by
a shop of more pretension; the plate-glass of the enterprising
draper, with the light veiled by shawls and ribbons; the ' purple
Jars,' green, ruby, and crimson of the chemist; and the modest
ray of the grocer, revealing busy heads driving Saturday-night
bargains.
' How well I soon shall know them all,' said Albinia, looking
at her husband, though she knew she could not see his face, as
he leant back silently in his corner, and she tried to say no
more. She was sure that coming home was painful to him;
he had been so willing to put it off, and to prolong those pleasant
seaside days, when there had been such pleasant reading,
walking, musing, and a great deal of happy silence.
Down the hill, and a little way on level ground-houses on
one side, something like hedge or shrubbery on the other-a
stop-a gate opened-a hollow sound beneath the carriage, as
though crossing a wooden bridge-trees-bright windows-an
open door-and light streaming from it.
'Here is your home, Albinia,' said that deep musical voice
that she loved the better for the subdued melancholy of the
tones, and the suppressed sigh that could not be hidden.
'And my children,' she eagerly said, as he handed her out,
and, springing to the ground, she hurried to the open door
opplosite, where, in the lamp-light, she saw, moving about in
shy curiosity and embarrassment, two girls in white frocks and
broad scarlet sashes, and a boy, who, as she advanced, retreated
with his younger sister to the fireplace, while the elder one, a
pretty, and rather formal looking girl of twelve, stood forward.
Albinia held out her arms, saying, 'You are Lucy, I am
sure,' and eagerly kissed the girl's smiling, bright iace.
' Yes, I am Lucy,' was the well-pleased answer; 'I am glad
you are come.'
' I hope we shall be very good friends,' said Albinia, with the
sweet smile that few, young or old, could resist. ' And this is
Gilbert,' as she kissed the blushing cheek of a thin boy of
thirteen-' and Soh)ia.'
Solphia, who was eleven, had not stirred to meet her. She
alone inierited her father's fine straight profile, and large black




<pb n="7"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                 7
eyes; but she had the heaviness of feature that sometimes goes
with very dark complexions. The white frock did not become
her brown neck and arms; her thick black hair was arranged
in too womanly a manner, and her head and faice looked too
large; moreover, there was no lighting-up to answer the greeting,
and Albinia was disappointed.
Poor child, she thought, she is feeling deeply that I am an
interloper; it will be different now her lather is coining.
Mr. Kendal was crossing the hall, and as he entered he took
the hand and kissed the forehead of each of the three, but Sophia
stood with the same half-sullen indifference-it might be shy-
ness, or sensibility.
'How much you are grown !' he said, looking at the children
with some surprise.
In fact, though Albinia knew their ages, they were all on a
larger scale than she had expected, and looked too old for the
children of a man of his youthful appearance. Gilbert had the
slight look of rapid growth; Lucy, though not so tall, and with
a small, clear, bright face, had the air of a little woman; and
Sophia's face might have befitted any age.
'Yes, papa,' said Lucy; ' Gilbert has grown an inch-and-a-half
since October, for we measured him.'
' Have you been well, Gilbert V continued Mr. Kendal,
anxiously.
'I have the toothache, said Gilbert, piteously.
'Happily, nothing more serious,' thrust in Lucy; ' Mr. Bowles
told Aunt Maria that he considers Gilbert's health much im-
proved.'
Albinia asked some kind questions about the delinquent tooth,
but the answers were short; and, to put an end to the general
constraint, she asked Lucy to show her to her room.
It was a pretty bay-windowed room, and looked cheerful in
the firelight. Lucy's tongue was at once unloosed, telling that
Gilbert's tutor, Mr. Salsted, had insisted on his having his
tooth extracted, and that he had refused, saying it was quite
well; but Lucy gave it as her opinion that he much preferred
the toothache to his lessons.
' Where does Mr. Salsted live '
'At Tremblam, about two miles off; Gilbert rides the pony
over there every day, except when he has the toothache, and
then he stays at home.'
'And what do you do I'
'We went to Miss Belmarch6 till the end of our quarter,
un(l since that we have been at home, or with grandmalmma
Do you really mean that we are to study with you V




<pb n="8"/>
8              THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
'I should like it, my dear. I have been looking forward
very much to teaching you and Sophia'
'Thank you, mamma.'
The word was said with an effort as if it came strangely, but
it thrilled Albinia's heart, and she kissed Lucy, who clung to
her, and returned the caress.
'I shall tell Gilbert and Sophy what a dear mamma you are,'
she said. ' Do you know, Sophy says she shall never call you
anything but Mrs. Kendal; and I know Gilbert means the
same.'
' Let them call me whatever suits them best,' said Albinia;
'I had rather they waited till they feel that they like to call
me as you have done-thank you for it, dear Lucy. You must
not fancy I shall be at all hurt at your thinking of times past. I
shall want you to tell me of them, and of your own dear mother,
and what will suit papa best.'
Lucy looked highly gratified, and eagerly said, 'I am sure I
shall love you just like my own mamma.'
'No,' said Albinia, kindly; 'I do not expect that, my dear.
T don't ask for any more than you can freely give, dear child.
You must bear with having me in that place, and we will try
and help each other to make your papa comfortable; and,
Lucy, you will forgive me, if I am impetuous, and make mis-
takes.'
Lucy's little clear black eyes looked as if nothing like this
had ever come within her range of observation, and Albinia
could sympathize with her difficulty of reply.
Mr. Kendal was not in the drawing-room when they re-
entered; there was only Gilbert nursing his toothache by the
fire, and Sophy sitting in the middle of the rug, holding up a
screen. She said something good-natured to each, but neither
responded graciously, and Lucy went on talking, showing off
the room, the chiffonieres, the ornaments, and some pretty
Indian ivory carvings. There was a great ottoman of Aunt
Maria's work, and a huge cushion with an Arab horseman, that
Lucy would uncover, whispering, 'Poor mamma worked it,'
while Sophy visibly winced, and Albinia hurried it into the
chintz cover again, lest Mr. Kendal should come. But Lucy
had full time to be communicative about the household with
such a satisfied, capable manner, that Albinia asked if she had
been keeping house all this time.
'No; old Nurse kept the keys, and managed till now; but
she went this morning.'
Sophy's mouth twitched.
'She was so very fond-' continued Lucy.




<pb n="9"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                  q
'Don't r burst out Sophy, almost the first word Albinia had
heard from her; but no more passed, for Mr. Kendal came in,
and Lucy's conversation instantly was at an end.
Before him she was almost as silent as the others, and he
seldom addressed himself to her, only inquiring once after her
gralndllamma's health, and once calling Sophy out of the way
when she was standing between the fire and-   He finished
with the gesture of command, whether he said 'Your mamma,'
none could tell.
It was late, and the meal was not over before bed-time, when
Albinia lingered to find remedies for Gilbert's toothache, pleased
to feel herself making a commencement of motherly care, and
to meet an affectionate glance of thanks from Mir. Kendal's eye.
Gilbert, too, thanked her with less shyness than before, and
was hopeful about the remedy; and with the feeling of having
nmade a beginning, she ran down to tell Mr. Kendal that she
thought he had hardly done justice to the children-they were
fine creatures-something so sweet and winning about Lucy-
slhe liked Gilbert's countenance-Sophy must have something
deep and noble in her.
Ire lifted his head to look at her bright face, and said, 'They
are very much obliged to you.'
'You must not say that, they arc my own.'
'I will not say it again, but as I look at you, and the home
to which I have brought you, I feel that I have acted sel-
fishly.'
Albinia timidly pressed his hand, 'Work was always what I
wislhed,' she said; 'if only I could do anything to lighten your
grief and care.'
He gave a deep, heavy sigh. Albinia felt that if he had
hoped to have lessened the sadness, he had surely found it again
at his own door. He roused himself, however, to say, 'This
is using you ill, Albinia; no one is more sensible of it than
I am.'
'I never sought more than you can give,' she murmured ; 'I
only wish to do what I can for you, and you will not let me dis-
turb you.'
'I am very grateful to you,' was his answer; a sad welcome
l;r a bride. ' And these poor children will owe everything to
you.'
' I wish I may do right by them,' said Albinia, fervently.
'The flower of the flock'-began 3Mr. Kendal, but he broke
off at once.
Allibiia had told Winifred that she could bear to have
his wilie's memory first with him, and that she knew that she




<pb n="10"/>
I
]t              THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
could not compensate to him for his loss; but the actual sight
of his dejection came on her with a chill, and she had to call
up all her energies and hopes, and, still better, the thought of
strength not her own, to enable her to look cheerfully on the
prospect.  Sleep revived her elastic spirits, and with eager
curiosity she drew up her blind in the morning, for the first view
of her new home.
But there was a veil-moisture made the panes resemble ground
glass, and when she had rubbed that away, and secured a clear
corner, her range of vision was not much more extensive. She
could only see the grey outline of trees and shrubs, obscured by
the heavy mist; and on the lawn below, a thick cloud that
seemed to hang over a dark space which she suspected to be
a large pond.
'There is very little to be gained by looking out here!'
Albinia soliloquized. ' It is not doing the place justice to study
it on a misty, moisty morning. It looks now as if that fever
might have come bodily out of the pond. I'll have no more to
say to it till the sun has licked up the fog, and made it bright!
Sunday morning-my last Sunday without school-teaching I
hope! I famish to begin again-and I will make time for
that, and the girls too ! I am glad he consents to my doing
whatever I please in that way! I hope Mr. Dusaut,,y will!
I wish Edmund knew him better-but oh ! what a hy man
it is !'
With a light step she went down-stairs, and found Mr" Ken-
dal waiting for her in the dining-room, his iace brighten ng as
she entered.
'I am sorry Bayford should wear this heavy cloud to receive
you,' he said.
'It will soon clear,' she answered, cheerfully.  'Have you
heard of poor Gilbert this morning?'
'Not yet.' Then, after a pause,' I have generally gone to
Mrs. Meadows after the morning service,' he said, speaking with
constraint.
'You will take me 2' said Albinia. 'I wish it, I assure you.'
It was evidently what he wished her to propose, and he
added, 'She must never feel herself neglected, and it will be
better at once.'
'So much more cordial,' said Albinia. ' Pray let us go !'
They were interrupted by the voices of the girls-not un-
pleasing voices, but loud and unsubdued, and with a slight tone
of provincialism, which seemed to hurt Mr. Kendal's ears, for
he said, 'I hope you will tune those voices to something leas
unlike your own.'




<pb n="11"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                   1
As he spoke, the sisters appeared in the full and conscious
rustling of new lilac silk dresses, which seemed to have happily
carried off all Sophy's sullenness; for she made much mole brisk
and civil answers, and ran across the room in a boisterous
manner, when her father sent her to see whether Gilbert were
up.
There was a great clatter, and Gilbert chased her in, breath-
less and scolding, but the tongues were hushed before papa, and
no more was heard than that the tooth was better, and had not
kept him awake. Lucy seemed disposed to make conversation,
overwhelming Albinia with needless repetitions of ' Mamma
dear,' and plunging into what Mrs. Bowles and Miss Goldsmith
had said of Mr. Dusantoy, and how he kept so few servants, and
the butcher had no orders last time he called. Aunt Maria
thought he starved and tyrannized over that poor little sickly
Mrs. Dusautoy.
Mr. Kendal said not one word, and seemed not to hear.
Albinia felt as if she had fallen into a whirlpool of gossip; she
looked towards him, and hoped to let the conversation drop, but
Sophy answered her sister, and, at last, when it came to some-
thing about what Jane heard from Mrs. Osborn's Susan, Albinia
gently whispered, ' I do not think this entertains your papa, my
dear,' and silence sank upon them all.
Albinia's next venture was to ask about that which had been
her Sunday pleasure from childhood, and she turned to Sophy,
and said, ' I suppose you have not begun to teach at the school
yet 1'
Sophy's great eyes expanded, and Lucy said, 'Oh dear
mamma! nobody does that but Genevieve Durant and the
monitors. Miss Wolte did till Mr. Dusautoy came, but she does
not approve of him.'
'Lucy, you do not know what you are saying,' said Mr.
I'endal, and again there was an annihilating silence, which
Albinia did not attempt to disturb.
At church time, she met the young ladies in the hall, in
pink bonnets and sea-green mantillas over the lilac silks, all
evidently put on for the first time in her honour, an honour
oif which she felt herself the less deserving, as, sensible that
this was no case for bridal display, she wore a quiet dark
silk, a Cashmere shawl, and plain straw bonnet, trimmed with
white.
With manifest wish for reciprocity, Lucy fell into transports
over the shawl ; but gaining nothing by this, Sophy asked if
she did not like the mantillas ? Albinia could only make civility
compatible with truth by saying that the colour was pretty,




<pb n="12"/>
12             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
but where was Gilbert t He was on a stool before the dining-
room fire, looking piteous, and pronouncing his tooth far too bad
for going to church, and she had just time for a fresh adminis-
tration of camphor before Mr. Kendal came forth from his study,
and gave her his arm.
The front door opened on a narrow sweep, the river cutting
i+t off from the road, and crossed by two wooden bridges, beside
each of which stood a weeping-willow, budding with fresh spring
foliage. Opposite were houses of various pretentions, and sheer
behind them rose the steep hill, with the church nearly at the
summit, the noble spire tapering high above, and the bells ring-
ing out a cheerful chime. The mist had drawn up, and all was
fresh and clear.
'There go Lizzie and Loo!' cried Lucy, 'and the Admiral
and Mrs. Osborn. I'll run and tell them papa is come home.'
Sophy was setting off also, but Mr. Kendal stopped them, and
lingered a moment or two, making an excuse of looking for a
needless umbrella, but in fact to avoid the general gaze. As if
making a desperate plunge, however, and looking up and down
the broad street, so as to be secure that no acquaintance was
near, he emerged with Albinia from the gate, and crossed the
road as the chime of the bells changed.
'We are late,' he said. ' You will prefer the speediest way,
though it is somewhat steep.'
The most private way, Albinia understood, and could also
perceive that the girls would have liked the street which sloped
up the hill, and thought the lilac and green insulted by being
conducted up the steep, irregular, and not very clean bye-lane
that led directly up the ascent, between houses, some meanly
modern, some picturesquely ancient, with stone steps outside to
the upper story, but all with far too much of pig-stye about them
for beauty or fragrance. Lucy held up her skirts, and daintily
picked her way, and Albinia looked with kindly eyes at the
doors and windows, secretly wondering what friends she should
find there.
The lane ended in a long flight of more than a hundred
shallow steps cut out in the soft stone of the hill, with landing-
places here and there, whence views were seen of the rich mea-
dow-landscape beyond, with villages, orchards, and farms, and
the blue winding river Baye in the midst, woods rising on the
opposite side under the soft haze of distance. On the other side,
the wall of rock was bordered by gardens, with streamers of ivy
or periwinkle here and there hanging down.
The ascent ended in an old-fashioned stone stile; and here
Sophy, standing on the step, proclaimed, with unnecessary




<pb n="13"/>
THE YOUNG STP-MOTIH EI.                ]3
loudness, that Mr. Dusautoy was carrying Mrs. Dusautoy across
the churchyard. This had the effect of making a pause, but
Albinia saw the rector, a tall, powerful man, rather supporting
than actually carrying, a little fiagile form to the low-browed
door leading into the chancel on the north side. The church
was handsome, though in the late style, and a good deal misused
by eighteenth-century taste; and Albinia was full of admiration
as Mr. Keudal conducted her along the flagged path.
She was rather dismayed to find herself mounting the gallery
stairs, and to emerge into a well-cushioned abode, with the
shield-bearing angel of the corbel of an arch all to herself, and a
very good view of the cobwebs over Mr. Dusautoy's sounding-
board. It seemed to suit all parties, however, for Lucy and
Sophia took possession of the forefront, and their father had the
inmost corner, where certainly nobody could see him.
Just opposite to Albinia was a mural tablet, on which she
read what revealed to her more of the sorrows of her household
than she had guessed before:
'To the memory of Lucy, the beloved wife of Edmund
Kendal. Died February i8th, 1845, aged 35 years.
Edmund Meadows Kendal, born January 20th, i834. Died
February ioth, 1845.
Maria Kendal, born September 5th, 1840. Died September
I4th, 1840.
Sarah Anne Kendal, born October 3rd, I841. Died Novem-
ber 20th, I843.
John Augustus Kendal, born January 4th, I842.     Died
July 6th, 1842.
Aune Maria Kendal, born June 12th, 1844. Died June I th,
1844.'
Then followed, in the original Greek, the words, ' Because I
live, ye shall live also.'
Four infants ! how many hopes laid here! All the English-
born children of the family had died in their cradles, and not
only did compassion for the past affect Albinia, as she thought
of her husband's world of hidden grief, but a shudder for the
future came over her, as she remembered having read that such
mortality is a test of the healthiness of a locality. What could
she think of Willow Lawn ? It was with a strong effort that
she brought her attention back to Him Who controlleth the
sickness that destroyeth at noon-day.
But Mr. Dusautoy's deep, powerful intonations roused her
wandering thoughts, and she was calmed and reassured by the
holy Feast, in which she joined with her husband.
Mr. Kendal's fine face was calm and placid, as best she loved




<pb n="14"/>
14             THE YOUNG STEP-MIOTHER
to look upon it, when they came out of church, and she was too
halppy to disturb the quiet by one word. Lively and animated
as she was, there was a sort of repose and enjoyment in the
species of respect exacted by his grave silent demeanour.
If this could only have lasted longer ! but he was taking her
along an irregular street, and too soon she saw a slight colour flit
across his cheek, and his eyebrows contract, as he unlatched a
green door in a high wall, and entered a little flagged court, de-
corated by a stand destined for flowers.
Albinia caught the blush, and felt more bashful than she had
believed was in her nature, but she had a warm-hearted deter-
ruination that she would work down prejudices, and like and be
liked by all that concerned him and his children. * So she
smniled at him, and went bravely on into the matted hall and up
the narrow stairs, and made a laughing sign when he looked
back at her ere he tapped at the sitting-room door.
It was opened from within before he could turn the handle;
and a shrill voice, ex ggerating those of the girls, showered wel-
comes with such rapidity, that Albinia was seated at the table,
and had been helped to cold chicken, before she could look
round, or make much answer to reiterations of' so very kind.'
It was a small room, loaded with knicknacks and cushions,
like a repository of every species of female ornamental handi-
work in vogue for the last half century, and the luncheon-tray
in the middle of all, ready for six people, for the two girls were
there, and tlough IMr. Kendal stood up by the fire, and would
not eat, he and his black image, reflected backwards and for-
wards in the looking-glass and in the little round mirror,
seemed to take up more room than if he had been seated.
IMrs. Meadows was slight, shrunken, and gentle-looking, with
a sweet tone in her voice, great softness of manner, and pretty
blue eyes. Albinia only wished that she had worn mourning,
it would have been so much more becoming than bright colours;
but that was soon overlooked in gratitudle for her affectionate
reception, and in the warmth of feeling excited by her evident
fondness and solicitude for Mr. Kendal.
Miss Meadows was gaily dressed in youthful fashion, such as
evidently had set her off to advantage when she had been a
bright, dark, handsome girl; but her hair was thin, her cheeks
haggard, the colour hardened, and her forty years apparent,
above all, in an uncomfortable furrow on the brow and round
the mouth ; her voice had a sharp distressed tone that grated
even in her lovwet key, and though she did not stammer, she could
never finish a sentence, but made half-a-dozen disjointed com-




<pb n="15"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                  15
mencements whenever she spoke. Albinia pitied her, and thought
her nervous, for she was painfully assiduous in waiting on every
one, scarcely sitting down for a minute before she was sure that
pepper, or pickle, or new bread, or stale bread, or something
was wanted, and squeezing round the table to help some one, or
to ring the bell every third minute, and all in a dress that had
a teasing stiff silken rustle. She offered Mr. K'endal everything
in the shape of food, till he purchased peace by submitting to
take a hard biscuit; while Albinia was not allowed her glass of
water till all manlner of wines, foreign and domestic, had been
tried upon her in vain.
Conversation was not easy. Gilbert was inquired after, and
his aunt spoke in her shrill, injured note, as she declared that
she had done her utmost to persuade him to have the tooth ex-
tracted, and began a history of what the dentist ought to have
done five years ago.
His grandmother softly pitied him, saying poor little Gibbie
was such a delicate boy, and required such careful treatment;
and when Albinia hoped that he was outgrowing his ill-health,
she was amused to find that desponding compassion would have
been more pleasing.
There had been a transaction about a servant in her behalf:
and Mliss Meadows insisted on hunting up a note, searching all
about the room, and making her mother and Sophy move from
the front of two table-drawers, a disturbance which Sophy did
not take with such placid looks as did her grandmother.
The name of the maid was Eweretta Dobson, at whic hthere
was a general exclamation.
'I wonder what is the history of the name,' said Albinia;
'it sounds like nothing but the diminutive of ewer.. I hope
she will not be the little pitcher with long ears.'
Mr. Kendal looked as much amused as he ever did, but no
one else gave the least token of so much as knowing what she
meant, and she felt as if she had been making a foolish attempt
at wit.
' You need not call her so,' was all that Mrs. Meadows said.
'1 do not like calling servants by anything but their true
names,' answered Albinia; 'it does not seem to me treating
them with proper respect to change their names, as if we
thought them too good for them. It is using them like slaves.'
Lucy exclaimed, 'Why ! grandmamma's Betty is really named
Philadelphia.'
Albinia laughed, but was disconcerted by finding that she had
really given annoyance. ' I beg your pardon,' she said. ' It in




<pb n="16"/>
16             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
only a fancy of my own. I am afraid that I have many fancies
for my friends to bear with. You see I have so fine a name of
my own, that I have a fellow-feeling for those under the same
affliction; and I believe some servants like an alias rather than 
be teased for their finery, so I shall give Miss Eweretta her
choice between that and her surname.'
The old lady looked good-natured, and that matter blew over;
but Miss Meadows fell into another complication of pros and
cons about writing for the woman's character, looking niserably
harassed whether she should write, or Mrs. Kendal, before she
had been called upon.
Albinia supposed that Mrs. Wolfe might call in the course
of the week; but this Miss Meadows did not know, and she
embarked in so many half speeches, and looked so mysterious
and significant at her mother, that Albinia began to suspect
that some dreadful truth was behind.
'Perhaps,' said the old lady, 'perhaps Mrs. Kendal might
make it understood through you, my dear Maria, that she is
ready to receive visits.'
'I suppose they must be !' said Albinia.
' You see, my dear, people would be most happy, but they do
not know whether you have arrived. You have not appeared
at church, as I may say.'
'Indeed,' said Albinia, much diverted by her new discoveries
in the realms of etiquette, ' I was rather in a cupboard, I must
allow. Ought we to have sailed up the aisle in state in the
Grandison pattern? Are you ready ' and she glanced up at
her husband, but he only half heard.
'No,' said Miss Meadows, fretfully; 'but you have not ap-
peared as a bride. The straw bonnet-you see people cannot
tell whether you are not incog. as yet-'
To refrain from laughing was impossible. 'My tarn cap,'
she exclaimed; I am invisible in it! What shall I do?  I
fear I shall never be producible, for indeed it is my very best,
my veritable wedding-bonnet '
Lucy looked as if she thought it not worth while to be mar-
ried for no better a bonnet than that.
'Absurdity !' said Mr. Kendal.
If he would but have given a good hearty laugh, thought
Albinia, what a consolation it would be ! but she considered
herself to have had a lesson against laughing in that house, and
was very glad when he proposed going home. He took a kind,
affectionate leave of the old lady, who again looked fondly in
his face, and rejoiced in his having recovered his looks
As they arrived at home, Lucy announced that she was just




<pb n="17"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-3MOTHER.                17
going to speak to Lizzie Osborn, and Sophy ran after her to a
house of about the same degree as their own, but dignified as
Mount Lodge, because it stood on the hill side of the street.
while Mr. Kendal's house was for more gentility called 'Willow
Lawn.' Gilbert was not to be found; but at four o'clock the
whole party met at dinner, before the evening service.
Gilbert could eat little, and on going back to the fire to roast
his cheek instead of going to church, was told by his father,
'I cannot have this going on. You must go to Mr. Bowles
directly after breakfast to-morrow, have the tooth drawn, and
then go on to Mr. Salsted's.
Thle tone was one that admitted of no rebellion. If Mr.
Kendal interfered little, his authority was absolute where he
did interfere, and Albinia could only speak a few kind words of
encouragement; but the boy was vexed and moody, seemed half
asleep when they came home, and went to bed as soon as tea
was over.
Sophy went to bed too, Mr. Kendal went to his study, and
Albinia, after this day of novelty and excitement, drew her chair
to the fire, and as Lucy was hanging wearily about, called her
to her side, and made her talk, believing that there was more
use in studying the girl's character than even in suggesting
some occupation, though that was apparently the great want of
the whole family on Sunday.
Lucy's first confidence was that Gilbert had not been out
alone, but with that Archibald Tritton. Mr. Tritton had a
great farm, and was a sort of gentleman, and Gilbert was al-
ways after that Archy. She thought it ' very undesirable,' and
Aunt Maria had talked to him about it, but he never listened
to Aunt Maria.
Albinia privately thought that it must be a severe penance
to listen to Aunt Maria, and took Gilbert's part. She supposed
that he must be very solitary; it must be a melancholy thing to
be a twin left alone.
'And Edmund, dear Edmund, was always so kind and so
fond of Gilbert ! said Lucy. "You would not have thought
they were twins, Edmund was so much the tallest and strongest.
It seemed so odd that Gilbert should have got over it, when he
did not. Should you like to hear all about it, mamma ?'
It was Albinia's great wish to lift that dark veil, and Lucy
began, with as much seriousness and sadness as could co-exist
with the satisfaction and importance of having to give such a
nlarration, and exciting emotion and pity. It was remarkable
how she managed to make herself the heroine of the story,'
tl-ough she had been sent out of the house, and had escaped the
c




<pb n="18"/>
18             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
infection. She spoke in phrases that showed that she had so
ofttu told the story as to have a set forn, caught from her
elders, but still it had a deep and intrinsic interest for the bride,
that made her sit gazing into the fire, pressing Lucy's hand,
and now and then sighing and shuddering slightly as she heard
how there had been a bad fever prevailing in that lower part of
the town, and how the two boys were both unwell one damp,
hot autumn morning, and Lucy dwelt on the escape it had been
that she had not kissed them before going to school. Sophy
had sickened the same day, and after the tedious three weeks,
when father and mother were spent with attendance on the
three, Edmund, after long delirium, had suddenly sunk, just
as they had hopes of himi; and the same message that told
Lucy of her brother's death, told her of the severe illness of
both parents.
The disease had done the work rapidly on the mother's ex.
hausted frame, and she was buried a week after her boy. Lucy
had seen the procession from the window, and thought it neces-
sary to tell how she had cried.
Mr. Kendal's had been a long illness; the first knowledge of
his loss had caused a relapse, and his recovery had long been
doubtful. As soon as the children were able to move, they
were sent with Miss Meadows to Ramsgate, and Lucy had joined
them there.
' The day before I went, I saw papa,' she said. ' I had gone
home for some things that I was to take, and his room door was
open, so he saw me on the stairs, and called me, for there was
no fear of infection then. Oh, he was so changed ! his hair all
cut off, and his cheeks hollow, and he was quite trembling, as
he lay back on pillows in the great arm-chair. You can't think
what a shock it was to me to see him in such a state. He held
out his arms, and I flung mine round his neck, and sobbed and
cried. And he just said, so faintly, " Take her away, Maria, I
cannot bear it." I assure you I was quite hysterical.'
' You must have wished for more self-command,' said Albinia,
disturbed by Lucy's evident pleasure in having made a scene.
' Oh, but it was such a shock, and such a thing to see the house
all empty and forlorn, with the windows open, and everything
so still I Miss Belmarch6 cried too, and said she did not wonder
my feelings overcame me, and she did not see papa.'
Ah ! Lucy,' said Albinia, fervently, ' how we must try to
make him happy after all that he has gone through !'
'That is what grandmamma said when she got his letter. " I
would be glad of anything," she said, "that would bring back




<pb n="19"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHEIR                 19
a smile to him." And Aunt Maria said she had done her best
for him, but he must consult his own happiness; and so I say.
When people talk to me, 1 say that papa is quite at liberty to
consult his own happiness.'
T'lhank you.'
Lucy did not understand the tone, and went on patronizing.
' And if they say you look younger than they expected, I don't
object to that at alL  I had rather you were not as old as Aunt
Maria, or Miss Belmarche.'
' Who thinks me so young '
' Oh  Aunt Maria, and grandmamma, and Mrs. Osborn, and
all; but I don't mind that, it is only Sophy who says you look
like a girl.  Aunt Maria says Sophy has an unmanageable
te pier.'
' Don't you think you can let me find that out for myself '
'I thought you wanted me to tell you about everybody.'
'Ah ! but tell me of the good in your brother and sister.'
'I don't know how,' said Lucy. 'Gilbert is so tiresome, and
so is Sophy. I heard Mary telling Jane, " I'm sure the new
missus will have a heavy handful of those two."'
'And what of yourself?' said Albinia.
' Oh ! I don't know,' said Lucy, modestly.
Mr. Kendal came in, and as Albinia looked at his pensive
brow, she was oppressed by the thought of his sufferings in that
dreary convalescence.  At night, when she looked from her
window, the fog hung white, like mildew over the pond, and she
could not reason herself out of a spectral haunting fancy that
sickness lurked in the heavy, misty atmosphere. She dreamt of
it and the four babies, started, awoke, and had to recal all her
higher trust to enable her vigour to chase off the oppressive
imagination.
CHAPTER III.
FOG greeted Mrs. Kendal's eyes as she rose, and she resolved
to make an attack on the pond without loss of time. But
Mr. Kendal was absorbed nearly all breakfast-time in a letter
from India, containing a scrap in some uncouth character. As
he finished his last cup of tea, he looked up and said, ' A letter
from my old friend Penrose, of Bombay-an inscription in the
Salsette caves.'
'Have you seen the Salsette caves '
c2




<pb n="20"/>
20             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
' Yes.'
She was longing to hear about them, but his horso wa
announced.
'You said you would be engaged in the morning while I ride
out, Albinia ?' he said ;' I shall return before luncheon. Gilbert,
you had better go at once to Mr. Bowles. I shall order your
pony to be ready when you come back.'
There was not a word of remonstrance, though the boy looked
very disconsolate, and began to murmur the moment his fathller
had gone. Albinia, who had regarded protection at a deutist's
one of the offices of the head of a family, though dismayed at
the task, told Gilbert that she would come with him in a
moment. The girls exclaimed that no one thought of going
with him, and fearing she had put an affront on his manliness,
she asked what lie would like, but could get no answer, only
when Lucy scolded him for lingering, he said, ' I thought she
was going with me.'
'Amiable,' thought Albinia, as she ran up to put on her
bonnet; ' but I suppose toothache puts people out of the pale of
civilization. And if he is thankless, is not that treating me
more like a mother ?'
Perlhlas he had accepted her escort in hopes of deferring the
evil hour, for he seemed discomfited to see her so quickly ready,
and not grateful to his sisters, who hurried them by saying that
Mr. Bowles would be gone out upon his rounds.
Mr. Bowles was amazed at the sight of Mrs. Kendal, and so
elaborate in compliments and assurances that AMrs. Bowles would'
do herself the honour of calling, that Albinia, pitying Gilbert,
called his attention back.
With him the apothecary was peremptory and facetious.
'He had expected that lie should soon see him after his papa's
return!' And with a '.oon be over,' he set him down, and
Albina bravely stood a desperate wringing of her hand at the
tug of war. She was glad she had comle, for the boy suffered a
good deal, and was faint, and Mr. Bowles pronounced his mouth
in no state for a ride to Trenmlam.
'I must go,' said Gilbert, as they walked home; 'I wish papa
would listen to anything.'
' He would not wish you to hurt yourself.'
' When papa says a thing-' began Gilbert.
'Well, Gilbert, you are quite right, and I hope you don't
think I mean to teach you disobedience.  Iut 1 do (lesire you,
on my own responsibility, not to go and catch an inflammation
in your jaw. I'll undertake papa.'
Gilbert at once became quite another creature. Ile discoursed




<pb n="21"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                21
so much, that she had to make him restore the handkerchief to
his mouth; he held open the gate, showed her a shoal of min-
nows, and tried to persuade her to come round the garden
before going in, but she clapped her hands at him, and hunted
him back into the warm room, much impressed and delighted
by his implicit obedience to his father. With Lucy and Sophy,
his remaining seemed likewise to make a great sensation; they
looked at Mrs. Kendal and whispered, and were evidently
curious as to the result of her audacity. Albinia, who had
grown up with her brother Maurice and cousin Frederick, was
more used to boys than to girls, and was already more at ease
with her son than her daughters.
Gilbert lent a ready hand with hammer and chisel, and boxes
were opened, to the great delight and admiration of the girls.
They were all very happy and busy setting things to rights, but
Albinia was in difficulty how to bestow her books. There was
an unaccountable scarcity both of books and book-cases; none
were to be seen except that, in a chiffoniere in the drawing.
room, there was a row in gilded bindings, chiefly Pope, Gray,
and the like ; and one which Albinia took out had pages which
stuck together, a little pale blue string, faded at the end, and
in the garlanded fly-leaf the inscription, 'To Miss Lucy Meadows,
the reward of good conduct, December 20th, 1822.' The book
seemed rather surprised at being opened, and Albinia let it close
itself as Lucy said, 'Those are poor mamma's books; all the
others are in the study. Come in, and I'll show you.'
She threw open the door, and Albinia entered. The study
was shaded with a mass of laurels that kept out the sun, and
made it look chill and sad, and the air in it was close. The
round library-table was loaded with desks, pocket-books, and
papers; the mantelpiece was covered with letters, and book-
shelves mounted to the ceiling, filled with the learned and the
poetical of new and old times.
Over the fireplace hung what it needed not Lucy's whisper
to point out, as ' Poor mamma's picture.' It represented a very
pretty girl, with dark eyes, brilliant colour, and small cherry
1mouth, painted in the exaggerated style usually called ' ridicu-
lously like.'
Albinia's first feeling was that there was nothing in herself
that could atone for the loss of so fair a creature, and the
thought became more oppressive as she looked at a niche in the
wall, holding a carved sandal-wood work-box, with a silver
Watch lying on it.
'Poor Edmund's watch,' said Lucy. 'It was given to him
for a reward just before he was ill'




<pb n="22"/>
22            ETHE YOUNG STEP-hOTHER.
Albinia tried to recover composure by reading the titles of
the books.  Suddenly, Lucy started and exclaimed, 'Come
away. There he is r
' Why come away I' said Albinia.
'I would not have him find me there for all the world.'
In all her vexation and dismay, Albinia could not help.
thinking of Bluebeard's closet. Her inclination was to stay
where she was, and take her chance of losing her head, yet she
felt as if she could not bear to be found invading a sanctuary of
past recollections, and was relieved to find that it was a false
alarm, though not relieved by the announcement that Admiral
and Mrs. Osborn and the Miss Osborns were in the drawing.
room.
'Before luncheon-too bad !' she exclaimed, as she hurried.
upstairs to wash off the dust of unpacking.
Ere she could hurry down, there was another inundation
streaming across the hall, Mrs. Drury and three Miss Drurys,
who, as she remembered, when they began to kiss her, were
some kind of cousins.
There was talk, but Albinia could not give entire attention;
she was watching for Mr. Kendal's return, that she might
guard Gilbert from his displeasure, and the instant she heard
him, she sprang up, and flew into the hall. He could not help
brightening at the eager welcome, but when she told him of
Mr. Bowles' opinion, lie looked graver, and said, 'I fear you
must not always attach credit to all Gilbert's reports.'
'Mr. Bowles told me himself that he must run no risk of
inflammation.'
' You saw Mr. Bowles F
'I went with Gilbert.'
'You ! I never thought of your imposing so unpleasant a
task on yourself. I fear the boy has been trespassing on yout
kind ness.'
'No, indeed, he never asked me, but-' with a sort of laugh
to hide the warmth excited by his pleased, grateful look,
thought it all in the day's work, only natural-'
She would have given anything to have had time to enjoy
his epanchement de ccur at those words, but she was obliged to
add, Alas I there's all the world in the drawing-room!'
'Who '
'Osborns and Drurys'
'Do you want me 1'
'I ran away on the plea of calling you.'
'I'll never do so again,' was her inward addition, as his coun-
tenance settled into the accustomed fixed look of abstraction, and




<pb n="23"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                 23
as an unwilling victim he entered the room with her, and the
visitors were' dreadful enough' to congratulate him.
Albinia knew that it must be so unpleasant to him, that she
blushed up to the roots of her hair, and could not look at any-
body.
When she recovered, the first comers were taking leave, hut
the second set stayed on and on till past luncheon-time, and far
past her patience, before the room was at last cleared.
Gilbert hurried in, and was received by his father with, 'You
are very much obliged to her V'
'Indeed I am,' said Gilbert, in a winning, pleasant
manner.
'I don't want you to be,' said Albinia, affectionately laying
her arm on his shoulder. ' And now for luncheon-I pitied
you, poor fellow; I thought you must have been famished.'
'Anything not to have all the Drurys at luncheon,' said
Gilbert, confidentially; '1 had begun to wish myself at Trem-
blare.'
'By the bye,' said Mr. Kendal, waking as he sat down at the
bottom of the table, ' how was it that the Drurys did not stay
to luncheon ?'
' Was that what they were waiting for ' exclaimed Albinia.
'Poor people, I had no notion of that.'
'They (lo have luncheon here in general,' said Mr. Kendal, as
if not knowing exactly how it came to pass.
' yes,' said Lucy; 'Sarah Anne asked me whether we ate
weddling-cake every day.'
'Poor Miss Sarah Anne !' said Albinia, laughing. ' But one
cannot help feeling inhospitable when people come so uncon-
scionably early, and cut up all one's morning.'
The door was again besieged by visitors, just as they were
all going out to make the round of the garden; and it was not
till half-past four that the succession ceased, and Albinia was
left to breathe fieely, and remember how often Maurice had
called her to order for intolerance of morning calls.
'And not the only people I cared to see,' she said, 'the
Dusautoys and Nugents. But they have too much mercy to
call the first day.'
Mr. Kendal looked as if his instinct were drawing him study-
wards, but Albinia hung on his arm, and made him come into
the garden. Though devoid of W\inifred's gardening tastes, she
was dismayed at the untended look of the flower-beds. The
laurels were too high, and seemed to choke the narrow space,
and the turf owed its verdant appearance to damp moss. She
had made but few steps before the water squished under her




<pb n="24"/>
24             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
feet, and impelled her to exclaim,' What a pity this pond should
not be filled up !'
'Filled up !-'
'Yes, it would be so much less damp. One might drain it
off into the river, and then we should get rid of the fog.'
And she began actively to demonstrate the convenient slope,
and the beautiful flower-bed that might be made in its place.
Mr. Kendal answered with a few assenting sounds and com-
placent looks, and Albinia, accustomed to a brother with whom
to assent was to act, believed the matter was in train, and that
pond and fever would be annihilated.
The garden opened into a meadow with a causeway leading to
a canal bank, where there was a promising country walk, but
the cruel visitors had left no time for exploring, and Albinia
had to return home and hurry up her arrangements before
there was space to turn round in her room-even then
it was not what Winifred could have seen without making a
face.
Mr. Kendal had read aloud to his wife in the evening duringthe
stay at the sea-side, and she was anxious not to let the habit drop.
He liked it, and read beautifully, and she thought it good for
the children.  She therefore begged him to read, catching 
him on the way to his study, and coaxing him to stay no
longer than to find a book. He brought Schlegel's Philo-
sophy of History. She feared that it was above the young ones,
but it was delightful to herself, and the custom had better be
established before it was perilled by attempts to adapt it to the
children. Lucy and Sophy seemed astonished and displeased,
and their whispers had to be silenced; Gilbert learnt his lessons
apart. Albinia rallied her spirits, and insisted to herself that she
did not feel discouraged.
Monday had gone, or rather Albinia had been robbed of it
by visitors-now for a vigorous Tuesday. Her unpacking and
her setting to rights were not half over, but as the surface was
habitable, she resolved to finish at her leisure, and sacrifice no 
more mornings of study.
So after she had lingered at the door, to delight Gilbert by
admiring his pony, she returned to the dining-room, where the
girls were loading a small table in the window with piles of
books and exercises, and Lucy was standing looking all eager-
ness to show off her drawings.
'Yes, my dear, but first we had better read. I have been
talking to your papa, and we have settled that on Wednesdays
mnd Fridays we will go to church; but on these days we will
begin by reading the Psalms and Lessons.'




<pb n="25"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                25
(Oh,' said Lucy, ' we never do that, except when we are at
grandmlamma's.'
'Pray are you too old or too young for it ' said Albinia.
' We did it to please grandmamma,' said Sophy.
'Now you will do it to please me,' said Albinia, 'if for no
better reason. Fetch your Bibles and Prayerbooks.'
' We shall never have time for our studies, I assure you,
mamma,' objected Lucy.
'That is not your concern,' said Albinia, her spirit rising at
the girls' opposition. 'I wish for obedience.'
Lucy went; Sophy leant against the table like a post.
Albiuia regretted that the first shot should have been fired for
such a cause, and sat perplexing herself whether it were worse
to give way, or to force the girls to read Holy Scripture in such
a mood.
Lucy came flying down with the four books in her hands, and
began officiously opening them before her sister, and exhorting
her not to give way to sullenness-she ought to like to read
the Bible-which of course made Sophy look crosser. The
desire to establish her authority conquered the scruple about
reverence.  Albinia set them  to read, and suffered for it.
Lucy read flippantly; Sophy in the hoarse, dull, dogged voice
of a naughty boy. She did not dare to expostulate, lest site should
exasperate the tempers that she had roused.
' Never mind,' she thought, 'when the institution is fixed, they
will be more amenable.'
She tried a little examination afterwards, but not one answer
was to be extracted from Sophy, and Lucy knew far less than
the first class at Fairmead, and made her replies wide of the
mark, with an air of satisfaction that nearly overthrew the young
stcl)-mother's patience.
When Albinia took her Bible upstairs, she gave Sophy time
to say what Lucy reported instantly on her entrance.
'Dear me, mamma, here is Sophy declarilng that you ought
to be a charity-schoolmistress. You won't be angry with her,
but it is so funny !'
'If you were at my charity school, Lucy,' said Albinia,
'the first lesson I should give you would be against telling tales.'
Lucy subsided.
Albiuia turned to Sophy. ' My dear,' she said, 'perhaps I
pressed this on when you were not prepared for it, but I have
always been used to think of it as a duty.'
Sophy made no answer, but her moody attitude relaxed, and
Albinia took comfort in the hope that she might have been
gracious if she had known how to set about it.




<pb n="26"/>
26             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
I suppose Miss Belmarch6 is a Roman Catholic,' she said,
wishing to account for this wonderful ignorance, and address-
ing herself to Sophy; but Lucy, whom she thought she had
effectually put down, was up again in a moment like a Jack-in-
a-box.
' O yes, but not G6neviave. Her papa made it his desire
that she should be brought up a Protestant. Wasn't it funny t
You know G6nevieve is Madame Belmarchbs grand-daughter,
and Mr. Durant was a dancing master.'
' Madame Belmarche's father and brother were guillotined,
continued Sophy.
' Ah  then she is an emigrant T
'Yes. Miss Belmarcha has always kept school here. Our
own mamma, and Aunt Maria went to school to her, and Miss
Celeste Belmarche married Mr. Durant, a dancing-master-she
was French teacher in a school in London where he taught;
and Madame Belmarch6 did not approve, for she and her husband
were something very grand in France, so they waited and waited
ever so long, and when at last they did marry, they were quite
old, and she died very soon; and they say he never was happy
again, and pined away till he really did die of grief, and so Gene-
vieve came to her grandmamma to be brought up.'
'Poor child ! How old is she '
'Fifteen,' said Lucy. 'She teaches in the school  She is
not at all pretty, and such a queer little thing.'
' Wa  her father French '
'No,' said Sophy.
'Yes,' said Lucy. 'You know nothing about it, Sophy. He
was French, but of the Protestant French sort, that camne to
England a great many years ago, when they ran away from the
Sicilian Vespers, or the Edict of Nantes, I don't remember
which; only the Spitalfields weavers have something to do with
it. However, at any rate Geneviave has got something in a
drawer up in her own room that she is very secret about, and
wont show to anybody.'
'I think it is something that somebody was killed with,' said
Sophy, in a low voice.
' Dear me, if it is, I am sure it is quite wicked to keep it. I
shall be quite afraid to go into her room, and you know I slept
three all the time of the fever.'
' It did not hurt you,' said Sophy.
Albinia  had been strongly interested by the touching
facts, so  untouchingly narrated, and by the characteristic
account of the Huguenot emigration, but it suddenly oo-
curred to her that she was promoting gossip, and she returned




<pb n="27"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                 27
to business.  Lucy showed off her attainments with her
usual self-satisfaction.  They were what might be expected
from a second-rate old-fashioned young ladies' school, where
nothing was good but the French pronunciation.   She was
evidently considered a great proficient, and her glib mediocrity
was even more disheartening than the ungracious carelessness
or dulness-there was no knowing which-that made her sister
figure wretchedly in the examination.  However, there was
little time-the door-bell rang at a quarter to twelve, and Mrs.
Wolfe was in the drawing-room.
'I told you so,' whispered Lucy, exultingly.
'This is unbearable,' cried Albinia. 'I shall give notice that
I am always engaged in the morning.'
She desired each young lady to work a sum in her absence,
and left them to murmur, if they were so disposed. Perhaps
it was Lucy's speech that made her inflict the employment; at
any rate, her spirit was not as serene as she could have desired.
Mr. Kendal was quite willing that she should henceforth
shut her door against company in the morning; that is to say,
lie bowed his head assentingly. She was begging him to take
a walk with her, when, at another sound of the bell, he made a
precipitate retreat into his study. The visitors were the Belmarch6
family. The old lady was dark and withered, small, yet in look
and air, with a certain nobility and grandeur that carried Albinia
back in a moment to the days of hoops and trains, of powder and
high-heeled shoes, and made her feel that the sweeping courtesy
had come straight from the days of Marie Antoinette, and that
it was an honour and distinction conferred by a superior-
superior, indeed, in all the dignity of age, suffering, and con-
stancy.
Albinia blushed, and took her hand with respect very unlike
the patronizing airs of Bayford Bridge towards 'poor old
Aladame Belmarche,' and with downcast eyes, and pretty
embarrassment, heard the stately compliments of the ancien
regine.
Miss Belmarche was not such a fine specimen of Sevres
porcelain as her mother.   She was a brown, dried, small
woman, having lost, or never possessed, her country's taste in
dress, and with a rusty bonnet over the tight, fiizzly curls of
her fiont; too thin and too scantily robed to have any waist,
alnd speaking English too well for the piquant grace of her
Ilother's speech. Poor lady ! born an exile, she had toiled and
struggled for a whole lifetime to support her mother; but
though care had worn her down, there was still vivacity in her
quick little black eyes, and though her teeth w re of a dreadful




<pb n="28"/>
28             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
colour, her laugh was so full of life and sweetness, that Albinia
felt drawn towards her in a moment.
Silent and demure, plainly dressed in an old dark merino,
and a white-ribboned faided bonnet, sat a little figure almost
behind her grandmother. Her face had the French want of
complexion, but the eyes were of the deepest, most lustrous
hue of grey, almost as dark as the pupils, and with the softness
of long dark eyelashes-beautiful eyes, full of light and expres-
sion-and as she moved towards the table, there was a finish
and delicacy about the whole form and movements, that made
her a most pleasing object.
But Albilia could not improve her acquaintance, for in
flowed another party of visitors, and Madame curtsied herself
out again, Albinia volunteering that she would soon come to
see her, and being answered, 'You will do me too much
honour.'
Another afternoon devoured by visitors ! Every one seemed
to have come except the persons who would have been most
welcome, Mr. Dusautoy, and Winifred's friends, the Nugents.
When, at four o'clock, she had shaken hands with the last
guest, she gave a hearty yawn, jumped up and shook herself, as
she exclaimed, 'There I There! that is done    I wonder
whether your papa would come out now I'
He is in his study,' said the girls.
Albinia thought of knocking and calling at the door, but
somehow it seemed impossible, and she decided on promlenading
past his window to show that she was ready for him. But
alas ! those evergreens ! She could not see in, and probably
he could not see out.
' Ha !' cried Lucy, as they pursued their walk into the kitchen
garden, ' here are some asparagus comling up. Grandmamma
always has our first asparagus.'
Albinia was delighted to find such an opening. Out came
her knife-they would cut the heads and take them up at
once; but when the tempting white-stalked, pink-tipped bundle
had been made up and put into a basket, a difficulty arose.
'I'll call the boy to take it,' said Lucy.
'What, when we are going ourselves V' said Albinia.
'Oh ! but we can't.'
'Why I   Do you think we shall break down under the
weight T'
' 0 no, but people will stare.'
'Why-what should they stare at?'
'It looks so to carry a basket-'
Albinia burst into one of her merriest peals of laughing.




<pb n="29"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                29
'Not carry a basket! My dear, I have looked so all the
days of my life. Bayford must endure the spectacle, so it may
as well begin at once.'
' But, dear mamma-'
'I'm not asking you to carry it. O no, I only hope you
don't think it too ungenteel to walk with me. But the notion
of calling a boy away fiom his work, to carry a couple of dozen
asparagus when an able-bodied woman is going that way herself!'
Albinia was so tickled that she could hardly check herself,
even when she saw Lucy looking distressed and hurt, and little
laughs would break out every moment as she beheld the young
lady keeping aloof, as if ashamed of her company, turning
towards the steep church steps, willing at least to hide the
dreadful sight from the High Street.
Just as they had entered the narrow alley, they heard a
hasty tread, and almost running over them with his long strides,
came Mr. Dusautoy.  lie brought himself up short, just in
time, and exclaimed, ' I beg your pardon-Mrs. Kendal, I be-
lieve. Could you be kind enough to give me a glass ofbrandy '
Albinia gave a great start, as well she might.
'I was going to fetch one,' quickly proceeded Mr. Dusautoy,
'but your house is nearer. A poor man-there-just come
home-been on the tramp for work-quite exhausted-' and he
pointed to one of the cottages.
'I'll fetch it at once,' cried &lbinia.
' Tlank you,' he said, as they crossed the street. ' Tllis poor
fellow has had nothing all day, has walked from Hadminster-
just got home, sank down quite worn out, and there is nothing
in the house but dry bread. His wife wants something nearly
as much as he does.'
In the excitement, Albinia utterly forgot all scruples about
'Bluebeard's closet.' She hurried into the house, and made but
one dash, standing before her astonished husband's dreamy eyes,
exclaiming, 'Pray give me the key of the cellaret; there's a
poor man just come home, fainting with exhaustion; Mr. Du-
sautoy wants some brandy for him.'
Like a man but half awake, obeying an apparition, MTr.
Kendlal put his hand into his pocket and gave her the key. She
was instantly opening the cellaret, seeking among the bottles,
and asking questions all the time. She proposed taking a jug
of the kitchen-tea then in operation, and Alr. I)usautcy caught
at the idea; so that poor Lucy beheld the dreadful spectacle of
the vicar bearing a can full of steaming tea, and Mrs. Kendal a
small cup with the ' spilituous liquor.' What was the asparagub
to this 




<pb n="30"/>
80             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
Albinia told her to go on to Mrs. Meadows', and that she
should soon follow. She intended to have gone the moment
that she had carried in the cup, leaving Mr. Dusautoy in the
cottage, but the poor trembling frightened wife needed woman's
sympathy and soothing, and she waited to comfort her, and to
see the pair more able to enjoy the meeting, in their tidy, but
bare and dampl-lookiing cottage. She promised broth for the
morrow, and took her leave, the vicar cowing away at the same
time.
'Thank you,' he said, warmly, as they came out, and turned
to mount the hill together.
'May I go and call on them again ?'
'It will be very kind in you. Poor Simkins is a steady,
good sort of fellow, but a clumsy workman, down-hearted, and
with poor health, and things have been untoward with him.'
'People who do not prosper in the world are not always the
worst,' said Albinia.
'No, indeed, and these are grateful, warm-hearted people
that you will like, if you can get over the poor woman's lack-
adaisical manner.  But you are used to all that,' he added,
sniiling. 'I see you know what poor folk are made of.'
'I have been living among them pearly all my days,' said
Albinia. ' 1 hope you will give me something to do, I should
be quite forlorn without it;' and she looked up to his kind, open
face, as much at home with him as if she had known him for
years.
'Fanny-my wife-shall find work for you,' he said. ' You
must excuse her calling on you, she is never of' the sofa, but-'
And what a bright look he gave ! as much as to say that his
wife on the sofa was better than any one else of. ' I was hoping
to call some of these afternoons,' he continued, 'but I have
had little tine, and Fanny thought your door was besieged
enough already.'
'Thank you,' said Albinia; 'I own I thought it was your
kindness in leaving me a little breathing time. And would
Mrs. Dusautoy be able to see me if I were to call I'
'She would be delighted. Suppose you were to come in at
once.'
'I wish I could, but I must go on to Mrs. Meadows'. If I
were to come to-morrow ?'
'Any time-any time,' he said. 'She is always at home,
and she has been much better since we came here. We were
too much in the town at Lauriston.'
Mlr. Dusautoy, having a year ago come out of the diocese
where had been Albinia's home, they had many common friends,




<pb n="31"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MIOTHER.                31
and plunged into 'ecclesiastical intelligence,' with a mutual
understanding of the topics most often under discussion, that
made Albinia quite in her element. 'A great Newfoundland
dog of a man in size, and countenance, and kindness,' thought
she. ' If his wife be worthy of him, I shall reck little of all the
rest.'
Her tread the gayer for this resumption of old habits, she
proceeded to Mrs. Meadows', where the sensation created by
her poor little basket justified Lucy's remonstrance.  There
were regrets, and assurances that the girl could have come in a
moment, and that she need not have troubled herself and her
laughing declarations that it was no trouble were disregai ditd,
except that the old lady said, in gentle excuse to her daughter,
that Mrs. Kendal had always lived in the country, where people
could do as they pleased.
'I mean to do as I please here,' said Albinia, laughing; but
the speech was received with silent discomfiture that made her
heartily regret it. She disdained to explain it away; she was
beginning to hold Mrs. and Miss Meadows too cheap to think
it worth while.
' Well,' said Mrs. Meadows, as if yielding up the subject,
'things may be different from what they were in my time.'
'Oh ! mamma-Mrs. Kendal-I am sure-' Albinia let
Maria flounder, but she only found her way out of the speech
with ' Well! and is not it the most extraordinary I-Mr. Du-
sautoy-so rude-'
' I should not wonder if you found me almost as extraordinary
is Mr. Dusautoy,' said Albinia.
Why would Miss Meadows always nettle her into saying
exactly the wrong thing, so as to alarm and distress the old
lady ?  That want of comprehension of playfulness was a
strangely hard trial. She turned to Mrs. Meadows and tried to
reassure her by saying, ' You know I have been always in the
clerical line myself, so I naturally take the part of the parson.'
'Yes, my dear,' said Mrs. Meadows. 'I dare say Mr. Dusau-
toy is a very good man, but I wish he would allow his poor
delicate wife more butcher's meat; and I don't think it looks
well to see the vicarage without a man-servant.'
Albinia finally made her escape, and while wondering whether
she should ever visit that house without tingling with irritation
with herself and with the inmates, Lucy exclaimed, ' There, you
see I was right. Grandmamma and Aunt Maria were surprised
when I told them that you said you were an able-bodied woman.'
What would not Albinia have given for Winifred to laugh
with her   What to do now she did not know, so she thought




<pb n="32"/>
32             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
it best not to hear, and to ask the way to a carpenter's shop to
order some book-shelves.
She was more uncomfortable after she came home, for by the
sounds when Mr. Kendal next emerged from his study, she
found that he had locked himself in, to guard against further
intrusion. And when she offered to return to him the key of 
the cellaret, he quietly replied that he should prefer her retain-
ing it,-not a formidable answer in itself, but one which,
coupled with the locking of the door, proved to her that she
might do anything rather than invade his privacy.
T Now Maurice's study was the thoroughfare of the household,
the place for all parish preparations unpresentable in the
drawing-room, and Albinia was taken by surprise. She grew
hot and cold. Had she done anything wrong   Could he care
for her if he could lock her out ?
'I will not be morbid, I will not be absurd,' said she to
herself, though the tears stood in her eyes. ' Some men do not
like to be rushed in upon! It may be only habit. It may
have been needful here. It is base to take petty offences, and
set up doubts.'
And Mr. Kendal's tender manner when they were again
together, his gentle way of addressing her, and a sort of shy
caress, proved that he was far from all thought of displeasure;
nay, he might be repenting of his momentary annoyance, though
he said nothing.
Albinia went to inquire after the sick man at her first
leisure moment, and while talking kindly to the wife, and
hearing her troubles, was surprised at the forlorn rickety
state of the building, the broken pavement, damp walls, and door
that would not shut, because the frame had sunk out of the
perpendicular.
'Can't you ask your'landlord to do something to tl;e house,
'It is of no use, ma'am, Mr. Pettilove never will do nothing.
Perhaps if you would be kind enough to say a word to him, 
ma'am-' 
' Mr. Pettilove, the lawyer ? I'll try if Mr. Kendal can say
anything to him. It really is a shame to leave a house in this
condition.'
Thanks were so profuse, that she feared that she was supposed
to possess some power of amelioration. The poor woman even
insisted on conducting her up a break-neck staircase to see the
broken ceiling, whence water often streamed in plentifully from
the roof.
Her mind full of designs against the cruel landlord, she
speeded up the hill, exhilarated by each step she took into the




<pb n="33"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.          .      3
fresh air, to the garden-gate, which she was just uuhasping when
the hearty voice of the Vicar was heard behind her. ' Mrs
Kendal I I told Fanny you would come.'
Instead of taking her to the front door he conducted her
across a sloping lawn towards a French window open to the
bright afternoon sunshine.
'Here she is, here is Mrs. Kendal!' he said, sending his
voice before him, as they came in sight of the pretty little
ldrawing-room, where through the gay chintz curtains, she saw
the clear fire shining upon half-a-dozen school girls, ranged
opposite to a couch. 'Ah!' as he perceived them, 'shall I
take her for a turn in the garden while you finish your lesson i'
' One moment, if you please. I did not know it was so late,'
and a face as bright as all the rest was turned towards the
window.
'Ah l  give her her scholars, and she never knows how time
passes,' said Mr. Dusautoy. ' But step this way, and I'll show
you the best view in Bayford.' He took her up a step or two,
to a little turfed mound, where there was a rustic seat command-
ing the whole exquisite view of river, vale, and woodland, with
the church tower rising in the foreground. The wind blew
pleasantly, chasing the shadows of the clouds across the open
space. Albinia was delighted to feel it fan her brow, and her
eager exclamations contented Mr. Dusautoy. 'Yes,' he said,
'it was all Fanny's notion. She planned it all last summer
when I took her round the garden. It is wonderful what an
eye she has ! I only hope when the dry weather comes, that I
shall be able to get her up there to enjoy it.'
On coming down they found that Mrs. Dusautoy had dismissed
her class, and come out to a low, long-backed sloping garden-
seat at the window. She was very little and slight, a mere
doll in proportion to her great husband, who could lift her
as easily and tenderly as a baby, paying her a sort of reve-
rential deference and fond admiration that rendered them a
I)eautiful sight, in such full, redoubled measure was his fondness
repaid by the little, clever, fairy-looking woman, with her
playful manner, high spirits, keen wit, and the active habits
that even confirmed invalidism could not destroy. She had
snlall deadly white hands, a fair complexion, that varied more
hinan was good for her, pretty, though rather sharp and irregular
features, and hazel eyes dancing with merriment, and face and
tigure at some years above thirty, would have suited a girl of
twcelty. To see Mr. Dusautoy bringing her footstools, shawls,
:irld cushions, and to remember the accusation of starvation, was
almost irresistibly ludicrous.
J)




<pb n="34"/>
34             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
'Now, John, you had better have been giving Mrs. Kendal
a chair all this time.'
' Mrs. Kendal will excuse,' said Mr. Dusautoy, as he brought
her a seat.
' Mrs. Kendal has excused,' said Mrs. Dusautoy, bursting into
a merry fit of laughter. ' Oh, I never heard anything more
charming than your introduction ! I beg your pardon, but I
laughed last evening till I was worn out, and waked in the night
laughing again.'
It was exhilarating to find that any one laughed at Bayford,
and Albinia partook of the mirth with all her heart. 'Never
was an address more gratifying to me !' she said.
' It was like him ! so unlike Bayford ! So bold a venture r
continued Mrs. Dusautoy amid peals of laughter.       X
' What is there to laugh at ?' said Mr. Dusautoy, putting on a
look between merriment and simplicity. 'What else could
I have done ? I should have done the same whoever I had met:
' Ah ! now he is afraid of your taking it as too great a com-
pliment ! To do him justice I believe he would, but the question
is, what answer he would have had.'
'Nobody could have refused-' began Albinia.
'Oh!' cried Mrs. Dusautoy. ' Little you know Bayford.
'Fanny ! Fanny ! this is too bad. Madame Belmarche-' 
'Would have had nothing but eau sucre I No, John, decidedly
you and Simkins fell upon your legs, and you had better take
credit for your " admirable sagacity." ' 
' I like the people,' said Albinia;' ' but they never can be wel
while they live in such a shocking place. It is quite a disgrace
to Bayford.'
'It is in a sad state,' said Mr. Dusautoy.
' I know I should like to set my brother upon that Mr. Petti.
love, who they say will do nothing,' exclaimed Albinia.
The Vicar was going to have said something, but a loo
from his wife checked him.  Albinia was sorry for it,
she detected a look of suppressed amusement on Mrs. Dusau
toy's face. 'I mean to ask Mr. Kendal what can be done,
she said; 'and in the meantime, to descend from what we can't
do to what we can. Mr. Dusautoy told me to come to you for
orders.'
' And I told Mr. Dusautoy that I should give you none.'
' Oh I that is hard.'
'If you could have heard him! He thought he had got
a working lady at last, and he would have had no mercy upon
you. One would have imagined that Mr. Kendal had brought
you here for his sole behoof '




<pb n="35"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                 35
'Then I shall look to you, Mr. Dusautoy.'
'No, I believe she is quite right,' he said. 'She says you
ought to undertake nothing till you have had time to see what
leisure you have to give us.'
'Nay, I have been used to think the parish my business,
home my leisure.'
' Yes,' said Mrs. Dusautoy, 'but then you were the woman-
kind of the clergy, now you are a laywoman.'
'I think you have work at home,' said the Vicar.
'Work, but not work enough f cried Albinia. 'The girls
will help me; only tell me what I may do.'
'I say, "what yot can,"' said Mrs. Dusautoy. 'You see
before you a single-handed man. Only two of the ladies here
can be called coadjutors, one being poor little Genevieve Durant,
the other the bookseller's daughter, Clarissa Richardson, who
made all the rest fly off. All the others do what good they
mean to do according to their own sweet will, free and inde-
pendent women, and we can't have any district system, so I
think you can only do what just comes to hand.'
Most heartily did Albinia undertake all that Mrs. Dusautoy
would let her husband assign to her.
'Yes, John is a strong temptation,' said the bright little
invalid; 'but you must let Mrs. Kendal find out in a month's
time whether she has work enough.'
'I could think my wise brother Maurice had been cautioning
you,' said Albinia, taking leave as of an old friend, for indeed
she felt more at home with Mrs. Dusautoy than with any ac-
quaintance she had made in Bayford.
Albinia told her husband of the state of the cottages, and
railed at Mr. Pettilove much to her own satisfaction. Mr.
Kendal answered, ' He would see about it,' an answer of which
Albinia had yet to learn the import.
CHAPTER IV.
THERE are some characters so constituted, that of them the
old proverb, that Love is blind, is perfectly true ; they can
see no imperfection in the mind or body of those dear to them.
There are others in whom the strongest affections do not destroy
clearness of vision, who see their friends on all sides, and per-
0!ive their faults and foibles, without loving them the less.
Albinia Kendal was a person of the latter description. Is
night almost be called her temptation, that her mind beheld
D 2




<pb n="36"/>
36             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHEI
all that came before it in a clear, aqd a humorous light, 
only a disposition overflowing with warm affection and wit
energy of kindness, could have prevented from bordering
censoriousness. She had imagination, but it was not 
to make an illusion of the present, or to interfere withf
almost satirical good sense. Happily, religion and its 
manifestation-charity regulated her, taught her to 
judge lest she should be judged, strengthened her nat
fond affections, and tempered the keenness that disappoint
might soon have turned to sourness. The tongue, the te
and the judgment knew their own tendencies, and a
was set over them; and if the sentinel were ever torpi
deceived, repentance paid the penalty.
She had not long seen her husband at home before she
involuntarily completed her view of his character.  N
must have designed him for a fellow of a college, where, 
from all cares, he might have collected fragments of torg
authors, and immortalized his name by some edition of a (
Lyric poet, known by four poems and a half, and two-thi
a line quoted somewhere else  In such a controversy, light
by perpetually polished poems, by a fair amount of m
literature, select college friendships, and methodical 
Edmund Kendal would have been in his congenial ele
lived and died, and had his portrait hung up as one of
glories of his college.
But he had been carried off from school, before he had 4
more than prove his unusual capacity. All his connexions
Indian, and his father, who had not seen him since his ear
childhood, offered him no choice but an appointment in
civil service.  He had one stimulus; lie had seen 
Meadows in the radiant glory of girlish beauty, and.
fastened on her all a poet's dreams, deepening and beco
more fervid in the recesses of a reserved heart, which did
easily admit new sensations. That stimulus carried him
cheerfully to India, and quickened his abilities, so that
exerted himself sufficiently to obtain a lucrative situation
in life. He married, and his household must have been on
German system, all the learning on one side, all the dom
cares on the other. The understanding and refinement 
ing in his wife, he believed to be wanting in all women.
resident at a small remote native court in India, he saw
female society such as could undeceive him; and subsequ
his Bayford life had not raised his standard of womankind.&
perfect gentleman, his superiority was his own work, r
than that of station or education; and so he had never 




<pb n="37"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHEB.                  37
intercourse with really ladylike or cultivated female minds,
expected little from wife, or daughters, or neighbours; had a
few learned friends, but lived within himself. He had acquired
a competence too soon, and had the great misfortune of pro-
perty without duties to present themselves obviously. He had
nothing to do but to indulge his naturally indolent scholarly
tastes, which, directed as they had been to Eastern languages,
had even less chance of sympathy among his neighbours than
if they had been classical. Always reserved, and seldom or
never meeting with persons who could converse with him, he
had lapsed into secluded habits, and learnt to shut himself up
in his study and exclude every one, that he might have at least a
refuge from the gossip and petty cares that reigned everywhere
else. So seldom was anything said worth his attention, that
he never listened to what was passing, and had learnt to say
'very well'-' I'll see about it,' without even knowing what was
said to him.
But though his wife had been no companion, the illusion had
never died away; he had always loved her devotedly, and her
loss had shattered all his present rest and comfort; as entirely
as the death of his son had taken from him hope and companion-
ship.
What a home it must have been, with Lucy reigning over it
in her pert self-sufficiency, Gilbert and Sophy running riot and
squabbling, and Maria Meadows coming in on them with her
well-meant worries and persecutions !
When taken away from the scene of his troubles, his spirits
revived; afraid to encounter his own household alone, he had
thought Albinia the cure for everything. But at home, habit
and association had proved too strong for her presence-the
grief, which he had tried to leave behind, had waited ready to
meet him on the threshold, and the very sense that it was a
melancholy welcome added to his depression, and made him less
able to exert himself. The old sorrows haunted the walls of
the house, and above all the study, and tarried not in seizing
on their unresisting victim. Melancholy was in his nature, his
indolence gave it force, and his habits were almost ineffaceable,
and they were habits of quiet selfishness, formed by a resolute,
though inert will, and fostered by an adoring wife. A youth
spent in India had not given him ideas of responsibilities
beyond his own family; and his principles, though sound, had
not expanded the views of duty with which he had started in life.
It was a positive pleasure to Albinia to discover that there had
been an inefficient clergyman at Bayford before Mr. Dusautoy,
and to know that during half the time that the present vicar




<pb n="38"/>
38             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
had held the living, Mr. Kendal had been absent, so that hid
influence had had no time to work. She began to understand
her line of action. It must be her effort, in all loving patience
and gentleness, to raise her husband's spirits and rouse his facul-
ties; to make his powers available for the good of his fellow-,
creatures, to make him an active and happy man, and to draw
him and his children together. This was truly a task to make her
heart throb high with hope and energy. Strong and brave was
that young heart, and not self-contident-the difficulty made
her only the more hopeful, because she saw it was her duty,
She was secure of her influence with him. If he did exclude
her from his study, he left her supreme elsewhere, and though
she would have given the world that their sovereignty might be
a joint one everywhere, still she allowed much for the morbid
inveterate habit of dreading disturbance. When he began by
silence and not listening, she could always rouse him, and give
him animation, and he was so much surprised and pleased
whenever she entered into any of his pursuits, that she had full
hope of drawing him out.
One day when the fog, instead of clearing off had turned to
violent rain, Albinia had been out on parish work, and afterwards
enlivening old Mrs. Meadows by dutifully spending an hour
with her, while Maria was nursing a nervous headache-she 
had been subject to headaches ever since-an ominous sigh
supplied the rest.
But all the effect of Albinia's bright kindness was undone,
when the grandmother learnt that Gilbert was gone to his
tutor, and would have to come home in the rain, and she gave
such an account of his exceeding delicacy, that Albinia became
alarmed, and set off st once that she might consult his father
about sending for him.
Her opening of the hall door was answered by Mr. Kendal
emerging from his study. He was looking restless and anxious,
came to meet her, and uncloaked her, while he affectionately
scolded her for being so venturesome. She told him where she
had been, and he smiled, saying, ' You are a busy spirit! But
you must not be too imprudent.'
' Oh, nothing hurts me. It is poor Gilbert that I am anxious
about.'
'So am I. Gilbert has not a constitution fit for exposure.
I wish he were come home.'
'Could we not send for him ? Suppose we sent a fly.'
He was consenting with a pleased smile, when the door
opened, and there stood the dripping Gilbert, completely wet




<pb n="39"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                 39
through, pale and chilled, with his hair plastered down, and his
Ct stuck all over with the horse's short hair.
' You must go to bed at once, Gilbert,' said his father. ' Are
you cold ?'
'Very. It was such a horrid driving wind, and I rode so
fast,' said Gilbert; violently shivering, as they helped to pull
him out of his great coat; he put his hand to his mouth, and
said that his face ached. Mr. Kendal was very anxious, and
Albinia hurried the boy up to bed, and meantime ordered quickly
a basin of the soup preparing for dinner, warmed some worsted
socks at the fire, and ran upstairs with them.
He seemed to have no substance in him; he had hardly had
energy to undress himself, and she found him with his face
hidden on the pillow, shivering audibly, and actually crying.
She was aghast.
The boys with whom she had been brought up, would never
have given way so entirely without resistance; but between
lalughing, cheering, scolding, covering him up close, and rubbing
his hands with her own, she comforted him, so that he could be
grateful and cheerful when his father himself came up with the
soup. Albinia noticed a sort of shudder pass over Mr. Kendal
as he entered, and he stood close by Gilbert, turning his back
on everything else, while he watched the boy eat the soup, as if
restored by every spoonful. 'That was a good thought,' was
his comment to his wife, and the look of gratitude brought a
flush of pleasure into her cheek.
Of all the dinners, this was the most pleasant; he was more
gentle and affectionate, and she made him tell her about the
Persian poets, and promise to show her some specimens of the
Rose Garden of Saadi-she had never before been so near
having his pursuits opened to her.
' What a favourite Gilbert is!' Lucy said to Sophia, as
Albinia lighted a candle and went up to his room.
'He makes such a fuss,' said Sophy. 'What is there in
being wet through to cry about ?'
Albinia heard a little shuffle as she opened the door, and
Gilbert pushed a book under his pillow. She asked him what
he had been reading. 'Oh,' he said, 'he had not been doing it
long, for the flickering of the candle hurt his eyes.'
'Yes, you had better not,' said Albinia, moving the flaring
light to a less draughty part of the dingy whitewashed attic.
' Or shall I read to you ?'
' Are you come to stay with me I' cried the boy, raising
hi mself up to look after her, as she moved about the room and




<pb n="40"/>
40             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
stood looking from the window over the trees at the water
meadows, now flooded into a lake, and lighted by the beams of
a young moon.
'I can stay till your father is ready for tea,' said Albinia,
coming nearer. ' Let me see whether your hands are hot.'
She found her own hand suddenly clasped, and pressed to his
lips, and then, as if ashamed, he turned his face away; nor
would she betray her pleasure in it, but merely said, ' Shall I
go on with your book ?'
'No,' said he, wearily turning his reddened cheek to the
other side. 'I only took it because it is so horrid lying here
thinking.'
' I am very sorry to hear it. Do you know, Gibbie, that it is
said there is nothing more lamentable than for a man not to
like to have his own thoughts for his company,' said she, gaily.
' Ah ! but- !' said Gilbert. 'If I lie here alone, I'm always
looking out there,' and he pointed to the opposite recess. She-
looked, but saw nothing. 'Don't you know ' he said.
'Edmund I' she asked.
He grasped her hands in both his own. ' Aye ! Ned used to
sleep there. I always look for him there.'
' Do you mean that you would rather have another room t
I would manage it directly.'
'0 no, thank you, I like it for some things. Take the candle
-look by the shutter-cut out in the wood.'
The boys' scoring of' E. & G. K.,' was visible there.
'Papa has taken all he could of Edmund's,' said Gilbert,
'but he could not take that! No, I would not have any other
room if you were to give me the best in the house.'
'I am sure not! But, my dear, considering what Edmund
was, surely they should be gentle, happy thoughts that the
room should g' ve you.'
He shuddered, and presently said, 'Do you know what ' and
paused; then continued, with an effort, getting tight hold of
her hand, 'Just before Edmund died-he lay out there-I lay
here-he sat up all white in bed, and he called out, clear
and loud, "l Mamma, Gilbert "-I saw him-and then-he was
dead ! And you know mamma did die-and I'm sure I shall!'
He had worked himself into a trembling fit, hid his face and
sobbed.
'But you have not died of the fever.'
'Yes-but I know it means that I shall die young ! I am
sure it does  It was a call! I heard Nurse say it was a
call!'
What was to be done with such a superstition ? Albinia did




<pb n="41"/>
THE YOVNG STEP-MOTHER.                41
not think it would be right to argue it away. It might be in
truth a warning to him to guard his ways-a voice from the
twin-brother, to be with hini through life. She knelt down by
him, and kissed his forehead.
'Dear Gilbert,' she said, ' we all shall die.'
'Yes, but I shall die young.'
'And if you should. Those are happy who die young.
How much pain your baby-brother and sisters have missed I
How happy Edmund is now !'
'Then vou really think it meant that I shall!' he cried,
trenlblingly. 'O don't! I can't die !'
'Your brother called on what he loved best,' said Albinia.
'It may mean nothing. Or rather, it may mean that your
dear twin-brother is watching for you, I am sure he is, to have
you with him, for what makes your mortal life, however long,
seem as nothing. It was a call to you to be as pure on earth
as he is in heaven. O Gilbert, how good you should be !'
Gilbert did not know whether it frightened him or soothed
him to see his superstition treated with respect-neither denied,
nor reasoned away. But the ghastliness was not in the mere
fear that death might not be far off.
The pillow had turned a little on one side-Albinia tried to
smoothe it-the corner of a book peeped out. It was a trans-
lation of The Three lusqzteteers, one of the worst and most
fascinating of Dumas' romances.
'You wont tell papa !' cried Gilbert, raising himself, in far
more real and present terror than he had previously shown.
' Iow did you get it ? Whose is it ?'
'It is my own. I bought it at Richardson's. It is very funny.
But you wont tell papa ? I never was told not; indeed I was
not.'
'Now, Gilbert dear, will you tell me a few thiLgsi ? I do
only wish what is good for you. Why don't you wish that
lala should hear of this book ?'
Gilbert writhed himself.
'You know he would not like it 1'
' Then why did you take to reading it ?'
'Oh !' cried the boy, 'if you only did know how stupid and
how miserable it has been ! More than half myself gone, and
Sophy always glum, and Lucy always plaguing, and Aunt
Maria always being a torment, you would not wonder at one's
doing anything to forget it !'
' Yes, but why do what you knew to be wrong ?'
'Nobody told me not.'
'Disobedience to the spirit, then, if not to the letter. It




<pb n="42"/>
42             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
was not the way to be happier, my poor boy, nor nearer to 
brother and mother.'
'Things didn't use to be stupid when Ned was thq
sobbed Gilbert, bursting into a fresh flood of tears.
' Ah Gilbert, I grieved most of all for you when fi
heard your story, before I thought I should ever have any
to do with you,' said Albinia, hanging over him fondly.
always thought it must be so forlorn to be a twin left solit
But it is sadder still than I knew, if grief has made you 
yourself farther from him instead of nearer.'
' I shall be good again now that I have you,' said Gilbert
he looked up into that sweet face.
' And you will begin by making a free confession to 
father, and giving up the book.'
'I don't see what I have to confess. He would be soan
and he never told me not. Oh I I cannot tell him.'
She felt that this was not the right way to begin a refo
tion, and yet she feared to press the point, knowing that
one was thought severe, the other timid.
'At least you will give up the book,' she said.
'  dear I if you would let me see whether d'Artagnan go
England. I must know thatl I'm sure there can't be 
harm in that. Do you know what it is about I'
'Yes, 1 do. My brother got it by some mistake among 
French books. He read some of the droll unobjectionable 
to my sister and me, but the rest was so bad, that he threw
into the fire.'
' Then you think it funny I'
' To be sure I do.'
'Do you remember the three duels all at once, and the 
valets ? Oh I what fun it is  But do let me see if d'Art
got the diamonds.'
'Yes, he did.  But will this satisfy you, Gilbert? I
know there are some exciting pleasures that we must turn 
backs on resolutely. I think this book is one of them  No
you will let me take it?  I will tell your father about it'
private, and he cannot blame you. Then, if he will give
consent, whenever you can come home early, come to my dr
nmg-room, out of your sisters' way, and I will read to you 
innocent part, so as to get the story out of your brain.'
'Very well,' said Gilbert, slowly. 'Yes, if you will not 
papa be angry with me, And, oh dear I must you go 1'
1 think you had better dress yourself and come down to 
TThere is nothing the matter with you now, is there ?'
'~             He was delighted with the suggestion, and promised to




<pb n="43"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                 43
directly; and Albinia carried off her prize, exceedingly hopeful
and puzzled, and wondering whether her compromise had been
a right one, or a mere tampering with temptation-delighted
with the confidence and affection bestowed on her so freely, but
awe-struck by the impression which the boy had avowed, and
marvelling how it should be treated, so as to render it a blessed
and salutary restraint, rather than the dim superstitious terror
that it was at present. At least there was hope of influencing
him; his heart was affectionate, his will on the side of right,
and in consideration of feeble health and timid character, she
would overlook the fact that he had not made one voluntary
open confession, and that the partial renunciation had been
wrung from him as a choice of evils. She could only feel how
much he was to be pitied, and how he responded to her affeo-
tion.
She was crossing the hall next day, when she heard a con-
fusion of tongues through the open door of the dining-room, and
above all, Gilbert's. 'Well, I say there are but two ladies in
Bayford. One is Mrs. Kendal, and the other is G6nevieve
Durant!'
'A  dancing-master's daughter!' Lucy's scornful tone was
unmistakeable, and so was the ensuing high-pitched querulous
voice, ' Well, to be sure, Gilbert might be a little more-a little
more civil. Not that I've a word to say against-against your
-your mamma. Oh, no !-glad to see-but Gilbert might be
more civil.'
'I think so indeed,' said Albinia.  ' Good morning, Miss
Meadows. You see Gilbert has come home quite alive enough
for mischief.'
'Ah ! I thought I might be excused. Mamma was so uneasy
-though I know you don't admit visitors-my just coming to
see-   We've been always so anxious about Gilbert. Gibbie
dear, where is that flannel I gave you for your throat '
She advanced to put her finger within his neck-tie and feel
for it. Gilbert stuck his chin down, and snapped with his teeth
like a gin. Lucy exclaimed, 'Now, Gilbert, I know mamma
will say that is wrong.'
'Ah ! we are used to Gilbert's tricks. Always bear with a
boy's antics,' said Miss Meadows, preventing whatever she
thought was coming out of Mrs. Kendal's mouth. Albinia
took the unwise step of laughing, for her sympathies were de-
cidedly with resistance both to flannels and to the insertion of
that hooked finger.
' Mr. Bowles has always said it was a case for great care.
Flannel next the skin-no exposure,' continued Miss Meadows,




<pb n="44"/>
4              THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
tartly. ' I am sure-I know I am the last person to wish to
interfere-but so delicate-  You'll excuse-but my mother
was uneasy; and people who go out in all weathers-'
'I hope Mrs. Meadows had my note this morning.'
'O yes! I am perfectly aware. Thank you. Yes, I know
the rule, but you'll excuse-  My mother was still anxious-
I know you exclude visitors in lesson-time. I'm going. Only
grandmamma would be glad-not that she wishes to interfere-,
but if Gilbert had on his piece of flannel-' 
'Have you, Gilbert ?' said Albinia, becoming tormented.
'I have been flannel all over all my life,' said Gilbert, sulkily;
'one bit more or less can make no odds.'
'Then you have not that piece ' said Albinia.
'Oh, my dear! Think of that! New Saxony! I begged
it of Mr. Holland. A new remnant-pink list, and all! I
said it was just what I wanted for Master Gilbert. Mr. Hol-
land is always a civil, feeling man. New Saxony-three shillings
the yard-and trimmed with blue sarsenet! Where is it,
Gilbert '
'In a soupdish, with a crop of mustard and cress on it,' said
Gilbert, with a wicked wink at Albinia, who was unable to
resist joining in the girls' shout of laughing; but she became'
alarmed when she found that poor Miss Meadows was very near
crying, and that her incoherency became so lachrymose as to be
utterly incomprehensible.
Lucy, ashamed of her laughter, solemnly declared that it was
very wrong of Gilbert, and she hoped he would not suffer from
it; and Albinia, trying to become grave, judicial, and concilia-
tory, contrived to pronounce that it was very silly to leave any-
thing off in an east wind, and hoping to put an end to the matter,
asked Aunt Maria to sit down, and judge how they went on with
their lessons.
O no; she could not interrupt. Her mother would want her. 
She knew Mrs. Kendal never admitted visitors. She had no
doubt she was quite right. She hoped it would be understood.
She would not intrude. In fact, she could neither go nor stay.
She would not resume her seat, nor let anything go on, and it
was full twenty minutes before a series of little vibrating
motions and fragmentary phrases had borne her out of the
house.
'Well !' cried Gilbert, 'I hoped Aunt Maria had left off com-
ing down upon us.'
;0, mamma !' exclaimed Lucy, 'you never sent your love to
grandmamma.'
'Depend upon it she was waiting for that,' said Gilbert.




<pb n="45"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                 45
crm sure I wish I had known it,' said Albinla, not in the
most judicious manner. ' Half-past eleven !'
'Aunt Maria says she can't think how you can find time for
church when you can't see visitors in the morning,' said Lucy.
'And oh! dear mamma, grandmamma says gravy soup was
enough to throw Gilbert into a fever.'
'At any rate, it did not,' said Albinia.
'Ohl and, dear mamma, Mrs. Osborn is so hurt that you
called on Mrs. Dusautoy before returning her visit; and Aunt
Maria says if you don't call to-day you will never get over it,
and she says that-'
'What business has Mrs. Osborn to ask whom I called on '
exclaimed Albinia, impatiently.
'Because Mrs. Osborn is the leading lady in the town,' said
Lucy. 'Slhe told Miss Goldsmith that she had no notion of not
being respected.'
'And she can't bear the Dusautoys. She left off subscribing
to anything when they came; and he behaved very ill to the
Admiral and everybody at a vestry-meeting.'
'I shall ask your papa before I am in any hurry to call on
she Osborns I' cried Albinia. ' I have no desire to be intimate
with people who treat their clergyman in that way.'
'But Mrs. Osborn is quite the leader!' exclaimed Lucy.
They keep the best society here.  So many families in the
county come and call on them.'
' Very likely-'
'Ah I Mrs. Osborn told Aunt Maria that as the Nugents
called on you, and you had such connexions, she supposed you
would be high. But you wont make me separate from Lizzie,
will you I I suppose Miss Nugent is a fashionable young lady.'
' iss Nugent is five years old. Don't let us have any more
of this nonsense.'
'But you wont part me from   Lizzie Osborn,' said Lucy,
hanging her head pathetically on one side.
'I shall talk to your father. He said, the other day, he d.d
not wish you to be so much with her.'
Lucy melted into tears, and Albinia was conscious of having
been first indiscreet and then sharp, hurt at the comments,
feeling injured by Lucy's evident halit of reporting whatever
she said, and at the failure of the attempt to please Mrs. Alea-
dows. She was so uneasy about the Osborn question, that she
waylaid AMr. Kendal on his return from riding, and laid it before
him.
'Mv dear Alhinia,' he said, as if he would fain have avoided
the appeal, 'you must manage your own visiting affairs your own




<pb n="46"/>
46             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
way. I do not wish to offend my neighbours, nor would I
desire to be very intimate with any one. I suppose you must
pay them ordinary civility, and you know what that amounts
to. As to the leadership in society here, she is a noisy woman,
full of pretension, and thus always arrogates the distinction to
herself Your claims will establish themselves.'
'Oh, you don't imagine me thinking of that!' cried Albinia,
laughing ' I meant their behaving ill to Mr. Dusautoy.'
'I know nothing about that. Mr. Dusautoy once called to
ask for my support for a vestry meeting, but I make it a rule
never to meddle with parish skirmishes. I believe there was a
very unbecoming scene, and that Mr. Dusautoy was in the
minority.'
'Ah, Edmund, next time you'll see if a parson's sister can
sit quietly by to see the parson beaten !'
He smiled, and moved towards his study.
'Then I am to be civil V'
'Certainly.'                                          4
'But is it necessary to call to-day '
'I should suppose not;' and there he was, shut up in his
den. Albinia went back, between laughing and vexation; and
Lucy looked up from her exercise to say, 'Does papa say you.
must call on the Osborns ?'
It was undignified ! She bit her lip, and felt her false posi-
tion, as with a quiver of the voice she replied, ' We shall make
nothing but mischief if we talk now.    Go on with your
business.'
The sharp, curious eyes did not take themselves off her face.
She leant over Sophy, who was copying a house, told her the
lines were slanting, took the pencil from her hand, and tried
to correct them, but found herself making them over-black,
and shaky.  She had not seen such a line since the days of her
chlidhood's ill-temper. She walked to the fireplace and said,
'I am going to call on Mrs. Osborn to- day  Not that your
father desires it, but because I have been indulging in a wrong
feeling.'
'I'm sure you needn't,' cried Gilbert. 'It is very imper-
tinent of Mrs Osborn. Why, if he is an admiral, she was the
daughter of an old lieutenant of the Marines, and you are
General Sir Maurice Ferrars' first cousin.'
'Hush, hush, Gilbert!' said Albinia, blushing and distressed.
' Mrs. Osborn's standing in the place entitles her to all atten-
tion. I was thinking of nothing of the kind. It was because
I gave way to a wrong feeling that I mean to go this afternoon.'
On the Sunday, when Mr. and Mrs. Kendal went to pay




<pb n="47"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                   17
their weekly visit to Mrs. Meadows, they found the old lady
taking a turn in the garden. And as they were passing by
the screen of laurels, Gilbert's voice was heard very loud,
' That's too bad, Lucy ! Grandmamma, don't believe one word
of it !'
' Gilbert, you-you are, Im sure, very rude to your sister.'
'I'll not stand to hear false stories of Mrs. Kendal !'
'What is all this ' said Mr. Kendal, suddenly appearing,
and discovering Gilbert pirouetting with indignation before
Lucy.
Miss Meadows burst out with a shower of half sentences,
grandmamma begged that no notice might be taken of the
children's nonsense, Lucy put on an air of injured innocence,
and Gilbert was beginning to speak, but his father put him
aside, saying, ' Tell me what has happened, Sophia. From you
I am certain of hearing the exact truth.'
' Only,' growled Sophy, in her hoarse boy's voice, ' Lucy said
mamma said she would not call on Mrs. Osborn unless you
ordered her, and when you did, she cried and flew into a tre-
mendous passion.'
' Sophy, what a story,' exclaimed Lucy, but Gilbert was ready
to corroborate his younger sister's report.
' You know Lucy too well to attach any importance to her
misrepresentations,' said Mr. Kendal, turning to Mrs. Meadows,
'but I know not what amends she can make for this most
unprovoked slander. Speak, Lucy, have you no apology to
make V'
For Lucy, in self-defence, had begun to cry, and her grand-
mother seemed much disposed to do the same. Miss Meadows
had tears in her eyes, and incoherences on her lips. The dis-
tress drove away all Albinia's inclination to laugh, and clasp-
ing her two hands over her husband's arm, she said, 'Don't,
Edmund, it is only a misunderstanding of what really happened.
I did have a silly fit, you know, so it is my fault.'
'I cannot forgive for you as you do for yourself,' said Mr.
Kendal, with a look that was precious to her, though it might
have given a pang to the Meadowses. ' I did not imagine that
my daughter could be so lost to the sense of your kindness and
forbearance. Have you nothing to say, Lucy ?'
'Poor child ! she cannot speak,' said her grandmother. ' You
see she is very sorry, and Mrs. Kendal is too kind to wish to
say any more about it.'
' Go home at once, Lucy,' said her father. ' Perhaps solitude
may bring you to a better state of feeling. Go !'
Direct resistance to Mr. Kendal was never thought of, and




<pb n="48"/>
43             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
Lucy turned to go. Her aunt chose to accompany her; and
though this was a decided relief to the company she left, it wag
not likely to be the best thing for the young lady herself.
Mr. Kendal gave his arm to Mrs. Meadows, saying gravely
that Lucy must not be encouraged in her habit of gossiping
and inaccuracy. Mrs. Meadows quite agreed with him; it was
a very bad habit for a girl, she was very sorry for it, she wished
she could have attended to the dear children better, but she
was sure dear Mrs. Kendal would make them everything de.
sirable. She only hoped that she would remember their disad.
vantages, have patience, and not recollect this ag:iiust poor
Lucy.
The warm indignation and championship of her husband and
his son were what Albinia chiefly wished to recollect; but it
was impossible to free herself from a sense of pain and injury
in the knowledge that she lived with a spy who would exagge-
rate and colour every careless word. 
Mr. Kendal returned to the subject as they walked honle.
'I hope you will talk seriously to Lucy about her intolerable
gossiping,' he said. ' There is no safety in mentioning any sub-
ject before her; and Maria Meadows makes her worse. Some
stop must be put to it.'
'I should like to wait till next time,' said Albinia.
'What do you mean '
'Because this is too personal to myself.'
'Nay, your own candour is an example to which Lucy cal
hardly be insensible. Besides, it is a nuisance which must be
abated.'
Albinia could not help thinking that he suffered from it as
little as most people, and wondering whether it were this which
had taught him silence.
They met Miss Meadows at their own gate, and she told them
that dear Lucy was very sorry, and she hoped they would take
no more notice of a little nonsense that could do no one any
harm; she would be more on her guard next time.
Mr. Kendal made no answer. Albinia ventured to ask him
whether it would not be better to leave it, since her aunt had
talked to her.
'No,' he said; 'Mlaria has no influence whatever with the
children. She frets them by using too many words about every-
thing. One quiet remonstrance from you would have far more 
effect.'
Albinia called the culprit and tried to reason with her.
Lucy tried at first to battle it off by saying that she had made
a mistake, and Aunt lMaria had said that she should hear no .




<pb n="49"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                 49
rnre about it. 'But, my dear, I am afraid you must hear
niore. It is not that I am hurt, but your papa has desired
me to talk to you. You would be frightened to hear what he
says.
Lucy chose to hear, and seemed somewhat struck, but she
was sure that she meant no harm; and she had a great deal to
say for herself, so voluble and so inconsequent, that argu.
Ient was breath spent in vain; and Albinia was obliged to
wind up, as an ultimatum, with warning her, that till she should
prove herself trustworthy, nothing interesting would be talked
of before her.
The atmosphere of gossip certainly had done its part in cul-
tivating Mr. Kendal's talent for silence. When Albinia had
him all to herself, he was like another person, and the long
drives to return visits in the country were thoroughly enjoy-
able. So, too, were the walks home from the dinner parties in
the town, when the husband and wife lingered in the starlight
or moonlight, and felt that the weary gaiety of the constrained
evening was made up for.
Great was the offence they gave by not taking out the carriage I
It was disrespect to Bayford, and one of the airs of which
Mrs. Kendal was accused. As granddaughter of a Baron,
daughter of one General Officer and sister of another, and pre-
sented at Court, the Bayford ladies were prepared to consider
her a fine lady; and when they found her peculiarly simple,
were the more aggrieved, as if her contempt were ironically
veiled. Her walks, her dress, her intercourse with the clergy,
were all airs, and Lucy spared her none of the remarks. Albinia
might say, ' Don't tell me all Aunt Maria says,' but it was
impossible not to listen; and whether in mirth or vexation, she
was sure to be harmed by what she heard.
And yet, except for the tale-bearing, Lucy was really giving
less trouble than her sister; she was quick, observant, and
obliging, and under Albinia's example, the more salient vul-
garities of speech and manner were falling off.  There had
seldom been any collision, since it had become evident that Mrs.
Kendal could and would hold her own; and that her address
and air, even while criticised, were regarded as something su-
perior, so that it was a distinction to belong to her. How
nany of poor Albinia's so-called airs should justly have been
laid to Lucy's account t
On the other hand, Sophy would attend to a word from her
father, where she had obstinately opposed her step-mother's
wishes, making her obedience marked, as if' for the very purpose of
enforcingthe contrast. It was a character that Albinia could notas
E




<pb n="50"/>
50             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
yet fathom. In all occupations and amusements, Sophy followed
the lead of her elder sister, and in her lessons, her sole objec
seemed to be to get things done with as little trouble as possible/
and especially without setting her mind to work; and yet in the
very effort to escape diligence or exertion, she sometimes showed
signs of so much ability as to excite a longing desire to
know of what she would be capable when once aroused and in.
terested; but the surly, ungracious temper rendered this ap-
parently impossible, and whatever Albinia attempted, was sure/
as if for the very reason that it came from her, to be answered
with a redoubling of the growl of that odd hoarse voice. 
On Lucy's birthday, there was an afternoon party of her
young fiiends, including Miss Dutant. Albinia, who, among'
the girlhood of Fairmead and its neighbourhood, had been so
acceptable a playmate, that her marriage had caused the outcry
that 'there would never be any fun again without Miss Feri
rars,' came out on the lawn with the girls, in hopes of setting,
them to enjoy themselves. But they looked at her almost sua.i
piciously, retained their cold, stiff, company manners, and drei
apart into giggling knots. She relieved them of her presence
and sitting by the window, watched G6neviev wwalking up a
down alone, as if no one cared to join her. Presently Lucy aa
Lizzie Osborn spoke to her, and blie went in. Albinia went 
meet her in the hall; she coloured and said, ' She was only com
to fetch Miss Osborn's cloak.'
Albinia saw her disposing it over Lizzie's shoulders, and then
running in again. This time it was for Miss Louisa's cloak,
and a third time for Miss Drurv's shawl, which Albinia chose
to take out herself, and encountering Sophia, said, 'Next timey
you had better run on errands yourself instead of sending yout
guests.' 
Sophy gave a black look, and she retreated, but presently
the groups coalesced, and Maria Drury and Sophy ran out to call
Genevieve into the midst. Albinia hoped they were going to
play, but soon she beheld GSnevieve trying to draw back, bui
evidently imprisoned; there was an echo of a laugh that she
did not like; the younger girls were skipping up in the victim'S
face in a rude way; she hastily turned round as in indignatio
one hand raised to her eyes, but it was instantly snatched down,
by Maria Drury, and the pitiless ring closed in. Albinia sprang
to her feet, exclaiming aloud, 'They are teasing her!' ani
rushed into the garden, hearing on her way, 'No, we wont let
you go !-you shall tell us-you shall promise to show us-y
palpa is a magistrate, you know-he'll come and search-Jeuunyi
you shall tell ' 




<pb n="51"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                 E1
Come with me, Genevieve,' said Albinia, standing in the
midst of the tormentors, and launching a look of wrath around
her, as she saw tears in the young girl's eyes, and taking her
hand, found it trembling with agitation. Fondling it with
both her own, she led Genevieve away, turning her back upon
Lucy and her, ' We were only-'
The poor girl shook more and more, and when they reached
the shelter of the house, gave way to a tightened, oppressed
sob; and at the first kind words a shower of tears followed,
and she took Albinia's hand, and clasped it to her breast in a
manner embarrassing to English feelings, though perfectly
natural and sincere in her. 'Ah I si bonne I si bonne I par-
donnez-moi, Madame f she exclaimed, sobbing, and probably
not knowing that she was speaking French; 'but, oh, Madame,
you will tell me ! Is it true-can he ?'
'Can who ? What do you mean, my dear ?'
'The Admiral,' said G6nevieve, looking about frightened,
and sinking her voice to a whisper. ' Miss Louisa said so, that
he could send and search-'
' Search for what, my dear ?'
' For my poor little secret. Ah, Madame, assuredly I may tell
you. It is but a French Bible; it belonged to my martyred
ancestor, Francois Durant, who perished at the St. Barthelemi
-it is stained with his blood-it has been handed on fiom one
to the other-it was all that Jacques Durant rescued when he
fled from the Dragonnades-it was given to me by my own
dear father on his death-bed, with a charge to keep it from my
grandmother, and not to speak of it-but to guard it as my
greatest treasure. And now-Oh, I am not disobeying him,'
cried (JGeevieve, with a fresh burst of tears. ' You can feel for
mne, Madame, you can counsel me. Can the magistrates come
ald search, unless I confess to those young ladies ?'
'Most decidedly not,' said Albinia. 'Set your mind at rest,
mly poor child; whoever threatened you played you a most
base, cruel trick.'
'Ah, do not be angry with them, Madame; no doubt they
were in sport. They could not know how precious that treasure
was to me, and they will say much in their gaiety of heart.'
' I lo not like such gaiety,' said Albinia. 'What, they wished
to make you confess your secret ?'
'Yes. They had learnt by some means that I keep one of
ray drawers locked, and they had figured to themselves that in
it was some relic of my Huguenot ancestors. They thought it
was some instrument of death, and they said that unless I would
tell them the whole, the Admiral had the right of search, and,
E2




<pb n="52"/>
52             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
oh ! it was foolish of me to believe them for a moment, but
only thought that the fright would kill my grandmother. 01
you were so good, Madame, I shall never forget; no, not to tb
end of my life, how you rescued me !'
' We did not bring you here to be teased,' said Albinia, cares
ing her. 'I should like to ask your pardon for what the
have made you undergo.'
'Ah, Madame 1' said G6nevieve, smiling, 'it is nothing.
am well used to the like, and I heed it little, except when i
falls on such subjects as these.'
Slhe was easily drawn into telling the full history of h(
treasure, as she had learnt from her father's lips; the Hugueni
shot down by the persecutors, and the son who had fled inl
the mountains and returned to bury the corpse, and take tl
prized, blood-stained Bible from the breast; the escapes an
dangers of the two next generations; the few succeeding da]
of peace; and, finally, the Dragonnade, when the childre
had been snatched from the Durant family, and the father an
mother had been driven at length to fly in utter destitutioi
and had made their way to England in a wretched, unpr
visioned open boat. The child for whose sake they fled, wl
the only one rescued from the hauds of these enemies, and 4
tradition of their sufferings had been handed on with tI
faithfully preserved relic, down to the slender girl, their s*
descendant, and who in early childhood had drunk in the ta
fiom the lips of her father. The child of the persecutors as
of the persecuted, G6nevieve Durant did indeed represeq
strangely the history of her ancestral country; and as Albini
said to her, surely it might be hoped that the faith in whii
she had been bred up. united what was true and sound in tl
religion of both Reformed and Romanist.
The words made the brown cheek glow. 'Ah, Madame, di
I not say I could talk with you ? You, who do not think n
a heretic, as my dear grandmother's friends do, and who y4
can respect my grandmother's Church.'
Assuredly little G6nevieve was one of the most interestil
and engaging persons that Albinia had ever met, and sl
listened earnestly to her artless history, and pretty enthusiasm
and the story which she could not tell without tears, of h4
father's care, when the reward of her good behaviour had bee
the reading one verse in the quaint black letter of the ol
French Bible.
The conversation lasted till Gilbert made his appearagP
and Albinia was glad to find that his greeting to Genevial
was cordial and affectionate, and free from all that was u!




<pb n="53"/>
THE YOTUNG STEP-MOTHEI.                53
pleasant in his sisters' manner; and he joined himself to their
conmpany when Albinia proposed a walk along the broad cause-
way through the meadows. It was one of the pleasantest walks
that sl:e had taken at Bayford, with both her corn panions so bright
aud merry, and the scene around in all the beauty of spring.
Gilbert, with the courtesy that Albinia's very presence had
inlfused into him, gathered a pretty wild bouquet for each, and
Albinia talked of cowslip-balls, and found that neither Gilbert
nor Genevieve had ever seen one; then she pitied them, and
owned that she did not know how to get through a spring
without one; and Gilbert having of course a pocketful of
string, a delicious ball was constructed, over which G6nevieve
went into an inexpressible ecstasy.
All the evening, Gilbert devoted himself to G6nevieve,
though more than one of the others tried to attract him, play-
ing off the follies of more advanced girlhood, to the vexation of
Albinia, who could not bear to see him the centre of attention
to silly girls, when he ought to have been finding his level
among boys.
'Gilbert makes himself so ridiculous about Jenny Durant,'
said his sisters, when he insisted on escorting her home, and
thus they brought on themselves Albinia's pent-up indignation
at their usage of their guest. Lucy argued in unsati-factory
self-(lefence, but Sophy, when shown how ungenerous her con-
duct had been, crimsoned deeply, and though uttering no word
of apology, wore a look that gave her step-mother for the first
time a hope that her sullenness might not be so much from
want of compunction, as from want of power to express it.
Oh! for a consultation with her brother. But he and his
wife were taking a holiday among their kindred in Ireland, and
for once Albinia could have echoed the aunts' lamentation
that Winifred had so many relations !
CHAPTER V.
ALBTNIA needed patience to keep alive hope and energy,
for a sore disappointment awaited her. Whatever had
"een her annoyances with the girls, she had always been on
lhaIl)), and comfortable terms with Gilbert; he had responded
to her advances, accommodated himself to her wishes, adopted
her tastes, and returned her atlectiou. She had early perceived
that his father and sisters looked on him as the naughty one of
the family, but when she saw Lucy's fretting interference, and




<pb n="54"/>
;4;       TTHE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
Sophia's wrangling contempt, she did not wonder that an unjun
degree of blame had often fallen to his share; and under hei
management, he scarcely ever gave cause for complaint. Tha
he was evidently happier and better for her presence, was corn
pensation for many a vexation; she loved him with all her heart
made fun with him, told legends of the fieaks of her broths
Maurice and cousin Fred, and grudged no trouble for his pleasure
As long as The Three Muesqueteers lasted, he had corn
constantly to her dressing-room, and afterwards she promise(
to find other pleasant reading; but after such excitement,-i
was not easy to find anything that did not appear dry. As th4
daughter of a Peninsular man, she thought nothing so charminj
as the Subaltern, and Gilbert seemed to enjoy it; but by th,
time he had heard all her oral traditions of the war by way o
notes, his attendance began to slacken; he stayed out later, an
always brought excuses-Mr. Salsted had kept him, he had beel
with a fellow, or his pony had lost a shoe. Albinia did not car
to question; the evenings were light and warm, and the one thinj
she desired for him was manly exercise; she thought it mud
better for him to be at play with his fellow-pupils, and she couli
not regret the gain of another hour to her hurried day.
One morning, however, Mr. Kendal called her, and his looi
was so grave and perturbed, that she hardly waited till th
door was shut to ask in terror, what could be the matter.
'Nothing to alarm you,' he said. ' It is only that I am vexe
about Gilbert. I have reason to fear that he is deceiving u
again; and I want you to help us to recollect on which day
he should have been at Tremblam. My dear, do not look a
pale !'
For Albinia had turned quite white at hearing that the boj
on whom she had fixed her warm affection, had been carryin
on a course of falsehood; but a moment's hope restored hei
'I did keep him at home on Tuesday,' she said; ' it was so ver
hot, and he had a headache. I thought I might. You told E
not to send him on doubtful days.'
'I hope you may be able to make out that it is right,' sai
3Mr. Kendal; 'but I am afraid that Mr. Salsted has too muc
cause of complaint. It is the old story !'
And so indeed it proved, when Albinia heard what the tutu
had come to say. The boy was seldom in time, often altogeth(
missing, excusing himself by saying lie was kept at home b
fears of the weather; but Mr. Salsted was certain that h
father could not know how he disposed of his time, namely, i
a low style of sporting with young Tritton, the son of a ric
farmer or half-gentleman, who was the pest of Mr. Salsted




<pb n="55"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                   55
parish. Ill-learnt, slurred-over lessons, with lame excuses, were
nothing as compared with this, and the amount of petty deceit,
stibterfuge, and falsehood, was frightful, especially when Albinia
recollected the tone of thought which the boy had seemed to be
catching from her. Unused to duplicity, except from  mere
ignorant, unmanageable school-children, she was excessively
shocked, and felt as if he must be utterly lost to all good, and
had been acting a lie from first to last. After the conviction
had broken on her, she hardly spoke, while Mr. Kendal was
promising to talk to his son, threaten him with severe punish-
ment, and keep a strict account of his comings and goings, to
he compared weekly with Mr. Salsted's notes of his arrival.
This settled, the tutor departed, and no sooner was he gone,
than Albinia, hiding her face in her hands, shed tears of bitter
grief and di.appointment.  'My dearest,' said her husband,
fondly, 'you must not let my boy's doings grieve you in this
manner. You have been doing your utmost for him; if any one
coull do him good, it would be you.'
'   no, surely I must have made some dreadful mistake, to
have promoted such faults.'
'No, I have long known him not to be trustworthy. It is
an evil of long standing.'
' Was it always so ?'
'I cannot tell,' said he, sitting down beside her, and shading
his brow with one hand ; 'I have only been aware of it since he
has been left alone. When the twins were together, they were
led by one soul of truth and generosity. What this poor fellow
was separately no one could know, while he had his brother to
guide and shield him. The first time I noticed the evil was
when we were recovering. Gilbert and Sophia were left to-
gether, and in one of their quarrels injured some papers of mine.
I was very weak, and had little power of self-control; I believe
I terrified him too much. There was absolute falsehood, and
the truth was only known by Sophia's coming forward and
confessing the whole. It was ill managed. I was not equal to
dealing with him, and whether the mischief began then or
earlier, it has gone on ever since, breaking out every now and
then. I had hoped that with your care- But oh ! how dif-
ferent it would have been with his brother! Albinia, what
would I not give that you had but seen him     Not a fault
was there; not a moment's grief did he give us, till-  0 what
an overthrow of hope !' And he gave way to an excess of grief
that quite appalled her, and made her feel herself powerless to
comfort. She only ventured a few words of peace and hope;
but the contrast between the brothers was just then keen agony,




<pb n="56"/>
56             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER. 
and he could not help exclaiming how strange it was, thatl
Edmitund should be the one to be taken.
'Nay,' she said, 'was not he ripe for better things 1 May
not poor Gilbert have been spared that longer life may train'
him to be like his brother '
'He never will be like him,' cried Mr. Kendal. 'No ! no I
The difference is evident in the very countenance and features'
' Was he like you ?'
'They said so, but you could not gather an idea of him froma
me,' said Mr. Kendal, smiling mournfully, as he met her gaze.
'It was the most beautiful countenance I ever saw, full of life
and joy ; and there were wonderful expressions in the eyes when 
he was thinking or listening. He used to read the Greek
Testament with me every morning, and his questions and ret
marks rise up before me again. That text-   You have seen
it in church.'
'Because I live, ye shall live also,' Albinia repeated.
'Yes. A   little before his illness we came to that.  He
rested on it, as he used to do on anything that struck him, and
asked me, " whether it meant the life hereafter, or the lite that
is hidden here !"  We went over it with such comments as I
could find, but his mind was not satisfied; and it must havq
gone on working on it, for one night, when I had been thinking
him delirious, he called me, and the light shone out of those
bright dark eyes of his as he said, joyfully, " It is both, papa I
It is hidden here, but it will shine out there," and as I did not
catch his meaning, he repeated the Greek words.'
'Dear boy ! Some day we shall be glad that the full life and
glory came so soon.'
He shook his head, the parting was still too recent, and it was.
the first time he had been able to speak of his son. It was a
great satisfaction to her that the reserve had once been broken;
it seemed like compensation for the present trouble, though that
was acutely felt, and not softened by the curious eyes and
leading questions of the sisters, when she returned to give what
attention she could to their interrupte( lessons.
Gilbert returned, unsuspicious of the storm, till his father's
stern gravity, and her depressed, pre-occuplied manner, excited
his attention, and lie asked her anxiously whether anything were
the matter. A sad gesture replied, and perhaps revealed the
state of the case, for he became absolutely silent. Albinia left
them together. She watched anxiously, and hurried after Mr.
Kendal into the study, where his manner showed her not to be
unwelcome as the sharer of his trouble. '1 do not know what
to do,' he said, dejectedly. 'I can make nothing of him. It is




<pb n="57"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                  7
all prevarication and sulkiness! I do not think he felt one
word that I said.'
, People often feel more tlan they show.'
Ile groaned.
' Will you go to him ' he presently added. ' Perlhaps I grew
too angry at last, and I believe he loves you. At least, if he
do not, lie must be more unfeeling than I can think him. You
do not dislike it, dearest.'
' 0 no, no ! If I only knew what would be best for him !'
' He may be more unreserved with you,' said Mr. Kendal;
and as lie was anxious for her to make the attempt, she moved
away, though in perplexity, and in the revulsion of feeling, with
a sort of disgust towards the boy who had deceived her so long.
Slie found him seated on a wheelbarrow by the pond, chuck-
ing pebbles into the still black water, and disturbing the duck-
weed on the surface. His colour was gone, and his face was
dark and moody, and strove not to relax, as she said, ' 0 Gilbert,
how could you 1'
lie turned sharply away, muttering, ' She is coming to bother,
now !'
It cut her to the heart. ' Gilbert !' was all she could exclaim,
hut the tone of pain made him look at her, as if in spite of
himlself, and as he saw tile tears he exclaimed in an impatient
voice of rude consolation, ' There's nothing to take so much to
heart. No one tlinks anything of it!'
' What would Edmund have thought ?' said Allinia; but the
appeal came too soon; he made an angry gesture and said, ' tIe
was nearly three years younger than I am now ! He would not
have been kept in these abominable leading-strings.'
She was too much shocked to find an answer, and Gilbert
went on, ' Watched and examined wherever I go-not a minute
to myself-nothing but lessons at Tremblam, and bother at
home ; driven about hither and thither, and not allowed a
fi'ind of my own, nor to do one single thing ! There's no
ata(lding it, and I wont !'
'  am very sorry,' said Albinia, struggling with cho(king
tears. ' It has been my great wish to make things pleasant to
you. I hope I have not teased or driven you to-'
'Nonsense !' exclaimled Gilbert, disrespectfully indeed, but
from the bottom of his heart, and breaking at once into a flood
of tears. 'You are the only creature that has been kind to me
since I lost my mother and Ned, and now they have been and
turned you against me too ;' and he sobbed violently.
'I don't know wliat you mean, Gillert. If I stand in your
mother's place, I can't be turned against you, any more than she




<pb n="58"/>
53             THE YOUNG STEP-MIOTRER.
could;' and she stroked his brow, which she found so throbbing
as to account for his paleness. ' You can grieve and hurt me,
but you can't prevent me from feeling for you, nor for your
dear fatther's grief.'
He declared that people at home knew nothing about boys,
and made an uproar about nothing
' Do you call falsehood nothing P'
' Falsehood ! A mere trifle now and then, when I am driven
to it by being kept so strictly.'
'I don't know how to talk to you, Gilbert,' said Albinia,
rising; 'your conscience knows better than your tongue.'
'Don't go ;' and he went off into another paroxysmu of crying,
as he cauglht hold of her dress; and when he spoke again his
mood was changed ; he was very miserable, nobody cared for
him, Lh did not know what to do; he wanted to do right, and 
to please her, but Archie Tritton would not let hin alone; he
wished he had never seen Archie Tritton. At last, walkingup
and down with him, she drew fiom him a full confidence, and
began to understand how, when health and strength had come
back to him in greater measure than he had ever before enjoyed,
the craving for boyish sports had awakened, just after he had -
been deprived of his brother, and was debarred from almost
every wholesome manner of gratifying it. To fall in with young
Tritton was as great a misfortune as could well have befallen a
boy, with a dreary home, nelancholy, reserved father, and weari-
some aunt. Tritton was a youth of seventeen, who had newly
finished his education at an inferior commercial school, and
lived on his father's farm, giving himself the airs of a sporting
character, anl fast hurrying into dissipation.
He was really good-natured, and Gilbert dwelt on his kind-
ness with warmth and gratitude, and on his prowess in all
sporting accomplishments with a perfect effervescence of admi-
ration. He evidently patronized Gilbert, partly fiom good-
natured pity; and p:rtlv as flattered by the adherence of a boy
of a grade above him; and Gilbert was proud of the notice of
one who seemed to him a man, and an adept in all athletic
games. It was a dangerous intimacy: and her heart sank as she
found that the pleasures to which he had been introducing Gil-
bert, were not merely the free exercise, the rabbit-shooting and
rat-hunting of the farm, nor even the village cricket-match, all
of which, in other company, would have had her full sympathy.
But there hadl been such low    and cruel sports that she
turned he hehead aw;y sick:leeed at the notion of any one dear to
her having been engaged in such amusemeil+s; and when Gil- ]




<pb n="59"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                 .59
bert in excuse said that every one did it, she answered indig-
nlantly, ' iy brothers never!'
'It is no use talking about what swells do that hunt and
shoot and go to school,' answered Gilbert.
'Do you wish you went to school ? asked Albinia.
I wish I was out of it all !'
Ile was in a very different frame. He owned that he knew
how wrong it had been to deceive, but he seemed to look upon
it as a sort of fate; he wished he could help it, but could not;
he was so much afraid of his father that he did not know what
he said; Archie Tritton said no one could get on without.-There
was an utter bewilderment in his notions, here and there showing
a better tone, but obscured by the fancies imbibed from his com-
panion, that the knowledge and practice of evil were manly.
At one moment he cried bitterly, and declared that he was
wretched; at another he defended each particular case with all
his might, changing and slipping away so that she did not know
where to take him. However, the conclusion was far more in pity
than anger, and after receiving many promises that if she would
shield him from his father and bear with him, he would abstain
from all she disapproved, she caressed and soothed the aching
head, and returned to his father hopeful and encouraged, certain
that the evil had been chiefly caused by weakness and neglect,
and believing that here was a beginning of repentance. Since
there was sorrow and confession, there surely must be refor-
mation.
For a week Gilbert went on steadily, but at the end of that
time his arrivals at home became irrcgular, and one day there
was another great aberration. On a doubtful day, when it had
been decided that he might go safely between the showers,
he never came to Tremblam at all, and Mr. Salsted sent a note
to Mr. Kendal to let him know that his son had been at the
races-village races, managed by the sporting farmers of the
neighl,borhood. There was a sense of despair, and again a talk,
bringing at once those ever-ready tears and protestations, sorrow
genuine, but fruitless. ' It was all Archie's fault, he had over-
taken him, persuaded him that Mr. Salsted would not expect
himl, promised him that he should see the celebrated ' Blunder-
buss,' Sam Shepherd's horse, that won the race last year.' Gil-
bert had gone  because he could not help it.'
'Not help it ! cried Albinia, looking at him with her clear
indignant eyes. ' How can you be such a poor creature, Gil-
bert V'
'It is very hard !' exclaimed Gilbert; 'I must go past Robble's




<pb n="60"/>
60             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTH E1L
Leigh twice every day of my life, and Archie will come out and
be at me.'
'That is the very temptation you have to resist,' said Albinia.
'Fight against it, pray against it, resolve against it; ride fast.
and don't linger and look after him.'
He looked desponding and miserable. If she could only have
put a spirit into him !
'Shall I walk and meet you sometimes before you get to
Robble's Leigh '
His face cleared up, but the cloud returned in a moment.
'What is it ' she asked. 'Only tell me. You know I wish
for nothing so much as to help you'
lie did confess that there was nothing he Phould like better,
if Arclie would not be all the worse another time, whenever he
should catch him alone.
' But surely, Gilbert, he is not always lying in ambush for you,
iike a cat for a mouse. You can't be his sole game.'
No, but he is coming or going, or out with his gun, and he
will often come part of the way with me, and he is such a droll
fellow!'
Albinia thought that there was but one cure. To leave
Gilbert daily exposed to the temptation must be wrong, and she
laid the case before Mr. Kendal with so much earnestness, that
he allowed that it would be better to send the boy fiom home;
and in the meantime, Albinia obtained that Mr. Kendal should
ride some way on the Tremblam road with his son in the plorn-
ing, so as to convoy him out of reach of the tempter; whilst
she tried to meet him in the afternoon, and man'iged so that he
should be seldom without the hope of meeting her.
Albinia's likings had taken a current absolutely contrary to
all her preconceived notions; Sophia, with her sullen truth, was
respected, but it was not easy to like her even as well as Lucy,
who, though pert and empty, had much good-nature and good-
temper, and was not indocile ; while Gilbert, in spite of a weak,
shallow character, habits of deception, and low ungelltlemanTy
tastes, had won her affection, and occupied the chief of her
time and thoughts; and she dreaded the moment of parting w'th
him, as removing the most available and agreeable of her young
companions.
That moment of parting, though acknowleldged to be ex-
pedient, did not approach.  Gilbert could not be sent to a
public school without risk and anxiety which his father did not
like, and which would have been horror to his gran(ld mther;
and Albinia herself did not feel certain that he was fit for it,
"r   ~    nor that it was her part to enforce it. She wrote to her brother,




<pb n="61"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                 61
and found that he likewise thought a tutor would be a safer
alternative; but then he must be a perfect man in a perfect
climate, and Mr. Kendal was not the man to make researches.
Mr. Dusautoy mentioned one clergyman who took pupils, Maurice
Ferrars another, but there was something against each. Mr.
Kendal wrote four letters, and was undecided-a third was
heard of, but the locality was doubtful, and the plan went off,
because Mr. Kendal could not make up his mind to go thirty
miles to see the place, and talk to a stranger.
Aibinia found that her power did not extend beyond
driving him from ' I'll see about it,' to 'Yes, by all means.'
Action was a length to which he could not be brought. Mr.
Nugent was very anxious that he should qualify as a magistrate,
since a sensible, highly-principled man was much wanted to
counterbalance Admiral Osborn's misdirected, restless activity,
and the lower parts of the town were in a dreadful state. Mrs.
Nugent talked to Albinia, and she urged it in vain. To come
out of his study, examine felons, contend with the Admiral, and
to meet all the world at the quarter sessions, was abhorrent to
him, and he silenced her almost with sternness.
She was really hurt and vexed, and scarcely less so by a dis-
covery that she made shortly after. The hot weather had made
the houses beneath the hill more close and unwholesome than
ever, Simkins's wife had fallen into a lingering illness, and
Albinia, visiting her constantly, was painfully sensible of the
dreadful atmosphere in which she lived, under the roof, with a
window that would not open. She offered to have the house
improved at her own expense, but was told that Mr. Pettilove
would raise the rent if anything were laid out on it. She went
about talking indignantly of Mr. Pettilove's cruelty and rapa-
city, and when Mr. Dusautoy hinted that Pettilove was only an
agent, she exclaimed that the owner was worse, since ignorance
alone could be excused. Who was the wretch ? Some one, no
doubt, who never came near the place, and only thought of it as
money.
'Fanny,' said Mr. Dusautoy, 'I really think we ought to tell
her.'
'Yes,' said Mrs. Dusautoy, 'I think it would be better. The
houses belonged to old Mr. Meadows.'
' Oi, if they are Mrs. Meadows's. I don't wonder at anything.'
' I believe they are Gilbert Kendal's.'
They were very kind; Mr. Dusautoy strode out at the window,
and his wife would not look at Albinia during the minute's
strulrgle to regain her composure, under the mortification that
her husband should have let her rave so much and so long about




<pb n="62"/>
62             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
what must be in his own power. Her only comfort was the
hope that he had never heard what she said, and she knew that
he so extremely disliked a conference with Pettilove, that he
would consent to anything rather than have a discussion.
She was, for the first time in her life, out of spirits. Gilbert
was always upon her mind; and the daily walk to meet him'
was a burthen, consuming a great deal of time, and becoming
trying on hot summer afternoons, the more so as she seldom
ventured to rest after it, lest dulness should drive Gilbert into
mischief, or, if nothing worse, into quarrelling with Sophia. If
she could not send him safely out fishing, she must be at hand to
invent pleasures and occupations for him; and the worst of it
was, that the girls grudged her attention to their brother, and
were becoming jealous. They hated the walk to Robble's Leigh,
and she knew that it was hard on them that their pleasure
should be sacrificed; but it was all-important to preserve him
from evil. She had wished to keep the tutor-negotiations a
secret, but they had oozed out, and she found that Mrs. and Miss
I'deadows had been declaring that they had known how it would
be-whatever people said beforehand, it always came to the
i:anme thing in the eld, and as to its being necessary, poor dear
C ibbie was very different before the change at home.
Albinia could not help shedding a few bitter tears. Why
was she to be always misjudged, even when she meant the best I
And, oh! how hard, well-nigh impossible, to forgive and can-
didly to believe that, in the old lady, at least, it was partiality,
and not spite.
In September, Mr. and Mris. Ferrars returned from their
journey. Albinia was anxious to see them, for if there was a
sense that she had fallen short of her confident hopes of doing
prosperously, there was also a great desire for their sympathy
and advice. But Maurice had been too long away fiom his
parish to be able to spare another day, and begged that the
Kendals would come to Fairnead. Seeing that Albinia's heart
was set on it, Mr. Kendal allowed himself to be stirred up to
appoint a time for driving her over to spend a long day at Fair-
inead.
For her own pleasure and ease of mind, Albinia made a point
of taking Gilbert, and the girls were to spend the day with their
granduo lther.
' Pretty old Fairmead !' she cried, as the beech-trees rose be-
fore her; and she was turning round every minute to point out
to Gilbert some of the spots of which she had told him; and
nodding to the few scattered children who were not at school,
~t       "and who looked up with mouths from ear to ear, and flushed




<pb n="63"/>
TILE YOUNG STEr-O'rTIIE.w                63
cheeks, as they curtsied to ' Miss Ferrars.' The 'Miss Ferrars
life seemed long ago.
They came to the little green gate that led to what had been
'homle' for the happiest years of All)inia's life, and from the
ivy porch there was a rush of little Willie and Mary, and close
at hand their mamma, and M\aurice emerging from the school.
It was very joyous and natural. But there were two more
figures, not youthful, but of decided style and air, and quiet but
fashionable dress, and Albinia had only time to say quickly to
her husband, ' my aunts,' before she was fondly embraced.
It was not at all what she had intended. IMrs. Annesley and
Miss Ferrars were very kind aunts, and she had much affection
for them ; but tlere was an end of the hope of the unreserve
and confidence that she wanted. She could get plenty of com-
passion and plenty of advice. but her whtole oljject wvould be to
avoid these; and, besides, MIr. Kendal had not bargained for
strangers. lWhat would become of his olpportunity of getting
better acquainted with MIaurice and \inifried, and of all the
1leasutres that she had promised Gilbert ?
At least, however, slie was prolu. that her aunts should see
what a fine-looking man lier husband was, and they were evi-
dently struck with his appearance and manner. Gilbert, too,
was in very good looks, and was altogether a bright, gentlemanly
boy, well made, though with the air of growing too fast, and
with something of uncertainty about his explression.
It was quickly explained that the aunts had only decided,
two days before, on coming to Fairmead at once, some other
engagemenl t having failed them, and they were delighted to find
tliat they should meet their dear Albinia, and be introduced to
Mr. Kendal. Setting off before the post caime in, Albinia bad
aissed \Vinifred's note to tell her of their arrival.
'And,' said Winifred, as she took Albinia up.st:irs, 'if I did
suspect that would be the case, I wont say I regretted it. I
did not wish to afford ,Mr. Kendal the pleasures of anticipation.'
' Perhaps it was better,' said Albinia, smiling,; 'especially as
I suppose they will stay for the next six weeks, so that the davs
wiil be short before you will be fiee.'
'And now let me see you, my pretty one,' said Winifred,
fondly. 'Are you well, are you strong 1 No, don't wriggle
your head away; I shall believe nothing but what I read for
niyself.'
' Don't believe anything you read without the notes,' said Al-
lainia  ' I have a great deal to say to you, but I don't expect
mluch opportunity thereof.'
Certainly not, for Miss Ferrars was knocking at the door.




<pb n="64"/>
Ct             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER. 
She had never been able to suppose that the sisters-in-lawcould 
be more to each other than she was to her own niece.
So it became a regular specimen of a ' long day' spent toge-
ther by relations, who, intending to be very happy, make them.
selves very weary of each other, by discarding ordinary occupa-
tions, and reducing themselves to needlework and small talk.
Albinia was bent on liveliness, and excelled herself in her droll
observations; but to Winifred, who knew her so well, this bril-
liancy did not seem like perfect ease; it was more like effort
than natural spirits. This was no wonder, for not only had the 
sight of new people thrown Mr. Kendal iito a severe access of
shyness and silence, but he was revolving in fear and dread the 
expediency of asking them to Willow Lawn, and considering
whether Albinia and propriety could make the effort bearable.
Silent he sat, while the aunts talked of their wishes that one
nephew would marry, and that the other would not; and no
one presumed to address him, except little Mary, who would
keep trotting up to him, to make him drink out of her doll's
tea-cups.
Mr. Ferrars took pity on him, and took him and Gilbert out  i
to call upon Colonel Bury; but this did not lessen his wife's
difficulties, for there was a general expectation that she would
proceed to confidences; whereas she would do nothing but
praise the Dusautoys, ask after all the parishioners of Fairmead
one by one, and consult about French reading-books and Italian
grammars. Mrs. Annesley began a gentle warning against over-
taxing her strength, and Miss Ferrars enforced it with such
vehemence, that Winifred, who had been rather on that side,
began to take Albinia's part, but perceived, with some anxiety,
that her sister's attempts to laugh off the admonition almost
amounted to an admission that she was working very hard. As
to the step-daughters, no intelligence was attainable, except that
Lucy would be pleased with a new crochet pattern, and that
Sophy was like her father, but not so handsome.
The next division of time passed better. Albinia walked olt
at the window to meet the gentlemen when they came home,
and materially relieved Mr. Kendal's mind by saying to him,
'The aunts are settled in here till they go to Knutsfbrd. I
hope you don't think-there is not the least occasion for asking
then to stay with us.'
' Are yop sure you do not wi.sh it ?' said Mr. Kendal, with
great kindness, but an evident weight renmoved.
'Most certain !' she exclaimed, with full sincerity; 'I am
not at all ready for them. What should I do with them to
entertain I'




<pb n="65"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                 6.5
'Very well,' said Mr. Kendal, 'you must be the judge. If
there be no necessity, I shall be glad to avoid unsettling our
habits, and probably Bayfbrd would hardly afford much enjoy-
mcnt to your aunts.'
Albinia glanced in his face, and in that of her brother, with
her own arch fun. It was the first time that day that Maurice
had seen that peculiarly merry look, and he rejoiced, but he was iot
without fear that she was fostering M 'r. Kendal's retiring habits
niore than was good for him. But it was not only on his
account that she avoided the invitation; she by no means
wished to show Bayford to her fastidious aunts, and felt as if to
keep them satisfied and comfortable would lie beyond her power.
Set free from this dread, and his familiarity with his brother-
in-law renewed, Mr. Kendal came out to great advantage at the
early dinner. Miss Ferrars was well read and used to literary
society, and she started subjects on which he was at home, and
they discussed new books and criticised critics, so that his deep
reading showed itself, and even a grave, quiet tone of satire, such
as was seldom developed, except under the most favourable cir-
cumstances. IHe and Aunt Gertrule were evidently so well
pleased with each other, that Albinia almost thought she had
been precipitate in letting himl off the visit.
Gilbert had, fortunately, a turn for small children, and sub.
mitted to be led about the garden by little Wiliie; and as far
as moderate enjoyment went, the visit was not unsuccessful; but
as for what Albinia came for, it was unattainable, except for
one little space alone with her brother.
'I meant to have asked a great deal,' she said, sighing.
'If you want me, I would contrive to ride over,' said
Ian rice.
'No, it is not worth that. But, Maurice, what is to be done
when one sees one's duty, and yet fails for ever for want of tact
and temper ? Ah, I know what you will say, and I often say
it to myself; but whatever I propose, I always do either the
wrong thing or in the wrong way!'
'You fill a hundred times a day, but are raised up again,'
said Mlaurice.
' Maurice, tell me one thing. Is it wrong to do, not the best,
but only the best one can ?'
'It is the wrong common to us all,' said Maurice.
'I used to believe in " whatever is worth doing at all, is worth
doing well."  Now, I do everything ill, rather than do notl.ing
'There are only two ways of avoiding that.'
'And they are- '
F.




<pb n="66"/>
66             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
' Either doing nothing, or admiring all your own doings.'
' Which do you recommend ' said Albinia, smiling, but n
far from tears.
' My dear,' said Maurice, 'all I can dare to recommend, 
patience and self-control. Don't fret and agitate yourself abou
what you can't do, but do your best to do calmly what yo
can. It will be mad(e up, depend upon it.'
There was no time for more ; but the sound counsel, tl
sympathy, and playfulness had ldone Albinia wonderful good
and she was almost glad there had been no more privacy, 
lher friends might lave guessed that she had not quite found 
counsellor at home.
CIIAPTER VL
THE Christmas holidays did indeed put an end to the wall
J     to meet Gilbert, but only so as to make Albinia fee
responsible for him all day long, and uneasy whenever he was
not accounted for. She played chess with imn, found book
and racked her brains to seek amusements for himl; but know
ing all the time that it was hopeless to expect a boy of fouree
to be satisfied with them. One or two boys of his age hI
come home for the holidays, and she tried to be relieved
being t     told that he was going out with Dick Wolfe or Harr
Osborn; but it was not quite satisfactory, and slie began t
look fagged and unwell, and had lost so much of her playfl
ness, tllhat even Mr. Kendal was alarmed.
Sophia's birthday fell in the last week before Christmas, and
it had always been the family custom   to drink tea wi
3Irs. Meadows. Albinia made tle engagement with a sense o
virtuous resignation, though not feeling well enough for the
infliction, but Mr. Kendal put a stop to all notion of her going,
She expected to enjoy her quiet solitary evening, but the,
result was beyond her hopes, for as she was wishing Gilbert,
good-bye, she heard the click of the study lock, and in came
Mr. Kendal.
'I thought you were gone,' she said.
'No.   I did not like to leave you alone for a whole
evenin,.'
If it were only an excuse to himself for avoiding the
MIeadows' party, it was too prettily done for the notion to
occur to his wife, and never had she spent a happier evening.
He was so unusually tender and unreserved, so desirous to




<pb n="67"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTTIER                fi7
make her comfortable, and, what was far more to her, growing
into so much confidence, that it was even better than what she
used last year to picture to herself as her future life with him.
It even came to what he had probably never done for any one.
She spoke of a beautiful old Latin hymn, which she had once
read with her brother, and had never seen adequately trans-
lated, and lie fetched a manuscript book, where, written out
with unrivalled neatness, stood a translation of his own, made
many years ago, flll of scholarly polish. She ventured to ask
leave to copy it. ' I will copy it for you,' he said, ' but it must
be for yourself alone.'
Slie was grateful for the concession, and happy in the
promise. She begged to turn the page, and it was granted.
There were other translations, chiefly fiom curious oriental
sources, and there were about twenty original poems, elaborated
in the same exquisite manner, and with a deep melancholy
strain of thought, and power of beautiful description, that she
thought finer and more touching than almost anything she had
read.
'And these are all locked up for ever. No one has seen
them.'
'No. When I was a young lad, my poor father put some
lines of mine into a newspaper. That sufficed me,' and he shut
the clasped book as if repenting of having revealed the
contents.
'No; I was not thinking of anything you would dislike
with regard to those verses. I don't like to let in the world on
things precious, but (how could she venture so far ?) I was
thinking how many powers and talents are shut up in that
study ! and whether they might not have been meant for more.
I beg your pardon if I ought not to say so.'
'The time is past,' lie replied, without displeasure; 'my
youth is gone, and with it the enterprise and hopefulness that
can press forward, insensible to annoyance. You should have
married a man with freshness and energy more responsive to
your own.'
' Oh, Edmund, that is a severe reproach for my impertinent
speech.'
'You must not expect too much from me,' he continued. 'I
told you that I was a broken, grief-stricken man, and you were
corntent to he my comforter.'
' Would that I could be so !' exclaimed Albinia, ' but to try
faithfully, I must say what is on my mind. Dear Edmund, if
you would only look out of your books, and see how much good
you could do, here in your own sphere, how much the right
Fv




<pb n="68"/>
68             T E YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
wants strengthening, how much evil cries out to he represse
how sadly your own poor suffer-oh! if you once began, you
would be so much happier !'
She trembled with earnestness, and with fear of her own
audacity, but a resounding knock at the door prevented her from
even discovering whether he were offended. He started away
to secure his book, and the two girls came in. Albinia could
hardly believe it late enough for their return. but they accounted
for having come rather earlier by saying that Gilbert had been
making himself so ridiculous when he had come at last, that
grandmlamma had sent him home.
' At last !' said Albinia. ' He set off only ten minutes after
you, as soon as he found that papa was not comilg,.'
'All I know,' said Lucy, 'is, that lie did not come till half-
past nine, and said he had come fiom home.'
' And where can he be now V'
'Gone to bed,' growled Sophy.
'I don't know what he has been doing,' said Lucy, who since
the suspicion of favouritism, had seemed to find especial plea-
sure in bringing forward her brother's faults; ' but he came in
laughing like a plougli-boy, and talking perfect nonsense. And
when Aunt Maria spoke to him, he answered quite rudely, that
he wasn't going to be questioned and called to order, he had
enough of petticoat government at home.'
'No,' said Sophy, breakig, in with ungracious reluctance, as ift
against her will conveying some comfort to her step-mother for;
the sake of truth, 'what he said was, that if he hore with letticoat
government at home, it was because Mrs. Kendal was pretty
and kind, and didn't torment him out of his life for nothing,
and what he stood from her, he would not stand from any 
other woman.'
'But, Sophy, I am sure he did say Mrs. Kendal knew what
she was going to say, and said it, and it was worth hearing, and
he laughed in Aunt Maria's face, and told her not to make so
many bites at a cherry.'
' He must have been beside himself,' said Albinia, in a
bewilderment of consternation; but Mr. Kendal's return put a
stop to all, for the sisters never told tales before him, andl she
would not bring the subject under his notice until she should' 
be better informed. His sufelring was too great, his wrath too
stern, to be excited without serious cause; but she spent a
wakeful, anxious night, revolving all imaginable evils into
which the boy could have fallen, and perplexing herself what
measures to take, feeling all the more grieved and bound to




<pb n="69"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                69
him by the preference that, even in this dreadful mood, he hal
expressed for her. She fell into a restless sleep in the morning,
from which she wakened so late as to have no time to question
Gilbert before breakfast. On coining down, she found that he
had not made his appearance, and had sent word that he had a
bad headache, and wanted no breakfast. His father, who had
made a visit of inspection, said he thought it was passing oftl
smiling as he observed upon Mrs. Meadows's mince-pie suppers
and home-made wine.
Lucy said nothing, but glanced knowingly at her sister and
at Albinia, from neither of whom did she get any response.
Albinia did not dare to take any measures till Mr. Kendal
had ridden out, and then she went up and knocked at Gilbert's
door. He was better, he said, and was getting up, he would
be down-stairs presently. She watched for him as he came
down, looking still very pale and unwell. She took him into
her room, made him sit by the fire, and get a little life and
warmth into his chilled hands before she spoke. ' Yes, Gilbert,
I don't wonder you cannot lift up your head while so much is
on your mind.'
Gilbert started and hid his face.
'Did you think I did not know, and was not grieved ?'
'Well,' he cried, peevishly, 'I'm sure I have the most ill-
natured pair of sisters in the world.'
'Then you meant to deceive us again, Gilbert.'
He had relapsed into the old habit-as usual, a burst of
tears and a declaration that no one was ever so badly off, and
he did not know what to do.
'You do know perfectly well what to do, Gilbert. There is
nothing for it hut to tell me the whole meaning of this terrible
affair, and I will see whether I can help you.'
It was always the same round, a few words would always
bring the confession, and that pitifll kind of helpless repentance,
which had only too often given her hope.
Gilbert assured her that he had filly purposed following his
sisters, but that on the way he had unluckily fallen in with
Archie Tritton and a friend, who had driven in to hear a man
from London singing comic songs at the King's Head, and they
had persuaded himn to come in. He ha;d been uneasy and tried
to get away, but the drearl of being laughed at about his
granldmother's tea had prevailed, and lie had been supping on
oysters and porter, and trying to believe himself a fast man,
till Archie, who had assured hint that he was himself going
home in 'no time,' had found it expedient to set off, and it had
*




<pb n="70"/>
70              THE YOUNG STEP-3IOTHER.
oeen agreed that he should put a bold face on it, and profess
that he had never intended to do more than come and fetch'
his sisters home.
Tlat the porter had anytling to do with his extraordinary
manner to his grandmother and aunt, was so shocking a notion, .
and the very hint made him cry so bitterly, and protest so ear-
nestly that he had only had one pint, which he did not like, and'
only drank because he was afiaid of being teased, that Albinia- 
was ready to believe that lie had been so elevated by excitement'
as to forget himself, and continue tlhe style of the company
lie had left. It was bad enough, and she felt almost over-
powered by the contemplation of the lamentable weakness of
the poor boy, of the consequences, and of what was incumbent
on ler.
She leant back and considered a little while, then sighed
heavily, and said, 'Gilbert, two things must be done. You
must make an apology to your grandmother and aunt, and you
must confess the whole to your father.'
He gave a sort of howl, as if she were misusing his confidence.'
' It must be,' she said. ' If you are really sorry, you will not
shrink.'
' I do not believe that it could fail to come to your father's
knowledge, even if I did not know it was my duty to tell him,.
and how much better to confess it yourself.' 
For this, however, Gilbert seened to have no force; he cried:
piteously, bewailed himself, vowed incoherently that he would,
never do so again; and if she had not pitied him so much,
would have made her think him contemptible.
She was inexorable as to having tle whole told, though
dreading the confession scarcely less than he did; and lie finally
made a virtue of necessity, and proirmsed to tell, if only she
would not desert him, declaring, with a fresh flood of tears, that
he slould never do wrong when she was by. Then came the
apology. It was most necessary, and he owned that it would
be much better to be able to tell his father that his grandmother,
had forgiven him; but he really had not nerve to set out alone,
and Albinia, who had begun to dread having him out of sight 
consented to go and protect hiim.
He shrank behind her, and she had to bear the flood of
Maria's surprises and regrets, before she could succeed in saying ,
that he was veyl sorry for yesterday's improper behaviour, and
had come to ask pardon.
Grandmamlma was placable; Gilbert's white face and red
eves were pleading enough, and she was distressed at Mrs.
Kendal having come out, looking pale and tired. If she had
0    0                             1~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~'




<pb n="71"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-IOTHER.                 71
been alone, the only danger would have been that the offence
would be lost in petting; but Maria had been personally
wounded, and the jealousy she already fult of the step-mother,
had been excited to the utmost by Gilbert's foolish words. She
was excessively grieved, and a great deal more angry with Mrs.
Kendal than with Gilbert; and the want of justification for
this feeling, together with her great excitement, distress, aul
embarrassment, made her attempts to be dry and dignified ludi-
crously abortive. She really seemed to have lost the power of
knowing what she said. She was glad Mrs. Kendal could walk
up this morning, since she could not come at night.
'It was not my fault,' said Albinia, earnestly; ' Mr. Kendal
forbade me. I am sure I wish we had come.'
The old lady would have said something kind about not
reproaching herself, but Miss Meadows interposed with, ' It was
very unlucky, to be sure-Mr. Kendal never failed them before,
not that she would wish-but she had always understood that
to let young people run about late in the evening by themselves
-not that she meant anything. but it was very unfortunate-
if she had only been aware-Betty should have come down to
walk up with them.'
Gilbert could not forbear an ashamed smile of intense affrout
at this reproach to his manliness.
'It was exceedingly unfortunate,' said Albinia, trying to
repress her vexation; 'but Gilbert must learn to have resolu-
tion to guard himself. And now that he is come to ask your
forgiveness, will you not grant it to him '
' Oh, yes, yes, certainly, I forgive him from my heart. Yes,
Gilbert, I do, only you must mind and beware-it is a very
shocking thing-low company and all that-you've made your-
self look as ill-and if you knew what a cake Betty had made
-almond and citron both-" but it's for Master Gilbert," she
sai(l, "and I don't grudge"-and then to think-oh, dear 1'
Albinia tried to express for him some becoming sorrow at
having disappointed so much kindness, but she brought Miss
Meadows down on her again.
'Oh, yes-she grudged nothing-but she never expected to
meet with gratitude-she was quite prepared-' and she swal-
lowed and almost sobbed, 'there had been changes. She was
ready to make every excuse-she was sure she had done her
best-but she understood-she didn't want to be assured. It
always happened so-she knew her homely ways were not what
Mrs. Kendal had been used to-and she didn't wonder-she
only hoped the dear children-' and she was absolutely crying.
'My ldear iMaria,' said her mother, soothingly, 'you have




<pb n="72"/>
72             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
worked yourself into such a state, that you don't know what
you are saying. You must not let Mrs. Kendal think that we
don't know that she is leading the dear children to all that is
right and kind towards us.'
' Oh, no, I don't accuse any one. Only if they like to put me
down under their feet and trample on me, they are welcome.
That's all I have to say.'
Albinia was too much annoyed to be amused, and said, as
she rose to take leave, ' I think it would be better for Gilbert,
as well as for ourselves, if we were to say no more till some
more cool and reasonable moment.'
'I am as cool as possible,' said Miss Meadows, convulsively
clutching her hand; 'I'm not excited. Don't excite yourself;
Mrs. Kendal-it is very bad for you. Tell her not, Mamma-
oh ! no, don't be excited-I mean nothing-I forgive poor dear
Gibbie whatever little matters-I know there was excuse-boys
with unsettled homes-but pray don't go and excite yourself-
you see how cool I am-'
And she pursued Albinia to the garden-gate, recommending
her at every step not to be excited, for she was as cool as
possible, trembling and stammering all the time, with flushed
cheeks, and tears in her eyes.
'I wonder who she thinks is excited I' exclaimed Albinia, as
they finally turned their backs on her.
It was hardly in human nature to help making the observa-
tion, but it was not prudent. Gilbert took licence to laugh,
and say, ' Aunt Maria is beside herself.'
'I never heard anything so absurd or unjust!' cried Albinia,
too much irritated to remember anything but the sympathy of
her auditor. 'If I am to be treated in this manner, I have
done striving to please them. Due respect shall be shown, but
as to intimacy and confidence-'
' I'm glad you see it so at last I' cried Gilbert. ' Aunt Maria
has been the plague of my life, and I'm glad I told her a bit of
my mind !'
What was Albinia's consternation ! Her moment's petulance
had undone her morning's work.
'Gilbert,' she said, 'we are both speaking very wrongly. I
especially, who ought to have helped you.'
Spite of all succeeding humility the outburst had been fatal,
and argue and plead as she might, she could not restore the
boy to anything like the half satisfactory state of penitence in
which she had led him from home. The giving way to her
worse nature had awakened his, and though he still allowed
that she should prepare the way for his confession to his father,




<pb n="73"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHE.                73
all real sense of his outrageous conduct towards his aunt was
gone.
Disheartened and worn out, Albinia did not feel equal even
to going to take off her walking things, but sat down in the
drawing-room on the sofa, and tried to silence the girls' ques-
tions and chatter, by desiring Lucy to read aloud.
By-and-by Mr. Kendal was heard returning, and she rose to
arrest him in the hall Her looks began the story, for he ex-
claimed, ' My dear Albinia, what is the matter 1'
'Oh, Edmund, I have such things to tell you I I have been
doing so wrong.'
She was almost sobbing, and he spoke fondly. ' No, Albinia,
I can hardly believe that. Something has vexed you, and you
must take time to compose yourself.'
He led her up to her own room, tried to soothe her, and
would not listen to a word till she should be calm. After
lying still for a little while, she thought she had recovered, but
the very word 'Gilbert' brought such an expression of anxiety
and sternness over his brow as overcame her again, and she could
not speak without so much emotion that he silenced her; and
finding that she could neither leave the subject, nor mention
it without violent agitation, he said he would leave her for a
little while, and perhaps she might sleep, and then be better
able to speak to him. Still she held him, and begged that
he would say nothing to Gilbert till he had heard her, and
to pacify her he yielded, passed his promise, and quitted her
with a kiss
CHAPTER VIL
THERE was a messenger at Fairmead Parsonage by sunrise
the next morning, and by twelve o'clock Mr. and Mrs
Ferrars were at Willow Lawn.
Mr. Kendal's grave brow and depressed manner did not re-
assure Winifred as he met her in the hall, although his
words were, ' I hope she is doing welL'
He said no more, for the drawing-room door was moving to
and fro, as if uneasy on the hinges, and as he made a step
towards it, it disclosed a lady with black eyes and pinched
features, whom he presented as ' Miss Meadows.'
'Well, now-I think-since more efficient-since I leave
Mrs Kendal to better-only pray tell her-my love and my
mother's-if I could have been of any use-or shall I remain I-




<pb n="74"/>
7t             THE YOUNG STEP-1MOTHER
could I be of any service, Edmund ?-I would not intrude when
-but in the house-if I could be of any further use.'
'Of none, thank you,' said Mr. Kendal, ' unless you would be
kind enough to take home the girls.'
'Oh, papa!' cried Lucy, I've got the keys. You wont be
able to get on at all without me. Sophy may go, but I could
not be spared.'
'Let it be as you will,' said Mr. Kend:l ; 'I only desire
quiet, and that you should not inconvenience IMrs. Ferrars.'
'You will help me, will you not?' said Winifred, smiling,
though she did ilot augur well from this opening scene. 'May
I go soon to Albinia ?'
'Presently, I hope,' said Mr. Kendal, with an uneasy glance
towards Miss Meadows; ' sle has seen no one as yet, and she is
so determined that you cannot come till after Christmnas, that
she does not expect you.'
Mliss Meadows began one of her tangled skeins of words, the
most tangible of which was excitement; and Mr. Kendal,
knowing by long experience that the only chance of a conclu-
sion was to let her run herself down, held his tongue, and she
finally departed.
Then he breathed more freely, and said he would go and
prepare Albinia to see her sister, desiring Lucy to show Mrs.
Ferrars to her room, and to take care not to talk upon the
stairs.
This, Lucy, who was in high glory, obeyed by walking upon
creaking tip-toe, alpparently borrowed from  her aunt, and
whispering at a wonderful rate about her eagerness to see dear,
dear mamma, and the darling little brother.
The spare room did not look expectant of guests, and felt
still less so. It struck Winifred as very like the mouth of a
well, and the paper showed patches of ancient damp. One maid
was hastily laying the fire, the other shaking out the curtains,
in the endeavour to render it habitable, and Lucy began saying,
'I must apologize. If papa had only given us notice that we
-were to have the pleasure of seeing you,' and then she dashed
at the maid in all the pleasure of authority. 'Eweretta, go and
bring up Mrs. Ferrars's trunks directly, and some water, and
some towels.'
Winifred thought the greatest mercy to the hunted maid
would be to withdraw as soon as she had hastily thrown off
bonnet and cloak, and Lucy followed her into the passage, re-
peating that papa was so absent and forgetful, that it was very
inconvenient in making arrangements.  Whatever was ordi-




<pb n="75"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHIER.                 75
narily repressed in her, was repaying itself with interest in the
pleasure of acting as mistress of tle house.
Mrs. Ferrars beheld Gilbert sitting listlessly on the deep
window-seat at the end of tile passage, resting his head on his
band.
\\ell !' exclairmed Lucy, 'if lie is not there still ! lie lias
hardly stirred since breakftst ! Come and spi:tlk to Mrs Fer-
r;rs, (ilbert. Or,' and she simpered, ' shall it be Aunt Wini-
irzl '
Iric 1 '
' As you please,' said MIrs. Ferrars, advancing towards her
old acquaintance, whom she would hardly hlave recognised, so
ditllerent was the pale, downcast, slouching figure, from the
bright, handsome lad she rememlcred.
'iHow cold your hand is !' she exclaimed; 'you should not
sit in this cold passage.'
'As I have been telling him all this morning,' said Lucy.
' How is she ?' whispered the boy, rousing himself to look
implloringly in Winifred's face.
'Your fithler seems satisfied about her.'
At that moment a door at some distance was opened, and
Gilbert seemed to thrill all over as for the moment ere it closed
a baly's cry was heard  HIe turned his face away, and rested
it on the window. ' My brother ! my brother !' he murmured,
iut at that momenlt his fiuther turned the corner of the passage,
saving that Albinia had heard their arrival, and was very
eager to see her sister.
Still Winified could not leave the boy without saying, 'You
can make Gilbert happy about her, can you not   I Ie is wait-
ing hlere, watching anxiously lfr news of her.'
'Gilbert himself best knows whether he has a right to be
made liappy,' said Mr. Kendal, gravely. 'I promised to ask no
questions till she is able to explain, but I much fear that
lie has been causing her great grief and distress.'
lie fixed his eyes on his son, and Winifred, in the belief that
she was better out of their way, llurried to Albini.a's room, and
was seen very little all tile rest of the day.
She was spared, however, to walk to church the next morning
with her husband, Lucy showing them    the way, and being
tqiet and agreeable when repressed by Mr. Ferrars's presence.
After church, Mr. Dusautoy overtook them to inquire after
llrs. Kendal, and to make a kind pyrolosal of exchanging Sunday
duty. He undertook to drive the ponies home on tile morrow,
begged for credentials for the clerk, and messages for Willie and
Mary, and seemed highly pleased with the prospect of the holi-




<pb n="76"/>
76             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
day, as he called it, only entreating that Mrs. Ferrars would ha
so kind as to look in on 'Fanny,' if Mrs. Kendal could spare
her.
'I thought,' said Winifred to her husband, ' that you would
rather have exchanged a Sunday when Albinia is better able to
enjoy you?'
' That may yet be, but poor Kendal is so much depressed,
that I do not like to leave him.'
'I have no patience with him !' cried Winifred; 'lie does
not seem to take the slightest pleasure in his baby, and lie will
hardly let poor Albinia do so either ! Do you know, Maurice,
it is as bad as I ever feared it would be. No, don't stop Ime, I
must have it out. I always said he had no business to victimize
her, and I am sure of it now ! I believe this rloom of his has
broken down her own dear sunny spirits! There she is-so
unlike herself-so anxious and fidgetty about her baby-will
hardly take any one's word for his being as healthy and stout a
child as I ever saw! And then, every other moment, she is
restless about that boy-always asking where he is, or what he
is doing. I don't see how she is ever to get well, while it goes on
in this way I Mr. Kendal told ine that Gilbert had been worry-
ing and distressing her; and as to those girls, the eldest of
them is intolerable with her airs, and the youngest-I asked
her if she liked babies, and she growled, "No."  Lucy said
Gilbert was waiting in the passage for news of mamma, and she
grunted," All sham !" and that's the whole I have heard of her I
He is bad enough in himself, but with such a train!  My
poor Albinia! If they are not the death of her, it will be
lucky !'
' Well done, Winifred !'
'But, Maurice,' said his impetuous wife, in a curiously al-
tered tone, ' are not you very unhappy about Albiiiia '
'I shall leave you to find that out for me.'
'Then you are not ?'
'I think Kendal thoroughly values and appreciates her, and
is very uncomfortable without her.'
' I suppose so. People do miss a maid-of-all-work. I should
not so much mind it, if she had been only his slave, but to be
so to all those disagreeable children of his too ! And with so
little effect. Why can't lie send them all to school I'
'Propose that to Albinia.'
'She did want the boy to go somewhere. I should not care
where, so it were out of her way. What creatures they must
be for her to have produlced no more effect on then !'
' Poor Albinia ! I am afraid it is a hard task; but these are




<pb n="77"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHEL          .       77
still early days, and we see things at a disadvantage. We shall
be able to judge whether there be really too great a strain on
her spirits, and if so, I would talk to Kendal.'
' And I wonder what is to come of that. It seems to me
like what John Smith calls singing psalms to a dead horse.'
' John Smith I I am glad you mentioned him; I shall desire
Dusautoy to bring him here on Monday.
' What I as poor Albinia would say, you can't exist a week
without John Smith'
' Even so. I want him to lay out a plan for draining the
garden. That pond is intolerable. I suspect that all, yourself
included, will become far more good-tempered in consequence.'
' A capital measure; but do you mean that Edmund Kendal
is going to let you and John Smith drain his pond under his
very nose, and never find it out I I did not imagine him quite
come to that.'                            *
'Not quite,' said Maurice; ' it is with his free consent, and I
believe he will be very glad to have it done without any trouble
to himself. He said that " Albinia thought it damp," and when
I put a few sanatory facts before him, thanked me heartily, and
seemed quite relieved. If they had only been in Sanscrit, they
would have made the greater impression.'
'One comfort is, Maurice, that however provoking you ate
at first, you generally prove yourself reasonable at last. I am
glad you are not Mr. KendaL'
' Ah I it will have a fine effect on you to spend your Christ
mas-day tete-a-tete with him.'
Mrs Ferrars's views underwent various modifications, like
all hasty yet candid judgments. She took Mr. Kendal into
favour when she found him placidly submitting to Miss Mea-
dows's showers of words, in order to prevent her gaining access
to his wife.
' Maria Meadows is a very well-meaning person,' he said
afterwards; ' but I know of no worse infliction in a sick-room,'
'I wonder,' thought Winifred, ' whether he married to get
rid of her. I should have thought it justifiable had it been
any one but Albinia r
The call on Mrs. Dusautoy was consoling. It was delight-
ful to find how Albinia was loved and valued at the vicarage.
Mrs. Dusautoy began by sending her as a message, John's first
exclamation on hearing of the event. 'Then she will never be
of any more use.' In fact, she said, it was much to him like
having a curate disabled; and she believed he could only be
consoled by the hopes of a pattern christening, and of a nursery
for his school-girls; but there Winifred shook her head, Fair-




<pb n="78"/>
78             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTIIER
mead had a prior claim, and Albinia had long had her eye upon
a scholar of her own.
'I told John that she would ! and he must bear it as lie can'
laughed Mrs. Dusautoy; and she went on more seriously to say
that her gratitude was lbey!ond expression, not merely fir tlhe
actual help, though that was much, but for the sylpathy, the
first encouragelment they hadl met among their richer parish-
ioners; and she spoke of the refresihmllellt of the mirtlhfulness
and playful manner, so as to convince Winifred that they had
neither died away nor been everywhere wasted.
Winifred had no amenable patient. Weak and depressed as
Albinia was, her restlessness and air of anxiety could not be
appeased. There was a look of being constantly on the watch,
and once, when her door was ajar, before Winifred was aware,
she exerted her voice to call Gilbert !
Pushing the door just wide enough to enter, and treading
almost noiselessly, lie came forward, looking from side to side as
with a sense of guilt. She stretched out her hand and smiled,
and he obeyed the movement that asked him to bend and kiss
her, but still durst not speak.
' Let me have the baby,' she said.
Mrs. Ferrars laid it beside her, and held aloof. Gilbert's eyes
were fixed intently on it.
'Yes, Gilbert,' Albinia said, 'I know -what you will feel
for him.  He can't be what you once hbad-but oh, Gilbert,
you will do all that an elder brother can to make him like
Edmund!'
Gilbert wrung her fingers, and ventured to stoop down to
kiss the little red forehead. The tears were running down his
cheeks, and he could not speak.
'If your father might only say the same of him ! that he
never grieved him !' said Albinia; ' but oh, Gilbert-example;'
and then, pausing and gazing searchingly in his face, 'You have
not told papa.'
'No,' whispered Gilbert.
'Winifred,' said Albinia,' would you be so kind as to ask
papa to come I'
Winifred was forced to obey, though feeling much to blame as
Mr. Kendal rose with a sigh of uneasiness. Gilbert still stood
with his hand clasped in Albinia's, and she held it while her
weak voice made the full confession for him, and assured his
father of his shame and sorrow. There needed no such assur-
ance, his whole demeanour had been sorrow all these dreary
days, and Mr. Kendal could not but forgive, though his eye
spoke deep grief.




<pb n="79"/>
TIIE YOUNG S'EP-3MOTIIER.              79
'I could not refuse pardon thus asked.' lie said. 'Oh, Gil-
bert, that I could hope this were the begiing of a new
course !'
Albinia looked from Gilbert to his little brother, and back
again to Gilbert.
'It s'lall be,' she said, and Gilbert's resolution was perhapt
the more sincere that lie spoke no word.
'Poor boy,' said Albinia, half to herself and half aloud, 'I
think I feel more strong to love and to help him !'
That interview was a dangerous experiment, and she snufired
for it. As her brother said, instead of having too little life, she
had too much, and could not let herself rest; she had never
cultivated the art of being still, and when she was weak, she
cull not be call.
Still the strength of her constitution staved off the nervous
fever of her spirits, and though she was not at all a comfortable
patient, she made a certain degree of progress; so that though
it was not easy to call her better, she was not quite so ill, and
lgew less irrational in hel solicitude, and more open to other
ideas. 'Do you know, IW'inifred,' she said one day, ' I have
been thinking myself at Fairmead till I almost believed I heard
John Smith's voice under the window.'
Winified was obliged to look out at the window to hide her
smile. Maurice, who was standing on the lawn with the very
John Smith, beckoned to her, and she went down to hear his
plans. He was wanted at home the next day, and asked whle-
ther she thought lie had better take Giibert with him. ' It is
the wisest thing that has been said yet !' exclaimed she. 'Now
1 shall have a chance for Albinia!' and accordingly, Mr. Ien-
dal having given a gracious and grateful consent, Albinia was
informed; but Winifred thought her almost perverse when a
p:erturbed look came over her, and she said, 'It is very kind in
Maurice, but I must speak to him.'
He was struck by the worn, restless expression of her features,
so unlike the calm contented repose of a young mother; and
-when she spoke to him, her first word was of Gilbert. ' Maurice,
it is so kind, I know you will make him happy-but oh ! take
care-he is so delicate-indeed, he is-don't let him get wet
through.'
Maurice promised, but Albinia resumed with minutiae of
directions, ending with, 'Oh! if he should get hurt or into
any mischief, what should we do t Pray, take care, Maurice,
you are not used to such delicate boys.'
'My dear, I think you may rely on me.'
' Yes, but you will not be too strict with him-' and more




<pb n="80"/>
F0              THE YOUNG STEP-MOThER.
was following, when her brother said, ' I promise you to make
him my special charge. I like the boy very much. I think
you may be reasonable, and trust him with me, without so
much agitation. You have not let me see my own nephew
yet.'
Albinia looked with her wistful piteous face at her brother as
he took in his arms her noble-looking fair infant.
'You are a great fellow indeed, sir,' said his uncle. ' Now
if I were your mamma, I would be proud of you, rather than-'
'I am afraid !' said Albinia, in a sudden low whisper.
He looked at her anxiously.
' Let me have him,' she said; then as Maurice bent over her,
and site hastily gathered the babe into her arms. she whispered
in quick, low, faint accents, 'Do you know how many children
have been born in this house ?'
Mr. Ferrars understood ler; he too had seen the catalogue
in the church, and guessed that the phantoms of her boy's dead
brethren dwelt on her imagination, forbidding her to rejoice in
him hopefully. He tried to say something encouraging of the
child's appearance, but she would not let him go on. '1 know,'
she said, ' lie is so now--ut-' then catching ler breath again
and speaking very low, ' his father does not dare look at him-
I see that lie is sorry for me--Oh, Maurice, it will come, and I
shall be able to do nothing !'
Maurice felt his lip quivering as his sister's voice became
choked-the sister to whom lie had once been the whole world,
and who still could pour out her inmost heart more freely to
him than to any other. But it was a time for grave authority,
and though lie spoke gently, it was almost sternly.
'Albinia, this is not right. It is not thankful or trustful.
No, do not cry, but listen to me. Your child is as likely to do
well as any child in the world, but nothing is so likely to do
him harmn as your want of composure.'
'I tell myself so,' said Albinia, 'but there is no helping it.'
Yes, there is. Make it your duty to keel) yourself still. an.l
not be troubled about what may or may not happen, but be
glad of the present pleasure.'
'Don't you think 1 am ' said Albinia, half smiling; 'so
glad, that 1 grow fiightened at myself, and-' As if ftin to
leave the sulject, she added, ' And it is what you don't under-
stand, Maurice, but he can't be the first to Edtninld as he is to
me-never-and when I get almost jealous for him, 1 tlink of
Gilbert and the girls-and oh ! there is so much to do for them
-they want a mother so much-and Winifred wont let me see
them, or teUd le about them 1'




<pb n="81"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHE.                 81
She had grown piteous and incoherent, and a glance from
Winifred told him, ' this is always the way.'
' My dear,' he said, 'you will never be fit to attend to them,
if you do not use this present time rightly. You may hurt your
health, and still more certainly, you will go to work fretfully
and impetuously. If you have a busy life, the more reason to
learn to be tranquil. Calm is forced on you now, and if you
give way to useless nervous brooding over the work you are
obliged to lay aside for a time, you have no right to hope that
you will either have judgment or temper for your tasks'
'But how am I to keep from thinking, MauriceI The
weaker I am, the more I think.'
' Are you dutiful as to what Winifred there thinks wisest?
Ah I Albinia, you want to learn, as poor Queen Anne of Aus-
tria did, that docility in illness may be self-resignation into
higher Hands. Perhaps you despise it, but it is no mean exer-
cise of strength and resolution to be still.'
Albinia looked at him as if receiving a new idea.
' And,' he added, bending nearer her face, and speaking lower,
'when you pray, let them be hearty faithful prayers that God's
hand may be over your child-your children, not half-hearted
faithless ones, that He may work out your will in them.'
' Oh, Maurice, how did you know ? But you are not going ? I
have so much to talk over with you.'
' Yes, I must go; and you must be still. Indeed I will watch
over Gilbert as though he were mine. Yes, even more. Don't
speak again, Albinia, I desire you will not. Good-bye.'
That lecture had been the most wholesome treatment she had
yet received; she ceased to give way without effort to restless
thoughts and cares, and was much less refractory.
When at last Lucy and Sophia were admitted, Winifred
found perils that she had not anticipated. Lucy was indeed
supremely and girlishly happy: but it was Sophy whose eye
Albinia sought with anxiety, and that eye was averted. Her
cheek was cold like that of a doll when Albinia touched it
eagerly with her lips; and when Lucy admonished her to kiss
the dear little brother, she fairly turned and ran out of the
room.
'Poor Sophy I' said Lucy. ' Never mind her, mamma, but
she is odder than ever, since baby has been born. When
Eweretta came up and told us, she hid her face and cried; and
when grandmamma wanted to make us promise to love him
with all our hearts, and not make any difference, she would only
say, u I wont 1"'
'We will leave him to take care of that, Lucy,' said Albinia.
G




<pb n="82"/>
82              THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
But though she spoke cheerfully, Winifred was not surprised,
after a little interval, to hear sounds like stifled weeping.
Almost every home subject was so dangerous, that whenever
Mrs. Ferrars wanted to make cheerful, innocent conversation,
she began to talk of her visit to Ireland and the beautiful Gal- 
way coast, and the O'Mores of Ballymakilty, till Albinia grew
quite sick of the names of the whole clan of thirty-six cousins
and thought, with her aunts, that Winifred was too Irish. Yet,
at any other time, the histories would have made her sometimes
laugh, and sometimes cry; but the world was sadly out of joint
with her.
There was a sudden change when, for the first time her eye
rested on the lawn, and she beheld the work of draiinage. The
light glanced in her eye. the colour rose on her cheek, and she
exclaimed, ' How kind of Edmund !'
Winifred must needs give her husband his share. 'Ah I you
would never have had it done without Maurice.'
'Yes,' said Albinia, 'Edmund has been out of the way of such
things; but he consented, you know.' Then as her eyes grew
liquid, ' A duckpond is a funny subject for sentiment, but oh I
if you knew what that place has been to my imagination from
the first, and how the wreaths of mist have wound themselves
into spectres in my dreams, and stretched out white shrouds
now for one, now for the other !' and she shuddered.
'And you have gone through all this and never spoken. No
wonder your nerves and spirits were tried.'
'1 did speak at first,' said Albinia; 'but I thought Edmund
did not hear, or thought it nonsense, and so did I at times.
But you see he did attend; he always does, you see, at the right
time. It was only my impatience.'
'I suspect Maurice and John Smith had more to do with it,'
said Winifred.
'Well, we wont quarrel about that,' said Albinia. 'I only
know that whoever brought it about has taken the heaviest
weight off my mind that has been there yet.'
In truth, the terror, half real, half imagilary, had been a sorer
burthen than all the positive cares for those unruly children, or
their silent, melancholy father; and the relief told in all
ways-above all, in the peace with which she began to regard
her child. Still she would provoke Winified by bestowing all
her gratitude on Mr. Kendlal, who began to be persuaded that
lie had made a heroic exertion.
Winifred had been somewhat scandalized by discovering
Albinia's deficiencies in the furniture development. She was
too active and stirring, and too fond of out-of-door occupation,




<pb n="83"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                   83
to regard interior decoration as one of the domestic graces;
'her nest was rather that of the ostrich than the chaffinch,' as
WVinifred told her on the discovery that her morning-room hlad
been used for no other purpose than as a deposit for all the
books, wedding presents, lumber, &c., which she had never had
leisure to arrange.
'You might be more civil,' answered Albinia. ' Remember
that the ringdove never made half such a fuss about her nest
as the magpie.'
'Well, I am glad you have found some likeness in yourself to
a dove,' rejoined Winifred.
Mrs. Ferrars set vigorously to work with Lucy, and rendered
the room so pretty and pleasant, that Lucy pronounced that it
must be called nothing but the boudoir, for it was a perfect
little bijou.
Albinia was laid on the sofa by the sparkling fire, by her side
the little cot, and in her hand a most happy affectionate letter
from Gilbert, detailing the Fairmead Christmas festivities. She
felt the invigoration of change of room, admired and was grate-
ful for Winifred's work, and looked so fair and bright, so tran-
quil and so contented, that her sister and husband could not
help pausing to contemplate her as an absolutely new creature
in a state of quiescence.
It did not last long, and Mrs. Ferrars felt herself the unwill-
ing culprit. Attracted by sounds in the hall, she found the
two girls receiving from the hands of Genevieve Durant a pretty
basket choicely adorned with sprays of myrtle, saying mamma
would be much obliged, and they would take it up at once;
Genevieve should take home her basket, and down plunged their
hands regardless of the garniture.
G6nevieve's disal)pointed look caught Winifred's attention,
and springing forward she exclaimed, ' You shall come to Mrs.
Kendal yourself, my dear. She must see your pretty basket,'
and yourself, she could have added, as she met the gratefuli
glitter of the dark eves.
Lucy remonstratedt thlt mamma had seen no one yet, not even
Aunt Maria, but Mrs. Ferrars would not listen; and treading
airily, yet with reverence that would have befitted a royal
palace, G6nevieve was ushered upstairs, and with heartfelt
sweetness, and timid grace, presented her etrennes.
Under the fragrant sprays lay a small white-paper parcel,
tied with narrow blue satin bows, such as no English fingers
could accomplish, and within was a little frock-body, exquisitely
embroidered, with a breastplate of actual point lace in a pattern
like frostwork on the windows. It was such work as Madame
a2




<pb n="84"/>
84              THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
Belmarchb had learnt in a convent in times of history, and poor
little G6nevieve had almost worn out her black eyes on this 
piece of homage to her dear Mrs. Kendal, grieving only that 
she had not been able to add the length of robe needed to com-
plete her gift.
Albinia's kiss was recompence beyond her dreams, and she
fairly cried for joy when she was told that she should come and
help to dress the babe in it for his christening. Mrs. Ferrarg
would walk out with her at once to buy a sufficiency of cambr'io
for the mighty skirts.
That visit was indeed nothing but pleasure, but Mrs. Ferrars
had not calculated on contingencies and family punctilios. She
forgot that it would be a mortal offence to let in any one rather
than Miss Meadows; but the rest of the family were so well
aware of it, that when she returned she heard a perfect sparrow's-
nest of voices-Lucy's pert and eager, Miss Meadows's injured 
and shrill, and Albinia's, alas ! thin and loud, half sarcasm, 
half fret.
There sat Aunt Maria fidgeting in the arm-chair; Lucy stood
by the fire; Albinia's countenance sadly different from what it
had been in the morning-weary, impatient, and excited, all
that it ought not to be !
Winifred would have cleared the room at once, but this was
not easy, and poor Albinia was so far gone as to be determined
on finishing that endless thing, an altercation ; so all three began
explaining and appealing at once.
It seemed that Mrs. Osborn was requiting Mrs. KendaFs
neglect in not having inquired after her when the Admiral's
sister's husband died, by the omission of inquiries at present;
whereat Albinia laughed a feeble, overdone giggle, and observed
that she believed Mrs. Osborn knew all that passed in Willow
Lawn better than the inmates; and Lucy deposed that Sophy
and Loo were together every day, though Solhy knew mamma
did not like it. Miss Meadows said if reparation were not made,
the Osborns had expressed their intention of omitting Lucy and
Sophy from their Twelfth-day party.
To this Albinia pettishly replied that the girls were to go to
no Christmas parties without her; Miss Meadows had taken it
very much to heart, and Lucy was declaiming against mamma
making any condescension to Mrs. Osborn, or herself being
supposed to care for ' the Osborn's parties,' where the boys were
so rude and vulgar, the girls so boisterous, and the dancing a
mere romp. Sophy miht like it, but site never did !
Miss Meadows was hurt by her niece's defection, and had
come to ' Oh, very wel],' and ' things were altered,' and ' people




<pb n="85"/>
THE YOTTN   STEP-MOTHER.               85
ased to be grateful to old fiiends, but there were changes' AnJ
thereby Lucy grew personal as to the manners of the Osborns,
while Albinia defended herself against the being grand or ex-
clusive, but it was her duty to do what she thought right for
the children  Yes, Mliss Meadows was quite aware-only
grandmamma was so nervous about poor dear Gibbie missing his
Christmas dinner for the first time-being absent-Mrs. Ferrars
would take great care, but damp stockings and all-
Winified endeavoured to stem  the tide of words, but in
vain, between the meandering incoherency of the one, and the
nervous rapidity of the other, and they had both set off again
on this fiesh score, when in despair she ran downstairs, rapped
at the study door, and cried, 'Mr. Kendal, Mr. Kendal, willyou
not come? I can't get Miss Meadows out of Albinia's room.'
Forth came Mr. Kendal, walked straight upstairs, and stco.
in full majesty on the threshold. Holding out his hand to Maria
with grave courtesy, he thanked her for coming to see his wife,
but at the same time handed her down, saw her out safely at
the hall door, and Lucy into the drawing-room.
It was a pity that he had not returned to Albinia's room, fo.
she was too much excited to be composed without authority.
first, she scolded Winifred ; 'it was the thing she most wished
to avoid, that he should fancy her teased by anything tle
Meadowses could say,' and she laughed, and protested she nevei
was vexed, such absurdity did not hurt her in the least.
'It has tired you, though,' said Winifred. ' Lie quite down
andl sleep.'
Of course, however, Albinia would not believe that she was
tired, and began to talk of the Osborns and their party-she
was annoyed at the being thought too fine. 'If it were not such
a penance, and if you would not be gone home, I really would
ask you to take the girls, Winifred.'
' I shall not be gone home.'
'Yes, you will. I am well, and every one wants you.'
'Did you not hear Willie's complimentary message, that he is
never naughty now, because Gilbert makes him so happy '
'But, Winifred, the penny club I The people must have their
things.'
'They can wait, or-'
'It is very well for us to talk of waiting,' cried Albinia, ' but
how should we like a frosty night without cloaks, or blankets, or
fire ? I did not think it of you, Winifred. It is the first winter
I have been away from my poor old dames, and I did think you
would have cared for them.
And thereupon her overwrought spirits gave way in a flood




<pb n="86"/>
86              THE, YOUNG STEP-MOTHER,
of tears, as she angrily averted her face from her sister, who
could have cried too, not at the injustice, but with compassion
and perplexity lest there should be an equally violent reaction
either of remorse or of mirth. 
It must be confessed that Albinia was very much the
creature of health. Never having been ill before, the depres. 
sion had been so new that it broke her completely down; con.
valescence made her fractious. 
Recovery, however, filled her with such an ecstasy of animal
spirits that her time seemed to be entirely passed in happiness
or in sleep, and cares appeared to have lost all power. It was
so sudden a change that Winifred was startled, though it was a
very pleasant one, and she did not reflect that this was as far
from the calm, self-restrained, meditative tranquillity enjoined
by Maurice, as had been the previous restless, querulous state.
Both were body more than mind, but Mrs. Ferrars was much
more ready to be merry with Albinia than to moralize about
her. And it was droll that the penny club was one of the first
stages in her revival.
'Oh, mamma,' cried Lucy, flying in, ' Mr. Dusautoy is at the
door.  There is such a to do.   All the women have been
getting gin with their penny club tickets, and Mrs. Brock has
been stealing the money, and Mr. Dusautoy wants to know if
you paid up three-and-fourpence for the Hancock children.'
Albinia instantly invited Mr. Dusautoy to explain in person;
and he entered, hearty and pleasant as ever, but in great haste,
for he had left his Fanny keeping the peace between five angry 
women, while he came out to collect evidence.
The Bayford clothing club payments were collected by Mrs,
Brock, the sexton's wife, and distributed by tickets to be
produced at the various shops in the town. Mrs. Brock had
detected some women exchanging their tickets for gin, and the
offending parties retaliated by accusing her of embezzling the
subscriptions, both parties launching into the usual amount of
personalities and exaggerations.
Albinia's testimony cleared Mrs. Brock as to the three-and-
fourpence, but she 'snuffed the battle from afar,' and rushed
into a scheme of taking the clothing-club into her own hands,
collecting the pence, having the goods from London, and selling
them herself-she would propose it on the very first oppor-
tunity to the Dusautoys. Winifred asked if she had not a good
deal on her hands already.
'My dear, I have the work in me of a young giant.'
'Aud will Mr. Kendal like it ?'
'He would never find it out unless I told him, and very
i




<pb n="87"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                87
possibly not then. Six months hence, perhaps, he may tell me
he is glad that Lucy is inclined to useful pursuits, and that is
approval, Winifred, much more than if I went and worried him
about every little petty woman's matter.'
'Every one to her taste,' thought Winifred, who had begun
to regard Mr. and Mrs. Kendal in the same relation as the king
and queen at ches.
The day before the christening, Mr. Ferrars brought back
Gilbert and his own little Willie.
Through all the interchange of greetings, Gilbert would
hardly let go Albinia's hand, and the moment her attention
was free, he earnestly whispered, 'May I see my brother I'
She took him upstairs at once. ' Let me look a little while,'
he said, hanging over the child with a sort of hungry fondness
and curiosity. 'My brother ! my brother !' he repeated. ' It
has rung in mny ears every morning that I can say my brother
once more, till I have feared it was a dream.'
It was the sympathy Albinia cared for, come back again I 'I
hope he will be a good brother to you,' she said.
' l-e must be good I he can't help it! He has you!' said
Gillert. 'See, he is opening his eyes-oh ! how blue ! May I
touch him Y'
'To be sure you may. He is not sugar,' said Albinia, laugh-
ing. ' There-make an arm ; you may have him if you like.
Your left arm, you awkward man. Yes, that is right. You
will do quite as well as I, who never touched a baby till
Willie was born. There, sir, how do you like your brother
Gilbert l'
Gilbert held him reverently, and gave him back with a sigh
when he seemed to have satiated his gaze and touch, and con-
vinced himself that his new possession was substantial. 'I
sav,' he added wistfully, 'did you think that name would bring
ill-luck I'
She knew the name he meant, and answered, ' No, but your
father could not have borne it. Besides, Gibbie, we would not
think him instead of Edmund. No, he shall learn to look up
to his other brother as you do, and look to meeting and know-
ing him some day.'
Gilbert shivered at this, and made no opposition to her
carrying him  downstairs to his uncle; and then Gilbert
hurried off for the basket of snowdrops that he had gathered
early, from a favourite spot at Fairmnead. That short absence
seemed to have added double force to his affection; he could
hardly bear to be away from her, and every moment when he
could gain her ear, poured histories of the delights of Fair-




<pb n="88"/>
88             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
mead, where Mr. Ferars had devoted himself to his amuse-
ment, and had made him happier than perhaps he had ever
been in his life-he had had a taste of shooting, of skating, of
snowballing-he had been useful and important in the village
feasts, had dined twice at Colonel Bury's, and felt himself
many degrees nearer manhood.
'o hear of her old haunts and friends from such enthusiastic
lips, delighted Albinia, and her felicity with her baby, with Mr.
Kendal, with her brother and his little son, was one of the
brightest things in all the world-the fresh young loving biloom
of her matronhood was even sweeter and more beautiful than
her girlish days.
Poor little frail, blighted M1s. Dusautoy I Winifred could
not help wondering if the contrast pained her, when in all the
glory of her motherly thankfulness, Albinia carried her beautiful
newly-christened Maurice Ferrars Kendal to the vicarage to
show him off, lying so open-chested and dignified, in Genevieve's
pretty work, with a sort of manly serenity already dawning
Ok his baby brow.
Winifred need not have pitied the little lady. She would
not have changed with Mrs. Kendal-no, not for that perfect
health, usefulness, value-nor even for such a baby as that. 
No, indeed ! She loved-she rejoiced in all her friend's sweet
and precious gifts-but Mrs. Dusautoy had one gift that she
prized above all.
Even grandmamma and Aunt Maria did justice to Master
Maurice's attractions, at least in public, though it came round
that Miss Meadows did not admire fat children, and when he
had once been seen in Lucy's arms, an alarm arose that Mrs.
Kendal would allow the girls to carry him about, till his weight
made them crooked; but Albinia was too joyous to take their
displeasure to heart, and it only served her for something to
laugh at.
They had a very happy christening party, chiefly juvenile, in
honour of little Willie and of Francis and Emily Nugent.
Albinia was so radiantly lively and good-natured, and her
assistants, Winifred, Maurice, and Mr. Dusautoy, so kind, so
droll, so inventive, that even Aunt Maria forgot herself in enjov-
ment and novelty, and was like a different person. Mr. Kendal
looked at her with a pleased sad wonder, and told his wife it
reminded him of what she had been when she was nearly the
prettiest girl at Bayford.
Gilbert devoted himself as usual to making Gcnevieve feel
welcome; and she had likewise Willie Ferrars and Francis
Nugent at her feet. Neither urchin would sit two inchite




<pb n="89"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                 89
away from her all the evening, and in all games she was olliged
to obviate jealousies by being partner to both at once. Where
there was no one to oppress her, she came out with all her
natural grace and vivacity, and people of a larger growth than
her little admirers were charmed with her.
Lucy was obliging, ready, and useful, and looked very
pretty; the only blot was the heavy duluess of poor Sophy, who
seemed resolved to take pleasure in nothing. Winifred varied
in opinion whether her moodiness arose from ill-health, or from
jealousy of her little brother. This latter Albinia would not
believe, especially as she saw that little Maurice's blue eyes
were magnets that held the silent Sophy fast, but surly denials
silenced her interrogations as to illness. and made her content to
acquiesce in Lucy's explanation that Sophy was only cross
because the Osborns and Drurys were not asked.
Allinia did her duty handsomely by the two families a day
or two after, for whatever reports might come round, they were
always ready to receive her advances, and she only took notice
of what she saw, instead of what she heard.   Her brother
helped Mr. Kendal through the party, and Winifred made a
discovery that excited her more than Albinia thought warranted
by any fact relating to the horde of Irish cousins.
'Only think, Albinia, I have found out that poor Ellen
O'More is Mr. Goldsmith's sister r
'Indeed I But I am afraid I don't remember which Ellen
O'Miore is. You know I never undertake to recollect any but
your real cousins out of the thirty-six.'
'For shame, Albinia; I have so often told you about Ellen.
I'm sure you can't forget. Her husband is my sister's brother-
in-law's cousin.'
'Oh, Winifred, Winifred r
'But I tell you, her husband is the third son of old Mr.
O'More of Ballymakilty, and was in the army.'
'Oh l the half-pay officer with the twelve children in the
cottage on the estate.'
'There now, I did think you would care when I told you
of a soldier, a Waterloo man too; and you only call him a half-
pay officer r
'I do remember,' said Albinia, taking a little pity, ' that you
used to be sorry for his good little English wife.'
'Of course. I knew she had married him very imprudently,
but she has struggled gallantly with ill-health, and poverty, and
Irish recklessness. I quite venerate her, and it seems these
Goldsmiths had so far cast her off that they had no notion of
the extent of her troubles.'




<pb n="90"/>
90             TIlE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
'Just like tlleln,' said Albinia. ' Is that the reason you wish
me to make the most of the connexion ? Let me see, my sister-
in-law's sister's wife-no, husband's brother's uncle, eh l'
'I don't want you to do anything,' said Winifred, a little
hurt; 'only if you had seen Ellen's patient face you would be
interested in her.'
'Well, I am interested; you know I am, Winifred. I hope
you interested our respected banker, which would be more to
the purpose.'
' think I did,' said Winifred ; 'at least he said " poor Elleu*
once or twice. I don't want him to do anything for the captain;
you might give him a thousand pounds and he would never be
the better for it: but that fourth boy, Ulick, is without exception
the nicest fellow I ever saw in my life-so devoted to his
mother, so much more considerate and self-denying than any of
the others, and very clever. Maurice examined him and was
quite astonished. We did get him sent to St. Columba for
the present, but whether they will keep him there no one can
guess, and it is the greatest pity he should run to waste. I
told Mr. Goldsmith all this, and I really think he seemed to
attend. I wonder if it will work.'
Albinia was by this time anxious that it should take effect,
and they agreed that an old bachelor banker and his sister, both
past sixty, were the very people to adopt a promising nephew. 
What had become of the multitude of things which Albinia
had to discuss with her brother 1 The floodtide of bliss had
floated her over all the stumbling-blocks and shoals that the
ebb had disclosed; and she had absolutely forgotten all the
perplexities that had seemed so trying. Even when she sought
a private interview to talk to him about Gilbert, it was in full
security of hearing the praises of her darling.
'A nice boy, a very nice boy,' returned Maurice; ' most
amiable and intelligent, and particularly engaging, from his
feeling being so much on the surface.'
'Nothing can be more sincere and genuine,' she cried, as if
this fell a little flat.
' Certainly not, at the time.'
'Always !' exclaimed Albinia. 'You must not distrust him
because he is not like you or Fred, and has never been hardened
and taught reserve by rude boys.   Nothing was ever more
real than his affection, poor dear boy,' and the tears thrilled to
her eyes.
' No, and it is much to his credit. His love and gratitude to
you are quite touching, poor fellow; but the worst of it is that
I am afraid he is very timid, both physically and morally.'
1




<pb n="91"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                91
Often as she had experienced this truth, the soldier's daughter
could not bear to avow it, and she answered hastily, ' He has
never been braced or trained; he was always ill till within the
last few years-coddling at first, neglect afterwards, he has it all
to learn, and it is too late for school.'
'Yes, he is too old to be laughed at or bullied out of cowardice.
Indeed, I doubt whether there ever would have been substance
enough for much wear and tear.'
' I know you have a turn for riotous, obstinate boys ! You
want Willie to be another Fred,' said Albinia, like an old hen,
ruffling up her feathers. 'You think a boy can't be good for
anything unless he is a universal plague 1'
' wonder what you will do with your own son,' said Maurice,
amused, ' since you take Gilbert's part so fiercely.'
'I trust my boy will never be as much to be pitied as his
brother,' said Albinia, with tenderness that accused her petu-
lance. 'At least he can never be a lonely twin with that sore
spot in his heart. Oh, Maurice, how can any one help dealing
gently with my poor Gibbie I'
' Gentle dealing is the very thing he wants,' said Mr. Ferrars;
'and I am thinking how to find it for him. How did his going
to Traversham fail '
'I don't know; Edmund did not like to send him without
having seen Traversham, and I could not go. But I don't think
there is any need for his going away. His father has been quite
enough tormented about it, and I can manage him very well
now. He is always good and happy with me. I mean to try
to ride with him, and I have pronised to teach him music, and
we shall garden. Never fear, I will employ him and keep him
out of mischief-it is all pleasure to me.'
' And pray what are your daughters and baby to do, while
you are galloping after Gilbert I'
'Oh ! I'll manage. We can all do things together. Come,
Maurice, I wont have Edmund teased, and I can't bear parting
with any of them, or think that any strange man can treat
Gibbie as I should.'
Maurice was edified by his sister's warm-hearted weakness, but
not at all inclined to let ' Edmund' escape a ' teasing.'
Mr. Kendal's first impulse always was to filnd a sufficient plea
for doing nothing. If Gilbert was to go to India, it was not
worth while to give him a classical education.
'Is he to go to India ? Albinia had not told me so.'
'I thought she was aware of it; but possibly I may not have
mentioned it. It has been an understood thing ever since I came
home. He will have a good deal of the property ill this place,




<pb n="92"/>
92             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTllErP 
but he had better have seen something of the world. Bayfora
is no place for a man to settle down in too young.'
'Certainly,' said Mr. Ferrars, repressing a smile. ' Then are
you thinking of sending him to Haileybury I'
He was pronounced too young; besides, it was explained that
his destination in India was unfixed. On going home it had 
been a kind of promise that one of the twin brothers should have
an appointment in the civil service, the other should enter the
bank of Kendal and Kendal ; and the survivor was unconsciously 
suspended between these alternatives, while the doubt served as
a convenient protection to his father from making up his mind
to prepare him for either of these or for anything else.
The prompt Ferrars telnler could be;r it no longer, and
Maurice spoke out. ' I'll tell you what, Kendal, it is time to
attend to your own concerns. If you choose to let your son
run to ruin, because you will not exert yourself to remove him
from temptation, I shall not stand by to see my sister worn out
with making efforts to save him. She is willing and devoted,
she fancies she could work lay and night to preserve him, and
she does it with all her heartt; but it is not woman's work, she
cannot do it, and it is not fit to leave it to her. When Gilbert
has broken her heart as well as yours, and left an evil example
to his brother, then you will feel what it is to have kept a lad
whom you know to be well disposed, but weak as water, in the
very midst of contamination, and to have left your young, in-
experienced wife to struggle alone to save him. If you are un-
warned by the experience of last autumn and winter, I could
not pity you, whatever might happen.'
Maurice, who had run on the longer because Mr. Kendal did
not answer immediately, was shocked at his own impetuosity;
but a rattling peal of thun(ler was not more than was requisite.
'I believe you are right,' Mr. Kendal said. 'I was to blame
for leaving him so entirely to Albinia; but she is very fond of
him, and is one who will never be induced to spare herself, and
there were considerations. However, she shall be relieved at
once. What do you recommend ?'
Mr. Ferrars actually made Mr. Kend;l promise to set out for
Traversham with him next morning, thirty miles by the railway,
to inspect Mr. Downton and his pupils.
Albinia had just sense enough not to object, though the dis-
covery of the Indian plans was such a blow to her that she cou Id
not be consoled by all her husband's representations of the
advantages Gilbert would derive there, and of his belief that the
Kendal constitution always derived strength from a hot climate;
and that to himself going to India seemed going home. She




<pb n="93"/>
THE YOUNG STEP MOTHER.                 93
took refuge in the hope that between the two Indian stools,
Gilbert might fall upon one of the professions which she
thought alone worthy of man's attention, the clerical or the
military.
Under Maurice's escort, Mr. Kendal greatly enjoyed his ex-
pedition; liked Traversham, was satisfied with the looks of the
pupils, and very much pleased with the tutor, whom he even
begged to come to Bayford for a conference with Mrs. Kendal,
and this was received by her as no small kindness. She was
delighted with Mr. Downton, and felt as if Gilbert could be
sately trusted in his charge; nor was Gilbert himself reluctant.
Ile was glad to escape from his tempter, and to begin a new life,
and though he hung about Mrs. Kendal,and implored her to vrite
often, and always tell him about his little brother-nay, thongh
he cried like a child at the last, yet still he was happy and
satisfied to go, and to break the painful fetters which had held
him so long.
And though Albinia likewise shed some parting tears, she
could not but own that she was glad to have him in trustworthy
hands; and as to the additional time thus gained, it was disposed
of in a million of bright plans for every one's service-daughters,
baby, parish, school, classes, clubs, neighbours. It almost made
Winifred giddy to hear how much she had undertaken, and yet
with what zest she talked and acted.
'There's your victim, Winified,' said Maurice, as they drove
awav, and looked back at Albinia, scandalizing Bayford by
staniding in the open gateway, her face all smiles of cheerful
l:arting, the sun and wind making merry with her chestnut
curls, her baby in one arm, the other held up to wave her fare-
well.
'That child will catch cold,' began Winifred, turning to
sign her to go in. 'Wrell,' she continued, 'after all, I believe
R(,me people like an idol that sits quiet to be worshipped ! To
be sure she must want to beat him sometimes, as the Africans
do their gods. But, on the whole, her sentiment of reverence
is satisfied, and she likes the acting for herself, and leigning
absolute. Yes, she is quite happy--why do you look doubtful I
l)on't you admire her ?'
'From my heart.'
'Tlhen why do you doubt? Do you expect her to do any-
thing o'
' A little too much of everything.'




<pb n="94"/>
94             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
CHAPTER VIIL
'TESI Albinia was excessively happy. Her naturally high
spirits were enhanced by the enjoyment of recovery, and
reaction from her former depression. Since the great stroke
of the drainage, every one looked better, and her pride in her
babe was without a drawback. He seemed to have inherited
her vigour and superabundance of life, and ' that first wondrous
spring to all but babes unknown,' was in him unusually rapid.;
so that he was a marvel of fair stateliness, size, strength, and
intelligence; so unlike the little blighted buds which had been
wont to fade at Willow Lawn, that his father watched him
with silent, wondering affection, and his eldest sister was un-
merciful in her descriptions of his progress; while even Sophia
lad not been proof against his smiles, and was proud to be
allowed to carry him about and fondle him.
Neither was Mr. Kendal's reserve the trial that it had once
been. After having become habituated to it as a necessary
idiosyncrasy, she had become rather proud of his lofty inaccessi-
bility. Besides, her brother's visit, her recovery, and the re-
newed hope and joy in this promising child, had not been with-
out effect in rousing him from his apathy. He was less in-
clined to shun his fellow-creatures, had become friendly with
the Vicar, and had even let Albinia take him into Mrs. Dusau-
toy's drawing-room, where he had been fairly happy. Having
once begun taking his wife out in the carriage, lie found this
much more agreeable than his solitary ride, and was in the
condition to which Albinia had once imagined it possible to
bring him, in which gentle means and wholesom-e influence
might lead him imperceptibly out of his morbid habits of self-
absorption.
Unfortunately, in the flush of blitheness and whirl of acti-
vity, Albinia failed to perceive the relative importance of
objects, and he had taught her to believe herself so little neces-
sary to him that she had not learnt to make her pursuits and
occupations subservient to his convenience. As long as the
drive took place regullarly, all was well, but he caught a severe
cold, which lasted even to the setting in of the east winds, the
yearly misery of a inmn who hardly granted that India was
over-hot.  Though Albinia had removed much listing, and
opened various doors and windows, he made no complaints, but
did his best to keep the obnoxious fresh air out of his study,
and seldom crossed the threshold thereof but with a shiver.




<pb n="95"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                  9.5
Ulis favourite atmosphere was quite enough to account for a
return of the old mood, but Albinia had no time to perceive
that it might have been prevented, or at least mitigated.
Few even of the wisest women are fit for authority and
liberty so little restrained, and happily it seldom falls to the lot
of such as have not previously been chastened by a life-long
affliction. But Mrs. Kendal, at twenty-four, with the conse-
quence conferred by marriage, and by her superiority of manners
and birth, was left as unchecked and almost as irresponsible as
if she had been single or a widow, and was solely guided by
the impulses of her own character, noble and highly principled,
but like most zealous dispositions, without balance and without
repose.
Ballast had been given at first by bashfulness, disappointment,
and anxiety; but she had been freed from her troubles with
Gilbert, had gained confidence in herself, and had taken her
position at Bayford. She was beloved, esteemed, and trusted
in her own set, and though elsewhere she might not be liked,
yet she was deferred to, could not easily be quarrelled with, so
that she met with little opposition, and did not care for such as
she did meet. In fact, very few persons had so much of their
own way as Mrs. Kendal.
She was generally in her nursery at a much earlier hour
than an old-established nurse would have tolerated, but the
little Susan, promoted from Fairmead school and nursery, was
trained in energetic habits. In passing the doors of the young
ladies' rooms, Albinia gave a call which she had taught them
not to resist, for, like all strong persons, she thought ' early to
rise' the only way to health, wealth, or wisdom. lMuch work
had been despatched before breakfast, after which, on two days
in the week, Albinia and Lucy went to church. Sophy never
volunteered to accompany them, and Albinia was the less in-
clined to press her, because her attitudes and attention on
Sunday were far from satisfactory. On Tuesday and Thursday
Albinia had a class at school, and so, likewise, had Lucy, who
kept a jealous watch over every stray necklace and curl, and
had begun thoroughly to enjoy the importance and bustle of
charity. She was a useful assistant in the penny club and
lending library, which occupied Albinia on other mornings in
the week, until the hour when she came in for the girls' studies.
After luncheon, she enjoyed the company of little 1 aurice, who
indeed pervaded all her home doings and thoughts, for she had
a great gift of doing everything at once.
A sharp constitutional walk was taken in the afternoon. She
thought no one could look drooling or dejected but from the




<pb n="96"/>
96             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
air of the valley, and that no cure was equal to rushing straight 
up one hill and on to the next, always walking rapidly, with a
springy buoyant step, and surprised at any one who lagged
behind.  Parochial cares, visits, singing classes, lessons to
Sunday-school teachers, &c., filled up the rest of the day. She
had an endless number of 'excellent plans,' on which she 
always acted instantly, and which kept her in a state of per. 
petual haste. Poor Mrs. Dusautoy had almost learnt to dread
her flashing into the room, full of some parish matter, and
flashing out again before the invalid felt as if the subject had
been fairly entered on, or her sitting down to impress some
project with overpowering eagerness that generally carried
away the Vicar into grateful consent and admiring approval,
while his wife was feeling doubtful, suspecting her hesitation ot
being ungracious, or blaming herself for not liking the little she
could do to be taken out of her hands.
There was nothing more hateful to Albinia than dawdling
She left the girls choice of employments, but insisted on their
being veritably occupied, and many a time did she encounter a
killing glance from Sophia for attacking her listless, moody
position in her chair, or saying, in clear, alert tones, ' My dear,
when you read, read; when you work, work. When you fix
your eye in that way, you are doing neither.'
Lucy's brisk, active disposition, and great good-humour, had
responded to this treatment; she had been obliging, instead of
officious; repeated checks had improved her taste; her love of
petty bustle was directed to better objects; and though
nothing could make her intellectual or deep, she was a really
pleasant assistant and companion; and no one, except grand-
mamma, who thought her perfect before, could fail to perceive
how much more lady-like her tones, manners, and appearance
bad become.
The results with Sophy had been directly the reverse. At
first she had followed her sister's lead, except that she was
always sincere, and often sulky; but the more Lucy had
yielded to Albinia's moulding, the more had Sophy diverged
from her; as if out of the very spirit of contradiction. Her
intervals of childish nonsense had well nigh disappeared; her
indifference to lessons was greater than ever, though she
devoured every book that came in her way in a silent, but
absorbed manner, a good deal like her father.  Tales and
stories were not often within her reach, but her appetite
seemed to be universal, and Albinia saw her reading old-
fashioned standard poetry-such as she had never herself
assailed-and books of history, travels, or metaphysics. She




<pb n="97"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHEM                   97
wondered whether the girl derived any pleasure from them, or
whether they were only a shield for doing nothing; but no
inquiry produced an answer, and if Sophy remembered any-
tling of them, it was not with the memory used in lesson-time.
The attachment to Louisa Osborn was pertinacious and unac-
countable in a person who could have so little in common with
that young lady, and there was nothing comfortable about her
except her fondness for her little brother, and that really
seemed to be against her will. Her voice was less hoarse and
gruff since the pond had been no more, and she had acquired
an expression, so suffering, so concentrated, so thoughtfil, that,
together with her heavy black eyebrows, large face, profuse
black hair, and unlustrous eyes, it gave her almost a dwarfish
air, increased by her awkward deportment, which concealed
that she was in reality tall, and on a large scale. She looked
to so little advantage in bright delicate colours, that Albinia
was often incurring her displeasure, and risking that of Lucy,
by the deep blues and sober browns which alone looked fit to
be seen with those beetle brows and sallow features. Her face
looked many years older than that of her fair, fresh, rosy step-
mother; nay, her father's clear olive complexion and hanldsome
countenance had hardly so aged an aspect; and Gilbert, when
he came home at Midsummer, declared that Sophy had grown
as old as grandmammna.
The compliment could not be returned; Gilbert was much
more boy-like in a good sense.  He had brought home an
excellent character, and showed it in every look and gesture.
His father was pleased to have him again, took the trouble to
talk to him, and received such sensible answers, that the habit
of conversing was actually established, and the dinners were
enlivened, instead of oppressed, by his presence. Towards his
sisters he had become courteous, he was fairly amiable to Aunt
Mlaria, very attentive to grandmamma, overflowing    with
affection to 3Mrs. Kendal, and as to little Maurice, he almost
adored him, and awakened a reciprocity which was the delight
of his heart.
At Midlsummer came the grand penny-club distribution, the
triumph for which Albinia had so long been preparing. One
of Mrs. Dusautoy's hints as to Bayford tradesmen had been
overruled, and goods had been ordered from a house in
London, after Albinia and Lucy had made an incredible agita-
tion over their patterns of calico and flannel. Mr. Kenllal was
just aware that there was a prodigious commotion, but he knew
that all ladies were subject to linen drapery epideleics, and
Albinia's took a more endural,le form than a pull on his purse
H




<pb n="98"/>
98             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER 
for the sweetest silk in the world, and above all. it neither eame 
into his study nor even into his house.
It was a grand spectacle, when Mr. Dusantoy looked in on
IMrs. Kendal and her staff, armed with their yard-wands.
A pile of calico was heaped in wild masses like avalanches in:
one corner, rapidly diminishing under the measurements of
Gilbert, who looked as if he took thorough good-natured delight
in the frolic. Brown, inodorous materials for petticoats, blouses,
and trowsers were dealt out by the dextrous hands of G6ne-
vieve; a mountain of lilac print was folded off by Clarissa
Richardson; Lucy was presiding joyously over the various
blue, buff, brown, and pink Sunday frocks; the schoolmistress
helping with the other goods, the customers-somne pleased
with novelty, or hoping to get more for their money, others
suspicious of the gentry, and secretly resentful for favourite
dealers, but, except the desperate grumblers, satisfied with the
quality and quantity of the wares-and extremely taken with
the sellers, especially with Gilbert's wit, and with Miss Durant s.
ready, lively persuasions, varied to each one's taste. and extract.
ing a smile and 'thank you, Miss,' from the surliest. And the
presiding figure, with the lighit on her sunny hair, and gooa-,
natured, unfailing interest in her countenance, was at her central
table, calcul;lting, giving advice, considering of complaints,
measuring, folding-here, there, and everywhere-always bright
lively, forbearing, however complaining or unreasonable her
clients might be.
Mr. Dusalltoy went home to tell his Fanny that Mrs. Kendal
was worth her weight in gold; and the workers toiled till
luncheon, when Albinia took them home for food and wine, to 
restore them for the labours of the afternoon.
' What have you been about all the morning, Sopliy ? Yes, I
see your translation--very well-I wish you woul(d come up
and help this afternoon, Miss Richardson is looking so pale and
tired that I want to relieve her.'
'I can't,' said Sophy.
'I don't order you, but you are losing a great deal of fun.
Suppose you came to look on, at least.'
'I hate poor people.'
'I hope you will change your mind some day, but you must
do something this afternoon. You had better take a walk with
Susan and baby; I told her to go by the meadows to Horton.'
' I don't want to walk.'
' Have you anytliing to do instead ? No, I thought not; and
it is not at all hot to signify.-It will do you much more goud.
Yes, you must go.'




<pb n="99"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                 99
In the course of the summer an old Indian friend was staying
at Fairmead Park, and Colonel Bury wrote to beg for a week's
visit from the whole Kendal family. Even Sophy vouchsafed to
be pleased, and Lucy threw all her ardour into the completion
of a blue braided cape, which was to add immensely to little
Maurice's charms; she declared that she should work at it the
whole of the last evening, while Mr. and Mirs. Kendal were at
the dinner that old Mr. and Mrs. Bowles annually inflicted on
themselves and their neighbours, a dinner which it would have
been as cruel to refuse as it was irksome to accept.
There was a great similarity in those Bayford parties, inas-
much as the same cook dressed them all, and the same waiters
waited at them, and the same guests met each other, and the
principal variety on this occasion was, that the Osborns did not
coime, because the Admiral was in London.
The ladies had left the dining-room, when Albinia's ear
caught a sound of hurried opening of doors, and sound of
steps, and saw Mirs. and Miss Bowles look as if they heard
something unexpected.  She paused, and forgot the end of
what she was saying. The room door was pushed a little way
open, but then seemed to hesitate. Miss Bowles hastened forward,
and opening it, admitted a voice that made Albinia hurry breath-
lessly fiom the other side of the rool, and push so that the
door yielded, and she saw it had been Mr. Dusautoy who had
been holding it while there was some kind of consultation
round Gilbert. The instant he saw her, he exclaimed, 'Come
to the baby, Sophy has fallen down with him.'
People pressed about her, trying to speak cheeringly, but she
understood nothing but that her husband and Mr. Bowles were
gone on, and she had a sense that there had been hardness and
cruelty in hesitating to summon her. Without knowing that a
shawl was thrown round her, or seeing ir. Dusautoy's offered
arm, she clutched Gilbert's wrist in her hand, and flew down
the street.
The gates and front door were open, and there was a throng
of people in the hall. Lucy caught hold of her with a sobbing,
'Oh, Mamma !' but she only framed the words with her lips-
' where ?'
IThey pointed to the study. The door was shut, but Albinia
broke from Lucy, and pushed through it, in too much haste to
dwell on the sickening doubt what it might conceal.
Two figures stood under the window. Mr. Kendal, who was
holding the little inanimate form in his arms for the doctor
to examine, looking up as she entered, cast on her a look of
mute, pleading, despairing agony, that was as the bitterness of
IH 




<pb n="100"/>
100            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
death. She sprang forward herself to clasp her child, and her 
husband yielded him in broken-hearted pity, but at that moment
the little limbs moved, the features worked, the eyes unclosed,
and clinging tightly to her, as she strained him to her bosom,
the little fellow proclaimed himself alive by lusty roars, more 
welcome than any music. Partly stunned, and far more terri-
fied, he had been in a sort of swoon, without breath to cry, till
recalled to himself by feeling his mother's arms around him.
Every attempt of Mr. Bowles to ascertain whether he were un-
injured produced such a fresh panic and renewal of screams,
that she begged that he might be left to her. A\r. Kendal
took the doctor away, and gradually the terror subsided, though
the long convulsive sobs still quivered npi through the little 
frame; and as the twilight darkened on her, she had time to
realize the past alarm, and rejoice in trembling over the treasure
still her own.
The opening of the door and the gleaming of a light had nearly
brought on a fresh access of crying, but it was his fatlher who
entered, and Maurice knew the low deep sweetness of his voice,
and was hushled. 'I believe there is no harm done,' Albiuia
said; and the smile that she fain would have made re-
assuring gave way as her eyes filled with tears, on feeling the
trembling of the strong arm that was put round her, when Mr.
Kendal bent to look into the child's eyes.
' I thought my blight had fallen on you,' was all he said.
' Oh ! the thankfulness-'  e s ae id; but she could not go on,
she must stifle a' that swelled within her, for the babe felt each
throb of her beating heart; und she could barely keep from
bursting into tears as his father kissed him ; then, as he marked
the still sobbing breath, said, ' Bowles must see him again.'
'I don't know how to make him cry again ! I suppose he
must be looked at, but indeed I think him safe.-See, this little
bruise on his forehead is the only mark I can find. What was
it ? How did it happen !'
'Sophia thought proper to take him herself from the nursery
to show him to Mrs. Osborn.  In crossing the street, she was
frightened by a party of men coming out of a public-house in
Tibbs's Alley, and in avoiding them, slipped down and struck
the child's head against a gate-post. He was perfectly insen-
sible when I took him-I thought him gone. Albinia, you must
let Bowles see him again !'
'Is any one there ?' she said.
'Every one, I think,' he replied, looking oppressed-' Maria,
and Mrs. Osborn. and Dusautoy-but I will call Bowles.'




<pb n="101"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                  101
A pparently the little boy had escaped entirely unhurt, but the
surgeon still spoke of the morrow, and he was so startled and
restless, that Albinia feared to move, and felt the dark study a
refllge from the voices and sounds that she feared to encounter,
lc.t they should again occasion the dreadful screaming.  Oh, if
they would only go home !' she said.
'I will send them,' said Mr. Kendal; and presently she heard
sounds of leave-taking, and he came back, as if he had been dis-
persing a riot, announcing that the house was clear.
Gilbert and Lucy were watching at the foot of the stairs, the
one pale, and casting anxious, imploring looks at her; the other
with eyes red and swollen with crying, neither venturing near
till she spoke to them, when they advanced noiselessly to
look at their little brother, and it was not till they had caught
his eye and made him smile, that Lucy bethought herself of
saying she had known nothing of his adventure, and Albinia, thus
recalled to the thought of the culprit, asked where Sophy was.
' In her own room,' said Mr. Kendal. ' I could not bear the
sight of her obduracy. Even her aunt was shocked at her want
of teeling.'
Low as he spoke, the sternness of his voice frightened the baby,
and she was obliged to run away to the nursery, where she
listened to the contrition of the little nursemaid, who had never
suspected Miss Sophy's intention of taking him out of the house.
'And indeed, ma'am,' she said, ' there is not one of us servants
who dares cross Miss Sophy.'
It was long before Albinia ventured to lay him in his cot,
and longer still before she could feel any security that if she
ceased her low, monotonous lullaby, the little fellow would not
wake again in terror; but the thankfulness and prayer, that, as
she grew more calm, gained fuller possession of her heart, made
her recur the more to pity and forgiveness for the poor girl who
had caused the alarm. Yet there was strong indignation like-
wise, and she could not easily resolve on meeting the hard
dleiance and sullen indifference which would wound her more
than ever. She was much inclined to leave Sophy to herself till
morning, but suspectinlg that this would be vindictive, she un-
clasped the arm that Lucy had wound round her waist, whispered
to her to go on singing and moved to Sophy's door. It was
fastened, but before she could call, it was thrown violently back,
and Sophy stood straight up before her, striving for her usual
rigidity, but shaking from head to foot; and though there were
Ilo signs of tears, she looked with wistful terror at her step-
nlotlier's face, and her lips moved as if she wished to speak.
' labv is gone quietly to sleep,' began Albinia in a low voice,




<pb n="102"/>
102            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
beginning in displeasure; but as she spoke, the harshness of
Sophy's face gave way, she sank down on the floor, and fell into
the most overpowering fit of weeping that Albinia had ever
witnessed. Kneeling beside her, she would have drawn the
girl close to her, but a sharp cry of pain startled her, and she
found the right arm, from elbow to wrist, all one purple bruise,
the skin grazed, and the blood starting
' My poor child! how you have hurt yourself!'
Sophy turned away pettishly.
' Let me look! I am sure it must be very bad. Have you
done anything to it '
'No, never mind. Go back to baby.'
'Baby does not want me. You shall come and see how com.
fortably he is asleep, if you will leave off crying, and let me see
that poor arm. Did you hurt it in the fall 1'
'The corner of the wall,' said Sophy. ' Oh ! did it not hurt
him ?' but then, just as it seemed that she was sinking on that
kind breast in. exhaustion, she collected herself, and pushing
Albinia off, exclaimed, ' I did it, I took him out, I fell down with
him, I hurt his head, I've killed him, or made him an idiot for
life. I did.'
' Who said so?' cried Albinia, transfixed.
'Aunt Maria said so. She said I did not feel. Oh, if I couli
only die before he grows up to let one see it. Why wont you
begin to hate me '
'My dear,' said Albinia, consoled on hearing the authority, 
'people often say angry things when they are shocked. Your
aunt had not seen Mr. Bowles, and we all think he was not in
the least hurt, only terribly frightened. Dear, dear child, I am
more distressed for you than for him !'
Sophy could hold out no longer, she let her head drop on the kind
shoulder, and seemed to collapse, with burning brow, throbbing
pulses, and sobs as deep and convulsive as had been those of her
little brother. Hastily calling Lucy, who was frightened, sub-
dued, and helpful, Albinia undressed the poor child, put her to
bed, and applied lily leaves and spirits to her arm. The smart
seemed to refresh her, but there had been a violent strain as
well as bruise, and each touch visibly gave severe pain, though
she never complained. Lucy insisted on hearing exactly how
the accident had happened, and pressed her with questions, which
Albinia would have shunned in her present condition, and it
was thus elicited that she had taken Maurice across the street
to show him to Mrs. Osborn. He had resented the strange place,
and strange leople, and had cried so much that she was obliged
to run home with him at once. A knot of bawling men came




<pb n="103"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTETER               10'3
reeling out of one of the many beershops in Tibbs's Alley, and
in her haste to avoid them, she tripped, close to the gate-post of
Willow Lawn, and fell, with only time to interpose her arm
between Maurice's head and the sharp corner.  She was lifted
up at once, in the horror of seeing him neither cry nor move, for,
in fact, he had been almost stifled under her weight, and all had
since been to her a frightful phantom dream. Albinia was in-
finitely relieved by this history, showing that Maurice could
hardly have received any real injury; and in her declarations
that Sophy's presence of mind had saved him, was forgetting
to whom the accident was owing. Lucy wanted to kn-owv why
ler sister could have taken him out of the house at all, but
Albinia could not bear to have this pressed at such a moment,
and sent the inquirer down to order some tea, which she shared
with Sophy, and then was forced to bid her good-night, without
drawing out any further confessions. But when the girl raised
herself to receive her kiss, it was the first real embrace that had
passed between them.
In the very early morning, Albinia was in the nursery, and
found her little boy bright and healthy. As she left him in
glad hope and gratitude, Sophy's door was pushed ajar, and her
wan face peeped out. ' My dear child, you have not been
asleep all night !' exclaimed Albinia, after having satisfied her
about the baby.
'No.'
'Does your arm hurt your
'Yes.'
'Does your head ache '
'Rather.'
But they were not the old sulky answers, and she seemed
glad to have her arm freely bathed, her brow cooled, her tossed
bed composed, and her window opened, so that she might make
a fresh attempt at closing her weary eyes.
She was evidently far too much shaken to be fit for the in-
tended expedition, even if her father had not decreed that she
should be deprived of it. Albinia had never seen him so much
incensed, for nothing makes a man so angry as to have been
alarmed; and he was doubly annoyed when he found that she
thought Sophy too unwell to be left, as he intended, to solitary
confinement.
He would gladly have given up the visit, for his repugnance
to society was in full force on the eve of a party; but Albinia,
by representing that it would be wrong to disappoint Colonel
Bury, and very hard on the unoffending Gilbert and Lucy, snc-
ceeded in prevailing on him to accept his melancholy destiny,




<pb n="104"/>
104           TIHE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
and to allow her to remain at home with Sophy and the bab'
-one of the greatest sacrifices hle or she had yet made. He
was exceedingly vexed, and therefore the less disposed to be
lenient. The more Albinia told him of Sophy's unhappinesa
the more he hoped it would do her good, and he could not be
induced to see her, nor to send her any message of forgiveness;
for in truth it was less the baby's accident that he resented,
than the eighteen months of surly resistance to the baby's
mother; and at present he was more unrelenting than the
generous, forgiving spirit of his wife could understand, though
she tried to believe it manly severity and firmness.
'It would be time to pardon,' he said, ' when pardon was
asked.'
And Albinia could not say that it had been asked, except by
misery.
' She has the best advocate in you,' said Mr. Kendal, affection-
ately, 'and if there be any feeling in her, such forbearance
cannot fail to bring it out. I am more grieved than I can tell
you at your present disappointment, but it shall not happen
again. If you can bring her to a better mind, I shall be the
more satisfied in sending her from home.'
'Edmnulnd ! you do not think of it!'
':My mind is made up. Do you think I have not watched
your patient care, and the manner in which it has been repaid?
You have sufficient occupation without being the slave of those
children's misconduct.'
'Sophy would be miserable. Oh ! you must not! She is
the last girl in the world fit to be sent to school.'
'I will not have you made miserable at home. This has
been a long trial, and nothing has softened her.' 
'Suppose this was the very thing.'
'If it were, what is past should not go unrequited, and the
change will teach her what she has rejected. Hush, dearest; it
is not that I do not think that you have done all for her that
tenderness or good sense could devise, but your time is too
much occupied, and I cannot see you overtasked by this poor
child's headstrong temper.  It is decided, Albinia; say no
more.'
' I have failed,' thought Albinia, as he left the room. 'le
decides that I have failed in bringing up his children. What
have I done?  Have I been mistaken 1 have I been careless 
have I not prayed enough ? Oh ! my poor, poor Sophy ! What
will she do among strange girls? Oh! how wretched, how
harsh, how misunderstood she will be ! She will grow worse
and worse, and just when I do think I might have begun to




<pb n="105"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               105
get at her!  And it is for my sake ! For me that her
father is set against ler, and is driving her out from her
home! Oh! what shall I do?    Winifred will promote it,
because they all think I am doing too mucl ! I wonder what
put that in Edmund's head   But when he speaks in that
way, I have no hope !'
Mr. Kendal's anger took a direction with which she better
sympathized when he walked down Tibbs's Alley, and counted
the nine beershops, which had never dawned on his imagina-
tion, and which so greatly shocked it, that he went straight to
the astonished Pettilove, and gave him  a severe reprirlud
for allowing the houses to be made dens of iniquity an  dis-
order.
He was at home in time to meet the doctor, and hear that
Maurice had suffered not the smallest damage; and then tc
make another ineffectual attempt to persuadr .LJbinia to con-
sign Sophy to imprisonment with Aunt Ma;ria; after which
he drove off very much against his will ?ith Lucy and Gilbert,
both declaring that they did not care a rush to go to Fairlmead
under the present circumstances.
Albinia had a sad, sore sense of failure, and almost of guilt,
as she lingered on the door-step after seeing them set off. The
education of ' Edmund's children' had been a cherished vision,
and it had resulted so differently from her expectations, that her
heart sank. With Gilbert there was indeed no lack of love and
confidence, but there was a sad lurking sense of his want of
force of character, and she had avowedly been insufficient to
preserve him from temptation; Lucy, whom externally she had
the most altered, was not of a nature accordant enough with
her own for her to believe the effects deep or permanenlt; and
Sophia-poor Sophia ! Had what was kindly called forbearance
been really neglect and want of moral courage? Would a
gentler, less eager person have won instead of repelling confi-
dence ? Had her multiplicity of occupations made her give but
divided attention to the more important home duty. Alas !
alas she only knew that her husband thought his daughter
beyond her management, and for that very reason she would
have given worlds to retain the uncouth, perverse girl under her
charge.
She stood loitering, for the sound of the river and the shade
of the willows were pleasant on the glowing July day, and having
made all her arrangements for going from home, she had no
pressing employment; and thus she waited, musing as she
seldom allowed herself time to do, and thinking ov:;r each plI)se
of her conduct towards Sophy, in the endeavour to detect tLs




<pb n="106"/>
106            THE YOUNG STEP-MIOTRER.
mistake; and throughout came, not exactly answering her
query, but throwing a light upon it, her brother's warning,
that if she did not resign herself to rest quietly when rest was
forced upon her, she would work amiss when she did work.
Just then came a swinging of the gate, a step on the walk,
and Miss Meadows made her appearance. A message had been 
sent up in the morning, but grandmamma was so nervous, that
Maria had trotted down in the heat so satisfy her.
Albinia was surprised to find that womanhood had thrown
all their instincts on the baby's side, and was gratified by the first
truly kind fellow-feeling they had shown her. She took Maria
into the morning room, where she had left Sophy lying on the
sofa, and ran up to fetch Maurice from the nursery.
When she came down, having left the nurse adorning him,
she found that she had acted cruelly. Soplhy was standing up
with her hardest face on, listening to her aunt's well-meant
rebukes on her want of feeling, and hopes that she did regret
the having endangered her brother, and deprived ' her dear
mamma of the party of pleasure at Fairmead; but Aunt Maria
knew it was of no use to talk to Sopliy, none- !'
'Pray don't, Aunt Maria,' said Albiuia, gently drawing
Sophy down on the sofa again; 'this poor child is in no state to
be scolded.'
' You are a great deal too good to her, Mrs. Kendal-after
such wilfulness as last night-carrying the dear baby out in
the street-I never heard of such a thing-But what made
you do it, Sophy, wont you tell me that 1 No, I know you
wont; no one ever can get a word from her. Ah ! that sulky
disposition-it is a very nasty temper-can't you break through
it, Sophy, and confess it all to your dear namma ? You would
be so much better. But I know it is of no use, poor child; it is
just like her father.'
Albinia was growing very angry, and it was well that
Maurice's merry crowings were heard approaching.    Miss
Meadows was delighted to see him, but as he had a great aver-
sion to her, the interview was not prolonged, since he could not
be persuaded to keep the peace by being held up to watch a
buzzing fly, as much out of sight of her as possible, wrinkling
up his nose, and preparing to cry whenever he caught sight of
her white bonnet and pink roses.
Miss Meadows bethought her that grandmamma was anxious,
so she only waited to give an invitation to tea, but merely to
Mrs. Kendal; she would say nothing about Sophy since disgrace
-well-merited-if they could only see some fe ling.
'Thank you,' said Albinia, 'some evening perhaps I may




<pb n="107"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               107
come. since yon are so kind, but I don't think I can leave this
poor twisted arm to itself.'
Miss Meadows evaporated in hopes that Sophy would be
sensible of-and assurances that Mrs. Kendal was a great deal
too    with fillally; ' Good-bye, Sophy, I wish I could have told
gralldmamma that you had shown some feeling.'
'I believe,' said Albinia, ' that you would only be too glad if
you knew how.'
Sophy gasped.
Albinia could not help feeling indignant at the misjudged
persecution; and yet it seemed to render the poor child more
entirely her own, since all the world besides had turned against
her. ' Kiss her, Maurice,' she said, holding the little fellow
towards her.  That scratched arm of hers has spared your
small brains from more than you guess.'
Sophy's first impulse was to hide her face ; but he thought it
was bo-peep, caught hold of her fingers, and laughed; then came
to a sudden surprised stop, and looked up to his mother, when
the countenance beliind the screen proved sad instead of
laughing.
'All ! baby, you had better have done with nme,' Sophy said,
bitterly; 'you are the only one that does not hate me yet, and
you don't know what I have done to you.'
'I know some one else that cares for you, my poor Sophy,'
said Albinia, 'and who would do anything to make you feel it
without distressing you. If you knew how I wish I knew what
to do for you !'
'It is no use,' said Sophy, moodily; 'I was born to be a
misery to myself and every one else.'
' What has put such a fancy in your head, my dear?' said
Albinia, nearly smiling.
'Grandmamma's Betty said so; she used to call me Peter
Grievous, and I know it is so. It is of no good to bother'
yourself about me. It can't be helped, and lhere's an end of it.'
'There is not an end of it, indeed !' cried Albinia. ' Why,
Sophy, do you suppose I could bear to leave you so '
' I'm sure I don't see why not.'
'Why not 1' continued Albinia, in her bright, tender voice.
'Why, because I must love you with all' my heart. You are
your own dear papa's child, and this little man's sister. Yes,
and you are yourself; my poor, sad, lonely child, who does not
know how to bring out the thoughts that prey on her, and who
think it very hard to have a stranger instead of her own
mother. I know I should have felt so.'
'But I have behaved so ill to you,' cried Sophy, as if bent on




<pb n="108"/>
108            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
repelling the proffered affection. ' I would not like you, and I
did not like you. Never ! and I have gone against you every
way I could.'
'And now I love you because you are sorry for it.'
'I'm  not'-Sophy had begun, but the words turned into
'Am I?'
'I think you are,' and with the sweetest of tearful Rmiles,
she put an arm roued the no longer resisting Sophy, and laying
her cheek against the little brother's, she kissed first one and
then the other.
'I can't think why you are so,' said Sophy, still struggling
against the undeserved love, though far more feebly. 'I shall
never deserve it.'
'See if you don't, when we pull together instead of contrary
ways.'
'But,' cried Sophy, with a sudden start from her, as if
remembering a mortal offence, 'you drained the pond !'
' I own I earnestly wished it to be drained; but had you any
reason for regretting it, my dear '
'Ah ! you did not know,' said Soplly. 'He and I used to be
alwavs there.'
'He-?'
'Why, will you make me say it?' cried Sophy. 'Edmund I
I mean Edmund ! We always called it his pond. He made
the little quay for his boats-he used to catch the minnows
there. I could go and stand by it, and think lie was coming
out to play; and now you have had it dried up, and his dear
little minnows are all dead ;' and she burst into a passion of
tears, that made Maurice cry till Albinia hastily carried him off
and returned.
' y dear, I am sorry it seemed so unkind. I do not thin&
we could have let the pond stay, for it was making the house
unhealthy; but if we had talked over it together, it need not
have appeared so very cruel and spiteful.'
'I don't believe you are spiteful,' said Sophy, 'though I
sometimes think so.'
The filial compliment was highly gratifying.
'And now, Sophy,' she said, 'that I have told you why we
were obliged to have the pond drained, will you tell me what
you wanted with baby at Mrs. Osborn's ?'
'I will tell,' said Sophy, 'but you wont like it.'
'I like anything better than concealment.'
' Mrs. Osborn said she never saw him. She said you kept
him close, and that nobody was good enough to touch him; so
I uromised I would bring him over, and I kept my word. I




<pb n="109"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                109
know it was wrong-and-I did not think you would ever
forgive me.'
' But how could you do it '
' Mrs. Osborn and all used to be so kind to us when there
was nobody else. I wont cast them off because we are too fine
and grand for them.'
'I never thought of that. I only was afraid of your getting
into silly ways, and your papa did not wish us to be intimate
there. And now you see he was right, for good friends would
not hlave led you to such disobedience-and by stealth, too, what
I should have thought you would most have hated.'
Albinia had been far from intending these last words to have
been taken as they were.   Sophy hid her face, and cried
piteously with an utter self:abandonment of grief, that Albiuia
could scarcely understand; but at last she extracted some
broken words. ' False ! shabby ! yes-Oh ! I have been false !
Oh ! Edmund ! Edmund! Edmund! the only thling I thought
I still was! I thouglht I was true!  Oh, by stealth! Why
couldn't I die when 1 tried, when Edmujnd did '
' And has life been a blank ever since '
'Off and on,' said Sophy. ' Well, why not? I am sure papa
is melancholy enough.  I don't like people that are always
making fun, I can't see any sense in it.'
'Some sorts of merriment are sad, and hollow, and wrong,
indeed,' said Albinia, ' but not all, I hope. You know there is
so much love and mercy all round us, that it is unthankful not
to have a cheerful spirit. I wish I could give you one, Sophy.'
Sophy shook her head. 'I can't understand about mercy
and love, when Edmund was all I cared for.'
'But, Sopliy, if life is so sad and hard to you, don't you see
the mercy that took Edmund away to perfect joy ? Remember,
not cutting you off fiom him, but keeping hiln safe for you.'
'No, no,' cried Soplly, 'I have never been good since he went.
I have got worse and worse, but I did think I was true still,
that that one thing was left me-but now-   ' The sense of
having acted a deception seemed to produce grief under which
the stubborn pride was melting away, and it was most affecting
to see the child weeping over the lost jewel of truth, which she
seemed to feel the last link with the remarkable boy whose
impress had been left so strongly on all connected with him.
' My dear, the truth is in you still, or you could not grieve
thus over your failure,' said Albinia. ' I know you erred,
because it did not occur to you that it was not acting openly by
me; but oh ! Sophy, there is something that would bring you
nearer to Edmund than hard truth in your own strength.'




<pb n="110"/>
110            TIlE YOUNG STiP-MOTTIER.
'I don't know what you mean,' said Solphy.
' Did you ever think what Edmund is about now t 
'I don't know,' said Sophy.
'I only know that the one thing which is carried with us to
the other world is love, Sophy, aud love that becomes greater,
than we can yet imagine. If you would think of Him who.
redeemed and saved your dear Edmund, and who is his happi-
ness, his exceeding great reward, your heart would warm; and,
oh I what hope and peace would come!'
'Edmund was good,' said Sophy, in a tone as if to mark the
hopeless gulf between.
'And you are sorry.    All human goodness begins from'
sorrow. It had even to be promised first for baby at his
christening, you know. Oh, Sophy, God's blessing can make.
all these tears come to joy.'
Albinia's own tears were flowing so fast, that she broke off
to hide them in her own room, her heart panting with hope,>-
and yet with grief and pity for the piteous disclosure of so
dreary a girlhood. After all, childhood, if not tle happiest, is
the saddest period of life-pains, griefs, petty tyrannies, neg-
lects, and terrors have not the alleviation of the experience that
' this also shall pass away ;' time moves with a tardier pace, and
in the narrower sphere of interests, there is less to distract the
attention from the load of grievances. Hereditary low spirits,
a precocious mind, a reserved temper, a motherless home, the
loss of her only congenial companion, and the long-enduring
effect of her illness upon her health, had all conspired to weigh
down the pIoor girl, and bring on an almost morbid state of gloomy
discontent. Her father's second marriage, by enlivening the
house, had rendered her peculiarities even more painful to
herself and others, and the cultivation of mind that was forced
upon her, made her more averse to the trifling and playfulness,
which, while she was younger, had sometimes brilghtened and
softened her.  And this was the girl whom her father had
resolved upon sending to the selfish, inconsiderate, fiivolous
world of school-girls, ju.t when the first opening had been made,
the first real insight gained into her feelings, the first appear-
ance of having touched her heart! Albinia felt baffled, dis-
appointed, almost despairing. His stern decree, once made,
was, she knew, well-nigh unalterable; and though resolved
to use her utmost influence, she doubted its power after having
seen that look of decision. Nay, she tried to think he might
be right. There might be those who would manage Sophy
better. Eigrlteen months had been a fair trial, and she had
failed. She prayed earnestly for whatever might be best for




<pb n="111"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                 1] .
the child; and for herself, that she might take it patiently and
sutbmissively.
Sophy felt tle heat of the day a good deal, but towards the
evening she revived, and seemed so much cheered and refreshed
by her tea, that, as the sound of the church bell came sweetly
down in the soft air, Albinia said, 'Solly, I am going to take
advantage of my holiday and go to the evening service. I
suppose you had rather not come ?'
' I think I will,' returned Sophy, somewhat glumly ; but
Albinia hailed tile answer joyfully, as tlhe first shamefaced
effort of a reserved character wisillg to make a new beginning,
and she took care that no renmark, not even a look, should rouse
tlhe sullen sensitiveness that could so easily be driven back for
ever.
Slowly they crept up the steps on the shady side of the hill,
watching how, beyond the long sladow it cast over the town
and tlhe meadows, the trees revelled in the sunset light, and
windows glittered like great diamonds, where in the ordinary
daylight the distance was too great for distiuct vision.
The church was cool and quiet, and there was something in
Sollhy's countenance and reverent attitude tlat seemed as if she
were consecrating a newly-formed resolution ; her eye was often
raised, as though in spite of herself. to the name of the brother
whose short life seenled inseparably interwoven with all the
higher aspirations of his home.
]i the midst of the Thanksgiving, a sudden movement
attracted( Albinia, and shle saw Sophy resting her head, and
looking excessively pale.  Sle put her arm round her, and
would have led her out, but could not persuade her to move,
alld Iy the time the Blessing was given, the power was gone,
and she had almost ftinted away, wlen a tall strong form
stoope)d over her, and Mr. Dusautoy gathered her up in his
arlms, and bore her off as if she had been a baby, to the open
'winlow of his own drawing-room.
' Put mne down ! The floor, please !' said Sophy, feebly, for all
hIUe remaining faculties were absorbed in dislike to the mode of
conveyance.
'Yes, flat on the floor,' said Mrs. Dusautoy, rising with full
energy, and laying a cushiou under Sophy's head, reaching a
scellt-,ottle, and sending her husband fr cold water and sal-
volatile; with readiness that astonisled Albinia, unused to
illness, and especially to faintings, and renmorseful at having
taken Sopliy out. ' Was it the pain of her arm that had over-
come her ?'
' No,' said Sohy, ' it was only my back.'




<pb n="112"/>
112            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER 
'Indeed ! you never told me you had hurt your back ;' and&
Albinia began describing the fall, and declaring there must be.
a sprain.
'Oh, no,' said Sophy, 'kneeling always does it.'
'Does what, my dear ?' said Albinia, sitting on the floor by..
her, and looking up to Mrs. Dusautoy, exceedingly frightened.
' Makes me feel sick,' said Sophy; ' I thought it would go off,
as it always does ; it didn't ; but it is better now.'
'No, don't get up yet,' said fMrs. Dusautoy, as she was trying
to move; 'I would offer you the sofa, it would be more hospi-
table, but I think the floor is the most comfortable place.'
' Thank you, much,' said Sophy, with an emphasis.
'Do you ever lie down on it when you are tired ?' asked the
lady, looking anxiously at Sophy.
'I always wish I might.'
Albinia was surprised at the interrogations that followed;
she did not understand what Mrs. Dusautoy was aiming at, in
the close questioning, which to her amazement did not seem to
offend, but rather to be gratifying by the curious divination of
all sensations. It made Albinia feel as if she had been carry-
ing on a deliberate system of torture, when she heard of a pain
in the back, hardly ever ceasing, aggravated by sitting upright,
growing severe with the least fatigue, and unless favoured by ;
day, becoming so bad at night as to take away many hours of 
sleep.
'Oh ! Sophy, Sophy,' she cried, with tears in her eyes, 'how
could you go on so ? Why did you never tell me ?'
'I did not like,' began Sophy; 'I was used to it.'
Oh, that barrier! Albinia was in uncontrollable distress,
that the girl should have chosen to undergo so much sufferijg
rather than bestow any confidence. Sophy stole her hand into
hers, and said in her odd, short way, ' Never mind, it did not
signify.'
'Yes,' said Mrs. Dusautoy, ' those things are just whiat one
does get so much used to, that it seems much easier to bear.
them than to slpeak about them.'
'But to let oneself be so driven about,' cried Albinia. 'Oh I
Sophy, you will never do so again ! If I had ever guessed-'
'Please hush ! Never mind !' said Sophy, almost crossly, and
getting up from the floor quickly, as though resolved to be
well.
'I have never minded long enough,' sighed Albinia. 'What
shall I do, 5Mrs. Dusautoy ? What do you think it is?'
This was the last question Mrs. Dusautoy wished to be asked
in Sophy's presence. She had little doubt that it was spine




<pb n="113"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-IOTHIER.              113
complaint like her own, but she had not intended to let her
perceive the impression, till after having seen Mrs. Kendal
alone. However, Albinia's impetuosity disconcerted all pre-
cautions, and Sophy's two great black eyes were rounded
with suppressed terror, as if expecting her doom. 'I think
that a doctor ought to answer that question,' Mrs. Dusautoy
began.
' Yes, yes,' exclaimed Albinia, 'but I never had any faith
in old Mr. Bowles. I had rather go to a thorough good man
at once.'
'Yes, certainly, by all means.'
'And then to whom I I will write to my Aunt Mary. It
seems exactly like you. Do you think it is the spine '
'I am afraid so. But, my dear,' holding out her hand caress-
ingly to Sophy, 'you need not be frightened-you need not
look at me as an example of what you will come to-I am
only an example of what comes of never speaking of one's
ailments.'
' And of having no mother to find them      out!' cried
Albinia.
'Indeed,' said Mrs. Dusautoy, anxious to console and en-
courage, as well as to talk the young step-mother out of her
self-reproach, 'I do not think that if I had been my good aunt's
own child, she would have been more likely to find out that
anything was amiss. It was the fashion to be strong and
healthy in that house, and I was never really ill-but I came
as a little stunted, dwining cockney, and so I was considered
ever after-never quite comfortable, often forgetting myself in
enjoyment, paying for it afterwards, but quite used to it. We
all thought it was " only Fanny," and part of my London breed-
ing. Yes, we thought so in good faith, even after the largest
half of my life had been spent in Yorkshire.'
' And what brought it to a crisis ? Did they go on neglect-
ing you ' exclaimed Albinia.
' Why, my dear,' said the little lady, a glow lighting on her
cheek, and a smile awakening, my uncle took a new curate,
whom it was the family custom to call "the good-natured giant,"
and whose approach put all of us young ladies in a state of
great excitement. It was all in character with his good-nature,
you know, to think of dragging the poor little shrimp up the
hill to church, and I believe he did not know how she would
get on without his strong arm; for do you know, when he had
the curacy of Lauriston given him, he chose to carry the
starveling off with him, instead of any of those fine, handsonio
prosperous girls. Dear Mary and Bessie ! how good they were,
I




<pb n="114"/>
11 i           THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
aid how kind and proud for me! I never could complain   f,
not having sisters.'
'Well, and 1Mr. Dusautoy made you have advice I'
'Not he ! Why, we all believed it cockneyism, you know,.
and besides, I was so happy and so well, that when we went
to Scotland, I fairly walked myself off my legs, and ended the.
honeymoon laid up in a little inn on Loch Katrine, where
John used regularly to knock his head whenever he came into
the room. It was a fortnight before I could get to Edinburgh,\
and the journey made me as bad as ever. So the doctors were,
called in, and poor John learnt what a crooked stick he had
chosen; but they all said that if I had been taken in hand as
a child, most likely I should have been a sound woman. The
worst of it was, that I was so thorotughly knocked up that I
could not bear the motion of a carriage ; besides, I suppose the
doctors wanted a little amusement out of me, for they would
not hear of my going home.    So poor John had to go to
Lauriston by himself, and those were the longest, dreariest six
months I ever spent in my life, though Bessie was so good as
to come and take care of me. But at last, when I had nearly
made up my mind to defy the whole doctorhood, they gave
leave, and between water and steam, Joln brought me to.
Lauriston, and ever since that, I don't see that a backbone:
would have made us a bit happier.'
Sophy had been intently reading Mrs. Dusantoy's face all
through the narration, from under her thick black eyelashes,,
and at the end she drew a sigh of relief, and seemed to catch
the smile of glad gratitude and affection. There was a prece-
dent, which afforded incredible food to the tumultuous cravings
of a heart that had been sinking in sullen gloom under the
consciousness of an unpleasing exterior. The possibility of a
'good-natured giant' was far more present to her mind than
the present probability of future suffering and restraint.
Ever rapid and eager, Alliuia could think of nothing but
immediate measures for Sophy's good, and the satisfaction
of her own conscience. She could not bear even to wait for
Mr. Kendars return, but, as her aunts were still in London,
she resolved on carrying Sophy to their house on the following
day for the best advice. It was already late, and she knelt at
the table to dash off two notes to put into the post-office as she
went home. One to Mrs. Annesley, to announce her coming
with Sophy, baby, and Susan, the other as follows:-
'July Ioth, 9 p.m.
'Dearest Edmund,
'I find 1 have been oruelly neglectful. I have hunted and driven




<pb n="115"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                 115
that poor child about till it has brought on spine complaint. The only thing
I can do, is to take her to have the best advice without loss of time, so I an
g.ing to-morrow to my aunt's. It would take too long to write and ask
your leave. You must forgive this, as indeed each word I have to s:y is,
forgive I She is so generous and kind ! You know I meant to do my best,
but they were right, I was too young.
'Forgive yours,
'A. K.'
The Dusautoys were somewhat taken by surprise, but they
knew too well the need of promptitude to dissuade her; and
Sophia herself sat aghast at the commotion excited by the
habitual discomfort of whioh she had thought so little. The
vicar, when ihe found Mrs. Kendal in earnest, offered to go with
them and protect them; but Albinia was a veteran in inde-
pendent railway travelling, and was rather affronted by being
treated as a helpless female. Mrs. Dusautoy, better aware of
what the journey might be to one at least of the travellers,
gave advice, and lent air cushions, and Albinia bade her good
night with an almost sobbing 'thank you,' and an entreaty
that if Mr. Kendal came home before them, she would tell him
all about it.
At home, she instantly sent the stupified Sophy to bed,
astonished the little nurse, ordered down boxes and bags, and
sl)pent half the night in packing, glad to be stirring and to tire
herself into sleeping, tor her remorse and her anticipations
were so painful, that, but for fatigue, her bed would have been
no resting-place.
CHAPTER IX.
W    INIFRED FERRARS was surprised by Mr. Kendal's
walking into her garden, with a perturbed countenance,
begging her to help him to make out what could be the mean-
Jlng of a note which he h ad just received. He was afraid that
there was much amiss with the baby, and heartily wished that
he had not been persuaded to leave home; but poor Albinia
wrote in so much distress, that he could not understand her
letter.
More accustomed to Albinia's epistolary habits, W\inified
,'xclaimed at the first glance, ' What can you mean ? There is
not one word of the little one ! It is only Sophy !'
The immediate clearing of his face was not complimentary to
poor Sophy, as he said, 'Can you be quite sure ? I had begun
2




<pb n="116"/>
116            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
to hope that Albinia might at least have the comfort of seeing
this little fellow healthy; but let me see-she says nursed andc
-and danced-is it ? this poor child-' 
' No, no; it is hunted and driven; that's the way she always
will make her K's; besides, what nonsense the other would be.'
'This poor child-' repeated Mr. Kendal, 'Going up to Lon.
don for advice. She would hardly do that with Sophia.'
' Who ever heard of a baby of six months old having a spines
complaint?' cried Mrs. Ferrars almost angrily.
'I have lost one in that way,' he replied.
A dead silence ensued, till Winifred, to her great relief, spied
the feminine pronoun, but could not fully satisfy Mr. Kendal
that the ups and downs were insufficient for the word hinm;
and each scrawl was discussed as though it had been a cuniform
inscription, until he had been nearly argued into believing in
the lesser evil. He then was persuaded that the Meadowses
had been harassing and fiighteniug Albinia into this startling
measure. It was so contrary to his own nature, that he hardly9
believed that it had actually taken place, and that she must be 
in London by this time; but at any rate, he must join her"
there, and know the worst. He would take the whole party to
an hotel, if it were too great a liberty to quarter themselves
upon Mrs. Annesley.
Winified was as much surprised as if the chess-king had.
taken a knight's move; but she encouraged his resolution,
assured him of a welcome at what the cousinhood were wont
to call the Family Office, and undertook the charge of Gilbert '
and Lucy. The sorrowful, almost supplicating tone of his wife's
letter, would have sufficed to bring him to her, even with-
out his disquietude for his child, whichever of them it might
be; and though Albinia's merry blue-eyed boy had brought'a 
renewed spring of hope and life, his crushed spirits trembled at
the least alarm.
Thus, though the cheerful Winifred had convinced his reason,
his gloomy anticipations revived before he reached London; and
with the stern composure of one accustomed to bend to the
heaviest blows, he knocked at Mrs. Annesley's door. He was
told that Mrs. Kendal was out; but on further inquiry, learnt
that Sophy was in the drawing-room, where he found her curled
up in the corner of the sofa, reading intently.
She sprang to her feet with a cry of surprise, but did not
approach, though he held out his arms, saying in a voice husky
with anxiety, ' Is the baby well, Sophia T
' Yes,' she cried, 'quite well; he is out in the carriage with
them.' Then shrinking as he was stooping to kiss her, she )an 




<pb n="117"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                117
tinued, reddening deeply, 'Papa, I did very wrong; I was sly
and disobedient, and I might have killed him.'
' Do not let us speak of that now, my dear; I want to hear
of-' and again he would have drawn her into his emtrace, but
she held out her hand, with her repelling gesture, and burst
forth in her rude honesty, 'I can't be forgiven only because I
am ill  Hear all about it, papa, and then say you forgive me
if you can. I always was cross to mamma, because I was
determined I would be; and I did not think she had any
business with us. The more she was kind, the more I did not
like it; and I thought it was mean in Gilbert and Lucy to be
fond of her. No ! I have not done yet! I grew naughtier and
naughtier, till at last I have been false and sly, and-have done
this to baby-and I would not have cared then-if-if she
would not have been-oh ! so good !'
Sophy made no farther resistance to the arm that was
thrown round her, as her father said, 'So good, that she has
overcome evil with good. MIy child, how should I not forgive
when you are sensible of your mistake, and when she has so
freely forgiven {'
Sophy did not speak, but she pressed his arm closer round
her, and laid her cheek gratefully on his shoulder. She only
wished it could last for ever; but he soon lifted her, that he
might look anxiously at her face, while he said, ' And what is
all this, my dear ? I am aftaid you are not well.'
Her energies were recalled; and, squeezing his hand, she
said, 'M ind, you will not let them say it was mamma's fault.'
' Who is accusing lher, my dear ? What is the matter i'
'It is only my back,' said Sophy; 'there always was a stupid
pain there; but grandmamma's Betty said I made a fuss, and
that it was all laziness, and I would not let any one say so again,
anl I never told of it; and it went on till the other night I
grew faint at church, and Mrs. Dusautoy put mamma in such a
fright, that we all came here yesterday; and there came a
doctor this morning, who says my spine is not straight, and
that I must lie on my back for a long time; but never mind,
ptipa, it will be very comfortable to lie still and read, and I
s'iall not he cross now,' she added reassuringly, as his grasp
pressed her close, with a start of dismay.
'IMy dear, I am afraid you hardly know what you may have
to go through; but I am glad you meet it bravely.'
'But you wont let them say mamma did it '
' Who should say so?'
'Aunt Maria will, and mamma will go and say so herself,'
cried Sophy; 'she zoill say it was takiun  walks and carrying




<pb n="118"/>
118            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
baby, and it's not true. I told the doctor how my back achl
long before baby came or she either; and he said that mo
likely the weakness had been left by the fever. So if it u
any one's mismanagement, it is Aunt Maria's; and if you won
tell her so, I will.'
'Gently, Sophy; that would hardly be grateful, after th
pains that she has taken with you, and the care she meant tb
give.'
' Her care was all worry,' said Sophy; 'and it will be very
lucky if I don't tell her so, if she says her provoking things to
mamma. But you wont believe them, papa.'
'Most certainly not.'
'Yes, you must tell her to he happy again,' continued Sophy ;
'I cannot bear to see her looking sorrowful ! Last night, when
she fancied me asleep, she cried-oh ! till it made me miserable I
And to-day I hearld Miss Ferrars say to Mrs. Annesley, that her
fine spirits were quite gone. You know it is very silly; for I
am the last person in all the world she ought to cry for.'
'She has an infinite treasure of love,' said Mr. Kendal; 'and
we ]'ave done very little that we should le blessed with it.'
' There, they are come home!' exclaimed Sophy, starting up
as sounds were heard on the stairs, and almost at the same
moment Albinia was in the room, overflowing with contrition,
gladness, and anxiety; but something of sweetness in the first
hasty greeting made the trust overcome all the rest; and, un-
derstanding his uppermost wish, she stepped back to the stair-
case, and in another second had put Maurice into his arms,
blooming and contented, and with a wide-mouthed smile for his
papa. Mr. Kendal held him fondly through all the hospitable
welcomes of the aunts, and his own explanations; but to Al-
binia it was all confusion, and almost annoyance, till she coald 
take him upstairs, and tell her own story.
' I am afraid you have been very much alarmed,' were his
first words.
' I have done everything wrong from beginning to end,' said
Albinia. 'Oh, Edmund, I am so glad you are cone ! Now you
will see the doctor, and know whether it was as bad as all the
rest to bring her to London.'
'My dearest, you must calm yourself, and try to explain.
You know I understand nothing yet, except from your resolute
little advocate downstairs, and your own note, which I could
scarcely make out, except that you were in great trouble.'
'Ah, that note; I wrote it in one of my impetuous fits
Maulice used to say I ran frantic, and grew irrational; and so
I did not know what I was saying to you; and I brought that 




<pb n="119"/>
THE YOUNG STEP MOTHER.                119
poor patient girl up here in all the heat, and the journey hurt
her so much, that I don't know how we shall ever get her home
again. Oh, Edmund, I am the worst wife and mother in the
world; and I undertook it all with such foolish confidence.'
3Mr. Kendal liked her imlpetuous fits as little as her brother
did, and was inot so much used to them ; but he dealt with her
in his quiet, straightforward way. ' You are exaggerating now,
Albinia, and I do not wonder at it, for you have had a great
deal to startle and to try you. Walking up andl lown is only
heating and agitating you more; sit down here, and let me
hear what gave you this alarm.'
Tlie grave affection of his manner restrained her, and Ilis
preselce soothed the fluttir of spirits ; though she still devoted
herself with ai sort of wilftllness to bear all the blame, until he
said, 'This is oIolish, Albinia; it is of no use to look at anything
but the silmple truth. This affection of the spine nlust be con-
stitutional ; and if neglect have aggravated the evil, it must date
from a much earlier period than since she has been under your
charge. If any one be to blame, it is myself, for the apathy
that prevented me from placing the poor things under proper
care; but I was hardly then aware that Maria's solicitude is
alwavs in the wrong place.'
'lut everybody declares that it was always visible, and that
no one could look at her without seeing that she was crooked.'
' Aprs le coup,' said Mr. Kendal. ' I grant you that a person
of more experience might perhaps have detected vliat w.as
amiss sooner than you did; but you have only to regret the
ignllorance you shared with us all; and you did your utmost
according to your judgment.'
'And a cruel utmost it was,' said Albinia; 'it is frightful
to think what I inflicted, and she endured in silence, because I
llad not treated her so that she could lear to speak to me.'
' That is over now,' said Mr. KeIidal ; I'you have conquered
her at last. Pride could not hold out against such sweetness.'
' It is her generosity,' said Albinia; 'I always knew she
was the best of them all, if one could but get at lier.'
' What have you done to her ? I never heard her say half so
much as she voluntarily said to me just now.'
' Poor dear! I believe the key of her heart was lost when
Edmund died, and so all within was starved,' said Albili:a.
' Yes,' as his eyes were suddenly raised and fixed on her, ' I
got to that at last. No one has ever undr.stuod her, since she
lost her brother.'
' She has a certain likeness to him.  I knew she was his
favourite sister; but such a child as she wvu.-'




<pb n="120"/>
]20             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHEIR
'Children have deeper souls than you give them credit for,'
said Albinia. ' Yes, Edmund, you and Sophy are very muoh
alike! You had your study, and poor Sophy enclosed herself
in a perpetual cocoon of study atmosphere, and so you never
found each other out till to-day.'
Perhaps it was the influence of the frantic fit that caused
her to make so direct a thlrut; but Mr. Kendal was not
offended. There was a good deal in the mere absence from
habitual scenes and associations; he always left a great deal of
reserve behind him at Bayford.
'You may be right, Albinia,' he said; ' I sometimes think
that amongst us you are like the old poet's " star confined into
a tomb." '
Such a compliment was a pretty reward for her temerity.
Returning to business, she found that her journey was treated
as more judicious than she deserved. The consequences had
justified her decision. Mr. Kendal knew it was the right thing
to be done, and was glad to have been spared the dreadful task
of making up his mind to it. He sat down of his own accord
to write a note to Winifred, beginning, ' Albinia was right, as
she always is ;' and though his wife interlined, ' Albinia had no
right to be right, for she was inconsiderate, as she always is,
she looked so brilliantly pretty and bright, and was so full of 
sunny liveliness, that she occasioned one of the very few dies
Iputes between her good aunts. Miss Ferrars declared that poor
Albinia was quite revived by the return to her old home, and
absence of care; while Mrs. Annesley insisted on giving the
credit to Mr. Kendal. They were perfectly agreed in unwilling-
ness to part with their guests; and as the doctor wished to see
more of his patient, the visit was prolonged, to the enjoyient
of all parties.
Sophy had received her sentence so easily, that it was susI
pected that she did not realize the tedium of confinement, and
was relieved by being allowed to be inactive. Until she should
go home, she might do whatever (lid not fatigue her; but most
sights, and even the motion of the carriage, were so fatiguing,
that she was muchl more inclined to remain at home and revel
in the delightful world of books. The kind, unobtrusive pet-
ting; the absence of customary irritations; the quiet high-bred
tone of the family, so acted upon her, as to render her some-
thing as agreeably new to herself as to other people. The glum
mask was cast aside, she responded amiably to kindness and at-
tention, allowed herself to be drawn into conversation, and de-
veloped much more intelligence and depth than even Albiuia
had given her credit for.




<pb n="121"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                 121
One day, when Miss Ferrars was showing Mr. Kendal some
illustrations of Indian scenery, a question arose upon the date
of the native sovereign to whom the buildings were ascribed.
Mhr. Kendal could not recollect ; hut Sophia, looking upl, quietly
pronounced the date, and gave her reasons for it. MIiss Ferrars
asked how she could have learnt so much on an out-of-the-way
topic.
I read a book of the History of India, up in the loft,' said
Sophy.
'That book r exclaimed her father; 'I wish you joy ! I
never could get through it ! It is the driest chronicle I ever
read-a mere book of reference. What could induce you to
read that ?'
'I would read anything about India;' and her tone, though
low and subdued, betrayed such enthusiasm as could find nothing
dry, and this in a girl who had read aloud the reign of Ed-
ward III. with stolid indifference !
'Well, I think I can promise you more interesting reading
about India when we go home,' said Mr. Kendal.
The colour rose on Sophy's cheek. Books out of papa's study I
Could the world offer a greater privilege ? She could scarcely
pronounce, ' Thank you.'
'Very faithfil to her birth-place,' said Miss Ferrars; 'but
she must have been very young when she came home.'
'About five years old, I believe,' said her fitlher. 'You
surely can remember nothing of Talloon.'
'I don't know,' said Sophy, mour'niully; 'I used-'
'I thought Indian children usually lost their eastern rccollec-
fons very early,' said Miss Ferrars; 'I never heard of one who
could remember the sound of Hindostanee a year after coming
lilo e.'
I r. Kendal, entertained and gratified, turned to his daughter;
and, by way of experiment, began a short sentence in llindos-
tauee; but the first sound brought a glow to her cheeks, and,
with a hurried gesture, she murmured, ' Please don't, papa.'
Alhinia saw that feelings were here concerned which must
not be played on in public; and she hastily plunged into the
discussion, and drew it away fiom Sophy. Following her up-
stairs at bed-time, she contrived to win fiom her an explana-
tion.
Edlmund had been seven years old at the time of the return
to England. Fondly attached to some of the Hindoo servants,
and with unusual intelligence and observation, the gorgeous
scenery and oriental habits of h]is first home had dwelt vividly
in his imagination, and he had always considered himself as




<pb n="122"/>
122            THE YUUNG STEP-MOTHER. 
only taken to England for a time, to return again to Indi
Thus, he had been fond of romancing of the past and of 
future, and had never let his little sister's recollections fade e
tirely away. His father had likewise thought that it would sav
future trouble to keep up the boys' knowledge of the langual
which would by-and-by be so important to them.   Gilbert
health had caused, his studies to be often intermitted. but E
mund had constantly received instructions in the Indian la
guages, and whatever he learnt had been imparted to Soph
It was piteous to dlicover how much time the poor forlor
little girl had spent sitting on the floor in the loft, poring ova
old grammars, and phrase-hooks, and translations of missiona
or government school-books there accumulated-anything th
related to India, or that seemed to carry on what she had dou
with Edmund: anlld she had acquired just enolugh to give her 
keen appetite for all the higher class of lore, which she knew tf
reside in the unapproachable study. Those few familiar wor
from her father had overcome her, because, a trivial greeting in
themselves, they had been a kind of password between her an
her brother.
Mr. Kendal was greatly touched, and very remorseful fo
having left such a heart to pine in solitude, while he was ab
sorbed in his own lonely grief; and Albinia ventured to say
'I believe the greatest pleasure you could give her would be 
help her to keep up the language.'
He smiled, but said, 'Of what possible use could it be tb
her r
'I was not thinking of future use. It would be of immense
present use to her to do anything with you, and I can see that
nothing would gratify her so much. Besides, I have been tryr
ing to think of all the new things I could set her to do. She
must have lessons to fill up the day, and I want to make freelI
beginnings, and not go back to the blots and scars of our old
misunderstandings.' 
'You want me to teach her Sanscrit because you cannot
teach her Italian.'
' Exactly so,' said Albinia; ' and the Italian will spring all the'
better from the venerable root, whene we have forgotten how
cross we used to be to each other over our relative pronouns.'
'But there is hardly anything which I could let her read iu
those languages.'
'Very likely not; but you can pick out what there is. Do
you remember the fable of the treasure that was to be gained
by digging under the apple-tree, and which turned out not to
be gold, but the fruit, the consequence of digging? Now, I




<pb n="123"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               12.
want you to dig Sophy; a Sanscrit, or a Hiidostanee, or a
Persian treasure will do equally well as a pretext. If she had
announced a taste for the differential calculus, I should have
said the same. Only dig her, as Maurice dug me apropos to
Homer. I wouldn't bother you, only you see no one else could
*ither do it, or be the same to Sophy.'
' We will see how it is,' said Mr. Kendal.
With which Albinia was obliged to be content; but in the
neantime she saw the two making daily progress in intimacy,
and Mr. Kendal beginning to take a pride in his daughter's
understanding and information, which he ascribed to Albinia,
in spite of all her disclaimers. It was as if she had evoked
the spirit of his lost son, which had lain hidden under the sul-
len demeanour of the girl, devoid indeed of many of Edmund's
charms, but yet with the same sterling qualities, and with re-
semblance enough to afford infinite and unexpected joy and
compensation.
Mr. Kendal enjoyed his stay in town. He visited libraries,
saw pictures, and heard music, with the new zest of having a wife
able to enter into his tastes. He met old friends, and did not
shrink immoderately from those of his wife; nay, he found
them extremely agreeable, and was pleased to see Albinia wel-
comed. Indeed, his sojourn in her former sphere served to
make him wonder that she could be contented with Bayford,
and to find her, of the whole party, by far the most ready to
return home. Both he himself and Sophy had an unavowed
dread of the influences of Willow Lawn; but Albinia had a
slpring of spirits, independent of place, and though happy, was
craving for her duties, anxious to have the journey over, and
afraid that London was making her little Maurice pale.
Miss Meadows was the first person whom they saw at Willow
Lawn. Two letters had passed, both so conventionally civil,
that her state of mind could nob be gathered from them ; but
her first tones proved that coherence was more than ever want-
ing; and no one attempted to understand anything she said,
while she enfolded Sophy in an agitated embrace, and mar-
shalled them to the drawing-room, where the chief of the apo-
logies were spent upon Sophy's new couch, which had been sent
down the day before by the luggage-train, and which she and
Eweretta had attempted to put together in an impossible way,
failing which, they had called in the carpenter, who had made
it worse.
It was an untold advantage that she had to take the initiative
in excuses. Sophy was so meek with weariness, that s e took
pretty well all the kind fidgeting that could not be averted




<pb n="124"/>
]. 1           THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
fiom her, and Miss Meadows's discourse chiefly tended to as
ances that Mrs. Kendal was right, and grandmamma was ne
vous-and poor Mr. Bowles-it could not be expected-wi
hints of the wonderful commotion the sudden flight to Londo
had excited at Bayford. As soon as Mr. Kendal quitted t
room, these hints were converted into something between exp
tulation, condolence, and cc'tgratulation.
IT was so very fortunate-so very lucky that dear Mr. Kend
had come home with ler, fpr-she had said she would let M!
Kendal hear, if only that she might be on her guard-peopl
were so ill-natured-there never was such a place for gossip.
not that she heard it from any one but Mrs. Drury, who reall
now had driven in-not that she believed it, lut to ascertain.
For Mrs. Drury had been told-mentioning no names-oh, no!
for fear of making mischief-she had Leen told that Mr;'
Kendal had actually been into Mr. Kendals study, which was
always kept locked up, and there she had found something which
had distresssd her so much that she had gone to Mr. Dusautoy,
and by his advice had fled from home to the protection of h
brother in Canada.
'Without waiting for Bluebeard's asking for the key I 0O
Maria !' cried Albinia, in a fit of laughter, while Sophia sat 
on the sofa in speechless indignation.                  ,
'You may laugh, Mrs. Kendal, if you please,' said Mar
with tart dignity; ' I have told you nothing but the truth. 
should have thought for my part, but that's of no consequence-
it was as well to be on one's guard in a nest of vipers, foe
Edmund's sake, if not for your own.' And as this last speech
convulsed Albinia, and rendered her incapable of reply, Misa
Meadows became pathetic.  ' I am sure the pains I have taken
to trace out and contradict-and so nervous as grandmnamma
has been- "'I'm sure, Mrs. Drury," said I, "that though
Edmund Kendal does lock his study.door, nobody ever thought
anything-the housemaids go in to clean it-and I've been in
myself when the whitewashers were about the house-I'm sure
Mrs. Kendal is a most amiable young woman, and you wouldn't
raise reports."  " No," she said, "but Mrs. Osborn was positive
that Mrs. Kendal was nearly an hour shut up alone in the study
the night of Sophy's accident-and so sudden," she said, "the
carriage being sent for-not a servant knew of it-and then,"
she said, "it was always the talk among the girls, that Mr.
Kendal kept his study a forbidden place."'
' Then,' said Sophia, slowly, as she looked full at her aunt, 'it
was the Osborns who dared to say such wicked things.'
' There now, I never meant you to be there. You ought to




<pb n="125"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               125
be gone to bed, child. It is not a thing for you to know any-
thing about.'
'I only want to know whether it was the Osborns who in-
vented these stories,' said Sophy.
' My dear,' exclaimed Albinia, 'what can it signify? They
are only a very good joke. I did not think there had been
so much imagination in Bayford.' And off she went laughing
again.
'They are very wicked,' said Sophy; 'Aunt Maria, 1 will
know if it was Mrs. Osborn who told the story.'
Sophy's will was too potent for Miss Meadows, and the ad-
mission was extracted in a burst of other odds and ends, in the
midst of which Albinia beheld Sophy cross the room with a
deliberate, determined step. Flying after her, she found her in
the hall, wrapping herself up.
' Sophy, what is this ? What are you about ?'
'Let me alone,' said Sophy, straining against her detaining
hand; ' I do not know when I shall recover again, and I will go
at once to tell the Osborns that I have done with them. I
stuck to them because I thought they were my mother's friends;
I did not guess that they would make an unworthy use of my
friendship, and invent wicked stories of my father and you.'
'Please don't make me laugh, Sophy, for I don't want to
affront you. Yes, it is generous feeling; I don't wonder you
are angry; but indeed silly nonsense like this is not worth it.
It will die away of itself; it must be dead already, now they
have seen we have not run away to Canada. Your heroics only
make it more ridiculous.'
' I must tell Loo never to come here with her hypocrisy,' re-
peated Sophy, standing still, but not yielding an inch.
Miss Meadows pursued them at the same moment with
broken protestations that they must forget it, she never meant
to make mischief, &c., and the confusion was becoming worse
confounded when Mr. Kendal emerged from the study, demand-
ing what was the matter, to the great discomfiture of Maria,
who began hushing Sophy, and making signs to Albinia that it
would be dangerous for him to know anything about it.
But Albinia was already exclaiming, ' Here's a champion
wanting to do battle with Louisa Osborn in our cause. Oh,
Edmund I our neighbours could find no way of accounting for
my taking French leave, but by supposing that I took advantage
of being shut in there, while poor little Maurice was squalling
so furiously, to rifle your secrets, and detect something so shock-
ing, that away I was fleeing to William in Canada.'
'Obliging,' quietly said Mr. Kendal.




<pb n="126"/>
126            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTIER           .
'Now, dear Edmund-I know-for my sake-for eve
thing's sake, remember you are a family man, don't take any
notice.'
'I certainly shall take no notice of such folly,' said MI
Kendal, 'and I wish that no one else should. What are you
about, Sophia '                                         .
'Tell mamma to let me go, papa,' she exclaimed; 'I must an
will tell Louisa that I hate her baseness and hypocrisy, and the.
I'll never speak to her again. Why will mamma laugh ? It ia
very wicked of them.'
Wrong in them, but laughing is the only way to treat it;'
said Mr. Kendal. 'Go hack to your sofa and forget it. Your'
aunt and I have heard B;lyford reports before.'
Sophy obeyed unwillingly; she was far too much incensed to'
forget. On her aunt's taking leave, and Mr. Kendal offering'
his escort up the hill, she rose up again, and would have perpe-
trated a denunciation by letter, had not Albinia seriously argued
with her, and finding ridicule, expediency, and Christian for-i
giveness all fail of hitting the mark, said, ' I don't know with'
what face you could attack Louisa, when you helped her to per-
secute poor G6nevieve because you thought she had an instru-,
nient of torture in her drawer.'
'It was not I who said that,' said Sophy, blushing.
'You took part with those who did. And poor G6nevibve;
was a much more defenceless victim than papa or myself'
' I would not do so now.'  .
'It does not take much individual blackness of heart to worki
up a fine promising slander. A surmise made in jest is repeatedr
in earnest, and all the other tale-bearers think they are telling
simple facts. Depend upon it, the story did not set off from.
the Osborns by any means as it came back to Aunt Maria.'
'I should like to know.'
Don't let us make it any worse; and above all, do not let us
tell Lucy.'
' Oh, no !' said Solhy, emphatically.
To Albinia's surprise no inuendo from Mrs. or Miss Meadows
ever referred to her manageenent having caused Sophy's misfor-
tune; and she secretly attributed this silence to nr. Kendal's
having escorted his sister-in-law to her own house.
Sophy's chief abode became the morning-room, and she seemed
very happy and tranquil there-shrinking from visitors, but
grateful for the kindness of parents, brother and sister.
Mr. Kendal, finding her really eager to learn of him, began
teaching her Persian, and was astonished at her promptness and
intelligence. He took increasing pleasure in her company.




<pb n="127"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                127
gave her books to read, and would sometimes tell the others
not to stay at home for her sake, as he should be ' about the
house.'
He really gave up much time to her, and used to carry her,
when the weather served, to a couch in the garden, for she could
not bear the motion of wheels, and was forbidden to attempt
walking, though she was to be in the air as much as possille,
so that Albinia spent more time at lome. The charge of Sophy
was evidently her business, and after talking the matter over
with Mrs. Dusautoy, she resigned, though not without a pang,
the offices she had undertaken in the time of her superfiuous
activity, and limited herself to occasional superintendence,
instead of undertaking constant employment in the parish.
Though she felt grieved and humiliated, Willow Lawn throve
the better for it, and so did her own mind, yes, and even her
temper, which was far less often driven by over-haste into quick
censure, or unconsidered reply.
Her mistakes about Sophia had been a lesson against one-
sided government. At first, running into the other extreme,
she was ready to imagine that all the past ill-humour had been
the effect of her neglect and cruelty; and Sophy's amiability
almost warranted the notion. The poor girl herself had pro-
mised 'never to be cross again,' and fancied all temptation was
over, since she had 'found out manmma,' and papa was so kind
to her. But all on a sudden, down came the cloud again.
Nobody could detect any reason. Affronts abounded-not re-
ceived with an explosion that would have been combated,
laughed at, and disposed of, but treated with silence, and each
sinkiug down to be added to the weight of cruel injuries.
There was no complaint; Sophy obeyed all orders with her old
form of dismal submission, but evcrytling proposed to her was
distasteful, and her answers were in the ancient surly style. If
attempts were made to probe the malady, her reserve was
imnpentrable-nothing was the matter, she wanted nothing,
was vexed at nothing  She pursued her usual occupations, but
as if they were hardships ; she was sullen towards her mamma,
snallppishly brief with her aunt and sister, and so ungracious
and inditferent even with her father, that Albinia trembled lest
he might withdraw the attention so improperly received. When
this dreary state of things had lasted more than a week, he
did tell her that if she were tired of the lessons, it was not
worth while to proceed; but that he had hoped for more per-
severance.
The fear of losing these, her great pride and pleasure, over-
cane her. She maintained her grim composure till he had left




<pb n="128"/>
128            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER. 
her, but then fell into a violent fit of crying, in which Albinl
found her, and which dissolved the reserve into complaints th
every one was very cruel and unkind, and she was the mo
miserable girl in all the world; papa was going to take awwa
from her the only one thing that made it tolerable !
Ieasoning was of no use; to try to show her that it was he
own behaviour that had annoyed him, only made her mamm
appear equally hard-hearted, and she continued wretched allth
rest of the day, refusing consolation, and only so far improve
that avowed discontent was better than sullenness. The nex
morning, she found out that it was not the world that was 
league against her, but that she had fallcn into the conditioa
which she had thought past for ever. This was worst of all,
and her disappointment and dejection lasted not only all that
long day, but all the next, making her receive all kindnesse
with a broken-down, wobegone manner, and reply to all cheer,
ful encouragements with despair about anything ever making
her good. Albinia tried to put her in mind of the Source of'
all goodness; but any visible acceptance of personal applic
tions of religious teaching had not yet been accomplished.
Gradually all cleared up again, and things went well till fo
some fresh trivial cause or no cause, the whole process was 
peated-sulking, injured innocence, and bitter repentance. Thi
time, Mr. Kendal pronounced, 'This is low spirits, far more
than temper,' and he thenceforth dealt with these moods with a
tender consideration that Albinia admired, though she though
at times that to treat them more like temper than spirits might
be better for Sophy; but it was evident that the poor child'
herself had at present little if any power either of averting such 
an access, or of shaking it off. The danger of her father's treat-
ment seemed to be, that the humours would be acquiesced in,
like changes in the weather, and that she might be encouraged,
neither to repent, nor to struggle ; while her captivity made her
much more liable to the tedium and sinking of heart that pre-
disposed her to them.
There seemed to be nothing to be done but to bear patiently
with them while they lasted, to console the victim afterwards,
lead her to prayer and resolute efforts, and above all to pray for
her; as well as to avoid occasions of bringing them on; but this
was not possible, since no one could live without occasional con-
tradiction, and Sophy could sometimes bear a strong remon-
strance or great disappointment, when at others a hint, or an
almost imperceptible vexation, destroyed her peace for days.
Mr. Kendal bore patiently with her variations, and did his
best to amuse away her gloom. It was wonderful how much cJ




<pb n="129"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               ]1  I
his own was gone, and how much more alive he was. He had
Ft himself to attack the five public-houses and seven beer-shops
in Tibhs's Alley, and since his eyes had been once opened, it
seemed as if the disorders became more flagrant every day. At
last, he pounced on a misdemeanour which he took care should
come before the magistrates, andt he was much annoyed to find
the case dismissed for want of evidence. One Sunday he beheld
the end of a fray begun during service-time; he caused an in.
formation to be laid, and went himself to the petty sessions to
represent the case, but the result was a nominal penalty. The
Admiral was a seeker of popularity, and though owning that
the town was in a shocking state, and making great promises
when talked to on general points, yet he could never make up his
mind to punish any 'poor fellow,' unless he himself were in a
passion, when he would go any length. The other magistrates
would not interfere; and all the satisfaction Mr. Kendal ob
tained was being told how much lie was wanted on the bench.
, One of the few respectable Tibbs's Alleyites told him that it
was of no use to complain, for the publicans boasted of their
impunity, snapped their fingers at him, and drank Admiral
Osborn's health as their friend. The consequence was, that Mr.
Kendal took a magnanimous resolution, ordered a copy of Burn's
Justice, and at the September Quarter Sessions actually rode
over to Hadmninster, and took the oaths.
On the whole, the expectation was more formidable than the
reality. However much he disliked applying himself to busi-
ness, no one understood it better. The value of his good sense,
judgment, and acuteness was speedily felt. Mr. Nugent, the
chairman, depended on him as his ally, and often as his adviser;
and as he was thus made to feel himself of weight and impor-
tance, his aversion subsided, and he almost learnt to look forward
to a chat with Mr. Nugent; or whether lie looked forward
to it or not, there could be no doubt that he enjoyed it.
Though still shy, grave, silent, and inert, there was a great
alteration in him since the time when he had had no friends, no
interests, no pursuits beyond his study; and there was every
reason to think that, in spite of the many severe shocks to his
nfauvaise wnzte, he was a much happier man.
His wife could not regret that his magisterial proceedings led
to a coolness with the Osborns, augmented by a vestry-meeting,
at which Mr. Dusautoy had begged him to be present. Tile
Admiral and his party surpassed themselves in their virulence
against whatever the vicar proposed, until they fairly roused
\Mr. Kendal's ire, and ' he came out upon them all like a lion ;'
and with force appearing the greater fiom being so seldom
K




<pb n="130"/>
130           THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
exerted, he represented Mr. Dusautoy's conduct in approp
terms, showing full appreciation of his merits, and holding
their own course before them in its true light, till they 
nothing to say for themselves. It was the vicar's first visi
victory. The increased congregation showed how much way
had made with the poor, and Mr. Kendal taking his part open
drew over many of the tradespeople, who had begun to feel
influence of his hearty nature and consistent uprightness, a
had become used to what had at first appeared innovations.
Dusautoy, in thanking Mr. Kendal, begged him to allow him
to be nominated his churchwarden next Easter, and having o
sented while his blood was up, there was no danger that, ho
ever he might dislike the prospect, he would falter when
tims should come.
CHAPTER X.
T was ' a green Yule,' a Christmas like an April day, and e
the lengthening days and strengthening cold of Janu
attaining to nothing more than three slight hoar-frosts, e
quickly melting into mud, and the last concluding in 
and fog.
' What would Willow Lawn have been without the drainage
Albinia often thought when she paddled down the wet stree
and saw the fields flooded. The damp had such an effect upo
Sophy's throat, temper, and whole nervous system, that h
moods had few intervals, and Albinia wrote to the surgeon
detail of her symptoms, asking if she had not better be remov
into a more favourable air. But he pronounced that the inbur
of the transport would outbalance the casual evils of the b
weather, and as the rain and fog mitigated, she improved; bu
there were others on whom the heavy moist air had a more fatal
effect.
One morning, Mr. Kendal saw his wife descending the pi
turesque rugged stone staircase that led outside the house to
the upper stories of the old block of buildings under the hill
nearly opposite to Willow Lawn. She came towards him with
tears still in her eyes as she said, 'Poor Mrs. Simkins has jus
lost her little girl, and I am afraid the two boys are sickening.
'What do you mean ? Is the fever there again i' exclaimed
Mr. Kendal in the utmost consternation.




<pb n="131"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                I 1
Did you not know it ? Lucy has been very anxious about
tie child, who was in her class.'
' You have not taken Lucy to a house with a fever !'
'No; I thought it safer not, though she wanted very much
to go.'
'But you have been going yourself r
'It was a low, lingering fever. I had not thought it infec-
tious, and even now I believe it is only one of those that ruu
through an over-crowded family. The only wonder is, that they
are ever well in such a place. Dear Edmund, don't be angry;
it is what I used to do continually at Fairmead. I never caught
anything; and there is plenty of chloride of lime, and all that.
I never imagined you would disapprove.'
'It is the very place where the fever began before I' said Mr.
Kendal, almost under his breath.
Instead of going into the house, he made her turn into the
garden, where little Maurice was being promenaded in the sun.
tie stretched out from his nurse's arms to go to them, and Al-
binia was going towards him, but her husband held her fast, and
said, ' I beg you will not take the child till you have changed
your dress.'
Albinia was quite subdued, alarmed at the effect on him.
'You must go away at once,' he said presently. ' How soon
can you be ready I You had better take Lucy and Maurice at
once to your brother's. They will excuse the liberty when they
know the cause.'
'And pray what is to become of poor Sophy '
'Never going out, there may be the less risk for her. I will
take care of her myself.'
'As if I was going to endure that!' cried Albinia  ' No, no,
Edmund, I am not likely to run away from you and Sophy I
You may send Lucy off, if you like, but certainly not me, or if
you do I shall come back the same evening.'
'I should be much happier if you were gone.'
'Thank you, but what should I be I No, if it were to be
caught here, which I don't believe, now the pond is gone, it
would be of no use to send me away, after I have been into the
house with it.'
Her resolution and Sophy's need prevailed, and most unwill-
ingly Mr. Kendal gave up the point. She was persuaded that
he was acting on a panic, the less to be wondered at after all he
had suffered. She thought the chief danger was from the effect
of his fears, and would fain have persuaded him to remain at
Fairmead with Lucy, but she was not prepared to hear him
S2




<pb n="132"/>
1r2            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
insist on likewise removing Maurice. She had promised not 
enter the sick room again, and pleaded that the little boy n
never be taken into the street-that the fever was not likely 
come across the running stream-that the Fairmead nurse
wasfull enough already.
Mr. Kendal was inexorable. 'I hope you may never
what I have seen,' he said gravely, and Albinia was silenced.
A man who had lost so many children might be allowed 
oe morbidly jealous of the health of the rest. But it was a cr
stroke to her to be obliged to part with her noble little boy,ju
when his daily advances in walking and talking made him mo
charming than ever.  Her eyes were full of tears, and h
struggled to choke back some pettish rebellious words.
'You do not like to trust him with Susan,' said Mr. Kendal 
'you had better come with him.'
' No,' said Albinia, 'I ought to stay here, and if you judge ii
right, Maurice must go. I'll go and speak to Susan.'
And away she ran, for she had no power just then to speal
in a wifely manner. It was not easy to respect a man in a panic
so extremely inconvenient.
He was resolved on an immediate start, and the next fe
hours were spent in busy preparation, and in watching lest th
excited Lucy should frighten her sister. Albinia tried to
suade Mr. Kendal at least to sleep at Fairmead that night, an
after watching him drive off, she hurried, dashing away the tear
that would gather again and again in her eyes, to hold coun
with the Dusautoys on the best means of stopping the course o
the malady, by depriving it of its victims.
She had a quiet snug evening with Sophy, whom she had sq
much interested in the destitution of the sick children as to set
her to work at some night-gear for them; and she afterwards.
sat long over the fire trying to read to silence the longing after
the little soft cheek that had never yet been laid to rest with-
out her caress, and foreboding that Mr. Kendal would returi
from his dark solitary drive with his spirits at the lowest ebb.
So late that she had begun to hope that Winifred had obeyedH
her behest and detained him, she heard his step, and before she
could run to meet him, he had already shut himself into the
study.
She was at the door in a moment; she feared he had thought
her self-willed in the morning, and she was the more bent on
rousing him.  She knocked-she opened the door. He had
thrown himself into his arm-chair, and was bending over the
dreary, smouldering, sulky log and white ashes, and his face, as




<pb n="133"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                133
he raised his head, was as if the whole load of care and sorrow
had suddenly descended again.
'I am sorry you sat up,' was of course his beginning, con-
veying anything but welcome; but she knew that this oily
meant that he was in a state of depression. She took hold of
his hand, chilled with holding the reins, told him of the good
tire in the morning-room, and fairly drew him up-staira
There the lamp burnt brightly, and the red fire cast a merry
.glow over the shining chintz curtains, and the two chairs drawn
so cosily towards the fire, the kettle puffing on the hearth, and
Albinia's choice little bed-room set of tea-china ready on the
small table. The cheerfulness seemed visibly to diffuse itself
over his face, but he still struggled to cherish his gloom, ' Thank
you, but I would not have had you take all this trouble, my dear.'
'It would be a great deal more trouble if you caught a bad
cold. I meant you to sleep at Fairmead.'
'Yes, they pressed me very kindly, but I could not bear not
to come home.'
'And how did Maurice comport himself '
'He talked to the horse and then went to sleep, and he was
not at all shy with his aunt after the first. He watched the
children, but had not begun to play with them. Still I think
he will be quite happy with Lucy there, and I hope it will not
be for long.'
It was a favourable sign that Mr. Kendal communicated all
these particulars without being plied with questions, and Albinia
went on with the more spirit.
'No, I hope it may not be for long. We have been holding
a great council against the enemy, and I do hope that we have
really done something. No, you need not be afraid, I have not
been there again, but we have been routing out the nucleus, and
hope we may starve out the fever for want of victims. You
never saw such a swarm as we had to turn out. There were
twenty-three people to be considered for.'
'Twenty-three ! Have you turned out the whole block l'
' No, I wish we had; but that would have been seventy-five.
This is only from those two tenements with one door !
' Impossible!'
'I should have thought so; but the lawful inhabitants make
up sixteen, and there were seven lodgers.'
IMr. Kendal gave a kind of groan, and asked what she had
done; she detailed the measures.
' Twenty-three people in those two houses, and seventy-five in
the whole block of building '




<pb n="134"/>
134            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
'Too true. And if you could only see the rooms!
windows that wont open; the roofs that opeu too much; t
dirt on the staircases; and, oh ! the horrible smells !'
'It shall not go on,' said Mr. Kendal. 'I will look over the
place.'
'Not till the fever is out of it,' hastily interposed Albinia.
He made a sign of assent, and went on: 'I will certainl
talk to Pettilove, and have the place repaired, if it be at my
own expense.'
Albinia lifted up her eyes, not understanding at whose expenue
it should be.
'The fact is,' continued Mr. Kendal, 'that there has been
little to induce me to take interest in the property. Old Mr.
Meadows was, as you know, a successful solicitor, and purchased
these various town tenements bit by bit, and then settled them
very strictly on his grandson. He charged the property with?'
life incomes to his widow and daughters, and to me; but the.
land is in the hands of trustees until my son's majority, and
Pettilove is the only surviving trustee.'
The burning colour mantled in Albinia's face, and almost,
inaudibly she said, 'I beg your pardon, Edmund; I have
done you most grievous injustice. I thought you would not
see-
'You did not think unjustly, my dear. I ought to have paid
more attention to the state of affairs, and have kept Pettilov
in order. But I knew nothing of English affairs, and was glad
to be spared the unpleasant charge. The consequence of leavI
ing a man like that irresponsible never occurred to me. His
whole conscience in the matter is to have a large sum to put
into Gilbert's hands when he comes of age. Why, he upholds
those dens of iniquity in Tibbs's Alley on that very ground !'
' Poor Gilbert! I am afraid a large sum so collected is not
likely to do him much good ! and at one-and-twenty-! But
that is one notion of faithfulness !'
Albinia was much happier after that conversation. She could
better endure to regret her own injustice than to believe her
husband the cruel landlord; and it was no small advance that
he had afforded her an explanation which once he would have
deemed beyond the reach of female capacity.
In spite of the lack of little Maurice's bright presence, which,
to Albinia's great delight, his father missed as much as she did,
the period of quarantine sped by cheerfully. Sophy had not a
single sullen fit the whole time, and Albinia having persuaded
Mr. Kendal that it would be a sanatory measure to whitewash
the study ceiling, he was absolutely foli ed to turn out of it and




<pb n="135"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                135
live in the morning-room, with all his books piled up in the
dining-room. And on that great occasion Albinia abstracted
two fusty, faded, green canvas blinds from the windows, carried
them off with a pair of tongs, and pushed them into a bonfire in
the garden, persuaded they were the last relics of the old fever.
She had the laurels cut, the curtains changed, the windows
cleaned, and altogether made the room so much lighter, that
when Mr. Kendal again took possession, he did not look at all
sure whether he liked it; and though he was courteously grate-
ful, he did not avail himself of the den half so much as when it
had more congenial gloom. But then he had the morning-room
as a resort, and it was one of Albinia's bargains with herself,
that as far as her own influence could prevent it, neither he noi
Sophy should ever rendei it a literal boudoir.
The sense of snugness that the small numbers produced was
one great charm, and made Mr. Kendal come unusually far out
of his shell. His chief sanatory precaution was to take Albinia
out for a drive or walk every day, and these expeditions were
greatly enjoyed.
One day, after a visit from her old nurse, Sophy received
Albinia with the words,-
'Oh, mamma,' she said, 'old nurse has been telling me such
things. I shall never be cross with Aunt Maria again. It is
such a sad story, just like one in a book, if she was but that
kind of person.'
'Aunt Maria! I remember Mrs. Dusautoy once saying she
gave her the idea of happiness shattered, but-'
'Did she ?' exclaimed Sophy. ' I never thought Aunt Maria.
could have done anything but fidget everybody that came near
her; but old nurse says a gentleman was once in love with her,
and a very handsome young gentleman too. Old Mr. Pringle's
nephew it was, a very fine young officer in the army. I want
you to ask papa if it is true. Nurse says that he wrote to make
an offer for her, very handsomely, but grandpapa did not choose
that both his daughters should go quite away; so he locked the
letter up, and said no, and never told her, and she thought the
captain had been trifling and playing her false, and pined and
fretted, till she got into this nervous way, and fairly wore herself
out, nurse says, and came to be what she is now, instead of the
prettiest young lady in the town ! And then, mamma, when
grandpapa died, she found the letter in his papers, and one
inside for her, that had never been given to her; and by that
time there was no hope, for Captain Pringle had gone out with
his regiment, and married a rich young lady in the Indies!
Oh, mamma ! you see she really is deserted, and it is all man's




<pb n="136"/>
I 6            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER 
rrtachery that has broken her heart. I thought people al
lied or went into convents-I don't mean that Aunt Ma
could have done that, but I did not think that way of hers w
a broken heart !'
' If she has had such troubles, it should indeed make us
to be very forbearing with her,' said Albinia.
'Will you ask papa about it ?' entreated Sophy.
'Yes, certainly; but you must not make sure whether 
will think it right to tell us. Poor Aunt Maria; I do t
some part of it must be true !'
'But, mamma, is that really like deserted love ?'
'My dear, I don't think I ever saw deserted love,' said Albin
rather amused. 'I suppose troubles of any kind, if not-
mean, I suppose, vexations-make people show their want 
spirits in the way most accordant with their natural dispositio
and so your poor aunt has grown querulous and anxious.'
' If she has such a real grand reason for being unhappy,
shall not be cross about it now, except-'
Sophy gave a sigh, and Albinia bade her good night.
Mr. Kendal had never heard the story before, but he re
membered many circumstances in corroboration. He knew
that Mir. Pringle had a nephew in the army; he recollect
that he had made a figure in Maria's letters to India; and th4
he had subsequently married a lady in the Mauritius, an,
settled down on her father's estate. He testified also to th
bright gay youth of poor Maria, and his surprise at the pro
mature loss of beauty and spirits; and from his knowledge 
old Mr. Meadows, he believed him capable of such an act o
domestic tyranny. Maria had always been looked upon as a
mere child, and if her father did not choose to part with her,
he would think it for her good, and his own peace, for her not to
be aware of the proposal. He was much struck, for he had not
suspected his sister-in-law to be capable of such permanent feeling.
' There was little to help her in driving it away,' said Albinia.
Few occupations or interests, and very little change, to prevent
it from preying on her spirits.'
'True,' said Mr. Kendal; 'a narrow education and limited
sphere are sad evils in such cases.'
'Do you think anything can be a cure for disappointment f
asked Sophy, in such a solemn, earnest tone, that Albiuia was
disposed to laugh; hut she knew that this would be a dire
offence, and was much surprised that Sophy had so far broken
through her reserve, as to mingle in their conversation on such
a subject.
'Occupation,' said Mr. Kendal; but speaking rather as if




<pb n="137"/>
\              q~THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.              ] 7
from duty than from conviction. ' There are many sources of
happiness, even if shipwreck have been made on one venture.
Your aunt had few resources to which to turn her mind. Every
pursuit or study is a help stored up against the vacuity which
renders every care more corroding.'
' Well I' said Sophy, in her blunt, downright way, 'I think it
would take all the spirit out of everything.'
' I hope you will never be tried,' said Mr. Kendal, with a
mournful smile, as if he did not choose to confess that she had
divined too rightly the probable effect of trouble upon her own
temperament.
' I suppose.' said Albinia, 'that the real cure can be but one
thing for that, as for any other trouble. I mean, " Thy will be
done." I don't suppose anything else would give energy to
turn to other duties. But it would be more to the purpose to
resolve to be more considerate to poor Maria.'
' I shall never be impatient with her again,' said Sophy.
And though at first the discovery of so romantic a cause for
poor Miss Meadows's fretfulness dignified it in Sophy's eyes, yet
it did not prove sufficient to make it tolerable when she tor-
mented the window-blinds, teased the fire, was shocked at
Sophy's favourite studies, or insisting on her wishing to see
Maria Drury. Nay, the bathos often rendered her petty un-
conscious provocations the more harassing; and Sophy often
felt, in an agony of self-reproach, that she ought to have known
herself too well to expect to show forbearance with any one when
she was under the influence of ill-temper.
In Easter week Mr. Ferrars brought Lucy and Maurice home,
and Gilbert came for a short holiday.
Gilbert was pleased when he was called to go over the empty
houses with his father, Mr. Ferrars, and a mason.
Back they came, horrified at the dreadful disrepair, at the
narrow area into which such numbers were crowded, and still
more at the ill odours which Mr. Ferrars and the mason had
gallantly investigated, till they detected the absence of drains,
as well as convinced themselves that mending roofs, floors, or
windows, would be a mere mockery unless the whole were
pulled down.
Mr. Ferrars was more than ever thankful to be a country
parson, and mused on the retribution that the miasma, fostered
by the avarice of the grandfather and the neglect of the father,
had brought on the family. Dives cannot always scorn Lazarus
without suffering even in this life.
Gilbert, in the glory of castle-building, was talking eagerly of
the thorough renovation that should take place, the sweep that




<pb n="138"/>
138            THE YOUNG STEP-iMOTHER
should be made of all the old tenements, and the wide healt
streets and model cottages that should give a new aspect to 
town.
Mr. Kendal prepared for the encounter with Pettilove, a
his son begged to go with him, to which he consented, sayin
that it was time Gilbert should have an opinion in a matter t
affected him so nearly.
Gilbert's opinion of the interview was thus announced on hi
return: 'If there ever was a brute in the world, it is 
Pettilove r
'Then he wont consent to do anything ?'
' No, indeed ! Say what my father or I would to him, it
all of not the slightest use. He smiled, and made little intole
able nods, and regretted-but there were the settlements, an
his late lamented partner! A parcel of stuff  Not so much M
a broken window will he mend ! He says he is not authorized 
'Quite true,' said Mr. Kendal. ' The man is warranted in'
his proceedings, and thinks them his duty, though I believe he'
has a satisfaction in the power of thwarting me.'
'I'm sure he has !' cried Gilbert. 'I am sure there was spit
in his grin when he pulled out that horrid old parchment, wit
the lines a yard long, and read us out the abominable old crabbe
writing, all about the houses, messuages, and tenements ther
upon, and a lot of lawyer's jargon. I'm sure I thought it was
left to Peter Pettilove himself. And when I came to underi
stand it, one would have thought it took my father to be the:
worst enemy we had in the world, bent on cheating us!'  ''
'That is the assumption on which settlements are drawn upl
Gilbert,' said his father.
'Can nothing be done, then ?' said Albinia.
'Thus much,' said Mr. Kendal. ' Pettilove will not object to
our putting the houses somewhat in repair, as, in fact, that will
be making a present to Gilbert; but he will not spend a farthing
on them of the trust, except to hinder their absolute falling, nor
will he make any regulation on the number of lodgers. As to
taking them down, that is, as I always supposed, out of the
question, though I think the trustees might have stretched a
point, being certain of both my wishes and Gilbeit'a.'
'Don't you think,' said Mr. Ferrars, looking up from his hook,
'that a sanatory commission might be got to over-ride Gilbertsf
guardian ?'
'My guardian ! do not call him so !' muttered Gilbert.
'I am afraid,' said Mr. Kendal, 'that unless your commission
conaisted of Albinia and Dusautoy they would have little pur-




<pb n="139"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                 139
ception of the evils. Our local authorities are obtuse in such
matters.'
' Agitate! agitate !' murmured Mr. Ferrars, going on with
his book.
' Well,' said Albinia, 'at least there is one beer-shop less in
Tibbs's Alley. And if there are tolerable seasons, I daresay
paint, whitewash, and windows to open, may keep the place
moderately wholesome till-Are you sixteen yet, Gilbert ? Five
years.'
' Yes, and then-'
Gilbert came and sat down beside her, and they built a scheme
for the almshouses so much wanted. Gilbert was sure the
accumulation would easily cover the expense, and Albinia had
many an old woman, who it was hoped might live to enjoy the
intended paradise there.
' Yes, yes, I promise,' cried Gilbert, warming with the subject;
'the first thing I shall do---
'No, don't promise,' said Albinia. 'Do it from your heart,
or not at all.'
'No, don't promise, Gilbert,' said Sophy.
' Why not, Sophy I' he said good-humouredly.
'Because you are just what you feel at the moment,' said
Sophy.
'You don't think I should keep it '
'No.'
The grave answer fell like lead, and Albinia told her she was
not kind or just to her brother. But she still looked steadily at
him, and answered, 'I cannot help it. What is truth, is truth,
and Gilbert cares only for what he sees at the moment.'
'What is truth need not always be fully uttered,' said Albinia.
'I hope you may find it untrue.'
But Sophy's words would recur, and weigh on her painfully.
CHAPTER XI.
TrHE summer had just begun, when notice was given that a
Confirmation would take place in the autumn; and Lucy's
name was one of the first sent in to Mr. Dusautoy. His plan
was to collect his candidates in weekly classes of a few at
a time, and likewise to see as much as he could of them in
private.




<pb n="140"/>
140           THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER 
' Oh I mamma !' exclaimed Lucy, returning from her fir
class, ' Mr. Dusautoy has given us each a paper, where we ar
to set down our christening days, and our godfathers and god.
mothers. And only think, I had not the least notion when Ii
was christened. I could tell nothing but that Mr. Wenlock
was my godfather I It made me feel quite foolish not to know
my godmothers.'
' We were in no situation to have things done in order,' said
Mr. Kendal, gravely. 'If I recollect rightly, one of your god.4
mothers was Captain Lee's pretty young wife, who died a feB 
weeks after.'
'And the other 1' said Lucy.
'Your mother, I believe,' he said.
Lucy employed herself in filling up her paper, and exclaimed,'
'Now I do not know the date! Can you tell me that,
papa ?'
'It was the Christmas-day next after your birth,' he said.
'I remember that, for we took you to spend Christmas at the
nearest station of troops, and the chaplain christened you.'
Lucy wrote down the particulars, and exclaimed, ' What an
old baby I must have been! Six months old! And I wondei
when Sophy was christened. I never knew who any of her
godfathers and godmothers were. Did you, Sophy '
'No-' she was looking up at her father.
A sudden flush of colour came over his face, and he left the
room in haste.
' Why, Sophy !' exclaimed Lucy, 'one would think you had
not been christened at all !'
Even the light Lucy was alarmed at the sound of her own
words. The same idea had thrilled across Albinia; but on
turning her eyes on Sophy, she saw a countenance flushed,
anxious, but full rather of trembling hope than of dismay.
In a few seconds Mr. Kendal came back with a thick red
pocket-book in his hand, and produced the certificate of the
private baptism of Sophia, daughter of Edmund and Lucy
Kendal, at Talloon, March 17th, 1838.
Sophy's face had more disappointment in it than satisfaction.
'I can explain the circumstances to you now,' said her father.
At Talloon we were almost out of reach of any chaplains, and,
as you know, were almost the only English.   We always
intended to take you to the nearest station, as had been done
with Lucy, but your dear mother was never well enough to bear
the journey; and when our next little one was born, it was so
plain that he could not live, that I sent in haste to beg that the
cliaj lain would come to us. It was then that you were both




<pb n="141"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                141
baptized, and before the week was over, he buried little Henry.
It was the first of our troubles. We never again had health or
spirits for any festive occasion while we continued in India, and
thus the ceremony was never completed. In fact, I take shame
to myself for having entirely forgotten that you had never been
received into the congregation.'
'Then I have told a falsehood whenever I said the Cate-
chism !' burst out Sophy.  Lucy would have laughed, and
Albinia could almost have been amused at the turn her dis-
pleasure had taken.
' It was not your fault,' said Mr. Kendal, quietly.
He evidently wished the subject to be at an end, excepting
that in silence he laid before Albinia's eyes the certificate of
the baptism of the twin-brothers, not long after the first arrival
in India. He then put the book in his pocket, and began, as
usual, to read aloud.
' Oh, don't go, mamma,' said Sophy, when she had been carried
to her own room at bed-time, and made ready for the night.
Albinia was only too glad to linger, in the hope to be
admitted into some of the recesses of that untransparent nature,
and by way of assistance, said, ' I was not at all prepared for
this discovery.'
Sophy drew a long sigh, and said, ' If I had never been
christened, I should have thought there was some hope for
me.'
' That would have been too dreadful. How could you imagine
your papa capable-?'
'I thought I had found out why I am so horrid !' exclaimed
Sophy. ' Oh, if I could only make a fresh beginning ! Mamma,
do pray give me a Prayer Book.'
Albinia gave it to her, and she hastily turned the pages to
the Order for Private Baptism.
' At least I have not mlade the promises and vows !' she said,
as if her stern conscientiousness obtained some relief.
'Not formally made them,' said Albinia; 'but you cannot
have a right to the baptismal blessings, except on those condi-
tions.'
' Mamma, then I never had the sign of the cross on my fore-
head ! It does not feel blest !' And then, hastily and low, she
muttered, ' Oh ! is that why I never could bear the cross in all
my life '
'Nay, my poor Sophy, you must not think of it like a spell
Many bear the cross no better, who have had it marked on
their brows.'
'Can it be done now ' cried Sophy, eagerly.




<pb n="142"/>
142             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHEB.
Certainly; I think it ought to be done. We will see w
your father says.'
'Oh, mamma, beg him, pray him !' exclaimed Sophy. 'J
know it will make me begin to be good ! I can't bear not 
be one of those marked and sealed. Oh! and, mamma, yo
will be my godmother ? Can't you? If the gleams of goo
ness and brightness do find me out, they are always fro
you.'
'I think I might be, dear child,' said Albinia; 'but M
Dusautoy must tell us whether I may.     But, indeed, I a
afraid to see you reckon too much on this. The essential, the
regenerating grace, is yours already, and can save you from
yourself; and Confirmation adds the rest-but you must no
think of any of these like a charm, which will save you al
further trouble with yourself. They do not kill the faults, but
they enable you to deal with them. Even baptism itself, yoyS,
know, has destroyed the guilt of past sin, but does not hinder
subsequent temptation.' 
Albinia hardly knew how far Sophy attended to this caution,,
for all she said was to reiterate the entreaty that the omitted
ceremony might be supplied. 
Mr. Kendal gave a ready consent, as soon as he was told thats
Soply so ardently wished for it-so willing, indeed, that Albinia
was surprised, until he went on to say, 'No one need be awari
of the matter beyond ourselves. Your brother and sister would
I have no doubt, act as sponsors. Nay, if Ferrars would officiate,
we need hardly mention it even to Dusautoy. It could tak
place in your sitting-room.'
'But, Edmund !' began A!binia, aghast, 'would that be the
right thing ? I hardly think Maurice would consent.'
'You are not imagining anything so preposterous or inex-
pedient as to wish to bring Sophia forward in church,' said Mr.
Kendal; 'even if she were physically capable of it, I should 
not choose to expose her to anything so painful or undesirable'
'I am afraid, then,' said Albinia, 'that it will not be done
at all. It is not receiving her into the congregation to have
this service read before half-a-dozen people in my sitting-
room.'
' Better not have it done at all, then,' said Mr. KendaL  ' It
is not essential. I will not have her made a spectacle.'
'Will you only consult Mr. Dusautoy '
'I do not wish Mr. Dusautoy to interfere in my family regu-
lations. I mean, that I have a great respect for him; but as a
clergyman, and one wedded to form, he would not take into
account the great evil of saking a public dsplay, and attracting




<pb n="143"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                143
attention to a girl of her age, station, and disposition. And, in
fact.' added Mr. Kendal, with the same scrupulous candour as his
daughter always showed, ' for the sake of my own position, and
the effect of example, I should not wish this unfortunate omis-
sion to be known.'
'I suspect,' said Albinia, ' that the example of repairing it
would speak volumes of good.'
' It is mere absurdity to speak of it !' said Mr. KendaL ' The
poor child is not to leave her couch yet for weeks.'
Sophy was told in the morning that the question was under
consideratian, and Lucy was strictly forbidden to mention the
subject.
When next Mr. Kendal came to read with Sophy, she said
imploringly, 'Papa, have you thought ?'
' Yes,' he said, ' I have done so; but your mamma thinks,
and, on examination of the subject, I perceive she is right, that
the service has no meaning unless it take place in the church.'
'Yes,' said Sophy; 'but you know I am to be allowed to go
about in July.'
' You will hardly be equal to any fatigue even then, I fear,
my dear; and you would find this publicity extremely trying and
ul pleasant.'
' It would not last ten minutes,' said Sophy,' 'and I am sure
I should not care ! I should have something else to think about.
Oh ! papa, when my forehead aches with surliness, it does feel so
unblest, so uncrossed !' and she put her hand over it; 'and all
the books and hymns seem not to belong to me. I think I
shall be able to keep off the tempers when I have a right in the
cross.'
' Ah ! my child, I am afraid the tempers are a part of your
physical constitution,' he returned, mournfully.
'You mean that I am like you, papa,' said Sophy. 'I think
I might at least learn to be really like you, and if I must feel
miserable, not to be unkind and sulky ! And then I should
leave off even the being unhappy about nothing.'
Her eyes brightened, but her father shook his head sadly, and
said, 'You would not be like me, my dear, if depression never
made you selfish. But,' he added, with an effort, 'you will not
suffer so much from low spirits when you are in better health,
and able to move about.'
' Oh, no!' exclaimed Sophy; 'I often feel so sick of lying here,
that I feel as if 1 never could be sulky if only I might walk
about, and go from one room to another when I please ! But
papa, you will let me be admitted into the Church when I am
able, will you not I'




<pb n="144"/>
]141           THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
'It shall be well weighed, Solphy.'
Sophy knew her father too well, and had too much reticen
to say any more. He was certainly meditating deeply, 
reading too; indeed he would almost have appeared to have
fit of the study, but for little Maurice, a tyrannical little ge
tleman, who domineered over the entire household, and wou
have been grievously spoilt, if his mother had not taken 
the crossing the stout little will upon herself. He had a galla
pair of legs, and the disposition of a young Centaur; he seem
to divide the world into things that could be ridden on, andth
could not; and when he bounced at the study door, with ' Papa
gee ! gee !' and lifted up his round, rosy face, and despotic blt
eyes, Mr. Kendal's foot was at his service, and the study w
brown no longer.
The result of Mr. Kendal's meditations was an invitation t
his wife to drive with him to Fairmead.
That was a most enjoyable drive; the weather too hot an
sunny, perhaps, for Albinia's preferences, but thoroughly pene.
trating, and giving energy to, her East-Indian husband, and
making the whole country radiant with sunny beauty-the
waving hay-fields falling before the mower's scythe, the ra
of hay-makers tossing the fiagrant grass, the growing corn softl
waving in the summer breeze, the river blue with reflected sky,
the hedges glowing with stately fox-gloves, or with blushin
wreaths of eglantine. And how cool, fresh, and fair was th
beech-avenue at Fairnead.
Yet though Albinia came to it with the fond tenderness
old association, it was not with the regretful clinging of the first
visit, when it seemed to her the natural home to which she still[
really belonged. Nor had she the least thought about producing
an impression of her own happiness, and scarcely any whether'
'Edmund' would be amused and at ease, though knowing he had
a stranger to encounter in the person of Winifred's sister, Mary
Reid.
That was not a long day. It was only too short, though
3Mr. and Mrs. Kendal stayed three hours longer than on the
last occasion. Mr. Kendal faced Mary Reid without flinching,
and she, having been previously informed that Albinia's husband
was the most silent and shy man in existence, began to doubt
her sister's veracity. And Albinia, instead of dealing out a
shower of fireworks, to hide what, if not gloom, was at least
twilight, was now 'temperately bright,' talking naturally of what
most concerned her with the sprightliness of her happy temper,
but without effort; and gratifying Winifred by a great deal
more notice of the new niece and namesake than she had over




<pb n="145"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTRER.                 14.5
bestowed on either of her predecessors in their infant days
Moreover, Lucy's two long visits had made Mrs. Ferrars feel a
strong interest in her, and, with a sort of maternal affection,
she inquired after the cuttings of the myrtle which she had
given her.
'Ah !' said Albinia, 'I never honoured gardening so much.'
'I know you would never respect it in me.'
'As you know, I love a walk with an object, and never could
alide breaking my back, pottering over a pink with aster that
wont support it, and a calyx that wont hold it.'
' And Lucy converted you when I could not !'
'If you had known my longing for some wholesome occupa-
tion for her, such as could hurt neither herself nor any one else,
and the pleasure of seeing her engrossed by anything innocent,
making it so easy to gratify her. Why, a new geranium is a
constant fund of ecstasy, and I do not believe she was ever so
grateful to her father in her life as when he gave her a forcing-
frame. Anything is a blessing that makes people contented at
home, and takes them out of themselves.'
' Lucy is a very nice, pleasant inmate; her ready obliging
ness and facility of adapting herself make her very agreeable.'
'Yes,' said Albinia, 'she is the " very woman," taking her
complexion from things around, and so she will go smoothly
through the world, and be always preferred to my poor turbid,
deep-souled Sophy.'
'Are you going to be very angry with me i'
'Ah ! you do not know Sophy I Poor, dear child! I do so
long that she could have-if it were but one day, one hour, of
real, free, glowing happiness! I think it would sweeten and
open her heart wonderfully just to have known it! If I could
but see any chance of it, but I am afraid her health will always
be against her; and oh ! that dreadful sense of depression!
1)o you know, Winifred, I do think love would be the best
chance. Now, don't laugh; I do assure you there is no reason
Soplhy should not be very handsome.'
'Quite as handsome as the owl's children, my dear.'
' Well, the owls are the only young birds fit to be seen. But
I tell you, Sophy's profile is as regular as her father's, aud
anilmation makes her eyes beautiful, and she has grown im.
mlensely since she has been lying down, so that she will come
out without that disproportioned look.    If her eyebrows
W'cle rather less marked, and her complexion-but that will
Clear.'
' Yes, we will make her a beauty when we are about it.'
'And, after all, affection is the great charm, and if she were
L




<pb n="146"/>
146           TTHE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER. 
attached, it would be so intensely-and happiness would devel]
so much that is glorious, only hidden down so deep.'
'I hope you may find her a male Albinia,' said Winifred, 
little wickedly ; ' but take care. It might be kill or cure; 
I fancy when sunshine is attracted by shadow, it is more of
as it was in your case than " vice versd." '
'Take care !' repeated Albinia, afifonted. 'You don't fan
I am going beyond a vague wish, do you ?'
'And rather a premature one. How old is Sophy I'
'Towards fourteen, but years older in thought and
suffering.'
Albinia did not hear the result of the conference with h
brother till she had resumed her seat in the carriage, at
having been surprised by MIr. Kendal handing in three
theological tomes. They both had much to think over as the
drove home in the lengthening shadows. Albinia was greatl
concerned that Winifred's health had become affected, and th
her ordinary home duties were beyond her strength. Albinit
had formerly thought Fairmead parsonage did not give h
enough to do, but now she saw the gap that she lad left; an
she had fallen into a maze of musings over schemes for helpi
Winifred, before Mr. Iendal spoke, telling her that he had
solved that Sophia's admission into the Church should 
place as soon as she was equal to the exertion.
Albinia asked if she should speak to Mhr. Dusautoy, but t
manliness of AMr. Kendal's character revolted from putting o
a confession upon his wife; so he went to church the nez
morning, and saw the vicar afterwards.
Mr. Dusautoy's first thought was gratitude for the effort th
the resolution must have cost both iMr. Kendal and his daughter
his next, how to make the occasion as little trying to the
feelings as was consistent with his duty and theirs. He sa
So)phy, and tried to draw her out, but, though far from sullen,
she did not reply freely. However, he was satisfied, and he
wished her, likewise, to consider herself under preparation for
Confirmation in the autumn.   She did all that he wisled
quietly and earnestly, but without much remark, her confident
only came forth when her feelings were strongly stirred ; and i
,was remarkable that throughout this time of preparation ther
was not the remotest shadow of ill-temper.
Mr. Kendal insisted that her London doctor should come 
see her at the year's end. The improvement hadl not been a
that had been hol)ed, but it was decided that though severa
hours of each day must still be spent on her back, she might
move about, join the meals, and do whatever she could without




<pb n="147"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHEIR                147
over-fatigue. It seemed a great release, but it was a shock to
find how very little she could do at first, now that she had lost
the liabit of exertion, and of disregard of her discomforts. She
had quite shot up to more tlan the ordinary woman's height, and
was miuch taller tlanl her sister-but this hardly gave the advan-
tage A lbinia had hoped, for she had a weak, overgrown look, and
could not help stooling. A number of people in a room, or
even the sitting upright during a morning call, seemed quite to
overcome and exhaust her: but still the return to ordinary life
was such great enjoyment, that she endured all with good
temper.
lut now the church-going was possible, a fit of exceeding
dread came upon her.    Albinia found her with the tears
silently rollilg down her cheeks, almost as if she were uncon-
scious of them.
' Oh, mamma, I can never do it ! I know what I am. I can't
let tlem say I will keel, all the commandments always ! It
will not be true !'
' It will be true that you have the steadfast purpose, my
dear.'
' How can it he steadfast when I know I can't 1'
It was the old story, and all had to be argued through again
-hlow the obligation was already incurred at her baptism, and
how it was needful that she should be sworn to her own side of
tlhe great covenant-how the power would be given, and tle
grace supplied, but that the will and purpose to obey was re-
quired-and then Sophy recurred to that blessing of the cross
f;,r which she longed so earnestly, and -which again Albinia
fcared she was regarding in the light of a talisman.
Mr. Ferrars was to be her godfather.   Mr. Kendal had
;wished Aunt Winified, as Lucy called her, to be the godmother,
but Sophy had begged earnestly for Mrs. Dusautoy, whose
kindness had made a great impression.
There was not much liking betweeln Mrs. Ferrars and Sophy.
Perhaps Sophy had been fietted and angered by her quick,
decided ways, and rather disgusted by the enthusiasm of her
brother and sister about Fairmead; and she was not gratified
by hearing that Winifred was to accompany her husband in
order to try the experiment of a short absence from cares and
children.
Albinia, on the contrary, was highly pleased to have Wini-
fred to nurse, and desirous of showing off Sophy's reformation.
Winifred arrived late in the day, with an invalid look, and a
great inclination to pine for her baby. She was so much tired,
that Albinia took her upstairs very soon, and put her to bed,
L2




<pb n="148"/>
14S            THE YOTNG STEP-MOTHER.
sitting with her almost all the evening, hoping that downs
all was going on well.
The next morning, too, went off very well. Mr. Ferr7
sought a private talk with his old godchild, and though Sop
scarcely answered, she liked his kind, frank, affectionate mann
and showed such feeling as he wished, so that he fully credi
all that his sister thought of her.
Otherwise, Sophy was kept quiet, to save her strength
collect her thoughts.
At seven o'clock in the evening, there was not a form
able congregation. Miss Meadows, who had been informed
late as could save offence, had treated it as a freak of M
Kendal, resented the injunction of secrecy, and would neit
be present herself, nor let her mother come out. Genevii
three old men, and a child or two, were the whole num
present. The daily service at Bavford was an offering m
in faith by the vicar, for as vet there was very little att
dance. 'But,' said Mr. Dusautov, 'it is the worrship of
not an entertainment to please man-it is all nonsense to
of its answering or not answering.'
Mr. Kendal was in a state of far greater suffering frO
shame than his daughter, as indeed lie deserved, but he endu
it with a gallant, almost touching resignation. He was the o
witness of her baptism, and it seemed like a confession, wh
he had to reply to the questions, by whom, and with w
words this child had been baptized, when she stood besi
him overtopping her little godmother. She stood with tighti
locked hands, and ebbing colour, which came back in a fl
when Mr. Dusautoy took her by the hand, and said, 'We 1
ceive this child into the congregation ;' and when he tr
the cross on her brow, she stood tremblingly, her lips sque
close together, and after she returned to her place no one sa
her face.
Alhinia, with her brother and Lucy, were at home by tbe
short cut before the carriage could return. She met Sophy
the hall-door, kissed her, and said, 'Now, my dear, you h
better lie down, and be quite quiet;' then followed Wini
into the drawing-room, and took her shawl and bonnet fro
her, lingering for a happy twilight conversation. Lucy camr
down, and went to water her flowers, and by-and-by tea wa-
brought, the gentlemen came in from their walk, and Mr.
Kendal asked whether Sophy was tired. Albinia went up tW
see. She found her on her couch in the morning room, ai
told her that tea was ready. There was something not pr
mising in the voice that replied; and she said,




<pb n="149"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                  14 9
'No, don't move, my dear, I will bring it to you; you are
tired.'
' No-I'll go down, thauk you.' It was the gruff voice !
' Iideed you lha(l muclh etter not, lny dear. It is only an
lhour to bud-time, and you would only tire yourself for nothing.'
' 1'11 o.'
' You are tired, Sophy,' said her father. 'You had better lie
down while you have your tea.'
N o, thank you,' growled Sophy, as though hurt by being
told to lie down before companyy.
11e fiLther put a sofa-cushion behind her, but though she
mumbled some acknowledgment, it was so surly, that Mrs.
Ferrars looked up in surprise, and she would not lean back till
fttigue gained the ascendancy. Mr. Kendal asking her, got
little in reply but such a grunt, that MSrs. Ferrars longed to
lliake her; but her father fetched a footstool, and put it under
her feet, and grew a little abstracted in his talk, as if watching
her, and his eye had something of the old habitual nlelanicholy.
So it went on. The night's rest did not carry off the temper.
Soply was monosyllabic, displeased if not attended to, but
receiving attention like an affront; wanting notlillg, but offended
it'it were not offered. Albinia was exceedingly grieved. She
lad some suspicion that Sophy might have been hurt by her
}going to Mrs. Ferrars instead of to her on their return from
c iurch, and made an attempt at an apology, but this was snubbed
lIke an additional affront, and she could only bide the time,
l.u1d be greatly disappointed at such an exhibition before tile
lgests.
Winifred looked on, forbearing to hurt Albinia's feelings by
rminarks, but in priv:ate compensating by little outbreaks with
];l' hlusband, teasing him  about his hopeful goddauglhter,
1liu,;hing at Allbiuia's infatuation, and r:ailing at Mr. Kelndal's
,cititraice of the ill-lhmnour, whlicll she declared he promoted.
I;aurice, as usual, was provoking. He had no notion of
;:i-ii;g up his godchild, lie said, and he had no doubt that
Lillllid Kendal could manage his own child his own way.
' lecause of his great success in that line.'
'lie is not what he was. lIe uses his sense and principle
o:w, and when they are fairly brought to bear, I know no one
\, loin I would more entirely trust.'
'Well ! it will be great good luck if I do not fall foul of
,lis-s Solhy one of these days, if no one else will !'
\Vinifred was slightly irritalile herself from weakness, and on
t!i- last morning of her stay she could bear the sight no longer.
ouiphy had twice been surly to Lucy's good olices, had given




<pb n="150"/>
150            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
Albinia a look like thunder, and answered her father wi
sulky displeasure that made Mrs. Ferrars exclaim, as soon as
had left the room, 'I should never allow a child of mine
speak to her father in that manner !'
Sophy swelled. She did not think Mrs. Ferrars had 
right to interfere between her and her father. Her sile
provoked Winifred to continue, ' I wonder if you have a
compunction for having spoilt all your-all Mrs. Kendal's
joyment of our visit.'
' am not of consequence enough to spoil any one's pleasu
That was the last effort. Albinia came into the room, wi
little IMaurice holding her hand, and flourishing a whip. 
trotted up to the sotfi, and began instantly to 'whip sia
Sophy ;' serve her right, if I had but the whip, thought M
Ferrals, as his mother hurried to snatch him off. Leaning ov
Sophy's averted face, she saw a tear under her eyelashes, ba
took no notice.
Three seconds after, Sophy reared herself up, and with arig
face and slow step walked out of the room.
'Have you said anything to her ' asked Albinia. 
'1 could not help it,' said Winifred, narrating what had p
Have I done wrong '                                   I
'Edmund cannot bear to have anything harsh said to her
these moods, especially about her behaviour to himself.
thinks she cannot help it-but it may be well that she sho
know how it appears to other people, for I cannot bear to 
his patient kindness spurned. Only, you know, she values
in her heart. I am afraid we shall have a terrible agony now.
Albinia was right. It was the worst agony poor Sophy h
ever undergone. She had been all this time ignorant that i
was a cross fit, only imagining herself cruelly neglected-a
cast aside for the sake of Mrs. Ferrars; but the wakening tim
had either arrived, or had been brolught by that reproach, an
she beheld her conduct in the most abhorrent light. Afte
having desired to be pledged to her share of the covenant, and
earnestly longed to bear the cross, to be sworn in as soldier ad
servant, to have put her neck under the yoke of her old maste
ere the cross had dried upon her brow, to have been meanly
jealous, ungratefil, disrespectful, vindictive! ! oh ! misery, misery
hopeless misery ! She would take no word of comfort whenl
Albinia tried to persuade her that it had been partly the
reaction of a mind wrought up to an occasion very simple in its
externals, and ofa body fatigued by exertion ; and then in warm-
hearted candour professed that she herself had been thoughtlea:
in neglecting Sophy for Winifred. iStll less comfort would shie




<pb n="151"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               ] . 
take in her father's free forgiveness, and his sad entreaties that
.lie would not treat these fits of low spirits as a crime, for they
were not her fault, but that of her constitution.
' Then one can't help being hateful and wicked ! Nothing is
of any use ! I had rather you had told me I was mad !' said
poor Sophy.
She was so spent and exhausted with weeping, that she could
not come down-indeed, between grief and nervousness she
would not eat; and Albinia found Mr. Kendal mournfully
perslading her, when a stern command would have done more
goocl. Albinia spoke it: 'Sophy, you have put your father to a
great deal of pain already; if you are really grieving over it,
you will not hurt him more by making yourself ill.'
The stlrong will came into action on the right side. and Sophy
sat up, took what was offered, but what was she that they should
care for her, when she had spoilt mamma's pleasure 1 Better
go and be happy with Mrs. Ferrars.
Sophy's next visitor came up with a manly tread, and she
almost feared that she had made herself ill enough for the
doctor; but it was Mr. Ferrars, with a kind face of pitying
sympathy.
' May I come to wish my godchild good-bye ?' he said.
Sophv did not speak, and he looked compassionately at the
prone (dejection of the whole figure, and the pale, sallow face, so
piteously mournful. He took her hand, and began to tell her
of the godfather's present, that he had brought her-a little
book of devotions intended for the time when she should be con-
firmed. Sophy uttered a feeble ' thank you,' but a hopeless one.
'Ah ! you are feeling as if nothing would do you any good,'
said M1r. Ferrars.
' Papa says so !' she answered.
'Not quite,' said Mr. Ferrars. 'He knows that your low
spirits are the effect of temperament and health, and that you
are not able to prevent yourself from feeling unhappy and
an rlieved. And perhaps you reckoned on too much sensible
etlfct from Church ordinances. Now joy, help, all these blessings
are seldom revealed to our consciousness, but are matters of
ftith ; and vou must be content to work on in faith in the dark,
before you feel comfort. I cannot but hope that if you will
struggle, even when you arc hurt and annoyed, to avoid the
expression of vexation, the morbid temper will wear out, and
you will both be tempted and sutler less, as you grow older.
And, Sophy--forgive me for asking-do you pray in this un-
lhap y state       '
I I cannot. It is not true.'




<pb n="152"/>
1 32           THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
' Make it true. Take some verse of a Psalm. Shall I m
you some I Repeat them, even if you seem to yourself not
feel them. There is a holy power that will work on you 
last; and when you can truly pray, the dark hour will pass.'
' Mark them,' said Sophy.
There was some space, while she gave him the book, and
showed her the verses. Then lie rose to go.
'I wish I had not spoilt the visit,' she said, wistfully, at la
'We shall see you again, and we shall know each oth
better,' lie said, kindly. 'You are my godchild now, Soph
and vou know that I must remember you constantly in prayer.
' Yes,' she faintly said.
'And will you promise me to try my remedy ?  I think i
will soften your heart to the graces of the Blessed Comforter
And even if all seem gloom within, look out, see others happy,
try to rejoice with them, and peace will come in ! Now, good-
bye, my dear godchild, and the God of Peace bless you, and
give you rest.
CHAPTER XII.
M/R. DUSAUTOY had given notice of the day of the Con
n firnmation, when Mr. Kendal called his wife.
' I wonder,' lie said, ' my dear, whether Sophia can spare yo
to take a walk with me before church.'
Sophy, who was well aware that a walk with him was thql
greatest and rarest treat to his wife, gave gracious permission,
and in a few minutes they were walking by the bright canal.
side, under the calm evening sunshine and deep blue sky of,
early autlumn.
Mr. Kendal said not a word, and Albinia, leaning on his arm,
listened, as it were, to the stillness, or lather to the sounds that
marked it-tie gurgling of the little streams let off into the
water-courses in the meadows; the occasional plunge of the rat
from the banks ; the sounds from the town, softened b9v distance;
and the far-off cawings of the rooks, which she could just see
wheeling about as little black specks over tie l lantations of
Woodside, or watching the swallows assemblinl for departure
sitting in long ranks, like an ornament along the roof of a neigh-
bouring barn.
Lolng, long it was before Mr. Kendal broke silence, but when
at length he did speak, his words amazed her extremely.
Albinia, poor Sopllia's admission into the Church has not




<pb n="153"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               153
been the only neglect. I have never been confirmed. I intend
to speak to Dusautoy this evening, but I thought you would wish
to know it first.'
' Thank you. I suppose you went out to India too young.'
, Poor Maria says truly that no one thought of these things in
our day, at least so far as we were concerned. I must explain
to you, Allinia, how it is that I see thilngs very differently now
from the light in which I once viewed tlem. I was sent home
from India, at six years old, to correspondents and relations to
whom I was a burthen. I was placed at a private school, whero
tile treatment was of the harsh style so common in those days.
The boys always had more tasks than they could accomplish,
and were kept employed by being always in arrears with their
lessons. This pressed less heavily upon me than on most; but
tlouglh I seldom incurred punishment, there was a sort of
hard distrust of me, I believe because the master could
not easily overwhelm me with work, so as to have me in
his power. I know I was often unjustly treated, and I nevel
was popular.'
'Yes, I can imagine you extremely miserable.'
' You can understand my resolution that my boys should not
be sent to England to be homeless, and how I judged all schools
by my own experience. I stayed there too late, till I was
beyond both tormentors and m and  sters, and was left to an un-
limited appetite for books, chiefly poetry. Our religious instruc-
tion was a nullity, and I am only surprised that the results were
not worse. India was not likely to supply what education had
omitted.  Looking back on old journals and the like, I am
astonished to see how unsettled my notions were-my subli-
mity, which was re;lly ignorant childishness, and yet my perfect
unconsciousness of my want of Christianity.'
' I dare say you cannot believe it was yourself, any more than
I can.  What brought other thoughts?'
' ractical obligations mad e me somewhat less dreamy, and
my dear boy, Edmund, did much for me, but all so insensiblly,
that I can remember no marked change. I do not know whether
you will understand me, when I say tlat I had attained to some-
wlhat of what I shoul(l call personal religion, such as we often
tind apart from the Church.'
' But, Edmund, you always were a Chur.hmnan.'
'I was; but I viewed the Church merlc  as an establishment
-human, not divine. I had learnt faith frolm Holy Scripture,
from my boy, from the infilts who passed away so quickly, and
I better understood how to direct the devotional tendencies that
I hlad never been without; but the sacramental system had never




<pb n="154"/>
151            THE YOUNG STEP-MIOTHER
dawned on my comprehension, nor the real meaning of Cri
fellowship. Thence my isolation.'
' You had never fairly seen the Church.'
'Never. It might have made a great difference to me
Dusautoy had been here at the time of my trouble. When,
did come, I had sunk into a state whence 1 could not ro
myself to understand his principles. I can hardly describe h
intolerable my life had become. I was almost resolved on
turning to India. I believe I should have done so if you 
not come to my rescue.'
'What would you have done with the children ?'
'To say the truth I had idolized their brother to such
exclusive degree, that I could not turn to the others when
was taken from me. I deserved to lose him ; and since I ha
seen this unfortunate strain of melancholy developed in 
Solhia, who so much resembles him, I have been the mi
reconciled to his having been removed. I never underst
what the others might he until you drew them out.'
Albinia paused, afraid to press his reserve too far; and
next thing she said was, 'I think I understand vour distincti
between personal religion and sacramental truth. It expla
what has often puzzled me about good devout people who
not belong to the Church. The Visible Church cannot 
without this individual personal religion; but without havi
recourse to the Church, there is- ' she could not find 
word.
'There is a loss of external aid,' he said; 'nay, of much mo
There is no certainty of receiving the benefits linked by Divi
Power to her ordinances. Faith, in fact, while acknowledgi
the great Object of Faith, refuses or neglects to exercise hers
upon the very subjects which He has set before her; and, i
effect, would accept Him on her terms, not on His own.'
'It was not refusal an your part,' said Albinia.
'No, it was rather indifference and imaginary superiority
But I have read and thought much of late, and see more clearl
If I thought of this rite of Confirmation at all, it was only as
means of impressing young minds. I now see every eviden
that it is the completion of Baptismal grace, and without, lil
poor Sophia, expecting that effects would ever have been pe
ceptible, I think that had I known how to seek after the Spi
of Counsel and Ghostly Strength, I might have given way lev
to the infirmities of my character. and have been less wilfull
insensible to obvious duties.'
'Then you have made up your mind ?'
'Yes. I shall speak to Mr. Dusautoy at once.'




<pb n="155"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               ].55
'And,' she said, feeling for his sensitive shyness, 'no one else
need know it-at least-'
'I should not wish to conceal it from the children,' he
answered, with his scrupulous candour. He was supine when
thought more ill of than he deserved, but he always defended
himself from undeserved credit.
I'Whom do you think I have for a candidate?' said Mr.
Dnsautoy that evening.
' Another now ! I thought you were talking to Mr. Kendal
about the onslaught on the Pringle pew.'
' What do you think of my churchwarden himself?'
'You don't mean that he has never been contirned !'
'So lie tells me. He went out to India young, and was
never in the way of such things.  Well, it will be a great
example.'
'Take care what you do. He will never endure having it
talked of.'
' I think he has made up his mind, and is above all nonsense.
I am sure it is well that I need not examine him.  I should
soon get beyond my depth.'
'And what good did his depth ever do to him,' indignantly
cried Mrs. Dusautoy, 'till that dear good wife of his took him
in hand ? Don't you rememher what a log he was when first
we came-how I used to say he gave you subscriptions to get
rid of you.'
'Well, well, Fanny, what's the use of recollecting all our
foolish first impressions. I always told you he was the most
able man in the parish.'
'Fanny' laughed merrily at this piece of sagacity, as she said,
'Ay, the most able. and the least practicable; and the best of
it is, that his wife has not the most distant idea that she has
been the making of him. She nearly quarrelled with me for
hinting it. She would have it that " Edmund" had it all in
him, and had only recovered his health and spirits.'
And, indeed, it was no wonder she was happy. This step,
taken of free will by Mr. Kendal. was an evidence not only of
a powerful reasoning intellect bowed to an act of simple faith,
but of a victory over the false shame that had always been a
part of his nature. Nor did it apparently cost him as much as
his consent to Sophy's admission into the Church; the first
effort had been the greatest, and he was now too much taken
up with deep thoughts of devotion to be sensitive as to the
eyes an( remarks of the world. 'he very resolution to bend in
faithful obedience to a rite usually helonging to early youth
and not obviously enforced to human reason, nor made an




<pb n="156"/>
1.56           THE YOUNG STEP-MOTIHER.
express condition of salvation, was as a pledge that he woud
strive to walk for the future in the path of self-denvi
obedience. Who that saw the manly well-knit form kneelin
among the slight youthful ones around, and the thoughtfu
sorrow-marked brow bowed down beneath the Apostolic han
could doubt that such faith and such humble obedience woul4
surely be endowed with a full measure of the Spirit of Ghostl
lMight, to lead him on in his battle with himself? Those youn
ones needed the 'sevenfold veil between them and the fires 
youth,' but surely the fieshening and renewing calne mo
blessedly to the man weary already with sin and woe, and tied
out alike with himself and the world, because he had lived to
himself alone.
CHAPTER XIII.
OLD Mr. Pringle never stirred beyond his parlour, and wa'
invisible to every one, except his houselkeeper and doctort
but his tall, square, curtained pew was jealously locked up, and
was a grievance to the vicar, who having been foiled in sever
attempts, was meditating a fresh one, if, as he told his wife, h
could bring his churchwarden up to the scratch, when on
Sunday morning the congregation was electrified by the soun
of a creak and a shake, and beheld a stout hale sunburnt gentle..
man, fighting with the disused door, and finally gaining the:
victory by strength of land, admlitting himself and a boy among.
the dust and the cobwebs.
Had Mr. Pringle, or rather his housekeeper, made a virtue of
necessity ? and if so, who could it he ?
Albinia hailed the event as a fertile source of conjecture
which might stave off dangerous subjects in the Sunday call;
but there was no opportunity for any dis.cussion, for Maria was
popping about, settling and unsettling cverythling and every-
body, in a state of greater cornfision than ever, inextricably
entangling her inquiries for Sophy with her explanations about
the rheumatism which had kept grandmlammna from church,
and jumpiing up to pull down the Venetian blind, which
descended awry, and went up worse. The lines got into such a
hopeless compllication, that Allilbia came to help her, while Mr.
Kenldal stood dutifully by the fire, in the sentry-like manner in
which he always passed that hour, benldinlg now and then to
listen and respond to some meek remark of old Mrs. Meadows,
and now and then originating one.   As to assisting Maria.




<pb n="157"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-IMOTHER.              157
in any pother, he well knew that would be a vain act of
chiva.ry, and he generally contrived to be insensible to her
turmoils.
' Who could that have been in old Pringle's seat ?' he presently
began, appropriating Albinia's cherished morsel of gossip ; hut
he was not allowed to enjoy it, for Miss Meadows broke out,
' Oh, Edmund ! this blind; I beg your pardon, but if you would
hell-'
He was obliged to move to the window, and nervously
clutching his arm, she whispered, 'You'll excuse it. I know, but
don't mention it-not a word to mamma.' Mr. Kendal looked
at Albinia to gather what could be this dreadful subject, but
the next words made it no longer doubtful. 'Ah, you were
away, there's no use in explaining-lut not a word of Sam
Pringle. It would only make her uneasy-' she gasped in a
floundering whisper, stopping suddenly short, for at that moment
the stranger and his son were entering the garden, so near
them, that they might have seen the three pairs of eyes levelled
on them, through the wide open end of the unfortunate blind,
which was now in the shape of a fan.
Albinia's cheeks glowed with sympathy, and she longed for
the power of helping her, marvelling how a being so nervously
restless and devoid of self-command could pass through a scene
likely to be so trying. The bell sounded, and the loud hearty
tones of a manly voice were heard.  Albinia looked to see
whether her help were needed, but Miss Meadows's whole face
was brightened, and moving across the room with unusually even
steps, sle leant on the arm of her mother's clair, saying, 'Alamma,
it is Captain Pringle. You remember Samuel Pringle 1  He
settled in the Mauritius. you know, and he was at church thl3
morning with his little boy.'
There was something piteous in the searching look of inquiry
that Mrs. Meadows cast at her daughter's face; but Maria had
put it aside with an attempt at a smile, as 'Captain Pringle'
was announced.
He trod hard, and spoke loud, and his curly grizzled hair was
thrown back from a bronzed open face, full of broad heartiness,
as lie w:\\ked in with outstretched hand, exclaiming, ' Well, and
])(ho , w   ? /,  do ' shaking with all his might the hand that
lu:i:a lild out. 'And how are you, Mrs. Meadows?  You see
I conld not help coming back to see old friends.'
'Oiil friends are always welcome, sir,' said the old lady,
wnarly. 'MIy son, Mr. Kendal, sir--Mrs. Kendal,' she added,
with a Iccoming old-fashioned movement of introduction.
' Very glad to meet you,' said the captain, extending to each




<pb n="158"/>
158            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
such a hearty shake of the hand, that Albinia suspected he 
taking her on trust for Maria's sister.
' Your little boy ?' asked Mrs. Meadows.
' Ay-Arthur, come and make the most of yourself, my ma
maid he, thulping the shy boy on the back to give him coura
'I've brought him home for his schooling-quite time, you 
though what on earth I'm to do without him-'
The boy looked miserable at the words. 'Ay, ay,' con
tinued his father, 'you'll do well enough. I'm not afraid fo
you, master, but that you'll be happy as your father w
before you, when once you have fellows to play with yo
Here is IMr. Kendal will tell you so.'
It was an unfortunate appeal, but Mr. Kendal made th
best of it, saying that his boy was very happy at his tutor's.
'A  private tutor, eh i' said the rough captain; 'I'd no
thought of that-neither home nor school. 1 had rather do if
thoroughly, and trust to numbers to choose friends from, and
be licked into shape.'
Poor little Arthur looked as if the process would be severe.;.
and by way of consolation, Mrs. Meadows suggested a piece of
cake. Maria moved to ring the bell. It was the first time
she had stirred since the visitor came in, and he getting upa
the same time, that she mlight not trouble herself, their eye
met. ' I'm very glad to see you again,' he exclaimed, catchint
hold of her hand for another shake; 'but, bless me ! you
sadly altered ! I'm sorry to see you looking so ill.'
'We all grow old, you know,' said Maria, endeavouring to
smile, but half strangled by a tear, and looking at that moment
as she might have done long ago. ' You find many changes.a'
'I hope you find Mr. Pringle pretty well,' said Albinis'
thinking this might be a relief; and accordingly, the kind-
hearted captain began ruefully to describe the sad alterations
that time had wrought. Then he explained that he had had
little correspondence with home, and had only landed three
days since, so that he was ignorant of all Bayford tidings, and
began asking after a multitude of old friends and acquaint-
ance.
The Kendals thought all would go on the better in their
absence, and escaped from the record of deaths and marriages,
each observing to the other as they left the house, that there
could be little doubt that nurse's story was true, but both
amazed by the effect on Maria, who had never been seen before.
to sit so long quiet in her chair. Was his wife alive? Albinia
thought not, but could not be certain.  His presence was
evidently happiness to Miss Meadows; but would this last 




<pb n="159"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                 159
Would this renewal soothe her, or only make her more restltsa
and unhlappy '
Albillia found that Sophy's imagination had been quicker
than her own. Lucy had brought holme the great news of the
stranger, and she had leapt at once to the conclusion that it
must be the hero of nurse's story; but she had had the resolu-
tion to keel the secret from her sister, who was found reproach-
ing her with lmaking mysteries. When Lucy heard that it was
Captain Pringle, she was quite provoked.
'Only Mr. Pringle's nephew !' she said, disdainfully. ' What
was the use of making a fuss I I thought it was some one in-
teresting !'
Sophy was able to walk to church in the evening, but was
made to go in to rest at the vicarage before returning home.
While this was being discussed before the porch, Albinia felt a
pre.'sure on her arm, and looking round, saw  lIaria Meadows.
'Can you spare me a few nioments ?' she said; and Albinia
turned aside with her to the flagged terrace path between the
churchyard and vicarage garden, in the light of a half-moon.
'You were so kind this morning,' began Maria, 'that I
thought-you see it is very awkward-not that I have any idea
-but if you would speak to Edmund-I know he is not in the
habit-morning visits and--'
' Do you wish him to call I He had been thinking of it.'
Mlaria would have been unbounded in her gratitude, but
catching herself up, she disclaimed all personal interest-only
she said Edmund knew nothing of anything that had passed-
if he did, he would see they would feel-
' think,' said Albinia, kindly, ' that we do know that you
had some troubles on that score. Old nurse said something to
ouplly, but no other creature knows it.'
' Ah !' exclaimed Maria, ' that is what comes of trusting any
one. I was so ill when I found out how it had been, that I
could not keep it from nurse, but fronl manmma I did-my
poor father being just gone and all-I could nut have had her
know how much I felt it-the discovery I mean-and it is
what I wish her never to do. But oh ! Mrs. Kendal, think
what it was to find out that when I had been thinking he had
been only trifling with me all those years, to find that he had
been so unkindly treated. There was his own dear letter to
me never unsealed; and there was another to my father saying
in a proud-spirited way that he did not know what lie had done
to be so served, and lie wished I might find happiness, for I
would never find one that loved me as well. 1 who had turned
against him in my heart 1'




<pb n="160"/>
160            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
' It was cruel indeed ! And you kept it from your moth
said Albinia, beginning to honour her.
My poor father was just gone, you know, and I could notl
grieving her with what was passed and over, and letting h
know that my father had broken my heart, as indeed I thi
he did, though he meant it all for the best. But oh! I thou
it hard when Lucy had married the handsomest man in t
country, and gone out to India, without a word against it, t
I might not please myself, because I was apa's favourite.'
It was very hard not to be made aware of his intentions. 
'Yes,' said Maria; 'for it gave me such a bitter, restless feeli
against him-though I ought to have known him better th
to think he would give one minute's pain he could help; a
then when I knew the truth, the bitterness all went to poo
papa's memory, and yet perhaps lie never meant to be unkin
either.'
Albinia said some kind words, and Maria went on:
' But what I wanted to say was this-Please don't let mamm
suspect one bit about it; and next. if Edmund would not mi
showing him a little attention. Do you think he would, m
dear ? I do so wish that lie should not think we were hurt 
his marriage; and you see, two lone women can do nothing 
make it agreeable; besides that, it would not be proper.'
'Is his wife living ?'
'My dear, I could not make up my tongue to ask-the poo
dear boy there and all-but it is all the same. I hope she 
for I would not see him unhappy; and you don't imagine i
have any folly in my head-oh, no ! for I know what a fright
the fiet and the wear of this have made me; and besides, I1
never could leave mamma. So I trust his with is living to makeI
him happy, and I shall be more at peace now I have seen him 
again. since he turned his horse at Robble's Leigh, and said I]
should soon hear from him again.'
'Indeed I think you will be happier. There is something
very soothing in taking up old feelings and laying them to rest
I hope even now there is less pain than pleasure.'
'I can't help it,' said Maria. 'I do hope it is not wrong;
but his very voice has got the old tone in it, as if it were the old
lullalh that my poor heart has been beating for all these years.'
Who would have thouight of IAaria speaking poeticallyl
But her words did indeed seem to be the truth. In spite of the
embarrassment of her situation and the futter of ler feelings,
she was in a state of composure unexampled. Albinia had just 
gratified her greatly by a few words on Captain Pringle' 
evident good-nature, when a tread came behind them.




<pb n="161"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MoTHER.                161
'Ha ! you here V' exclaimed the loud honest voice.
'We were taking a turn in the mooulight,' baid Albiuia
'A bl, utiful night.'
I Ibeautitul ! Arthur and I have been a bit of the way horIe
with old Goldsmith. There's an evergreen, to be sure; and
now-are you bound homewards, MIariat '
Maria clung to Albinia's arm. Perhaps in the days of the
last parting, she had been less careful to be with a chaperon.
'Al l1 I forgot,' said the captain; 'your way lies the other
sdle of the hill. I had very nearly walked into Willow Lawn
this mnllling, only luckily I bethought me of asking.'
'I hope you will yet walk into \illow Lawn,' said Albinia.
'All ! thank you; I should like to see the ol( p)lace. I
dare say it may be transumogrified now, but I think I could
find my way blindfold about tle old garden. I say, Maria, do
you rememlber that jolly tea-party on the lawn, when the frog
made one too many ?'
' That I do-' Maria could not utter more, and Albinia said
she was afraid he would miss a great deal.
'I reckoned on that when I came home. Changes every-
where; but after the one great change,' lie added, mournfully,
'the others tell less. One has the less heart to care for an old
tree or an old path.'
Albinia felt sure he could mean only one great change, but
they were now at Mrs. Meadows's door, and Maria wished them
good niglht, giving a most grateful squeeze of the hand to Mrs.
Ken~lal.
' Where are you bound now V' asked the captain.
' 'Back to the vicarage, to take up my husband and the girls,'
said Albiuia; 'but good night. I am not afraid.'
The captain, however, chose to continue a squire of dames,
and walked at her side, presently giving utterance to a sound
of conmmiseration. ' Ah ! well, ,oor Maria, I never thought to
Bee lier so altered. Why, she had the prettiest bloom-I dare
say youL remellller-but, I beg your pardon, somehow I thought
you were her elder sister.'
'Mr. Kendal's first wife was,' said Alhinia, pitying the poor
lan ; but Captain Pringle was not a man for awkwardness, and
tlhe short whistle with which he received ler answer set her off
laughing.
'1 beg your pardon,' he said, recovering himself; 'but you see
I am all astray, like a man buried and dug up again, so no
wonIder I make strange blunders ; and my poor uncle is grown
So childish, that he does not know onle person from another, and
began by telling me Maria Me;aldows had married and gone out
3"  J ~""iLL~L~~L(I  ll:llV~3  I\UIIMI~




<pb n="162"/>
1G2              THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
to India. I had not had a letter these seven years, so I tho
it was high time to bring my boy home, and renew old ti
though how I am ever to go back without him-' 
'Is he your only one T
'Yea    I lost his mother when he was six years old, and
have been all the world to each other since, till I began to thi
I was spoiling him outright, and it was time he should see w
Old England was made of.'
Albinia had something like a discovery to impart now; b
she hated the sense of speculating on the poor man's intentio
He talked so much, that he saved her trouble in replying, a
presently resumed the subject of Maria's looks.
'She has had a harassed life, I fear,' said Albinia.
'Eh ! old Meadows was a terrible old tyrant, I believe; b
she was his pet.  I thought he refused her nothing-but there
no trusting such a Turk I  Oh ! ah i I dare say,' as if replyi
to something within. And then having comle to the viar
wicket, Albinia took leave of him and ran indoors, answeri
the astonished queries as to how she had been employed,'Wall
ilng home with Aunt Maria and Captain Pringle !'
It was rather a relief at such a juncture that Lucy's curio*
eyes should be removed. Mr. Ferrars came to talk his wif
state over with his sister.  Her children were too much f
Winifred, and he wished to borrow Lucy for a few weeks, till
governess could be found for them.
It struck Albinia that this would be an excellent thing f
G6nevieve Durant, and she at once contrived to ask her to t
and privately propound the plan.
G6neviBve faltered much of thanks, and said that Madame w
very good; but the next morning a note was brought in, whi
caused a sudden change of countenance:
'My dear Madame,
'I was so overwhelmed with your kindness last night, and so uU.
willing to appear ungrateful, that perhaps I left you under a false impres-
sion. I entreat you not to enter on the subject with my grandmamma or
my aunt. They would grieve to prevent what they would think for my
advantage, and would, I am but too sure, make any sacrifice on my
account; but they are no longer young, and though my aunt does not
perceive it, I know that the real work of the school depends on me, and
that she could not support the fatigue if left unassisted. They need their
little Genevibve, likewise, to amuse them in their evenings ; and, forgive
me, madame, I could not, without ingratitude, forsake them now. Thusb
though with the utmost sense of your kindness, I must beg of you to
pardon me, and not to think me ungrateful if I decline the situation 
kindly offered to me by Mr. Ferrars, thanking you ten thousand times fo
your too partial recommendation, and entreating you to pardon
' Your most grateful and humble servant,
'GENEVIEVE CELESTz DURAL     '




<pb n="163"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                163
There I said Albinia, tossing the note to her brother, who
was the only person present excepting Gilbert.
' Poor Albinia,' he said; 'it is hard to be disappointed in a bit
of patronage.'
I never meant it as patronage,' said Alhinia, slightly hurt
' I thought it would help you, and rescue her from that school.
There will she spend the best years of her life in giving a second-
rate education to third-rate girls, not one of whose parents can
appreciate her, till she will grow as wizened and as wooden as
Mademoiselle herself.'
'Happily,' said Mr. Ferrars, 'there are worse things than
being spent in one's duty. She may be doing an important
work in her sphere.'
'So does a horse in a mill,' exclaimed Albinia ;' but you
would not put a hunter there. Yes, yes, I know, education,
and these girls wanting right teaching; but she, poor child, has
been but half educated herself, and has not time to improve
herself. If she does good, it is by force of sheer goodness, for
they all look down upon her, as much as vulgarity can upon
refinement.'
'I told her so,' exclaimed Gilbert; 'I told her it was the
only way to teach them what she was worth.'
'What did you know of the matter?' asked Albinia; and the
colour mounted in the boy's face as he muttered, ' She was over-
come when she came down; she said you lad been so kind, and
we were obliged to walk up and down before she could compose
herself, for she did not want the old ladies to know anything
about it.'
'And did she not wish to go ?'
'No; though I did the best I could. I to!d her what a jolly
place it was, and that the children would be a perfect holiday to
her. And I showed her it would not be like going away, for
she might come over here whenever she pleased ; and when I
have my horse, I would come and bring her word of the old
ladies once a week.'
'Inducements, indeed !' said Mr. Ferrars. 'And she could
not be melted by any of these ?'
'No,' said Gilbert; 'she would not hear of leaving the old
women. She was only afraid it would vex Mrs. Kendal, and
she could not bear not to take the advice of so kind a friend,
she said. You are not going to be angry with her,' he added.
'No,' said Albiuia; 'one cannot but honour her motives,
though I think she is mistaken; and I am sorry for her; but
she knows better than to be afraid of me.'
With which assurance Gilbert quitted the room; and the
L




<pb n="164"/>
164             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
next moment, hearing the fiont door, she exclaimed, 'I do 
lieve he is gone to tell her how I took the announcement.'
Maurice gave a significant 'Hem !' to which his sister
plied, 'Nonsense!'
'Very romantic consolations and confidences.'
'Not at all. They have been used to each other all th
lives, and lie used to be the odly person who knew how to 
have to her, so no wonder they are great friends. As to an
thing else, she is nineteen, and he not sixteen.'
'One great use of going to school is to save lads from
silly pastime. I advise you to look to these moonlight esco
ings !'
' One would think you were an old dowager, Maurice.
suppose Colonel Bury may not escort Miss Mary.'
'Ali, Allinia, you are a very naughty child still.'
'Of course, when you are here to keep me in order; I
I never were so at other times when it is not so safe.'
Mr. Keldal was kind and civil to Captain Pringle, 
though the boisterous manner seemed to affect him like a tb
derstorm, Maria imagined they were delighted with one anoth
Maria was strangely serene and happy; her querulous, n
vous manner smoothed away, as if rest had come to her at las
and even if the renewed intercourse were only to result in
friendship, there was hope that the troubled spirit had fou
repose now that misunderstandings were over, and the 
sense of ill-usage appeased.
Yet Albinia was startled when one day Mr. Kendal summon
her, saying, ' It is all over; she has refused him !'
'Impossible; she could only have left half her sentence ua
said.'
'Too certain. She will not leave her mother.'
'Is that all i'
'Of course it is. He told me the whole affair, and certain]
Mr. Meadows was greatly to blame. He let Maria give thi
man every encouragement, believing his property larger, an
his expectations more secure than was the case; and when th
proposal was made, having discovered his mistake, he sent
peremptory refusal, giving him reason to suppose her a party to
the rejection. Captain Pringle sailed in anger; but it appear
that his return has revived his former feelings, and that he ha
found out that poor Maria was a greater sufferer than himtn
self.'
' Why does he come to you ?'
'To consult me. He wishes me to persuade poor old Mras
Meadows to go out to the Mauritius, which is clearly impossiblei




<pb n="165"/>
TIHE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.              165
but BMaria must not be sacrificed again. Would the Drurys
make her comfortable ? Or could she not live alone with her
maid '
' She might live here.'
' Albinia! Think a little.'
'I can think of nothing else. Let her have the morning-
room, and Sophy's little room, and Lucy and I would do our
best for her.'
' No, that is out of the question. I would not impose such a
charge upon you on any consideration !'
Albinia's face became humble and remorseful  'Yes,' she
said. ' p rhaps I am too impatient and flighty.'
' That was not what I meant,' lie said; 'but I do not think
it right tlat a person with no claims of relationship should be
made a burthen on you.'
'No claims, Edmund,' said she, softly. 'In whose place have
you put me '
He was silent: then said, 'No, it must not be, my kind
Albinia. She is a very good old lady, but Sophy and she would
clash, and I cannot expose the child to such a trial.'
'I dare say you are right,' pensively said Albinia, perceiving
that her plan had been inconsiderate, and that it would require
the wisdom, tact, and gentleness of a model woman to deal
with such discordant elements. ' What are you going to do I'
as he took up his hat. ' Are you going to see Maria I May I
come with you I'
' If you please; but do not mention this notion. There is
no neees-ity for such a tax on you; and -such arrangements
should never be rashly made.'
lie asked whether Miss Meadows could see him, and awaited
her alone in the dining-room, somewhat to the surprise of his
wife; but either he felt that there was a long arrear of kind-
ness owing, or feared to trust Albinia's impulsive generosity.
Meantime Albinia found the poor old lady in much uneasi-
ness and distress. Her daughter fancied it right to keep her in
ignorance of the crisis; but Maria was not the woman to con-
ceal her feelings, and her nervous misery had revealed all that
she most wished to hide. Too timid to take her confidence by
storn, her mother had only exchanged surmises and observa-
tions with Betty, and was in a troubled condition of affection-
ate curiosity and anxiety.  Albinia was a welcome visitor,
since it was a great relief to hear what had really taken place,
an'l to know that Mr. Kendal was with MTaria.
- Ah ! that is kind,' she said; ' but he must tell her not to
think of me. I am an old woman, good tor nothing but to bo




<pb n="166"/>
166            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
put out of the way, and she has gone through quite eno
You will not let her give it up! Tell her I have not 
more years to live, and anything is good enough for me.'
'That would hardly comfort her,' said Albinia, affectionat
'but indeed, dear grandimamma, I hope we shall convince
'bat we can do something to supply her place.'
' Ah ! my dear, you are very kind, but nobody can be 
daughter I But don't tell Maria so-poor dear love-she
never have another chance. Such a beautifll place out th
and Mr. Pringle's property must come to him at last! B
me, what will Sarah Drury say I And such a good attent
man-besides, she never would hear of any one else-her 
papa never knew-Oh ! she must have him I it is all non
to think of me! I1 only wish I was dead out of the way !'
There was a strong mixture of unselfish love, and fear
solitude; of the triumph of marrying a daughter, and dread
separation; of affection, and of implanted worldliness; tou
ing Albinia at one moment, and paining her at another; 
she soothed and caressed the old lady, and was a willing listen
to what was meant for a history of the former transaction; 
as it started from old Mr. Pringle's grandfather, it had on
proceeded as far as the wedding of the Captain's father 
mother, when it was broken off by Mr. Kendal's entrance.
'Oh ! my dear Mr. Kendal, and what does poor Maria sa
It is so kind in you. I hope you have taken her in hand, a
told her it is quite another thing now, and her poor dear pa
would think so.  She must not let this opportunity pass,
she may never have another. Did you tell her so ?'
'I told her that, under the circumstances, she has no alter
tive but to accept Captain Pringle.'
'Oh ! thank you. And does she 1'
'She has given me leave to send him to her.'
'I am so much obliged. I knew that nobody but you coul
settle it for her, poor dear girl; she is so young and inexperi-
enced, and one is so much at a loss without a gentleman. Btk
this is very kind; I did not expect it in you, Mr. KendaL!
And will you see Mr. Pettilove, and do all that is proper abou,
settlements, as her poor dear papa would have done. Poor,
Pettilove, he was once very much in love with Maria I'
In this mood of triumph and felicity, the old lady was left to
herself and her daughter. Albinia, on the way home, begged&
to hear how Mr. Kendal had managed Maria; and found that
he had simply told her, in an authoritative tone, that after all
that had passed, she had no choice but to accept Captain Pringle,
and that he had added a promise, equally vague and reassuring




<pb n="167"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               167
of being a son to Mls. Meadows. Such injunctions from such
aquarter had infused new life into Maria; and in the course
of tile afternoon, Albinia met the Captain with the mother
and daughter, one on each arm, Maria in recovered bloom and
brilliancy, and Mrs. Meadows's rheumatism forgotten in the
glory of exhibiting her daughter engaged.
For form's sake, secrecy had been mentioned; but the world
of Bayford had known of the engagement a fortnight before it
took place. Sophy had been questioned upon it by Mary Wolfe
two hours ere she was officially informed, and was sore with the
recollection of her own ungracious professions of ignorance.
' So it is true,' she said. 'I don't mind, since Arthur is not a
girl.'
Mr. Kendal laughed so heartily, that Sophy looked to Albinia
for explanatih a; but even on the repetition of her words, she
failed to perceive anything ridiculous in them.
'Why, mamma,' she said, impressively, ' if you had been like
Aunt Maria, I should-' she paused and panted for sufficiel:t
strength of phrase-' I should have run away and begged !
Papa laughs, but I am sure he remembers when grandmamma
and Aunt Maria wanted to come and live here !'
He looked as if he remembered it only too well.
'Well, papa,' pursued Sophy, 'we heard the maids saying
that they knew it would not do, for all Mr. Kendal was so still
and steady, for Miss Meadows would worret the life out of a
lead pincushion.'
' Hem r said Mr. Kendal. 'Albinia, do you think after all
we are doing Captain Pringle any kindness '
'He is the best judge.'
'Nay, he may think himself bound in honour and compassion
-he may be returning to an old ideal.'
'People like Captain. Pringle are not apt to have ideals,' said
Albinia; 'nor do I think Maria will be so trying. Do you
remember that creeper of Lucy's, all tendrils and catching
leaves, which used to lie sprawling about, entangling everything,
till she gave it a prop, when it instantly found its proper
development, and offered no further molestation '
All was not, however, smooth water as yet. The Captain
invaded Mr. Kendal the next morning in despair at Maria's
having recurred to the impossibility of leaving her mother, and
wanting him to wait till he could reside in Engtland. This could
not be till his son was grown up, and ten years were a serious
delay.  Mr. Kendal suspected her of a latent hope that the
Captain would end by remaining at home; but he was a man of
sense and determination, who would lave thought it uriustiliable




<pb n="168"/>
168            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
weakness to sacrifice his son's interests and his own useful
lie would promise, that if all were alive and well, he w
bring Maria back in ten or twelve years' time; but he wo
not sooner relinquish his duties, and he was very reluctant
become engaged on such terms.
' No one less silly than poor Maria would have though
such a proposal,' was Mr. Kendlal's comment afterwards to
wife. ' Twelve years I INo one would be able to live with
by that time !'
' 1 cannot help respecting the unselfishness,' said Albinia.
'One sided unselfishness,' quoth Mr. Kendal. 'I am siok
the whole business; I wish I had never interfered. I can
get an hour to myself.'
He might be excused for the complaint on that day of n
tiations and counter negotiations, which gave no one any 
especially after Mrs. Drury arrived with all the rights  "
relation, set on making it evident, that whoever was to
charged with Mrs. Meadows, it was not herself; and enfor
that nothing could be more comfortable than that Lucy Ken
should set up housekeeping with her dear grandmamma. Ev
one gave advice, and nobody took it; Mrs. Meadows cri
Maria grew hysterical; the Captain took up his hat and wal
out of the house; and Albinia thought it would be very 
in him ever to venture into it again.
The next morning Mr. Kendal ordered his horse early,
hastened his breakfast; told Albinia not to wait dinner
him, and rode off by one gate, without looking behind him,
the other opened to admit Captain Pringle. She marve
whither he had fled, and thought herself fortunate in hav
only two fruitless discussions in his absence. Not till eig
o'clock did he make his appearance, and then it was in
unhearing, unseeing mood, so that nothing could be extrao
except that lie (lid not want any dinner; and it was not till a
in the evening that he abruptly announced, 'Lucy is comb
home on Wednesday. Colonel Bury will bring her to Woo
sile.'
'What ! have you heard from Maurice I'
'No; I have been at Fairnead.'
'You! To-day I How was Winifred '
'Better-I believe.'
' ow does she like the governess 1'
'I did not hear.'
Gradually something oozed out about Lucy having been happy't
And valuable; and after Soply had gone to bed, he iuquire
how the courtship was going on I




<pb n="169"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                169
- Worse than ever,' Albinia said.
I suppose it must end in this I'
' In what '
'If there is no more satisfactory arrangement, I suppose we
must receive Mrs. Meadows.'
If Albinia could but have heard what a scolding her brother
was undergoing from his vivacious wife !
' As if poor Albinia had not enough on her hands ! Of all
inmates in the world ! When Mr. Keudal himself did not like
it I Well I Maurice would certainly have advised Sinbad to
request the honour of taking the Old Man of the Sea for a
promenade a cheval. There was an end of Albinia. There
would never be any room in her house, and she would never be
able to come from home. And after having seen her worked to
death, he to advise-- '
'I did not advise, I only listened. What he came for was to
silence his conscience and his wife by saying, " Your brother
thinks it out of the question."  Now to this my conscience
would not consent.'
'More shame for it, then !'
'I could not say I thlught these two people's happiness
should be sacrificed, or the poor old woman left desolate.
Albinia has spirits and energy for a worse infliction, and
Edmund Kendal himself is the better for every shock to his
secluded habits. If it is a step I would never dare advise, still
less would I dare dissuade.'
' Well! I thought Mr. Kendal at least had more sense.'
' Ay, nothing is so provoking as to see others more unselfish
than ourselves.'
'All I have to say,' concluded Mrs. Ferrars, walking off, ' is,
I wish there was a law against people going and marrying two
wives.'
Albinia was in no haste to profit by her husband's consent
to her proposal. The more she revolved it, the more she fore-
saw the discomfort for all parties. She made every effort to
devise the 'more satisfactory arrangement,' but nothing would
occur. The Drurys would not help, and the poor old lady
could not be left alone. Her maid Betty, who had become
necessary to her comfort, was not a trustworthy person, and
could not be relied on, either for honesty, or for not leaving her
mistress too long alone; and when the notion was broached of
boarding Mrs. Meadows with some family in the place, the
*onviction arose, that when she had grandchildren, there was
Do reason for leaving her to strangers.
Finally, the proposal was made, and as instantly rejected by




<pb n="170"/>
170            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
Maria. It was very kind, but her mother could never be
at Willow Lawn, never; and the tone betrayed some inju
such a thing being thought possible. But just as the Ken
had begun to rejoice at having cleared their conscience at so
a cost, Captain Pringle and lMi.s Meadows made their ap
ance, and Maria presently requested that Mrs. Kendal w
allow her to say a few words.
'I am afraid you thought me very rude and ungrateful,
began, ' but the truth was, I did not think dear mamma w
ever bear to live here, my poor dear sister and all ; but si
that, I have been talking it over with the dear Captain-th
that since you are so kind, and dear Edlmund-more th
could ever have dared to expect-that I could not do b
than just to sound mamma.'
There was still another vicissitude. Mrs. Meadows would
hear of being thrust on any one, and was certain that Maria
extorted an invitation; she would never be a burden upon
one; young people liked company and amusement, and
was an old woman in every one's way; she wished she we
her coffin with poor dear Mr. Meadows, who would 
settled it all. Maria fell hack into the depths of despair,
all was lugubrious, till Mr. Kendal, in the most tender
gentle manner, expressed his hopes that Mrs. Meadows wo
consider the matter, telling her that his wife and children wo
esteem it a great privilege to attend on her, and that he sho
be very grateful if she would allow them to try to sup
Maria's place. And Albinia, in her coaxing tone, described
arrangement; how the old furniture should stand in the sitt
room, and how Lucy would attend to her carpet-work,
what nice walks the sunny garden would afford, and h
pleasant it would be not to have the long hill between th
till grandmamma forgot all her scruples in the fascination of
sweet face and caressing manner; she owned that poor 
Willow Lawn always was like home, and finally promised
come. Before the evening was over thewedling-day was 
What Sophy briefly termed 'the fuss about Aunt Ma
had been so tedious, that it almost dispelled all poetical ideas
courtship. If Captain Pringle had been drowned at sea,
Aunt Maria pined herself into her grave, it would have 
much more proper and affecting.
Sophy heard of the arrangement without remark, and quiet
listened to Albinia's explanation that she was not to be sent U
to the attics, but was to inhabit the spare room, which w
large enough to serve her for a sitting-room. But in




<pb n="171"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               171
evening Mr. Kendal happened in her absence to take up the
book which she had been reading, and did not perceive at once
on her entrance that she wanted it. When he did so, he
yielded it with a few kind words of apology, but this vexation
had been sufficient to bring down the thunder-cloud which had
been lowering since the morning. There were no signs of
clearance the next day; but Albinia had too much upon her
bands to watch the symptoms, and was busy making measure-
ments for the furniture in the morning-room when Mr. Kenual
came in.
' I have been thinking,' he said, 'that it is a pity to disturb
this room. I dare say Mrs. Meadows would prefer that below-
stairs. It used to be her parlour, where she always sat when I
first knew the house.'
'The dining-room I How could we spare that I'
'No, the study.'
Alhinia remained transfixed.
' We could put the books here and in the dining-room,' he
continued,' until next spring, when, as your brother said, we
can build a new wing on the drawing-room side.'
'And what is to become of you I' she continued.
'Perhaps you will admit me here,' he said, smiling, for lie
was pleased with himself. 'Turn me out when I am in the
way.'
'Oh ! Edmund, how delightful ! See, we shall put your high
desk under the window, and your chair in your own corner. This
will be the pleasantest place in the house, with you and your
books ! Dear Winified ! she did me one of her greatest ser-
vices when she made me keep this room habitable !'
'And I think Sophy will not object to give up her present
little room for my dressing-room. Shall you, my dear Y' said he,
anxious to judge of her temper by her reply.
' I don't care,' she said; ' I don't want aLy difference made to
please me; I think that weak.'
'Sophy !' began Albinia, indignantly, but Mr. Kendal stopped
her, and made her come down, to consider of the proposal in the
study.
That study, once an oppressive rival to the bride, now not
merely vanquished, but absolutely abandoned by its former
captive!
'Don't say anything to her,' said Mr. Kendal, as they went
downstairs. 'Of course her spirits are one consideration, but
were it otherwise, I could not see you give up your private
room'




<pb n="172"/>
172            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
'It is very kind in you, but indeed I can spare mine
than you can,' said Albinia. 'I am afraid you will nevet
out of the whirl.'
' Yours would be a loss to us all,' said Mr. Kendal. 
more inmates there are in a house, the more needful to
them well assorted.'
'Just so; and that makes me afraid-'
' Of me X No, Albinia, I will try not to be a check on
spirits.'
'You ! Oh ! I meant that we should disturb you.'
'You never disturb me, Albinia; and it is not what it
when the children's voices were untrained and unsubdued.'
I can't say much for Master Maurice's voice.'
He smiled; he had never yet found those joyous notes de 
and he continued, ' Your room is of value and use to us
mine has been of little benefit to me, and none to any one
I wish I could as easily leave behind me all the habits I
fostered there.'
'Edmund, it is too good ! When poor Sophy recovers
senses she will feel it, for I believe that morning-room w
have been a great loss to her.'
'It was too much to ask in her present state. I should 
come to the same conclusion without her showing how m
this plan cost her, for nothing can be plainer than that w
she continues subject to these attacks, she must have s
retreat.'
'Yet,' ventured Albinia, 'if you think solitude did you
good, do you think letting these fits have their swing is 
for Sophv I'
' I cannot drive her about I They must not be harshly trea
he answered quickly. ' Resistance can only come from wit
compulsion is worse than useless.  Poor child, it is piteous
watch that state of dull misery ! On other grounds, I am 
vinced this is the best plan.  The communication with
offices will prevent that maid from being always on the sa
Mrs. Meadows will have her own visitors more easily, and
get out of doors sooner, and I think she will be better please
' Yes, it will be a much better plan for every one but
Kendal himself,' said Albinia; ' and if he can be happy with
we shall be all the happier. So this was the old sitting-room
'Yes, I knew them first here,' he said. ' It used to be che
ful then, and I dare say you can make it the same again.
must dismantle it before Mrs. Meadows or Maria come to see
or it will remind them of nothing but the days when I 
recovering, and anything but grateful for their attention. Ye




<pb n="173"/>
'            ~THE YOUNG STEP MOTHER.              173
be added, 'poor Mrs. Meadows bore most gently and tenderly
with a long course of moroseness. I am glad to have it in my
I power to make any sort of amends, though it is chiefly through
you.'
Albinia might well be very happy It was her moment of
triumph, and whatever might be her fears for the future, and
uneasiness at Sophy's discontent, nothing could take away the
pleasure of finding herself deliberately preferred to the study.
Sophy did not fail to make another protest, and when told
that' it was not solely on her account,' the shame of having
fancied herself so important, rendered her ill-humour still more
painful and deplorable. It was vain to consult her about the
arrangements, she would not care about anything, except that
by some remarkable effect of her perverse condition, she had
been seized w:'h a penchant for maize colour and blue foi the
bridesmaids, and was deeply offended when Albinia represented
that they would look like a procession of macaws, and her aunt
declared that Sophy herself would be the most sacrificed by such
colours. She made herself so grim that Maria broke up the con-
sltation by saying good-humouredly, 'Yes, we will settle it
when Lucy comes home.'
'Yes,' muttered Sophy,' Lucy is ready for any sort of non-
sense.'
Mr. and Mrs Kendal went to Woodside to meet Lucy, hoping
that solitude would be beneficial  Albinia grieved at the mani-
festations of these, her sullen fits, if only because they made Lucy
feel herself superior. In truth, Lucy was superior in temper,
amiability, and all the qualities that smooth the course of life,
and it was very pleasant to greet her pretty bright face, so full
of animation.
'Dear grandmanlma going to live with us I Oh, how nice I
I can always take care of her when you are busy, mamma.'
That accommodating spirit was absolute refreshment, and
long before Albinia reached home the task of keeping the house-
hold contented seemed many degrees easier.
A grand wedding was ' expected,' so all the Bayford flys were
bespoken three deep, a cake was ordered from Gunter, and so
many invitations sent out, that Albinia speculated how all were
to come alive out of the little dining-room.
And Mr. Kendal the presiding gentleman !
He had hardly seemed aware of his impending fate till the
last evening, when, as the family were separating at night. he
sighed disconsolately, and said, ' I am as bad as you are, Sophy.'
It awoke her first comfortable smile.
Experience had, however, shown him that such occasions




<pb n="174"/>
174             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
might be survived, and he was less to be pitied than his daug
who felt as if she and her great brown face would be the 
of all beholders.  Poor Sophy! all scenes were to her
daguerreotypes in a bad light; she saw nothing but h
distorted I
And yet she was glad that the period of anticipation had 
sumed itself and its own horrors, and found herself not i
sible to the excitement of the occasion.  Lucy was joy
beyond description, looking very pretty, and solicitously d
rating her sister, while both bestowed the utmost rapture
their step-mother's appearance.
Having learnt at last what Bayford esteemed a complim
she had commissioned her London aunts to send her what
called 'an unexceptionable garment,' and so well did they f
their orders, that not only did her little son scream, 'Mami
pretty, pretty I' and Gilbert stand transfixed with admirati
but it called forth Mr. Kendal's first personal remark, 'Albi
you look remarkably well;' and Mrs. Meadows reckoned amo
the honours done to her Maria, that Mrs. Kendal wore a 
tiful silk dress, and a lace bonnet, sent down on purpose fro
London I
Maria Meadows made a very nice bride, leaning on her b
ther-in-law, and not more agitated than became her well. T
haggard restless look had long been gone, repose had taken a
the lean sharpness of countenance, the really pretty features 
fair play, and she was astonishingly like her niece Lucy, a
did not look much older. Her bridegroom was so beaming a
benignant, that it might fairly be hoped that even if force
habit should bring back fretfulness, he had a stock of happin
sufficient for both. The chairs were jammed so tight round t
table, that it was by a desperate struggle that people took th
seats, and Mr. Dusautoy's conversation was a series of apologie
for being unable to keep his elbows out of his neighbours' wa
while carving; and poor Sophy, whose back was not two feet
from the fire, was soon obliged to retreat. She had gained the
door before any one perceived her, and then her brother and
sister both followed; Albinia was obliged to leave her to their'
care, being in the innermost recesses, where moving was in-
possible.
There was not much the matter, she only wanted rest, and
Gilbert undertook to see her safely home.
'I shall be heartily glad to get away,' he said. ' There is no
breathing in there, and they'll begin talking the most intolerable
nonsense presently. Besides, I want to be at home to take baby




<pb n="175"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               1]5
down to the gate to halloo at the four white horses from the
King's Head. Come along, Sophy.'
S Mind you don't make her walk too fast,' said the careful
Lucy, ' and take care how you take off your muslin, Sophy; you
had better go to the nursery for hell.'
Gilbert did not seem inclined to hurry his sister as they came
near Madame Belmarche's.  He lingered, and presently said,
' Should you be too tired to come in here for a moment I it was
an intolerable shame that none of them were asked.'
' Mamma did beg for G6nevieve, but there was so little room,
and the Drurys did not like it. Mrs. Drury said it would only
be giving her a taste for things above her station.'
'Then Mrs. Drury should never come out of the scullery. I
am sure she looks as if her station was to black the kettles r
cried Gilbert, with some domestic confusion in his indignation.
' Didn't she look like a housekeeper with her mistress's things
on by mistake '
' She did not look like mamma, certainly,' said Sophy.
' Mamma looked no more aware that she had on those pretty
things than if she had been in her old grey-'
'Mamma-yes-Mrs. Drury might try seventy years to look
like mamma, or G6nevieve either ! Put G6nevieve into satin oi
into brown holland, you couldn't help her looking ten times
more the lady than Mrs. Drury ever will ! But come in, I have
got a bit of the cake for them here, and they will like to see you
all figged out, as they have missed all the rest of the show.
Aunt Maria might have cared for her old mistress !'
Sophy wished to be amiable, and refrained from objecting.
It was a holiday in honour of cette clere Qluve of five-and-
twenty years since, and the present pupils were from their
several homes watching for the first apparition of the four greys
from the King's Head, with the eight white satin rosettes at
their eight ears.
Madame Pelmarche and her daughter were discovered in the
parlour, cooking with a stewpan over the fire a concoction
vlhich Sophy guessed to be a conserve of the rose-leaves yearly
begged of the pupils, which were chiefly useful as serving to
be boiled up at any leisure moment, to make a cosmetic for
Mademoiselle's complexion. She had diligently used it these
;,rty-five years but the effect was not encouraging, as brown,
Wrinkled, with her frizzled front awry, with not stainless white
alpron, and a long pewter spoon, she turned round to confront
tile visitors in their wedding finery.
But what Frenchwoman ever was disconcerted I Away went




<pb n="176"/>
176            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
the spoon, forward she sprang, both Lands outstretched, and
little black eyes twinkling with pleasure. 'Ah! but this
goodness itself,' said she, in the English wherein she fiatt
herself Do French idiom appeared. ' You are come to let
participate in your rejoicing. Let me but summon Genevibvl
the poor child is at every fiee moment trying to perfectio
her music in the school-room.'
Madame Belmarche had arisen to receive the guests with 
dignitied courtesy and heartfelt felicitations, which were I
over when Genevieve tripped in, all fieshness and grace, w
her neat little collar, and the dainty black apron that so pret
marked her slender waist. One moment, and she had arran
a resting-place for Sophy, and as she understood Gilbert's erra
quickly produced from a corner-cupboard a plate, on which
handed it to the two other ladies, who meanwhile paid t
compliments in the most perfect style.
The history of the morning was discussed, and Madame B
march6 described her sister's wedding, and the curiosity which 
had shared with the bride for the first sight of' lehftur,' when 
two sisters had been brought from their convent for the marri
'But how could she get to like hiim ' cried Sophy.
' My sister was too well brought up a young girl to ackno
ledge a preference,' replied Madalle Belimarche. ' Ah ! my de
you are English; you do not underst;and these things.'
'No,' said Sophy, 'I can't understand how people can ma
without loving. How miserable they must be !'
'On the contrary, my dear, especially if one continued to li
with one's mother. It is far better to earn the friendship a
esteem of a husband than to see his love grow cold.'
'And was your sister happy ?' asked Soplhy, abruptly.
'Ah, my dear, never were husband and wife more attached.
My brother-in-law joined the army of the Prince de CondO, an
never was seen after the day of Valmy; and my sister pined
away and died of grief. My daughter and granddaughter go
to the Catholic burying-ground at Hadminster on her fete day
to dress her grave with immortelles.'
Now Sophy knew why the strip of garden grew so many 
the grey-leaved, woolly-stemmed, little yellow-and-white ever-
lasting flowers. Good madame began to regret having saddened-
her on this day of joy.
' Oh ! no,' said Sophy, 'I like sad things best.'
' Mais, non, my child, that is not the way to go through life,'
said the old lady, affectionately. 'Look at me ; how could 1 have
lived had I not always turned to the bright side I Do not think
of sorrow, it is always near enough.'




<pb n="177"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                177
This conversation had made an impression on Sophy, who
took the first opportunity of expressing her indignation at the
system of maribtges de convenance.
' And, mamma, she said if people began with love, it always
grew cold. Now, has not papa loved you better and better
every day V
Al1inia could not be displeased, though it made her blush,
and she could not answer such a home push. ' We don't quite
nean the same things,' she said evasively. ' Madame is thinking
of passion independent of esteem or confidence. But, Sophy,
this is enough even for a wedding-day. Let us leave it off with
our finery, and resume daily life.'
'Only tell me one thing, mamma.'
'Well '
She paused and brought it out with an effort. It had evi-
dently occupied her for a long time.  ' Mamma, must not every
one with feeling be in love once in their life ?'
'Well done, reserve!' thcught Albinia-' but she is only a
child, after all; not a blush, only those great eyes seeming 'eady
to devour my answer. Wlat ought it to be ? Whatever it is,
she will brood on it till her time comes. I must begin, or I
shall grow nervous: " Dear Sophy, these are not things good to
think upon. There is quite enough to occupy a Christian
woman's heart and soul without that-no need for her feelings
to shrivel up for want of exercise. No; I don't believe in the
passion once in the life being a fate, and pray don't you, my
Sophy, or you may make yourself very silly, or very unhappy, or
both."'
Solhy drew up her head, and her brown skin glowed. A.lbinia
feared that she had said the wrong thing, and affronted her, but
it was all working in the dark.
At any rate the sullenness was dissipated, and there were no
tokens of a recurrence. Sophy set herself to find ways of
making amends for the past, and as soon as she had begun to
do little services for grandmamma, she seemed to have forgotten
her gloomy anticipations, even while some of them were partly
realized. For as it would be more than justice to human nature
to say that Mrs. Meadows's residence at Willow Lawn was a
perfect success, so it would be less than justice to call it a failure.
To put the darker side first. Grandmamma's interest in life
was to know the proceedings of the whole household, and com-
ment on each. Now Albinia could endure housewifely advice,
some espionage on her servants, and even counsel about her
child; but she could not away with the anxiety that would
never leave Sophy alone, tried to force her sociability, and re-
N




<pb n="178"/>
178            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
gretted all extra studies, unable to perceive the delicate t
ment her disposition needed. And Sophy, in the intoler
of early girlhood, was wretched at hearing poor grandmam
petty views, and narrow, ignorant prejudices. She might reso
to be filial and agreeable, but too often found herself just aohi
ing a moody, disgusted silence, or else bursting out with so
true but unbecoming reproof.
On the whole, all did well. Mrs. Meadows was happy;
enjoyed the animation of the larger party, liked their ch
faces, grew fond of Maurice, and daily more dependent on L
and Mrs. Kendal. Probably she had never before had so m
of her own way, and her gentle placid nature was left to 
instead of being constantly worried. Her son-in-law was 
and gracious, though few words passed between them, and
gave her a sense of protection. Indeed, his patience and 
humour were exemplary; he never complained even when
was driven from the dining-room by the table-cloth, to
Maurice rioting in the morning-room, and a music lesson in
drawing-room, or still worse, when he heard the Drurys ev
where; and lie probably would have submitted quietly for
rest of his life, had not Albinia insisted on bringing for
the plan of building.
When Captain and Mrs. Pringle returned to Bayford to
leave, they tfond grandmammna so thoroughly at home, t
Mlaria could find no words to express her gratitude. Maria 
self could hardly have been recognised, she had grown so
her husband in look and manner! If her sentences did
always come to their legitimate development, they no lon
seemed blown away by a frosty wind, but pushed aside by f
kindly impulses; and her pride in the Captain, and the rest
his support, had set her at peace with all the world and 
herself. A comfortable, comely, happy matron was she, 
even her few weeks beyond the precincts of Bayford had
something to enlarge her mind.
It was as if her education had newly begun. The fixed
and the union with a practical man, had opened her facul
not deficient in themselves, but contracted and nipped by
circumstances which she had not known how to turn to 
account. Such a fresh stage in middle life comes to some fe
like the midsummer shoot to repair the foliage that has suffe
a spring blight; but it cannot be reckoned on, and NMrs Prigi
would have been a more effective and self-possessed woman,
better companion to her husband. and with more root in her
had Maria Meadows learnt to tune her nerves and her tem
in the overthrow of her early hopes.




<pb n="179"/>
THE YOUNG STEF-MIOTHER.               ]79
CHAPTER XIV.
M  AURICE FERRARS was a born architect, with such a
love of brick and mortar, that it was meritorious in him
not to have overbuilt Fairmead parsonage. With the sense of
giving him an agreeable holiday, his sister wrote to him in
February that Gilbert's little attic was at his service if he would
come and( give his counsel as to the building project.
Mr. Kendal disliked the trouble and disturbance as much as
Maurice loved it; but he quite approved and submitted, pro-
vided they asked him no questions; he gave them free leave to
ruin him, and set out to take Sophy for a drive, leaving the
brother and sister to their calculations. Of ruin, there was not
much danger; Mr. Kendal had a handsome income, and had
always lived within it; and Albinia's fortune had not appeared
to her a reason for increased expense, so there was a sufficient
sum in hand to enable Mr. Ferrars to plan with freedom.
A new drawing-room, looking southwards, with bedrooms
over it, was the matter of necessity; and Albinia wished for a
hay-window, and would like to indulge Lucy by a conservatory,
filling up the angle to the east with glass doors opening into the
drawing-room and hall. Maurice drew, and she admired, and
thought all so delightful, that she began to be taken with
scruples as to luxury.
'No,' said Maurice, 'these are not mere luxuries. You have
full means, and it is a duty to keep your household fairly com-
fortable and at ease. Crowded as you are with rather incon-
gruols elements, you are bound to give them space enough not
to clash.'
'They don't clash, except poor Sophy. Gilbert and Lucy are
elemen ts of union, with more plaster of Paris than stone in their
nature.'
'Pray, has Kendal made up his mind what to do with
Gilbert'?'
'I have heard nothing lately; I hope he is grown too old for
India.'
' Gilbert is rather too well off for his good,' said Mr. Ferrars;
'the benefit of a profession is not evident enough.'
'I know what I wish! If he could but be Mr. Dusautoy's
curate, in five or six years' time, what glorious things we might
do with the parish !'
' Eh ! is that his wish 'v
'I have sometimes hoped that his mind is taking that turn.
iT 2




<pb n="180"/>
180              THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
lHe is ready to help in anything for the poor people. Once
told ii e he never wished to look beyond Bayford for happin
or occupation; but I did not like to draw him out, because
his father's plans. Why, what have you drawn?        The al
houses I'
'I could do no other when I was improving Gilbert's ho
for him.'
'That would be the real improvement I How pretty I
will keep them for him.'
The second post came in, bringing a letter from Gilbert
his father, and Albinia was so much surprised, that her brot
asked whether Gilbert were one of the boys who only write
their father with a reason.
'He can write more freely to me,' said Albinia; 'and
comes to the same thing.     I am   not in the least afraid
anything wrong, but perhaps he may be making some prop
for the future.   I want to know how he is.   Fancy his
so foolish as to go out bathing.  I am afraid of his colds.'
Many times during the consultation did Mr. Ferrars de
Albinia's eye stealing wistfully towards that ' E. Kendal, E-
and when the proper owner came in, he was evidently as m
struck, for he paused. as if in dread of opening the letter.
eyes were on his countenance as he read, and did not ga!
much consolation.   'I am afraid this is serious,' at last he 
'His cold ' exclaimed Albinia.
'Yes,' said Mr. Kendal, reading aloud sentence by sen
with gravity and consideration.
'I do not wish to alarm Mrs. Kendal, and therefore address mysel
once to you, for I do not think it right to keep you in ignorance tha
have had some of the old symptoms. I do not wish to make any one un
about me, and I may have made light of the cold I caught a month 8in
but I cannot conceal from myself that I have much painful cough, an
clination to shortness of breath, and pain in the back and shoulders,
cially after long reading or writing. I thought it right to speak to
Downton, but people in high health can understand nothing short
raging fever; however, at last he called in the parish surgeon, a stu
ignorant fellow, who understands my case no more than his horse, 
treats me with hyoscyamus, as if it were a mere throat-cough. I thou
it my duty to speak openly, since, though I am quite aware that circu
stances make little difference in constitutional cases, I know you and d
Mrs. Kendal will wish that all possible means should be used, and
think it-
Mr. Kendal broke down, and handed the letter to his
who proceeded,
'I think it best you should be prepared for the worst, as I wish and
deavrur to be; and truly I see so much trial and disappointment in
course of life before me, that it would hardly be the worst to me, excep




<pb n="181"/>
Fr      ~      THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                 181
That sentence finished Albinia's voice, and stealing her hand
into her husband's, she read on il silence,
'for the additional sorrow to you, and my grief at bringing pain to my more
than mother, but she has long known of the presentiment that has always
hung over me, and will be the better prepared for its realization. If it
would be any satisfaction to you, I could easily take a ticket, and go up to
London to see any physician you would prefer. I could go with Price,
who is going for his sister's birthday, and I could sleep at his father's
house; but, in that case, I should want three pounds journey money, and
I should be very glad if you would be so kind as to let me have a sovereign
in advance of my allowance, as Price knows of a capital secondhand bow
and arrows. With my best love to all,
'Your affectionate son,
'GILBERT KENDAL.'
Albinia held the letter to her brother, to whom she looked
for something cheering, but, behold ! a smile was gaining un-
controllably on the muscles of his cheeks, though his lips strove
hard to keep closely shut. She would not look at him, and
turning to her husband, exclaimed, 'We will take him to
London ourselves !'
'I am afraid that would be inconvenient,' observed Maurice.
'That would not signify,' continued Albinia; 'I must hear
myself what is thought of him, and how I am to nurse him.
Oh ! taking it in time, dear Edmund, we need not be so much
afraid ! Maurice will not mind making his visit another time.'
'I only meant inconvenient to the birthday party,' drily said
her brother.
'Maurice !' cried she, 'you don't know the boy !'
'I have no doubt that he has a cold.'
' And I know there is a great deal more the matter r cried
Albinia. 'We have let him go away to be neglected and badly
treated! My poor, dear boy ! Edmund, I will fetch him
home to-morrow.'
'You had better send me,' said Maurice, mischievously, for
he saw he was diminishing Mr. Kendal's alarm, and had a
brotherly love of teasing Albinia, and seeing how pretty she
looked with her eyes flashing through wrathful tears, and her
foot patting impetuously on the carpet.
'You !' she cried; 'you don't believe in him! You fancy
all boys are made of iron and steel-you would only laugh at
himn-you made us send him there-I wish-'
'Gently, gently, my dear Albinia,' said her husband, dis-
mayed at her vehemence, just when it most amused her brother.
'You cannot expect Maurice to feel exactly as we do, and I
confess that I have much hope that this alarm  may be more
than adequate.'




<pb n="182"/>
182            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
' le thinks it all a scheme !' said Albinia, ii a tone of
injury. 
'No, indeed, Albinia,' answered her brother, seriously
fully believe that Gilbert imagines all that he tells you;
you cannot suppose that either the tutor or doctor could 
see if he were so very ill.'
'Certainly not,' assented Mr. Kendal.
And low spirits are more apt to accompany a slight
than such an illness as you apprehend.'
'I believe you are right,' said Mr. Kendal. 'Where is
letter I'
Albinia did not like it to come under discussion, but
not withhold it, and as she read it again, she felt that nei
Maurice nor her cousin Fred could have written the like ;
she was only the more impelled to do battle, and when
came to the unlucky conclusion, she exclaimed, 'I am sure
was an after-thought. I dare say Price asked him while
was writing.'
'What's this?' asked Mr. Kendal, coming to the 'pre
ment.'
She hesitated, afraid both of him and of Maurice, but ti
was no alternative. ' Poor Gilbert!' she said. ' It was a
or call from his brother just at last. It has left a very
impression.'
'Indeed I' said his father, much moved. 'Yes. Edma
gave a cry such as was not to be forgotten,' and the sigh
how it had haunted his own pillow; ' but I had not tho
that Gilbert was in a condition to notice it. Did he men
it to you ' 
'Yes, not long after I came; he thinks it was a call, al
have never known exactly how to deal with it.'
It is a case for very tender handling,' said Maurice.
'I should have desired him never to think of it again,
Mr. Kendal, decidedly. 'Mere nonsense to dwell on it. T
names were always in Edmund's mouth, and it was nothing
accident. You should have told him so, Albinia.'
And he walked out of the room.
'Ah ! it will prey upon him now,' said Albinia.
'Yes; I thought he only spoke of driving it away beca
it was what he would like to be able to do. But things do
prey on people of his age as they do on younger ones.'
'I wonder if I did right,' said Albinia. 'I never liked
ask you, though I wished it. I could not bear to treat it at
fancy. How was I to know, if it may not have been inten




<pb n="183"/>
f   ~ ~THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                        183
to do him good    And you see his father says it was very
remarkable.'
i   Do you imagine that it dwells much upon his mind ?'
Not when he is well-not when it would do him good,' said
Albinia; ' it rather haunts him the instant he is unwell.'
' He makes it a superstition, then, poor boy ! You thought
me hard on him, Albinia; but really I could not help being
angry with him for so lamentably frightening his father and
you.
' Let us see how he is before you find fault with him,' said
Albinia.
'You're as bad as if you were his mother, or worse!' ex-
claimed Maurice.
' Oh! Maurice, I can't help it ! He had no one to care for
him till I came, and he is such a very dear fellow-he wants
me so much !'
Mr. Ferrars agreed to go with Mr. Kendal to Traversham.
He thought his father would be encouraged by his presence,
and he was not devoid of curiosity. Albinia would not hear of
staying at home; in fact, Maurice suspected her of being afraid
to trust Gilbert to his mercy.
With a trembling heart she left the train at the little Tra-
versham station, making resolutions neither to be too angry
with the negligent tutor, nor to show Gilbert how much im-
portance she attached to his illness.
As they walked into the village, they heard a merry clamour
of tongue, and presently met five or six boys, and, a few paces
belind them, Mr. Downton.
'Ah !' he exclaimed, 'I am glad you are come. I would
have written yesterday, but that I found your boy had done so.
I shall be very glad to have him cheered up about himself  I
will turn back with you. You go on, Price. They are setting
out for one of Hullah's classes, so we shall have the house
clear.'
' I hope there is not much amiss ?' said _Mr. Kendal.
'A tedious cold,' said the tutor; ' but the doctor assures me
that there is nothing wrong with his chest, and I do believe he
would not cough half so much, if he were not always watching
hiluself.'
' Who has been attending him ?'
'Lee, the union doctor; a very good man, with a large family,'
(Albinia could have beaten him). 'Indeed,' he continued,
perceiving some dissatisfied looks, 'I think you will find thab
a little change is all that he wants.'




<pb n="184"/>
18t            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
'I hope you can give a good account of him in other rest
said Mr. Kendal.
'Oh ! yes, in every way; he is the most good-natured
the world, and quite the small boys' fiiend. Perlaps he.
been a little more sentimental of late, but that may be
from being rather out of order. I'll call him.'
The last words were spoken as they entered the parso
where opening a door, he said, 'Here, Kendal, here's a
prescription for you.'
Allinia had a momentary view of a tabby-cat and kit
volume of poetry, a wiry-haired terrier, and Gilbert, all I
promiscuously on the hearth-rug, before the two last leaped
the one to bark, and the other to come forward with outstre
hand, and glad c(,untenance.
He looked flushed aind languid, but the roaring fire and 
room might account for that; and though, when the sub
was mentioned, he gave a short uncomfortable cough, Alb
mind was so far relieved, that she was in doubt with whom
be angry, and prepared to stand on the defensive, should
brother think him too well.
The gentlemen went away together, and Gilbert, grasping
hand, gave way to one of his effusions of affection-' So.
to come to him-hie knew he had her to trust to, wbat
happened'-and he leant his cheek on his hand in a melanc
mood.
'Don't be so piteous, Gibbie,' she said. 'You were q
right to tell us you were not well, only you need not have 
so very doleful; I don't like papa to be frightened.'
' 1 thought it was no use to go on in this way,' said Gil
with a cough: 'it was the old thing over again, and no
would believe I had anything the matter with me.'
And he commenced a formidable catalogue of symp
which satisfied her that Maurice would think him fully ju
fled. Just at a point where it was not easy to know what 
to say, the kitten began to play tricks with her mother's
and a happy diversion was made ; Gilbert began to exhibit
various drolleries of the animals, to explain the friendship
tween dog and cat, and to leave off coughing as lie rela
anecdotes of their sagacity; and finally, when the gentlem
returned, laughing was the first sound they heard, and M
Kendal was found sitting on the floor at play with the live s
They had come to fetch her to see the church and sch
and on going out, she found that Mr. Ferrars had moved 
carried that Gilbert should be taken home at once, and, on 
way, be shown to a physician at the county town. From




<pb n="185"/>
rf'~ THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                           185
she gathered that Maurice was compassionate, and though, of
course, le would make no such admission, she had reason after-
wards to believe that he had shown Mr. Downton that the pupil's
health ought to have met with a shade more attention.
With Gilbert wrapped up to the tip of his nose, they set off,
and found the doctor at home. Nothing could have been more
satisfactory to Albinia, ifr it gave her a triumph over her
brother, without too much anxiety for the future. The phy-
sician detected the injury to the lungs left by an attack that
the boy had suffered from in his first English winter, and had
scarcely outgrown when Albinia first knew him. The recent
cold had so far renewed the evil, that though no disease actually
existed, the cough must be watched, and exposure avoided; in
fact, a licence for petting to any extent was bestowed, and there-
with every hope of recovery.
Albinia and her son sat in their corers of the carriage in
secret satisfaction, while Mr. Kendal related the doctor's opinion
to MIr. Ferrars; but one of them, at least, was unprepared for
the surnming-up. 'Under the circumstances, Gilbert is most
fortunate. Afew years in his native climate will quite set him up.'
'Oh ! but he is too old for Haileybury,' burst out Albinia,
.in her consternation.
' Nearly old enough for John Kendal's bank, eh, Gilbert ?'
'Oh!' cried Albinia, 'pray don't let us talk of that while
poor Gilbert is so ill.'
'Hm !' said Mr. Kendal with interrogative surprise, almost
displeasure, and no more was said.
Allinia felt guilty, as she remembered that she had no more
intended to betray her dislike to the scheme, than to gratify
Gilbert by calling him ' so ill.' Aristocratic and military, she had
no love f;r the monied interest, and had so sedulously impressed
on her fiiends that Mr. Kendal had been in the Civil Service,
and quite unconnected with the bank, that Mr. Ferrars had told
her she thought his respectability depended on it; and she was
ashamed that her brother should hear her give way again so
foolishly to the weakness.
Gilbert became the most talkative as they drew near home,
and was the first to spring out and open the hall door, display-
ing his two sisters harnessed tandem-fashion with packthread,
and driven at full speed by little Maurice, armed with the
veritable carriage whip!  The next moment it was thrown
down, with a rapturous shout, and Maurice was lost to every-
thing but his brother !
' Oh ! girls, how could you let him serve you so ?' began the
horrified Albinia. 'Sophy will be laid up for a week 1'




<pb n="186"/>
186            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
'Never mind,' said Sophy, dropping on a chair. 'Poor
fellow, he wished it so much !'
' I tried to stop her, mamma,' said Lucy, 'but she will
Maurice pleases.'
'See, this is the way they will spoil my boy, the instat
back i- turned !' said Albinia. ' What's the use of all I 
with him, if every one else will go and be his bond-slave I
believe Sophy would let him kill her, if he asked her 1'
' It is no real kindness,' said Mr. Kendal. ' Their good-
ought not to go beyond reason.'
The elder Maurice could hardly help shrugging his shoul
Well did he know that Mr. Kendal would have joined the
if such had been the will of that sovereign in scarlet me
who stood with one hand in Gilbert's, and the whip in
other.
' Come here, Maurice,' quoth Albinia; ' put down the w
and she extracted it from his grasp, with grave resolu
against which he made no struggle, gave it to Lucy to be
away, and seated him on her knee. 'Now listen, Mau
poor sister Sophy is tired, and you are never to make a h
of her. Do you hear '
'Yes,' said Maurice, fidgeting.
'Mind, if ever you make a horse of Sophy, mamma will
you into the black cupboard. You understand ?'
'Sophy shan't be horse,' said Maurice.  'Sophy naug
lazy horse. Boy has Gibbie-' 
'There's gratitude,' said Mr. Ferrars, as 'Boy' slid offG
mamma's knee, stood on tiptoe to pull the door open, and
after Gilbert to grandmamma's room.
'Yes,' said Albinia; 'no one is grateful for services bey
all reason. So, Sophy, mind, into the cupboard he goes,
very next time you are so silly as to be a horse.'
'To punish which of them ' asked her brother.
'Sophy knows,' said Albinia.
Soplly was too miserable to smile. Sarah Anne Drury
been calling, and on hearing of Gilbert's indisposition,
favoured them with ' mamma's remarks,' and w hen Mrs. Ken
was blamed, Sophy had indignantly told Sarah Anne that
knew nothing about it, and had no business to interf
Then followed the accusation, that Mrs. Kendal had set
whole family against their old friends; and Sophy
found all her own besetting sins charged upon her
mother.
'My dear!' said Albinia, 'don't you know that if a 
tiger were to eat up your cousin John in India, the Dr




<pb n="187"/>
I~r ~THE YOUNG STEP-MIOTHER                         187
would say Mrs. Kendal always let the tigers run about loose ?
Nor am I sure that your faults are not my fault. I helped
you to be more exclusive and intolerant, and I am sure I tried
your temper, when I did not know what was the matter with
you-
'No-no,' said the choked voice. It would have been an
immense comfort to cry, or even to be able to return the kiss;
but she was a great deal too wretched to be capable of any de-
monstration; physically exhausted by being driven about by
Maurice; mentally worn out by the attempts to be amiable,
which had degenerated into wrangling; full of remorse for hav-
ing made light of her brother's illness, and, for that reason,
persuaded that she was to be punished by seeing it become
fataL  Not a word of all this did she say, but, dejected and
silent, she spent the evening in a lonely corner of the drawing-
room, while her brother, in the full pleasure of returning home,
and greatly enjoying his invalid privileges, was discussing the
projected improvements.
Talking at last brought back his cough with real violence,
and he was sent to bed; Albinia went up with him to see
that his fire burnt. He set Mr. Ferrars's drawing of the alms-
houses over his mantelshelf.  'I shall nail it up to-morrow,
he said. 'I always wanted a picture here, and that's a jolly
one to look to.'
'It would be a beautiful beginning,' she said. ' I think your
life would go the better for it, Gibbie.'
'I suppose old nurse would be too grand for one,' he said;
'but I should like to have her so near ! And you must mind
and keep old Mrs. Baker out of the Union for it. And that
famous old blind sailor! I shall put him up a bench to sit
in the sun, and spin his yarns on, and tell him to think him-
self at Greenwich.'
Albinia went down, only afraid that his being so very good
was a dangerous symptom.
Sophy was far from well in the morning, and Albinia kept
her upstairs, and sent her godfather to make her a visit. He
always did her good; he knew how to probe deeply, and help
her to speak, and he gave her advice with more experience
than his sister, and more encouragement than her father.
Sophy said little, but her eyes had a softened look.
'One good thing about Sophy,' said he afterwards to his
sister, 'is, that she will never talk her feelings to death.'
'That reserve is my great pain. I don't get at the real being
once in six months.'
'So much the better for people living together.'




<pb n="188"/>
188            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
'Well, I was thinking that you and I are a great deal
intimate and confidential when we meet now, than we 
be when we were always together.'
'People can't be often confidential from the innermost
they live together,' said Maurice.
'Since I have been a Kendal, such has been my
rience.'
' It was the same before, only we concealed it by an u
surface of chatter,' said Maurice. " As iron sharpeneth i
doth a man the countenance of his friend ;" but if the m
sharpening, went on without intermission, both irons would
away, and no work would be done. Aren't you coming
me ? Edmund is going to drive me to Woodside to meet
pony-carriage from home.'
'I wish I could; but you see what happens when I go
pleasuring !'
' Well, you can take one element of mischief with you
imp, Maurice.'
'Ye-es. Papa would like it, if you do.'
'I should like you to come on worse terms.'
'Very well, then; and Sophy is safe; I had already 
Geneviive to come and read to her this afternoon. If Gi
can spare me, I will go.'
Gilbert did not want her, and begged Lucy not to think
staying indoors on his account. He was presently left in
tary possession of the drawing-room, whereupon he rose, se
his brown locks at the glass, arranged his tie, brushed his O
leisurely walked upstairs, and tapped at the door of the m
ing-room, meekly asking, ' May I come in ' with a cough:
each end of the sentence.
'Oh ! Gilbert!' cried his anxious sister, starting up. '
you come to see me ' and she would have wheeled round
father's arm-chair for him, but G6nevieve was beforehand
her, and he sank into it, saying pathetically, ' Ah ! thank
Miss Durant; you are come to a perfect hospital. Oh I thil
too much,' as she further gave him a footstool.  ' Oh I
thank you, Sophy,' for she would have handed Genevieve
own pillow for his further support; 'this is delightful I'
clining pathetically in his chair. 'This is not like Trave
Where they would not believe he was ill 1' said Sophy.
I hope he does not look so very ill,' said G6nevieve, 
fully, hut this rather hurt the feelings of both; the one
'Oh ! but he is terribly pale,' the other coughed, and 
' Looks are deceitful.'
' That is the very reason,' said G6nevieve. ' You don't 




<pb n="189"/>
Ir    ~         THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                189
deceitful enough to be so ill-so ill as Miss Sophie fears; now
you are at home, and well cared for, you will soon be well.'
' Care would have prevented it all,' said Sophy.
' And not brought me home !' said Gilbert. ' Home is home
on ally terlis. No one there had the least idea a fellow could
ever be unwell or out of spirits !'
Ah ! you must have been ill,' cried his sister, 'you who
never used to be miserable !'
Gilbert gave a sigh. ' They were such mere boys,' he said
'Monzsieur votre Precepteur ?' asked Genevieve.
'All! he was otherwise occupied ?
'There is some mystery beneath,' said Genevieve, turning to
Sophy, who exclaimed abruptly, ' Oh ! is he in love ?'
'Sophy goes to the point,' said Gilbert, smiling, the picture of
languid comfort; 'but I own there are suspicious circumstances.
He always has a photograph in his pocket, and Price has seen
him looking at it.'
' Ah ! depend upon it, Miss Sophy, it is all a romance of these
young gentlemen,' said Genevieve, turning to her with a droll,
provoking air of confidence; 'ce pauvre MIonzieur had the por-
trait of his sister r'
'Catch me carrying Sophy's face in my waistcoat pocket,'
cried Gilbert, forgetting his languor.
'Speak for yourself, Mr. Gilbert,' laughed Genevieve.
'And he writes letters every day, and wont let any of us
put them into the post for him; but we know the direction
begins with Miss-'
'Oh ! the curious boys 1' cried Genevieve.  'If I could
only hint to this poor tutor to let them read Miss Downton
on one !'
'I assure you,' cried Gilbert, ' Price has laid a bet that she's
an heiress with forty thousand pounds and red hair.'
'Mr. Price is an impertinent 1 I hope you will inform me
how he looks when he is the loser.'
' But he has seen her ! He met Mr. Downton last Christmas
in Regent Street, in a swell carriage, with a lady with such
carrots, he thought her bonnet was on fire; and Mr. Downton
never saw Price, though he bowed to him; and you know
nobody would marry a woman with red hair unless she was an
heiress.'
'Miss Sophy,' whispered G6nevieve, 'prepare for a red-
haired sister-in-law. I predict that every one of the pupils of
the respectable Mr. Downton will marry ladies with lively
chestnut locks.'
' What, you think me so mercenary, G6neviBve I' said Gilbert.




<pb n="190"/>
190            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTBER.
' I only hope to see this school-boy logic well revenged r
Genevieve. ' Mrs. Price shall have locks of orange red, and
Mrs. Gilbert Kendal-ah I we will content ourselves with
having a paler shade-sandy gold.'
'No,' said Gilbert, speaking slowly, turning round his
'I could tell you what Mrs. G. Kendal's hair will be-'
Genevieve let this drop, and said, 'You do not want
good-bye, Miss Sophie.'
'Going I why, you came to read to me, G6nevieve,' exclai
Sophy.
' Ah ! I beg your pardon, I have been interrupting you
this time,' cried Gilbert; 'I never meant to disturb you.
let me listen.'
And G6nevieve read while Gilbert resumed his rc
attitude, with half-closed eyes, listening to the sweet in
tions and pretty refined accent of the ancien regime.
Sophy enjoyed this exceedingly, she made it her es
occupation to take care of Gilbert, and enter into his fir
amusements. This indisposition had drawn the two n
together, and essentially unlike as they were, their two chara
seemed to be fitting well one into the other. His sentim
accorded with her strain of romance, and they read poetry
had discussions as they sat over the fire, growing constantly 
greater intimacy and confidence. Sophy waited on him, 
watched him perpetually, and her assiduity was impartin
softness and warmth quite new to her, while the constant 
pation kept affronts and vexations out of her sight, and m
her amiable.
Gilbert's health improved, though with vicissitudes that
forced the necessity of prudence. Rash when well, and
sponding at each renewal of illness, 'he was not easy to mna
but he was always so gentle, grateful, and obliging, that
endeared himself to the whole household. It was no nove
for him to be devoted to his step-mother and his little broth
but he was likewise very kind to Lucy, and spent much time
helping in her pursuits; he was becoming companionable to 
father, and could play at chess sufficiently well to be a wort
antagonist in Mr. Kendal's scientific and interminable ga
He would likewise play at backgammon with grandmamma,
could entertain her for hours together by listening to her lo
stories of the old Bayford world. He was a favourite in h
little society, and would often take a hand at cards to ma
up a rubber; nay, even when not absolutely required,
was very apt to bestow his countenance upon the little parti
where he had the pleasure of being treated as a great man, an




<pb n="191"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                191
which, at least, lad the advantage of making a variation in his
imprisonment during the east winds.
Madame Belmarche and her daughter and grandchild were
sometimes of the party, and on these occasions, Sophy always
claimed G6nevieve. and usually succeeded in carrying her off,
when Gilbert would often join them. Their books and prints
were a great treat to her; Gilbert had a beautiful illustrated
copy of Longfellow's poems, and the engravings and 'Evangeline'
were their enjoyment; Gilbert regularly proffering the loan
of the book, and she as regularly refusing it, and turning a deaf
ear to gentle insinuations of the pleasure of knowing that any
book of his was in her hands. Gilbert had never had much of
the schoolboy manner, and he was adopting a gentle, pathetic
tone, at which Albinia was apt to laugh, but in her absence was
often verged upon tendresse, especially with G6nevieve. She, how-
ever, by her perfect simplicity and lively banter, always nipped
the bud of his sentiment; she had known him from a child, and
never lost the sense of being his elder, treating him somewhat
as a boy to be played with. Perfectly aware of her own posi-
tion, her demeanour, frank and gracious as it was, had something
in it which kept in check other Bayford youths less gentleman-
like than Gilbert Kendal. If she never forgot that she was a
dancing-master's daughter, she never let any one else forget that
she was a lady.
When the building began, Gilbert had a wholesome occupa-
tion, saving his father some trouble and-not quite so much
expense by overlooking the workmen. Mr. Kendal was glad
to be spared giving orders and seaking to people, and would
always rather be overcharged than be at the pains of bargaining
or inquiring. 'It was Gilbert's own house,' he said, 'and it
was good for the boy to take an interest in it, and not to be too
much interfered with.' So the bay window and the conserva-
tory were some degrees grander than Mr. Ferrars had proposed,
but all was excused by the pleasure and experience they afforded
Gilbert, and it was very droll to see Maurice following him
about after the workmen, watching them most knowingly, and
deep in mischief at every opportunity. Once he had been up
to his knees in a tempting blaancangr-like lake of lime, many
times had he hammered or cut his fingers, and once his legs had
gone through the new drawing-room ceiling, where he hung by
the petticoats screaming till rescued by his brother. The room
Was under these auspices finished, and was a very successful
affair-the conservatory, in which the hall terminated, and into
which a side door of the drawing-room opened, gave a bright,
fragrant, flowery air to the whole house; and the low fireplace




<pb n="192"/>
192            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
and comfortable fan-shaped fender made the room very oh
Fresh delicately-tinted furniture, chosen con amore by
London aunts, had made the apartment very unlike old W
Lawn; and Albinia had so much enjoyed setting it off
best advantage, that she sent word to Winifred that sha
really becoming a furniture fancier. 
It was a very pretty paper, and some choice prints hu
it; but Albinia and Sophy had laid violent hands on al
best-looking books, and kept them for the equipment of o
the walls. The rest were disposed, for Mr. Kendal's deleot
in the old drawing-room, henceforth to be named the lib
Lucy thought it sounded better, and he was quite as will
Albinia was that the name of study should be extinct. 
time Mr. Downton had verified the boys' prediction by wri
to announce that he was about to marry and give up pupils,
Gilbert was past seventeen, and it was time to decide on
profession. Albinia had virtuously abstained from any
adverse to the house of Kendal and Kendal, for she kne
hurt her husband's feelings to hear any disparagement of,
country where he had spent some of his happiest years
was fond of his cousins; and knew that they would give his
a safe and happy home, and he believed that the climate
exactly what his health needed.
Sophy fired at the idea. Her constant study of the su
and her vivid imagination had taken the place of memory, w
could supply nothing but the glow of colouring ald the da
haze which enveloped all the forms that she would fain be
that she remembered. She and her father would discuss I
scenery as if they had been only absent fiom it a year;
envied Gilbert his return thither, but owned that it was
next thing to going herself, and was already beginning to a
a hoard of English gifts for the old ayahs and bearers who
lived in her recollection, in preparation for the visit whioh.
his first holiday her brother must pay to her birthplace
first home.
Gilbert, however, took no part in this enthusiasm, he made
opposition, but showed no alacrity; and at last his father 
Albinia whether she knew of any objection on his part, or
design which he might be unwilling to put forward. Wi
beating heart she avowed her cherished scheme.
'Is this his own proposal ?' asked Mr. Kendal.
'No; he has never spoken of it; but your plan has al
seemed so decided that perhaps he thinks lie has no choice.'
'That is not what I wish,' said his father. ' f his inclinat
be otherwise, he has only to speak, and I will consider.'




<pb n="193"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               193
Shall I sound him?' suggested Albinia, dreading the timiditj
that always stood between the boy and his father.
'Do not inspire him with the wish and then imagine it his
own,' said Mr. Kendal; and then thinking he had spoken
sternly, added ' I know you would be the last to wish him to
take holy orders inconsiderately, but you have such power over
him, that I question whether he would know his wishes from
yours.
Albinia began to disavow the desire of actuating him.
'You would not intend it, but he would catch the desire from
you, and I own I would rather he were not inspired with it.
If he now should express it, I should fear it was the unconscious
effort to escape from India. If it had been his brother Edmund,
I would have made any sacrifice, but I do not think Gilbert has
the energy or force of character I should wish to see in a clergy-
man, nor do I feel willing to risk him at the university.'
'Oh ! Edmund, why will you distrust Oxford I Why will
you not believe what I know through Maurice and his friends?'
'If my poor boy had either the disposition or the discipline
of your brother, I should not feel the same doubt.'
' Maurice had no discipline except at school and when William
licked him,' cried Albinia. ' You know he was but eleven
years old when my father died, and my aunts spoilt us without
mitigation.'
' I said the disposition,' repeated Mr. Kendal; ' I can see
nothing in Gilbert marking him for a clergyman, and I think
him susceptible to the temptations that you cannot deny to
exist at any college. Nor would I desire to see him fixed here,
until he has seen something of life and of business, for which
this bank affords the greatest facilities with the least amount of
temptation. He would also be doing something for his own
support; and with the life-interests upon his property, he must
he dependent on his own exertions, unless I were to do more
for him than would be right by the other children.
'Then I am to say nothing to him '
'I will speak to him myself. He is quite old enough to
understand his prospects and decide for himself.'
'Blut, Edmund,' cried Alhinia, with sudden vehemence, 'you
are not sacrificing Gilbert for Maurice's sake '
She had more nearly displeased him than she had ever done
before, though he looked up quietly, saying, ' Certainly not. I
al not sacrificing Gilbert, and I should do the same if Maurice
Were not in existence.'
She was too much ashamed of her foolish fancy to say more,
and she cooled into candour sufficient to perceive that he was
0




<pb n="194"/>
19 -           THIE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
wise in distrusting her tact where her preference was so 
But she foresaw that Gilbert would shrink and falter befo
father, and that the conference would lead to no discovery
views, and she was not surprised when her husband toll
that he could not understand the boy, and believed thaV
truth was, that he would like to do nothing at all. It had
by Mr. Kendal, in a sort of despair, undertaking to wri
his cousin John for a statement of what would be reql
after which the decision was to be made.
Meantime Mr. Kendal advised Gilbert to attend to arith
and book-keeping, and offered to instruct him in his 1
forgotten Hindostanee. Sophy learnt all these with all
heart, but Gilbert always had a pain in his chest if ha
still at any kind of study I
CHAPTER XV.
COLONEL BURY was the most open-hearted old bac
in the country. His imagination never could conceive
possibility of everybody not being glad to meet everybody i
house could never be too full, his dinner-parties of 'a
friends' overflowed the dining-room, and his 'nobody' 
always at least six bodies. Every season was fertile in oc
of gathering old and young together to be made happy; and
Mary Ferrars, at five years old, had told her mamma that
Colonel's parties made her quite dissipated.'
One bright summer day, his beaming face appeared at
Lawn with a peremptory invitation.  His nephew and
had newly married a friend of Albinia's girlhood, and was 
to pay his wedding visit. Too happy to keep his gues
himself, the Colonel had fixed the next Thursday for a fete,
wanted all the world to come to it-the Kendals, every o
them-if they could only sleep there-but Albinia brought
to confession that he had promised to lodge five people 
than the house would hold; and the aunts were at the
sonage, where nobody ventured to crowd their servants.
But there was a moon-and though Mr. Kendal would
allow that she was the harvest moon, the hospitable Co
dilated on her as if she had been bed, board, and lodging,
he did not find much difficulty in his persuasions.
Few invitations ever gave more dlight ; Alliniaapprea
a holiday to the utmost, and the whole family was happy
Sophy's chance of at length seeing Fairmead, and taking pa




<pb n="195"/>
l                 THE YOUNG STEP-OTHER         .      195
little gaiety. And if iMr. Kendal's expectations of pleasure
were less high, he submitted very well, smiled benignantly
at the felicity around him, and was not once seen to shudder.
Sarah Anne Drury had been invited to enliven grandmamma,
and every one augured a beautiful day and perfect enjoyment
The morning was beautiful, but alas! Sophy was hors de conbat,
far too unwell to think of making one of the party. She bore
the disappointment magnanimously, and even the pity. Every
one was sorry, and Gilbert wanted her to go and wait at Fair-
mead Parsonage for the chance of improving, promising to come
and fetch her for any part of the entertainment; and her father
told her that he had looked to her as his chief companion while
the gay people were taking their pleasure. No one was uncom-
fortably generous enough to offer to stay at home with her; but
Lucy suggested asking Genevieve to come and take care of her.
'Nay,' said Sophy, 'it would be much better if she were to
go in my stead.'
Gilbert and Lucy both uttered an exclamation; and Sophy
added, 'She would have so much more enjoyment than I could I
Oh, it would quite make up for my missing it !'
'My dear,' said grandmamma, 'you don't know what you
are talking of. It would be taking such a liberty.'
'There need be no scruples on that score,' said Albinia;
'the Colonel would only thank me if I brought him half
Bayford.'
'Then,' cried Sophy, 'you think we may ask her  Oh, I
should like to run up myself;'-and a look of congratulation
and gratitude passed between her and her brother.
'No, indeed, you must not; let me go,' said Lucy; 'I'll just
finish this cup of tea-'
'My dear, my dear,' interposed Mrs. Meadows, 'pray con-
sider. She is a very good little girl in her way, but it is only
giving her a taste for things out of her station.'
'Oh ! don't say that, dear grandmamma,' interposed Albinia;
one good festival does carry one so much better through days
of toil !'
'Ah, well I my dear, you will do as you think proper; but
considering who the poor child is, I should call it no kindneW'
to bring her forward in company.'
Something passed between the indignant Gilbert and Sophy
about French counts and marquises, but Lucy managed much
better. ' Dear me, grandmamma, nobody wishes to bring her
forward. She will only play with the children, and see the
fireworks, and no one will speak to her.'
Albinia averted further discussion till grandmamma haa
2




<pb n="196"/>
196            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
left the breakfast-table, when all four appealed with
voice to Mr. Kendal, who saw no objection; wber
Lucy ran off, while Albinia finished her arrangement
the well-being of grandmamma, Sophy, and Maurice, who
as difficult to manage as the fox, goose, and cabbage.
every turn she encountered Gilbert, touching up his toile
each glass, and seriously consulting her and Sophy upon
choice between lilac and lemon-coloured gloves, and upoa
bows of his fringed neck-tie.
'My dear Gilbert,' said Albinia, on the fifth anxious 
native, 'it is of no use. No living creature will be the 
and do what you will, you will never look half so well as
father.'
Gilbert flung aside, muttering something about 'fit to
seen,' but just then Lucy hurried in. ' Oh! mamma, she
go-she is very much obliged, but she can't go.'
'Can't ? she must,' cried Albinia and Gilbert together.
'She says you are very kind, but that she cannot. I
everything I could; I told her she should wear Sophy's m
mantle, or my second best polka.'
'No doubt you went and made a great favour of it,'
Gilbert.
'No, I assure you I did not; I persuaded her with all
might; I said mamma wished it, and we all wished it;
I am sure she would really have been very glad if she
have gone.'
'It can't be the school, it is holiday time,' said Gilbert. 
go and see what is the matter.'
' No, I will go,' said Albinia; 'I will ask the old ladi
luncheon here, and that will make her happy, and ma
easier for Sophy to get on with Sarah Anne Drury.'
Lucy had seen Genevieve alone; Albinia took her by 
before Madame Belmarch6, whose little black eyes sparkle
she assured Mrs. Kendal that the child merited that and 
other pleasure; and when G6nevieve attempted to whisper
jections, silenced her with an embrace, saying, Ah I my 1
where is your gratitude to Madame I Have no fears for
Your. pleasure will be ours for months to come.'
The liquid sweetness of G6nevieve's eyes spoke of no wani
gratitude, and with glee which she no longer strove to rep
she tripped away to equip herself, and Albinia heard her
young voice upstairs, singing away the burthen of some q
old French ditty.
Albinia found Gilbert and Sophy in disgrace with Lucy
having gathered the choicest flowers, which they were ea




<pb n="197"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                 197
making up into bouquets. Genevieve's was ready before she
arrived in the prettiest tremor of gratitude and anticipation,
and presented to her by Gilbert, whilst Sophy looked on, and
blushed crimson, face, neck, and all, as Gdnevieve smelt and
admired the white roses that had so cruelly been reft from
Lucy's beloved tree.
With every advantage of pretty features, good complexion,
and nice figure, the English Lucy, in her blue-and-white
checked silk, worked muslin mantle, and white chip bonnet
with blue ribbons, was eclipsed by the small swarthy French
girl, in that very old black silk dress, and white trimmed coarse
straw bonnet, just enlivened by little pink bows at the neck
and wrists. It had long been acknowledged that Gdnevieve
was unrivalled in the art of tying bows, and those pink ones
were paragons, redolent of all her own fresh sprightly archness
and refinement. Albinia herself was the best representative of
English good looks, and never had she been more brilliant, her
rich chestnut hair waving so prettily on the rounded contour of
her happy face, her fair cheek tinted with such a healthy fresh
bloom, her grey eyes laughing with merry softness, her whole
person so alert and elastic with exuberant life and enjoyment,
that grandmamma was as happy in watching her as if she had
been her own daughter, and stroked down the broad flounces of
her changeable silk, and admired her black lace, as if she felt
the whole family exalted by Mrs. Kendal's appearance.
It was a merry journey, through the meadows and corn-fields,
laughing in the summer sunshine; and in due time they saw
the flag upon Fairmead steeple, and Albinia nodded to curtsey-
ing old friends at the cottage doors. The lodge gate swung
open wide, and the well-known striped marquee was seen
among the trees in the distance, as they went up the carriage-
road; but at the little iron gate leading to the shrubbery there
was a halt; Mr. Ferrars called to the carriage to stop, and
opelled the door. At the same moment Albinia gave a cry of
wonder, and exclaimed, 'Why, Fred I is William here '
' No; at Montreal, but very well,' was the answer, with a
hearty shake of the hand.
'Edmund, it is Fred Ferrars,' said Albinia. ' Why, Maurice,
you never told us.'
' He took us by surprise yesterday.'
'Yes; I landed yesterday morning, went to the Family
Office, found Belraven was nowhere, and the aunts at Fairmead,
8nd so came on here,' explained Fred, as he finished shaking
anllds with all the party, and walked on beside Albinia. He
Was tall, fresh-coloured, a good deal like her, with a long fair




<pb n="198"/>
198            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
moustache, and light, handsome figure; and Lucy, th
rather disconcerted at G6nevieve being taken for one of t
selves, began eagerly to whisper her conviction that he was 
Belraven's brother, mamma's first cousin, captain in the 
Lancers, and aide-de-camp to General Ferrars.
It was the first meeting since an awkward parting.
only son of a foolish second marriage, and early left an orp
Frederick Ferrars had grown up under the good aunts' cha
somewhat neglected by his half-brother, by many years
senior. He was little older than Albinia, and a merry, ban
ing affection had always subsisted between them, till he 
begun to give it the air of something more than fiiends
Albinia was, however, of a nature to seek for something
depth and repose, on which to rely for support and ancho
Fred's vivacious disposition had never for a moment won
serious attachment; she was 'very fond of him,' but no mo
her heart was set on sharing her brother's life as a country 
tor. She went to Fairmead, Fred was carried off by the Gen
to Canada, and she Iresently heard of his hopeless attachme
to a lovely Yankee, whom he met on board the steamer. All t
was now cast behind the seven most eventful years of Albin
life ; and in the dignity of her matronhlod, she looked mo
than ever on 'poor Fred' as a boy, and was delighted to
him again, and to hear of her brother William.
A few steps brought them to the shade of the large ce l
tree, where was seated Winifred, and Mrs. Annesley was wi
her.  The greetings had hardly been exchanged before t
Colonel came upon them in all his glory, with his pretty i
bride niece on his arm, looking very like the Alice Percy of t
old times, when Fred used to tease the two girls.
Genevieve nas made heartily welcome, and Sophia's absen
deplored, and then the Colonel carried off the younger ones
the archery, giving his arm to the much-flattered Lucy, 
followed by Gilbert and Genevieve, with Willie and 
adhering to them closely, and their governess in sight.
Mr. Ferrars and Mr. Kendal fell into one of their discussione
and paced up and down the shady walk, while Albinia sat, in
the complete contentment, between Alice and Winifred, with
Fred Ferrars on the turf at their feet, living over again th
bygone days, laughing over ancient jokes, resuscitating past
scrapes, tracing the lot of old companions, or telling mischievous
anecdotes of each other, for the very purpose of being contra-
dicted. They were much too light-hearted to note the lapse of
time, till Maurice camne to take his wife home, thinking slie had
had fatigue enough. Mrs. Annesley went with her, and Albini%.




<pb n="199"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               1,9
on looking for her husband, was told that he had fallen in with
some old Indian acquaintances; and Charles Bury presently
came to find his wife, and conduct the party to luncheon. There
was no formal meal, but a perpetual refection laid out in the
dining-room, for relays of guests. Fred took care of Albinia,
and here they met Miss Ferrars, who had been with one of her
old friends, to whom she was delighted to exhibit her nephew
and niece in their prime of good looks.
' But I must go,' said Albinia; 'having found the provisions,
I must secure that Mr. Kendal and the children are not
famished.'
Fred came with her, and she turned down the long alley
leading to the archery-ground. He felt old times so far re-
newed as to resume their habits of confidence, and began, 'I
suppose the General has not told you what has brought me
home 1'
'He has not so much as told me you were coming.'
'Ay, ay, of course you know how he treats those things.'
'Olh-h !' said Albinia, perfectly understanding.
'But,' continued Frederick, eagerly, 'even he confesses that she
is the very sweetest- I mean,' as Albinia smiled at this evident
embellishment, 'even he has not a word of objection to make,
except the old story about married officers.'
' And who is she, Fred V'
' Oh, mamma, there you are !' and Lucy joined them as they
emerged on the bowling-green, where stood the two bright tar-
gets, and the groups of archers, whose shafts, for the most part,
flew far and wide.
'    Where are the rest, my dear ? are they shooting ?'
'Yes; Gilbert has been teaching G6nevieve-there, she is
shooting now.'
The little light figure stood in advance. Gilbert held her
arrows, and another gentleman appeared to be counselling her.
There seemed to be general exultation when one of her arrows
touched the white ring outside the target.
'That has been her best shot,' said Lucy. ' I am sure I would
not shoot in public unless I knew how !'
'Do you not like shooting 1' asked Captain Ferrars; and Lucy
smiled, and lost her discontented air.
' t hurts my fingers,' she said; ' and I have always so much to
do in the garden.'
Albinia asked if she had had anything to eat.
' Oh, yes; the Colonel asked Gilbert to carve in the tent there,
for tile children and governesses,' said Lucy; ' he and Genevieve
Were very busy there; but 1 found I was not of much use so, I




<pb n="200"/>
.200            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
came away with the Miss Bartons to look at the flown
now they are shooting, and I could not think what had 
of you.'
And Lucy bestowed her company on Albinia a
Captain, reducing him to dashing, disconnected talk, till
met Mr. Kendal, searching for them in the same fear tha
were starving, and anxious to introduce his wife to his
friends. When at the end of the path, Albinia looked
the Lancer had disappeared, and Lucy was walking b
father, trying to look serenely amused by a discussion l
annexation of the Punjaub.
The afternoon was spent in pleasant loitering, chiefly*
Miss Ferrars, who asked much after Sophy, lamented gi
over Winifred's delicate health, and was very anxious to
what could have brought Fred home, being much afraid i
some fresh foolish attachment.
Ominous notes were heard from the band, and the C
came to tell them that there was to be dancing till it was
enough for the fireworks, his little Alice had promised 
first country-dance. Fred Ferrars emerged again with a
laughing, half-imploring, 'For the sake of old times, Alu
We've been partners before !'
' You'll take care of Lucy,' said Albinia, turning to her 
but Mr. Winthrop had already taken pity on her, and Al
was led off by her cousin to her place in the fast length
rank. How she enjoyed it! She had cared little for 
balls after the first novelty, but these Fairmead dances on
turf had always had an Arcadian charm to her fancy,
were the more delightfil after so long an interval, inl
renewal of the old scene, and the recognition of so many f
faces.
With bounding step and laughing lips, she flew down'
middle, more exhilarated every moment, exchanging 
scraps of talk with her partner or bright fragments as
poussetted with pair after pair; and when the dance was
with glowing complexion and eyes still dancing, she took
arm, and heard the renewal of his broken story-the 
his Emily, the fairest of Canadians, whom even the G
could not dislike, though, thorough soldier as he was, he
fain have had all military men as devoid of encumbrance
himself, and thought an officer's wife one of the most misp
articles in the world. Poor Fred had been in love so 0
that he laboured under the great vexation of not being able
persuade any of his fiiends to regard his passion seriously,
Albinia was quite sisterly enough to believe him this time,




<pb n="201"/>
FrL-         THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                201
gie full sympathy to his hopes and fears. Far less wealth had
tallen to his lot than to that of his cousins, and his marriage
F   must depend on what his brother would ' do for him,' a point
on which he tried to be sanguine, and Albinia encouraged him
against probability, for Lord Belraven was never liberal towards
his- relations, and had lately married an expensive wife, with
whom he lived chiefly abroad.
This topic was not exhausted when Fred fell a prey to the
Colonel, who insisted on his dancing again, and Albinia telling
him to do his duty, he turned towards a group that had coalesced
round Miss Ferrars, consisting of Lucy, Gilbert, Genevieve, and
the children from the parsonage, and at once bore off the little
Frenchwoman, leaving more than one countenance blank. Lucy
and Willie did their best for mutual consolation, while Albinia
undertook to preside over her niece and a still smaller partner
in red velvet, in a quadrille. It was amusing to watch the
puzzled downright motions of the sturdy little bluff King Hal,
and the earnest precision of the prim little damsel, and Albinia
hovering round, now handing one, now pointing to the other,
keeping lightly out of every one's way, and far more playful
than either of the small performers in this solemn undertaking.
As it concluded she found that Mr. Kendal had been watching
her, with much entertainment, and she was glad to take his
arm, and assure herself that he had not been miserable, but had
been down to the parsonage, where he had read the newspaper
in peace, and had enjoyed a cup of tea in quiet with Winifred
and Mrs. Annesley.
The dancing had been transferred to the tent, which presented
a very pretty scene from without, looking through the drooping
festoons of evergreens at the lamps and the figures flitting
to and fro in their measured movements, while the shrubs and
dark foliage of the trees fell into gloom around; and above,
the sky assumed the deep tranquil blue of night, the pale bright
stars shining out one by one.  The Kendals were alone in the
terrace, far enough from the gay tumult to be sensible of the
contrast.
'How beautiful!' said Albinia: 'it is like a poem.'
'I was just thinking so,' he answered.
'This is the best part of all,' she said, feeling, though hardly
expressing to herself the repose of his lofty, silent serenity,
standing aloof from gaiety and noise. She could have compared
him and her lively cousin to the evening stillness contrasted
with the mirthful scene in the tent; and though her nature
seemed to belong to the busy world, her best enjoyment lay
with what calmed and raised her above herself; and she was




<pb n="202"/>
202             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
perfectly happy, standing still with her arm upon that of
silent husband.
'These things are well imagined,' said he. 'The freedom
absence of formality give space for being alone and quiet.'
Yes,' said Albinia, saucily; 'when that is what you go
society for.'
You have me there,' he said, smiling; 'but I must own
much I enjoyed coming back from the parsonage by m
I am glad we brought that little Genevieve; she seems to
so perfectly in her element. I saw her amusing a set of 
children in the prettiest, most animated way; and afterw
when the young people were playing at some game, her ges
were so sprightly and graceful, that no one could look at
English girls beside her.  Indeed I think she was m
quite a sensation; your cousin seemed to admire her
much. If she were but in another station, she would shine
where.'
'How much you have seen, Edmund !'
'I have been a spectator, you an actor,' he said, smiling.
Her quiescence did not long continue, for the poor pe
had begun to assemble on the gravel road before the front da
to see the fireworks, and she hurried away to renew
acquaintance with her village friends, guessing at them in
dark, asking after old mothers and daughters at service, inq
ing the names of new babies, and whether the old ones 
at school, and excusing herself for having become 'quite
stranger.'
In the midst-whish-hiss, with steady swiftness, up sho
the dark purple air the first rocket, bursting and scattering
rain of stars. There was an audible gasp in the surroun
homely world, a few little cries, and a big boy clutched t
hold of her arm, saying, 'I be afeard.' She was explai
away his alarms, when she heard her brother's voice, and fo
her arm drawn into his.
'Here you are, then,' he said; 'I thought I heard your vo
'Oh ! Maurice, I have hardly seen you. Let us have a
quiet turn in the park together.'
He resisted, saying, 'I don't approve of parents and
dians losing themselves. What have you done with all y
children I'
' What have you done with yours T retorted she.
'I left Willie and Mary at the window with their governes
I came to see that these other children of mine were orderly.'
' Most proper, prudential, and exemplary Maurice !' his s
laughed. 'Now I have an equally hearty belief in my child
0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.




<pb n="203"/>
r                   THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                203
being somewhere, sure to turn up when wanted. Come, I want
to get out from the trees to look for Colonel Bury's harvest
]noon, for I believe she is an imposition.'
'No, I'm not comiing. You don't understand your duties.
Your young ladies ought always to know where to find you, an1
you where to find theul.'
'Oh I Maurice, what must you have suffered before you
imported Winifred to chaperon me r
, You are in so mad a mood that I shall attempt only one
moral maxim, and that is, that no one should set up for a
chaperon, till she has retired from business on her own ac-
count.'
That's a stroke at my dancing with poor Fred, but it was
his only chance of speaking to me.'
'Not particularly at the dancing.'
' Well, then-'
'You'll see, by-and-bye. It was not your fault if those girls
were not in all sorts of predicaments.'
'I believe you think life is made up of predicaments. And
I want to hear whether William has written to you anything
about poor Fred.'
'Only that he is more mad than ever, and that he let him
go, thinking that there is no chance of Belraven helping him,
but that it may wear itself out on the journey.'
A revolving circle shedding festoons of purple and crimson
jets of fire made all their talk interjectional, and they had by
this time reached the terrace, where all the company were
assembled, the open windows at regular intervals   casting
bewildering lights on the heads and shoulders in front of them.
Then out burst a grand wheat-sheaf of yellow flame with
crimson ears and beards, by whose light Albinia recognised
Gilbert standing close to her in the shadow, and asked him
where the rest where.'
' I can't tell; Lucy and my father were here just now.'
'Are you feeling the chill, Gilbert ' asked Albinia, stru..k
by something in his tone.   'You had better look from the
window.'
He neither moved nor made answer, but a great illumination
of Colonel Bury's coat-of-arms, with Roman candles and Chinese
trees at the four corners, engrossed every eye, and flashing on
every face, enabled Albinia to join MIr. Kendal, who was with
Lucy and Miss Ferrars. No one knew where Genevieve was,
but Albinia was confident that she could take good care of
her'self, and was not too uneasy to enjoy the grand representas
tion of Windsor Castle, and the finale of interlaced ciphers




<pb n="204"/>
204            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
amidst a multitude of little fretful sputtering tongues of 
Then it was, amid good nights, donning of shawls, and aa
ing of carriages, that Captain Ferrars and Miss Duraut 
their appearance together, having been 'looking everywhe
Mrs. Kendal,' and it was not in the nature of a brother n
look a little arch, though Albinia returned him as resolute
satisfied a glance as could express ' Well, what of that ?'
In consideration of the night air, Mr. Kendal put Gil
inside the carriage, and mounted the box, to revel inl
pleasures of silence. The four within talked incessantly
compared adventures.  Lucy had been gratified by
patronized by Miss Ferrars, and likewise had much to
the smaller fry, and went into raptures about many a '
little thing,' none of whom would, however, stand a compa
with Maurice; Gilbert was critical upon every one's beauty;
Genevieve was more animated than all, telling anecdotes
great piquancy, and rehearsing the comical Yankee stories.
had heard from Captain Ferrars. She had enjoyed with
zest and intensity of a peculiarly congenial temperament,
she seemed not to be able to cease from working off her ex
ment in repetitions of her thanks, and in discussing the end
delights the day had afforded.
But the day had begun early, and the way was long,
remarks became scanty, and answers were brief and wentast
and Albinia thought she was travelling for ever to Mont
when she was startled by a pettish exclamation from Lucy; 
that all I It was not worth while to wake me only to see
noon.'
'I beg your pardon,' said G6nevieve, 'but I thought 
Kendal wished to see it rise.'
'Thank you, G6nevieve,' said Albinia, opening her le
eyes; 'she is as little worth seeing as a moon can well be
waning moon does well to keel) untimely hours.' 
'Why do you think she is so much more beautiful in
crescent, Mrs. Kendal ' said Genevieve, in the most wae
manner.
'I'm sure I don't know,' said Albinia, subsiding into
corner.
'Is it from the situation of the mountains in the moon
continued the pertinacious damsel.
'In Africa ?' said Albinia, well.nigh asleep; but G6neviev
laugh roused her again, partly because she thought it 
mannerly than accorded with the girl's usual politeness.
more sleep was allowed her; an astronomical passion seemed
have possessed the young lady, and she dashed into the ti




<pb n="205"/>
r              1-THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.             205
and the causes of the harvest-moon, and volcanoes, ai-d thunder-
bolts, and Lord Rosse's telescope, forcing her tired friend to
reply by direct appeals, till Albinia almost wished her in the
moon herself; and was rejoiced when in the dim greyness of
the early summer dawn, the carriage drew up at Madame Bel-
march6's house. As the light from the weary maid's candle
flashed on Geneviave's face, it revealed such a glow of deep
crimson on each brown cheek, that Albinia perceived that the
excitement must have been almost fever, and went to bed
speculating on the strange effects of a touch of gaiety on the
hereditary French nature, startling her at once from her graceful
propriety and humility of demeanour, into such extraordinary
obtrusive talkativeness.
She heard more the next morning that vexed her. Lucy
was seriously of opinion that Geneviave had not been sufficiently
retiring. She herself had heedfully kept under the wing of
Mary's governess, mamma, or Miss Ferrars, and nobody had
paid her any particular attention; but G6neviave had been with
Gilbert half the day, had had all the gentlemen round her at
the archery and in the games, had no end of partners in the
dances, and had walked about in the dark with Captain Ferrars.
Lucy was sure she was taken for her sister, and whenever she
had told people tIhe truth, they had said how pretty she was.
'You are jealous, Lucy,' Sophy said.
Lucy protested that it was quite the reverse. She was glad
poor little Jenny should meet with any notice; there was no
cause for jealousy of her, and she threw back her head in
conscious beauty; ' only she was sorry for Jenny, for they were
quite turning her head, and laughing at her all the time.'
Albinia's candour burst out as usual, 'Say no more about it,
my dear; it was a mistake from beginning to end. I was too
much taken up with my own diversion to attend to you, and
now you are punishing me for it. I left you to take care of
yourselves, and exposed poor little GeneviBve to unkind
remarks.'
'I don't know what I said,' began Lucy. ' I don't mean to
blame her; it was just as she always is with Gilbert, so very
French.'
That word settled it-Lucy pronounced it with ineffable
pity and contempt-she was far less able to forgive another for
being attractive, than for trying to attract.
Sophy looked excessively hurt and grieved, and in private
asked her step-mother what she thought of C;G evieve's behaviour.
' My dear, I cannot tell; I think she was off her guard
'ith excitement; but all was very new to her, and there wav




<pb n="206"/>
206(           THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
every excuse. I was too happy to be wise, so no wond
was.'
' And do you think Captain Ferrars was laughing at hI
wish you would tell her, mamma. Gilbert says he is af
flourishing officer in moustaches, who, he is sure, flirts wit
breaks the heart of every girl he meets. If he is right, m
it would cure G6nevieve to tell her so, and you would not 
it, though he is your cousin.'
'Poor Fred !' said Albinia. 'I am sorry Gilbert con
such a notion. But G6nevieve's heart is too sensible to bre
that way, even if Fred wished it, and I can acquit him of
savage intentions. I never should have seen any harm 
that G6nevieve did last night if she had not talked us to 
coming home ! Still I think she was off her balance, 
own I am disappointed. But we don't know what it is
born French 1'
CHAPTER XVL
'M\RS. KENDAL, dear Madame, a great favour, could
IVI spare me a few moments V'
A blushing face was raised with such an expression of con
timidity, that Albinia felt sure that the poor little Frenchwo
had recovered from her brief intoxication, and wanted to P
gize and be comforted, so she said kin'dly,
'I was wishing to see you, my dear; I was afraid the
had been too much for you; I was certain you were feveri
'Ah ! you were so good to make excuses for me. I 
ashamed when I tlink how tedious, how disagreeable I 
have been. It was why I wished to speak to you.'
'Never mind apologies, my dear; I have felt and done
like nanly a time-it is the worst of enjoying oneself.'
'Oh! that was not all-I could not help it-enjoyme
no!' stammered G6nevieve. 'If you would be kind enoug
come this way.'
She opened her grandmother's back gate, the entrance
slip of garden smothered in laurels, and led the way to a 
green arbour, containing a round table, transformed by 
hangings into what the embroidered inscription called ' Aut
l'Amour filial et maternel,' bearing a plaster vase full of 
flowers; but ere Albinia had time to admire this achievemD
of French sentiment, Genevieve exclaimed, clasping her h
'Oh, madame, pardon me, you who are so good I You will




<pb n="207"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTIIER.              207
no one, you will bring on him no trouble, but you will tell him
it is too foolish-you will give him back his billet, and forbid
him ever to send another.'
Spite of the confidence about Emily, spite of all unreason,
such was the family opinion of Fred's propensity to fall in
love, that Albinia's first suspicion liglhted upon him ; but as her
eye fell on the pink envelope the handwriting concerned her
even more nearly.
' Gilbert !' she cried. ' My dear, what ihi this  Do you wish
me to read it {'
' Yes; for I cannot.' G6nevieve turned away, as in his best
hand, and bad it was, Albinia read the commencement-
(' y hope, my joy, my Genevieve !'
In mute astonishment Albinia looked up, and met G6ne-
vieve's eyes. ' Oh, madame, you are displeased with me 1' she
cried in despair, misinterpreting the look; 'but indeed I could
not help it.'
' y dear child,' said Albinia, affectionately putting her arm
round her waist, and drawing her down on the seat beside her,
'indeed I am not displeased with you; you are doing the very
best thing possible by us all. Think I am your sister, and
tell ne what is the meaning of all this, and then I will try to
help you.'
'Oh, madame, you are too good,' said Genevieve, weeping; and
kindly holding the trembling hand, Albinia finished the letter,
herself. 'Silly boy ! Gdnevieve, dear girl, you must set my mind
at rest; this is too childish-this is not the kind of thing that
would touch your affections, T am sure.'
'Oh / pour cela non,' said G6neviave. ' Oh I no; I am grateful
to Mr. Gilbert Kendal, for, even as a little boy, he was always
kind to me; but for the rest-he is so young, madame, even if
I could forget-'
'I see,' said Albinia. 'I am sure that you are much too
good and sensible at your age to waste a moment's thought or
pain on such a foolish boy, as he certainly is, Genevieve, though
hot so foolish in liking you, whatever he may be in the way of
expressing it. Though of course-' Albinia had floundered
into a dreadful bewilderment between her sense of Gdnevieve's
Inerits and of the incompatibility of their station, and she
plunged out by asking, ' And how long has this been going on T
G6eeviave hesitated. 'To speak the truth, madame, I have
long seen that, like many other youths, he would be-very
attentive if one were not guarded; but I had known him so
long, that perhaps I did noL soon enough begin to treat him en
Jeune womnme.'




<pb n="208"/>
208            THE YOUNG STEP MOTHER
' And this is his first letter ?'
' Oh I yes, madame.'
* He complains that you will not hear him ? Do youd
to tell me if anything had passed previously {'
'Thursday,' was slightly whispered.
'Thursday ! ah ! now I begin to understand the cause of
being suddenly moon-struck.'
'Ah ! madame, pardon me !'
'I see-it was the only way to avoid a tete-&t9te r
Albinia. 'Well done, Genevieve. What had he beensa
to you, my dear T'
Poor G6nevieve cast about for a word, and finally faltered
'Des sottises, Madame.'
'That I can well believe,' said Albinia. ' Well, my de
'I think,' pursued Geneviave, ' that he was vexed beca
would not let him absorb me exclusively at Fairmead; and
to reproach me, and protest-'
'And like a wise woman you waked the sleeping dragon,'
Albinia. 'Was this all ''
'No, madame; so little had passed, that I hoped it was
the excitement, and that he would forget; but on Saturday
met me in the flagged path, and oh ! he said a great deal, th
I did my best to convince him that he could only make hi
-be laughed at.   I hoped even then that he was sien
and that I need not mention it, but I see he has been wat
me, and I dare not go out alone lest I should meet him.
called this morning, and not seeing me left this note.'
'Do your grandmother and aunt know I'
'Oh, no ! I would far rather not tell them. Need I t
madame, surely you can speak to him, and no one need 
hear of it ?' implored G6neviave. ' You have promised me
no one shall be told !' 
' No one shall, my dear. I hope soon to tell you that he
heartily ashamed of having teased you. No one need be asha
of thinking you very dear and good-you can't help 
loveable, but Master Gibbie has no right to tell you so,
we'll put an end to it. He will soon be in India out of y
way. Good-bye !'
Albinia kissed the confused and blushing maiden, and w
away, provoked, yet diverted.
She found Gilbert alone, and was not slow in coming
the point, endeavouring to model her treatment on that
her brother, the General, towards his aide de-camp in the
predicaments.
'Gilbert, I want to speak to you. I am afraid you 




<pb n="209"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               209
been making yourself troublesome to Miss Durant.   You
are old enough to know better than to write such a note as
this.'
He was all one blush, made an inarticulate exclamation, and
burst out, '.That abominable treacherous old wooden doll of a
mademoiselle.'
, No, Miss Belmarch6 knows nothing of it. No one ever shall
if you will promise to drive this nonsense out of your head.'
Nonsense I Mrs. Kendal I' with a gesture of misery.
' Gilbert, you are making yourself absurd.'
He turned about, and would have marched out of the room,
but she pursued him. ' You must listen to me. It is not fit
that you should carry on this silly importunity. It is exceed-
ingly distressing to her, and might lead to very unpleasant and
hurtful remarks.' Seeing him look sullen, she took breath,
and considered.  'She came to me in great trouble, and
begged me to restore your letter, and tell you never to repeat
the liberty.'
He struck his hand on his brow, crying vehemently, ' Cruel
girl ! She little knows me-you little know me, if you think I
am to be silenced thus. I tell you I will never cease I I am
not bound by your pride, which has sneered down and crushed
the loveliest-'
'Not mine,' said Albinia, disconcerted at his unexpected
violence.
'Yes  he exclaimed. 'I know you could patronize! but
a step beyond, and it is all the same with you as with the rest-
you despise the jewel without the setting.'
'No,' said Albinia, 'so far from depreciating her, I want to
convince you that it is an insult to pursue her in this ridiculous
underhand way.'
'You do me no justice,' said Gilbert loftily; 'you little un-
derstand what you are pleased to make game of;' and with one
of his sudden alternations, he dropped into a chair, calling him-
self the most miserable fellow in the world, unpitied where he
would gladly offer his life, and his tenderest feelings derided,
and he was so nearly ready to cry, that Albinia pitied him, and
said, 'I'll laugh no more if I can help it, Gibbie, but indeed
you are too young for all this misery to be real. I don't
mean that you are pretending, but only that this is your own
fancy.'
' Fancy r said the boy solemnly. 'The happiness of my life
i9 at stake. She shall be the sharer of all that is mine, the
lnoment my property is in my own bhids.'
' And do you think so high-minded a girl would listen toyon,
1,




<pb n="210"/>
210            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
and take advantage of a fancy in a boy so much younger, 
a different class I'
'It would be ecstasy to raise her, and lay all at her f
'So it might, if it were worthy of her to accept it. Gi
if you knew what love is, you would never wish her to 1
herself by encouraging you now. She would be called ar
designing-'
'If she loved me-' he said disconsolately.
'I wish I could bring you to see how unlikely it is t
sensible, superior woman could really attach herself to a
lad. An unprincipled person might pretend it for the s
your property-a silly one might like you because you
good-looking  and well-mannered; but neither would
Genevieve.'
' There is no use in saying any more,' he said, rising in offe
dignity.
'I cannot let you go till you have given me your word l
to obtrude your folly on Miss Durant again.'
' Have you anything else to ask me ' cried Gilbert in a
dramatic tone.
' Yes, how would you like your father to know of this 1
is her secret, and I shall keep it, unless you are so selfish as
continue the pursuit, and if so, I must have recourse to
authority.'
'Oh! Mrs. Kendal,' he said, actually weeping, 'you
always pitied me hitherto.'
'A man should not ask for pity,' said Albinia; 'but IL
sorry for you, for she is an admirable person, and I see you
very unhappy; but I will do all I can to help you, and you
get over it, if you are reasonable. Now understand me, I
and must protect Genevieve, and I shall appeal to your fa
unless you promise me to desist from this persecution.'
The debate might have been endless, if Mr. Kendal had
been heard coming in. ' You promise ' she said. ' Yes,'
the faint reply, in nervous terror of immediate reference to
father; and they hurried different ways, trying to look un
cerned.
'Never mind,' said Albinia to herself. 'Was not Fred q`
as bad about me, and look at him now I Yes, Gilbert must
to India, it will cure him; or if it should not, his affection
be respectable, and worth consideration. If he were but o 1
and this were the genuine article, I would fight for him, bu
And she sat down to write a loving note to G6nevicve.
sanguine disposition made her trus:, that all would blow o
but her experience of the cheerful buoyant Ferrars tem




<pb n="211"/>
Tr ITHE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                         211
ment was no guide to the morbid Kendal disposition; Gilbert
lay on the grass limp and doleful till the fall of the dew, when
be betook himself to a sofa; and in the morning turned up his
eyes reproachfully at her instead of eating his breakfast.
About eleven o'clock the Fairmead pony-carriage stopped at
the door, containing Mr. Ferrars, the Captain, Aunt Gertrude,
and little Willie. Albinia, her husband, and Lucy, were soon
in the drawing-room welcoming them; and Lucy fetched her
little brother, who had been vociferous for three days about
Cousin Fred, the real soldier, but now, struck with awe at the
mighty personage, stood by his mamma, profoundly silent, and
staring. He was ungracious to his aunt, and still more so to
Willie, the latter of whom was despatched under Lucy's charge
to find Gilbert, but they came back unsuccessful.  Nor did
Sophy make her appearance; she was reported to be reading to
grandmamma-Mrs. Meadows preferred to Miss Ferrars ! there
was more in this than Albinia could make out, and she sat
uneasily till she could exchange a few words with Lucy. ' My
dear, what is become of the other two i'
'I am sure I don't know what is the matter with them,' said
Lucy. ' Gilbert is gone out-nobody knows where-and when
I told Sophy who was here, she said Captain Ferrars was an
empty-headed coxcomb, and she did not want to see him !'
'Oh! the geese!' murmured Albinia to herself, till the
comical suspicion crossed her mind that Gilbert was jealous, and
that Sophy was afraid of falling a victim to the redoubtable
lady killer.
Luncheon-time produced Sophy, grave and silent, but no
Gilbert, and Mr. Kendal, receiving no satisfactory account of
his absence, said, ' Very strange,' and looked annoyed.
Captain Ferrars seemed to have expected to see his bright
little partner of Thursday, for he inquired for her, and Willie
imparted the information that Fred had taken her for Sophy
all the time ! Fred laughed, and owned it, but asked if she
were not really the governess?  'A governess,' said Albinia,
'but not ours;' and an explanation followed, during which
Sophy blushed violently, and held up her head as if she had an
iron bar in her neck.
' A lity,' said the Lancer, when he had heard who she was,
and under his moustache he murmured to Albinia, 'She is rather
in Emily's style.'
'Oh, Fred,' thought Albinia, 'after all, it may be lucky that
you aren't going to stay here !'
When Ali)inia was alone with her brother, she could not
help saying, ' Maurice, you were right to scold me; I reproached
P2




<pb n="212"/>
212              THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
you with thinking life made up of predicaments. I think
is made of blunders !'
' Ah ! I saw you were harassed to-day,' said her brother 
'Whenever one is happy, one does something wrong r' 
'I guess-'
'You are generous not to say you warned me monthsl
Mind, it is no fault of hers, she is belaving beautifully;
oh ! the absurdity, and the worst of it is, I have promised
to tell Edmund.'
'Then don't tell me. You have a judgment quite good 
for use.'
' No, I have not.  I have only sense, and that only serv
for what other people ought to do.'
'Then ask Albinia what Mrs. Kendal ought to do.'
Gilbert came in soon after their departure, with an odd, d
velled, abstracted look, and muttering something inaudible
not knowing the time. His depression absolutely courted n
but as a slight cough would at any time reduce him to d
le obtained no particular observation, except from Sophy,.
made much of him, flushed at G6nevieve's name, and 1
reproachful, that it was evident that she was his confid
Several times did Albinia try to lead her to enter on
subject, but she set up her screen of silence.  It was
pointing, for Albinia had believed better things of her
and hardly made allowance for the different aspect of the l
sorrows of seventeen, viewed fiom     fifteen or twenty-
vexatious, too, to be treated with dry reserve, and pro
viewed as a rock in the course of true love; and provoki
see perpetual tete-a-tetes that could hardly fail to fill So
romantic head with folly.
At the end of another week, Albinia received the f
ing note:-
'Dear and most kind Madame,
' I would not trouble you again, but this is the third within
days. I returned the two former ones to himself, but he continu
write. May I ask your permission to speak to my relatives, for I.
that I ought to hide this no longer from them, and that we must take
measures for ending it. He does me the honour to wait near the h
and I never dare go out, since-for I will confess all to you, madam
met me by the river on Monday. I am beginning to fear that his as
ties have been observed, and I should be much obliged if you would tell
how to act. Your kind perseverance in your goodness towards me is
greatest comfort, and I hope that you will still continue it, for indeed 
most unwillingly that I am a cause of perplexity and vexation to
Entreating your pardon,
'Your most faithful and obliged servant,
' GC6NVIVE CELESTE DURAb  'J




<pb n="213"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTIIER.               213
What was to be done ?  That broken pledge overpowered
Albinia with a personal sense of shame, and though it set her
free to tell all to her husband, she shrank from provoking his
stern displeasure towards his son, and feared he might involve
Genevieve in his anger. She dashed off a note to her poor
little friend, telling her to do as she thought fit by her aunt
and grandmother, and then sought another interview with the
reluctant Gilbert, to whom she returned the letter, saying,' Oh,
Gilbert, at least I thought you would keep your word.'
'I think,' he said, angrily, trying for dignity, though be-
wrayed by his restless eyes and hands-' I think it is too
much to accuse me of-of-when I never said-    What word
did I ever give '
'You promised never to persecute her again.'
'There may be two opinions as to what persecution means'
said Gilbert.
'I little thought of subterfuges. I trusted yo.'
'Mrs. Kendal! hear me,' he passionately cried. ' You knew
not the misery you imposed. To live so near, and not a word,
not a look! I bore it as long as I could; but when Sophy
would not so much as take one message, human nature could
not endure.'
' Well, if you cannot restrain yourself like a rational creature,
some means must be taken to free Miss Durant from a pursuit
so injurious and disagreeable to her.'
'Ay,' he cried, ' you have filled her with your own prejudices,
and inspired her with such a dread of the hateful fences of society,
that she does not dare to confess-'
'For shame, Gilbert, you are accusing her of acting a part.'
'No !' he exclaimed, 'all I say is, that she has been so thrust
down and forced back, that she cannot venture to avow her
feelings even to herself !'
' Oh !' said Albinia, ' you conceited person !'
'Well !' cried the boy, so much nettled by her sarcasm that
he did not know what he said, ' I think-considering-con-
sidering our situations, I might he worth her consideration !'
'Who put tl:at in your head ?' asked Albinia. 'You are
too much a gentleman for it to have come there of its own
accord.'
He blushed excessively, and retracted. ' No, no ! I did not
mean that ! No, I only mean I have no fair play-she will
not even think. Oh! if I had but been born in the same
station of life !'
Gillert making entreclhats with a little fiddle! It had nearly
OVerllrown her gravity, and she nmade no direct answer, only




<pb n="214"/>
214            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
saying, ' Well, Gilbert, these talks are useless. I only t
it right to give you notice that you have released me fr
engagement not to make your father aware of your folly.'
He went into an agony of entreaties, and proffers of p
but no more treaties of secrecy could he obtain; she would
say that she should not speak immediately, she should wa
see how things turned out. By which she meant, how 
might be hoped that he would be safe in the Calcutta
where she heartily wished him.
She sought a conference with G6nevieve, and took her
walking in the meadows, for the poor child really needed o
and exercise; the fear of Gilbert had made her imprison 
within the little garden, till she looked sallow and worn.t
said that her grandmother and aunt had decided that she 
go in a couple of days to the Concent at Hadminster, to re
there till Mr. Gilbert went to India-the superior was
friend of her aunt, and Genevieve had often been there
knew all the nuns.
Albinia was startled by this project. ' My dear, I had
rather send you to stay at my brother's, or-anywhere.
you sure you are not running into temptation V'
'Not of that kind,' said G6nevieve. 'The priest, Mr. 0'
is a good-natured old gentleman, not in the least dispo
trouble himself about my conversion.'
'And the sisters ?'
'Good old ladies, they have always been very kind toi
and petted me exceedingly when I was a little child; b   H
the rest-' still seeing Alhinia's anxious look--' Oh ! they
not think of it; I don't believe they could argue; they areI
like the new-fashioned Roman Catholics of whom you,
thinking, madame.'
'And are there no enthusiastic young novices ''
'I should think no one would ever be a novice there,' 
Genevieve.
'You seem to be bent on destroying all the romance:
convents, G6nevieve r
'I never thought of anything romantic connected with
reverend mothers,' rejoined Genevieve; 'and yet whe
recollect how they came to Hadminster, I think you will
interested. You know the family at Hadmiuster Hall in
last century were Roman Catholics, and a daughter
professed at a convent in France. At the time of the re
tion, her brother, the esquire, wrote to offer her an asylumi
his house. The day of her arrival was fixed-behold ! a s
coach draws up to the door-black veils inside -black 




<pb n="215"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                 215
clustered on the roof-a black veil beside the coachman on tlhe
box -eighteen nuns alight, and the poor old infirm abbess is
lifted out. They had not even figured to themselves that the
invitation could be to one without the whole sisterhood '
' And what did the esquire do with the good ladies '
' He took them as a gift from Providence; he raised a sub-
ecription among his friends, and they were lodged in the house
at Hadminster, where something like a sisterhood had striven
to exist ever since the days of James II.'
' Are any of these sisters living still '
'Only poor old Mother Therese, who was a little pension-
naire when they came, and now is blind, and never quits her
bed. There are only seven sisters at present, and none of them
are less than five-and-forty.'
'And what shall you do there, G6nevieve I'
'If they have any pupils from the town, perhaps I may help
to teach them French. And I shall have plenty of time for my
music. Oh I madame, would you lend me a little of your music
to copy V'
'With all my heart. Any books '
'Oh ! that would be the greatest kindness of all I And if it
were not presuming too much, if madame would let me take the
pattern of that beautiful point lace that she sometimes wears in
the evening, then I should make myself welcome !'
' And put out your eyes, my dear I But you may turn out
my whole lace-drawer if you think anything there will be a
pleasure to the old ladies.'
' Ah ! you do not guess the pleasure, madame. Needlework
and embroidery is their excitement and delight.  They will
ask me closely about all I have seen and done for months
past, and the history of the day at Fairmead will be a f6te in
itself.'
'Well my dear, it is very right of you; and I do feel very
thankful to you for treating the matter thus. Pray tell your
grandmamma and aunt to pardon the sad revolution we
have made in their comfort, and that I hope it will soon be
over !'
Genevieve took no leave. Albinia sent her a goodly parcel
of books and work-patterns, and sle returned an affectionate
note; but did not attempt to see Lucy and Sophy.
The next Indian mail brought the expected letter, giving an
exact account of the acquirements and habits that would be
required of Gilbert, with a promise of a home where he would
be treated as a son, and of admission to the firm after due pro-
bation. The letter was so sensible and affectionate, that Mt




<pb n="216"/>
216            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
Kendal congratulated his son upon such an advantageousq
in life.
Gilbert made slight reply, but the next morning
sought Albinia out, and with some hesitation began to tell
that Gilbert was very anxious that she would intercede 
papa not to send him to Calcutta.
' You now, Sophy ' cried Albinia. 'You who used to th
nothing equal to India !'
'I wish it were I,' said Sophy; 'but you know--'
'Well,' said Albinia, coldly.
Sophy was too shy to begin on that tack, and dashed off
another.
'Oh, mamma, he is so wretched. He can't bear to th
papa, but he says it would break his heart to go so far aw
and that he knows it would kill him to be confined to a d
in that climate.'
' You know papa thinks that nothing would confirm
health so much as a few years without an English winter.'
'One's own instinct-' began Solhy; then breaking of,
added, 'Mamma, you never were for the bank.'
' I used not to see the expediency, and I did not like
parting; but now I understand your father's wishes, and
sort of allegiance he feels towards India, so that Gilbert's
luctance will be a great mortification to him.' 
' So it will,' said Sophy, mournfully; ' I am sure it is to
I always looked forward to Gilbert's going to Talloon,
seeing the dear old bearer, and taking all my presents there
but you see, of course, mamma, he cannot bear to go-'
'Sophy, dear,' said Albinia, 'you have been thinking me
very hard-hearted woman this last month. I have been lo
ing to have it out.'
' Not hard-hearted,' said Sophy, looking down; ' only I 
always thought you different from other people.'
'And you considered that I was worldly, and not roman
enough. Is that it, Sophy I'
'I thought you knew how to value her for herself, so go4
and so admirable-a lady in everything-with such perf
manners   I thought you would have been pleased and pro
that Gilbert's choice was so much nobler than beauty, or ran
or fashion could make it,' said Sophy, growing enthusiastic al
she went on.
'Well, my dear, perhaps I am.'
'But, mamma, you have (one all you could to separate them 
you have shut Genevieve up in a convent, and you want to
banish him.'




<pb n="217"/>
rK *THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                               217
' It sounds very grand, and worthy of a cruel step-dame,' said
Albinia; 'but, my dear, though I do think Geneviave in her-
self an admirable creature, worthy of any one's love, what am I
to think of the way Gilbert has taken to show his admiration ?'
And is it not very hard,' cried Sophy, ' that even you, who
own all her excellences, should turn against him, and give ir.
to all this miserable conventionality, that wants riches and
station, and trumpery worldly things, and crushes down true
love in two young hearts I'
' Sophy dear, 1 am afraid the love is not proved to he true
in the one heart, and I am sure there is none in the other !'
' Mamma ! 'Tis her self-command-'
'Nonsense I His attentions are nothing but distress to her I
Sensible grown-up young women are not apt to be flattered by
importunity from silly boys. Has he told you otherwise '
' le thinks-he hopes, at least-and I am sure-it is all
stifled by her sense of duty, and fear of offending you, or appear-
ing mercenary.'
'All delusion ' said Alhinia; 'there's not a spark of con-
sciousness about her ! I see you don't like to believe it, but it
is my great comfort. Think how she would suffer if she did love
him ! Nay, think, before you are angry with me for not pro-
moting it, how it would bring them into trouble and disgrace
with all the world, even if your father consented. Have you
once thought how it would appear to him '
'You can persuade papa to anything !'
'Sophy ! you ought to know your father better than to say
that !' cried Albinia, as if it had been disrespect to him.
'Then you think he would never allow it!    You really
think that such a creature as Genevieve, as perfect a lady as
ever existed, must always be a victim to these hateful rules
about station.'
'No,' said Albinia, 'certainly not; but if she were in the
very same rank, if all else were suitable, Gilbert's age would
make the pursuit ridiculous.'
'Only three years younger,' sighed Sophy. 'But if they
were the same age ? Do you mean that no one ever ought to
marry, if they love ever so much, where the station is diffe-
rent '
'No, but that they must not do so lightly, hut try the love
first to see whether it be worth the sacrifice. If an attachment
last through many years of adverse circumstances, I think the
happiness of the people has been shown to depend on each
other; but I dont think it safe to disregard disparities till
there has been some test that the love is the right stuff, or else




<pb n="218"/>
218            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
they may produce ill-temper, regrets, and unhappiness, all
rest of their lives.'
' Tf Gilbert went on for years, mamma I'
'I did not say that, Sophy.'
'Suppose,' continued the eager girl, ' he went out to Cal
and worked these five years, and was made a partner. 
he would be two-and-twenty, nobody could call him too yo
and he would come home, and ask papa's consent, and you-.J
'I should call that constancy,' said Albinia. 
' And he would take her out to Calcutta, and have no D
and Osborns to bother her   Oh ! it would be beautiful l
would watch over her while he was gone ! I'll go and tell hi
' Stop, Sophy, not from me-that would never do. I d
think papa would think twenty-two such a great age-'
' But he would have loved her five years I' said Sophy. '
you said yourself that would be constancy 1'
' True; but, Sophy, I have known a youth who sailed bro
hearted, and met a lady "just in the style" of the former
on board the steamer-'
Sophy made a gesture of impatient disdain, and repea
'Do you allow me to tell Gilbert that this is the way T 
' Not from me. I hold out no hope. I don't believe
vieve cares for him, and I don't know whether his father wo
consent-' but seeing Sophy's look of disappointment, 'I
no harm in your suggesting it, for it is his only chance w
either of them, and would be the proof that his affection
good for something.'
' And you think her worth it T
'I think her worth anything in the world-the more for
behaviour in this matter. I only doubt if Gilbert have
conception how much she is worth.'
Away went Sophy in      a glow that made her alm
handsome, while Albinia, as usual, wondered at her own
prudence.
At luncheon Sophy avoided her eye, and looked crestfall
and when afterwards she gave a mute inquiring address, sh
her head impatiently. It was plain that she had failed, a
was too much pained and shamed by his poorness of spirit to
able as yet to speak of it.
Next came Gilbert, who pursued Albinia to the mornin
room  to entreat her interference in his behalf, appeali
piteously to her kindness ; but she was obdurate. If any 
monstrance were offered to his father, it must be by himself.
Gilbert fell into a state of misery, threw himself about upo
the chairs, and muttered in the fretfulness of childish desp




<pb n="219"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                219
something about its being very hard, when he was owner of
half the town, to be sent into exile-it was like jealousy of his
growing up and being master.
'Take care, Gilbert !' said Albinia, with a flash of her eye
that he felt to his backbone.
'I don't mean it,' cried Gilbert, springing towards her in
supplication. ' I've heard it said, that's all, and was as angry
as you ; but when a fellow is beside himself with misery at
being driven away from all he loves-not a friend to help him
-how can he keep from thinking all sorts of things I'
'I wonder what people dare to say it !' cried Alhinia wrath-
fully; but he did not heed, he was picturing his own future
misfortunes-toil -climate - fevers-choleras-Th ugs--coups
de soleil-genuine dread and repugnance working him up to
positive agony.
'Gilbert,' said Albinia, ' this is trumpery self-torture I Yon
know this is a mere farrago that you have conjured up. Your
father would neither thrust you into danger, nor compel you to
do anything to which you had a reasonable aversion. Go and
be a man about it in one way or the other ! Either accept or
refuse, but don't make these childish lamentations. They are
cowardly I I should be ashamed of little Maurice if he behaved
so !'
'And you will not speak a word for me !'
'No ! Speak for yourself!' and she left the room.
Days passed on, till she began to think that, after all, Gilbert
preferred Calcutta, cholera, Thugs, and all, to facing his father;
but at last, he must have taken heart from his extremity, for
Mr. Kendal said, with less vexation than she had anticipated,
'So our plans are overthrown. Gilbert tells me he has an in-
vincible dislike to Calcutta. Had you any such ideal'
'Not till your cousin's letter arrived. What did you say to
him ?'
'He was so much afraid of vexing me that I was obliged to
encourage him to speak freely, and I found that he had always
had a strong distaste to and dread of India. I told him I
wished he had made me aware of it sooner, and desired to know
lwhat profession he really preferred. He spoke of Oxford and
the Bar, and so I suppose it must be.  I do not wonder that
he wishes to follow his Traversham friends, and as they are a
good set, I hope there may not be much temptation. I see
you are not satisfied, Albinia, yet your wishes were one of my
motives.'
'Thnnk yon-once I should,' said Alhinia; 'but, Edmnnd,
I see how wrong it was to have concealed anything from you;'




<pb n="220"/>
220             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
and thereupon she informed him of Gilbert's passion for 
vieve Durant, which astonished him greatly, though he tool
far less seriously than she had expected, and was not disple
at having been kept in ignorance and spared the troubl
taking notice of it, and thus giving it importance.
'It will pass off,' he said. 'She has too much sense 
principle to encourage him, and if you can get her out of Bayf
for a few years he will be glad to have it forgotten.'
'Poor G6nevieve! She must break up her grandmoth
home after all 1'
' It will be a great advantage to her. You used to say t
it would be most desirable for her to see more of the wor
Away from this place she might nmlrry well.'
'Any one's son but yours,' said Albinia, smiling.
'The connexion would be worse here than anywhere el
but I was not thinking of any one in our rank of life. Th
are many superior men in trade with whom she might be ve
happy.'
' Poor child !' sighed Albinia. 'I cannot feel that it is 
that she should be banished for Gilbert's faults; and I
sorry for the school; you cannot think how much the tone w
improving.'
'If it could be done without hurting her feelings, I sho
gladly give her a year at some superior finishing school, whi
might either qualify her for a governess, or enable her to 
this one more profitable.'
' Oh ! thank you !' cried Albinia; 'yet I doubt. Howev
her services would be quite equivalent in any school to
lessons she wants. I'll write to Mrs. Elwood-' and she W
absorbed in the register-office in her brain, when Mr. Ken
continued-
' This is quite unexpected. I could not have supposed t
boy so foolish I However, if you please, I will speak to hi
tell him that I was unaware of his folly, and insist on his gii
it up.'
'I should be very glad if you would.'
Gilbert was called, and the result was more satisfactory t
Albinia thought that G6nevieve deserved.  His frenzy
tended to wear itself out, and he had been so dreadfully alarm
about India and his father, that in his relief, gratitude, and fl
of being sent out, he was ready to promise anything. Befor$
his father he could go into no rhapsodies, and could only bIi
miserably confused.
'Personally,' said Mr. Kendal, 'it is creditable that yo4'




<pb n="221"/>
THE YOUNG STEP MOTHER.                221
should be attracted by such estimable qualities, but these are
not the sole consideration. Equality of station is almost as
great a requisite as these for producing comfort or respectability,
aud nothing but your youth and ignorance could excuse your
besetting any young woman with importunities which she had
shown to be disagreeable to her.'
There was no outcry of despair, only a melancholy muttering.
Then Mr. Kendal pronounced his decree in terms more explicit
than those in whichAlbinia had exacted the promise. He said
nothing about persecution, nor was he unreasonable enough to
colmmand an instant immolation of the passion ; he only insisted
that Gilbert should pay no marked attention, and attempt no
unsanctioned or underhand communication.  Unless he thought
he had sufficient self-command to abstain, his father must take
'further measures'
As if fearing that this must mean ' Kendal and Kendal,' he
raised his head, and with a deep sigh undertook for his own
self-coimmand. Mr. Kendal laid his hand on his shoulder with
kind pity, told him he was doing right, and that while he acted
openly and obediently, he should always meet with sympathy
and consideration.
Two difficult points remained-the disposing of the young
people. Gilbert was still over young for the university, as well
as very backward and ill-prepared, and the obstinate remains of
the cough made his father unwilling to send him from home.
And his presence nm; d Guevieve's absence necessary.
The place had begun to loom in the distance. A former
governess of Albinia's, who would have done almost anything
to please her, had lately been left a widow, and established her-
self in a suburb of London, with a small party of pupils. She
had just begun to feel the need of an additional teacher, and
should gladly receive Genevibve, provided she fulfilled certain
requisites, of which, luckily, French pronunciation stood the
foremost. The terms were left to Albinia, who could scarcely
believe her good fortune, and went in haste to discuss the matter
with the Belnarches.
It almost consoled her for what she had been exceedingly
ashamed to announce, the change of purpose with regard to
Gilbert, which was a sentence of banishment to the object of
his folly. Nothing pained her more than the great courtesy and
kindness of the two old ladies to whom it was such a cruel
stroke; they evidently felt for her, and appeared to catch at
irs. Elwood's offer, and when Albinia proposed that her salary
should be a share in the instructions of the masters, agreed




<pb n="222"/>
222             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
that this was the very thing they had felt it their duty to
vide for her, if they had been able to bring themselves to
with her.
'So,' said good Madame Belmarche, smiling sadly, 'you
has been for the dear child's real good that our weakness
been conquered.'
Genevieve was written to, and consented to everything,
when Mr. Kendal took Gilbert away to visit an old friend
wife called for G6nevieve at the convent to bring her ho,
Albinia could not divest herself of some curiosity and ex
ment in driving up to the old-fashioned red brick house,
two tall wings projecting towards the street, and the front 
in the centre between them, with steps down to it. She
not been without hopes of a parlour with a grille, or at 
that a lay sister would open the door; but she saw nothing
a very ordinary-looking old maid-servant, and close behind
was G6nevieve, with her little box, quite ready-no excuse
seeing anything or anybody else.
If Genevieve were sad at the proposal of leaving home
going among strangers, she took care to hide all that could
Mrs. Kendal, and her cheerful French spirit really enjoyed
prospect of new scenes, and bounded with enterprise at
hope of a new life and fresh field of exertion.
' Perhaps, after all,' she said, smiling, ' they may make of
something really useful and valuable, and it will all be o
to you, dear madame. Drawing and Italian I When I
teach them, I shall be able to make grandmamma easy
life !'
Genevieve skipped out of the carriage and into her a
arms, as if alive only to the present delight of being at b
again. It was a contrast to Sophy's dolorous visage. 
Sophy 1 she was living in a perpetual strife with the out
tokens of sulkiness, forcing herself against the grain to 
civil answers, and pretend to be interested when she felt wreto
and morose. That Gilbert, after so many ravings, should ha
relinquished, from mere cowardice, that one hope of
G6nevieve by honourable exertion, had absolutely lowered
trust in the exalting power of love; and her sense of jus
revolted against the decision that visited the follies of the gu
upon the innocent. She was yearning over her fiiend with
her heart, pained at the separation, and longing fervently
make some demonstration, but the greater her wish, the vw1
was her reserve. She spent all her money upon a beau
book as a parting gift, and kept it beside her, missing occasi
after occasion of presenting it, and falling at each into a




<pb n="223"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               23
feet agony behind that impalpable, yet impassable, barrier of
em barrassme t.
It was not till the very last evening, when G6nevieve had
actually wished her good-bye and left the house, that she grew
desperate. She hastily put on bonnet and cloak, and pursued
G6nevieve up the street, overtaking her at last, and causing her
to look round close to her own door.
' My dear Miss Sophy,' cried Genevieve, ' what is the matter {
You are quite overcome.'
'This book-' said Sophy-it was all she could say.
'Love-yes,' said Genevieve. ' Admiration-no.'
'      You shall not say that,' cried Sophy.  'I have found what
is really dignified and disinterested, and you must let me admire
you. Jenny, it makes me comfortable.'
Genevieve smiled. 'I would not commit an egoism,' she
said; ' but if the sense of admiration do you good, I wish it had
a worthier cause.'
'There's no one to admire but you,' said Sophy. ' I think it
very unfair to send you away, and though it is nobody's fault, I
hate good sense and the way of the world !'
'Oh ! do not talk so. I am only overwhelmed with wonder
at the goodness I have experienced.  If it had happened with
any other family, oh I how differently 1 should have been
judged ! Oh! when I think of Mrs. Kendal, I am ready to
weep with gratitude!'
'Yes, mamma is mamma, and not like any one else; but even
she is obliged to be rational, and do the injustice, whatever she
feels,' said Sophy.
'Oh ! not injustice-kindness ! I shall be able to earn more
for grandmamma !'
' It is injustice !' said Sophy; ' not hers, perhaps, but of the
world ! It makes me so angry, to think that vou-you should
never do anything but wear yourself out in drudging over tire-
some little children-'
'Little children are my brothers and sisters, as I never had
any,' said Genevieve. ' Oh ! I always loved them, they make a
home wherever they are. I am thankful that my vocation is
among them.'
In dread of a token from Gilbert, Gdnevieve would not notice
it, but pursued, ' You must come in and rest-you must have
my aunt's salts.'
'No-no-' said Sophy, 'not there-' as G6nevieve would
have taken her to the little parlour; but opening the door of
the school-room, she sank breathless into a sitting position on
the carpetless boards.




<pb n="224"/>
221            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
Genevieve shut the door, and kneeling down, found o
arms thrown round her, pressing her almost to strangula
'Oh! I wanted to do it-I never could.  Wont you
the book, Genevieve I It is my keepsake-only I could not
it because-'
'Is it your keepsake, indeed, dear Miss Sophy I' said
vieve. ' Oh I if it is yours-how I shall value it-but it is
beautiful-'
'Nothing is too beautiful for you, G6neviave,' said So
Cervently.
'And it is your gift I But I am frightened-it must 
cost- !' began G&nevieve, still a little on her guard.  ' D
dear Miss Solhy, forgive me if I do seem ungrateful, but ind
I ought to ask-if-if it is all your own gift ?'
' Mine i yes !' said Sophy, on the borders of offence. ' I k
what you mean, Genevieve, but you may trust me. I would
take you in.'
Genevieve was blushing intensely, but taking courage
bestowed a shower of ardent embraces and expressions of g
tude, mingled with excuses for her precaution  ' Oh I it
so very kind in Miss Sophy,' she said; 'it would be such
comfort to remember; she had feared she too was angry v
her.'
'Angry! oh, no!' cried Sophy, her heart quite unloc
'but the more I loved and admired, the more I could
speak !'
'And if they drive you to be a governess ? If you had
situation like what we read of?'
'Perhaps I shall not,' said Genevieve, laughing. 'Every d
has been so good to me hitherto ! And then I am not redud
from anything grander.  I shall always have the children, 
know.' 
'How I should hate them !' quoth Sophy.
'They are my pleasure. Besides I have always thought it
blessing that my business in life, though so humble, should
what may do direct good. If only I do not set them a 
example, or teach them any harm.'
'Not much danger of that,' said Sophy, smiling. 'Well,
can't believe it will be your lot all your life. You will
some one who will know how to love you.'
' No,' said Genevieve, 'I am not in a position for marrige
grandmamma has often told me so !'
'Things sometimes happen,' pursued Sophy. 'Mamma 
if Gilbert had been older, or even if-if he had been in earnel
and steady enough to work for you in India, then it might- :




<pb n="225"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                 225
And surely if Gilbert could care for you-people higher and
deeper than he would like you better still.'
, Hush,' said Genevieve; 'they would only see the objections
more strongly. No, do not put these things in my head. I
know that unless a teacher hold her business as her mission, and
put all other schemes out of her mind, she will work with an
absent, distracted, half-hearted attention, and fail of the task
that the good God has committed to her.'
'Then you would never even wish-'
' It would be seeking pomps and vanities to wish,' said Gene-
vieve; 'a school-room is a good safe cloister, probably less dull
than the convent. If I wish at all, it will be that I may be
well shut up there, for I know that in spite of myself my man-
ners are different from your English ones. I cannot make them
otherwise, and that amuses people; and I cannot help liking to
please, and so I become excited. I enjoy society so much that
it is not safe for me ! So don't be sorry, dear Sophy, it is a fit
penance for the vanity that elated me too much that evening at
Fairmead !'
Mademoiselle Belmarch6 was here attracted by the voices.
Sophy started up from the ground, made some unintelligible
excuse, and while Mademoiselle was confounded with admiration
at the sight of the book, inflicted another boa-constrictor
embrace, and hurried away.
CHAPTER XVIL
DLANETS hostile to the tender passion must have been in
tle ascendant, for the result of Captain Ferrars's pursuit
of his brother to Italy was the wholesome certainty that his own
slender portion was all he had to reckon upon.  Before return-
ing to Canada, he came to Bayford to pour out his troubles to
his cousin, and to induce her, if he could induce no one else, to
advise his immediate marriage. It was the first time he had
been really engaged, and his affection had not only stood three
months' alsence, but had so much elevated his shatter-brained
tl6oll-i frank and honest temperament, that Albinia conceived
a highl opinion of' Emily,' and did her best to persuade him to
he patient, and wait for promotion.
Solphy likewise approved of him this time, perhaps because
he was so opposite a specimen of the genus lover from that pre-
sented by her brother.  Gilbert had not been able to henl
enJ(oing himself while from home, but his spirits sank on his
Q




<pb n="226"/>
;;'6            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
return; he lay about on the grass in doleful dejection,
little but L. E. L., lost appetite, and reproachfully fondled
cough; but Albinia was now more compassionate than 
whom she was obliged to rebuke for an unsisterly dis
toward his woes.
' can't help it,' said Sophy; 'I can't believe in him now
'Yes, you ought to believe that he is really unhappy, 
more gentle and considerate with him.' 
'If it had been earnest, he would have sacrificed hi
instead of G6nevieve.'
'Ah   Soplly, some day you will learn to make excuses
other people, and not be so intolerant.'
'I never make excuses.'
'Except for Maurice,' said Albinia. 'If you viewed 
people as you do him, your judgments would be gentler.'
Sophy's conscientiousness, like her romance, was hard, 
and strict; but while she had as little mercy on herself
others, and while there were some soft spots in her adaman
judgment, there was hope that these would spread, and, wi
lowering her tone, make her more merciful
She corresponded constantly with Genevieve, who se
very happily placed; Mrs. Elwood was delighted with her,
she with Mrs. Elwood; and her lively letters showed no
of pining for home. Soplly felt as if it were a duty to her 
to do what in her lay to prevent the two old ladies from 
dull, and spent an hour with them  every week, not he
contributing much to their amusement, but pleasing them
the attention, and hearing much that was very curious of 
old-world recollections.
Ever since that unlucky penny-club-day, when she
declared that she hated poor people, she had been let alon
that subject; and though principle had made her use
needle in their behalf, shyness and reserve had kept her
from all intercourse with them; but in her wish to compel
for Genevieve's absence, she volunteered to take charge of
vacant Sunday-school class, and obtained leave to have the
at home on the afternoons fur an hour and a half. This
enough for one who worked as she did, making a conscien
every word, and toiling to prepare her lessons, writing
her questions beforehand, and begging for advice upon them.
'My dear,' said Albinia, 'you must alter this-you see
question does not grow out of the last answer.'
'Yes,' said Sophy, 'that must have been what puzzled
last Sunday: they want counexion.'
Nothing like logic to teach one to be simple,' said Alb




<pb n="227"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                227
'I can't see the use of all this trouble,' put in Lucy. ' Why
can't you ask them just what coles into your head, as I always
do f
Suppose mistakes came into my head.'
' Oh ! they would not find it out if they did ! I declare !-
what's this-Persian ? Are you going to teach them Persian T
No; it is Greek. You see it is a piece of a Psalm, a
quotation rather different in the New Testament. I wrote it
down to ask Ipapa what it is in lebrew.'
' By-the-bye, Sophy,' continued Lucy, 'how  could you let
Susan Price come to church with lace sleeves-absolute lace
sleeves !'
' :ltad she i'
'There-you never see anything I Mamma, would not it be
more sensible to keep their dress in order, than to go poking
into Hebrew, which can't be of use to any one 1'
There was more reason than might appear in what Lucy said:
the girls of her class were more orderly, and fonder of her
than Sophy's of the grave young lady whose earnestness oppressed
them, and whose shyness looked dislike and pride. As to
finding fault with their dress, she privately told Albinia that
she could not commit such a discourtesy, and was answered that
no one but Mrs. Dusautoy need interfere.
'I will go and ask Mrs. Dusautoy what she wishes,' said
Albinia.  ' I should be glad if she would modify Lucy's
sulmptuary laws. To fall foul of every trifle only makes the
girls tlink of their dress.'
Albinia found Mrs. Dusautoy busied in writing notes on
mourning paper.
'Here is a note I had written to you,' she said. 'I am
sending over to Hadminster to see if any of the curates can
take tihe services to-morrow.'
Albinia looked at the note while Mrs. Dusautoy wrote on
hurriedly. She read that there could be no daily services at
lresent, the Vicar having been summoned to Paris by the
sudden death of Mrs. Cavendish Dusautoy.  As the image of a
well-endowed widow, always trying to force her way into
higher society, arose before Albinia, she could hardly wait till
the letter was despatched, to break out in amazement,
' Was she a relation of yours ? Even the name never made
me think of it 1'
'It is a pity she cannot have the gratification of hearing it,
poor woman,' said Mirs. Dusautoy, ' but it is a fact that she did
poor George Dusautoy the honour to marry him.'
' Mr. Dusautcy's brother ?'
Q 2




<pb n="228"/>
228            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
'Ay-he was a young surgeon, just set up in pa
exactly like John-nay, some people thought him still
looking. She was a Miss Greenaway Cavendish, a 
broker's heiress of a certain age.'
'Oh !' expressively cried Albinia.
'You may say so,' returned Mrs. Dusautoy. 'She made
put away his profession, and set up for taste and el
idleness.'
'And he submitted I'
'There was a great deal of the meek giant in him, an
believed implicitly in the honour she had done him. It w
have been very touching, if it had not been so provoking, to
how patiently and humbly that fine young man gave up all
would have made him happy, to bend to her caprices and
tensions.'
'Did you ever see them together I'
'No, I never saw her at all, and him only once. I
knew John really savage but once, and that was at her
letting him come to our wedding; but she did give him
of absence for one fortnight, when we were at Lauriston.
happy the brothers were ! It did one good to hear their
voices about the house; and they were like boys on a
frolic, when John took him to prescribe for some of our
people. He used to talk of bringing us his little son-the
pleasure of his life-but he never was allowed. Oh, how I
to long to stir up a mutiny f cried Mrs. D;asautoy, quite
knowing that she ruled her own lion with a leash of silk.,.
she had appreciated him, it would have been bearable; b
her he was no more than the handsome young doctor, whom
had made a gentleman, and not a very good piece of work 
either ! Little she recked of the great loving heart that
thrown itself away on her, and the patience that bore with
and she tried to hinder all the liberal bountiful actions
were all he cared to do with his means I I wish the boy
remember him !'
'How long has he been dead I'
'These ten years. He was drowned in a lake storml
Switzerland-people clung to him, and he could not swim.
was John's one great grief-lie cannot mention him even
And really,' she added, smiling, ' I do believe he has bro
himself to fancy it was a very happy marriage. She has al
been very civil; but she has been chiefly abroad, and n
would take his advice about sending her boy to school.'
'What becomes of him now ?'
' He is our charge. She was on the way home from I




<pb n="229"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                229
when she was taken ill at Paris, and died at the end of the
week.'
' How old is he V'
' About nineteen, I fancy. He must have had an odd sort of
education; but it he is a nice lad, it will be a great pleasure to
John to have something young about the house.'
'I was thinking that Air. Dusautoy hardly wanted more
cares.'
' So have I,' said her friend, smiling; 'and I have been
laying a plot against him. You see, he is as strong as a lion,
and never yet was too tired to sleep; but it is rather a tempt-
ing of Providence to keep 3589 people and fourteen services
in a week resting upon one man !'
'Exactly what his churchwarden has preached to him.'
' Moreover, he cannot be in two places at once, let alone half-
a-dozen. Now, my Lancashire people have written in quest of
a title for holy orders for a young man who has just gone
through Cambridge with great credit, and it strikes me that he
might at once help John, and cram Master Algernon.'
' And Gilbert!' cried Albinia. ' Oh, if you will import a
tutor for Gilbert, we shall be for ever beholden to you !'
'I had thought ot him. I have no doubt that he is much
better taught than Algernon; but I am not afraid of this poor
fellow briinging home bad habits, and they will be good com-
1uanions.  I reckon upon you and Mr. Kendal as great
auxiliaries, and I don't think John will be able to withstand
our united forces.'
On the way home, on emerging from the alley, Albinia
encountered Gilbert, just parting with another youth, who
walked off quickly on the Tremblam road, while she inquired
who it was.
'That ?' said Gilbert; ' oh! that was young Tritton. He
has been away learning farming in Scotland. We speak when
we meet, for old acquaintance sake and that.'
The Bayford mind was diverted from the romance of Gene-
vicve by the enormous fortune of the Vicar's nephew, whose
calpital was in their mouths and imaginations swelled into his
yearly income. Swarms of cards of inquiry were left at the
tcarage ;and Mrs. Aleadows and Lucy enjoyed the reflected
dignlity of being able to say that Mrs. Kendal was continually
there. And so she was, for Mrs. Dusautoy was drooping,
t}lough more in body than visibly in spirit, and needed both
conlpanionship and assistance in supporting the charge left by
her absent Atlas.
lie was not gone a moment longer than necessary, and took




<pb n="230"/>
2.0            THE YOUNG STEP-MO'IEP.
her by surprise at last, while Alhinia and Sophy wore si
on the lawn with her, when she welcomed the nephew and
Vicar, holding out a hand to each, and thanked them for
care of 'Fanny.' 'Here, Algernon,' he continued, 'her
two of our best friends, Mrs. Kendal and Miss Sophy.'
There was a stiff bow from a stiff altitude. The youth
on the gigantic Dusautoy scale, looking taller even than
uncle, from his manner of holding himself with his chin so
what elevated. He had a good ruddy sun-burnt complexi
shining brown hair, and regular features; and Albinia 
respond heartily to the good Vicar's exclamation, as he follo
her down to the gate for the sake of saying,
'Well-grown lad, isn't that I  And a very good-hea
fellow too, poor boy-the very picture of his dear fat
Well, and how has Fanny been ?'                       .
He stayed to be reassured that his return was all his Fan
wanted, and then hurried back to her, while Alhinia and So
pursued their way down the hill.
'News for grandmamma.    We must give her a partic
description of the hero.'
' How ugly he thought me !' said Sophy, quaintly.
'My dear, I believe that is the first thing you think of w
you meet a stranger !'
'I saw it this time,' returned Sophy.  ' His chin went up
the air-at once. He set me down for Mrs. Kendal, and you
Miss Sophy.'
'Nonsense,' said Albinia, for the inveterate youthfulnessa
her bright complexion and sunny hair was almost a sore subj
with her. ' Your always fancying that every one is disgu
with you, is as silly as if you imagined yourself transcenden
beautiful. It is mere self-occupation, and helps to make
blunt and shy.'
'Mamma,' said Sophy, 'tell me one thing. Did you e
think yourself pretty ?'
'I have thought myself looking so, under favourable circu
stances, but that's all. You are as far from ugliness as I
and have as little need to think of it. As far as features go, th
the making of a much handsomer woman in you than in me.'
Sophy laughed. A certain yearning for personal beauty
a curious part of her character, and she would have been asham
to own the pleasure those few words had given ler, or how mu
serenity and forbearance they were worth; and her good-humo
was put to the proof that evening, for grandrmamma had a
party, bent on extracting the filll description of the great Alge
non Greenaway Cavendish Dusautoy, Esquire.    Lucy's fin




<pb n="231"/>
THE YOUNG STEP MOTlHER.               231
igrht was less at her ease. Elizabeth Osborn, with whom she
kept up a fitful intimacy, summoned her mysteriously into her
garden, to show her a peep-hole through a little dusty window
in the tool-house, whence could be descried the vicarage garden,
and Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy, as, with a cigar in his mouth,
and his hands in his pockets,
'Stately stept he east the wa', and stately stept he west.'
Lucy was so much amused, that she could not help reporting
it at home, where Gilbert forgot his sorrows, in building up a
mischievous romance in honour of the hole in the 'sweet and
lovely wall.'
But the parents' feud did not seem likely to hold out. A
hundred thousand pounds on one side of the wall, and three
single daughters on the other, Mrs. Oslorn was not the woman
to trust to the 'wall's hole;' and so Mr. Dusautoy's enemy laid
down her colours; and he was too kind-hearted to trace her
sudden politeness to the source.
Mr. Dusautoy acceded to the scheme devised by his wife, and
measures were at once taken for engaging the curate. When
Albinia went to talk the matter over at the parsonage, Lucy
accompanied her; but the object of her curiosity was not in the
room; and when she had heard that he was fond of drawing,
and that his horses were to be kept at the King's Head stables,
the conversation drifted away, and she grew restless, and begged
Mrs. Dusautoy to allow her to replenish the faded bouquets on
the table. No sooner was she in the garden, than Mrs. Dusautoy
put on an arch look, and lowering her voice, said,
'Oh ! it is such fun ! He does despise us so immensely.'
'Despise-you ?'
'He is a good boy, faithful to his training. Now his poor
mother's axioms were, that the English are vulgar, country
English more vulgar, Fanny Dusautoy the most vulgar I I wish
we always as heartily accepted what we are taught.'
'He must be intolerable.'
'No, he is very condescending and patronizing to the savages.
HTe really is fond of his uncle; and John is so much hurt if I no-
tice his peculiarities,that I have been dying to have my laugh out.'
'Can Mr. Dusautoy bear with pretension '
'It is not pretension, only calm faith in the lessons of his
youth. Look,' she added, becoming less personal at Lucy's re-
entrance, and pointing to a small highly-varnished oil-painting
of a red terra cotta vase, holding a rose, a rhododendron before
it, and half a water-melon grinning behind, newly severed by a
knife.




<pb n="232"/>
2:32            THIE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
'Is that what people bring home from Italy now-a-days
Albinia.
'That is an original production.'
'Did Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy do that ?' cried Lucy.  -
' Genre is his style,' was the reply. ' His mother was reso
he should be an amateur, and I give his master great credit.
'Especially for that not being a Madonna,' said Albinia
congratulate you on his having so safe an amusement.'
'Yes; it disposes of him and of the spare room. He o
exist without an atelier.'
Just then the Vicar entered.
'Ah ! Algernon's picture,' began he, who had never
known to look at one, except the fat cattle in the Illust
News. 'What do you think of it ? Has he not made a
hand of the pitcher I'
Albinia gratified him by owning that the pitcher was rou
and Lucy was in perfect rapture at the ' dear little spots' in
rhododendron.
' A poor way of spending a lad's time,' said the uncle; 
it is better than nothing; and I call the knife very good :
declare you might take it up,' and he squeezed up his eyes
enhance the illusion.
A slow and wide opening of the door admitted the lofty
sence of Algernon Cavendish Dusautoy, with another s
picture in his hand. Becoming aware of the visitors, he sal
them with a dignified movement of his head, and erecting
chin, gazed at thenl over it.
'So you have brought us another picture, Algernon,' said
uncle. ' Mrs. Kendal has just been admiring your red jar.'
'Have you a taste for art ' demanded Mir. Cavendish
sautoy, turning to her with magnificent suavity.
'I used to be very fond of drawing.'
' Genre is my style,' he pursued, almost overthrowing
gravity by the original of his aunt's imitation. 'I took les
of old Barbouille-excellent master. Truth and nature, t
were his maxims; and from the moment I heard them, I
"' This is my man." We used positively to live in the Borgh
There !' as he walked backwards, after adjusting his product
in the best light.
'A snipe,' said Albinia.
' A snipe that I killed in the Pontine marshes.'
'There is very good shooting abut Anxur,' said Albinia.
"You have been at Rome ?' He pernrttcd himself a lit.
animation at discovering any one within th )2ale of civilization.
' For one fortnight in the course of a galloping tour with iji




<pb n="233"/>
TIlE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER 2..3
two brothers, said Albinia. 'All the Continent in one long
vacation r
(That was much to be regretted. It is my maxim to go
through every museum thoroirghly.'
' I can't regret,'said Albinia. ' I should be very sorry to give
up my bright indistinct haze of glorious memories, though I was
too young to appreciate all I saw.'
' For my part, I have grown up among works of art. My
whole existence has been moulded on them, and I feel an inex-
pressible void without them. I shall be most happy to intro-
duce you into my atelier, and show you my notes on the various
ilusees. I preserved them merely as a trifling memorial; but
many connoisseurs have told me that I ought to print them as a
Catalogue raisonnee, for private circulation, of course. I should
be sorry to interfere with Murray, but on the whole I decided
otherwise: I should be so much bored with applications.'
Mrs. Dusautoy's wicked glance had so nearly demolished the
restraint on her friend's dimples, that she turned her back on
her, and commended the finish of a solitary downy feather that
lay detached beside the bird.
'M y maxim is truth to nature, at any cost of pains,' said the
youth, not exactly gratified, for homage was his native element,
but graciously proceeding to point out the merits of the com-
position.
Albinia's composure could endure no more, and she took her
leave, Mr. Dusautoy coming down the hill with her to repeat,
and this time somewhat wistfully,
'A fine lad, is he not, poor fellow 1'
With perfect sincerity, she could praise his good looks.
'He has had a quantity of sad stuff thrust on him by the
people who have been about his poor mother,' said Mr. Dusautoy.
'She could never bear to part with him, and no wonder, poor
thllng; and she must have let a very odd sort of people get
about her abroad-they've flattered that poor lad to the top of
his bent, you see; but he's a very good boy for all that, very
warm-hearted. .
'He must be very amiable for his mother to have been able
to nanage him all this while.'
'Just what 1 say ]' cried the Vicar, his honest face clearing.
' Ianly youths would have run into all that is had, brought up
in that way; but only consider what disadvantages he has had !
WVhen we get him to see his real standing a little better-I say,
could not you let us have four young people to come up this
evenilng have a little music, and make it livelyl I suppose
'anny and I are growing old, though I never thought so before.




<pb n="234"/>
22 b            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHE:.
Will you come, Lucy, there's a good girl, and bring your b
and sister ? The lads must be capital friends.'
Lucy promised with sparkling eyes, and the Vicar strod
saying he should depend on the three.
Gilbert ' supposed he was in for it,' but ' did not see the
of it;' he was sick of the name of 'that polysyllable,
'should see enough of him when Mr. Hopecatme, worse luck
The result of the evening was, that Lucy was enraptur
the discovery that this most accomplished hero sang I
songs to the loveliest guitar in the world, and was very m
offended with Sophy for wishing to know whether ms
really thought him so very clever.
Immediately after the Ordination arrived Mr. Hope, a
youthful, small, and delicate-looking man, whom Mr. Dusan
could have lifted as easily as his own Fanny, with short 
timid nature, scholarly habits, weak nerves, and an inaudible v
Of great intellect, having read deeply, and reading still
deeply, he had the utmost dread of ladies, and not even
countrywoman, Mrs. Dnsautoy, could draw him out. He thre
whole soul into the work, winning the hearts of the infant-
and the old women, but discomfiting the congregation by
weakness of his voice, and the length and depth of his serm
There was one in especial which very few heard, and no
entered into except Sophy, who held an hour's argument 
it with her father, till they arrived at such lengthy nam
heresies, that poor grandmamma asked if it were right to
Persian on a Sunday evening.
He conscientiously tutored his two pupils, but there wm
common ground between him and them. Excepting his 
intellect, there was no boyhood in him. A town-bred sch
a straight constitutional upon a clean road was his wil
dream of exercise; he had never mounted a horse, did not
a chicken from a partridge, except on the table, was too s
sighted for pictures, and esteemed no music except Gregor
The two youths were far more alive to his deficiencies tha
his endowments: Algernon contemned him for being a
seller's son, with nothing to live on but his fellowship
curacy, and Gilbert looked down on his ignorance of ev
matter of common life, and excessive bashfulness. Mr. Dusan
would have had less satisfaction in the growing intimacy betw
the lads, had he known that it had been cemented by inveigu
poor Mr. Hope into a marsh in search of cotton-grass, which,
Gilbert's instigation, Algernon avouched to be a new sort
Indian corn, grown in Italy for feeding silkworms.
An intimacy there was, rather from constant intercourse 




<pb n="235"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHTER                2.,5
from positive liking. Gilbert saw through and disdained young
Dusautoy's dulness and self-consequence; but good-natured,
kindly, and unoccupied, he had no objection to associate with
him, showing him English ways, trying to hinder him from
needlessly exposing himself, and secretly amused with his pre-
tension.  Algernon, with his fine horses, expensive appoint-
ments, and lofty air, was neither a discreditable nor unpleasant
companion. Mr. Kendal had given his son a horse, which, with-
out costiug the guineas that Algernon had 'refused' for each of
his steeds, was a very respectable-looking animal, and the two
young gentlemen, starting on their daily ride, were a grand
spectacle for more than little Maurice.
Gilbert had suffered some eclipse. Once he had been the grand
parti, the only indisputable gentleman; tbut now Mr. Cavendish
Dusautoy had entirely surpassed him both in self-assertion and in
the grounds for it. His incipient dandyisms faded into ilsigni-
ficance beside the splendours of the heir of thousands; and he,
who among all his faults had never numbered conceit or for-
wardness, had little chance beside such an implicit believer in
his own greatness.
Nor was Bayford likely to diminish that faith. The non-
adorers might be easily enumerated-his uncle and aunt, his
tutor, his groom, Mr. and Mrs. Kendal, Gilbert and Sophy;
the rest all believed in him as thoroughly as he did in himself.
His wealth was undoubted, his accomplishments were rated at
his own advertisement, and his magnanimous condescension was
esteemed at full value. Really handsome, good-natured and
sociable, ie delighted to instruct his worshippers by his maxims,
and to bend graciously to their homage. The young ladies had
but one cynosure ! Few eyes were there that did not pursue his
every movement, few hearts that did not bound at his approach,
few tongues that did not chronicle his daily comings and goings.
'It would save much trouble,' said Albinia, ' if a court circular
could be put into the Bayford paper.'
The Kendals were the only persons whom Algernon re-
garded as in any way on a footing with him. Finding that the
lady w"as a Ferrars, and had been in Italy, he regarded her as
fit clmpaly, and whenever they met, favoured her with the
chie' and choicest of his maxims, little knowing how she and
his aunt presumed to discuss him in private.
Without being ill-disposed, he had been exceedingly ill taught;
his mother, the child of a grasping vulgar father, had little re-
ligious impression, and that little had not been fostered by the lax
habits of a self-expatriated Englishwoman, and very soon after his
arrival at Baytord his disregard of ordinary Engiish proprieties




<pb n="236"/>
23.            THE YOUNG STEP-M1OTHER. 
had made itself apparent. On the first Sunday he wentto o
in the morning, but spent the evening in pacing the garden
a cigar; and on the afternoon of that day week his aun
startled by the sound of horse's hoofs on the road. Mr. Du
was at school, and she started up, met the young gentl
and asked him what strange mistake could have been 
He made her a slight bow, and loftily said he was always
tomed to ride at that hour! ' But not on Sunday 1' she
claimed. He was not aware of any objection. She told 
his uncle would be much displeased; he replied politely 
would account to his uncle for his conduct; begged her p
but he could not keel) his horse waiting.
Mrs. Dusautoy went back, fairly cried at the thought of
husband's vexation, and the scandal to the whole town.
The Vicar was, of course, intensely annoyed, though he
could make excuses for the poor boy, and laid all to the  O
ignorance and foreign education. He made Algernon lej
understand that the Sunday ride must not be repeated. Al
non mumbled something about compromising his uncle j
offending English prejudices, by which lie reserved to himseJ
belief that he yielded out of magnanimity, not because he o
not help it; but he could not forgive his aunt for her ere
tory opposition; he became unpleasantly sullen and moro
regularly as the Sunday came round, and revenged himself
pacing the verandah with his cigar, or practising anything
sacred music on his key-bugle in his painting-room.
The youth was really fond of his uncle, but he had imb
all his mother's contempt for her sister-in-law.  Used No,
wheedled by an idolizing mother, and to reign over her cour
parasites, he had no notion of obeying, and a direct command
opposition roused his sullen temper of passive resistance.
he found 'that little nobody of a Mrs. John Dusautoy' so
from being a flatterer, or an adorer of his perfections, inc'
to laugh at him, and bent on keeping him in order, all
enmity of which he was capable arose in his mind, and tho
in general good-natured and not aggressive, he had a deci
pleasure in doing what she disapproved, and thus asserting
dignity of a Greenaway Cavendish Dusautoy.
The atelier was a happy invention. Certainly weariso
noises, and an aroma of llavannahs would now and then p
ceed therefrom; but he was employed there the chief part
the day, and fortunately his pictures were of small size, 
took an infinite quantity of labour, so that they could 
speedily outrun all the Vicarage walls.
Lie favoured the University of Oxford by going up w




<pb n="237"/>
F                  THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                2..7
Gilbert for matriculation, when, to the surprise of Mr. Hope,
lie was not plucked. They were to begin their residence at the
Easter term. Mrs. Dusautoy did not confess even to Albinia
bow much she looked forward to Easter.
In early spring, a sudden and short illness took away Madame
BelmarchC's brave spirit to its rest, after sixty years of exile
and poverty, cheerfully borne.
There had been no time to summon G6nevieve, and her aunt
would not send for her, but decided on breaking up the
school, which could no longer be carried on, and going to live
in the Hadminster convent. And thus, as Mr. Kendal hoped,
all danger of renewed intercourse between his son and Genevieve
ended. Gilbert looked pale and wretched, and Sophy hoped it
was with compunction at having banished Genevieve at such a
moment, but not a word was said-and that page of early
romance was turned I
CHAPTER XVIII.
T was a beautiful July afternoon, the air musical with mid-
summer hum, the flowers basking in the sunshine, the turf
cool and green in the shade, and the breeze redolent of inde-
scribable freshness and sweetness compounded of all fragrant
odours, the present legacy of a past day's shower. Like the
flowers themselves, Albinia was feeling the delicious repose of
refreshed nature, as in her pretty pink muslin, her white drapery
folded round her, and her bright hair unbonnetted, she sat
reclining in a low garden chair, at the door of the conservatory,
a little pale, a little weak, but with a sweet happy languor, a
soft tender bloom.
There was a step in the conservatory, and before she could
turn round, her brother Maurice bent over her, and kissed her.
'Maurice ! you have come after all !'
' Yes, tle school inspection is put off. How are you I' as he
sat down on the grass by her side.
' Ol, quite well! What a delicious afternoon we shall have 
Edmunld will be at home directly. Mrs. Meadows has absolutely
let Gilbert take her to drink tea at the Drurys ! Only I am
s'rry Sophy should miss you, for she was so good about going,
because Lucy wanted to do something to her fernery. Of course
you are come for Sunday, and the christening V'
' Yes,-that is, to throw myself on Dusautoy's mercy.'
'We will send Mr. Hope to Fairmead,' said Albinia, 'and
see whether Winifred can make him speak. We can't spare




<pb n="238"/>
238             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER. 
the Vicar, for he is our godfather, and you must
little maiden.'
'I thought the three elder ones were to be sponsors.'
' Gilbert is shy,' said Albinia, 'afraid of the responsil
and perhaps he is almost too near, the very next to ou
His father would have preferred IMr. Dusautoy from the
and only yielded to my wish. I wish you had come two m
sooner, she was being paraded under that wall, but now 
gone in asleep.'
' Her father writes grand things of her.'
' Does he T said Albinia, colouring and smiling at what
not be heard too often; ' he is tolerably satisfied with the y'
woman I And he thinks her like Edmund, and so she mu
for she is just like him. She will have such beautiful eyea
is very good of her to take after him, since Maurice wont rI
' And she is to be another Albinia.'
'I represented the confusion, and how I always meant
daughter to be Winifred, but there's no doing anything 
him ! It is only to be a second name. A. W. K. 1 Think if
should marry a Mr. Ward !'
'No, she would not be awkward, if she were so a-ward
'It wont spell, Maurice,' cried Albinia, laughing as 
nonsense, as usual, rose to the surface, 'but how is Winifre
' As well as could be hoped under the affliction of not
able to come and keep you in order.'
'She fancied ne according to the former pattern,' said A
smiling; 'I could have shown her a better specimen, not t
was any merit, for there were no worries, and Edmund 
happy, that it was pleasure enough to watch him.'
'I was coming every day to judge for umyself, but I tho
things could not be very bad, while he wrote such fiouri
accounts.'
'No, there were no more ponds !' said Albinia, 'and
mamma happily was quite well, cured, I believe, by the
ment. Lucy took care of her, and Sophy read to me-howi
have enjoyed those readings! Oh! and Aunt Gertrude
found a delightful situation for G6nevieve, a barrister's faii
with lots of little children-eighty pounds a year, and q
ready to value her, so she is off luy mind.'
' Maurice, boy! come here,' she called, as she caught sight.
a creature prancing astride on one stick, and waving ano
On perceiving a visitor, the urchin came careering up, bouno
full tilt upon her, and clasping her round with both his stal
arms. ' Gently, gently, boy,' she said, bending down, and 1
ing with proud delight at her brother, as she held between




<pb n="239"/>
R~F THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                          239
hands a face much like her own, as fair and freshly tinted, but
with a peculiar squareness of contour, large blue eyes, with dark
friiuges, brimming over with nmischief and fun, a bold, broad
brow, and thick, light curls. There was a spring and vigour as
of perpetual irrepressible life about the whole being, and the
moment he had accepted his uncle's kiss, he poised his lance,
and exclaimed, ' You are Bonaparte, I'm the Duke!'
' Indeed,' said Mr. Ferrars, at once seizing a wand, and be-
striding tile nearest bench. Two or three charges rendered the
boy so uproarious, that presently he was ordered ofl; and to use
the old apple tree as Bonaparte.
' What a stout fellow !' said Mr. Ferrars, as he went off at a
plunging gallop, 'I should have taken him for at least five years
old!'
* So he might be,' said Albinia, ' for strength and spirit-he
i3 utterly fearless, and never cries, much as he knocks himself
about! He will do anything but learn. The rogue! he once
knew all his letters, but no sconer did he find they were the
work of life, than he forgot every one, and was never so obstre-
perous as when called upon to say them. I gave up the point,
but 1 foresee some fine scenes.'
'llis minding no one but you is an old story. I hope at
least the exception continues.'
'I have avoided testing it. I want all my forces for a decisive
battle. I never heard of such a masterful imlp,' she continued,
^ ith mluch more exultation than anxiety,' his sisters have no
cilance with him, he rules them like a young Turk. There's
tle puny ! Sophy will let him have it as a right, and it is the
olrk of my life to see that she is not defrauded of her rides.'
'You don't mean that that child rides anything but a stick.'
' One would think he had been born in boots and spurs.
Legitimately he only rides with some one leading the pony, but
I have my suspicions that by some preternatural means lie las
been on the pony's back, and round the yard alone, and that
papa lrudentially concealed it from me r
'I confess I should not like it,' said her brother gravely.
' Oh ! I don't mind that kind of thing. A real boy can't be
hurt, and I don't care how wild he runs, so long as he is obedient
and truthful. And true I think he is to the backbone, and I
know he is reverend. We had such a disturbance because he
' ould not say his prayers.'
' Proof positive !'
'Yes, it was,' said Albinia. 'It did not seem to him orthodox
without me, and when he was let into my room again, it was
the lrettiest sight I When he had been told of his little sister,




<pb n="240"/>
240            THE YOU1G STEP-MOTHER.
all he said was that he did not want little girls-girls
stupid--'
'Ah! that came of your premature introduction to
Albinia'
'Not at all. It was partly as William's own nephew,
partly because pleasure was expected from him. But wh
actually saw the little thing, that sturdy face grew so very
and sweet, and when we told him he was her protector, he
both his hands tight together, and said, "I'll be so g
When he is with her, ancther child seems to shine out I
the bluff pickle he generally is-he walks so quietly, and t
it such an honour to touch her.'
'She will be his best tutor,' said Maurice, smiling, but 
ing off-
A sudden shriek of deadly terror rang out over the
from the river! A second or two sufficed to show
Lucy at the other end of the foot-bridge, that led across
canal to the towing-path. She did not look round, till Alb
clutching her, demanded, 'Where is he i'
Unable to speak, Lucy pointed down the towing-path,
which a horse was seen rushing wildly-a figure pursuing
'It was hitched up here-he must have scrambled up by.
gate ! Oh ! mamma ! mamma ! ie has run after him, but
Mr. Ferrars gave Lucy's arm a squeeze, a hint not to
ment the horror. Something he said of ' Let me-and you 
better-' but Albinia heard nothing, and was only bent
pressing forward.
The canal and path took a wide sweep round the mead
and the horse was still in sight, galloping at full speed, wi
small heap on its back, as they trusted, but the rapid mo
and their eyes strained and misty with alarm, caused an 
of uncertainty.
Albinia pointed across the meadows in anguish at not 
able to make herself understood, and hoarsely said, 'The I
Mr. Ferrars caught her meaning, and the next moment
leaped over the gutter, and splashed into the water mead
but in utter hopelessness of being beforehand with the
away steed ! How could that gate be other than fatal ?
horse was nearing it-the pursuer far behind-- Mr. Ferrars
half way over the fields.
There was a loud cry from Lucy.-' He is caught ! caught
A loud shout came back, was caught up, and sent on by l
the pursuers, 'All right !'
Albinia had stood in an almost annihilation of consciousf
ing. Even when her brother strode back to her repeat




<pb n="241"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                241
All safe, thanks be to God,' she neither spoke nor relaxed
that illtensity of watching. A few seconds more, and she
6prang forward again as the horse was led up by a young man
at his side; and on his back, laughing and chattering, sat
Master Maurice. Algernon Dusautoy strode a few steps behind,
somewhat aggrieved, but that no one saw.
The elder Maurice lifted down the younger one, who, as he
was clasped by his mother, exclaimed, 'Oh ! mamma, Bamfylde
went so fast! I am to ride home again ! He said so-he's my
COusin !'
Albinia scarcely heard; her brother however had turned to
thank the stranger for her, and exclaimed, ' I should say you
were an O'.Iore.'
'I'm Ulick, from the Loughside Lodge,' was the answer.
Is cousin Winifred here ?'
'No, this is my sister, Mrs. Kendal, but-'
Albinia held out her hand, and grasped his; 'I can't-Mau-
rice, speak,' she said.
The little Maurice persisted in his demand to be remounted
for the twelve yards to their own gate, but nobody heard him;
his uncle was saying a few words of explanation to the stranger,
and Algernon Dusautoy was enunciating something intended as
a gracious reception of the apologies which no one was making.
All Albinia thought of was that the little unruly hand was
warm and struggling, prisoned in her own; all her brother
cared for was to have her safely at home. He led her across
the bridge, and into the garden, where they met Mr. Kendal,
who had taken alarm from her absence; Lucy ran up with
her story, and almost at the same moment, Albinia, springing to
him, murmured, 'Oh ! Edmund, the great mercy-Maurice ;'
but there she found herself making a hoarse shriek; with a
mingled sense of fright and shame, she smothered it, but there
was an agony of suffocation, she felt her husband's arms round
her, heard his voice, and her boy's scream of terror-felt them
all unable to help her, and sank into unconsciousness.
Mr. Ferrars helped Mr. Kendal to carry his wife's inanimate
form to her room. They used all means of restoration, but it
was a long heavy swoon, and a slow, painful revival. Mr.
Kendal would have been in utter despair at hearing that the
doctor was out, but for his brother, with his ready resources and
cheerful encouragement; and finally. she lifted her eyelids. and
as she felt the presence of her two dearest guardians, whispered,
'Where is he ?'
Lucy reported that he was with Susan, and Albinia, alter
heariing her husband again assure her that he was quite safe,
B




<pb n="242"/>
242            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
lay still from exhaustion, but so calm, that hei brother 
them best alone, and drew Lucy away.
In about a quarter of an hour Mr. Kendal came do
ing that she was quietly asleep, and he had left the nur
her. He had yet to hear the story, and when he uud
that the child had been madly careering along the towing
on the back of young Dusautoy's most slirited hunter, 
been only stopped when the horse was just about to le
tall gate, lie was completely overcome. When he spoke
it was with the abrupt exclamation, ' That child I Lucy,
him down F
In marched the boy, full of life and mischief, though
a large red spot beneath each eye.
' Maurice !' Gilbert had often heard that tone, but M
never, and lie tossed back his head with an innocent 1
fearless wonder. ' Maurice, I tind you have been a very na
disobedient boy. When you rode the pony round the
did not I order you never to do so again V'
'1 did not do it again,' boldly rejoined Maurice.
'Speak the truth, sir.  What do you mean by d
what you have done ' exclaimed his father, angrily.
'I didn't ride the pony,' indignantly cried the child; I
a horse, saddled and bridled I'
'Don't answer me in that way !' thundered Mr. Ki
and much incensed by the nice distinction, and not app
ing the sincerity of it, he gave the child a shake, 
enough to bring the red into his face, but not a tear.
knew it was very wrong, and you were as near as p
breaking your neck. You have frightened your mamma, 
to make her very ill, and I am sorry to find you most mi
ous and unruly, not to be trusted out of sight. Now, list
me, I shall punish you very severely if you act in this di
dient way again.'
Papa angry, was a novel spectacle, at which Maurice 1
as innocently and steadily as ever, so completely without
or contrition, that he provoked a stern, ' Do you hear me,
and another shake. Maurice flushed, and his chest he!
though he did not sob, and his father, uncomfortable at 
sharp dealing with so young a child, set him aside, with
words, 'There now, recollect what I have told you !' and 
to the window, where he stood silent for solme seconds, W
the boy stood with rounded shoulders, perplexed eye, and fi
on his pouting lip, antd Mr. Felrars, nlewslaper in hand, wa
him under his eyelids, and speculated what would be the
sort of mediation, or whether the young gentleman yet dese




<pb n="243"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                243
ff   He knew that his own Willie would have been a mere
F  qtakiula, sobbing mass of terror, under such a shake, and he
w would like to have been sure whether that sturdy silence were
obstinacy or fortitude.
The sound of the door-bell made Mr. Kendal turn round,
and laying his hand on the little fellow's fair head, he said,
'There, Maurice, we'll say no more about it if you will be a
good boy. Run away now, but don't go into your mamnia's
room.
Maurice looked up, tossed his curls out of his eyes, shook
himself, felt the place on his arm where the grip of the hand
had been, and galloped off like the young colt that he was.
Albinia awoke, refreshed, though still shaken and feeble, and
surprised to find that dinner was going on downstairs. Her
own meal presently put such new force into her, that she felt
able to speak Maurice's name without bursting into tears; and
longing to see both her little ones beside her, she told the nurse
to fetch the boy, but received for answer, ' No, Master Maurice
said he would not come,' and the manner conveyed that it had
been defiantly said. Master Maurice was no favourite in the
nursery, and he was still less so, when his mamma, disregarding
all mandates, set out to seek him. Already she heard from the
stairs the wrangling with Susan that accompanied all his toi-
lettes, and she found him the picture of firm, solid fairness, in
his little robe de nuit, growling through the combing of his
tangled locks. Though ordinarily scornful of caresses, he sprang
to her and hugged her, as she sat down on a low chair, and he
knelt in her lap, whispering with his head on her shoulder, and
his arms round her neck, ' Mamma, were you dead i'
'No, Maurice,' she answered with something of a sob, 'or I
should not have my dear, dear little boy throttling me now I
But why would you not come down to me i'
'Papa said I must not.'
Ol, that was quite right, my boy ;' and though she unclasped
the tight arms, she drew him nestling into her bosom. 'Oh,
laurice, it has been a terrible day ! Does my little boy know
how good the great God has been to him, and how near he was
never seeing mamma nor his little sister again.'
Her great object was to make him thankful for his preserva-
tion, but with a child, knowing nothing of death and heedless
of fear, this was very difficult. The rapid motion had been
delightful excitement, or if there had been any alarm, it was
fJrgotten in the triumph. She had to change her note, and re-
present how the poor horse might have run into the river, or
against a post! Maurice looked serious, and then she came to
a2




<pb n="244"/>
244            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
the high moral tone-mounting strangers' horses with
-would papa, would Gilbert, think of such a things
full lip was put out, as though under conviction, and
his head. ' You wont do it again ?' said she.
'No.'
She told him to say his prayers, guiding the conf
thanksgiving that she feared he did not fully follow.
rose up, and saw the tears on her cheeks, he whispered, 
ma, did it make you 80o '
Cause and effect were a great puzzle to him, but that
was the only thing that brought home to him that
been guilty of something enormous, and when she ow
his danger had been the occasion, he stood and looked 
standing bolt upright, with clasped hands, and rosy feet
close together, he said, with a long breath, 'I'll never
Bamfylde again till I'm a big boy.'
As he spoke, Mr. Kendal pushed open the half-closed,
and Albinia, looking up, said, ' Here's a boy who knows
done wrong, papa.'
Never was more welcome excuse for lifting the gallant
to his breast, and lavishing caresses that would have been
but for the strong spirit of riot which turned them 
game at romps, cut short by Mr. Kendal, as soon as the
grew very outrageous. 'That's enough to-night; good
And when they each had kissed the monkey face tossing
among the clothes, Maurice might have heard more pride
pain in the ' I never saw such a boy I' with which the
the door.
'This is not prudent!' said Mr. Kendal.
'Do you think I could have rested till I had seen him
he said you had told him not to come down.'
' I would have brought him to you. You are looking
ill; you had better go to bed at once.'
' No, I should not sleep. Pray let me grow quiet first.
you know you trust Maurice,-old Maurice, and I'll lie o
sofa like any mouse, if you'll bring him up and let him
You know it will be an interesting novelty for you to talk'
me to listen I and he has not seen the baby.'
Albinia gained her point, but Mr. Kendal and Lucy
tucked her up upon the sofa, till she cried out, 'You
swathed me hand and foot. How am I to show off that
Awk V'
'I'll take care of that,' said Mr. Kendal; and so he did,
doing the honours of the little daughter, who had already
ened on his heart.




<pb n="245"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                245
' But,' cried Albinia, breaking into the midst, 'who or what
*re we, ungrateful monsters, never to have thought of the man
who caught that dreadful horse !'
You shall see him as soon as you are strong enough,' said
Mr. Kendal; 'your brother and I have been with him.'
' Oh, I am glad; I could not rest if he had not been thanked.
And can anything be done for him ? What is he   I thought
be was a gentleman.'
Maurice smiled, and Mr. Kendal answered, 'Yes, he is Mr.
Goldsmith's nephew, and I am pleased to find that he is a con-
nexion of your brother.'
'One of the O'Mores,' cried Albinia. 'Oh, Maurice, is it
really one of Winifred's O'Mores '
' Even so,' replied Mr. Ferrars; the very last person I should
have expected to meet on the banks of the Baye ! It was that
clever son of the captain's for whose education Mr. Goldsmith
paid, and it seems had sent for, to consider of his future destina-
tion. He only arrived yesterday.'
' A very fine young man,' said Mr. Kendal. ' I was particu-
larly pleased with his manner, and it was an act of great pre-
sence of mind and dexterity.'
'It is all a maze and mystery to me,' said Albinia; 'do tell
me all about it. I can't make out how the horse came there.'
'I understood that young Dusautoy was calling here,' said
Mr. Kendal; ' I wondered at even his coolness in coming in by
that way, and at your letting him in.'
'I saw nothing of him,' said Albinia. Perhaps he was look-
ing for Gilbert.'
'No,' said Lucy, looking up from her work, with a slight
blush, and demure voice of secret importance; 'he had only
stepped in for a minute, to bring me a new fern.'
'Indeed,' said her father; 'I was not aware that he took in-
terest in your fernery.'
' He knows everything about ferns,' said Lucy. ' Mrs. Caven-
dish Dusautoy once had a conservatory filled with the rarest
Specillens, and he has given me a great many directions how to
launma.e them.'
' O1h! if he could get you to listen to his maxims, I don't
wonder at anything,' exclaimed Albinia.
'He had only just come in with the Adiantium, and was
telling me how hydraulic power directed a stream  of water
near the roots among his mother's Fuci,' said Lucy, rather hurt.
'le had fastened up his horse quite securely, and nobody could
have guessed that Maurice could have opened that gate to cross
the bridge, far less have climbed up the rail to the horse's back.




<pb n="246"/>
216             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
1 never shall forget my fright, when we heard the 
feet, and Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy began to run 
directly.'
'As foolish a thing as he could have done,' said Mr. 
not impressed with Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy's condesce
giving chase. 'It was well poor little Maurice was not
doned to your discretion, and his resources.'
' It seems,' continued Mr. Ferrars, ' that young O'Mo
taking a walk on the towing-path, and was just so far off
see, without being able to prevent it, this little monkey 
from the gate upon the horse's neck.  How it was that h
not go down between, I can't guess; the beast gave a vi
start, as well it might, jerked the reins loose, and set o
gallop. Seeing the child clinging on like a young panth
dashed across the meadow, to cut him off at the turn
river; and it was a great feat of swiftness, I assure you, 
so lightly through those marshy meadows, so as to get the
of the runaway; then he crept up under cover of the hed
as not to startle the horse, and had hold of the bridle, j
he paused before leaping the gate ! He said he could 
believe his eyes when he saw the urchin safe, and looking
excited than terrified.'
'Yes, lie was exceedingly struck with Maurice's spirit,'
Mir. Kendal, who, when the fright and an-ger were over,
begin to be proud of the exploit.
'They fraternized at once,' said Mr. Ferrars.  ' Mauri
parted that his name was Maurice Ferrars Kendal, and 
in all good faith and Irish simplicity, discovered that they 
cousins !'
' Oh ! Edmund, he must come to the christening dinner 
' Mind,' said Maurice, 'you know he is not even my
cousin; only nephew to her second cousin's husband.'
'For shame, Maurice; cousin is that cousinly does !'
'Very well; only don't tell the aunts that Winifred
all the O'Mores upon you.'
'Not an O'More but should be welcome for his sake I'
'Nor an Irishman,' said Mr. Ferrars.
Albinia suffered so much from the shock, that she could
make her appearance till noon on the following day.
after sitting a little while in the old study, to hear that 
mamma had not been able to sleep all night for thinkin
Maurice's danger, and being told some terrible stories of
dents with horses, she felt one duty done, and moved on to
drawing-room in search of her brother.
She found herself breaking upon a tete-a-tete. A sweet




<pb n="247"/>
Fr     ~      THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                247
voice. with strong cadences, was saying something about duty
and advice, and she would have retreated, but her brother and
the stranger both sprang up, and made her understand that she
was by no means to go away. No introduction was wanted;
she grasped the hand that was extended to her, and would have
said something if she could, but she found herself not strong
enough to keep from tears, and only said, ' I wish little Maurice
were not gone out with his brother, but you will dine with us,
and see him to-morrow.'
'With the greatest pleasure, if my uncle and aunt will
spare me.
' They must,' said Albinia; 'you must come to meet your old
friend and c, lsin,' she added, mischievously glancing at Maurice;
hut he did not look inclined to disavow the relationship, and
the youth was not a person whom any one would wish to keep
at a distance. Hle seemed about nineteen or twenty years of
age, not tall, but well made, and with an air of great ease and
ngility, rather lounging and c:reless, yet alert in a moment.
The cast of his features at once betrayed his country, by the
rounded temples, with the free wavy hair; the circular form of
tlhe eyebrow; the fully opened dark blue eye, looking almost
black when shaded ; the short nose, and the well-cut chin and
lilps, with their outlines of sweetness and of fun, all thoroughly
Irish, Iult of the best style, and with a good deal of thought
an(l mind on the brow, and determination in the mouth. Albinia
had sca'cely a minute, however, for observation, for he seemed
agitated, and in haste to take leave, nor did her brother press
him to remain, since she was still looking very white and red,
and too fragile for anything hut rest. With another squeeze of
the hand she let him go, while he, with murmured thanks, and
head bent in enthusiastic honour to the warm kindness of one so
sweet and graceful, took leave. Mr. Ferrars followed him into
the hall, leaving the door open, so that she heard the words,
'Good-bye, Ulick; I'll do my best for you. All I can say is, that
I respect you.'
' Don't respect me too soon,' he answered; 'maybe you'll have
to change your mind. The situation may like me no better
than I the situation.'
'No, what you will, you can do; I trust to your perse-
verance.'
'As my poor mother does! Well, with patience the snail
got to Rome; and if it is to lighten her load, I must bear it.
AMany tilnks, AMr. Ferrars. Good morning.'
Goodl morning; only, Ulick, excuse me, but let me give you
a hint ; if the situation is to like you, you must mind your Irish.'




<pb n="248"/>
248            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
' Then you must not warm my heart with your 
was the answer. ' No, no, never fear, when I'm not 
one who has seen Ballymakilty, I can speak English so
could not be known for a Galway man. Not that I'm 
of my country,' he added; and the next moment the d
behind him.
'How could you scold him for his Irish I' exclaimed
as her brother re-entered; 'it sounds so pretty and o,
teristic.'
'I fear Mr. Goldsmith may think it too characteristic r I
'I am sure Edmund might well call him preposseai
hope Mr. Goldsmith is going to do something handsome for
'Poor lad! Mr. Goldsmith considers that he has purf
him for a permanent fixture on a high stool. It is a sad
pointment, for he had been doing his utmost to prepare  i
for college, and he has so far distinguished himself at
that I see that a very little help would soon enable him to
tain himself at the University. I could have found it ix
heart to give it to him myself; it would please Winifred.'
' Oh, let us help ; I am sure Edmund would be glad.'
'No, no, this is better for all. Remember this is the 
smith's only measure of conciliation towards their sister
her marriage, and it ought not to be interfered with.
Ulick says he knows this is tl. readiest chance of being of
use to his family, and that his mother has often said she
be happy if she could but see one of the six launched in a
to be independent! There are those three eldest, little
than squireens, never doing a thing but loafing about with 
guns. I used to long for a horse-whip to lay about them'
they spoke to me, and then not one of the rogues but won'
heart with his fun and good-nature.' 
'Then I suppose it is a great thing to have one in the
money-making.'
' Hem ? The Keltic blood is all in commotion I This i
business was to ask my candid opinion whether there were 
thing ungentl]manlike in a clerkship in a bank. It was well
was not you !'
' Now, Maurice, don't you know how glad I should have
if Gilbert would have been as wise !'
' Yes, you have some common sense after all, which is
than Ulick attributes to his kith and kin. When I had P
the respectability of banking to his conviction, I'll not say
faction, he made me promise to write to his father. 
making up his mind to what is not only a great vexatio
,J1




<pb n="249"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                 249
r  ibmelf, and very irksome employment, but he knows he shall be
looked down upon as having lost caste with all his family !'
' It really is heroism !' cried Albinia.
-     ' It is,' said Mr. Ferrars; 'he does not trust himself to face
the clan, and means to get into harness at once, so as to clench
his resolution, and relieve his parents from his maintenance
immediately.'
' Is he to live with that formal Miss Goldsmith ?'
'No. In solitary lodgings, after that noisy family and easy
home ! I can't think how he will stand it. I should not won-
der if the Galwegian was too strong after all.'
We must do all we can for him,' cried Albinia; 'Edmund
likes hinm already. Can't he dine with us every Sunday 1'
'I know you will be kind,' said Mr. Ferrars. ' Only see how
things turn out before you commit yourself. Ah ! I have said
the unlucky word which always makes you fly off!'
There was little fear that Ulick O'More would not win his
way with Mr. and Mrs. Kendal, recommended as he was, and
with considerable attractions in the fiankness and brightness of
his manner. He was a very pleasant addition to the party who
dined at Willow Lawn, after the christening. No one had
time to listen to Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy's maxims, and he
retired rather sullenly, to lean against the mantelpiece, and
marvel why the Kendals should invite an Irish banker's clerk
to meet him. Gilbert likewise commented on the guest with a
muttered observation on his sisters' taste; ' Last year it was all
the Polysyllable, now it would be all the Irishman !'
CHAPTER XIX.
THERE was a war of supremacy in the Kendal household.
Albinia and her son were Greek to Greek, and if physical
force were on her side, her own tenderness was against her. As
to allies, Maurice had by far the majority of the household; the
much-tormented Susan was her mistress's sole supporter; Mr.
Kendal and Sophy might own it inexpedient to foster his
Outrecuidance, but they so loved to do his bidding, so hated to
thwart him, and so grieved at his being punished, that they
were little better than Gilbert, Lucy, grandmamma, or any of
the maids or men.
The moral sense was not yet stirred, and the boy seemed to
he trying the force of his will like the strength of his limbs




<pb n="250"/>
250            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
Even as he delighted to lift a weight the moment he
it was heavy, so a command was to him a challenge to'
much he would undergo rather than obey; but his 
was so open, gay, and free, that it could hardly be
stinacy, and he gloried in disappointing punishment. The
closet lost all terror for him; he stood there blowing th
through his hand, content to follow an imaginary chase
when untimely sent to bed, he stole Susan's scissors, and
range of stables in the sheets. The short, sharp infii
pain answered best, but his father, though he could give a
when angry, could not strike when cool; and Albinia
forced to turn executioner, though with such tears andtr
that her culprit looked up reassuringly, saying, 'Never
mamma, I shan't !' He did, however, mind her tear,
bore in upon him the sense of guilt; and after each
gression, he could not be at peace till he had marched up
holding out his hand for the blow, and making up his
to wince, and then would cling round her neck to feel 
pardoned. Justice came to him in a most fair and m
shape I The brightest, the merriest of all his playmatel
mamma; he loved her passionately, and could endure no
between himself and her, so that he was slowly learnin
submission to her was peace and pleasure, and rebellion
pain to both. She established ten minutes of daily lesso
even she could not reach beyond the capture of his 
person, his mind was out of reach, and keen as he was in
thing else, towards a-b-ab he was an unmitigated dunce.
did he obey any one who did not use authority and f
will, and though perfectly simple and sincere, he was too 
to restrain himself without the assistance of the oontro
power, so that in his mother's absence he was tyrannica
violent, and she never liked to have him out of her sigh
never was so sure that he was deep in mischief as when
not heard his voice for a quarter of an hour.
'Albinia,' sa'l Mr. Kendal, one relenting autumn day,
November strove to look like April, ' I thought of wal
pay Farmer Graves for the corn. Will you come with me'
' Delightful; I want to see what Maurice will say to
turkey-cock.'
'Is it not too far for him f
'He would run quite as many miles in the garden,'
Albinia, who would have walked in dread of a court of j
on her return, had not the scarlet hose been safely prancing
the road before her.
'This way, then,' said Mr. Kendal ' I must get this




<pb n="251"/>
r                   TIlE YOUNG STEP MOTHER                251
changed at the bank. Come, Maurice, you will see a friend 
there.'
' Do you know, Edmund,' said Albinia, as they set forth,
smv conscience smites me as to that youth; I think we have
neglected him.'
* I cannot see what more we could have done. If his uncle
does not bring him forward in society, we cannot interfere.'
It must be a forlorn conditicn,' said Albinia; 'he is above
the other clerks, and he seems to be voted below the Bayford
glite, since the Polysyllable had made it so very refined ! One
never meets him anywhere now it is too dark to walk after the
banking hours. Cannot we ask him to come in some evening 1'
' We cannot have our evenings broken up,' said Mr. KendaL
'I should be glad to show him any kindness, but his uncle seems
to have ruled it that he is to be considered more as his clerk
than as one of his family, and I doubt if it would be doing him
any service to interfere.'
They wvere now at the respectable old freestone building, with
'Goldsmith' inscribed on the iron window-blinds, and a vene-
ralle date carved over the door. Inside, those blinds came high,
and let in but little light over the tall desks, at which were
placed the black-horsehair perches of the clerks, old Mr. Gold-
slnlitl himself occupying a lower throne, more accessible to the
clients. One of the high stools stood empty, and Albinia
nmrking inquiry, Mr. Goldsmith answered, with a dry, dissatisfied
coullh, that More, as he called him, had struck work, and gone
home with a headache.
'Indleel,' said Albinia, 'I am sorry to hear it. Mr. Hope
said he thought him not looking well.'
'He has conplained of headache a good deal lately,' said
lMr. Goldsmith. ' Young men don't find it easy to settle to
bu-iness.'
Alinia's heart smote her for not having thought more of her
son's rescuer, and she revolved what could or what might have
bell done. It really was not easy to show him attention, con-
sid(liriug Gilbert's prejudice against his accent, and AMr. Kendal's
dislike to an interrupted evening, and all she could devise was
a fixture call on Miss Goldsmith.  But for Maurice, it would
hl:ve been a silent walk, and though her mind was a little
diverted by his gallant attempt to bestride the largest pig in
the farm-yard, she was sure Mr. Kendal was musing on the
Sn .:e topic, and was not surprised when, as they returned, he
exclaimed, ' I have a great mind to go and see after that poor ladl.'
'This way, then,' said Albinia, turning down a narrow muddyi
strect parallel with the river. 




<pb n="252"/>
252            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER. 
'Impossible !' said Mr. Kendal; 'he can never live 
Wharves ?'
'Yes,' said Albinia; 'he told me that he lodged 
old servant of the Goldsmiths, Pratt's wife, at the
Wharf.'
She pointed to the name of Pratt over a shop-window
house that had once seen better days, but which look
forlorn, that Mr. Kendal would not look the slatternly 
the face while so absurd a question was asked as whether
O'More lived there.
The girl, without further ceremony, took them up a
stair, and opened the door of a twilight room, where Alb
first glimpse showed her the young man with his head
down on his arms on the table, as close as possible to the fo
black fire, of the grim, dull, sulky coal of the county, which
filled the room with smoke and blacks. The window, o
to clear it, only admitted the sickly scent of decaying weed 
the river to compete with the perfume of the cobbler's stock
trade. Ulick started up pale and astonished, and Mr. Ke
struck with consternation, chiefly thought of taking away
wife and child from the infected atmoslphere, and made si
Albinia not to sit down; but she was eagerly compassiona
'It was nothing,' said Ulick; 'only his head was rather w
than usual, and he thought it time to give in when the 
put lapwings' feathers in their caps just like the fives.'
'Are you subject to these headaches ?'
'It is only home-sickness,' he said. ' I'll have got over it
'I must come and see after you, my good friend,' said
Kendal, with suppressed impatience and anxiety. '! I
return in a moment or two, but I am sure you are not
enough for so many visitors taking you by surprise. Come.
He was so peremptory, that Albinia found herself on
staircase before she knew what she was about. The fever 
had seized Mr. Kendal in full force; he believed typhus wa
the air, and insisted on her taking Maurice home at once, w
he went himself to fetch Mr. Bowles  She did not in the I
credit fever to be in the chill touch of that lizard hand, 
believed that she could have been the best doctor; but th
was no arguing while he was under this alarm, and she ke
that she might be thankful not to be ordered to observe
quarantine.
When Mr. Kendal returned home he looked much dis
posed, though his first words were, 'Thank Heaven, it is
fever ! Albinia, we must look after that poor lad; he is 
tively poisoned by that pestiferous river and bad living ! Bo




<pb n="253"/>
Ir             TETHE YOUNG STEP MOTHER.             2.53
said he was sure he was not eating meat enough. I dare say
that greasy woman gives him nothing fit to eat ! Albinia, you
must talk to him-find out whether old Goldsmith gives him a
decent salary !'
' He ought not to be in those lodgings another day. I suppose
Miss Goldsmith had no notion what they were. I fancy she
never saw the Lower Wharf in her life.'
I never did till to-day,' said Mr. Kendal. 'It was all of a
piece-the whole street-the room-the furniture-why the
paper was coming off the walls I What could they be dreaming
of! And there he was, trying to read a little edition of Pru.
dentius, printed at Salamanca, which he picked up at a bookstall
at Galway. It must have belonged to some priest educated in
Spain. He says any Latin book was invaluable to him. He is
infinitely too good for his situation, and the Goldsmiths are
neglecting him infamously. Look out some rooms fit for him,
Albinia.'
'I will try. Let me see-if I could only recollect any; but
Mr. Hope has the only really nice ones in the place.'
' Somewhere he must be, if it is in this house.'
'There is poor old Madame Belmarche's still empty, with
Bridget keeping it. I wish he could have rooms there.'
' Well, why not? Pettilove told me it must be let as two
tenements. If the old woman could take half, a lodger would
pay her rent,' said Mr. Kendal, promptly. ' You had better
propose it.'
' And the Goldsmiths ' asked Albinia.
'I will show him the Lower Wharf.'
The next afternoon Mr. Kendal desired his wife to go to the
Bank and borrow young O'More for her walking companion.
'Really I don't know whether I have the impudence.'
'I will come and do it for you. You will do best alone with
the lad ; I want you to get into his confidence, and find out
whether old Goldsmith treats him properly. I declare, but that
I know John Kendal so well, this would be enough to make me
rejoice that Gilbert is not thrown on the world !'
Albinia knew herself to be so tactless, that she saw little
hope of her doing anything bht setting him against his relations;
but her husband was in no frame to hear objections, so she
made none, and only trusted she should not be very foolish.
At least, the walk would be a positive physical benefit to the
slave of the desk.
Ulick O'More was at his post, and said his head was well,
blt his hair stuck up as if his fingers had been many times run
through it; he was much thinner, and the wearied countenance,




<pb n="254"/>
254            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
whitened complexion, and spiritless sunken eyes, were
contrast to the glowing freshness and life that had d
him in the summer.
Mr. Kendal told the Banker that it had been decided,
his nephew needed exercise, and that M.rs. Kendal 
glad of his company in a long walk. Mr. Goldsmith
rather surprised, but consented; whereupon the young
lighted up into animation, and bounded out of his prison h
with a springy step learnt upon mountain heather. Mr. K'
only waited to hear whither they were bound.
' Oh ! as far as we can go on the Woodside road,' said A
'I think the prescription I used to inflict on poor Sophy
not be thrown away here. I always fancy there is a w
sea air upon the hill there.'
Ulick smiled at such a fond delusion, bred up as he had'
upon the wildest sea-coast, exposed to the full sweep of
Atlantic storm ! She set him off upon his own scenery,
destruction of his laborious English, as he dwelt on the gio
his beloved rocks rent by fierce sea winds and waves into
tastic, grotesque, or lovely shapes, with fiords of exquisite 
sea between, the variety of which had been to him as the
foliage of tamer countries. Not a tree stood near the '
of Ballymakilty, but the wild crags, the sparkling watera,
broad open hills, and the bogs, with their intensely 
horizon, held fast upon his heart; and he told of white
reported to be haunted by mermaids, and crevices of rock w
the tide roared, and gave rise to legends of sea monsters,
giants turned to stone. He was becoming confidential
intimate when, in a lowered voice, he mentioned the Ban
crag, where the shrouded messenger of doom never iil
bewail each dying child of the O'More, and where his own;
nurse had actually beheld her keening for the uncle who
killed among the Caffres. Albinia began to know how 
ought to respect the O'lores.
They were skirting the side of the hill, with a dip of
meadow-land below them, rising on the other side into copp
The twang of the horn, and the babbling cry of the hob
reminded Albinia that the hunting season had begun, and 
ing over a gate, she watched the parti-coloured forms of
dogs glancing among the brushwood opposite, and an occas
red coat gleaming out through the edge above. Just then
cry ceased, the dogs became silent, and scattered hither
thither bewildered. Ulick looked eagerly, then suddenly vau
over the gate, went forward a few steps, looked again, poi
towards some dark object which she could barely discern, put




<pb n="255"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               255
finCer in his ear, and uttered an unearthly screech, incomprehen-
sible to her, but well understood by the huntsman, and through
him by the dogs, which at once simultaneously dashed in one
direction, and came pouring into the meadow over towards him;
down went their heads, up went their curved tails; the clatter
and rushing of hoofs, and the apparition of red coats, showed the
hunters all going round the copse, while at the same moment,
away with winged steps bounded her companion, flying headlong
like the wind, so as to meet the hunt.
'Ask me not what the lady feels,
Left in that dreadful hour alone,
laughed Albinia to herself. 'Well done. speed ! Edmund might
be satisfied there's not much amiss ! Through the hedge-over
the meadow-a flying leap over the stream-it is more like a
bird than a man-up again. Does he niean to follow the hunt
all the rest of the way i Rather Irish, I must say I And I do
believe they will all come down this lane ! I must walk on; it
wont do to be overtaken here between these high hedges. Ah I
I thought he was too much of a gentleman to leave me-here he
comes. How much in his way I must be I I never saw such
a runner; not a bit does he slacken for the hill-and what bright
cheeks aud eyes ! What good it must have done him !'
' I beg ten thousand pardons !' cried he, as he came up, scarcely
out of breath. ' I declare I forgot you; I could not help it,
when I saw them at a check !'
' You feel for the hunter as I do for the fox,' said Albinia.
'Is yours one of the great hunting neighbourhoods '
'That it is !' he cried. ' My grandfather had the grand stud I
He and his seven sons were out three times in the week, and
there was a mount for whoever wanted it !'
'And this generation is not behind the last '
'Ah! and why would it be?' exclaimed the boy, the last
remnant of English pronunciation forsaking him. 'My Uncle
Connel has the best mare on this side the bridge of Athlone I
I mean that side.'
'And how is it with you ' asked Albinia.
' We've got no horses-that is, except my father's mare, and
the colt, and Fir Darrig-the swish-tailed pony-and the blind
donkey that brings in the turf. So we younger ones mostly go
hunting on foot; and after all I believe that's the best sport.
Bryan always comes in befotre any of the horses, and we all
think it a shame if we don't!'
'I see where you learnt the swiftness of foot that was sc
Useful last July,' said Albinia.




<pb n="256"/>
236           THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
'That ? oh I but Bryan would have been up long befog
said Ulick. ' He'd have made for the lock, not the gate I 
should see what sport we have when the fox takes to the 
Dearg up among the rocks-and little Rosie upon Fir 
with her hair upon the wind, and her colour like the mo
cloud, glancing in and out among the rocks like the fairy
glen. There are those that think her the best part of the 
they say the English officers at Ochlochtimore would
think it worth coming out but for her. I don't believe
you know,' he added, laughing, 'though I like to fetch a
out of Ulick at the great house by telling him of it.'
'How old is she I'
'Fifteen last April, and she is like an April wind, w
comes warm and frolicking over the sea ! So wild and
and yet so gentle and soft! Ellen and Mary are grave
steady, and work hard-every stitch of my stockings was
Mary's knitting, except what poor old Peggy would send
a compliment; but IRosie-I don't think she does a thin
sing, and ride, and row the boat, and keep the house 
My mother shakes her head, but I don't know what shell
when she gets my aunt's letter. My Aunt Goldsmith pum
her lips, and says, "I'll write to advise my sister to send
daughters to some good school." Ellen, maybe, might beart
but ah ! the thought of little Rosie in a good school r
'Like her brother Ulick in a good bank, eh I'
'Why,' he cried, ' they always called me the steady Ea
man !'
Albinia laughed, but at that moment the sounds of the
again occupied them, and all were interpreted by Ulick
the keenest interest; but he would not run away again,
she exhorted him not to regard her. Presently it swept on
of hearing, and by-and-bye they reached the summit of the
and looked forth on the dark pine plantations on the op
undulation, standing out in black relief against a sky
with a pale, pure, pearly November sunset, a 'daffodil
flecked with tiny fleeces of soft bright-yellow light, remi
Albinia of Fouqul's beautiful dream of Aslauga's golden
showing the gates of Heaven to Ler devoted knight. She 1l
for her companion's sympathy in her admiration, but the w
seemed to oppress him, and his panting sigh showed how 
thing was heimnweh. 
' Oh I my poor sun !' he broke out, 'I pity you for hai
go down before your time into these black, stifling woods
rise up to smother you like giants-and not into your 
broad, cool Atlantic, laughing up your own sparkles of lihght




<pb n="257"/>
                 THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                257
WeV inland people can hardly appreciate your longing for
space.
It's a very prison,' said Ulick; 'the horizon is choked all
round, and one can't breathe in these staid stiff hedges and
enclosures !' And he threw out his arms and flapped them over
his breast with a gesture of constraint.
' You seem no friend to cultivation.'
'Why, your meadows would be pretty things if they were a
little greener,' said Ulick; ' but one gets tired of them, and of
those straight lines of ploughed field.  There's no sense of
liberty ; it is like the man whose prison walls closed in upon
him !' And he gave another weary sigh, his step lost elasticity,
and lie moved on heavily.
'You are tired; I have brought you too far.'
'Tired by a bit of a step like this ?' cried the boy, disdain-
fully, as he straightened himself, and resumed his brisk tread.
But it did not last.
'I had forgotten that you had not been well,' she said.
'Pshaw !' muttered Ulick; then resumed, 'Aye, Mr. Kendal
brought in the doctor upon me-very kind of him--but I do
assure you 'tis nothing but home sickness; I was nearly as bad
when I went to St. Columba, but I got over it then, and I will
again !'
'It may be so in part,' said Albinia, kindly; 'but let me be
impertinent, Ulick, for my sister Winifred told me to look after
you; surely you give it every provocation. Such a change of
habits is enough to make any one ill. Should you not ask your
uncle for a holiday, and go home for a little while '
'Don't name it, I beg of you,' cried the poor lad in an
agitated voice; 'it would only bring it all over again ! I've
promised my mother to do my part, and with His help I will I
Let the columns run out to all eternity, and the figures crook
themselves as spitefully as they will, I've vowed to myself not
to stir till I've got the better of the villains !'
'All !' said Albinia, 'they have blackened your eyes like the
bruis(es of material antagonists ! Yes, it is a gallant battle, but
indeed you must give yourself all the help you can, for it would
bedoing your mother no good to fall ill.'
'I've n, fears,' said Ulick; 'I know very well what is the
matter with me, and that if I don't give way, it will go off in
time.  You've given it a good shove with your kindness,
rs. Kendal,' he added, with deep emotion in his sensitive
Voice; ' only you must not talk of my going home, or you'll
Undo all you have done.'
'Then I wont; we must try to make you a home here.
a




<pb n="258"/>
2. 8           THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
And in the first place, those lodgings of yours; you cant
be comfortable in them.'
'Ah ! you saw my fire smoking. I never shall learn to
a coal fire burn.'
'Not only that,' said Albinia, 'but you might easily
rooms much better furnished, and fitter for you.'
'I do assure you,' exclaimed Ulick, 'you scarcely saw
Why, I don't think there's a room at the big house in 
order, or so good f
' At least,' said Albinia, repressing her deduction as toX
'big house of Ballymakilty,' 'you have no particular love
the locality-the river smell-the stock of good leather, &o,'
'It's all Bayford and town smell together,' said Ulick 
never thought one part worse than another, begging
pardon, Mrs. Kendal.'
' And I ant sure,' she continued,' that woman can 
make your meals comfortable. Yes, I see I am right, 
assure you hard head-work needs good living, and you
lever be a match for the rogues in black and white iti
good beef-steaks. Now confess whether she gives you di
of old shoe-leather.'
'A man can't sit down to dinner by himself,' cried 
impatiently. ' Tea with a book are all that is bearable.' 
'And you never go out-never see any one.'
'I dine at my uncle's every Sunday,' said Ulick.
'Is that all the variety you have ?'
'Why, my uncle told me he wuld not have me getting
what he calls idle company. I've dined once at the vi
and drunk tea twice with Mr. Hope, but it is no use thi
of it-I couldn't afford it, and that's the truth.'
'Have you any books 1 What can you find to do all
evening ?'
' T have a few that bear reading pretty often, and Mr. 
has lent me some. I've been tryilg to keep up my Greek,.
then I do believe there's some way of simplifying those a
by logarithms, if I could but work it out. But my mo
told me to walk, and I assure you I do take a constitutioi
soon as I come out at half-past four every day.'
'Well, I have designs, and mind you don't traverse the
I shall have to report you at home. I have a lodging in
eye for you, away from the river, and a nice clean, tidy It
woman to keep you in order, make your fires, and cram 
you wont eat, and see if she does not make a man of you
'Stop, stop, Mrs. Kendal !' cried Ulick, distressed. 
are very kind, but it can't be.'




<pb n="259"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               259
cExcuse me, it is economy of the wrong sort to live in a
gutter, and catch agues and fevers. Only think, if it was my
boy Gilbert, should I not be obliged to any one that would
tyrannize over him for his good ? Besides, what I propose is
not at all beyond such means as Mr. Kendal tells me are the
least Mr. Goldsmith ought to give you. Do you dislike going
into particulars with me ? You know I am used to think for
Gilbert, and I am a sort of cousin.'
' You are kindness itself,' said Ulick; 'and there ! I suppose
I must go to the bottom of it, and it is no news that pence are
not plenty among the O'Mores, though it is no fault of my
uncle. See there what my poor dear mother says.'
He drew a letter from his pocket, and gave a page to her.
' I miss you sorely, my boy,' it said; ' I know the more what
a support and friend you have been to me now that you are so
far away; but all is made up to me in knowing you to be among
my own people, and the instrument of reconciliation with my
brother, as you well know how great has been the pain of the
estrangement caused by my own pride and wilfulness. I cannot
tell you how glad I am that lie approves of you, and that you
are beginning to get used to the work that was my own poor
father's for so long. Bred up as you have been, my mountain
lad, I scarcely dared to hope that you would be able to sit
down quietly to it, with all our hop'.s of making you a scholar
so suddenly frustrated; but I might have put fiLith in your
loving heart and sense of duty to carry you through anything.
I feel as if a load were off my mind since you and Bryan are so
happily launched. The boy has not once applied for money
since he joined; and if you write to him, pray beg him to be
careful, for it would well-nigh drive your father mad to be
pressea any more-the poor mare has been sold at a dead loss
and the Carrick-humbug quarry company pays no dividends, so
how we are to meet the Christmas bills I cannot guess. But, as
you remember, we have won over worse times, and now Provi-
dence lhs been so good to you and Bryan, what have I to do
but he thankful and hope the best.'
Ulick watched her face, and gave her another note, saying
mournfullly, ' You see they all, but my mother, think that it I
amn dragging our family honour through the mire, I've got
something by it.  Poor Brvau, he knows no better-he's
younger than me by two years.'
The young ensign madle a piteous confession of the first debt
he had been able to contract. for twenty pounds, with a promise
tilat if his brother would help him out of this one scrape, he
Would never run into another.
s2




<pb n="260"/>
260            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTIER.
' amn very sorry for you, Ulick,' said Albinia, 'and I
advise you to be selfish, but it really is quite impossible
to be paymaster for all your brothers' debts.'
'If it were Connel, I know it would be of no use,i
'Ulick. ' But Bryan-you see he has got a start-they gay
a commission, and he is the finest fellow of us all, and
what his word is, and keeps it! Mlaybe, if I get on, I 
able to save, and help him to his next step, and t
Redmond could get to college, my mother would be a
won)an, and all thanks to my uncle.'
'Then it is this twenty pounds that is pinching you
Is that it ?'
' You see my uncle said he would give me enough to 
as a gentleman and his nephew, but not enough to keep 
family, as he said. After my Christmas quarter I shall
in the world again, and then there will be time to think
woman you spoke of-a Connaught woman, did you say ,
When Albinia reported this dialogue to her husband, 
much moved by this simple self-abnegation.
'There is nothing for it,' lie said, ' but to bring him h
Christmas, and by that time we will take care that t
lodgings are cheap enough for him. He must not be left
mercy of old Goldsmith and his sister !'
Even Albinia was astonished, but Mr. Kendal carri
his intentions, and went in quest of his new friend; w
one thought of objecting except grandmalmma.
'I suppose, my dear,' she said, that you know what
Goldsmith means to do for this young man.'
'I am sure I don't,' said Albinia.
' Really ! Ah ! well, I'm an old woman, and I may be
but my poor dear Mr. Meadows would inever encourage a 
clerk about the house unless lie knew what were his e
tions. Irish too ! If there was a thing Mr. Meadows
more than another, it was an Irishman ! He said they
all adventurers.'
However, Ulick's first evening at Willow Lawn was on
he called 'a headache day.' He could not have taken a 
measure for overcoming grandmamma's objections. Poor
AIr. Meadows' worldly wisdom was not sufficiently nativ
her to withstand the sight of anything so pale and suf
especially as he did not rebel against answering her
examination, which concluded in her pronouncing these'
mitting attacks to be agueish, and prescribing quinine.
takt medicines is an effectual way of gaining an old lady's
..




<pb n="261"/>
rF      ~     TIIE YuUNG STEP-MOTHER.               261
Ulick was soon established in her mind as 'a very pretty
behaved yo ing gentlenian.'
In the evenings, when Mr. Kendal read aloud, Ulick listened,
and enjoyed it from the corner where he sheltered his eyes from
tile light. lie was told that he ought to go to bed quickly, but
after tile ladies were in their rooms, a lolng ,U7.iL 1lbuzin tiirur was
heard in the passage, and judicious peeping lcvcahld the two
gentlemen, each, candle in hand, the one with his back against
the wall at the top of the stairs, the other leaning upon the
balusters three steps below, and there they stayed, till the clock
stirick one, and Ulick's candle burnt out.
'\VIat could you be talking about?' asked the aggrieved
Albinia.
'Prometheus Vinctus,' composedly returned Mr. Kendal.
Ulick's eagerness in collecting every crumb of scholarship
was a great bond of union ; but there was still more in the
bright, open, demonstrative nature of the youth, whiclh ad a
great attraction for the reserved, serious Mr. Kenidal, and scarcely
a day had passed before they were on terms of intimacy, almost
like an elder and younger brother. Admitted into the family
as a connexion, Ulick at once viewed the girls as cousins, and
treated tlhem with thle sane easy grace of good-natured fami-
liarity as if they had been any of the nineteen Miss O'Moree
around Ballynakilty.
'How is your head now?' asked Mr. Kendal. 'You are late
this evening.'
'Yes,' said Ulick, entering the drawing-room, which was
ruddy with firelight, and fragrant with the breath of the con-
servatory, and leaning over an arm-chair, as he tried to rub the
aching out of his brow; ' there were some accounts to finish up,
and my additions came out different every tine.'
'A sure sign that you ought to have left oft:'
'I was just going to have told my uncle I was good for
nothing to-day, when I heard old Johns mumbling something
to him about Mr. More being unwell, and looking up, I saw
that cold grey eye twinkling at me, as much as to say he was
proud to see how soon an Irishman could be beaten. So what
could I do but give him look for look, and go on with eight and
seven, and five and two, as unconcerned as lie was.'
'Well,' said Mr. Kendal, ' you know I think that your uncle's
apparent indifference may be his fashion of being your best
friend.'
'I'd take it like sunshine in May from a stranger, and be
proud to disappoint him,' said Ulick; 'but to call himself my




<pb n="262"/>
262             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
uncle, and use my mother's own eyes to look at me tb
that's the stroke ! and to think that I'm only striving to
myself by force of habit to be exactly like him ! I'd
enlist to-morrow, if that would not be his greatest triu
lie cried, pressing his hinds hard on his temples. 'It i
childish, but I could forgive him anything but using my m
eyes that way !'
'You will yet rejoice in the likeness,' said Mr. Ke
'You must believe in more than you can trace, and
your perseverance has conquered his esteem, the rest
follow.'
' Follow ? The rest, as you call it, would go before at h
sighed Ulick, wearily.  'Esteem is like fame! what I
begins without it, and lives as well with or without it r
'Perhaps,' said his friend, ' Mr. Goldsmith would t
weakness to show preference to a relation before it was
' Ah then,' cried Ulick, in a quaint Irish tone, ' Heavei
mercy on the little children !'
'Yes, the doctrine can only be consistently held by a
man.'
'Where would we be but for inconsistency i' exc
Ulick.
' I do not like to hear you talk in that manner,' said
'Inconsistency is mere weakness.'
'Ah! then you are the dangerous character,' said Ulicklr,
a droll gesture of sheltering himself behind the chair.
'I did not call myself consistent, I wish I were,' she!
gravely.
' How she must love the French !' returned Ulick, con
tially turning to her father.
'Not at all, I detest them.'
'Then you are inconsistent, for they're the very m
uncompromising consistency.'
'Yes, to bad principles,' said Sophy.
'Robespierre was a prime specimen of consistency to
principle!'
Sophy turned to her father, and with an odd dubious
asked him, 'Is he teasing me '
'He'd be proud to have the honour,' Ulick made answe
that SMr. Kendal's smile grew broad. It was the fun
thing to see Ulick sporting with Sophy's gravity, constr
her to playfulness, with sometling of the compulsion exe
by a large frolicsome puppy upon a sober old dog ot less siz .
strength.




<pb n="263"/>
t             TETHE YOUNG STEP-3IOTHER              263
'I do not like to see powers wasted on paradox,' she said,
even as tle grave senior might roll up his lip and snarl.
'I'm in earnest, Soplly,' pursued Ulick, cllanging his note to
eatgerness. 'La grande tnation herself finds that logic was her
bane.  Consistency was never made for man ! Why where
would this world le it'it did not go two ways at once '
Soplly did laugh at this Irish version of the centripetal and
centrifugal forces, but she held out. 'The earth describes a
circle; I like straight lines.'
' Much we shall have of the right direction, unless we are
content to turn right about tftce,' said Ulick. ' The best path
of life is but a herring bone pattern.'
'What does he know of herring-boning ?' asked Mrs. Kendal,
coming in at the moment, with a white cashmere cloak folded
picturesquely over her delicate blue silk. Ulick in a moment
assumed a less careless attitude, as he answered-
'I found my poetical illustration on the motion of the earth
too much for her, so I descended to the herring-bone as more
suited to her capacity.'
'There he is, mamma,' said Sophy, 'pleading that consistency
is the most ruinous thing in the world.'
' thought as much,' said Albinia. ' Prometheus and his kin
do most abound when Ulick's head is worst, and papa is i l
greatest danger of being late.'
Mr. Kendal turned round, looked at the time-piece, and
marched off.
'But mamma r continued Sophy, driving straight at her point,
'what do you think of consistency?'
' Oh, mamma!' cried Lucy, coming into the room in a flutter
of white; there you are in your beautiful blue! Have you
really put it on for the Drurys?'
Sophy bit her lip, neither pleased at the interruption, nor at
the taste.
' Have you a graduated scale of dresses for all your friends,
Lucy?' asked Ulick.
'Everybody has, I suppose,' said Lucy.
'Ah ! then I shall know how to judge how I stand in your
favour. I never knew so well what the garb of friendship
meant.'
'You must know which way her scale goes,' said Alhinia,
laughing at Sophy's evident affront at the frivolous turn the
conversation had taken.
'That needs no asking,' quoth Ulick. ' Unadorned, adorned
the most for the nearest the hearth.'




<pb n="264"/>
264             TIE YOUNG STEP-3OTHER. 
'That's all conceit,' said Lucy. 'Maybe familiarity
contempt.'
'No, no, when young ladies despise, they use a precisio
says, "'Tis myself I care for, and not you."'
IWhat an observer!' cried Lucy. 'Now then, inte
dres, to-night !'
'How can you, Lucy ?' muttered the scandalized Sophy. i
'Well, Sophy, as you will lhave him to torment with ph
phy this whole evening, I think you might give him a
respite,' said Lucj, goo(l-hlnuouredly. 'I want to know 
my dress reveals to him !' and drawing up her head, where
coral pins contrasted with her dark braids, and spreading
her full whih. skirts and cerise trimmilg-s, she threw her fi
into an attitude, and darted a merry challenge from her li
black eyes, while Ulick availed himself of the permission to
critically, and Sophy sank back disgusted.
'Miss Kendal can, when she is inclined, produce as
effect with her beams of the second order as with all her s
dours displayed.'
'Stuff,' said Lucy.
'Stuff indeed,' more sincerely murmured Sophy.
'Say something in earnest,' said Lucy. 'You professe
tell what I thought of the people.'
'I hope you'll never put on such new white gloves w]
I'm the party chiefly concerned.'
' What do you mean ?'
'They are a great deal too unexceptionalle.'
If there were something coquettish in the manner of th
two, it did not give Albinia much concern. It was in him '
Irish;' and Fred Ferrars had made her believe that it 
rather a sign of the absence of love than of its presence. 
saw much more respect and interest in his mischievous att
on Sophy's gravity, and though Lucy both pitied him and lil
chattering with him, it was all the while under the secret 
test that he was only a banker's clerk.
Sophy was glad of the presence of a third person to ob
the perils of her evenings with grandmamma, and she behal
the trio set off to their dinner-party, without the usual dr
of being betrayed into wrangling. Mr. O'MIore devoted hi
self to the old lady's entertainment ; he amused her with d
stories, and played backgammon with her. Then she comp
herself to her knitting, and desired them not to mind her,
liked to hear young people talk cheerfully ; whereupon Sopho
by way of light and cheerful conversation, renewed the bat
of consistency with a whole broadside of heavy metal




<pb n="265"/>
TTHE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                                 265
When the diners-out came home, they found the war raging
s hotly as ever; a great many historical facts and wise sayings
having been fired off on both sides, and neither having found
out that each meant the same thing.
However, the hours had gone imperceptibly past them, which
could not be said for the others. The half-yearly dinners at
LMr. Drury's were Albinia's dread nearly as much as Mr. Kendal's
averSion. He was certain, whatever he might intend, to fall
into a fit of absence, and she was almost equally sure to hear
something unpleasant, and to regret her own reply. On the
whole, however, Mr. Kendal came away on this evening the least
dissatisfied, for Mr. Goldsmith had asked him with some solici-
tude, whether he thought 'that lad, young More,' positively
unwell; and had gone the length of expressing that he seemed
to be fairly sharp, and stuck to his work. Mr. Kendal seized
the moment for telling his opinion of Ulick, and though Mr.
Goldsmith coughed and looked dry and almost contemptuous,
le was perceptibly gratified, and replied with a maxim evidently
intended both as an excuse for himself and as a warning to the
Kendals, that young men were always spoilt by being made too
much of-in his younger days-&c.
Lucy, meantime, was undergoing the broad banter of her un-
refined cousins on the subject of the Irish clerk. A very little
grace in the perpetration would have made it grateful to her
vanity, but this was far too broad raillery, and made her hold
iu) her head with protestations of her perfect indifference, to
which her cousins manifested incredulity, visiting on her with
some petty spite their small jealousies of her higher pretensions,
and of the attention which had been paid to her by Mr. Caven-
dish D usautoy.
'Not that he will ever look at you again, Lucy, you need not
flatter yourself,' said the amiable Sarah Anne. ' Harry Wolfe
writes that he was flirting with a beautiful young lady who
came to see Oxford, and that he is spending quantities of
money.'
'It is nothing to me, I am sure,' retorted Lucy. 'Besides,
Gilbert says no such thing.'
' Gilbert ! oh, no !' exclaimed Miss Drury; 'why, he is just as
bad himself.  Papa said, from what Mrs. Wolfe told him, he
would not take 500 to pay Mr. Gilbert's bills.'
Allinia had been hearing much the same story from Mrs.
Drury, though not so much exaggerated, and administered with
nore condolence. She did not absolutely believe, and yet she
could not utterly disbelieve, so the result was a letter to Gilbert,
with an anxious exhortation to be careful, and not to be deluded




<pb n="266"/>
266            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER. 
into foolish expenditure in imitation of the Polysyllable;:
no special answer was returned, she dismissed the who
her mind as a Drury allegation.                    x
The horse chanced to be lame, so that Gilbert could
met at Hadminster on his return from Oxford; but much 
than the omnibus usually lumbered into Bayford, he asto
Sophy, who was lying on the sofa in the morning-roo
marching in with a free and easy step, and a loose coat 
most novel device.
'No one else at home ' he asked.
'Only grandmamma.   We did not think the omnibus
come in so soon, but I suppose you took a fly, as there
three of you.'
'As if we were going to stand six miles of bus with the
cub ! No, Dusautoy brought his horse down with him,
took a fly!' said Gilbert. 'Well, and what's the matter.
Captain ; has the Irishman been riding him V'
Sophy bit her lip to prevent an angry answer, and was
that Maurice rushed in, full of uproarious joy. 'IHollo I
how you grow! What have you got there ?'
' It's my new pop-gun that Ulick made me; I'll shoot
cried Maurice, retiring to a suitable distance.
'I declare the child has caught the brogue ! Is the 
here still ?'
' What fellow?' coldly asked Sophy.
'Why, this pet of my father's.'
' Bang !' cried Maurice, and a pellet passed perilously ol
Gilbert's eyes.
' Don't, child. Pray is this banker's clerk one of our fix
Sophy ?'
'I don't know why you despise him, unless it is because
what you ought to be yourself,' Sophy was provoked int
torting.
'Apparently my father has a monomania for the ar
Gilbert intended to speak with provoking coolness; butan
fraternal pellet hit him full in the nose, and the accompan
shout of glee was too much for an already irritated te]
With passion most unusual in him, he caught hold of
child, and exclaiming, 'You little imp, what do you me
it 1' he wrenched the weapon out of his hand, and d
into the fire, in the midst of an energetic 'For shame '
his sister. Maurice, with a furious ' Naughty Gilbert,' St
at him with both his little fists clenched, and then precipi
himself over the fender to snatch his treasure from the 
but was instantly captured and pulled back, struggling, kic




<pb n="267"/>
r                   THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               267
and fighting M ith all his might, till, to the equal relief of both
brothers, Sophy held up the pop-gun in the tongs, one end still
tinged with a red glow, smoky, blackened, and perfumed. Mau-
rice made one bound, she lowered it into his grasp as the last
red spark died out, anu he clasped it as Siegfried did the magic
sword !
There, Maurice, I didn't mean it,' said Gilbert, heartily
ashamed and sorry; ' kiss and make it up, and then put on your
hat, and we'll come up to old Smith's and get such a jolly one !'
The forgiving child had already given the kiss, glad to atone
for his aggressions, but then was absorbed in rubbing the charred
wood, amazed that while so much black came off on his fingers,
the effect on the weapon was not proportionate, and then tried
another shot in a safer direction. ' Come,' said Gilbert, ' put
that black affair into the fire, and come along.'
' No ' said Maurice; ' it is my dear gun that Ulick made me,
and it shan't be burnt.'
' What, not if I give you a famous one-like a real one, with
a stock and barrel ' said Gilbert, anxious to be freed from the
tokens of his ebullition.
' No ! no !' still stoutly said the constant Maurice. ' I don't
want new guns; I've got my dear old one, and I'll keep him to
the end of his days and mine !' and he crossed his arms over it.
' That's right, Maurice,' said Sophy; 'stick to old friends that
have borne wounds in your service !'
' Well, it's his concern if he likes such a trumpery old thing,'
said Gilbert. 'Come here, boy; you don't bear malice! Colme
and have a ride on my back.'
The practical lesson, 'don't shoot at your brother's nose,'
would never have been impressed, had not mamma, on coming
in, found Maurice and his pop-gun nearly equally black, and by
gradual unfolding of cause and effect, learni his forgotten offence.
She reminded him of ancient promises never to aim at human
creatures; assured him that Gilbert was very kind not to have
burnt it outright; and to the great displeasure, and temporary
relief of all the family, sequestrated the weapon for the rest oi
the evening.
Sophy told her in confidence that Gilbert had been the most
to blame, which she took as merely an instance of Sophy's
blindness to Maurice's errors; for the explosion had so com-
pletely worked off the Oxford dash, that he was perfectly week
and amiable. Considering the antecedents, such a contrast tohim-
self as young O'More could hardly fail to be an eyesore, walking
tame al,out the house, and specially recommended to his friend-
ship; but so good-natured was he, and so attractive was the




<pb n="268"/>
2(8             1HE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
Irishman, that it took much influence from Algernon
to keep up a thriving aversion. Albinia marvelled
power exercised over Gilbert by one whose intellect and 
sions he' openly contemned, but perceived that obstin
undoubting self-satisfaction overmastered his superior
gence and princille, and that while perceiving all the
of the Polysyllable, Gilbert had a strange propensity 
company, and therein always resumed the fast man, did
of the clerk. I-e did not like Ulick better for being th'
mediate cause of the removal of the last traces of the Bel
family from their old abode, which had been renova
pretty slhamrock chintz furniture, the pride of the two'
hearts. Indeed it was to be flared that Bridget would.
in the perlpetuation of those rolling R'S which caused Mr.
smith's brow to contract whenever his nephew careered
upon one.
His del,arture from Willow Lawn was to take place at
mas. The Ferrars party were coming to keep the two co
tive birthdays of Sophy and Maurice at Bayford, woul
him back for Christmas-day to Fairmead, and on his retu
would take possession of his new rooms.
Maurice's fete was to serve as the occasion of payi
civilities to a miscellaneous young party; but as grandmam
feelings would have been hurt, had not Sophy's been eq
distinguished, it was arranged that Mrs. Nugent 
then bring her eldest girl to meet the Ferrar. e.s at an
tea.
Just as Albinia had descended to await her guests, G
came down, and presently said, with would-be indifference,
by-the-by, Dusautoy said he would look in.'
'The Polysyllable!' cried  Albinia, thunderstruck; '
possessed you to ask him, when you knew I sacrificed 
Dusautoy rather than have hiln to spoil it all !'
'I didn't ask him exactly,' replied Gilbert; 'it was old Bo
who met us, and tried to nail us to eat our mutton with
as he called it. I had my answer, and Dusautoy got off'
saying he was engaged to us, and desired me to tell yo
would make his excuses in person.'
'He can make no excuse for downright falsehood.'
'Hem !' quoth Gilbert. ' You wouldn't have him done 
drinking old Bowles's surgery champagne.'
'One comfort is that he wont get any dinner,' said Albl
vindictively. 'I hope he'll be ravenously hungry.'
' He may not come after all,' said Gilbert; and Albinia,
ing hold of that hope, had nearly forgotten the threatened




<pb n="269"/>
Fr"           THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                2C9
aster, as her party appeared by instalments, and Winifred
r   owned to her that Sophy had grown better-looking than could
have been expected. Her eyes had brightened, the cloudy brown
of her cheeks was enlivened, she held herself better, and the
less childish dress was much to her advantage. But above all, the
moody look of suffering was gone, and her face had something
of the grave sweetness and regular beauty of that of her father.
Seventeen,' said M'rs. Ferrars; 'by the time she is seventy, she
may be a remarkably handsome woman !'
The tea-drinking was in lively operation, when after a
thundering knock, Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy was ushered in,
with the air of a prince honouring the banquet of his vassals,
&aying, ' I told Kendal I should presume on your hcspitality.
I beg you will make no difference on my account.'
Of which gracious permission Albinia was resolved to avail
herself. She left all the insincerity to her husband, and would
by no means allow grandmamma to abdicate the warm corner.
She suspected that he wanted an introduction to Mrs. Nu.
gent, andl was resolved to defeat this object, unless he should
condescend to make the request, so she was well satisfied to
see hinil wedged in between papa and Sophy, while a prodi-
gious quantity of Irish talk was going on between Mrs. Nu-
gent and Mr. O'More, with contributions of satire from Mr.
Ferrars which kept every one laughing except little Nora
Nugent and Mary Ferrars, who were deep in the preliminaries
of an eternal fiiendship, and held the ends of each other's crack-
ers like a pair of doves  Lucy, however, was ill at ease at the
obscurity which shrouded the illustrious guest, and in her anxi-
ety, gave so little attention to her two neighbours, that Willie
Ferrats, affronted at some neglect, exclaimed, 'Why, Lucy,
what makes you screw your eyes about so ? you can't attend to
any one.'
' It is because Polly Silly is there,' shouted Master Maurice
from his throne beside his mamma.
To the infinite relief of the half-choked Albinia, little Mary
Ferrars, with whom her cousin had been carrying on a direful
warfare all day, fitted on the cap, shook her head gravely at
him, and after an appealing look of indignation, first at his
mamnma, then at her own, was overheard confiding to Nora
Nuugent that Maurice was a very naughty boy-she was sorry to
say, a regular spoilt child.
' But how should you hinder Miss Kendal fiom attending '
' I'll tell you, darling. Poor Lucy ! she is very fond of mo,
and I dare say she wanted me to sit next to her, but you kniw
she will have me for three days, and I have you only this one




<pb n="270"/>
270            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
evening. I'll go and speak to her after tea, when we go
the drawing-room, and then she wont mind.'
Lucy, after an agony of blushes, had somewhat reco
finding that no one seemed to apply her brother's speech,
when the benevolent Mary made her way to her, and th
hland into hers, only a feeble pressure replied to these ron
blandishments, so anxious was she to carry to Mrs. Kendal
information that Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy had been so ob
as to desire his servant to bring his guitar and key-bugle.
'We are much obliged,' said Allinia, 'but look at
face!' and she turned Lucy towards Willie's open-mout
dismayed countenance. You must tell him the company.
not sufficiently advanced iu musical science.'
' But nmamma, it would gratify him !' 
'Very likely'-and without listening further, Albinia tu
to Willie, who had all day been insisting that papa should
troduce her to the new game of the Showman. 
Infinitely delighted to be relieved fiom the fear of the guw
Willie hunted all who would play into another room; wh
they were to be summoned, one by one, back to the dra
room by the showman, Mr. Ferrars, who shrugged his shoul
at the task, but undertook it, and first called for 
Kendal.
She found him stationed before the red curtains, which 
closely drawn, and her husband and the three elder ladies sit
by as audience.
'Pray, madam, may I ask what animal you would desire
have exhibited to you, out of the vast resources that-
menagerie contains. Choose freely, I undertake that whate
you may select, you shall not he disappointed.'
'What, not if I were to ask for a black spider monk
said Albinia, to whom it was very charming to be playing
Maurice again.
Mr. Kendal looked up in entertained curiosity, Mra Nu
smiled as if she thought the showman's task impossible 
Winified stretched out to gain a full view. 
'A  black spider monkey,' he said, slowly. 'Allow me.
ask, madam, if you are acquainted with the character of
beast 'f
' It doesn't scratch, does it ?' said she, quickly. 
'That is for you to answer.'
'I never knew it do so. It does chatter a great deal, but
never scratched that I knew of.'
'Nor I,' said the showman, 'since it was young. Do 
think age renders it graver and steadier I'




<pb n="271"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                 271
'Not a bit. It is always frisky andi troublesome, and I never
knew it get a bit better as it grew oller.'
Wilnifred laughed outright. Mr. Kcndal's lips were parted
lv his smile. ' 1 wonder what sort of a mother it would make ?'
Baid the showman.
'All animals are good mothers, of course.'
'I meant, is it a good disciplinarian V'
'If von mean cuffing its young one for playing exactly the
same tricks as itself.'
Exactly; and what would be the effect of letting it and its
yoing one loose in a great scholar's study '
(There wouldn't be much study left.'
' And would it be for his good '
'Really, Mr. Showman, you ask very odd questions. Shall
we try ' said Albinia, with a skip backward, so as to lay her
hand on the shoulder of her own great scholar, while the slhow-
man drew back the curtain, observing-' I wish, ma'am, I could
show " it and its young one" together, but the young specimen
is unfortunately asleep.  Belold the original black spider
monkey!'
There stood the monkey, with sunny brown locks round the
laughing glowing face, and one white paw still lying on the
sclhol:r's shoulder-while his face made no assurance needful
that it was very good for him ! The mirror concealed behind
the curtains was the menagerie ! Albinia clapped her hands
with delight, and pronounced it the most perfect of games.
'And now let us have Willie,' said Mrs. Ferrars; 'it will
conduce to the harmony of the next room.'
Willie, already initiated, holped to puzzle papa as a platypus
orti!lhoroyncus, but was driven to allow that it was a nonde-
scri!,t anilal, neither fish, flesh, nor good red-herring, useless,
ald( very fond of grubllin in the mud ; and if it were not at
Lotany Bay, it ought to he ! The langhter that liailed his de-
fence of its nose as ' well, nothing particular,' precipitated the
(lawing up of the curtain and his apparition in the glass : and
then Nora 'XNugent being called, the inseparable Mary accom-
l'anied her, arml-in-arm, simpering an announcement that they
liked nothilln so well as a pair of dear little love-birds.
Oh, nlnpitying papa ! to draw from the unsuspicious Nora the
admission that they were very dull little birds, of no shape
at all, who always sat hunched up in a corner without any
fun, and people said their love was all stupidity and pretence;
il fact, if she had one she should call it Silly Polly or Polly Silly !
To silence Willie's exultation in his sister's discomfiture, he
was sent to fetch Lucy, whose impersonation of an argus




<pb n="272"/>
272            THE YOUNG STEP-.()OTHEIR.
pheasant would not have answered well but for a sugg
Albinia, that she was eyes all over for any deliqu
school. Ulick 0'More, owning with a sigh that he sho
to see no beast better than a snipe, gave rise to much it
by being led to describe it as of a class migratory,
catch, food for powder, given to long bills. There he 
something, and stood on the defensive, but could not deny
its element was bogs, but that it had been seen skimming
water meadows, and finding sustenance in banks, whe
the curtain rose. Ulick rushed upon the battles of his m
and was only reduced to quiescence by the entrance of
who expressed a desire to see a coral worm, apparently p
ing the showman, who, to gain time, hemmed, and said, 'A
unusual species, ma'am ;' which set all the younger ones
double giggle, such as confused Sophy, to find herself
ing up, with every one looking at her, and listening f
words. 'I thought you undertook for any impossibi
earth, air, or water.'
' Well, ma'am, do you take me for a mere mountebank J
when ladies and gentlemen take such unusual fancie
for an animal that-you would not aver that it is often
from home ?'
'Never, I should say.'
' Nor that it is accessible I'
'Certainly not.'
'And why is it so, ma'am V'
'Why,' said Sophy, bewildered into forgetting her n
history, 'it lives at the bottom of the sea; that's one thin
' Where Truth lives,' said a voice behind.
'I beg to differ,' observed Albinia. ' Truth is a fresh
fish at the bottom of a well; besides, I thought coral V
were always close to the surface.' 
' But below it-not in everybody's view,' said Sophy
answer which seemed much to the satisfaction of the
ence, but the showman insisted on knowing why, and wh
it did not conceal itself. 'It makes stony caves for itself,;
of sight,' said Sophy, almost doubting whether she spoke 
rectly. 'Well, surely it does so.'
'Most surely,' said an acclamation so general that she 
not like it. If she had been younger, she would have
sulky upon the spot, and Mr. Ferrars almost doubted whe
to bring out his final query.  'Pray, ma'am, do you 
this creature out of reach in its self-made cave, at the bo
-no, below the surface of the sea, would be popular eno
to repay the cost of procuring it.'




<pb n="273"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                273
'Ah ! that's too bad,' burst out the Hibernian tones. ' Why,
is not-the best of everything hidden away from the common
eye ? Out of sight-stony cave-  It is the secret worker that
lays the true solid foundation, raises the new realms, and forms
the precious jewels.' The torrent of r's was irresistible !
'Police! order!' cried the showman. 'An Irish mob has
got in, and there's an end of everything.' So up went the cur-
tain, and the polyp appeared, becoming rapidly red colal as she
perceived what the exhibition was, and why the pl,liteness of
the Green Isle revolted from her proclaiming her own unpopu-
larity. But all she did was to turn gruffly aside, all say, ' It is
lucky there are no more ladies to come, Mr. Showman, or the
mob would turn everything to a compliment.'
Gilbert's curiosity was directed to the Laughing Jackass, and
with too much truth he admitted that it took its tone from
whatever it associated with, and caught every note, from the
song of the lark to the bray of the donkey; then laughed good-
humouredly when the character was fitted upon himself.
' That is all, is it not ?' asked the showman. ' I may retire
into private life.'
'Oh no,' cried Willie; 'you have forgotten Mr. Dusautoy.'
'I was afraid you had,' said Lucy, ' or you could not have
left him to the last.'
'I am tempted to abdicate,' said Mr. Ferrars.
'No,' Albinia said. ' He must have his share, and no one lut
you can do it. Where can he be ? the pause becomes awful !'
' Willie is making suggestions,' said Gilbert; ' his imagination
would never stretch farther than a lion. It's what he thinks
himself and no mistake.'
' He is big enough to be the elephant,' said little Mary.
'The half-reasoning?' said Ulick, softly; 'and I can answer
for his trunk, I saw it come off the omnibus.'
'Ladies and gentlemen, if you persist in such disorderly con-
duct, the exhibition will close,' cried the showman, waving his
wand as Willie trumpeted Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy in, and on
the demand what animal he Ranted to see, twitched him as
Flibbertigibbet did the giant warder, and caused him to re-
spond-' The Giraffe.'
' Has it not another name, sir ? A short or a long one, more
orless syllables !'
'Camelolpard. A polysyllabic word, certainly,' said Algernon,
looking with a puzzled expression at the laughers behind; and
almost imlagining it possible that he could have made an error,
he releated, 'Camel-le-o-pard.  Yes, it is a polysyllable-as,
indeed, he had added an unnecessary syllable.
T




<pb n="274"/>
274             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
'Most assuredly,' said tile showman, looking daggers 
suffocating sister. ' May I ask you to describe the creatu
'Seventeen feet from the crown to the hoof, but fall
behind,' said the accurate Mr. Dusautoy ; 'beautiful 
colour.'
'Nearly as good as a Lion,' added Gilbert; but Alge
fancying the game was by way of giving useful instructio
tlie children, went on in full swing. 'Handsomely mo
with darker brown; a ruminating animal; so gentle that in
of its size, none of my little friendis need be alarmed at
vicinity.  Inhabits the African deserts, but may be bre
more temperate latitudes. I myself saw an individual in
Jardin des llantes, which was popularly said never to bendj
neck to the ground, but I consider this a vulgar delusion, fi
offering it food, it mildly inclined its head.'
'Let us hope the present specimen is equally condescen
said Mr. Ferrars.
'Eh? what I I see myself !' said Mr. Cavendish Dusa
with a tone so inllpprecially grand in mystification, that
showman had no choice but to sllare the universal convu
,f laulghter, while Willie rolling on the floor with ecs
shouted, ' Yes, it is you that are the tlling with such a
name that it can't l)end its head to tire ground !'
' But too good-natured to be annoyed at folly,' said Mr. Fe
perceiving tlhat it was no sport to lim.
' This is the way my mischievous uncle lhas served ns all
turn,' said Lucy, advancing; 'we have all been shown
anil there was mlnamma a monkey, and 1 an argus phlesantf
'Ah ! I see,' said the gentlel:ian. 'These are your 
pastimes of tile season. Yes, I can take my share in good
just as I have pilted the masks at tile Carnlival.' 
'Even a girafle can bend his head and do at Rome as R
does,' murmured Ulick. But instea,1 of heeding the audas
Irishman, Algernon patroiiztd the showman by thanks for
exhibition  and tlen sitting dlown by lIcy, asked it lie lad
told her of the tricks that lie and il Princilpe Odorico MoN
used to play at Emns on the oll B1aron Slrawlowsky, while 
Ferrars, I.aning over his sister's chair, said aside, ' I beg y
pardon, Allhinia ; 1 should not have vielded to Willie.
"rural pastime" is only in seaso n  .en fat.iille.'
'Never mind; it served hinl rigllt.'
'It may have served him right, Iut had we the right to
him.'
'I forgive your prudence for tlie s:ike of your folly. 
not Oxford have lessened his pomplosity 1'




<pb n="275"/>
~'  'THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                        275
' It comes too late,' said M.urice.
Before Ulick went to bed his pen and ink had depicted the
entire caravan. The love-birds were pressed up together, with the
individual features of the two young la lies, and completely little
jArrots; the snipe ran along the bars of the cage, looking exactly
like all the O'.Mores. The monkey showed nothing but the hands,
but one lield Maurice, and the other was clenched as ifto cufllhim,
and grandest of all was,as in duty bound, Camelopardelis giraffa,
thlown somewhat backwards. with such a majestic form, such a
stalking attitude, loftily ruminating face, and legs so like the
Cavendish Dusautoy's last new pair of trowsers, that Albilia could
nothelpreservingitfor the private delectation of his Aunt Fanny.
'It and its young one,' said Mr. Kendal, as he looked at her
portrait; and the name delighted him so much, that he for some
time applied it with a smile whenever his wife gave him cause
to remember how much there was of the monkey in her com-
position.
It was the merriest Christmas ever known at Willow Lawn,
and the first time there had been anything of the atmosphere
of family fiolic and fun. The liglhting up of Sophy was
one great ingredient; hitherto mirth had been merely endured
by her, whereas now, improved health and spirits had made ler
take her share, amuse others and be amused, and cease to be
hurt by the jarring of chance words. Lucy was lively as usual,
but ratller more excited than Albinia altogether liked; she
was doubly particular about her dress; more disdainful of the
colimionl herd, and had a general air of exaltation that nmade
Albinia rejoice when tile Polysyllable, tile horses, the key-
bugle, and genre painting disappeared from  the  B3ayfrd
horizon.
CHAPTER XX.
IF the end of the vacation were a relief on Lucy's account,
Albinia would gladly have lengthened it on Gill,ert's.
Letters fiom his tutor had disquieted his father; there had
been an expostulatiou followed by promises, and afterwards (;ne
of the usual scenes of argument, compnlaint, excuse, lamentation,
and wish to amend; but lastly, a murmur that it was no use
to talk to a father who hlad never been at the University, and
did not know what was expected of a man.
The aspect of Oxford liad changdle in Albinia's eves since the
days of her brother. Alm.a Malter hlad been a vision of pealing
T O




<pb n="276"/>
2 76            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
bells, chanting voices, cloistered shades, bright waters-the
of her most cherished thoughts, the abode of youth walkin
the old paths of pleasantness and peace; and she knew th
faithful hearts, old Oxford was still the same. But to
present anxious gaze it had become a field of snares and ten
tions, whit hlr she had been the means of sending one, unga
and unst:le. (
Oli'- undelr the influence of a good sound-hearted friend
might Il: ve been easily led right, but his intimacy with y
Dusautoy semnled to cancel all hope of this, and to be li
rope about his neck, drawing him into the same career,
keeping aloof all better influences. Algernon, with his
pomposity, and false refinement, was more likely to run
ostentatious expenditure, than into coarse dissipation, an
night still be hoped that the two youths would drag thr
without public disgrace; but this was felt to be a very
hope by those who felt each sin to be a fital blot, and trem
at the self-indulgent way of life that might be a more 
injury than even the ban of the authorities.
She saw that the anxiety pressed heavily on Mr. Ken
and though both shrank from giving their uneasiness for
putting it into words, each felt that it was ever-present
the other. Mr. Kendal was deeply grieving over the effects;
the former state of ignorance and apathy of the evils ofw
he had only recently become fully sensible. Living for hi
alone, without cognizance of his membership in one great
versal system, he had needed the sense of churchmansbi
make him act up to his duties as father, neighbour, cit
and man of property; and when aroused, he found that
time of his inaction had bound him about with fetters. A
of mind had grown up in his family from which only So
had been entirely freed; seeds of ineradicable evil had 
sown, mischiefs had grown by neglect, abuses been established
custom ; and his own personal disadvantages, his mou,
honte, his reserved, apparently proud manner, his slowness
speech, dislike to interruption, and over-vehemence Wl
excited, had so much increased upon him, as, in spite of
efforts, to be serious hindrances. Kind, liberal, painsal
and conscientious as he had become, he was still looked up
hard, stern, and tyrannical. His ten years of inertness
strewn his path with thorns and briars, even beyond his o
household; and when he looked back to his neglect of his 
he felt that even the worst consequences would be but
retribution.
Once such feelings would have wrapt him in morbid glo1




<pb n="277"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                277
now lie strove against his disposition to sit inert and hidden,
lie did his work manfully, and endeavoured not to let his want
of spirits sadden the household.
Nor was he insensible to the cheerful healthy atmosphere
of animation which   had  diffused itself there; and the
bright discussions of the trifling interests of the day. Ulick
O'More was also a care to him, which did him a great deal of
good.
That young gentleman now lived at his lodgings, but was
equally at home at Willow Lawn, and his knock at the library
door, when he wished to change a book, usually led to some
'Prometheus' discussion, and sometimes to a walk, if Mr.
Kendal thought him looking pale; or to dining and to spending
the evening.
His scrapes were peculiar. He had thoroughly mastered his
work, and his active mind wanted farther scope, so that lie
threw himself with avidity into deeper studies; and once fell
into horrible disgrace for being detected with a little Plato on
his desk. Mr. Goldsmith nearly gave him up in despair, and
pronounced that he would never make a man of business. He
made matters worse by replying that this was the best chance of
his not being a man of speculation. If he were allowed to think
of nothing but money, he should speculate for the sake of
something to do !
Before Mr. Goldsmith had half recovered the shock, Mr.
Dusautoy and Mr. Hope laid violent hands upon young O'More
for the evening school twice a week, which almost equally dis-
composed his aunt. She had never got over the first blow of
AJr. Dusautoy's innovations, and felt as if her nephew had gone
over to the enemy. She was doubly ungracious at the Sunday
dinner, and venomously critical of the choir's chanting, Mr.
Holpes voice, and the Vicar's sermons.
The worst scrape came in March. The Willow Lawn ladies
were in the lower end of the garden, which, towards the river,
Was separated from the lane that continued Tibb's Alley, by a
low wall surmounted by spikes, and with a disused wicket,
always locked, and nearly concealed by a growth of laurels; when
out broke a horrible hullabaloo in that region of evil report,
the shouts and yells coming nearer, and becoming so distinct
that they were about to retreat, when suddenly a dark figure
leapt over the gate, and into the garden, amid a storm of outcries
As he disappeared among the laurels, Albinia caught up Maurice,
Lucy screamed and prepared to fly, and Sophy started forward,
exclaiming, ' It is Ulick, mamma; his face is bleeding !' But as
he emerged, she retreated, for she had a nervous terror of the




<pb n="278"/>
2 78           THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
canine race, and in his hand, at arm's length he held
neck a yellow dog, a black pot dangling from its tail.
'Take care,' he shouted, as Albinia set down Mauri
was running up to him; ' he may ,e mad.'
Maurice was caught up again, Lucy shrieked, and 
tottering against an apple-tree, faintly said, ' He has bitten
'No, not lie; it was only a stone,' said Ulick, as 
might, with a fast bleeding upper lip. 'They were hunti
poor beast to death-I believe he's no more mad than I
only with the fright-but best make sure.'
'Fetch some milk, Lucy,' said Albinia. 'Take Maurice
you. No, don't take the poor thing down to the river; he'l
think you are going to drown him. Go, Maurice dear.'
Maurice safe, Albinia was able to find ready expedients
Sir Fowell Buxton's celebrated example. She brought
the gardener's thick gauntlets from the tool-house, and 8Ul
him with her knife, with which he set the poor creatu
from the instrument of torture, and then let him loose, 
pan of milk before him, in the old-fashioned summer-
through the window of which he could observe his motio
if he looked dangerous, shoot him. .f
Nothing could look less dangerous ; the poor creature,
down on the floor and moaned, licked its hind leg, and
dragged itself as if famished to the milk, lapped a little ea
but lay down again whining, as if in pain. Ulick and Al
called to it, and it looked up and tried to wag its tail, wh
appealingly.  ' My poor brute !' he cried, ' they've treated
worse than a heathen. That's all-let me see what I 
for vou.'
' Yes, but yourself, Ulick,' said Albinia, as in his h
took down his handkerchief from his mouth ; 'I do believe 
lip is cut through ! You had better attend to that first.'
'No, no, thank you,' said Ulick, eagerly; they've broke
poor wretch's leg !' and he was the next moment sitting on
summer-house floor, lifting up the animal tenderly, regardl
her expostulation that the injured, fiightened creature m
not know its friends. But she (lid it injustice; it wage
stumpy tail, and licked his fingers.
She offered to fetch rag for his surgery, and he further
for some slight bits of wood to serve as splints; he and
brothers had been dog-doctors before. As she hurried intoi
house, Sophy, who had sunk on a sofa in the drawing-
looking deadly pale, called out, ' Is lie bitten 1'
'No, no,' cried Albinia, hurrying on; ' the dog is all safe.
has only got a broken leg.' 




<pb n="279"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               279
Maurice, with whom Lucy had all this time been fighting,
came out with her to see the rest of the adventure; and thought
it very cruel that he was not permitted to touch the patient,
which bore the operation with affecting fortitude and gratitude,
and( was then consigned to a basket lined with hay, and left in the
sulmmer-house, Mlr. Kendal being known to have an almost
easterni repugnance to clogs.
Then Ulick had leisure to he conducted to tile morning-room,
and be rendered a less ghastly spectacle, by some very uncom-
ftrtable stickinlg-plaster moustaches, which hardly permitted him
to narrate his battle distinctly.  He thought the boys, even of
Tibb's Alley, would hardly have ventured any violence after lie
lad interfered, but for some young men who ought to have known
better; he fancied he had seen young Tritton of Robbles Leigh,
uand lie was sure of an insolent groom whom Mr. Cavendish
Dusautoy, to the great vexation of his uncle, had recently sent
down with a horse to the King's Head. They had stimulated
the boys to a shout of Paddy and a shower of stones,
and Ulick expected credit for great discretion in having fled
instead of fought. ' Ah ! if Brian and Connel liad but been
there, wouldn't we have put them to the rout ?'
Nothing would tlen serve him but going back to Tibb's Alley
to trace the dog's history; and meantime Lucy, fiom the end of
the passage, beckoned to Albinia, and whispered mysteriously
that' Sophy would not have any one know it for the world-but,'
said Lucy,' I found her absolutely fainting away on the sofa,
only she would not let nme call you, and ordered that no one
should know anything about it.    But, mamma, there was
a red-hot knitting-needle sticking out of the fire, and I am
quite sure that she meant if Ulick was bitten, to burn out the
place.'
Albinia believed Sophy capable of both the resolution and
its consequence; but she agreed with Lucy that no notice should
be taken, and would not seem aware that Sophy was much paler
than usual.
The dog, as well as Ulick could make out, was a waif or stray,
belonging to a gipsy deported that morning by the police, and
on whom its master's sins had been visited. So without scruple
he carriel the basket home to his lodgings, and on the way, had
the misfortune to encounter his uncle, while shirtfront, coat,
and waistcoat were fresh friom the muddy and bloody fray, and
his visage in tile height of disfigurement.
Mr. Goldsmith looked on the whole affair as an insult to
every Goldsmlith ,f past ages ! A mere street row ! Ile orlered
3]r. More to his lodgings, and said he should hear from him




<pb n="280"/>
280            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
to-morrow. Ulick came down to Willow Lawn in the
almost considering himself as dismissed, not knowing whe
to be glad or sorry; and wanting to consult Mr. Kendal whe
it would be possible to work his way at college as Mr. Hlope
done, or even wondering whether he might venture to beg 
recommendation to ' Kendal and Kendal.'
MIr. Kendal was so strongly affected, that lie took up his
and went straight to Mr. Goldsmith, ' to put the matter
him in a true light.'
True light or filse, it was intolerable in the banker's e
and it took a great deal of eloquence to persuade him that
nephew was worth a second trial. Fighting in Tibb's A
over a gipsy's dog, and coming back looking like a ruffian ! 
Goldsmith wished him no harm, but it would be a disgrace
the concern to keep him on, and Miss Goldsmith, whom
Kendal heartily wished to gag, chimed in with her old predicti
of the consequences of her poor sister's foolish marriage. The 
argumbent, was Mr. Kendal's declaration of the testimonials 
which he would at once send him out to Calcutta, to take
situation once offered to his own son. No sooner did Mr. Goldsmi
hear that his nephew had an alternative, than he promised to
lenient, and finally dispatched a letter to U. More, Esquire, w
a very serious rebuke, but a promise that his conduct sho
be overlooked, provided the scandal were not repeated, and
should not present himself at the bank till his face should be
to be seen.
Mr. Kendal mounted him the next morning on Gilbe
horse, and sent him to Fairmead. The dog was left in cha
of Bridget, who treated it with abundant kindness, but failed
obtain the exclusive affection which the poor thing lavish
upon its rescuer. By the time Ulick came home, it had arriv
at limping upon three legs, and was bent on following hi
wherever he went. Disreputable and heinously ugly it was,
tawny currish yellow (whence it was known as te Oran
man), with a bull-dog countenance; and the legs that did
limp, were bandy. Albinia called it the Tripod, but someho
it settled into the title of Hyder Ali, to which it was said
' answer' the most readily, though it would in fact answer an
thing from Ulick, and nothing fiom any one else.
Ever at his heels, the ' brazen Tripod' contrived to establi
an entrance at Willow Lawn; scratched till Mr. Kendal wou
interrupt a 'Prometheus talk' to let him in at the library door
and gradually made it a matter of course to come into t
drawing-room, and repose upon Sophy's flounces.
This was by way of compensation for his misadventures els




<pb n="281"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               2S1
where. He was always bringing Ulick into trouble; shut or
tie him up as he might, lie was sure to reappear when least
wanted. He had been at church, he had been in Miss Gold-
nsitl's drawing-rooml, he had been found times without
number curled up under Ulick's desk. Mr. Goldsmith growled
hints about hanging him, and old Mr. Johns, who really was
fond of his bright young fellow clerk, gave grave counsel; but
Ulick only loved his protc6g  the better, and after having ex-
hausted an Irish vocabulary of expostulation, succeeded in
prevailing on him to come no farther than the street; except on
very wet days, when he would sometimes be found on the mat
in the entry, looking deplorably beseeching, and bringing on his
master an irate, 'Here's that dog again F
'Would that no one fell into worse scrapes,' sighed Mr.
Dusautoy, when lie heard of Ulick's disasters with Hyder Ali;
and it was a sigh that the house of Kendal re-chcoed.
Nolbody could be surprised when, towards the long vacation,
tidings Cilne to Bayford, that after long forbearance on the part
of the authorities, the insubordination and riotous conduct of
the two young nen could be endured no longer. It aplpeared
that young Dusautoy, with his weak head and obstinate will,
had never attempted to bend to rules, but had taken every
reproof as an insult and defiance. Young men had not been
wanting who were ready to take advantage of his lavish ex-
penditure, and to excite his disdain for authorities. They had
promoted the only wit he did understand, broad practical jokes
and nischief; and had led him into the riot and gambling to
which lie was not naturally prone. Gilbert Kendal, with more
sense and principle, had been led on by the contagion around
him, and at last an outrageous wine party had brought matters
to a ciisis. Tlhe most guilty were the most cunning, and the
only two to whom the affair could actually be brought home,
were Dusautoy and Kendal. The sentence was rustication, and
the tutor wrote to Mr. Dusautoy, as the least immedia:ely
affected, to ask him to convey the intelligence to Mr. Kenda:.
The vicar was not a man to shrink fromi any task, however pain-
ful, but he felt it the more deeply, as, in spite of his partiality, he
Was forced to look on his own favourite Algernon as the mis-
leader of Gilbert; and when he overtook tlhe sisters on his
melancholy way down the hill, he consulted them how their
father would bear it.
'Oh ! I don't know,' said Lucy; 'he'll be terribly angry. I
Should not wonder if he sent Gilbert straight off to India;
should you, Sophy ?'
'I hope he will do nothing in haste,' exclaimed Mr. Duseatoy.




<pb n="282"/>
282            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
I I do believe if those two lads were but separated, or ev
of such company, they would both do very well.'
' Yes,' exclaimed Lucy; ' and, after all, they are such a
regulations, treating men like schoolboys, wanting the
keep such regular troublesome hours.  Mr. Cavendish
sautoy told me that there was no enduring the having e
thing, enforced.'
'If tlings had been enforced on poor Algernon earlier,
might never have been,' sighed his uncle.
' 'm sure I don't see why papa should mind it so m
continued Lucy. 'Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy told me his f
Lord Reginald Raymond had been rusticated twice, and
Ielled at last.'
' What do you think of it, Sophy ?' asked the vicar,
iously.
'I don't feel as if any of us could ever look up again,'!
answered very low.
'Why, no; not that exactly. It is not quite the right'
to take these things, Sophy,' said Mr. Dusautoy. ' Boys
be very foolish and wrong-headed, without disgracing
family.'
Sophy did not answer-it was all too fresh and sore; and
did not find much consolation in the numbler of youths w
Lucy reckoned up as having incurred the like penalty. 
they entered the house, and Mr. Dusantoy knocked at.
library door, she followed Lucy into the garden, without 
ing where she was going, and threw herself down upon
grass, miserable at the pain which was being inflicted upon'
father, and with a hardened resentful feeling, between cont
and anger, against the brother, who, for very weakness, 
so dishonour and grieve hinm. Slhe clenclhed her hanl in the
tensity of her passionate thoughts and impulses, and sat l
statue, while Lucy, from time to time, between the tying
flowers and watering of annuals, came up with incon
exhortations not to be so unhappy-for it was not expulsi
it was sure to be unjust-nobody would think the wore
them because young men were foolish-all men of spirit did
into scrapes-
It was lucky for Lucy that all this passed by Sophy's ear
unheeded as the babbling of the brook. She did not move,
roused by Ulick O'More, coining up from the bridge,te
that he had met some Irish haymlakers in the meadowsl
saying he wanted to beg a frock for one of their children.
'I think I can find you one,' said Lucy, ' if you will 
minute ; but don't go in, Mr. Dusautoy is there.'




<pb n="283"/>
THE YOUNG STEP MOTHER.                283
' Is anything the matter ?' he exclaimed.
'Every one must soon know,' said Lucy; ' it is of no use to
keep it back, Sophy. Only my brother and Mr. Cavendish
Dusautoy have got into a scrape about a wine party, and are
going to be rusticated. But wait, I'll fetch the frock.'
Sophy had almost run away while her sister spoke, but the
kind look of consternation and pity on Ulick's face deterred her;
he in soliloquy repeated, as if confounded by the greatness of
the misfortune, ' Poor Gilbert!
'Poor Gilbert!' burst fiom Sophy in irritation at misplaced
sympathy; 'I thought it would be papa and mamma you cared
for?'
' With reason,' returned Ulick; 'but I was thinking how it
must break his heart to have pained such as they.'
'I wish he would feel it thus,' exclaimed Sophy; 'but he
never will I'
'Oh ! banish that notion, Sophy,' cried Ulick, recoiling at
the indignation in her dark eyes; 'next to grieving ny mother,
I declare nothing could crush me like meeting a look such as
that from a sister of mine.'
'How can I help it ?' she said, reserve breaking down in her
vehemence, 'when I think how much papa has suffered-how
much Gilbert has to make up to him-how nmamma took him
for her own-how they have borne with him, and set their
happiness on him, and yielded to his fancies, only for him to
disappoint them so cruelly, and just because he can't say No !
I hope he wont come home; I shall never know how to speak
to him !'
' But all that makes it so much the worse for him,' said Ulick,
in a tone of amazement.
'Yes, you can't understand,' she answered; 'if he had had
one spark of feeling like you, he would rather have died than
have gone on as he has done.'
'Surely many a man may be overtaken in a fault, and never
be wrong at heart,' said Ulick. 'There's many a worse sin
than what the world sets a blot upon, and I believe that is
just why homes were made.'
Lucy came back with the frock, and Ulick, thanking her, sped
away; while Sophy slowly went upstairs and laid herself on
her couch. For a woman to find a man thinking her over-hard
and severe, is sure either to harden or to soften her very
decidedly, and it was a hard struggle which would be the effect.
There was an inclination at first to attribute his surprise to the
lax notions and foolish fondness of his home, where no doult
tar worse disorders than Gilbert's were treated as mere matters




<pb n="284"/>
284            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
of course. But such strong pity for the offender did not
to accord with this; and the more she thought, the mo
she became that it was the fresh charity and sweetness
innocent spirit, 'believing all things,' and separating the
from the offender. His words had fallen on her ear in a
beyond what he meant. Pride and uncharitable reset
might be worse sins than mere weakness and excess.
thought of the elder son in the parable, who, unknowing
brother's temptation and sorrow, closed his heart agi
return; and if her tears would have come, she would have
that she could not bring herself to look on Gilbert ot
than as the troubler of her father's peace.
When her mother at last came upstairs, she only vent
ask gently, 'How does papa bear it ?'
'It did not come without preparation,' was the answer;
at first we were occupied with comforting Mr. Dusautoy,
takes to himself all the shame his nephew will not feel, for
drawn poor Gilbert into such as ec.'
'And papa ?' still asked Sophy.
'He is very quiet, and it is not easy to tell  I believe i
a great mistake, though not of his making, to send Gilbe
Oxford at all, and I doubt whether he will ever go back 
'Oh, mamma, not conquer this, and live it down 1'
Solphy; but then changing, she sighed and said, [
would-'
' Yes, a great deal depends upon how he may take this.,
what becomes of Algerncn Dusautoy; though I suppose th
no lack of other tempters. Your papa has even spoken of
again; he still thinks he would be more guarded there, bat
depends on the spirit in which we find him. One thing I
that I shall leave it all to his father's judgment, and not sa
word.'
The next post brought a penitent letter from Gilbert, su
ting completely to his father; only begging that he might'
see any one at home until he should have redeemed his ch
and promising to work very hard and deny himself all rela
if he might only go to a tutor at a distance.
This did not at all accord with Mr. Kendal's views. He
an unavowed distrust of Gilbert's letters; he did not fa
tutor thus selected, and believed the boy to be physically 
pable of the proposed amount of study. So he wrote a
grave but merciful summons to Willow Lawn.
Albinia went to meet the delinquent at Hadminster, and
struck by the different deportment of the two youths. Alge
Duwautoy, whose servant had met him, sauntered up to her




<pb n="285"/>
*-             TITHE YOUNG STEP-MOTTTFR.            2.5
nothing had happened, carelessly hoped all were well tit Bayford,
and, in spite of her exceeding coldness, talked on with perfect
ease upon the chances of a war with Russia, and had given her
three or four maxims, before Gilbert came up with the lugg;rge
van, with a bag in his hand, and a hurried bewildered manner,
unable to meet her eye. He handed her into the carriage,
seated himself beside her, and drove off without one unnecessary
word, while Algernon, mounting his horse, waved them a dis-
engaged farewell, and cantered on. Albiuia heard a heavy sigh,
and saw her companion very wan and sorrowful, dejection in
every feature, in the whole stool) of his figure, and in the nervous
twitch of his hands. The contrast gave an additional impulse to
her love and pity, and the first words she said were, ' Your
father is quite ready to forgive.'
'I knew he would he so,' he answered, hardly able to command
his voice ; 'I knew you would all be a great deal too kind to me,
and that is the worst of all.'
' No, Gilbert, not if it give you resolution to resist the next
time.'
He groaned; and it was not long before she drew fiom him a
sincere avowal of his follies and repentance. He had been led
on by assurances that' every one' did the like, by fear of betray-
ing his own timidity, by absurd dread of being disdained as slow;
all this working on his natural indolence and love of excite-
ment, had combined to involve him in habits which had brought
on him this disgrace. It was a hopeful sign that he adlmitted its
justice, and accused no one of partiality ; the reprimand hau told
upon him,and he was too completely struckdown even to attempt
to justify himself; exceedingly afraid of his father, and only
longing tohitle himself. Such was his utter despair, that Albini.a
had no scruples in encouraging him, and assuring him with all
her heart, that if taken rightly, the shock that brought him to
his senses, might be the blessing of his life. He did not take
confort readily, though soothed by her kindness; he could not
get over his excessive dread of his father, and each attempt at
reassurance fell short. At last it came out that the very core of
his misery was this, that he had found hinlself for part of the
journey, in the same train with Miss Durant and two or three
children. He could not tell her where he was going nor why,
and lie had leant back in the carriage, and watched her on the
platform by stealth, as she moved about, ' lovelier and more grace-
fil than ever !' but how could he present himself to her in his
disgrace and misery? 'Oh, Mrs. Kendal, I forgive my father,
but my life was blighted when I was cut off from her !'
'No, Gilbert, you are wrong. There is no blighting in a worthy,




<pb n="286"/>
286            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
disinterested attachment. To be able to love and respect
a woman is a good substantial quality in you, and ought to 
you a higher and better man.'
Gilbert turned round a face of extreme amazement.
thought,' he said, 'I thought you-' and went no farther.
'I respect your feeling for her more than when it was
years younger,' she said; 'I should respect it doubly if inst
of making you ashamed, it had saved you from the need of ha
'Do you give me any hope T cried Gilbert, his face gleam
into sudden eager brightness.
'Things have not become more suitable,' said Albinia;
his look lapsed again into despondency; but she added, '
step towards real manhood, force of character, and steadin
would give you weight which might make your choice wo
your father's consideration, and you worth that of Genevieve.,
'    O  ! would you but have told me so before !'
'It was evident to your own senses,' said Albinia; and
thought of the suggestion that Sophy had made.
' Too late ! too late !' sighed Gilbert.
'No, never too late ! You have had a warning; you aree
young, and it cannot be too late for winning a character, 
redeeming the time !'
' And you tell me I may love her !' repeated Gilbert, so
toxicated with the words, that she became afraid of them.
' I do not tell you that you may importune her, or dis
your father. I only tell you that to look up and work and de
yourself, in honour of one so truly noble, is one of the best 
most saving of secondary motives. I shall honour you, Gil
if you do so use it as to raise and support you, though of cou,
I cannot promise that she can be earned by it, and even th
motive will not do alone, however powerful you may think it. 
Neither of them said more, but Gilbert sighed heavily seve
times, and would willingly have checked their homeward sp
lie grew pale as they entered the town, and groaned as
gates swung back, and they rattled over the wooden bridge.
was about four o'clock, and lie said, hurriedly, as with a sort
hope, 'I suppose they are all out.'
He was answered by a whoop of ecstasy, and before he w
well out of the carriage, he was seized by the joyous Mauri
shouting that he had been for a ride with Ipapa, without a leadi
rein. Happy age for both, too young to know more than 
the beloved pIlayfellow was at home again !
Little Albinia studied her brother till the small memory eaW
hack, and she made her pretty signs for the well-rememberei'
dancing in his arms. From such greetings, Gilbert's wounded




<pb n="287"/>
!n             1sTHE YOUNG. STI'P-MOTIIER.            287
:ppirit could not shrink, much as he dreaded all others; and,
carrying the baby and preceded by Maaurice, while lie again
nittered that of course no one was at home, he went upstairs.
Alhinia meantime tapped at the library door. She knew
3lr. Kendal to be there, yearning to forgive, but thinking it
rigllt to have his pardon sought; and she went in to tell him of
his son's keen remorse, and deadly fear. Displeased and mourn-
1fi1. Mr. Kendal sighed. ' He has little to fear froml me, would
h1,: lt believe so ! He ought to have come to me, but-'
Tll;t ' but' meant repentance for over-sternness in times
past.
' Let me send him to you.'
' 1 will come,' said Mr. Kendal, willing to spare his son the
terror of presenting himself.
There was a pretty sight in the morning-room. Gilbert was
on the floor with the two children, Maurice intent on showing
how nearly little A Ibinia could run alone, and between ordering
and coaxing, drawing her gently on; her beautiful brown eyes
opened very seriously to the great undertaking, and her round
soft hands, with a mixture of confidence and timidity, trusted
within the sturdy ones of her small elder, while Gilbert knelt on
one knee, and stretched out a protecting arm, rea ly to grasp the
little one, if the more childish brother should fail her, and his
eountenance, liglhtedl up with interest and affection, was far more
prepossessing than when so lately it had been full of cowering
almost alject apprehension.
Was it a sort of instinctive feeling that the little sister would
le his besAt shelter, that made him gather the child into his arms,
and hold her before his deeply blushing face as he rose from the
floor 1 She merrlily called out, Papa ! Maurice loudly began to
recount her exploits, nod thus passed tie salutation, at the end
of which Gill ert found thlat his father was taking the little one
from him, amnl hivin, lher to her mother, who carried ler away,
calling Maurlice with her.
'lave you nothing to say to me?' said Mr. Kendal, aftec
waiting for s-ome moments ; but as Gilbert only loked up to
himwitl a piieous, seared, uncertain glance, lie added; 'You
need not fi ar me; I believe you have erred more froml weakness
than flini evil inclinations, and I trust in the sincerity of your
repent:.llce.'
These kind words softened Gilbert; he assured his father of
his thanks for his kindness, no one could grieve more deelv, or
le more anxious to atone in any possible manner for what he
h:d unwittingly done.
' I believe you, Gilbert,' said his father; 'but you well know




<pb n="288"/>
288            THE YOUNG STEP MOTHER. 
that the only way of atoning for the past, as well 
avoiding such wretchedness and disgrace for the future
show greater firmness.'
' I know it is,' said Gilbert, sorrowfully.
'I cannot look into your heart,' added Mr. Kendal. c
only hope and believe that your grief for the sin is as de
deeper, than that for the public stigma, for which compara
I care little.'
Gilbert exclaimed that so indeed it was, and this was no
than the truth. Out of sight of temptation, and in that
atmosphere, the loud revel and coarse witticisms that h
him on, were only loathsome and disgusting, and made
miserable in the recollection.
' I am ready to submit to anything,, he added, fervently.,
long as you forgive me, I am ready to bear anything.' 
' I forgive youl from my heart,' said Mr. Kendal, warmly. 
only wish to consider what may be mnist expedient for you.
should scarcely like to send you back to Oxford to retrieve
character, unless I were sure that you would be more re
in resisting temptation. No, do not reply; your actions d
this time of penance will be a far more satisfactory answers
any promises. I had thought of again apl)lying to your 
John, to take you into his hank, though you could not no
on such terms as you might have done when there was no
in the background, and 1 still sometimes question whether 
not the safer method.'
' Whatever you please,' said Gilbert; ' I deserve it all.'
' Nay, do not look upon my decision, whatever it may
punishment, but only as springing from my desire for your 
welfare. I will write to your cousin and ask whether he
has a vacancy, but without absolutely proposing you to 
and we will look on the coming months as a period of proba
during which we may judge what may be the wisest course. I
only ask one other question, Gilbert, and you need not be 
to answer me fully and freely. Have you any debts at Oxfo
'A few,' stammered Gilbert, with a great effort.
'Can you tell me to whom, and the amount 1'
He tried to recollect as well as he could, while compl
frightened and confused by the gravity with which his 
was jotting them down in his pocket-book.
' Well, Gilbert,' he concluded, ' you have dealt candidly
me, and you shall never have cause to regret having done.
.A id now we will only feel that you are at home, and dwell
longer on the cause that has brought you. Come out, and
what we have been doing in the meadow.'




<pb n="289"/>
TIHE YOING STEP-MOTHER.               2S9
Gilbert seemed more overthrown and broken down by kind.
ness than by reproof. He hardly exerted himself even to play
with Maurice, or to amuse his grandmother; and though his
sisters treated him as usual, he never once lifted up his eyes to
meet Sophy's glance, and scarcely used his voice.
Nothing could be more disarming than such genuine sorrow;
and Sophy, pardoning him with all her heart, and mourning for
her past want of charity, watched him, longing to do something
tfor his comfort, and to evince her tenderness; but only
succeeded in encumbering every petty service or word of inter-
course with a weight of sad consciousness
CHAPTER XXL
'T  AD   almost written to ask your pardon,' said Mrs.
I  Dusautoy, as Albinia entered her drawing-room on the
afternoon following. 'I should like by way of experiment to
know what would put that boy out of countenance. He listened
with placid graciousness to his uncle's lecture, and then gave us to
understand that he was obliged for his solicitude, and that there
was a great deal of jealousy and misrepresentation at Oxford;
but he thought it best always to submit to authorities, however
unreasonable. And this morning, after amiably paying his
respects to me, he said he was going to inquire for Gilbert. I
intimated that Willow Lawn was the last place where he would
be welcome, but he was far above attending to me. Did Gilbert
see him ?'
'Gilbert was in the garden with us when we were told he
was in the house. Poor fellow, he shuddered, and looked as if
lie wanted me to guard him, so I sent him out walking with
Maurice while I went in, and found Lucy entertaining the
gentleman. I made myself as cold and inhospitable as I could,
but I aml afraid he rather relishes a dignified retenue.'
'Poor boy ! I wonder what on earth is to be done with
him. I never before knew what John's love and patience were.'
'Do you think lie will remain here ?'
I cannot tell; we talk of tutors, but John is really, I believe,
lalppier for having him here, and besides one can be sure the
Worst he is doing is painting a lobster. However, much would
(lepend on what you and MIr. Kendal thought. If he and
Gilbert were doing harm to each other, everytlling must give
way.'
'If people of that age will not keep themselves out of harm's
lI




<pb n="290"/>
O90            TIIE YOUNG STEP MOTHER.
way, nobody can do it for them,' said Albinia, ' and as lonI
Gilbert continues in his present mood, there is more real
ration in voluntarily holding aloof, than if they were sent
apart, only to come together again at college.'
Gilbert did continue in the same mood. The tender cheris
of his home restored his spirits; but he was much subd
and deeply grateful, as he manifested by the most eager
affectionate courtesy, such as made him almost the servant
everybody, without any personal aim or object, except to w
up his deficient studies, and to avoid young Dusautoy.
seemed to cling to his family as his protectors, and to fol
the occupations least likely to lead to a meeting with the P
syllable; he was often at church in the week, rode with
father. went parish visiting with the ladies, and was respons
when Maurice fished for minnows in the meadows. Noth
could be more sincerely desirous to atone for the past and 
on a diflerent course, and no conduct could be more
humble or endearing.
The imaginary disdain of Ulick O'More was entirely
and perceiving that the Irishman's delicacy was keeping
away fiom Willow Lawn, Gilbert himself met him and bro
him home, in the delight of having heard of a naval cade
having been offered to his brother, and full of such eager joly
longed for sympathy. 
'Happy fellow !' Gilbert murmured to himself.
Younger in years, more childish in character, poor Gil
had managed to make his spirit world-worn and weary, 
pared with the fresh manly heart of the Irishman, all cent
in the kindred ' points of Heaven and home,' and enjo
keenly, for the very reason that he bent dutifully with a
might to a humble and uncongenial task.
Yet somehow, admire and esteem as he would, there 
no intimacy or friendship between Gilbert and Ulick;
manners were frank and easy, but there was no spontan
approach, no real colgeialitv, nor exchange of mind and s
pathy as between Ulick and Mr. Kendal. Albinia hadathe
that the friendship was too much watched to take; So
hated herself for the recurring conviction that ' Gilbert was
the kind of stuff,' though she felt day by day how fxrt
excelled her in humility, gentleness, and sweet temper.
When the Goldsmiths gave their annual dinner-party, Al
felt a sudden glow at the unexpected sight of Ulick O'More.
'I am only deputy for the Orange man,' he said; it is H
Ali who ought to be dining here ! Yes, it is his doing, rd 
Lim against any detective !' 




<pb n="291"/>
THE YOUNG STEP MOTHER.                 291
' What heroism have you been acting together ?'
' \We had just given Farmer Martin I201. in notes, when as
he went out, we heard little Hydergrowliug and giving tongue,
and a fellow swearing as if he was at the fair of Monyveagh,
and the farmer hallooing thieves. I found little Hvder had
nailed thb rascal fast by the leg, just as he had the notes out of
the f:rmler's pouch. I collared him, Johns ran for the police,
and the rascal is fast.'
' What a shame to cheat Mr. Kendal of the committal.'
' The policemanl said he was gone out, so we had the villain
up to the Admiral with the greater satisfaction, as he was a
lodger in one of the Admiral's pet public-houses in Tibb's
Alley.'
' Ah, when Gilbert is of age,' said Albinia, ' woe to Tibb's I
So vou are a testimonial to the Tripod 1'
' So I suspect, for I found an invitation when I came home,
I would have run down to tell you, but I had been kept late,
and one takes some getting up for polite society.'
There was a great deal of talk about Hyder's exploit, and
some disposition to make Mr. O'More the hero of the day; but
this was quickly nipped by his uncle's dry shortness, and the
superciliousness with which Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy turned
the conversation to the provision of pistols, couriers, and guards,
for travelling through the Abruzzi. The polysyllabic courage,
and false alarms on such a scale, completely eclipsed a real pick-
pocket, caught by a gipsy's cur and a banker's clerk.
Not that Ulick perceived any disregard until later in the
evening, when the young Kendals arrived, and of course lle
wanted each and all to hear of his Tripod's achievement. He
met with ready attention from Soplly and Gilbert, who pro-
nounced that as the cat was to Whittington, so was Hyder to
O'More; but when in his overflowing he proceeded to Lucy,
lshe h;ad neither eyes nor ears for him, and when the vicar told
her Mr. O'More was speaking to her, she turned with an air of
petulance, so that he felt obliged to beg her pardon and retreat.
The Bayfolrd parties never lasted later than a few minutes
after ten, but when once Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy and Miss
Kendlal had possession of the piano and guitar, there was no
onIIclusion. Song succeeded song, they wanted nothing save
their own harmony, and hardly waited for Miss Goldsmith's
sleepy thanks. The vicar hated late hours, and the Kendals
felt every song a trespass upon their hosts; but the musicians
had their backs to the world, and gave no interval, so that it
Was eleven o'clock before Mr. Kendal, in desperation, laid his
hand on his daughter, and barbarously carried her off.
u ;I




<pb n="292"/>
2912           THE 'oUNG STEP MOTHER.
Tile flirtation was so palpable, that Albinia mused on
means of repressing it; but she believed that to remons
would only be to give Lucy pleasure, and held her peace 
passion for riding seized upon the young lady. The old
had hard service between Sophy's needs and Maurice's ea
but Lucy's soul soared far above ponies, and fastened upon 
bert's steed.
'And pray what is Gilbert to ride l'
' Oh ! papa does not always want Captain, or Mr. Cave
Dusautoy would lend him Bamfylde.'
Thank you,' returned Gilbert, satirically.
Next morning Lucy, radiant with smiles, announced th
was settled. Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy's Lady Elmira woul
brought down for her to try this afternoon, so Gilbert 
keep his own horse and come too, which permission he 
with a long whistle and glance at Mlrs. Kendal, and then w
out of the room.
'How disobliging !' said Lucy. 'Well then, Sophy, yonu
make your old hat look as well as you can, for I suppose iti
not quite do to go without anyone.'
Sophy, like her brother, looked at Mrs. Kendal, and wi
eye of indignant appeal and entreaty, while Albinia's count
was so full of displeasure, that Lucy continued earnestly 
mamma, you can't object.  You used to go out riding
papa when he was at Colonel Bury's.'
'Well, Lucy !' exclaimed her sister, I did not thinkeven
capable of such a comparison.'
'It's all the same,' said Lucy tartly, blushing a good deaL
Sophy leapt up to look at her, and Albinia trying to be 
and judicious, demanded, ' What is the same as what '
'Why, Algernon and me,' was the equally precise reply. J
In stately horror, Sophy rose and seriously marched
leaving, by her look and manner, a species of awe upon 
parties, and some seconds passed ere, with crimson blushe#
binia ventured to invite the dreaded admission, by deman
* Now, Lucy, will you be so good as to tell me the meani
this extraordinary allusion ?'
' Why, to be sure-I know it was very different. Papa
so old, and there were us,' faltered Lucy; 'but I meant,
would know how it all is-how those things-'
'Stop, Lucy, am I to understand by those things, that
wish me to believe you and Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy are o0
same terms as- No, I can't say it.'
'I don't know what you mean,' said Lucy, growing frights




<pb n="293"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               293
"T never thought there could be such an uproar about my just
goil.g out riding.'
, You have led me to infer so much more, that it becomes my
duty to have an explanation, at least,' she added, thinking this
soulllded cold, ' I should have hoped you would have given me
your contitence.'
O, but you always would make game of him !' cried Lucy.
' Not now ; this is much too serious, if you have been led to
believe that his attentions are not as I supposed, because you
are the only girl about here whom he thinks worthy of his
notice.'
' It's a great deal more,' said Lucy, with more feeling and less
vanity than had yet been apparent.
'And what has he been making you think, my poor child '
said Albinia. 'I know it is very distressing, but it would be
more right and safe if I knew what it amounts to.'
' Not much after all,' said Lucy, her tone implying the reverse,
and though her cheeks were crimson, not averse to the triumph
of the avowal, nor enduring as much embarrassment as her
auditor; 'only he made me sure of it-he said-(now, mamma,
you have made me, so I must) that he had changed his opinion
of English beauty-you know, mamma. And another time he
said he had wandered Europe over to-to find loveliness on the
banks of the Baye. Wasn't it absurd ? And he says lie does
not think it half so much that a woman should be accomplished
herself, as that she should be able to appreciate other peol)le's
talents--and once he said the Principessa Bianca di Moretti
would be very much disappointed.'
' Well, my dear,' said Albinia, kindly putting her arm round
Lucy's waist, ' perhaps by themselves the things did not so much
require to be told. I can hardly blame you, and I wish I had
been more on my guard, and helped you more. Only if he
seems to care so little about disappointing this lady might he
not do the same by you Y'
' But she's an Italian, and a Roman Catholic,' exclaimed
Lucy.
Albinia could not help smiling, and Lucy, perceiving that
this was hardly a valid excuse for her utter indifference towards
her Grandison's Clementina, contiuued,' I mean-of course there
was nothing in it.'
' Very possibly ; but how would it be, if by-and by he told
somebody that Miss Kendal would be very much disappointed?'
' O, nmamma,' cried Lucy, hastily detaching herself, 'you don't
know !'
'I cannot tell, my poor Lucy,' said Albiuia. 'I fear there




<pb n="294"/>
29:            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
must be grief and trouble any way, if you let yourself at
him, for you know, even if he were in earnest, it would 
right to think of a person who has shown so little wish
good.'
Lucy stood for a few moments before the sense reached
mind, then she dropped into a chair, and exclaimed,
'I see how it is ! You'll treat him as grandpapa t
Captain Pringle; but I shall break my heart, quite !' and
burst into tears.
' My dear, your father and I will do our best for your ha
ness, and we would never use concealment. Whatever we
shall be as Christian people working together, not as ty
with a silly girl.'
Lucy was pleased, and let Albinia take her hand.
' Then I will write to decline the horse. It would be far
marked.'
'But oh, mamma ! you wont keep him away !'
'I shall not alter our habits unless I see cause. He is 
too young for us to think seriously of what he may have
and I entreat you to put it out of your mind, for it wouldi
very sad for you to fix your thoughts on him, and then
him not in earnest, and even if he were, you know it woul
wrong to let affection grow up where there is no real de
dence upon a person's goodness.'
The kindness soothed Lucy, and though she shed some
she did not resist the decision. Indeed she was sensible of
calm determination of manner, which all the family had l
to mean that the measures thus taken were unalterable, wh
the impetuous impulses often were reversed.
Many a woman's will is like the tide, ever fretting at
verge of the boundary, but afraid to overpass it, and only te
ing the utmost limit in the certainty of the recal, and
perhaps felt a kind of protection in the curb, even while
treated it as an injury. She liked to be the object of solicit
and was pleased with Albinia's extra kindness, while, perh
there was some excitement in the belief that Algernon
missing her, so she was particularly amenable, and not m
out of spirits.
The original Meadows character, and Bayford breeding,
for a time been surmounted Iy Albinia's influence and train
but so ingrain was the old disposition, that a touch would
- once re-awaken it, aid the poor girl was in a neutral 
coloured by whichever impressioll had been most recent.
binia's hopes of prevailing in the end i:lcreased when 
Dusautoy told her, with a look of inLelligeee, that Alge




<pb n="295"/>
r!t    ~      THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                295
was going to stay with a connexion of his mother, a Mr. Green-
awav, with six daughters, very stylish young ladies.
six stylish young ladies ! Albinia could have embraced them
all, and actually conferred a cordial nod on Mr. Cavendish
)usautoy when she met him on the way home.
But as she entered the house, so ominous a tone summoned
her to the library, that she needed not to be told that Mr.
Cavendish Dusautoy had been there.
I told him,' said Mr. Kendal, 'that he was too young for
me to entertain his proposal, and I intimated that he had a
character to redeem  before presenting himself in such a
capiacity.'
'I hope you made the refusal evident to his intellect.'
'He drove me to be more explicit than I intended. I think
he was astonished. He stared at me for full three minutes
before he could believe in the refusal. Poor lad, it must be real
attachment, there could be no other inducement.'
'And Lucy is exceedingly pretty.'
AIr. Kendal glanced at the portrait over the mantelpiece,
smile'd sadly, and shook his head.
'Poor dear,' continued Albiuia; 'what a commotion there
will be in her head; but she has behaved so well hitherto, that
I hope we may steer her s;Lfely throutgh, above all, if one of the
six cousins will but catch him in the rebound I Have you
spoken to her '
' Is it necessary V
'So asked her grandfather,' said Albinia, smiling, as he, a
little out of countenance, muttered something of ' foolish affair
-mere child-and turn her head-'
' That's done !' said Albinia, ' we have only to try to get it
straihllt. Besides, it would hardly be just to let her think he
had meant nothing, and I have promised to deal openly with
her, otherwise we can hardly hope for plain dealing from her.'
'Andl you think it will be a serious disappointment '
' She is highly flattered by his attention, but I don't know
how deep it n.ay have gone.'
'I wish people would let one's daughters alone!' exclaimed
MIr. Kendal. ' You will talk to her then, Albinia, and don't
let her think me more harsh than you can help, and come and
tell me how sie bears it.'
' \\ont you speak to her yourself?'
'Do you think I must ' lie said, reluctantly; 'you know so
much better how to nmanaffe her.'
'I think von Imust do this, dear Eldmund,' she said, between
decision and entreaty. ' She knows that 1 dislike the man, and




<pb n="296"/>
2.9 G          THE YOUNG STEP-3MOTHER
may fancy it my doing it she only hears it at second band.,^
you speak, there will be no appeal, and besides there are 
ments when the really nearest should have no go-betweena.'
' We were not very near without you,' he said. ' If it 
Sophy, I should know better what to be about.'
'Sophy would not put you in such a fix.'
'No. I have fancied-' he paused, smiling, while she wa
in eager curiosity, such as made him finish as if ashamed.
have thought our likings much the same. Have you never
served what I mean ?'
'Oh ! I never observe anything. I did not find out Mau
and Winitred till he told me. Who do you think it is?
always thought love would be the making of Sophy. I see 
is another being. What is your guess, Mr. Hope ?'
Mr. Kendal made a face of astonishment at such an im
bable guess, and was driven into exclaiming, 'How could
one help thinking of O'More 1'
'Oh! only too delightful!' cried Albinia.  'Why didn
I think of it-but then his way is so free and cousinly  i
us all.'
'There may be nothing in it,' said Mr. Kendal; 'and un
present circumstances it would hardly be desirable.'
' If old NMr. Goldsmith acts as he ought,' continued Albin
'we should never lose our Sophy-and what a son we sho
have ! he has so exactly the bright temper that she needs.'
'Well, well, that is all in the clouds,' said Mr. KendaL 
wish the present were equally satisfactory.'
'Ah, I had better call poor Lucy.'
'Come back with her, pray,' called Mr. Kendal, nervously.
Albinia regretted her superfluous gossip when Lucy appea
with eyes so sparkling, and cheeks so flushed, that it was pl
that she had been in all the miseries of suspense. Her count
nance glowed with feeling, that lifted her beyond her ordin
doll-like prettiness. Albinia's heart sank with compassion
she held her hand, and her father stood as if struck by 
thing more like the vision of his youth than he had been p
pared for; each feeling that something genuine was presen
and respecting it accordillgly.                        '
'Lucy,' said Mr. Keudal, tenderly, 'I see I need not tell y
why I have sent for you. You are very young, my dear, 
you must trust us to care for your happiness.'
'Yes.' Lucy looked up wistfully.
'This gentleman has some qualities such as may malk,
him shine in the eyes of a young lady; but it is our duty to
look farther, and I am afraid I know nothing of him that'oould




<pb n="297"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                 297
jtlstify me in trusting him  with anything so precious to
me.
Lucy's face became full of consternation, her hand lay un-
nerved in Albinia's pressure, and Mr. Kendal turned his eyes
from her to his wife, as he proceeded,
' I have seen so much wretchedness caused by want of reli-
gious principle, that even where the morals appeared unblen-
ished, I tlluld feel no confidence where I saw lo evidence of
religion; and I should consider it as positively wrong to sano-
tion an engagement with such a person. Now you must per-
ceive that we have every means of forming an opinlion of this
young m1an, and that lie has given us no reason to think he
would show the un.leltish care for your welfare that we should
wish to secure.'
Albinia tried to make it comprehensible. 'You know, my
dear, we have always seen him resolved on his own way, and
not caring how he may inconvenience his uncle and aunt. We
know his temper is not always amiable, and differently as you
see himl, you must let us judge.'
W\renlching her hand away, Lucy burst into tears.   Her
father looked at Albinia, as if she ought to have saved him this
infliction, and she began a little whispering about not distressing
papa, which checked the sobs, and enabled him to say, 'There,
that's right, my dear, I see you are willing to submit patiently
to our judgment, and I believe you will find it for the best.
We will do all in our power to hellp you, and make vnn
halpy,' and bending down he kissed her, and left her to his
wile.
In such family scenes, logic is less useful than the power of
coming to a friendly conclusion ; Lucy's awe of her father was
a great assistance, she was touched with his unwonted softness,
and did not apprehend how total was the rejection. But what
lie was spared, was reserved for Albinia. Tlhere was a lament-
able scene of sobbing and weepling, beyond all argumlent, and
only ending in physical exhaustion, which laid her on the bed
all the rest of the day.
Gilbert and Sophy could not but l)e aware of the cause of her
distress. The former thought it a great waste.
'Ttll Lucy,' lie said, 'that if she wishes to be miserable for
life, she has found the best way I He is a thorough-bred tyrant
at heart, pig-headed, and obstinate, and with the very worst
tenmper I ever cam;e across. Not a soul can he feel for, nor
ailmire but hilmself.  His wife will be a perfect slave. I declare
I would as soon sell her to Legree.'
jophy's views of the gentleman were not more favourable, but




<pb n="298"/>
298            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
she was in terror lest Lucy should have a permanently b
heart, after the precedent of Aunt Maria. And on poor 
fell the misfortune of being driven up by grandmamma's in
ries, to own that the prolosal had been rejected.
Shade of poor dear Mr. Meadows, didst thou not s
aghast ? Five thousand a year refused ! Grandmllamma wo
have had a fit if she had not conceived a conviction, that
parted a look of shrewdness to her mild, simple old face.
course Mr. Kendal was only holding off till the young man
a little older. He could have no intention of letting his da
ter miss such a match, and dear Lucy would have her carri
and be presented at court.
Sophy argued vehemently against this, and poor grandmam
who had with difficulty been taught worldly wisdom as a d
and always thought herself good when she talked pruden
began to cry. Sophy, quite overcome, was equally distres
with her apologies; Albinia found them both in tears, andSo
was placed on the sick-list by one of her peculiar headaches
self-reproach.
It was a time of great perplexity. Lucy cried incessan
bursting out at every trifle, but making no complaints,
submitting so meekly, that the others were almost as unha
as herself.
She was first cheered by the long promised visit from
Annesley and Miss Ferrars.   Albinia had now no fears
showing off home or children, and it was a great success.
The little Awk was in high beauty, and graciously winn
and Maurice's likeness to his Uncle William enchanted
aunts, though they were shocked at his mamma's indiffere
to his constant imperilling of life and limb, and grievo
discomfited his sisters by adducing children who talked Fr
and read history, whereas he could not read d-o-g wi
spelling, and had peculiar views as to b and d, p and q. 
ever, if he could not read he could ride, and Mrs. Ann
scarcely knew the extent of the favour she conferred, when
commissioned Gilbert to procure for him a pony as his pri
property.
Miss Ferrars had not expected one of the thirty-six O' Mo
to turn up here. She gave some good advice about hasty 
timacies, and as it was received with a defence of the gent'i
of the O'Mores, the two good ladies agreed that dear Albi
was quite a child still, not fit for the care of those girls, and.
would be only acting kindly to take Lucy to Brighton,
show her something of the world, or Albinia would surely
her fall a prey to that Irish clerk.




<pb n="299"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                299
They liked Lucy's pretty face and obliging ways, and were
fond of having a young lady in their house; they saw her
looking ill and depressed, and thought sea air would be
good for her, and though Lucy fancied herself past caring for
gaiety, and was very sorry to leave home and marlmma, she
was not insensible to the refreshment of her wardrobe, and
the excitement and honour of the invitation. At night she
cried lamentably, and clung round Allinia's neck, sobbing,
' Oh1, mamma, what will become of me without you V' but in the
morning she went off in very fair spirits, and Albinia augured
holefully that soon her type of perfection would be no longer
Polysyllabic. Her first letters were deplorable, but they soon
became cheerful, as her mornings were occupied by lessons in
munic and drawing; and her evenings in quiet parties among
the friends whom the aunts met at Brighton. Aunt Gertrude
wrote to announce that her charge had recovered her looks and
was much admired, and this was corroborated by the prosperous
complacency of Lucy's style. Albinia was more relieved than
surprised when the letters dwindled in length and number,
well knowing that the Family Office was not favourable to
leisure; and devoid of the epistolary gift herself, she always
wondered more at people's writing than at their silence, and
scarcely reciprocated Lucy's effusions by the hurried notes which
she enclosed in the well-filled envelopes of Gilbert and Sophy,
who, like their father, could cover any amount of sheets of paper.
CHAPTER XXIL
'T6 IERE!' cried Ulick O'More, 'I may wish you all good-
l  bye. There's an end of it.'
Ir. Kendal stood aghast.
' He's insulted my father and my family,' cried Ulick, 'and
does lie thilnk I'll write another cipher for him ?'
' Your uncle 1'
'Don't call him my uncle. I wish I'd never set eyes on his
wooden old face, to put the family name and honour in the
powr of such as lie.'
'   all;t has he done to you ?'
' ie hlas oltlred to take me as his partner,' cried Ulick, with
a s:iii'g eyes; and as all outcry arose, not in sympathy with his
l'-c'ltilleilt, lie continued vehemenntly, 'Stay, you have not
];ear l  'Twas on condition I'd alter my name, leave out the




<pb n="300"/>
300            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
O that has come down to me from them that were kings'
princes before his grandfathers broke stones on the road.'
' He offered to take you into partnership,' repeated
Kendal.
'Do you think I could listen to such terms ?' cried the iN
nant lad. 'Give up the O I Why, I would never be ab
face my brothers 1'
'But, Ulick-'
' Don't talk to me, Mr. Kendal; I wouldn't sell my na
you were to argue to me like Plato, nor if his bank were
DBank of England. I might as well be an Englishman at 
'Then this was the insult ?'
'And enough too, but it wasn't all. When I anw
speaking as coolly, I assure you, as I'm doing this minute, 
does he do, but call it a folly, and taunt us for a crew of
beggars ! Beggars we may be, but we'll not be bought by 
' Well, this must have been an unexpected reception of
a proposal.'
'You may say that! The English think everything m
bought with money ! I'd have overlooked his ignoranceo
old gentleman, if he would not have gone and spoken of m
as vulgar. Vulgar! So when I began to tell him ho
began from Tigearnach, the O'More of Ballymakilty that
Tanist of Connaught, in the time of King Mac Murrough, 
that killed Phadrig the O'Donoghoe in single combat at,
fight of Shoch-knockmorty, and bit off his nose, calling
sweet morsel of revenge, what does he do but tell me I
mad, and that he would have none of my nonsensical tal
the savage Irish. So I said I couldn't stand to hear my fa
insulted, and then-would you believe it? he would have it
it was I that was insolent, and when I was not going to apol
for what I had borne from him, he said he had always known
it would be trying to deal with one of our family, no better
making a silk purse out of a sow's ear. " And I'm obliged
the compliment," said I, quite coolly and politely, "but no i
pig would sell his ear for a purse ;" and so I came away, q
civilly and reasonably.  Aye, I see what you would do,
Kendal, but I beg with all my heart you wont. There
some things a gentleman should not put up with, and I'll 
take it well of you-if you call it my duty to hear my father
his family abused. I'll despise myself if I could. You da
_' cried he, turning round to Albinia.
'Oh, no; but I think you should try to understand
Goldsmith's point of view.'
' I understand it only too well, if that would do any 




<pb n="301"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               301
point of view-why, 'tis the farmyard cock's point of view,
strutting on the top of that bank of his own, and patronizing
the free pheasant out in the woods.  More fool I for ever
letting him clip my wings; but he's seen the last of me. No,
don't ask me to make it up. It can't be done-'
( What can be done to the boy ' asked Albinia; 'how can he
be brought to hear reason ?'
' Leave him alone,' Mr. Kendal said, aside; while Ulick in a
torrent of eager cadences protested his perfect sanity and reason,
and Mr. Kendal quietly left the room, again to start on a
peace-making mission, but it was unpromising, for Mr. Gold-
smith began by declaring he would not hear a single word in
favour of the ungrateful young dog.
Mr. Kendal gathered that young O'More had become so
valuable, and that cold and indifferent as Mr. Goldsmith ap-
peared, he had been growing so fond and so proud of his nephew,
as actually to resolve on giving him a share of the business, and
dividing the inheritance which had hitherto been destined to a
certain Andrew Goldsmith, brought up in a relation's office at
Bristol. Surprised at his own graciousness, and anticipating
transports of gratitude, his dismay and indignation at the recep-
tion of his proposal were extreme, especially as he had no con-
ception of the offence he had given regarding the unfortunate
0 as a ,badge of Hibernianism and vulgarity. ' I put it to you,
Mr. Kendal, as a sensible man, whether it would not be enough
to destroy the credit of the bank to connect it with such a
namle as that, looking like an Irish haymaker's. I should be
aslamned of every note I issued.'
' It is unlucky,' said Mr. Kendal, ' and a difficulty the lad
could hardly appreciate, since it is a good old name, and the 0
is a special mark of nobility.'
'And what has a banker to do with nobility ? Pretty sort of
no'oility too, at that dog-kennel of theirs in Ireland, and his
father, a mere adventurer if ever there lived one ! But I swore
when he carried off poor Ellen that his speculation should do
him no good, and I've kept my word. I wish I hadn't been fool
enonuhl to meddle with one of the concern ! No, no,'tis no use
arguling, Mr. Kendal, I have done with him! I would not
make him a partner, not if he offered to change his name to John
Smiith1  I never tllought to meet witl such ingiatitude, but it
runs in the breed ! 1 mighlt have known better than to make
much of one of the crew. Yet it is a pity too, we have not had
such a clear-headed, trustworthy fellow about the place since
1oung Bowles died; lie has a good deal of the Goldsmith in him
when you set him to work, and makes his figures just like my




<pb n="302"/>
302            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
poor father. I thought it was his writing the other day
looked at the date. Clever lad, very, but it runs in the 
I shall send for Andrew Goldsmith.'
One secret of Mr. Kendal's power was that he never in
rupted, but let people run themselves down and contr
themselves; and all he observed was, 'However it maye
you have done a great deal for him. Even if you parted now,
would be able to find a situation.'
' Why-yes,' said Mr. Goldsmith, 'the lad knew not
serviceable when he came, we had an infinity of maggots a
algebra and logarithms to drive out of his head; but now he 
is nearly as good an accountant as old Johns.'
' You would be sorry to part with him, and I cannot h
hoping this may be made up.'
'You don't bring me any message ! I've said I'll listen to noth
'No; the poor boy's feelings are far too much wounded,'
Mr. Kendal. ' Whether rightly or wrongly, he fancies
his father and family have been slightingly spoken of, and he
exceedingly hurt.'
His father ! I'm sure I did not say a tenth part of what
follow richly deserves. If the young gentleman is so touchy,
had better go back to Ireland again.'
Nothing more favourable could Mr. Kendal obtain, though
thought Mr. Goldsmith uneasy, and perhaps impressed by
independence of his nephew's attitude.
It was an arduous office for a peace-maker, where neit
party could comprehend the feelings of the other, but on
return he found that Ulick had stormed himself into comparati
tranquillity, and was listening the better to the womanki
because they had paid due honour to the amiable ance
Tigearnach and all his guttural posterity, whose savage expl
and bloody catastrophes acted as such a sedative, that by 
time he had come down to Uncle Bryan of the Kaffir war,
actually owned that as to the mighty ' 0,' Mr. Goldsmith mi
have erred in sheer ignorance.
'After all,' said Albinia, 'U. O'More is rather personal
writing to a creditor.'
'It might be worse,' said Ulick, langhing, ' if my name
John.  I. O'More would be a dangerous confession.  B
I'll not be come round even by your fun, Mrs. Kendal; I'll
part with my fatler's name.'
' No, that would be base,' said Solphv.
'Who would wish to persuade you ' added Albinia. 'I
sure you are right in refusing with your feelings; I only
you to forgive your uncle, and not to break with him.'




<pb n="303"/>
TIlE YOrNG STEP-MOTHER.               n03
s I'd forgive hin his ignorance, but my mother herself could not
wish me to forgive what he said of my f:ather.'
' And how if he thinks this explosion needs forgiveness ?'
' He must do without it,' said Ulick. ' No, I was cool, I assure
you, cool and collected, but it was not fit for me to stand by and
hear my father insulted.'
Allinia closed the difficult discussion by observing that it was
time to dress, and Sophy followed her from the room burning
with indignant sympathy. ' It would be meanly subservient to
ask parldon for defending a father whom he thought maligned,'
said Albinia, and Solly took exception at the word 'thought.'
'Ah ! of course ihe cannot be deceived!' said Albinia-but
no sooner were the words spoken than she was half-startled,
half-charmed by findin g they had evoked a glow of colour.
'How do you think it will end ' asked Solhy.
'I can hardly fancy he will not be forgiven, and yet-it might
be better.'
'Yes, I do think he would get on faster in India,' said Sophy
eagerly; 'he could do just as Gilbert might have done.'
Was it possible for Albinia to have kept out of her eyes a
significant glance, or to have disarmed her lips of a merry smile
of amused encouragement 2 How she had looked she knew not,
but the red deepened on Sophy's whole face, and after one in-
quiring gaze from the eyes they were cast down, and an ineffable
brightness caine over the expression, softening and embellishing.
' What have I done ? thought Albinia. ' Never mind-it must
have been all there, or it would not have been wakened so easily
-if he goes they will have a scene first.'
But when Mr. Kendal came back he only advised Ulick to go
to his desk as usual the next day, as if nothing had happened.
And Ulick owned that, turn out as things might, lie could
not quit his work in the first ardour of his resentment, and with
a great exertion of Christian forgiveness. lie finally promised not
to give notice of his retirement unless his -uncle should repeat
the oflence. This time Albinia durst not look at Sophy.
latller according to his friend's hopes than his own, he was
alle to report at the close of the next day, that he had not 'had
a word from his uncle, except a nod ;' and thus the days passed
on, Andrew Goldsmith did not appear, and it became evident
that he was to remain on sufferance as a clerk. Nor did Albinia
and Sophy venture to renew the subject between themselves
At first there was consciousness in their silence; soon their
ilnds were otherwise engrossed.
Mrs. Meadows was suddenly stricken with paralysis, and was
touglht to be dying. She recovered partial consciousness in the




<pb n="304"/>
o004           THI  YOUNG STEP-MOTH EK
course of the next day, but was constantly moaning then
her eldest and favourite granddaughter ; and when telegraph
express train brought home the startled and trembling 
she was led at once to the sick bed-where at her name 
was the first gleam of anything like pleasure.
'And where have vou been, my dear, this long time '
'I've been at-at Brighton, dear grandmamma,' said
so much agitated as scarcely to be able to recal the name
utter the words.
'And-I say, my dear love,' said Mrs. Meadows, earn
and mysteriously, ' have you seen him a'
Poor Lucy turned scarlet with distress and confusion,.
she was held fast, and grandmamma pursued, ' I'm sure he
not his equal for handsomeness and stateliness, and there
have been a pair of you.'
' Dear grandmamma, we must let Lucy go and take off'
things; she shall come back presently, but she has had a
journey,' interposed Albinia, seeing her ready to sink intoi
earth.
But Mrs. Meadows had roused into eagerness, and would
let her go. 'I hope you danced with him, dear,' she went
' and it's all nonsense about his being high and silent. Y
papa is bent on it, and you'll live like a princess in India.
' She takes you for your mother-she means papa, whis
Albinia, not without a secret flash at once of indignatio
perceiving howhis first love had been wasted yet of exultatio
finding that no one but herself had known how to love 
but poor Lucy, completely and helplessly overcome, could 
exclaim in a faltering voice: 'Oh, grandmamma, don't-' i
Albinia was forced to disengage her, support her out of.
room, and leaving her to her sister, hasten back to soothe
old lady, who had been terrified by her emotion. It had
a great mistake to bring her in abruptly, when tired with
journey, and not fully aware what awaited her. But there-
at that time reason to think all would soon be over, and Alb
was startled and confused.
Albinia had hitherto been the only efficient nurse of
family. Sophy's presence seemed to stir up instincts of the'
wrangling habits, and the invalid was always fretful when
to her, so that to her own exceeding distress she was 
almost entirely out of the sick room.
Lucy, on the other hand, was extremely valuable there,
bright manner and unfailing chatter always amused if ne
and her light step and tender hand made her useful, and hi
appreciated by the regular nurse.




<pb n="305"/>
: *    .          THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                S305
For the first few days, they watched in awe for the last dread
Bummons, but gradually it was impossible not to become in a
manner habituated to the suspense, so that common things re-
sumed their interest, and though Sophy was pained by the in-
colgruity, it could not have been otherwise without the spirits
and health giving way under the strain. Nothing could be
more trying than to have the mind wrought up to hourly anti-
cipation of the last parting, and then the delay, without the
reaction of recovery, the spirit beyond all reach of intercourse,
and the mortal frame languishing and drooping. Mr. Kendal
had from the first contemplated the possibility of the long     ,
duration of such lingering, and did his utmost to promote such
enlivenment and change for the attendants as was consistent 
with their care of the sufferer. They never dared to be all
beyond call at once, since a very little agitation might easily
suffice to bring on a fatal attack, and Albinia and Lucy were
forced to share the hours of exercise and employment between
them, and often Albinia could not leave the house and garden
at all.
Gilbert was an excellent auxiliary, and would devote many an
hour to the cheering of the poor shattered mind. His entrance
seldom failed to break the thread of melancholy murmurs, and
he had exactly the gentle, bright attentive manner best fitted
to rouse and enliven. Nothing could be more irreproachable
than his conduct, and his consideration and gentleness so much
endeared him, that he had never been so much at peace. All
he dreaded was the leaving what was truly to him the sanctuary
of home; he feared alike temptation and the effort of resistance,
and could not bear to go away when his grandmother was in so
precarious a state, and he could so much lighten Mrs. Kendal's
cares both by being with her, and by watching over Maurice.
His parents were almost equally afraid of trusting him in the
world; and the embodiment of the militia for the county
offered a quasi profession, which would keep him at home and
yet give him employment. He was very anxious to be allowed
to apply for a commission, and pleaded so earnestly and humbly
that it would be his best hope of avoiding his former errors,
that Mr. Kendal yielded, though with doubt whether it
Would be well to confine him to so narrow a sphere.  Mean-
time the corps was quartered at Bayford, and filled the streets
with awkward louts in red jackets, who were inveterate in
mistaking the right for the left. Gilbert had a certain shy
ride in his soldiership, and Maurice stepped like a young Field
arshal when he saw his brother saluted.
Nothing  had so much decided this step as the finding
x




<pb n="306"/>
306            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
that young Dunsautoy was to return to his college after 
He was at the Vicarage again, marking his haughty avoi
of the Kendal family; and to their great joy, Lucy did
appear distressed, she was completely absorbed in her 
mother, and shrank from all allusion to her lover. Ha
small flutter of vanity been cured by a glimpse beyond hair
corner of the world ?
But soon Albinia became sensible of an alteration in  il
He had no sooner settled completely into his new emplo
than a certain restless dissatisfaction seemed to have po
him. He was fastidious at his meals, grumbled at his k
scolded the groom, had fits of petulance towards his br
and almost neglected Mrs. Meadows. No one could wonde
a youth growing weary of such attendance, but his tend
and amiability had been his best points, and it was grievoll
find them failing. Albinia would have charged the alte
on his brother officers, if they had not been a very steady
humdrum set, whose society Gilbert certainly did not 
She was more uneasy at finding that he sometimes saw Alg
Dusautoy, though for Lucy's sake, he always avoided br
his name forward.
A woman was ill in the bargeman's cottage by the
path, and Albinia had walked to see her. As she came
stairs, she heard voices, and beheld Mr. Hope evidently on'"
same errand with herself, talking to Gilbert. She caught
words, ere she could safely descend the rickety staircase, G
was saying.
'Oh ! some happy pair from the High Street '
'I beg your pardon,' said Mr. Hope; ' I am so blind, I 
took it for your sister, but our shopkeepers' daughters do
80 !'
Albinia looking in the same direction, beheld in a walk
skirted the meadow towards the wood, two figures, of W
only one was clearly visible; it was nearly a quarter of a
off, but there was sornething about it that made her exo
'Why, that's Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy I whom can he be w
ing with i'
Gilbert started violently at hearing her behind him,
a word or two of greeting passed with Mr. Hope; then
was some spying at the pair, but they were getting fr
off, and disappeared in the wood, while Gilbert, screwing
his eyes, and stammering, declared he did not know; it 
be, he did not think any one could be recognised at 
distance; and then saying that he had fallen in with Mr. 
by chance, he hastened on. The curate made a brief viit,




<pb n="307"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHIEE.              307
ked home with her, examining her on her impression that
he gentleman was young Dusautoy, and finally consulting her
[a the expediency of mentioning the suspicion to the vicar, in
ose he should be deluding some foolish tradesman's daughter.
Albinia strongly advised -his doing so; she had much faith in
er own keen eyesight, and could not mistake the majestic mien
of Algernon; she thought the vicar ought at once to be warned,
but felt relieved that it was not her part to speak.
She was very glad when Mr. Hope took an opportunity of
telling her that young Dusautoy was going to the Greenaways
in a day or two.
As to Gilbert, it was as if this departure had relieved him
from an incubus; he was in better spirits from that moment,
and returned to his habits of kindness to both grandmamme
and Maurice.                        .
The manifold duties of head sick-nurse, governess, and bolue.
keeper, were apt to clash, and valiant and unwearied as Albinia
was, she was obliged perforce to leave the children more to
others than she would have preferred. Little Albinia was all
docility and sweetness, and already did such wonders with her
ivory letters, that the exulting Sophy tried to abash Maurice
by auguring that she would be the first to read; to which, un-
daunted, he replied, 'She'll never be a boy!' Nevertheless
Maurice was developing a species of conscience, rendering him
trustworthy and obedient out of sight, better, in fact, alone
with his own honour and his mother's commands, than with any
' authority that he could defy. He knew when his father meant
to be obeyed, and Gilbert managed him easily; but he warred
with Lucy, ruled Sophy, and had no chivalry for any one but
little Albinia, nor obedience except for his mother, and was a
terror to maid-servants and elder children. With much ot
promise, he was anything but an agreeable child, and whilst no
one but herself ever punished, contradicted, or complained oz
him, Albinia had a task that would have made her very uneasy,
had not her mind been too fresh and strong for over-sense of
responsibility. Each immediate duty in its turn was sufficient
for her.
Maurice's shadow-like pursuit of Gilbert often took him off
her hands. It might sometimes be troublesome to the elder
brother, and now and then rewarded with a petulant rebuff, but
Miaurice was only the more pertinacious, and on the whole his
alhegiance was requited with ardent affection and unbounded
indulgence. Nay, once when Maurice and his pony, one or
both, were swept on by the whole hunt, and obliged to follow
the hounds, Gilbert in his anxiety took leaps that he shuddered
x2
e




<pb n="308"/>
308            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHERT
to remember, while the urchin sat the first gallantly, and th
he fell into the next ditch, scrambled up on the instant,
was borne by his spirited pony over two more, amid univ
applause. Mr. Nugent himself rode home with the broth
tell the story; papa and mamma were too much elated at
prowess to scold.
The eventful year 1854 had begun, and General Ferrars
summoned from Canada to a command in the East. OnI
arrival in England, he wrote to his brother and sister,
meet him in London, and the aunts, delighted to gather t
children once more round them, sent pressing invitations, o
regretting that there was not room enough in the Family 
for the younger branches.
Mr. Ferrars' first measure was to ride to Willow 1A
Knocking at the door of his sister's morning-room, he f
Maurice with a pouting lip, back rounded, and legs tw
standing upon his elbows, which were planted upon the 
on either side of a calico spelling-book. Mr. Kendal stood,
straight before the fire, looking distressed and perplexed,
Albinia sat by, a little worn, a little irritable, and with the
pression of a wilful victim.
All greeted the new-comer warmly, and Maurice excla
'Mammla, I may have a holiday now !'
'Not till you have learnt your spelling.' There was 
sharpness in the tone, and Maurice's shoulder-blades lo
sulky.
'In consideration of his uncle,' began Mr. Kendal; but
put her hand on the boy, saying, 'You know we agreed
were to be no holidays for a week, because we did not useo
last properly.' 
He moved off disconsolately, and his father said, '
you are come to arrange the journey to London. Is Wi.
coming with you V'
'No; a hurry and confusion, and the good aunts woul
too much for her; you will be the only one for inspection.'
' Yes, take him with you, Maurice,' said Albinia; 'he 
see William.'
'You must be the exhibitor, then,' her brother replied.
'Now, Maurice, I know what you are come for, but
ought to know better than to persuade me, when you 
there are six good reasons against my going.'
'I know of one worth all the six.'
' Yes,' said Mr. Kendal; ' I have been telling her that ishe
convincing me that I did wrong in allowing her to bu
herself with this charge.'




<pb n="309"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                309
' Th.at's nothing to the purpose,' said Albinia; 'having nnder-
tgkl'n it, when you all saw the necessity, I cannot forsake it
now-
' If Mrs. Meadows were in the same condition as she was in
two months ago, there might be a doubt,' said Mr. Kendal;
'but she is less dependent on your attention, and Lucy and
Gill,ert are most anxious to devote themselves to her in your
absence.'
' I know they all wish to be kind, but if anything went
wrong, I should never forgive myself!'
'iNot if you vent out for pleasure alone,' said her brother;
'but relationship has demands.'- -                 .....
- 'Of course,' she said, petulantly, 'if Edmund is resolved, I
must go, but that does not convince me that it is right to
leave everything to run riot here.'
Mhr. Iendal looked serious, and Mr. Ferrars feared that the
winter cares had so far told on her temper, that perplexity
nadle ler wilful in self-sacrifice. There was a pause, but just
as she Began to perceive she had said something wrong, the
lesser Maurice burst out in exultation,
'There, it is not indestructible r
'What mischief have you been about ?' The question was
needless, for the table was strewn with snips of calico.
'This nasty spelling-book ! Lucy said it was called inde-
structille, because nobody could destroy it, but I've taken my
new knife to it. And see there !'
'A nd now can you make another ' said his uncle.
' I don't want to.'
'Nor one either, sir,' said Mr. Kendal. 'What shall we
have to tell Uncle William about you ! I'm afraid you are
one of the chief causes of mamma not knowing how to go to
London.'
M1aurice did not appear on the way to penitence, but his
mother said, ' Bring me your knife.'
He hung down his head, and obeyed without a word. She
closed it, and laid it on the mantel-shelf, which served as a
sort of pound for properties in sequestration.
' Now, then, go,' she said; 'you are too naughty for me to
attend to you.'
' Iut when will you, mamma ?' laying a hand on her dress.
'I don't know. Go away now.'
He slowly obeyed, and as the door shut, she said, 'There r
in a tone as if her view was established.
'Yon must send him to Fairmead,' said the uncle.
'To "terrify" Winifreedl   No, no, I know better than




<pb n="310"/>
310            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
that; Gilbert can look after him. I don't so much care 
that.'
The admission was eagerly hailed, and objection after
tion removed, and having recovered her good humour, sh
candid, and owned how much she wished to go. 'I really
to make acquaintance with William.   I've never seen
since I came to my senses, and have only taken him on
from you.'
' I wish equally that he should see you,' said her bro
'It would be good for him, and I doubt whether he has
conception what you are like.'
' I'd better stay at home, to leave you and Edmund to
pict for his benefit a model impossible idol-the normal WO
Maurice looked at her, and shook his head.
' No-it would be rather-it and its young one, eh ?'
Maurice took both her hands. 'I should not like to
William what I shall believe if you do not come.'
' Well, what-'
' That Edmund is right, and you have been overtasked
you are careful and troubled about many things.'
'Only too much bent on generous self-devotion,' said
Kendal, eagerly; ' too unselfish to cast the balance of duti
' Hush, Edmund,' said Albinia. ' I don't deserve fine w
I honestly believe I want to do what is right, but I can't
sure what it is, and I have made quite fuss enough, so you
shall decide, and then I shall be made right anyway.  i
do it fiom your consciences.'
They looked at each other, taken aback by the sudden 
render.  Mr. Ferrars waited, and her husband said, '
ought to see her brother. She needs the change, and there
no sufficient cause to detain her.'
'She must be content sometimes to trust,' said Mr. Ferra
'Aye, and all that will go wrong, when my back is turn
'Let it,' said her brother. ' The right which depends oa
single human eye is not good for much. Let the weeds 
or you can't pull them up.'
'Let the mice play, that the cat may catch them,' 
Albinia, striving to hide her care. 'One good effect is,
Edmund has not begun to groan.'
Indeed, in his anxiety that she should consent to enjoy h
self, he had not had time to shrink from the introduction.
Outside the door they found Maurice waiting, his spcll
learnt from a fragment of the indestructible spelling-book,
the question followed. ' Now, mamima, you wont say I'm 
naughty for you to go to London and see Uncle William r




<pb n="311"/>
TIHE YOUNG STEP-MOTHEIR              31 
'   No, my little boy, I mean to trust you, and tell Uncle
William that my young soldier is learning the soldier's first
duty-obedience.'
' And may I have my knife, mamma    '
Papa had settled that question by himself taking it off the
chimney-piece and restoring it. If mamma wished the penance
to have been longer, she neither looked it nor said it.
The young people received the decision with acclamation,
and the two elder ones vied with one another in attempts to set
her mind at rest by undertaking everything, and promising for
themselves and the chiluren perfect regularity and harmony.
Sophy, with a bluntness that King Lear would have highly
disapproved, said,' She was glad mamma was going, bu. she
knew they should be all at sixes and sevens. She would do
her best, and very bad it would be.'
' Not if you don't make up your mind beforehand that it must
be bad,' said her uncle.
Sophy smiled; she was much less impervious to cheerful
auguries, and spoke with gladness of the pleasure it would give
her friend G6neviave to see Mrs. Kendal.
Mr. Ferrars had a short interview with Ulick, and was amused
by observing that little Maurice had learnt as much Irish as
Ulick had dropped. After the passing fever about his O had
subsided, he was parting with some of his ultra-nationality.
The whirr of his R's and his Irish idioms were far less per-
ceptible; and though a word of attack on his country would put
him on his mettle, and bring out the Kelt in full force, yet in
his reasonable state, his good sense and love of order showed an
evident development, and instead of contending that Galway
was the most perfect county in the world, he only said it might
yet be so.
' Isn't he a noble fellow ' cried Albinia, warmly.
'Yes,' said her brother; ' I doubt whether all the O'Mores put
together have ever made such a conquest as he has.'
'It was fun to see how the aunts were dismayed to find one
of the horde in full force here. I believe it waas  a measure of
precaution that they took Lucy away. I was very glad for Lucy
to go, but hers was not exactly the danger.'
'Ha ' said Maurice; and Albinia blushed.  Whereupon he
said interrogatively, ' Heu i' which made her laugh so consciously
that he added, ' Don't you go and be romantic about either of
your young ladies, or there will be a general burning of fingers.'
'If you knew all our secrets, Maurice, you would think me a
model of prudence and forbearance.'
' o !' was his next interjection, 'so much the worse. For my




<pb n="312"/>
3123            THE YOUNG STEP-.MOTTIlR.
own part, I don't expect prudence will come to you natur
the little Awk has a lover.'
'Wont it come any other way ?'
'Yes, in one way,' he said, gravely.
'And that way is not easily found by those who have ne
numility nor patience,' she said, sadly; 'who rush on their
will.'
'Nay, Albinia, it is being sought, I do believe; and reme
the lines-
"Thine own mild energy bestow,
And deepen while thou bidst it flow,
More calm our stream of love." '
Forced to resign herself to her holiday, Albinia did so wi
good grace, in imitation of her brother, who assured her that
had brought a bottle of Lethe, and had therein drowned 
children, and parish. Mr. Kendal's spirits, as usual, rose hi
every mile fiom Bayford, and they were a very lively party  h
they arrived in Mayfair.
''he good aunts were delighted to have round them
those whom they called their children; all except Fred, wh
the new arrlangements had sent to rejoin his regiment
Ireland.
Sinewy, spare, and wiry, with keen gray eyes under strai
brows, narrow temples, a sunburnt face, and alert, upright beai
and quick step, William Ferrars was every inch a soldier; 
nothing so much struck Mr. and MBrs. Kendal as the likeneud
their little lMaurice, though it consisted more in air and gest
than in feature. His speech was brief and to the point, soften
into delicately-polished courtesy towards womankind, in theo
descension of strength to weakness-the quality he eviden
thought their chief characteristic.
Albinia was amused as she watched him with grown-up ey
and compared present with past impressions. She could n
imagine that she had been an inconvenient charge to a youl
soldier brother, and that he had been glad to make her over tot
aunts; only petting and indulging her as a child; looking do
on her fancies, and smiling at her sauciness when she was an eB
thusiastic maiden-treatment which she had so much resented
that she had direfully offended Maurice by pronouncing William
a mere martinet, when she was hurt at his neither reading the
Curse of Kehama, nor entering into her plans for Fairmead schooL
Having herself become a worker, she could better appreciate
a man who had seen and acted instead of reading, recollected
herself as an emanation of conceit, and felt shy and anxious, even




<pb n="313"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOT ER.                313
more for her husband than for herself. Iow would the scholar
and the soldier fare together? and could she and Maurice
keep them from wearying of each other  She had little trust
in her own fascinations, though she saw the General's eye
approvingly fixed on her, and believing herself to be a more
pleasing object in her womanly bloom than in her unformed
girlhood.
'How does the Montreal affair go on 1' she asked.
'What affair '
'Fred and Miss Kinnaird.'
'I am sorry to say he has not put it out of his head.'
'Surely she is a very nice person.'
'Pshaw ! He has no right to think of a wife these dozen
years.'
' Not even think ? When he is not to have one at any rate
till he is a field officer !'
' And he is a fool to have one then. A mere encumbrance to
himself and the entire corps.'
'Yes, I know,' said Albinia; ' she always gets the best cabin.
' And that is no place for her!. No man, as I have told Fred
over and over again, ought to drag a woman into hardships for
which she is not fitted, and where she interferes with his effec-
tiveness and the comfort of every one else.'
The identical lecture of twelve years since, when he had feared
Albinia's becoming this inconvenient appendage ! If he had
repeated it on all like occasions, she did not wonder that it had
wearied his aide-de-camp.
'Perhaps,' she said, ' the backwoods may have fitted Miss
Emily for the life; and I can't but be glad of Fred's having been
steady to anything.'
Considering this speech like the Kehama days, the General
went on to dilate on the damage that marriage was to the 'service,'
removing the best officers, first from the mess, and then from the
army.
' What a pity William was born too late to be a Knight of St.
John !' said Albinia.
All laughed, but she doubted whether he were pleased, for he
addressed himself to one of the aunts, while Maurice spoke to her
in an under tone-' I believe he is quite right. Homes are
better for the individual man, but not for the service. How
remarkably the analogy holds with this other service !'
'You mean what St. Paul says of the married and un-
married ?'
'I always think he and his sayings are the most living lessons
I know on the requirements of the other army.'




<pb n="314"/>
,1l4           THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
Albinia mused on the insensible change in Maurice.
had not embraced his profession entirely by choice. It
always been understood that one of the younger branches
take the family living; and as Fred had spurned study, he
been bred up to consider it as his fate, and if he had ever
other wishes, he had entirely accepted his destiny, and sin
turned to his vocation. The knowledge that he must 
clergyman had ruled him and formed him from his youth,
acting through him on his sister, had rendered her more
the accomplished, prosperous young lady her aunts meant to h
made her. Yet, even up to a year or two after his Ordina
there had been a sense of sacrifice; he loved sporting, and 
halls, and it had been an effort to renounce them. He
avoided coming to London because his keen enjoyment
society tended to make him discontented with his narrow sp
she had even known him to hesitate to ride with the staff ai
review, lest he should make himself liable to repinings
now how entirely had all this passed away, not merely
outgrowing the enterprising temper and boyish habits, nor'
contentment in a happy home, but by the sufficiency and res
his service, the engrossment in the charge from his 
Captain. Without being himself aware of it, he had ceased
distrust a holiday, because it was no longer a temptation; and
animation and mirth were the more free, because self-regulat
was so thoroughly established, that restraint was no longer
Mrs. Annesley was talking of the little Kendals, who she 
ruled should be at Fairmead.
' No,' said Maurice, ' Albinia thought her son too mighty 
Winifred. Our laudable efforts at cousinly friendship us
produce war-whoops that bring the two mammas each tosna
her own offspring from the fray, with a scolding for the sake
appearances though believing the other the only guilty party,
'Now, Maurice,' cried Albinia, 'you confess how fond
is of setting people to rights.'
'Well-when Maurice bullies Alby.'
Aye, you talk of the mammas, and you only want to 
out poor Maurice the aggressor.'
'Never mind, they will work in better than if they w
fabulous children. Ah, you are going to contend that yours
a fabulous child. Take care I don't come on you with
indestructible--'
'Take care I don't come on you with Mary's lessons to Colon
Bury on the game-law.' 
'Does it not do one good to see those two quarrelling juI
like old times ?' exclaimed one aunt to the other.




<pb n="315"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                315
'And William looking on as contemptuous as ever!' said
Albinia.
' Not at all. I rejoice to have this week with you. I should
like to see your boy. Maurice says he is a thorough young soldier.'
Mr. Kendal looked pleased.
The man of study had a penchant for the man of action, and
the brothers-in-law were drawing together. Mars, the great
geographical master, was but opening his gloomy school on the
Turkish soil, and the world was discovering its ignorance
beyond the Pinnock's Catechisms of its youth. Maurice treated
Mr. Kendal as a dictionary, and his stores of Byzantine, Othmian,
and Austrian lore, chimed in with the perceptions of the General,
who, going by military maps, described plans of operations which
Mr. Kendal could hardly believe he had not found in history,
while he could as little credit that Mr. Kendal had neither
studied tactics, nor seen the spots of which he could tell such
serviceable minutie.
They had their heads together over the map the whole
evening, and the next morning, when the General began to ask
questions about Turkish, his sister was proud to hear her husband
answering with the directness and precision dear to a military
man.
'That's an uncommonly learned man, Albinia's husband,'
began the General, as soon as he had started with his brother on
a round of errands.
'I never met a man of more profound and universal knowledge.'
'I don't see that he is so grave and unlike other people.
Fred reported that he was silence itself, and she might as well
have married Hamlet's ghost.'
'Fred saw him at a party,' said Maurice; then remembering
that this might not be explanatory, he added, ' He shines most
iwhen at ease, and every year since his marriage has improved
and enlivened him.'
' I am satisfied. I hardly knew how to judge, though I did
not think myself called upon to remonstrate against the mar-
riage, as the aunts wished. I knew 1 might depend on you, and
I tlouglht it high time that she should be settled.'
'I have been constantly admiring her discernment. for I own
that at first his reserve stood very much in my way, but since
she has raised his spirits, and taught him to exert himself, he
has been a most valuable brother to me.'
'Then you think her halpy    I was surprised to see her
such a fiue-looking woman ; my aunts had croaked so much
about his children and his mother, that I thought she would be
worn to a shadow.'




<pb n="316"/>
316            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
'Very happy. She has casual troubles, and a great 
work, but that is what she is madle for.'
'How does she get on with his children ?'
'Hearty love for them has carried her through the first
ficulties, which appalled me, for they had been greatly
managed. I am afraid that she has not been able to undo
of the past evil; and with all her good intentions, I am so
times afraid whether she is old enough to deal with gro
young people.'
'You don't mean that Kendal's children are grown upi.
should think him younger than I am.'
'He is so, but civil servants marry early, and not alw
wisely; and the son is about twenty. Poor Albinia dotes
him, and has done more for him than ever his father did;
the lad is weak and tender every way, with no stamina, mo
physical, and with just enough property to do him harm 
has been at Oxford and has iailed, and now he is in the mil
but what can be expected of a boy in a country town,
nothing to do ? I did not like his looks last week, and I d
think his being there, always idle, is good for that little 
scamp of Albinia's own.'
' Why don't they put him into the service ?'
'He is too old.'
'Not too old for the cavalry !'
'He can ride, certainly, and is a tall, good-looking fellow;
I should not have thought him the stuff to make a d
He has always been puling and delicate, unfit for school,
ing force.'
'Wanting discipline,' said the General. 'I have seen a
in a good regiment make an excellent officer of that very
of youngster, just wanting a mould to give him substance'
'The regiment should be a very good one,' said Mr. Fe
'he would be only too easily drawn in by the bad style of su
tern.'
'Put him into the 25th Lancers,' said the General, 'and
Fred to look after him. Rattlepate as he is, he can take exc
lent care of a lad to whom he takes a fancy, and if Albini a e
him, he would do it with all his heart.'
' I wish you would propose it, though I am afraid his f
will never consent. I would do a great deal to get him a
before he has led little Maurice into harm.'
'This consideration moved the Rector of Fairmead him
to broach the subject; but neither Mr. Kendal nor AlbiniM
could think of venturing their fragile son in the army, tho
assured that there was little chance that the 25th Lancers wo




<pb n="317"/>
fI         moe     THIE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.              l1 7
be summoned to the east, and they would only hold out hopes
of little Maurice by and by.
Albinia's martial ardour was revived as she listened with
greater grasp of comprelension to subjects familiar in her girl-
hood. She again net old friends of her father, the lingering
glories of the Peninsula and Waterloo, who liked her for her
own sake as well as for her father's, while Maurice looked on,
amused by her husband's silent pride in her, and her hourly
progress in the regard of the General, who began to talk of
making a long visit to Fairmead, after what he expected would
be a slight demonstration on the Danube. He even began to
regret the briefness of the time that he could spend in their
society.
Much was crowded into that week, but Albinia contrived to
find an hour for a call on her little French friend, to whom she
had already forwarded the parcels she had brought from home
-a great barm-brack from Biddy, and a store of delicate convent
confections from Hadninster.
She was set down at a sober old house in the lawyers' quarter
of the world, and conducted to a pretty, though rather littered
drawing-room, where she found a delicate-looking young mamma,
and various small children.
'I'm so glad,' said little Mrs. Rainsforth, 'that you have been
able to conle, it will be such a pleasure to dear Miss Durant;'
nld while one of the children was sent to summon the governess,
the lady continued, nervously but warmly, 'I hope you will
think Miss Durant looking well; I am afraid she shuts herself
up too much. I'm sure she is the greatest comfort, the greatest
blessing to us.'
Albinia's reply was prevented by a rush of children, followed
1,v the dear little trim, slight figure. There was no fear that
Genevieve did not look well or happy. Her olive complexion
was healthy; her dark eyes lustrous with gladness; her smile
frank and unquelled; her movements full of elastic life.
She led the way to the back parlour, dingy by nature, but
bearing living evidence to the charm which she infused into any
1oomll. Scratched table, desks, copybooks, and worn grammars,
]ind iole the air of a comfortable occupation than of the shabby
]laut of irksome taskwork. There were flowers in the window,
-ld the children's treasures were arranged with taste. GCne-
X ive loved her school-room, and showed off its little advantages
'ith pretty exultation.  If Mrs. Kendal could only see how
'e;l it looked with the curtains down, after tea!
And tle;i camne the long, long talk over home affairs, and the
l;istory et' half the population of Bayford, Ge6evieve making
!]!




<pb n="318"/>
S31            THIE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
inquiries, and drinking in the answers as if she could not makl
enough of her enjoyment.
Not till all the rest had been discussed, did she say, with
dropped eyelids, and a little blush, ' Is Mr. Gilbert Kendal
quite strong '
'Thank you, he has been much better this winter, and so
useful and kind in nursing grandmamma !'
'Yes, he was always kind.'
'He was going to beg me to remember him to you, but he
broke off, and said you would not care.'
'I care for all goodness towards me,' answered G6nevieve,
lifting her eyes with a flash of inquiry.
'I am afraid he is as bad as ever, poor fellow,' said Albinia,
with a little smile and sigh; ' but lie has behaved very well. I
must tell you that you were in the same train with him on his
journey from Oxford, and he was ashamed to meet your eye.'
'Ah, I remember well. I thought I saw him. I was bring-
ing George and Fanny from a visit to their aunts, and I was sure
it must be Mr. Gilbert.'
' As prudent as ever, Genevieve.'
'It would not have been right,' she said, blushing; ' but it was
such a treat to see a Bayford face, that I had nearly sprung out
of the waiting-room to speak to him at the first impulse.'
'My poor little exile !' said Albinia.
'No, that is not my name. Call me my aunt's bread-winner.
That's my pride ! I mean my cause of thankfulness. I could
not have earned half so much at home.'
'I hope indeed you have a home here.'
'That I have,' she fervently answered. 'Oh, without being
a homeless orphan, one does not learn what kind hearts there
are. Mr. and Mrs. Rainsforth seemed only to fear that they
should not be good enough to me.'
' Do you mean that you found it a little oppressive '
'Fi donc, Madame! Yet I must own that with her timid
uneasy way, and his so perfect courtesy, they did alarm me a
little at first. I pitied them, for I saw them so resolved not to
let me feel myself de trop, that I knew I was in their way.'
'Did not that vex you I'
'Why, I suppose they set their inconvenience against the
needs of their children, and my concern was to do my duty, and
be as little troublesome as possible. They pressed me to spcn' I
my evenings with them, but 1 thought that would be too hard
on theml, so 1 told them I preferred the last hours alone, and I
do not come in unless there are others to prevent t p t their being
tdteld-tete.'




<pb n="319"/>
I       ~      ~THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.              319
Very wise. And do you not find it lonely T
S It is my time for reading-my time for letters-my time for
being at home !' cried Genevieve. ' Now however that I hope
I am no longer a weight oil them, Mrs. Rainsforth will some-
times ask me to come and sing to him, or read aloud, when he
comes home so tired that he cannot speak, and her voice is
weak. Alas ! they are both so fragile, so delicate.'
Her soul was evidently with them and with her charges, of
whom there was so much to say, that the carriage came all too
soon to hurry Albinia away from the sight of that buoyant sweet-
ness and capacity of happiness.
She was rather startled by Miss Ferrars saying, ' By-the-by,
Albinia, how was it that you never told us of the development
of the Ilifant prodigy '
'I don't know what you mean, Aunt Gertrude.'
'Don't you remember that boy, that Mrs. Dusautoy Caven-
dish's son, whom that poor little companion of hers used to call
VEvfant prodigue. I did not know he was a neighbour of yours.
as I find from Lucy.'
' What did Lucy tell you about him ? She did not meet him I
cried Albinia, endeavouring not to betray her alarm. 'I mean,
did she meet him I'
' Ildeed,' said Miss Ferrars, 'you should have warned us if
you had any objection, my dear.'
'Well, but what did happen I'
'Oh, nothing alarming, I assure you. They met at a ball at
Brighton; Lucy introduced him, and said he was your vicar's
nephew; they danced together. I think only once.'
'I wish you had mentioned it. When did it happen '
'I can hardly tell. I think she had been about a fortnight
with us, but she seemed so indifferent that I should never have
thought it worth mentioning.  I remember my sister thought
of asking him to a little evening party of ours, and Lucy dis-
suading her. Now, really, Albinia, don't look as if we had
been betraying our trust. You never gave us any reason to
think-'
'No, no. I beg your pardon, dear aunt. I hope there's no
harm done. If I could have thought of his turning up, I would
-But I hope it is all right.'
Such good accounts came from both homes, and the General
was so unwilling to part with his brother and sister, that he
persuaded them to accompany him to Southampton for em-
barkation. They all felt that these last days, precious now,
might be doubly precious by-and-by, and alone with them and
tree from the kindly scrutiny of the good aunts, William ex-




<pb n="320"/>
8320           THE YOUNG STEP MOTHER.
pauded and evinced more warm fraternal feeling than he
ever manifested. He surprised his sister by thanking
warmly for having come to meet him. 'I am glad to
been with you, Albinia; I am glad to have seen your hus
I have told Maurice that I am heartily rejoiced to see yo
such excellent hands.'
'You must come and see the children, and know him be
'I hope so, when this affair is over, and I expect it will
soon settled. Anyway, I am glad we have been together.
we meet again, we will try to see more of one another.'
He had said much more to his brother, expressing regret
he had been so much separated from his sister.  Thor
soldier as he was, and ardent for active service, the sight of
and her husband had renewed gentler thoughts, and he was:
far growing old that the idea of home and rest came invitin
before him. He was softened at the parting, and when
wrung their hands for the last time on the deck of the steam
they were glad that his last words were, ' God bless you.'
There had been some uncertainty as to the time of
sailing, and Fairmead and Bayford had beenl told that un
their travellers arrived by the last reasonable train on Frid
they were not to be expected till the same time on Satur
Maurice having concocted a scheme for crossing by sev
junction lines, so as to save waiting; but they had
reckoned on the discourtesies of two rival companies wh
lines met at the same station, and the southern train was o
in time to hear the parting snort of the engine that it profe
to catch.
The Ferrars' nature, above all when sore with farewells,
not made to submit to having time wasted by treacherous tr
on a cold wintry day, and at a small new station, with
apology for a waiting-room, no bookstall, and nothing to
but greasy gingerbread and hard apples. 
Maurice relieved his feelings by heartily rowing all
officials, but lie could obtain no redress, as he knew full 
the whole time, nor would any train pick them up for full t
hours.
So indignant was he, that amusement rendered Albi
patient, especially when he took to strilding up and down t
platform, devising cases in which the delay might be actional
and vituperating the placability of Mr. Kendal, who hav
wrapt up his wife in plaids and( seated her on the top of 
luggg;e, hIld set his back to the wall, and was lost to the pro,
sent world in a book.
'Never mind, MIaurice,' said Albinia; 'in any other circulrm




<pb n="321"/>
THE YOUNG STEP MOTHER.               321
stances we should think three hours of each other a great
bocn.'
' f anything could be an aggravation, it would be to see
Albinia philosophical.'
'You make me so on the principle of the Helots and
Spartans.'
It was possible to get to Hadminster by half-past seven, and
on to Bayford by nine o'clock, but Fairmead lay further fronm
the line, and the next train did not stop at the nearest station,
so Maurice agreed to sleep at Bayford that night; and this
settled, set out with his sister to explore the neighbourhood
for eatables and church architecture. They made an ineffec-
tual attempt to rouse Mr. Kendal to go with them, but he was
far too deep in his book, and only muttered something about
looking after the luggage. They found a stale loaf of bread,
and a hideous church, but it was a merry walk, and brought
them back in their liveliest mood, which lasted even to pro-
nouncing it 'great fun' that the Hadminster flies were all at a
ball, and that the omnibus must convey them home by the full
moonlight.
CHAPTER XXIII.
SLOWLY the omnibus rumbled over the wooden bridge, and
then with a sudden impulse it thundered up to the front door.
Albinia jumped out, and caught Sophy in her arms, exclaim-
ing, 'And how are you all, my dear '
'We had quite given you up,' Gilbert was saying. ' The fire
is in the library,' he added, as Mr. Kendal was opening the
drawing-room door, and closing it in haste at the sight of a pale,
uninviting patch of moonlight, and the rush of a blast of cold
wind.
'And how is grandmamma ? and the children ? My Sophy,
you don't look well; and where's Lucy ?'
Ere she could receive an answer, down jumped, two steps at
a time, a half-dressed figure, all white stout legs and arms which
were speedily hugging mamma.
' There's my man !' said Mr. Kendal, 'a good boy, I know.'
'No !' cried the bold voice.
' No ? (incredulously) what have you been doing?'
'I broke the conservatory with the marble dog, and-' he
looked at Gilbert.
'There's my brave boy,' said Mr. Kendal, who had suffered
o0 much from his elder son's equivocation as to be itady to
y




<pb n="322"/>
S22            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
overlook anything for the sake of truth. ' Tere, Uncle 
llake hands with your godson, who always tells truth.'
The urchin folded his arms on his bosom, and looked 
young Bonaparte.
'Where's your hand?' said his uncle. 'Wont you 
to me ?'
'No.'
' He will be wiser to-morrow, if you are so good as to try
,gain,' said Allinia, who knew nothing did him more
tlhan creating a commotion by his caprices; 'he is up too
and fractious with sleepiness. Go to bed now, my dear.'
'I slhall not be wiser to-morrow,' quotl the child, marc
out of the room in defiance.
'Monkey! what's the matter now?' exclaimed Albinia;
ciippose you have all been spoiling him. But what's beco
Lucy ?'
'Gilbert said she was at the Dusautoys,' replied Sophy; 
if you would but come to grandmamma ! Slie found out t
you were expected, and she is in such a state that we have
known what to do.' 
' I'll come; only, Sophy dear, please order tea and some
to eat. Your uncle looks ravenous.'
She broke off, as there advanced into the room a being
Lucy, but covered with streams and spatters of flowing
tears, like a heraldic decoration, over face, neck, and dress
All unconscious, she came with outstretched hlands and
of welcome, but an astonished cry of' Lucy !' met her, and
ing her eyes on her dress, she screamed, '0O1 goodness ! it's
'Where can you have been 1 what have you been doing t:
'I-don't know-Oh! it was the great inkstand, and
the scent-Oh ! it is all over me ! It's in my hair !' shudde
' Ol, dear ! oh dear ! I shall never get it out !' and off
rushed, i;'lowed by Gilbert, and was soon heard calling
maids to bring hot water to her room.
' What is all this ?' asked Mr. Kendal.
'1 (lo not know,' mournfully answered Sophy.
Albinia left the library, and taking a candle, went into
empty drawing-room. The moonlighlt shone white upon
table, and showed the large cut-glass ink-bottle in a pool of
own contents; and the sofa-cover had black spots and stains a
it had partaken of the libation.
Sophy saw, and stood like a statue.
'You know nothing, I am sure,' said Albinia.
' Nothing 1' repeated Sophy, with a blank look of wretch
neks.




<pb n="323"/>
THE YOUING STEP-MOTHER.               823
'If you please, ma'amr,' said the nurse at the door, 'could you
be kind cenough to come to IMrs. Meadows, she will be quieter
when she has seen you 7'
Iophly dear, we must leave it now,' said Albinia. 'You
Ilust see to their tea; they have had nothing since break-
fast.'
hlle hastened to the sick room, where she found Mrs. Meadows
in a painful state of agitation and excitement. The nurse said
that until this evening, she had been as usual, but finding that
IMrs. Kendal was expected, she had been very restless; Mliss
Kendal was out, and neither Miss Sophy nor Mr. Gilbert could
soothe her.
She eagerly grasped the hand of Albinia who bent down to
kiss her, and asked how she had been.
' O11 ! my dear, very unwell, very. They should not leave
me to myself so long, my dear. I thought you would never
come back ;' and she began to cry, and say, ' no one cared for
an old woman.'
Albinia assured her that she was not going away, and re-
strained her own eager and bewildered feelings to tranquilize
her, by prosing on in the lengthy manner which always soothed
the poor old lady. It was a great penance, in her anxiety to
investigate the mysteries that seemed to swarm in the house,
but at last she was able to leave the bedside, though not till she
had bejen twice summoned to tea.
So,,hy, lividly pale, was presiding with trembling hands;
Gilbert, flulshed and nervous, waiting on every one, and trying
to be lively and at ease, but secret distress was equally traceable
in each.
Slhe durst only ask after the children, and heard that her
little imailsake had been as usual as good and sweet as child
could Ie. And Maurice 
' lo's a famous fellow, went on capitally,' said Gilbert.
' Yes, till yesterday,' hoarsely gasped Sophy, sincerity wrench-
ing out the protest by force.
' Ah, wlhat has lie been doing to the conservatory I'
' Ile let the little marble dog down from the morning-room
wii(llw with my netting silk; it fell, and made a great hole,'
said s phy.
' \ lhat, as a form of dawdling at his lessons '
'Yes; but he has not been at all tiresome about them except
to-day and yesterday.'
' And he has told the exact truth,' said Mr. Kendal; 'his
gallant confession has earned the little cannon I promised him.'
'I believe,' said Albinia, 'that it would be greater merit in
2




<pb n="324"/>
324            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
Maurice to learn forbearance than to speak truth and be
for it. I have never seen his truth really tried.'
' I value truth above all other qualities,' said Mr. Ke
So do I,' said Albinia, and it is my greatest joy in that
fellow; but some time or other it must cost him somet
it will not be tested.'
Mr. Kendal did not like this, and repeated that he must
his cannon. Albinia fancied that she heard something
groan from Gilbert.
When they broke up for the night, she threw her arm
Sophy as they went upstairs, saying, ' My poor dear, you
half dead. Have things been going very wrong ?'
'Only these two days,' said Sophy; 'and I don't know
they have either. I am glad you are come !'
' What kind of things ' said Albinia, following her into.
room.
'Don't ask,' at first began Sophy; but then, frownin
she could hardly speak, she added, 'I mean, I don't know w
it is my own horrid way, or that there is really an atmo
of something I don't make out.'
' Didn't you tell me Lucy was at the Vicarage ?' said A
suddenly.
Gilbert said yes, when I asked if she could be with
Dusauzoys,' said Sophy,' when grandmamnma wanted her.
she did rot come. Mamma, please don't think of what I
for very likely it is only that I am cross, because of being
alone with grandmamnla so long this evening, and then M
being slow at his lessons.'
' You are not cross, Sophy; you are worn out, and perp
and unhappy.'
'Oh ! not now you are come home,' and Sophy laid her
on her shoulder and cried with relief and exhaustion. Al
caressed her, saying,
'My trust, my mainstay, my poor Sophy ! There, go to
and sleep, and don't think of it now. Only first tell me
thing, is that Algernon at home ?'
' No !' said Sophy, vehemently, 'certainly not !'
Albinia breathed more freely.
'Everybody,' said Sophy, collecting herself, 'has gone on
Gilbert and Lucy have been as kind as could be, and Ma
very good, but yesterday morning he went on in his foolish
at lessons, and Gilbert took him out riding before he had f
them.   They came in very late, and I think Maurice n
have been overtired, for he was so idle this morning, that
threatened to tell, and put him in mind cf the cannon 




<pb n="325"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                325
,romised him; but somehow I must have managed badly, for
he only grew more defiant, and ended by letting the marble
dog out of window, so that it went through the roof of the
conservatory.'
'Yes, of course it was your fault, or the mar- le dog's,' said
Albinia, smiling, and stroking her fondly. 'Ah ! we ought to
have come home at the fixed time, and not left you to their
mercy; but one could not hurry away from William, when he
was so much more sorry to leave us than we ever expected.'
' Oh! mamma, don't talk so! We were so glad. If only we
could help being such a nuisance !'
Albinia contrived to laugh, and withdrew, intending to make
a visit of inquiry to Lucy, but she could not refuse herself the
refreshment of a kiss to the little darling who could have no
guile to hide, no wrong to confess. She had never so much
realized the value of the certainty of innocence as when she hung
over the crib, and thought that when those dark fringed lids were
lifted, the eyes would flash with delight at meeting her, without
one drawback.
Suddenly a loud roar burst from the little room next to Gil-
bert's, in which Maurice had lately been installed. She hurried
swiftly in that direction, but a passage and some steps lay be-
tween, and Gilbert had been beforehand with her.
She heard the words, 'I don't care! I don't care if it is
manly ! I will tell; I can't bear this !' then as his brother
seemed to be hushing him, he burst out again, 'I wouldn't have
minded if papa wouldn't give me the cannon, but he will, and
that's as bad as telling a lie ! I can't sleep if you wont let me
off my promise !'
Trembling from head to foot, her voice low and quivering
with concentrated, incredulous wrath, Albinia advanced. ' Are
you teaching my child falsehood ?' she said; and Gilbert felt as
if her look were worse to him than a thousand deaths.
'0 mamma! mamma! Gilbert! let me tell her,' cried the
child; and Albinia, throwing herself on her knees, clasped
him in her arms, as though snatching him from the demon of
deceit.
' Tell all, Maurice,' said Gilbert, folding his arms; 'it is to
your credit, if you would believe so. I shall be glad to have
this misery ended any way! It was all for the sake of
others.'
' Mamma,' Maurice said, in the midst of these mutterings of
his unhappy brother,' I can't have the cannon without papa
knowing it all. I couldn't shake hands with Uncle Maurice
for telling the truth, for I had not told it.'




<pb n="326"/>
326            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER 
'And what is it, my boy ? tell me now; no one caui
you.' 
'I scratched and fought him-M-r. Cavendish Dusa
kicked down the decanter of wine. They told me it was
not to tell, and I promised.'                     i
He was crying with the exceeding pain and distreum
child whose tears were rare, and Albinia rocked him 
arms.
Gilbert cautiously shut the door, and said sadly, ']
behaved nobly, if he would only believe so. You would be _
of your son if you had seen him. They wanted to make]
drink wine, and he was fighting them off.'
'And where were you, Gilbert, you to whom I trusted 
I could not help it,' said Gilbert; then as her lip curled 
contempt, and her eye spoke disappointment, he cast 
the ground, exclaiming, 'Oh, if you knew how I have
mixed up with others, and what I have gone through, you
pity me. Oh, Maurice, don't cry, when I would give wor
be like you. Why do you let him cry ? why don't you tell
what a brave noble boy he is ?'
' I don't know what to think or believe,' said Albinia,
but returning vehemently to her child, she continued, 'Ma
my dear, no one is angry with you ! You, at least, I can 
on. Tell ne where you have been, and what they have
doing to you.'
Even with Gilbert's explanations, she could hardly u
stand Maurice's narrative, but she gathered that on Thu
the brothers had ridden out, and were about to turn home
when Archie Tritton, of whom to her vexation Maurice
familiarly, had told Gilbert that a friend was waiting for hi
the inn connected with the training stables, three miles
on. Gilbert had demurred, but was told the matter would 
no delay, and yielded on being pressed. He tried to supp
the friend's name, but Maurice had called him Mr. Cave
Dusautoy.
While Gilbert was engaged with him, Tritton had intro
Maurice to the horses and stable boys, whose trade had ins
him with such emulation, that he broke off in the midst of'
confession to ask whether he could be a jockey and 
gentleman. All this had detained them till so late, that 
had been drawn into staying to dinner. Maurice had gone
very happily, secure that he was right in Gilbert's hands, aud o _
laying up a few curious words for explanation; but when he
asked to drink wine, he stoutly answered that mamma did 
allow it.




<pb n="327"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTtHEI                327
Idle mischief prompted Dusautoy and Tritton to set them-
selves to over)ower his resistance. Gilbert's feeble remonstrances
were treated as a jest, and Algernon, who could brook no oppo-
sition, swore that he would conquer the little prig. Maurice
found himsclf pinioned by strong arms, but determined and
spirited, he lmade a vigorous struggle, and so judiciously aimed
a furious kick, that MIr. Cavendish Dusautoy staggered back,
stumbling against the table, and causing a general over-
throw.
The victory was with Maurice, but warned as he llad often
been against using his natural weapons, lie thought himself
guilty of a great crime. The others, including, alas ! Gilbert,
strove to persuade him it was a joke, and, above all, to lind him
to silence, tor Tritton and Dusautoy would never have ventured
so far, could they have imagined the possibility of such terms
as those on which he lived with his parents. They attacked the
poor child on the score of his manly aspirations, telling him it
was babyish to tell mamma and sisters everything, a practice fit
for girls, not for boys or men. These assurances extracted a
pledge of secrecy, which was kept as long as his mother was
absent, and only rendered him reckless by the sense that he had
forfeited the prize of good conduct; but the sight of her re-
newed the instinct of confidence, and his father's reliance on his
truth so acted on his sense of honour, that he could not hold his
peace.
' May I tell papa ? and will he let me have the cannon ?' he
finished.
'You shall certainly tell him, my dear, dear little boy, and
we will see what he says about the cannon,' she said, fervently
kissing hima. 'It will be some comfortfort for him to hear how yoo
have behaved, my precious little man. I thank God with all
my heart that He has saved you from putting anything before
truth. I little thought I was leaving you to a tempter !'
The child did not fully understand her. His was a very simple
nature, and he was tired out by conflicting emotions. His breast
was relieved, and his mother caressed him ; he cared for nothing
more, and drawing her hand so as to rest his cheek on it, he
looked up in her face with soft weary happiness in his eyes, then
let the lids sink over them, and fell peacefully asleep, while the
()tlers talked on. 'At least you will do me the poor justice of
believing it was not willinglv,' said Gilbert.
' wish you would not talk to me,' she answered, averting her
face and speaking low as if to cut the heart; 'I don't want to
re>roaclh you, and I can't speak to you properly.'
'If you would only hear me, my only friend and helper I




<pb n="328"/>
328            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
But it was all that was wanting ! I have forfeited 
toleration! I wonder why I was born!'            '
He was taking up his light to depart but Albinia's 
her own temper made her suspect that she had spoken
tively, and she said, 'What can I do, Gilbert? Here
poor child, whom I trusted to you, who can never
ignorant of the sound of evil words, and only owes it to
mercy on his brave spirit that this has not been the
ning of destruction. I feel as if you had been trying to 
away his soul !'
'And will you, can you not credit,' said Gilbert, n
inaudibly, 'that I did not act by my free will? I h
notion that any such thing could befal him, and would
have let them try to silence him, but to shield others.'
'Others! Yes, Archie Tritton and Algernon Dusautoy
know what your free-will is in their hallds, and yet I tho
you cared for your brother enough to guard him, if
yourself.'
'If you knew the coercion,' muttered Gilbert. 'I pr
as I would to my dying day, that I had no intention of
near the stables when I set out, and would never have cons
could I have helped it.'
'And why could not you help it ?'
Gilbert gasped.  'Tritton brought me a message
Dusautoy, insisting on my meeting him there. It was too
to take Maurice home, and I could not send him with
I expected only to exchange a few words at the door. It
Tritton who took Maurice away to the stables.'
'I hear, but I do not see the compulsion, only the i
ordinary weakness that leads you everywhere after those m
' I must tell you, I suppose,' groaned Gilbert; I can bear
thing but this. There's a miserable money entanglement
lays me under a certain obligation to Dusautoy.'
'Your father believed you had told him of all your de
she said, in a tone of increased scorn and disappointment.
' I did-I mean-Oh ! Mrs. Kcndal, believe me, I inten
to have told him the utmost farthing-I thought I had done
but this was a thing-Dusautoy had persuaded me into half O
senting to have some wine with him from a cheating Portugu
-then ordered more than ever I knew of, and the man W
and became bankrupt, and sent in a great abominable bill 
I no more owned, nor had reason to expect than my horse.'
'So you preferred intriguing with this man to appl
openly to your father ?'
'It was no doing of mine. It was forced upon me, and,




<pb n="329"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.              329
fact, the account was mixed up with his. It was the most evil
hour of my life when I consented. I've not had a moment's
peace or happiness since, and it was the promise of the bill re-
ceipted that led me to this place.'
'And why was this place chosen for the meeting ? You and
lr. Cavendish Dusautoy live only too near one another.'
' He is not at the Vicarage,' faltered Gilbert.
Albinia suddenly grew pale with apprehension. 'Gilbert,'
she said, 'there is only one thing that could make this business
worse;' and as she saw his change of countenance, she continued,
'Then it is so, and Lucy is his object.'
'He did not speak, but his face was that of a convicted
traitor, and fresh perceptions crowded on her, as she exclaimed,
horror struck, 'The ink I Yes, when you said she was with
the Dusautoys! I understand! He has been in hiding, he
has been here ! And this expedition was to arrange a clandes-
tine meeting between them under your father's own roof ! You
conniving ! you who said you would sooner see your sister sold
to Legree!'
'It is all true,' said Gilbert, moodily, his elbows on the table
and his face in his hands, 'and if the utmost misery for weeks
past could be any atonement, it would be mine. But at least
I have done nothing willingly to bring them together. I have
only gone on in the hope and trust that I was some protection
to poor Lucy.
' Fine protection,' sighed Albinia. 'And how has it been 
how does it stand ?'
'Why, they met at Brighton, I believe. She used to walk
on the chain pier before breakfast, and he met her there. If
he chooses, he can make any one do what he likes, because lie
does not understand no for an answer. Then when she came
home, he used to meet her on the bridge, when you sent her
out for a turn in the evening, and sometimes she would make
me take her out walking to meet him. Don't you see how
utterly miserable it was for me; when they had volunteered this
help all out of kindness, it was impossible for me to speak
to you.'
Albinia made a sound of contempt, and said, 'Go on.'
'That time when you and Mr. Hope saw them, Lucy was
frightened, and they had a quarrel, he went away, and I hoped
and trusted it had died out. I heard no more till yesterday,
when I was dragged into giving him this meeting. It seems
that he had only just discovered your absence, and wanted to
take the opportunity of seeing her. I was in hopes you would
have come back; I assured him you would; but he chose to




<pb n="330"/>
330            TIE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
watch till evening, and then Lucy was to meet him in the
servatory. Poor Lucy, you must not be very angry with
for she was much averse to it, and I enclosed a letter fro
to forbid him to come. I thought all was safe, till I
heard their voices, and grandinmamma got into an agitation^
Sophy was running about wild to find Lucy. When you 
home, papa's opening the door frightened Lucy, and it
that Dusautoy thought that she was going to faint and
and laid hold of the ink instead of the eau-de-cologne. Tl
I believe the ink would have betrayed it without me. N
you have heard everything, Mrs. Kendal, and can believe t
is not a more wretched and miserable creature breathing
I am.'
Albinia slowly rose, and put her hand to her brow,;
though confused with the tissue of deceit and double dealing.:
'    Oh ! Mrs. Kendal, will you not speak to me? I solem
declare that I have told you all.'
'I am thinking of your father.'
With a gesture of acquiescent anguish and despair, he let 
pass, held open the door, and closed it softly, so as not to af
the happy sleeper.                                    '
'Good night,' she said, coldly, and turned away, but
mournful, resigned 'Good night,' was so utterly broken do
that her heart was touched, and turning she said, 'Good nig
Gilbert, I am sorry for you; I believe it is weakness and n
wickedness.'
She held out her hand, but instead of being shaken, it
pressed to his lips, and the fingers were wet with his tears.
Feeling as though the bad dreams of a night had taken s
and life, Albinia stood by the fire in her sitting-room the n
morning, trying to rally ler judgnlent, and equally dr
the sight of those who had caused her grief, and of those 
would share the shock she had last night experienced. ''
The first knock announced one whom ,she (lid not ex
Gilbert, wretchedly pale from a sleepless night, and his vo
scarcely audible.
'I beg your pardon,' he said; 'but I thought I might ha
led you to be hard on Lucy: I do believe it was against h.
will.'
Before she could answer, the door flew wide, and in rus
Maurice, shouting, 'Good morning, mamnma;' and at his vo
Mr. Kendal's dressing-room door was pushed back, and he calle
'Here, Maurice.'
As the boy ran forward, he was met and lifted to his fatherd
wI




<pb n="331"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                 331
breast, while, with a fervency he little understood, though he
never forgot it, the words were uttered,
'God blless you, Maurice, and give you grace to go on to
withstand temptation, and speak the truth from your heart!'
Maurice was impressed for a moment, then he recurred to his
leadilng thlought-
'.May I have the cannon, papa? I did kick-I broke the
ebttle ; but may I have the cannon ?'
' Maurice, you are too young to understand the value of your
resistance. Listen to me, my boy, for you must never forget
this: you have been taken among persons who, I trust, will
never be your companions.'
' h !' interrupted Maurice, ' must I never be a jockey ?'
'No, Maurice.   Horses are perverted to bad purposes by
thoughtless men, and you must keep aloof from such. You
were not to blamle, for you refused to do wlhat you knew to be
wrong, and did not know it was an improper place for you.'
' Gilbert took me,' said Maurice, puzzled at the gravity, which
convinced him that some one was in fault, and of course it must
be himself.
'Gilbert did very wrong,' said Mr. Kendal; 'and henceforth
you luitlst learn that you must trust to your own colnscience, and
no longer believe that all your brother tells you is right.'
Maurice gazed in inquiry, and perceiving his brother's down-
cast air, ran to his mother, crying, ' Is papa angry 1'
'Yes,' said Gilbert, willing to spare her the pain of a reply,
'hle is justly angry with me for having exposed you to tempta-
tion. Oh, Maurice, if I had been made such as you, it would
have been better for us all !'
It was the first perception that a grown person could do wrong,
and that person his dear Gilbert. As if the grave countenances
were insupportable, he gave a long-drawn breath, hid his face on
his mother's knee, and burst into an agony of weeping. He was
lifted on her lap in a moment, father and mother both comfort-
ing him with assurances that lie was a very good boy, and that
papa was much pleased with him, Mr. Kendal even putting the
cannon into his hand, as a tangible evidence of favour ; but the
child thrust aside the toy, and sliding down, took hold of his
brother's languid, dejected hand, and cried, with a sob and stamp
of his foot,
'You shan't say you are naughty: I wont let you !'
Alas ! it was a vain repulsion of the truth that this is a
v'icked world. Gilbert only put him back, saying,
'You had better go away from me, Maurice: you cannot




<pb n="332"/>
332            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
understand what I have done. Pray Heaven you may
know what I feel !'
Maurice did but cling the tighter; and though Mr. 
had not yet addressed the culprit, he respected the force ofJ
innocent love too much to interfere. The bell rang, and 
went down, Maurice still holding by his brother; and when
imcle met them, it was touching to see the generous little fe
hanging back, and not giving his own hand till he had
Gilbert receive the ordinary greeting.
Though Mr. Ferrars had been told nothing, he could not 
be aware of the symptoms of a family crisis-the gravity
some, and the pale, jaded looks of others. Lucy was not one
these; she came down with little Albinia in her arms,
began to talk rather airily, excusing herself for not having oo.
down in the evening because that 'horrid ink' had got into 
hair, and tittering a little over the absurdity of her hav
picked up the inkstand in the dark. Not a word of respo
did she meet, and her gaiety died away in vague alarm. Soph
the most innocent, looked wretched; and Maurice absolu
began to cry again, at the failure of some manceuvre to 
his father speak to Gilbert. 
His tears broke up the breakfast-party. His mother led
away to reason with him, that, sad as it was, it was better t
people should be grieved when they had transgressed, as 
only hope of their forgiveness and improvement.  Ma
wanted her to reverse the declaration that Gilbert had d
wrong; but, alas! this could not be, and she was obliged 
send him out with his little sister, hoping that he would w
off his grief by exercise. It was mournful to see the first sha
of the penalty of sin falling on the Eden of his childhood I 
With an aching heart, she went in search of Lucy, who
taken sanctuary in Mrs. Meadows's room, and was not
withdrawn from thence to a tate-&-t'te. Fearful of falseh
Albinia began by telling her she knew all, and how little 
had expected such a requital of trust.
Lucy exclaimed that it had not been her fault, she had alwa
wanted to tell, and gradually Albinia drew from her the who
avowal, half shamefaced, half exultant.
She had never dreamt of meeting Algernon at Brighton
was quite .by chance that she came upon him at the officers'
when he was staying with Captain Greenaway. He asked 
to dance, and she had said yes, all on a sudden, without thinkingl
and then she fancied he would go away; she begged him noS'
to come again, but whenever she went out on the chain-pie 
before breakfast, there he was.
'Ji




<pb n="333"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                .333
Why did she go thither ? She hung her head. MIrs. Annesley
had desired her to walk; she could not help it; she was afraid
to write and tell what was going on-besides, he would come,
though she told him she would not see him ; and she could not
bear to make him unhappy. Then, when she came home, she
had been in hopes it was all over, but she had been very un-
happy, and had been on the point of telling all about it many
times, when mamma looked at her kindly; but then he came to
the Vicarage, and he would wait for her at the bridge, and
write notes to her, and she could not stop it; but she had
always told him it was no use, she never would be engaged to
him without papa's consent. She had only promised that she
would not marry any one else, only because he was so very
desperate, and she was afraid to break it off entirely, lest he
should go and marry the Principessa Bianca, a foreigner and
Papist, which would be so shocking for him and his uncle.
Gilbert could testify how grieved she was to have any secrets
from mamma; but Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy was so dreadful
when she talked of telling, that she did not know what would
happen.
When he went away, and she thought it was all over-
mamma might recollect how hard it was for her to keep up,
and what a force she put upon herself-but she would rather
have pined to death than have said one word to bring him back,
and was quite shocked when Gilbert gave her his note, to beg
her to let him see her that evening, before the party returned;
she said, with all her might, that he must not come, and when
he did, she was begging him all the time to go away, and she
was so dreadfully frightened when they actually came, that she
had all but gone into hysterics, or fainted away, and that was
the way he came to throw the ink at her-she was so very
much shocked, and so would he be-and really she felt the mis-
fortune to the beautiful new sofa-cover as a most serious calamity
and aggravation of her offence.
It was not easy to know how to answer; Albinia was scornful
of the sofa-cover, and yet it was hard to lay hold of a tangible sub-
ject on which to show Lucy her error, except in the conceal-
ment, which, by her own showing, she had lamented the whole
time. She had always said no, but, unluckily, her noes were of
the kind that might easily be made to mean yes; and she evidently
had been led on partly by her own heart, partly by the force of
the stronger will, though her better principles had filled her
with scruples and misgivings at every stage. She had been often
on the point of telling all, and asking forgiveness; and here it
painfully crossed Albinia, that if she herself had been less




<pb n="334"/>
334             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER. 
hurried, and less disposed to take everything for granted, 1a
tenderness might have led to a voluntary confession.
Still Lucy defended herself by the compulsion exerc
her, and she would hear none of the conclusions Albinia
therefrom; she would not see that the man who drove her
course of disobedience and subterfuge could be no fit guide
fired up at a word of censure, declaring that she knew
mamma had always hated him, and that now he was absent,
would not hear him blamed. The one drop of true love 
her difficult to deal with, for the heart was really made ove
the tyrant, and Albinia did not feel herself sufficiently guil
of negligence and imprudence to rebuke her with a comfor
conscience.
Mr. Kendal had been obliged to attend to some justice b
ness-better for him, perhaps, than acting as domestic magist
-and meanwhile the Vicar of Fairmead found himself
gotten. He wanted to be at home, yet did not like to leave
sister in unexplained trouble, though not sure whether he m
not be better absent.
Time passed on, he finished the newspaper, and wrote le
and then, seeing no one, he had gone into the hall to send ft
conveyance, when Gilbert, coming in from the militia pa
became the recipient of his farewells, but apparently with
little comprehension, that he broke off, struck by the dej
countenance, and wandering eye.                      ii
'I beg your pardon,' Gilbert said, passing his hand over
brow, ' I did not hear.'
'I was only asking you to tell my sister that I w6uld
disturb her, and leaving my good-byes with you.'
'You are not going I'
'Thank you; I think my wife will grow anxious.'
'I had hoped'-Gilbert sighed and paused-' I had tho
that perhaps-'
The wretcledness of his tone drove away Mr. Ferrars's 
pose of immediate departure, and returning to the drawing r
he said, ' If there were any way in which I could be of use.'
'Then you do not know ?' said Gilbert, veiling his face  i
his hand, as he leant on the mantel-shelf.
'I know nothing.   I could only see that something 
amiss. I was wisling to know whether my presence or abe
would be best for you all.' 
'Oh ! don't go !' cried Gilbert. ' Nobody must go who
be any comfort to Mrs. Kendal.'
A few kind words drew forth the whole piteous history tha
lay so heavily on his heart. Reserves were all over now; 




<pb n="335"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOThIER.               335
irregularly snd inc,,herenitly lie laid open his _riefs and errors,
his gradill alsorption into tile society with xwhich he had once
broken, and the inextricalle conplication of mischief in which
he lhad l'en involved by his debt.
' Yet,' lie said, 'all thle time 1 longed fiom my heart to do
w-ell. It was the very thing tllt led me inlto this scrape. I
thoughl t if the mlanl alpplied to iv father, as lie threatened, that
I should le suspected of having concealed this on purlose, and
be sent to Indlia . and I was so llalpy, and( thought myself so
safe here. I did believe that hloiet ald Mrs. Kendal would
have sheltered me ; but my destiny must needs hunt me out
here. and alienate even her !'
' The way to find tie Devil clhiind the Cross, is to cower be-
neath it in weak idolatry, instead; of grasping it in courageous
aiith,' said Mr. Ferrars. 'Suchl flitlh would have made you
trust yourself implicitly to your father. Then you would either
have gone forth in humble acceptance of the punishnment, or
else have stayed at holme, free. parlldonel, and guarded ; but, as
it was, no wonder telimptation followed you, and you had no
force to resist it.'
'And so all is lost ! Even delr little Maurice can never be
trusted to me again ! Andl his miother, wlo would, if she could,
be still merciful and pitying as an angel, she cannot forget to
what I exposed him ! Shie will never be the same tome again !
Yet I could lay down my lifi for any of thein !'
Mr. Flerrars watcled the droopling figure, crouching on his
chalirs, elbows on l kees, head bowed on the supportilng hands, and
fice hid(en ; an(l, listening to the meek, aflectionate holeless-
ness of the tone, lie understood the fond love and comlpassion
tlat had often surprised him in his sister, but he longed to read
whether tlis were penitence towards God, or remorse towards
' Miserablle il)eed, Gilbert,' lie said; 'but if all were irre-
trievally oflemuled, there still is One who can abundantly
pardon, whlere repentance is true.'
'1 tlhonugt'-cried Gilbert-' I thorlught it had been true
)etfore ! If pain, and shame, and abhorrence could so render it,
1 know it was when I came ]home. Ald then it was compara-
tive happiness; I thought I was forgiven ; I found joy anl
peace where they are promised'-thle burning tears dropped
between his fingers-' but it was all delusion; not prayers nor
sacranents can shield nle-I am doomed, and all I ask is to be
out of tle way of ruining M3aurice !'
'This is mere despair,' said MJr. Ferrars.  'I cannot but
believe your contrition was sincere; but steadfast courage was




<pb n="336"/>
336            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
what you needed, and you failed in the one trial that may
been sent you to strengthen and prove you. The effects 
been terrible, but there is every hope that you may r
your error, and wil back the sense of torgiveness'
'If I could dare to hope so-but I cannot presume to 
home to myself those assurances, when I know that I 
resolve, that I may have resolutions to break.'
'Have you ever laid all this personally before Mr. Dusau
' No; I have thought of it, but, mixed up as this is with
nephew and my sister, it is impossible 1 But you are a cl
man, Mr. Ferrars !' he added, eagerly.
Mr. Ferrars thought, and then said,
'If you wish it, Gilbert, I will gladly do what I can fory
I believe that I may rightly do so.'
His face gleamed for a moment with the light of gra
gladness, as if at the first ray of comfort, and then he said, :
am sure none was ever more grieved and wearied with 
burden of sin-if that be all.'
'I think,' said Mr. Ferrars, ' that it might be better to g
time to collect yourself, examine the past, separate the so
for the sin from the disgrace of the consequences, and then 
earnestly at the sole ground of hope. How would it be to a
for a couple of nights to Fairmead, at the end of next weekl!
Gilbert gratefully caught at the invitation; and Mr. Fel
gave him some advice as to his reading and self-discipl
speaking to him as gently and tenderly as Albinia herself 
lingered in case the other should have more to say; but at 
Gilbert stood up, saying,
'I would thankfully go to Calcutta now, but the situation
filled up, and my father said John Kendal had been eno
trifled with. If I saw any fresh opening, where I should
safe from hurting Maurice !'
'There is no reason you and your brother should not b 
blessing to each other.'
'Yes, there is. Till I lived at home, I did not know h
impossible it is to keep clear of old acquaintance. They 
good-natured fellows-that Tritton and the like-and after
that has come and gone, one would be a brute to cut them 
tirely; and Maurice is always after me, and has been moreabo
with them than his mother knows.    Even if I were
different, I should be a link ; and though it might be no g
harm if Maurice were a tame mamma's boy-you see, being
fellow he is, up to anything for a lark, and frantic about hors
-I could never keep him from them. There's no such great'
harm in themselves-hearty, good-natured fellows they are-.




<pb n="337"/>
TIlE YOUNG STEP 5MOTIER.              337
but there's a worse lot that they meet, and Manrice will go all
lengths whenever he begins. Now, so little as he is now, if r
were once gone, lie would never run into their way, and tley
would never get a hold of him.'
Mr. Firl'ars had unconsciously screwed up his face with dis-
may, but lie relaxed it, and spoke kindly.
, You are right. It was a mistake to stay at home. Perhaps
your regilent malv be stationed elsewhere.'
'I don't know hlow long it may be called out. If it were but
possible to make a fresh beginning.'
Did vyu hear of my brother's suggestion ?'
'I wish-but it is useless to talk about that. I could not
presume to ask my father for a commission-Heaven knows
wllell I shall dare to speak to him !'
' You have not personally asked his pardon after full con-
fessiol.'
' N-o-Mrs. Kendal knows all.'
'Did you ever do such a thing in your life V'
You don't know wliat my fthler is.'
' Neither do you, Gilbert. Let that be the first token of sin-
ceritv.'
Without leaving space for another word, Mr. Ferrars went
through the conservatory into the garden, where, meeting the
children, lie took the little one in his arms, and sent Maurice
to fetch his manmma. Albinia came down, looking so much
heated and harassed, that lie was grieved to leave her.
'Oh, Maurice, I am sorry ! You always come in for some
catastrople,' she said, trying to smile. ' You have had a most
forlorn inorniing.'
' ilbert has been with me,' he said. 'He has told me all,
my (lear, and I think it hopeful: I like him better than I ever
did before.'
' Poor feather, the breath of your lips has blown him the other
way,' said Albinia, too unhappy for consolation.
'  ell, it secims to me tlat you have done more for him than
I ever quite believed. I did not expect such sound, genuine
rcliu-ious feeling.'
' lie always had plenty of religious sentiment,' said Albinia,
sadly.
' I have asked him to come to us next week. Will you tell
Edlmund so '
' Yes. I-e will be thankful to you for taking him in lhand.
Poor boy, I know how attractive his penitence is, but I have
quite left off building on it.'
Mr. Ferrars defended him no longer. He could not help
z




<pb n="338"/>
.38             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
being much moved by the youth's self-abasement, but that 
be only because it was new to him, and lie did not even
recommend him to her mercy; he knew her own heart mi
trusted to relent, and it woull not hurt Gilbert in the end
made to feel the full weight of his offence.
' I must go,' he said, 'though I am sorry to leave you in
plexity. I am afraid I can do nothing for you.'
'Nothing-but feel kindly to Gilbert,' said Albinia.  I
do so yet. I don't feel as if I ever could again, when I t
what he was doing with Maurice. Yes, and how easily
could have brought poor Lucy to her senses, if he had
good for anything! Oh i Maurice, this is sickening w
You should be grateful to me for not scolding you for ha
taken me from home !' 
' I do not repent,' said her brother. ' The explosion isbe
than the subterranean mining.'
'It may be,' said Albinia;' and I need not boast of the
I did at home ! My poor, poor Lucy! A little discreet
ness and watchfulness on my part would have made all the
ference I It was all my running my own way with my 
shut; but then, I had always lived with trustworthy pee
Well, I wont keep you listening to my maundering, when 
fred wants you. Ol ! why did that Polysyllable ever come
the place I'
Mr Ferrars said the kindest and most cheering thin
could devise, and drove away, not much afraid of her being
forgiving.
lie was disposed to stake all his hopes of the young ma
:le issue of his advice to make a direct avowal to his fa
And Gilbert made the effort, though rather in desperation 
resolution, knowing that his condition could not be worse,
seeing no hope save in Mr. Ferrars' counsel. Hie was the
to seek Mr. Kendal, and dreadful to hliin as was the unal
melancholy displeasure of the fixed look, the steadily penetra
deep dark eyes, and the subdued sternness of the voice, hen
his confession fully, without reserve or palliation.
It was more than Mr. Kendal liad expected, and more,
haps, than he absolutely trusted, for Gilbert had not hitl
inspired faith in his protestations that lie spoke the whole t
and nothing but the truth, nor lad lie always the powerl
doing so when overpowered by fri-ght. The manner in wh
his father laid hold of any inadvertent discrepancy, treatiDg
,s a wilful prevarication, was terror and agony; and well as
knew it to be the meed of past equivocation, he felt it cre
torture him by ilmlied suspicion. Yet how could it be o




<pb n="339"/>
THE YOUNG STEP MOTHER.                 339
wise, when lie had been introducing his little brother to his own
corrupters, and conniving at his sister's clandestine correspond-
ence with a man whom he knew to be worthless?
The grave words that he obtained at last, scarcely amounted
to pardon ; they implied that he had done irreparable mischief,
anul acted disgracefully, and such forgiveness as was granted was
(oilv made conditional on there being no farther reserves.
Alas ! even with all tender love and compassion, no earthly
paent can forgive as does the Heavenl,y Father. None but the
O)mniscient can test the fulness of the confession, nor the sin-
cerity of 'Father, I have sinned against Heaven and hbfore
Thee, and am no more worthy to be called Thy son.' This inter-
view only sent the son away more crushed and overwhelmed,
antd yearning towards the more deeply oflended, and yet more
collassionate Father.
Mr. Kendal, after this interview, so far relaxed his displeasure
as to occasionally address Gilbert when they met at luncheon
a;fter this deplorable morning, while towards Lucy he observed
a cmlllllete silence.  It was not at first that she perceived this,
;nil even tllen it struck more deeply on Sophia than it did on
r.     enda srak f          iflicting pain on the good vicar,
Mlr. Kendal shrank from  inflicting pain on the good vicar,
i nd it was decided that the wives should be the channel through
whlich the information should be imparted. Albinia took the
children, sending them to play in the garden while she talked to
'lrs. I)usautoy.  She found tlat keen little lady had some
s!lr\.wd suspicions, but had discovered nothing defined enlough to
Iact u; ,n, and was relieved to have the matter opened at last.
As to the ink, no mortal could help laughing over it; even
Ailliiiat, who had been feeling as if she could never laugh again,
uids suddenly struck by the absurdity, and gave way to a pa-
I'ro;Vslu of merrimenet.
' Properly managed, I do tlink it might put an end to the
\vl:le affair,' said Mrs. Dusautoy.  'He could not stand being
lau! lid  at.'
' I'm afraid he never will believe that he can be lauglhed at.'
' Yes, that is unlucky,' said Mrs. Dusautoy, gravely; but re-
cOllecting that she was not conplimentary, sle added, ' You
Iui.st not think we undervalue Lucy. John is very fond of her,
aiid the only objection is, tlat it would require a person of more
a-re and weight to deal with Algernon.'
'Never mind speeches,' sighied Albinia; 'we know too well
tl:;.t nothing could be worse for either. Can't you give him a
tutor alnd send him to travel.'
' 1'l talk to John ; but unluckily he is of age next month, and
z 2




<pb n="340"/>
340            THE YOUNG STEP-MIOTHER.
there's an end of our power. And John would never keqa
away fiom hence, for he thinks it his only chance.'
'I suppose we must do something with Lucy. Hei
People used not to be always falling in love in my time, 
Fred, and that was in a rational way; that could be
rid of !'
The effect of the intelligence on the vicar was to make
set out at once to the livery-stables in quest of his nephew.
he found that the young gentleman had that morning sta
for London, whither he proposed to follow him on the Mo
Lucy cried incessantly, in the fear that the gentle-hearted
might have some truculent intentins towards his nephew,
was so languid and unhaippy that no one had the heart to
her ; and comforting her was still more impossible.
Mr. Kendal used to stride away fiom the sight of her w
eyes, and ask Albinia why she did not tell her that the
good thing that could happen to her would be, that she sh
never see nor hear of the fellow again. 
Why he did not tell her so himself was a different queti
CHAPTER XXIV.
WELL, Albinia,' said Mr. Kendal, after seeing Mr. 
toy on his return from London.
There was such a look of deprecation about, him, that
exclaimed, 'One would really think you had been accepting
charming son-in-law.' 
' Suppose I had,' he said, rather quaintly; then, as he
her hands held up, 'conditionally, you understand, enti
conditionally. What could I do, when Dusautoy entreated
with tears in his eyes, not to deprive him of the only chano
saving his nephew ?'
' Umph,' was the most innocent sound Albinia could per
herself to make.
' Besides,' continued Mr. Kendal, ' it will be better to h
the affair open and avowed than to have all this secret plot
going on without being able to prevent it. I can always
hold my consent if lie should not improve, and Dusautoy
cares nothing would be such an incentive.'
'May it prove so !'
'You see,' he pursued, 'as his uncle says, nothing can,




<pb n="341"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-IMOTHER                341
worse than driving him to these resorts, and when he is once of
age. there's an end of all power over him to hinder his running
Ftr;,i;iht to ruin. Now, when he is living at the Vicarage, we
shall have far more opportunity of knowing how he is going
on, and putting a check on their intercourse, if he be unsatis-
tfct( ory.'
'If we can.'
' After all, the young man has done nothing that need blight
his future life. He has had great disadvantages, and his steady
attachment is much in his favour. His uncle tells me he pro-
mlises to become all that we could wish, and, in that case, I do
not see that I have the right to refuse the offer, when things
have gone so far-conditionally, of course.' He dwelt on that
saving clause like a salve for his misgivings.
'And what is to become of Gilbert and Maurice, with him
always about the house ?' exclaimed Albinia.
' \e will take care he is not too much here. He will soon
be at Oxford. Indeed, my dear, I am sorry you disapprove. I
should have been as glad to avoid the connexion as you could
be, but I do not think I had any alternative, when Mr. Duau-
toy pressed me so warmly, and only asked that he should be
taken on probation; and besides, when poor Lucy's affections
are so decidedly involved.'
Albinia perceived that there had been temper in her tone,
and could object no further, since it was too late; and as she
could not believe that her husband had been weak, she en-
deavoured to acquiesce in his reasoning, and it was a strong
argument that they should see Lucy bright again.
'I suppose,' he said, ' that you would prefer that I should
announce my decision to her myself I'
It was a more welcome task than spreading gloom over her
countenance, but she entered in great trepidation, prepared to
sink under some stern mandate; and there was nothing at first
to undeceive her, for her father was resolved to atone for his
concession by sparing her no preliminary thunders; and began
by depicting her indiscretion and deceit, as well as the folly of
attaching herself to a man without other recommendations than
figure and fortune.
How much Lucy heard was uncertain; she leant on a chair
with drooping head and averted face, trembling and suppressing
a sob, apparently too much frightened to attend. Just when
the exordium was over, and 'Therefore I lay my commands on
you' might have been expected, it turned into, ' However, upon
Mr. Dusautoy's kind representation, I have resolved to give the




<pb n="342"/>
4-2             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
young man a trial, and provided he convinces me by his
that I may safely entrust your happiness to him, I have
uncle that I will not withhold my sanction.'
With a shriek of irrepressible feeling, Lucy lookedi
father to mother, and clasped her hands, unable to t
ears.
'Yes, Lucy,' sai(l Alhinia, 'your father consents, on co
that nothing further happens to excite his doubts of Mr.
dislh Dusautoy. It rests with yourself now; it is not to
A fter all that has passed, you would incur much deserved'
sure if you put an end to the affair; but even that wo
better, far better, than entering into an engagement with a
without sound principle.'
'Your mother is quite right, Lucy,' said Mr. KendaL  '
is the only time. Gratified vanity has led you too far, anr
have acted as I hoped no child of mine would ever act, but
have not forfeited our tenderest care.  You are not enga
this man, and no word of yours would be broken. If
hesitate to commit yourself to him you have only to speakl
we would gladly at once do everything that could cond
make you happy.' 
'You don't want me to give him up!' cried Lucy.
mamma, did not he say he had consented I'
'I said it rested with yourself, Lucy. Do not answe
now. Come to me at six o'clock, and tell me, after full refl
whether I am to consider you as ready to pledge yourself 
young man.'
It was all that could be done. Albinia had a dim hope
the sense of responsibility, and dread of that hard will 
fish temper, might so rise upon Lucy as to startle her; but
as Mr. Kendal observed, if she should decide against hi
would have used him so extremely ill, that they should
nothing but shame.
' Yes,' said Allinia; 'but it would be better to be asham
a girl's folly, than to see her made miserable for life.
Lucy I if she decide against him, she will become a w
at once; if not, I'm afraid it will be the prediction about I
Antoinette over again-very gay, and coming right tbh
trial.'
They were obliged to tell Sophy of the state of things.
stood up straight, and said, slowly and clearly, 'I do not
the world at all.'
'I don't quite see what you mean.'
'Every one does what cau't be helped, and it is not 
thing 




<pb n="343"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                343
' Explain yourself, Sophy,' said her father, amused.
' I don't think Lucy ought to be making the decision at all,'
said Sophy. 'She did that long ago, when first she attended to
what lie said to her. If she does not take him now, it will be
swearing to her neighbour, and disappointing him, because it is
to her own hindrance.'
' Yes, Sophy; but I believe it is better to incur the sin of
breaking a promise, than to go on when the fulfilment involves
not only suffering, but mischief.  Lucy has repeatedly declared
there was no engagement.'
'I know it could not be helped ; but Mr. Dusautoy ought
not to have asked papa.'
' Nor papa to have consented, my Suleiman ben Daool,'
said Mr. Kendal. All ! Sophiy, we all have very clear, straight-
forward views at eighteen of what other people ought to do.'
'Papa-I never meant-I did not think I was saying any-
thing wrong. I only said I did not like the world.'
' And I heartily agree with you, Sophy ; and if I had lived
in it as short a time as you have, perhaps" considerations" would
uot affect my judgment.'
'I am always telling Sophy she will be more merciful as she
grows older,' said Albinia.
' If it were only being more merciful, it would be very well,'
said Mr. Kendal; 'but one also becomes less thorough-going,
because practice is more painful than theory, and one remembers
consequences that have mnade themselves felt. It is just as
well that there should be young people to put us in mind what
our flights once were.'
Albinia and Sophy left Lucy to herself; they both wished to
avoid the useless ' What shall I do ?' and they thought that,
driven back on her own resources, even her own mind might
give her better couu.el than the seven watchmen aloft in a high
tower.
She came down looking exceedingly pale. Mr. Kendal re-
garded her anxiously, and held his hand out to her kindly.
'Papa,' she said, simply, ' I can't give it up. I do love him.'
'Very well, my dear,' he answered, 'there is no more to be
sail than that I trust lie will imerit your affection and make
you haplpy'
Good Mr. Dusautoy was as happy as a king ; he took Lucy
in his arms, and kissed her as it she had been his child, and with
her hands folded in his own, lie told her how she was to teach
his dear Algernon to I)e everything that was good, and to lead
himl right by her influence. She answered with caresses and
promises, and whoever had watched her eye, would have seen it




<pb n="344"/>
344            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
in a happy day-dream of Algernon's perfection, and his
thanking her for it.
She had expected that grandmamma would have been
happy; but marriage had, with the poor old lady, led t
much separation, that her weakened faculties took the
and she received the tidings by crying bitterly, and decJ
that every one was going away and leaving her. Lucy ass
tier over and over again that she was never going to desert
and as Mr. Kendal had made it a condition that Alge
should finish his Oxford career respectably, there was lit
chance that poor IMrs. Meadows would survive until the marri
All along Gilbert made no remark. Though he had been
out of the family conclaves, and his opinion not asked, he su
mitted with the utmost meekness, as one who knew that
had forfeited all right to be treated as son and heir. The m
he was concerned at the engagement, the greater stigma 
would place on his own connivance; so he said nothing, a
only devoted himself to his grandmother, as though the atten
ance upon her were a refuge and relief.  More gentle 
patient than ever, he soothed her fretfulness, invented pleas
for her, and rendered her so placid and contented, that 
health began to improve. 
Not for a moment did he seem to forget his error; a
Albinia's resolution to separate Maurice from him, could l
hold when he himself silently assumed the mournful nec
and put the child from him when clamorous for rides, till th
was an appeal to papa and mamma. MIr. Kendal gave one lo
of inquiry at Albinia, and she began some matter-of-co  i
about Gilbert being so kind-whereupon the brothers we
together as before. When Albinia visited her little boy 
Pight, she found that Gilbert had been talking to him of
eldest brother, and she heard more of Edmund's habits and 
from the little fellow who had never seen him, than from eith!
the twin-brother or the sister who had loved him so devotedl
It was as if Gilbert knew that he could be doing Maurice
harm when leading him to think of Edmund, and perhaps
felt some intrinsic resemblance in the deep loving strength
the two natures. 
The invitation to Fairmead spared him the pain and shan
of Algernon Dusautoy's first reception as Lucy's accepted lover
lIe went early on Saturday morning, and young Dusautoyw
arriving in the evening, was first ushered into the library; whi l
Albinia did her best to soothe the excited nerves and fluttering
spirits of Lucy, who was exceedingly ashamed to meet him
again under the eyes of others, after such a course of stol4




<pb n="345"/>
THE YOUNG STEP MOTHER.               345
interviews, and what she had been told of her influence doing
him good only alarmed her the more.
Well she might, for if ever character resembled that of the
iron pot borne down the stream in company with the earthen
one, it was the object of her choice. Poor pipkin that Gilbert
was, the contact had cost him a smashing blow, and for all clay
of tle more fragile mould, the best hope was to give the invul-
neralle material a wide berth. Talk of influence ' iMr. Dusautoy
might as well hope that a Wedgewood cream-jug would guide a
copper cauldron and keep verdigris aloof
His attraction for Lucy had always been a mystery to her
family, who perhaps hardly did justice to the magnetism  of
mere force of purpose. Better training might have ennobled
into resolution that which was now doggedness and obstinacy;
and, even in that shape, the real element of strength had a
tendency to work upon softer natures. Thus it had acted in
different ways with the Vicar, with Gilbert, and with Lucy;
each had fallen under the power of his determination, with
more or less of their own consent, and with Lucy the surrender
was complete; she no sooner sat beside Algernon than she was
completely his possession, and his complacent self-satisfaction
was reflected on her face in a manner that told her parents
that she was their own no longer, but given up to a stronger
master.
Albini:; liked neither to see nor to think about it, and kept
aloof as much as she could, dividing herself between grandnmamma
and the children.  On Tuesday morning, during Maurice's
lessons, there was a knock at the sitting-room door. She ex-
pected Gilbert, but was delighted to see her brother.
'I thought you were much too busy to come near us ?'
'So I am; I can't stay; so if Kendal be not forthcoming you
must give this fellow a holiday.'
' He is gone to Hadminster, so-'
' Where's Gilbert I' broke in little Maurice.
' He went to his room to dress to go up to parade,' said Mr.
Ferrars, and off rushed the boy without waiting for permission.
Albinia sighed, and said, ' It is a perfect passion.'
'Don't mourn over it. Love is too good a thing to be
lamented over, and this may turn into a blessing.'
' I used to be proud of it.'
'So you shall be still. I am very much pleased with that
poor lad.'
She would not raise her eyes; she was weary of hoping for
Gilbert, and his last offence had touched her where she had never
been touched before.




<pb n="346"/>
346            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHIER.
' Whatever faults he has,' Mr. Ferrars said, 'I am much
taken if his humility, love, and contrition be not genuine;
what more can the best have T
'Sincerity r said Albinia, hopelessly. 'There's no truth
him !' 
'You should discriminate between deliberate self-inte
deception, and failure in truth for want of moral cou
Both are bad enough, but the latter is not "loving a lie,"
such a ruinous taint and evidence of corrultion as the form
'It is curious to hear you repeating my old excuses for hi
said Albinia, ' now that he has cast his glamour over you.'
'Not wrongly,' said her brother. 'Hie is in earnest; t
is no acting about him.'
Yes, that I believe; I know he loves us with all his h
poor boy, especially Maurice and me, and I think he had a
go right than wrong, if he could only be let alone. But, 
it is all " unstable as water." Am I unkind, Maurice I I kn
how it would be if I let him talk to me for ten minutes, or 1
at me with those pleading brown eyes of his !'
Mr. Ferrars knew it well, and why she was steeled against hi
but he put this aside, saying that he was come to speak of
future, not of the past, and that he wanted Edmund to 
sider William's advice. He told her wlat Gilbert had said ot
difficulty of breaking off old connexions, and the danger'
Maurice from his acquaintance. An exchange into ano
corps of militia might be for the worse, the occupation 
uncertain, and Mr. Ferrars believed that a higher position,
panions of a better stamp, and the protection of a man of liv
manners, quick sympathy, and sound principle, like their cot
Fred, might be the opening of a new life. He had found Gil
most desirous of such a step, regarding it as his only hope;
thinking it so oftensively presumptuous to propose it to
father under present circumstances, his Oxford terms thro
away, and himself disgraced both there and at home, thatt
matter would hardly have been brought forward had not
Ferrars undertaken to press it, under the strong conviction t
remaining at home would be destruction, above all, with yo
Dusautoy making part of the family.
'I declare,' said Mr. Ferrars, ' he looked so much at home
the drawing-room, and welcomed Gilbert with such an air
patronage, that I could have found it in my heart to ha
knocked him down !'
It was a treat to hear Maurice speak so unguardedly, al
Albinia laughed, and asked whether he thought it very wronl




<pb n="347"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                347
to hope that the Polysyllable would yet do something flagrallt
enough to open Lucy's eyes
' I'll allow you to hope that if he should, her eyes may be
opened,' said Maurice.
Albinia began a vehement vindication for their having tole-
rated the engagement, in the midst of which her brother was
obliged to depart, amused at her betrayal of her own sentiments
by warfare against what he had never said.
She had treated his counsel as chimerical, but when she re-
peated it to her husband, she thought better of it, since, alas I
it had become her great object to part those two loving brothers.
Mr. Kendal ilrst asked where the 25th Lancers were, then spoke
of expense, and inquired what she knew of the cost of commis-
sions, and of her cousin's means. All she could answer for was,
that Fred's portion was much smaller than Gilbert's inheritance,
but at least she knew how to learn what was wanted, and if her
friends, the old Generals, were to be trusted, she ought to have
no lack of interest at the Horse Guards.
Gilbert was taken into counsel, and showed so much right
spirit and good sense, that the discussion was friendly and un-
reserved. It ended in the father and son resorting to Pettilove's
office to ascertain the amount of ready money in his hands, and
wlhat income Gilbert would receive on coinig of age. The
investigation somewhat disappoilted the youth, who had never
thoroughly credited what his tather told him of the necessity of
his exerting himself for his own maintenance, nor understood
how heavy a drain on his property were the life-interests of his
father and grandmother, and the settlement on his aunt. By-
and-by, he might be compulratively a rich man, but at first his
present allowance would be little more than doubled, and the
receipts would be considerably d(miniished by an alteration of
existing system of rents, such as had so long been planned.  It
was plain that the almshouses were the unsubstantial fabric of
a dream;n but no one now dared to reter to them, and MAr.
Kendal desired Albinia to write to consult her cousin.
Captain Ferrars was so much flattered at her asking his pro.
tection for anything, that he would have promised to patronize
Cousin Slender himself for her sake. He praised the Colonel
and lauded the mess to the skies, and economy being his presents
hobby, he represented himself as living upon nothing, and saving
his pay. He further gave notice of impending retirements, anl
advised that the application should be made without loss of
tile, lamenting grievously himself that there was no chance for
the 25th, of a touch at the Russiaus




<pb n="348"/>
34S            THE YOUNG STEP MOTHER.
Something in his letter put every one into a hurry,
correspondence began, which resulted in Gilbert's being
moned to Sandhurst for an examination, which he passed cI
ably. The purchase-money was deposited, and the hous
was daily thrown into a state of excitement hy the arriv
official-looking envelopes, which turned out to contain sol
tions from tailors and outfitters, bordered with portrai
camp-beds and portable baths, until, at last, when the
document appeared, Gilbert tossed it aside as from 'ano
tailor :' but Albinia knew the article too well to mistake
and when tile long blue cover was opened, it proved to co
more than they had reckoned upon.
Gilbert Kendal held a commission in the 25th Lancers,
the corps was under immediate orders for the East.
number of officers being deficient, he was to join the h
quarters at Cork, without going to the dep6t, and would th
sail with a stated minimum of baggage.
Albinia could not look up. She knew her husband had
intended thus to risk the last of his eldest-born sons; 
though her soldier-spirit might have swelled with exulta
had her own brave boy been concerned, she dreaded the 
of quailing or dismay in Gilbert.
'Going really to fight the Russians,' shouted Maurice, as
meaning reached him. ' Oh ! Gibbie, if I was but a man t
with you r
'You will do your duty, my boy,' said his father. 
'By God's help,' was the reverent answer which embolde
Albinia to look up at him, as he stood with Maurice clin
by both hands to him. She had done him injustice, and 
heart bounded at the sight of the flush on his cheek, the 
his eyes, and the expression on his lips, making his face finer
more manly than she had ever seen it; as if the grave neces
and the awe of the unseen glorious danger, were fixing
elevating his wandering purpose. To have no choice was
blessing to an infirm will, and to be inevitably out of his o
power braced him and gave him rest. She held out her h
to him, and there was a grasp of inexpressible feeling, the 
renewal of their old terms of sympathy and confidence.
There was no time to be lost; Mr. Kendal would go to
don with him by the last train that day, to fit him out as spe
as possible, before he started for Cork.
Every one felt dizzy, and there was no space for aught
action. Perhaps Albinia was glad of the hurry; she could
tlk to Gilbert till she had learnt to put faith in him, and
would rather do him substantial kindnesses than be made




<pb n="349"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTIIER.               3.49
sharer of feelings that had too often proved like the growth of
the seed whiich found no depth of earth.
She ran about for him, worked for him, contrived for him,
and ;gave him directions; she could not, or would not, perceive
his yearning for an effusion of penitent tenderness. He looked
wistfully at her when he was setting out to take leave at the
vicarage, but she had absorled herself in flannel shirts, and
would not meet his eye, nor did he venture to make the request
that sihe would come with him.
Indeed, confidences there could be but few, for Maurice and
Aliinia hung on either side of him, so that he could hardly
move, but he resisted all attempt to free him even from the
little girl, who was hardly out of his arms for ten minutes to-
gether. It was only from her broken words that her mother
understood that from the vicarage he had gone to the church.
Poor little Albilia did not like it at all. 'Why was brother
Ednimnll up in the church, and why (lid Gilbert cry '
Maurice angrily enunciated, ' Men never cry,' but not a word
of the visit to the church came from him.
Algernon Dusautoy had wisely absented himself, and the
two sisters devoted themselves to the tasks in hand. Sophy
worked as hard as did Mrs. Kendal, and spoke even less, and
Lucy took care of Mrs. Meadows, whose nerves were painfully
excited by the bustle in the house. It had been agreed that
she should not hear of her grandson's intention till the last
moment, and then he went in, putting on a cheerful manner,
to bid her good-bye, only disclosing that he was going to London;
hut little as she could understand, there was an instinct about
her that could not be deceived, and she began to cry helplessly
and violently.
Mrs. Kendal and Lucy were summoned in haste; Gillert
lingered, trving to help them to restore her to composure. But
time ran short; his fathler called hiin, and they hardly knew
that they had received his last hurried embrace, nor that he
was really gone, till they heard Maurice shouting like a Red
Indian, as he careered about in the garden, his only resource
against tears; and Sophy came in very still, very pale, and in-
capable of uttering a word or shedding a tear. Albinia was
much concerned, for she could not bear to have sent him away
without a more real adieu, and word of blessing and good
augury ; it made her feel herself truly unforgiving, and perhaps
turned her heart back to him more fully and fondly than any
exchange of sentiment would have done. But she had not
much time to dwell on this omission, for poor Mrs. Meadows
missed him sorely, and after two days' constant fretting after




<pb n="350"/>
350             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
him, another paralytic stroke renewed the immediate
that by the time Mr. Kendal returned from London a
again hovering between life and death.
Mr. Kendal, to his great joy, met Frederick Ferrars at
'Family Office.' The changes in the regiment had given
his majority, and he had flashed over from Ireland to mak,
preparations for the campaign. His counsel had been
valuable in Gilbert's equipment, especially in the knotty q
tion of horses, and he had shown himself so amiable and ra
that Mr. Kendal was quite delighted, and rejoiced in commit
Gilbert to his care. He had assumed the trust in a pa
nanner, and, infected by his brilliant happiness and hopeful
Gilbert had gone off to Ireland in excellent spirits.
'Another thing conduced to cheer him,' said Mr. K
afterwards to his wife, with a tone that caused her to exc
' You don't mean that he saw G6nevieve ?'
' You are right. We came upon her in Rivington's
while we were looking for the smallest Bible. I saw who
was chiefly by his change of colour, and I confess I kept out
the way. The whole did not last five minutes; she had
pupils with her, and soon went away; but lie thanked me,
took heart from that moment. Poor boy, who would 
thought the impression would have been so lastingr  '
' Well, by the time he is a field-officer, even William will
him please himself,' said Albinia, lightly, because her heart
too full for her to speak seriously.
She tried, by a kind letter, to atone for the omitted fare
and it seemed to cheer and delight Gilbert. He wrote 
Cork as if he had imbibed fiesh hople and enterprise from his 
companions; lie liked th in all. and could not say enough of
kindness of Major Ferrars. Everything went smoothly,
in the happiest frame lie sailed fromn Cork, and was heard
again at Mlalta and Gallipoli, direfilly sea-sick, but reviving
write most amlusing long (dscritive letters, and when he reac
the camp at Varna, he reported as gratefully of General F
rars as the General did kindly of himn.
Those letters were the chief pleasures in a harassing spr
and summer. It was well that practice had trained Sophias
the qualities of a nurse, for Lucy was seldom available wl
Algelron Dusautoy was at home; she was sure to be rid
with him, or sitting for her picture, or the good Vicar, af
of her overworkin heherself, insisted on her spending the eve
ing at the vicarage.
She yielded, but not with an easy conscience, to judge by
her numerous apologies, and when Mr. Cavendish Dusaut<




<pb n="351"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                 351
returned to Oxford, she devoted herself with great assiduity to
tlhe invalid.  Her natural gifts were far more efficient than
,Sophy's laboriously-earned gentleness, and her wonderful talent
for prattling about nothing had a revivifying influence, sparing
much of the plaintive weariness which accompanied that mourn-
util descent of life's hill.
Albinia had reckoned on a rational Lucy until the Oxford
term should be over. She might have anticipated a failure in
the responsions, (who, in connexion with the Polysyllable,
could mention being plucked for the little-go ?) but it was more
than she did expect that his rejection would send him home in
sullen resentment, resolved to punish Oxford by the withdrawal
of his august name. He had been quizzed by the young, re-
prilmanded by the old, plucked by the middle-aged, and he re-
turned with his mouth full of sentences against blind, benighted
bigtry, and the futility of classical study, and of declamations,
as an injured orphan, against his uncle's disregard of the in-
tentions of his dear deceased parent, in keeping him from Bonn,
Jena, Heidelberg, or any other of the outlandish universities
whlose guttural names he showered on the meek Vicar's despond-
ing head.
He was twenty-one ,and could not be sent whither he would
not go. His uncle's resource was SMr. Keendal, who strongly
hoped that the link was about to snap, when, summoning the
gentleman to the library, he gave him to understand that he
should consider a refusal to resume his studies as tantamount
to a dissolution of the engagement.   A  long speech ensued
tbout dear mothers, amiable daughters, classics, languages, and
irteign tours. That was all the account Mr. Kendal could give
his twi'e of the dialogue, and she could only infer that Alger-
non's lharangue had sent him into such a fit of abstraction, that
lie really could not tell tihe drift of it. However, he was clear
tlI:t he had himself given no alternative between returning to
Oxfir(d and resigning Lucy.
That same evening, Lucy, all blushes and tears, faltered out
that she was very unwilling, she could not bear to leave them
"al, nor dear grandnlammnla, but dear Algernon had prevailed on
her to .say next August 
When indignant astonishment permitted Albinia to speak,
File reminded Lucy that a respectable career at Oxford had been
thle condition.
' 1 know,' said Lucy; 'but dear Alg.rnon convinced papa
of the nunrasonableness of such a stipulation under the circum-
Etalnces.
Albinia felt the ground cut away under her feet, and all she




<pb n="352"/>
352            THE YOUNG STEP-M3OTHER.
could attempt was a dry answer. ' We shall see what
says; but you, Lucy, how can you think of marrying 
your grandnimamma in this state, and Gilbert in that'cam
cholera-'
'I told Algernon it was not to be thought of,' said 
her tears flowing fast. ' But I don't know what to do; no
can tell how long it may go on, and we have no right to 
with his feelings.'
' If lie had any feelings for you, he would not ask it.' 
'No, mamna, indeed !' cried Lucy, earnestly; 'it was
feeling for me; he said I was looking quite languid and 
ciated, and that he could not allow mv-good looks and viv
to be diminished by my attendance in a sick chamber. I
him never to mind, for it did not hurt me; but he said it
incumbent on him to take tlought for me, and that he co
not present me to his friends if I were not in full bloom:
beauty; yes, indeed, he said so; and then he said it would
the right season for Italy.' 
It is impossible you can think of going so far away I
Lucy ! you should not have consented.' 
I could not help it,' said Lucy, sobbing. ' I could not
to contradict him; but please, mamma, let papa settle it
me. I don't want to go away; I told him I never would
told him I had promised never to leave dear grandmamma;
you see he is so resolute, and he cannot bear to be without
Oh ! do get him to put it off-only if he is angry and goe
Italy without me, I know I shall die!'
'We will take care of you, my dear. I am sure we shan
able to show him how impossible a gay wedding would be
present; and I do not think he can press it,' said Albil
moved into soothing the present distress, and relieved to 
that there was no heartlessness on Lucy's side.
What a grand power is sheer obstinacy ! It has all the
menturn of a stone, or cannon-ball, or any other object set
motion without inconvenient sensations to obstruct its cours
Algernon Dusautoy had decided on being married in Augl
and taking his obedient pupil-wife through a course of lect
on the continental galleries of art; and his determined sin
ness of aim prevailed against the united objections and opt
tion of four people, each of double or quadruple his wisdol
and weight.
His first great advantage was, that, as Albinia surmised, M1
Kendal could not recal the finale of their interview, and haIr
ing lost the thread of the rigmarole, did not know to what biU
silence had been supposed to assent. Next, Algernon conquered




<pb n="353"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                 35:3
his uncle by representing Lucy as on the road to an atrophy,
and persuading him that he should be much safer on the Con-
tinent with a wife than without one; and though the two
ladies were harder to deal with in themselves, they were obliged
to stand by the decision of their lords. Above all, he made
way by his sincere habit of taking for granted whatever he
wished, and by his magnanimous oblivion of remonstrance and
denial; so that every day one party or the other found that
assumed, as fixed in his favour, which had the day before been
most strenuously refused.
'If you consented to this, I thought I could not refuse
that.'
' I consent ! I told him it was the last thing I could think
of.'
, Well, I own I was surprised, but he told me you had readily
colie into his views.'
Such was the usual tenor of consultations between the au-
thorities, until their marvel at themselves and each other came
to a height when they found themselves preparing for the wed-
ding on the very day originally chosen by Algernon.
Mr. Kendal's letter to Gilbert was an absolute apology.
Gilbert in Turkey was a very different person from Gilbert at
Bayford, and had assumed in his father's mind the natural
rights of son and heir; he seemed happy and valued, and the
heat of the climate, pestiferous to so many, seemed but to give
his Indian constitution the vigour it needed. When his colm-
rades were laid up, or going away for better air, much duty was
falling on him, and he was doing it with hearty good-will and
effectiveness. Already the rapid changes had made him a lieu-
tenant, and he wrote in the highest spirits. Moreover, he had
fallen in with Bryan O'More, and had been able to do him
sundry kindnesses, the report of which brought Ulick to Wil-
low Lawn in an overflow of gratitude.
It was a strange state of affairs there. Albinia was ashamed
of the ulea of 'could not help it,' and yet that was the only
one to rest on; the adherence to promises alone gave a sense of
dllty, and when or how the promises had been given was not
*lea;r.
IesiCes, no one could be certain even about poor Lucy's pre-
sent satisfaction; she sometimes seemed like a little bird flutter-
ilng under the fascination of a snake. She was evidently half
afraid of Algernon, and would breathe more freely when he
wls not at hand; but then a restlessness would come on if lie
did not appear as soon as she expected, as if she dreaded having
oilended him. She had violent bursts of remorseful tears, and
A A




<pb n="354"/>
3.51           THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
great outpourilgs of fondness towards every one at home,
she positively did look ill enough to justify Algernon in  ^
that the present condition of matters was hurtful to her.
she could not endure a word that remotely tended toward
vising her to break off the engagement, or even to retard the
ding, and her admiration of her intended was unabated.
Indeed, his affection could not be doubted; he liked
adoration of all his performances, and le regarded her
beneficent protection, as a piece of property; he made her 
iificent presents, and conceded to her that the wedding
should not be beyond Clifton, whence they would return
Willow Lawn, and judge ere deciding on going abroad.
He said that it would be 'de bon ton' to have the ma
strictly private.  Even he saw the incongruity of festi
alongside of that chamber of decay and death; and bes
lie had conceived such a distaste to the Drury family, that
had signified to Lucy that they must not make part of
spectacle.
Albinia and Sophy thought this so impertinent, that
manfully fought the battles of the Drurys, but without
vailing; Albinia took her revenge, by observing that this
the case, it was impossible to ask her brother and little 
whose well-sounding names she knew Algernon ambition
for the benefit of the county paper.
Always doing what was most contrary to the theories
which she started in life, Albinia found herself taking
niddle course that she contemned. She was marrying her
daughter with an aching, foreboding heart, unable either to
prove or to prevent, and obliged to console and cheer just 
sie would have imagined herself insisting upon a rupture at
costs.
Sophy had said from the first that her sister could not 
back. She expected her to be unhappy, and believed it
penalty of the wrongdoings in consenting to the clandest
correspondence; and treated her with melancholy kindness
victim under sentence. She was very afl'ctionate, but not:
all consoling when Lucy was sad, and she was impatient
gloomy wlen the trousseau, or any of the privileges of afa
brought a renewal of gaiety and importance. A broken h
and ruined fortunes were the least of the consequences
augured, and she went about the house as if she had real
them both herself.
The wedding-day came, and grandmamma was torpid
only half conscious, so that all could venture to leave her. 
bride was not allowed to see her, lest the agitation should or




<pb n="355"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-M3OTHER.                s355
whelm both; for the poor girl was indeed looking like the vic-
tim her sister thought her, pale as death, with red rings round
her extinguished eyes, and trembling fiom head to foot, the
more at the apprehension that Algernon would think her a fright.
After all that lavender and sal-volatile could do for her, she
was sucl a spectacle, that when her father came to fetch her
he was shocked, and said, tenderly, 'Lucy, my child, this must
not be.  Say one word, and all shall be over, and you shall
never hlear a word of reproach.'
But Lucy only cast a frightened glance around, and rising up
with the accents of perfect sincerity, said, ' No, papa; 1 am
qlite ready ; I am quite happy. I was only silly.'
Her mind was evidently made up ; and it was past Albinia's
divination whether her agitation were composed of fear of the
future and remorse for the l)ast, or whether it were mere love
of home and hurry of spirits, exaggerated by belief that a
bride .'ight to weep. Probably it was a compound of all, and
the wi;''e of ler reply perfect truth, especially the final clause.
So tlih' ra-arried her, poor child, very much as if they had
been atte;iting her to the block.  Sophy's view of the case
lhad infected them all beyond being dispelled by the stately
colmplacency of the bridegroom, or the radiant joy and affection
of his uncle.
'They put her into a carriage, watched her away, and turned
bacck to the task which she had left them, dreading the effects
of her absence. She was missed, but less than they feared; the
fii'ulties had become too feeble for such strong emotion as had
followed Gilbert's departure; and the void was chiefly percep-
tible by the plaintive and exacting clinging to Albinia, who had
less and less time to herself and her children, and was somewhat
ullneasy as to the consequences as regarded Maurice. While
Gilbert was at home, the child had been under some super-
vision ; but now his independent and unruly spirit was left
a!luost uncontrolled], except by his own intermittent young
consciencee; his father indulged him, and endured from him
what would have been borne firom no one else; and Soplhy was
his willing slave, unable to exact obedience, and never com-
plaining, save under the most stringent necessity or sense of
duty. lie was too young for school, and there was nothing to
l'e done but to go on, from day to day, in the trust that no
larm could eventually ensue in consequence of so absolute a
duty as the care of the sufferer; and that while the boy's truth
and generosity were sound, though he might be a torment, his
claracter might be all the stronger afterwards for that very
iducility.
AA2




<pb n="356"/>
- .56          THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
It was not satisfactory, and many mothers would ha
miserable; but it was not in Albinia's nature to be m
when her hands were full, and she was doing her beiLt
bad heard her brother say that when good people gave
children sound principles and spoilt them, they gafe
children the trouble of selt-conquest instead of doing
them. She had great faith in Maurice's undertaking thi
in due time; and while she felt that she still had her
the rein, she must be content to leave it loose for a while
Besides, when his father and sisters, and, least of all, 
did not find him a plague, did it much matter if other
did 
CHAPTER XXV. 
EXULTING peals rang out from the Bayford tower,
J_ Mr. and Mrs. Cavendish Dusautoy alighted from
carriage at Willow Lawn, the cry of the vicar and of
assembled household was, ' Have you heard that Sebast
taken ?'
'Any news of Gilbert I' was Lucy's demand.
'No; the cavalry were not landed, so he had nothing
with it.'
' I say, uncle,' said Algernon, ' shall I send up asove
those ringers n'                                  'I
'Eh ! poor fellows, they will be very glad of it, thank
only I must take care they don't drink it up. I'm sure
must be tired enough; they've been at it ever since the
graph came in !'
'There !' exclaimed Algernon; 'Barton must have 
graphed from the station when we set out!'
' You   Did you think the bells were ringing for
exclaimed his uncle, ' when there's a great battle won,
'Sebastopol taken I'
'Telegraphs are always lies !' quoth Mr. Cavendish Du
tersely; 'I don't believe anything has happened at all I'
re-pocketed the sovereign.
Meantime Lucy was in a rapture of embracing. She.
spread out with stiff silk flounces and velvet mantle, so
emulate her husband's importance, and her chains and bra
ciattered so much, that Mr. Kendal could not help oy
'fou should have taken lessons of your Ayah, to learn ho
manage your bangles.'




<pb n="357"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                357
'h ! papa,' said she, with a newly-learnt little laugh, 'I
could not help it; Louise could not find room for them in m)
dressing-case.'
They were not, however, lost upon the whole of the family.
Grandmnamma's dim   eyes lighted when she recognised her
favourite grand-daughter in such gorgeous array, and that
any one should have come back again was so new and de.
lightful, that it constantly recurred as a fresh surprise and
pleasure.
All were glad to have her again-their own Lucy, as she
still was, though somewhat of the grandiose style and self-
consequence of her husband had overlaid the original nature.
She was as good-natured and obliging as ever, and though
beginning by conferring her favours as condescensions, she soon
would forget that she was the great Mrs. Cavendish Dusautoy,
and quickly become the eager, helpful Lucy. She was in very
good looks, and bright and happy, admiring Algernon, rejoicing
to obey his behests, and enhancing his dignity and her own by
her discourses upon his talents and importance. How far slhe
was at ease with him, Albinia sometimes doubted; there now
and then was an air of greater freedom when he left the room,
and some of her favourite old household avocations were
tenderly resumed by stealth, as though she feared he might
think them unworthy of his wife.
She gave her spare time to the invalid, who was revived by
her presence as by a sunbeam; and Albinia, in her relief anl
gratitude, did her utmost to keep Algernon happy and con-
tented. She resigned a room to him as an atelier, and let the
little Awk be captured to have her likeness taken; she pro-
moted the guitar and key-bugle, and abstained from resenting
his strictures on her dinners.
Such a guest reduced Mr. Kendal to absolute silence, but she
did not think he suffered much therefrom, and he was often
relieved, for all the neighbourhood asked the young couple to
dinner. Mrs. Cavendish Dusautoy's toilette was as good as a
play to the oldest and youngest inhabitants of the house; her
little sister used to stand by the dressing-table with her small
fingers straightened to sustain a column of rings threaded o:L
them, and her arm weighed down with bracelets; and grandl-
nmamuma's happiest moments were when she was raised up to
contemplate the costly robes, jewelled neck, and garlanded heai
of her darling.
When it turned out that Sebastopol was anything but taken,
Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy's incredulity was a precious confirm.-
tion of his esteem for his own sagacity, more especially as Ulick




<pb n="358"/>
358            THIE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
O'More and Maurice had worn out the little brass p
ordnance in firingfeux dejoie.
'But,' said Maurice, 'papa always said it was not true.
you only said so when you found the bells were rigin
that, and not for you.' 
Maurice's observations were not always convenient.,
gernon, with much pomp, had caused a horse to be led
door, for which he had lately paid eighty guineas, and he
expatiating on its merits, when Maurice broke out, 
Macheath, the horse that Archie Tritton bought of Mr. Nu
coachman for twenty pounds.'
' Hush, Maurice I' said his father, ' you know nothing of
and Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy pursued, 'It was bred at
Lewthorp's, and sold because it was too tall for its compa
Laing was on the point of sending it to Tattersall's, wh
was secure of a hundred, but he was willing to oblige
we had had transactions before.'
'Papa I' cried Maurice, 'I know it is Macheath, for
Tritton showed him to Gilbert and me, when he hadjust
him, and said he was a showy beast, but incurably lame,
should get what he could for him from Laing. Now, J
isn't it i' he called to the servant who was sedulously t
away a grinning face, but just muttered, ' Same, sir.'
Mr. Kendal charitably looked the other way, and Alg
muttered some species of imprecation.
Thenceforth Maurice took every occasion of inquiring 
had become of Macheath, whether Laing had refunded the
and what had been done to him for telling stories.
If the boy began in innocence, he went on in mischief
was just old enough to be a most aggravating compoun
simplicity and malice. He was fully aware that Mr. Cave
Dusautoy was held cheap by his own favourites, and had
partly the cause of his dear Gilbert's troubles; and his 
wits and daring nature were excited to the utmost by
solemn irritation that he produced. Not only was it irresi
droll to tease one so destitute of fun, but he had the stro
desire to see how angry it was possible to make the big br
in-law, of whom every one seemed in awe.
First, he had recourse to the old term Polysyllable, and W
'Lucy remonstrated, he answered, 'I've a right to call
brother what I please.'
'You know how angry mamma would be to hear you.'
'Mamma calls him the Polysyllable herself,' said Mau
looking full at his victim.
Lucy, who would have given the world to hinder this epi




<pb n="359"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                .-1 9
from coming to her husband's knowledge, began explailinig
something about Gilbert's nonsense before he knew him, and
bow it had been long disused.
That's not true, Lucy,' quoth the tormentor. ' I heard
mamma tell Sophy herself this morning to write for some fish-
s;tnce. because she said that Polysyllable was so fanciful about
his dinner.'
Lucy was ready to cry, and Algernon, endeavouring to rccal
his usual. dignity, exclaimed, 'If Mrs. Kendal-I mean, MIrs.
Keitidal has it in her power to take liberties, but if I find you
repeating such again, you little imp, it shall be at your risk.'
' What will you do to me V' asked the sturdy varlet.
'Dear Maurice, I hope you'll never know I Pray don't try I
cried Lucy; but if she had had any knowledge of character,
she would have seen that she had only provoked the little
Berserkar's curiosity, and had made him determined on proving
the undefined threat. So the unfortunate Algernon seldom
descenled the stairs without two childish faces being protruded
fiom the balusters of the nursery-flight over-head, pursuing him
with hissing whispers of ' Polysyllable' and 'Polly-silly,' and if
he ventured on indignant gestures, Maurice returned them with
nutcracker grimacts and provoking assurances to his little sister
that lie could not hurt her.
Algernon could not complain without making himself ridicu-
lous, and Albinia was too much engaged to keep watch over
her soln, so that the persecution daily became more intolerable,
anld barren indications of wrath were so diverting to the little
monkey, that the presence of the heads of the family was the
sole security from his tricks. Poor Lucy was the chief sufferer,
una)le to restrain her brother, and enduring the brunt of her
husband's irritation, with the great disappointmient of being
mlbtlle to make him happy at her home, and fearing every day
tll;t he would fulfil his threat of not staying another week in
the house with that intolerable child, for the sake of any one's
gral:ndmother.
Tidings came, however, that completely sobered Maurice, and
madel them unable to think of moviltg. It was the first rumour
of the charge o0 B3alaklava, with the report that the 25th
Lancers were cut to pieces. In spite of Algernon's reiteration
t!:at telegraphs were lies, all the household would have been
gila to lose the selse of existence during the time of suspense.
Albiinia's heart was wlrung as she thought of the cold hurried
lianner of the last farewell, and every look she east at her
husband's calm melanlcholy face, seemed to be asking pardon
that his son was not safe in India.




<pb n="360"/>
3GO            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
Late that evening the maid came hurriedly in with a pae]
of palers. 'A  telegraph, ma'am, come express from  Ha
minster.'
It was to Mrs Kendal from one of her friends at the Hora
Guards. She did not know how she found courage to turn h
eyes on it, but her shriek was not of sorrow. 
'Major the Honourable F. Ferrars, severely wounded-rig
arm amputated.'
' Lieutenant Gilbert Kendal, slightly wounded-contusion,
rib broken.'
She saw the light of thankfulness break upon Mr. Kendal'l
face, and the next moment flew up to her boy's bed-side. He'
started up, half asleep, but crying out, 'Mamma, where's
Gibbie?'                                                ,
'Safe, safe ! Maurice dearest, safe; only slightly wounded.
Oh, Maurice, God has been very good to us !'
He flung his arms round her neck, as she knelt beside his
crib in the dark, and thus Mr. Kendal found the mother and 
son.  As he bent to kiss them, Maurice exclaimed, with a sort
of anger, 'Oh, mamma, why have 1 got a bullet in my throat?'
Albinia laughed a little hysterically, as if she had the like 
bullet.
'It was very kind of Lord H-   ,' fervently exclaimed Mr. :5
Kendal; 'you must write to thank him, Albinia. Gilbert may
be considered safe while he is laid up. Perhaps he may be sent
home. What should you say to that, Maurice I'
' 0h ! I wouldn't come home to lose the fun,' said Maurice.
'Oh, mamma, let me get up to tell Awkey, and run up to
Ulick ! Gilbert will be the colonel when I'm a cornet I Oh I.
I must get up !'
His outspoken childish joy seemed to relieve Albinia's swell-
ing heart, too full for the expression of thankfulness, and the
excitement was too much even for the boy, for he burst into
passionate sobs when forbidden to get up and waken his little
sister.
The sobering came in Mr. Kendal's mention of Fred. Al-
binia was obliged to ask what had happened to him, and was
shocked at having overlooked so terrible a misfortune; but
Maurice seemed to be quite satisfied.  ' You know, mamma, it
said they were cut to pieces. Can't they make him a wooden arm '
evidently thinking he could be repaired as easily as the crea-
tures in his sister's Noah's Ark. Even Algernon showed a
heartiness and fellow-feeling that seemed to make him more like
one of the family.  Moreover, he was so much elevated at the
receil)t of a telegraph direct from the fountain-head, that he rode




<pb n="361"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-3MOTHER.               361
about the next day over all the neighbourhood with the tidings,
and comported himself as though he had private acceas to all
Lord Raglan's secrets.
The unwonted emotion tamed Maurice for several days, and
his behaviour was the better for his daily rides with papa to
Hadniinster, to forestall the second post. At last, on his return,
his voice rang through the house. 'Mamma, where are you?
The letter is come, and Gilbert shot two Russians, and laved
Cousin Fred!'
'I opened your letter, Albinia,' said Mr. Kendal; aLd, as
she took it from him, he said, ' Thank God, I never dared hope
for such a day as this !
He shut himself into the library, while Albinia was sharing
with Sophy the precious letter, but with a moment's disappoint-
ment at finding it not from Gilbert, but from her brother
William.
'Before you receive this,' he wrote, 'you will have heard of
the affair of to-day, and that our two lads have come out of it
better than some others. There are but nine officers living,
and only four unhurt out of the 25th Lancers, and Fred's
escape is entirely owing to your son.'
Then followed a brief narrative of the events of Balaklava,
that fatal charge so well described as 'magnifique mais pas la
guerre,' a history that seemed like a dream in connexion with
the timid Gilbert. His individual story was thus :-He safely
rode the ' half a league ' forward, but when more than half way
back, his horse was struck to the ground by a splinter of the
same shell that overthrew Major Ferrars, at a few paces' distance
from him. Quickly disengaging himself from his horse, Gilbert
ran to assist his friend, and succeeded in extricating him from
his horse, and supporting him through the remainder of the
terrible space commanded by the batteries.   Fred, unable
to move without aid, and to whom each step was agony, had
entreated Gilbert to relinquish his hold, and not peril himself
for a life already past rescue; but Gilbert had not seemed to
hear, and when several of the enemy came riding down on them,
he had used his revolver with such effect, as to lay two of the
number prostrate, and deter the rest from repeating the attack.
'All this I heard from Fred,' continued the General; 'he is
in his usual spirits, and tells me that he feels quite jolly since
his arm has been off, and he has been in his own bed, but I
fear he has a good deal to suffer, for his right side is terribly
lacerated, and I shall be glad when the next few days are over.
I-e desires me to say with his love that the best turn you ever
iid him was putting young Kendal into the 25th. Tell your




<pb n="362"/>
362             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
husband that I congratulate him on his son's conduct, a
afraid that his promotion without purchase is only too e
Gilbert's only message was his love. Speaking seems to
him pain, and he is altogether more prostrated than so sli
wound accounts for; but when I saw him, he had just bee
of the death of his colonel and several of his brother oi
among them young Wynne, who shared his tent; and he
completely overcome. There is, however, no cause for 
ness; he had not even been aware that he was hurt, unt
fainted while Fred was under the surgeon's hands, and was
found to have an ugly contusion of the chest, and a fractu
the uppermost rib on the left side. A few days' rest will se
that to rights, and I expect to see him on horseback before
can ship poor Fred for Scutari  Inthe meantime they are
in Fred's tent, which is fairly comfortable.'
Albinia understood whence came Gilbert's heroism. He
charged at first, as lie had hunted with Maurice, because t
was no doing otherwise, and in the critical moment the w
heart had done the rest, and equalled constitutional conr
but then, she saw the gentle tender spirit sinking under the li
irjury, and far more at the suffering of his friend, the de
havoc among his comrades, and his own share in the car
The General coolly mentioned the two enemies who had
by his pistol, and Maurice shouted about them as if they
been two rabbits, but she knew enough of Gilbert to be 
that what he might do in the exigency of self-defence, w
shock and sicken him in recollection. Poor Fred ! how 
would she once have believed that his frightful wound couli
a secondary matter with her, only enhancing her gratitude
account of another.
That was a happy evening; Maurice was sent to ask Ulih
dinner, and at dessert drank the healths of his soldier relati
among whom Mr. Kendal with a smile at Ulick, inclu,
Bryan O'More.
In the universal good-will of her triumph, Albinia ha
read her precious letter to every one, resolved to let the Dr
hear it, before forwarding it to Fairmead. Lucy's neglect
that family was becoming flagrant, and Albinia was resolved
take her to make the call. Therefore, after promulgating
intentions too decidedly for Algernon to oppose them, she
out with Lucy in the most virtuous state of mind. Maur
was to ride out with his father, and Sophy was taking caref
grandmamma, so she made her expedition with an easy mi
and absolutely enjoyed the change of scenery.
The war had drawn every one nearer together, and M.




<pb n="363"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MTOTHER.              363
Dl-ury was really anxious about Gilbert, and grateful for the
intelligence. Nor did Lucy meet with anything unpleasant.
Irs. Cavendish Dusautoy, in waist deep flounces, a Paris bonnet,
and her husband's dignity, impressed her cousins, and whatever
use they might make of their tongues, it was not till after she
was gone.
As the carriage stopped at the door, Sophy came out with
such a perturbel an expression, as seemed to prelude fatal
tilings ; and Lucy was pausing to listen, when she was hastily
suniilioned by her husband.
'Ohl! mamma, he has struck Maurice such a blow f cried
Sophy.
Algernon ? where's Maurice ? is he hurt?'
' He is in the library witl papa.'
She was there in a moment. Maurice sat on his father's knee,
listening to Pope's Homer, leaning against him, with eye, cheek,
and nose exceedingly swelled and reddened ; but these were
symptoms of which she had seen enough in past days not to be
greatly terrified, even while she exclaimed aghast.
' Aye !' said Mr. Kendal, sternly. ' What do you think of
young Dusautoy's handiwork ?'
' What could you have done to him, Maurice '
' I painted his image.'
'The children got into the painting-room,' said Mr. Kendal,
'and did some mischief; Maurice ought to have known better,
but that was no excuse for his violence. I do not know what
would have been the consequence, if poor little Albinia's screams
had not alarmed me. I found Algernon striking him with his
doubled fist.'
' But I gave him a dig in the nose,' cried Maurice, in exulta-
tion; 'I pulled ever so much hair out of his whiskers. I had
it just now.'
'This sounds very sad,' said Albinia, interrupting the search
for the trophy. ' What were you doing in the painting-room ?
You know you had no business there.'
' Why, mamma, little Awk wanted me to look at the pictures
that Lucy shows her. And then, don't you know his image I
the little white bare boy pulling the thorn out of his foot.
Awkey said he was naughty not to have his clothes on, and so I
thought it would be such fun to make a militiaman of him, and
so the paints were all about, and so I gave him a red coat and
black trousers.'
'Oh, Maurice, Maurice, how could you V'
'I couldn't help it, mamma! I did so want to see what
Algernon would do r




<pb n="364"/>
364            THE YOUNGx STEP-MOTHER
' Well.'
'So he came up and caught us  And wasn't he in a
good rage ? that's all. He stamped, and called me namesa
got hold of me to shake me, but I know I kicked him well,
I had quite a handful out of his whisker; but you see
little Awkey is only a girl, and couldn't help squalling, so
came up.'
'And in timer said Mr. Kendal; 'he reeled against
almost stunned, and was hardly himself for some momentas
nose bled violently. That fellow's fist might knock down
ox.'
'But he didn't knock me down,' said Maurice. 'You
me he did not, papa.' 
'That's all he thinks of!' said Mr. Kendal, in admirati
'Not a cry nor a tear from first to last. I told Sophy to let
know when Bowles came.'
' For a black eye i' cried the hard-hearted mother, laugh
' You should have seen what Maurice and Fred used to do
each other.'
'Oh, tell me, mamma,' cried Maurice, eagerly.
'Not now, master,' she said, not thinking his pugnacity
need of such respectable examples. ' It would be more to
purpose to ask Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy's pardon for such 
bad behaviour.'
Mr. Kendal looked at her in indignant surprise.  '
is not the side for the apology,' he said. 'If Dusautoy bi
spark of proper feeling, he must excuse himself for such a br
assault.' 
'I am afraid Maurice provoked it; I hope my little boy
sorry for having been so mischievous, and sees that he 
serves-'
Mr. Kendal silenced her by an impatient gesture, and fel
that anything was better than the discussion before the boy, 
tried to speak indifferently, and not succeeding, left the room
much annoyed that alarm and indignation had led the ind
gent father to pet and coax the spirit that only wanted to be
taken down, and as if her discipline had received its first reo
shock.
Mr. Kendal followed her upstairs, no less vexed. 'Albiniai
this is absurd,' he said. ' I will not have the child punished, 
made to ask pardon for being shamefully struck.'
'It was shameful enough,' said Albinia; 'but, after all,
can't wonder that Algernon was in a passion; Maurice did be-
have very ill, and it would be much better for him if you would
not make him more impudent than he is already.'




<pb n="365"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               365
'I did not expect you to take part against your own child,
,when he has been so severely maltreated,' said he, with such un-
reasonable displeasure, that almost thinking it play, she laughed
and said, 'You are as bad as the mothers of the school-children,
when they wont have them beaten.'
He gave a look as if loth to trust his ears, walked into his
room, and shut the door. The thrill of horror came over her
that this was the first quarrel. She had been saucy when he
was serious, and had offended him. She sprang to the door.
knocked and called, and was in agony at the moment's delay ere
lie returned, with his face still stern and set. Pleading and
earnest she raised her eyes, and surrendered unconditiorixlly.
'Dear Edmund, don't be vexed with me, I should not have
said it.'
' Never mind,' he said, affectionately; 'I do not wish to inter-
fere with your authority, but it would be impossible to punish
a child who has suffered so severely; and I neither choose that
Dusautoy should be made to think himself the injured party,
nor that Maurice should be put to the pain of apologizing for
an offence, which the other party has taken on himself to cancel
with interest.'
Albinia was too much demolished to recollect her two argu-
ments, that pride on their side would only serve to make Alger-
non prouder, and that she did not believe that asking pardon
would be so bitter a pill to Maurice as his father supposed. She
could only feel thankful to have been forgiven for her own offence.
When they met at dinner, all were formal, Algernon stiff and
haughty, ashamed, but too grand to betray himself; and Lucy rest-
less and uneasy, her eyes looking as if she had been crying. When
MIaurice came in at dessert, the fourth part of his countenance
emulating the unlucky cast in gorgeous hues of crimson and
violet, Algernon was startled, and turning to Albinia, muttered
something about 'never having intended,' and ' having had no
idea.'
He might have said more, if Mr. Kendal, with Maurice on
his knee, had not looked as if he expected it; and that look
sealed Albinia's lips against expressing regret for the provoca-
tion; but ilaurice exclaimed, 'Never mind, Algernon, it was
l11 fair, and it doesn't hurt now. I wouldn't have touched your
image, but that I wanted to know what you would do to me.
Shake hands; people always do when they've had a good mill.'
Mr. Kendal looked across the table to his wife in a state of
unbounded exultation in his generous boy, and Albinia felt
infinitely relieved and grateful. Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy took
the firm young paw, and said with an attempt at condescension,




<pb n="366"/>
3(S6            THE YOUNG STEP-MIOTHlER.
'Very well, Maurice. the subject shall be mentioned no
since you have received a severer lesson than I intendd
appear sensible of your error.'
' It wasn't you that made me so,' began Maurice, with
eye; but with a strong sense of ' let well alone,' his fath
him short with, ' That's enough, my man, you've said all 
can be wished,' lifted him again on his knee, and stoppe
mouth with almonds and raisins.
The subject was mentioned no more; Lucy considered 
as proclaimed, and herself relieved from the necessity of such
unprecedented deed as preferring an accusation against Mau, _
and Albinia, unaware of the previous persecution, did no t
that Maurice considered himself as clallenged to prove, 
experience of his brother-in-law's fist did not suffice to 
him cease from his ' fun.' 
Two days after, Algernon was coming in from riding, whh
simple voice upon the stairs observed,' Here's such a p
picture I'
' Eh I what ?' said Algernon; and Maurice held it near to
as he stood taking off his great coat. 
' Such a pretty picture, but you mustn't have it I No, it
Ulick's.'
'Heavens and earth !' thundered Algernon, as he gathered
the meaning. ' Who has dared-?   Give it nie-or-' and
soon as he was freed from the sleeves, he snatched at the 1x
but the boy had already sprung up to the first landing, 
waving his treasure, shouted, 'No, it's not for you; 1'll notgi
you Ulick's picture.' 
' Ulick !' cried Algernon, in redoubled fury. ' You're put
to this ! Give it me this instant, or it shall be the worse
you ;' but ere he could stride up the first flight, Maurice's last 
was disappearing round the corner above, and the next monm
the exhibition was repeated overhead in the gallery. Thi
did Algernon rush headlong, following the scampering patterinu
feet, till the door of Maurice's little room was slammed in 
face. Bursting it open, he found the chamber empty, but th
was a shout of elvish laughter outside, and a cry of disma
coming up from the garden, impelled him to mount the ricke
deal-table below the deep sunk dormer window, when thrusting
out his head and shoulders, he beheld his wife and her paren9m
gazing up in terror from the lawn. No wonder, for there ware
a narrow ledge of leading without, upon which Maurice bad'
suddenly appeared, running with unwavering steps till in a too 
ment he stooped down, and popped through the similar window
of Gilbert's room.




<pb n="367"/>
TIHE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.              fG7
While still too dizzy with horror to feel secure that the child
,.as indeed safe within, those below were startled by a frantic
slout from  Algernon: ' Let me out    I say, the imp has
locked me in ! Let me out !'
Allilia flew into the house and upstairs.  MTaurice was
flourishling the key, and executing a war-dance before the cap-
tive's door, with a chant alternating of war-wlhoops, ' Promise
not to hurt it, and I'll let you out I' and ' Pity poor prisoners in
a foreign land !'
Shle called to him to desist, but he was too wild to be checked
by her voice; and as she advanced to capture him, he shot like
an arrow to thle other end of the passage, and down the back-
stairs. She promised speedy rescue, and hurried down, hoping
to seize the culprit in the lhall, but lie had whipped out at the
back-door, and was making for the garden gate, when his father
hastened down the path to meet him, and seeing his retreat cut
oft' lie plunged ilto the bushes, and sprang like a cat ul) a cock-
sp)ur-tlorn, too slender for a.cent by a heavier weight, and
thence grinned and waved his hand to his prisoner at the
wiindow.
' Maurice,' called his father, ' what does this mean '
' I only want to take home Ulick's picture. Then I'll let him
out.'
What picture T
'lThat's my secret.'
'This is not play, Maurice,' said Albinia. 'Attend to papa.'
The boy swung the light shrub about with him in a manner
fearful to behold, and looked irresolute. Lucy put in her cry,
' You very naughty child, give up the key this moment ;' and
dalove, Algernon bawled appeals to Mr. Kendal, and threats to
l1aurice.
'Silence 1' said Mr. Kendal, sternly. 'I aurice, this must not
be. Comle down, and give me the key of your room.'
'I will, papa,' said Maurice, in a reasonable voice. 'Only
please promise not to let Algernon have Ulick's picture, for I
got it without his knowing it.'
' 1 promlise,' said Mr. Kendal. 'Let us put an end to this.'
Maurice came down, and brought the key to his father, and
while Lucy hastened to release her husband, MJr. Kendal seized
the boy, finding him already about again to take flight.
' Pala, let me take home Ulick's picture before he gets out,' said
Maurice, finding the grasp too strong for him ; but Mr. Kendal
had taken the picture out of his hand, and looked at it with
chlanged countenance.
It depicted the famous drawing-room scene, in its native




<pb n="368"/>
368             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER 
element, the moon squinting through inky clouds at-Lucy
ing on the sofa, while the lofty presence of the Pols
discharged the fluid from the inkstand. 
'Did Mr. O'More give you this ?' asked Mr. Kendal.
'No, it tumbled out of his paper-case. You know he 
might go to his rooms and get the Illustrated News wit
picture of Balaklava, and so the newspaper knocked the 
case down, and all the things tumbled out, so I picked thi'
and thought I would see what Algernon would say to it, 
then put it back again. Let me have it, papa; if he catches 
he'll tear it to smithereens.'
'Don't talk Irish, sir,' said his father. 'I see where 
impertinence comes from, and I will put a stop to it.'
Maurice gave back a step, amazed at his father's unwo
anger; but far greater wrath was descending in the person
Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy, who came striding across the
and planting himself before his father-in-law, demanded, 'I 
to know, sir, if it is your desire that I should be delberate
insulted in this house I'
'No one can be more concerned than I am at what 
occurred.'
'Very well, sir; then I require that this intolerable ohi
be soundly flogged, that beggarly Irishman kicked out, and'^
infamous libel destroyed !'
'Oh, papa,' cried Maurice, 'you promised me the pict
should be safe !'
'I promise you, you impudent brat,' cried Algernon,'
you shall learn what it is to insult your elders I You shall 
flogged till you repent it 1'
'You will allow me to judge of the discipline of my 
family,' said Mr. Kendal.
' Ay ! 1 knew how it would be I You encourage that 
in every sort of unbearable impudence; but I have endured.
long enough, and I g;ve you warning that I do not remai
another night under this roof unless I see the impertinen
flogged out of him.'
' Papa never whips me,' interposed Maurice  'You must 
mamna.
Mr. Kendal bit his lips, and Albinia could have smiled, 
their sense of the ludicrous inflamed Algernon, and like 
beside himself, he swung round, and declaring he should ask hi
uncle if that were proper treatment, he marched across th
lawn, while Mr. Kendal exclaimed, 'More childish tha
Maurice!'
'Oh, mamma, what shall I do ?' was Lucy's woful cry, as 




<pb n="369"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               369
turned back, finding herself unable to keep up with his huge
steps, and her calls disregarded.
'My dear,' said Allinia, affectionately, 'you had better com-
pose yourself and follow him. His uncle will bring him to
reason, and then you can tell him how sorry we are.'
( Yon may assure him,' said Mr. Kendal, 'that I am as much
hurt as he can be, that such an improper use should have been
nade of O'More's intimacy here, and I mean to mark my sense
of it.'
And,' said Lucy, 'I don't think anything would pacify him
so much as Maurice being only a little beaten, not to hurt him,
you know.'
' If Maurice be punished, it shall not be in revenge,' said
Mr. Kendal.
'I'm afraid nothing else will do,' said Lucy, wringing her
hands. 'He has really declared that he will not sleep another
niglht here unless Maurice is punished; and whatever he says,
lie'll do, and I know it would kill me to go away in this
llanner.'
Her father confidently averred that he would do no such
thing, but she cried so much as to move Maurice into exclaim-
ing, ' Look here, Lucy, I'll come up with you, and let him give
me one good punch, and then we shall all be comfortable
again.
'I don't know about the punching,' said Albinia; 'but I think
the least you can do, Maurice, is to go and ask his forgiveness
for having been so very naughty. You were not thinking what
you were about when you locked him in.'
This measure was adopted, Mr. Kendal accompanying Lucy
and the boy, while Albinia went in search of Sophy, whom she
found in grandmamna's room, looking very pale. 'Well ?' was
the inquiry, and she told what had passed.
'I hope Maurice will be punished,' said Sophy; so unwonted
a sentiment. that Albinia quite started, though it was decidedly
her own opinion.
'That meddling with papers was very bad,' she said, with an
extenuating smile.
' Fun is a perfect demon when it becomes master,' said Sophy.
It was plain that it was not Maurice that she was thinking of,
but the caricature. Her sister should have been sacred from
derision.
'We must remember,' she said, 'that it was only through
Maurice's meddling that we became aware of the existence of
this precious work. It is not as if he had shown it to any one.
'How many of the O'Mores have made game of it T asked
B B




<pb n="370"/>
370            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER. 
Sophy, bitterly. ' No, I am glad I know of it; I shall 
deceived any more.' 
With these words she withdrew, evidently resolved to p
end to the subject. Her face was like iron, and Albiiagr
for the deep resentment that the man whom she had ven
to think of as devoted to herself, had made game of her 
Poor Sophy, to her that tryste had been a subject of unmiti
affliction and shame, and it was a cruel wound that 
O'More should, of all men, have turned it into ridicule.
would be the effect on her I
In process of time Mr. Kendal returned. 'Albinia,' he
'this is a most unfortunate affair. He is perfectly impracti
insists on starting for Paris to-morrow, and I verily believe
will.'
'Poor Lucy.'
'She is in such distress, that I could not bear to look at
but he will not attend to her, nor to his uncle and aunt.
Dusautoy proposed that they should come to the vi
where there would be no danger of collisions with Maurice 
his mind can admit no idea but that he has been insulted,
that we encourage it, and he thinks his dignity concerned
resenting it.'
' Not much dignity in being driven off the field by a child
six years old.'
'So his aunt told him, but he mixes it up with O'More,
insists on my complaining to Mr. Goldsmith, and getting
lad dismissed for a libellous caricaturist, as he calls it.  '
little as I should have expected such conduct from O'Mor
could not be made a ground of complaint to his uncle.'
'I should think not. No one with more wit than Al.
would have dreamt of it! But if Ulick came and apol
Ah ! but I forgot  Mr. Goldsmith sent him to London
morning. Well, it may be better that he should be out of
way of Algernon in his present mood.'
'Humph !' said Mr. Kendal. 'It is the first time I e
allowed a stranger to be intimate in my family, and it shall
the last. I never imagined him aware of the circumstance.
'Nor I; I am sure none of us mentioned it.'
' Maurice told him, I suppose. It is well that we should
aware who has instigated the child's impertinence. I 
keep him as much as possible with me; he must be cured:
Irish brogue and Irish coolness before they are confirmed.'
Mr. Kendal's conscience was evidently relieved by tran'
ring to the Irishman the imputation of fostering Mauric(' x
practices




<pb n="371"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               371
They were interrupted by Lucy's arrival. She was come to
take leave of home, for her lord was not to be dissuaded from
going to London by the evening's train. The greater the con-
sternation, the sweeter his revenge. Never able to see more
than one side of a question, he could not perceive how impos-
sible it was for the Kendals to fulfil his condition with regard
to Ulick O'More, and he sullenly adhered to his obstinate de.
termination. Lucy was in an agony of grief, and perhaps the
most painful blow was the perception how little he was swayed
by consideration for her. Her maid packed, while her parents
tried to console her. It was easier when she bewailed the
torrors of the voyage, and the uncertainty of hearing of dear
grandmamma and dear Gilbert, than when she sobbed about
Algernon having no feeling for her. It might be only too true,
bult her wifely submission ought not to have acknowledged it,
aud they would not hear when they could not comfort; and so
they were forced to launch her on the world, with a tyrant
instead of a guide, and dreading the effbct of dissipation on her
levity of mind, as lmuch as they grieved for her feeble spirit.
It was a piteous parting-a mournful departure for a bride-a
heavy penalty for vanity and weakness.
Unfortunately the result is to an action as the lens through
which it is viewed, and the turpitude of the deed seems to in-
crease or diminish according to the effect it produces.
Had it been in Algernon Dusautoy's nature to receive the
joke good-humouredly, it might have been regarded as an
audacious exercise of wit, and have been quickly forgotten; but
lien it had actually made a breach between him and his wife's
family, and driven him from Bayford when everything con-
spired to make his departure unfeelingly cruel, the caricature
was regarded as a serious insult and an abuse of intimacy.
Even Mr. Kendal was not superior to this view, feeling the
offence with all the sensitiveness of a hot-tempered man, a proud
reserved guardian of the sanctities of home, and of a father who
had seen his daughter's weakest and most faulty action turned
into ridicule; and he seemed to feel himself bound to atone for
not g(ing to all the lengths to which Algernon would have im-
pelled him, by showing the utmost displeasure within the bounds
of common sense.
Albinia, better appreciating the irresistibly ludicrous aspect
of the adventure, argued that the sketch harmlessly shut up
in a paper-case showed no great amount of insolence, and that
considering how the discovery had been made, it ought not to
h' visited. She thought the drawing had better be restored
without remarks by the same hand that had abstracted it; but
B   2




<pb n="372"/>
7S             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER. 
Mr. Kendal sternly declared this was impossible, and 
countenance seconded him. 
' Well, then,' said Albinia, 'put it into my hands  I'm  I
manager in general, but I can promise that Ulick will 
down so shocked and concerned, that you will not have
heart not to forgive him.'
'The question is not of forgiveness,' said Sophy, in the 
rigid of voices, as she saw yielding in her father's face; it
one had to forgive, it was poor Lucy and Algernon. Al
have to do, is to be on our guard for the future.'
'Sophy is right,' said Mr. Kendal; 'intimacy must be
with one who has so little discretion or good taste.'
'Then after his saving Maurice, he is to be given up, 
he quizzed the Polysyllable ' cried Albinia.
'I do not give him up,' said Mr. Kendal. ' I highly 
his good qualities, and should be happy to do him a service, b
I cannot have my family at the mercy of his wit, nor my  i
taught disrespect. We have been unwisely familiar, and m
retreat.'
'And what do you mean us to do I' exclaimed Albinia '
we to cut him systematically ?'
'I do not know what course you may adopt,' said Mr. Kend
in a tone whose grave precision rebuked her half petulant, h
facetious inquiry. ' I have told you that I do not mean to
anything extravagant, nor to discontinue ordinary civiliti
but I think you will find that our former habits are not
sumed.'
'And Maurice must not he always with him,' said Sophy. -
'Certainly not ; I shall keep the boy with myself.'
It was with the greatest effort that Albinia held her tong
To have Sophy not only making common cause against her,b
inciting her father to interfere about Maurice, was well-ni
intolerable, and she only endured it by sealing her lips as wit
a bar of iron.
By-and-by came the reflection that if poor Sophy had
secret cause of bitterness, it was she herself who had given th
thoughts substance and consciousness, and she quickly forgal
every one save herself and Algernon.
As to her little traitor son, she took him seriously in h
at bedtime, and argued the whole transaction with him, re
presenting the dreadful consequences of meddling with people'
private papers under trust. Here was poor Lucy taken a
from home, and papa made very angry with Ulick. becasU
Maurice had been meddlesome and mischievous; and though h
had not been beaten for it, he would find it a wolre puniJb




<pb n="373"/>
TIE YOUNG STEP-M3OTHERI.                73
pcllt uot to be trusted another time, nor allowed to be with
U lick.
Mau;rice turned round with mouth open at hearing of papa's
auler with Ulick, and the accusation of having brought his
frieind into troulle.
' Whv, Maurice, you remember how unhappy we were, Gil-
bert and all. It was because it was sadly wrong of Gilbert
andl Lucy to have let Algernon in without papa's knowing it,
atlld it was not right or friendly in Ulick to lallgh at what was
so wrong, and grieved us all so much.'
'It was such fan,' said Maurice.
'Yes, Maurice; but fun is no excuse for doing what is nn-
kind and iischlievous. Ulick would not have been amused if
lie had cared as much for us as we thought he did; but, after
all, his drawing the picture would have done no harm but for
a little boy, whom lie trusted, never thinking that an unkind
wish to tease, would betray this foolish action, and set his best
frieids against him.'
' I did not know I should,' said Maurice, winking liard.
'No; you did not know you were (oing what, if you were
older, would have been dishonourable.'
That word was too much ! First he hid his face from his
mother, and cried out fiercely, ' I've not-I've not been that;'
and clenchled his fist. ' Don't say it, mamma.'
' If you had known what you were doing, it would have
been disilonourable,' she repeated, gravely. ' It will be a long
timle before you earn trust and confidence again.'
There was a great struggle with his tears. She had punished
him, and almost more than she could bear to see, but she knew
tlie conquest must be secured, and she tried, while she caressed
hlin, to m;ake him look at the real cause of his lapse ; he declared
that it was 'such fun' to provoke Algernon, and a little more
brought out a confession of the whole course of persecution;
the child's voice becoming quite triumphant as he told of the
success of his tricks, and his mnother, though appalled at their
audalcity, with great difficulty hindering herself from manifesting
lier alluseellellt.
She did not wonder at Algernon's having found it intoler-
alble, and though angry with him for having made hinself such
l;irg:lme, she set to work to impress upon  .aurice hisown errors,
andl the hateflllless of practical jokes, and site succeeded so far
as to leave lilm crying hilmstef to sleep, completely subdued,
while she felt as if all the tears ought to have been shed by
herlself fori lher want of vigilance.
Conflicuilg duties ! how Lard to strike the balance ! She had




<pb n="374"/>
357              THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
readily given up her own pleasures for the care of Mrs. Xlead
but when it came to her son's training, it was another que
She much wished to see the note with which Mr. 
returned the unfortunate sketch, but one of the points on w
he was sensitive, was the sacredness of his correspondence,
all that she heard was, that Ulick had answered. 'not at all
Mr. Kendal had expected; he was nothing but an Irish
after all.' But at last she obtained a sight of the note.
' Bayford, Nov. 2oth, 185^
'Dear Sir,
' I was much astonished at the contents of your letter of this m
ing, and greatly concerned that Mr. Cavendish Dutsautoy should have d
so much honour to any production of mine, as to alter his arrangements 
that account.
' As the scrawl in question was not meant to meet the eye of any liv
being, I should, for my own part, have considered it proper to take
notice of what was betrayed by mere accident. I should have conside
it more conducive to confidence between gentlemen. I fully acquiesce
what you say of the cessation of our former terms of acquaintance, 
with many thanks for past kindness, believe me,
'Your obedient servant,
'U. O'Monu.'
Nothing was more evidently written in a passion at the i
vasion of these private papers, and Albinia, though she
always feared he might consider himself the aggrieved pa
had hardly expected so much proud irritation and so lit
regret. Mr. Kendal called him 'foolish boy,' and tried to 
the matter aside, but he was much hurt; and Ulick put him
decidedly in the wrong by passing in the street with a for
bow, when Mr. Kendal, according to his purpose of ordin
civility without an open rupture, would have shaken hands.
Sophy looked white, stern, and cold, but said not a word
she deepened her father's displeasure quite sufficiently by h
countenance. His was grave disappointment in a youth who
he found less grateful than he thought he had a right to expect
hers was the rankling of what she deemed an insult to h
sister, and the festering of a wound of which she was asham
She meant to bear it well, but it made her very hard and rig
and even the children could hardly extract a smile from h
She seemed to have made a determination to do all that Lug
or herself had ever done, and more too. and listened to no en
treaties to spare herself  Commands were met with sulle
resignation, entreaties were unavailing, and both in the sicko
room and the parish, she insisted on working beyond her poweM 
It was a nightly battle to send her to bed, and A Ibinia suspected
that she did not sleep.  Meantime Lucy had sailed, and W     ;O




<pb n="375"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                373
presently heard of in a whirl of excitement that shortened lhe
letters, and made them joyous and self-important.
' Ah !' said Sophy, ' she will soon forget that she ever had a
homle.'
, Poor dear ! Wait till trouble comes, and she will remember
it only too sadly,' sighed Albinia.
' Trouble is certain enough,' said Sophy; 'but I don't think
what we deserve does us much good.'
Sophy could see nothing but the most ungentle and gloomy
aspects. Gilbert had not yet written, and she was convinced
that he was either very ill, or had only recovered to be killed
at Inkermann, and she would only sigh at the Gazette that
announced Lieutenant Gilbert Kendal's promotion to be Cap-
tain, and Major the Honourable Frederick Ferrars to be Lieu-
tenant Colonel.
The day after, however, came the long-expected letter from
the captain himself. It was to Mrs. Kendal, and she detected
a shade of disappointment on her husband's face, so she would
have handed it to him at once, but he said, 'No, the person
to whom the letter is addressed, should always be the first to
read it.'
The letter began with Gilbert's happiness in those from home,
which he called the greatest pleasure he had ever known. He
feared he had caused uneasiness by not writing sooner, but it
had been out of his power while Fred Ferrars was in danger.
Then followed the account of the severe illness from which Fred
was scarcely beginning to rally, though that morning, on hear-
ing that he was to be sent home as soon as he could move, he
had talked about Canada and Emily. Gilbert said that not
only time hut strength had been wanting for writing, for atten-
dance on Fred had been all that he could attempt, since moving
produced so much pain and loss of breath, that he had been
forced to be absolutely still whenever he was not wanted, but
he was now much better. 'Though,' he continued, 'I do not
now mind telling you that I had thought myself gone. You,
who have known all my feelings, and have borne with them so
kindly, will understand the effect upon me, when on the night
previous to the 25th, I distinctly heard my own name, in
Edmund's voice, at the head of my bed, just as he used to cal
me when he had finished his lessons, and wanted me to come
out with him. As I started up, I heard it again outside the
tent.  I ran to the door, but of course there was nothing, nor
did poor Wynne hear anything. I lay awake for some time,
but slept at last, and had forgotten all by morning. It did not
even occur to me when I saw the pleasant race they had cut




<pb n="376"/>
376            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
out for us, nor through the whole affair. Do not ask
descrioe it, the scene haunts me enough. When I found
had not come off unhurt, and it seemed as if I could not
for one of our fellows but to hear he was dead or dying,
Wynne among them, then the voice seemed a summons. I
thoroughly done up, and could not even speak when Ger
Ferrars came to me; I only wanted to be let alone to die
peace. I fancy I slept, for the next thing I heard wa t
Ma;or's voice asking for some water, too feebly to wake 
fellow who had been left in charge. I got up, and found h
in a state of high fever and great pain, and from that time
the present, I have hardly thought of the circumstance, a
know   not why I have now     written it to you.  Did 
danger actually bring Edlmnd nearer, or did its presence act 
my iniagination I Be that as it. may, I think, after the 
impression of awe and terror, the having heard the dear o
voice braced me, and gave me a sfiese of being near home a
less lonely. Not that my hurt has been for an instant dangeror
and I am mending every day; if it were wanrmer I should g
on faster, but I cannot stir into the air without briingin
cough. Tell Ulick O'More that we entertained his brother;
tea last evening ; we were obliged to desire himl to bring Wi
own cup, and lie produced the shell of a land tortoise; it w
very like the fox and the crane. Poor fellow, it was the fir
good meal he had for weeks, and I was glad lie came in for so
famous bread that the General had sent us in. Ite made
much more merry than was convenient to either of us, n
being in condition for lauglhing. He is a fine lad1, and liked b
ail.' Then camie a break, and the letter closed with such tidin
of Inkermann as had reached the invalid's tent.
A few lines from General Ferrars spoke of the improvemefl
in both patients, adding that Fred had had a hard struggle fd0
his life, and hlad only been saved by Gilbert's unrelnittinig caLt
by day and nigiht.
HIeroismn h;a  not transformed Gilbert, and Albinia's o194
fondness glowed with doulble ardour as she imlused over his h'i,;
tory of the battle eve. His father attributed the impression t6
a mind full of pres.age and excitement, actetd luol 1by strond
memory ; but woman-like, Albinia lprcflrred tle belief that t.h6:
one twin mighlt have been an actual mnlss^ltgcr to cheer a d
strelgthen the other for the coming trial. Sophy only said, 
'Gilbert's fancies as susual.' 
' This was not like fitlcy,' said Albinia. ' This is an unkind l
Wray of tlaking it.'
'It is commlon sense,' she bluntly answered. ' 1 don't ee whl 




<pb n="377"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-NIOTHER.              S77
he should think that Edmund has nothing better to do than to
call him. It would be childish.'
Albinia did not reply, disturbed by this display of jealousy
and harshness, as if every bud of tenderness had been dried up
and withered, and poor Sophy only wanted to run counter to any
obvious sentiment.
Albinia was grateful for the message which gave her an excuse
for seeking Ulick out, and endeavouring to conciliate him. Mr.
Kendal made no objection, and expressed a hope that he might
have become reasonable. She therefore contrived to waylay
him in the November darkness, holding out her hand so that
he took it at unawares, as if not recollecting that lie was
offended, but in the midst his grasp relaxed, and his head
went up.
'I have a message for you from Gilbert about your brother
Bryan,' she said ; and he could not defend himself from mani-
festing eager interest, as she told of the tea-party; but that
over, it was in stiff formal English that he said, 'I hope you
had t good account.'
It struck a chill, and she answered, almost imploringly, 'Gil-
bert is much better, thank you.'
'I am glad to hear it;' and he was going to bow and pass on,
when she exclaimed,
' Ulick, why are we strangers l'
' It was agreed on all hands that things past could not be un-
done,' he frigidly replied.
'Too true,' she said; 'but I do not think you know how
sorry we are for my poor little boy's foolish trick.'
'I owe no displeasure to Maurice. He knew no more what
he was doing than if he had ;een a gust of wind ; but if the
wind had borne a private paper to my feet, I would never have
acted on the contents.'
'Unliappily,' said Albinia, 'some revelations, though received
against our will, cannot help being felt. We saw the drawing
before we knew how he came by it, and you cannot wonder
that it gave pain to find that a scene so distressing to us should
have furnlished you with amusement. It was alisurd in itself,
but we had hoped it was a secret, and it wounded us because we
thlought you would have been tender of our feelings.'
'You don't mean that it was fact !' cried Ulick, stopping
suddenly ; and as her silence replied, lie continued, ' I give you
my word and honour that I never ilnmained there was a word
of truth in the farrago old lid]ly told me, and I'll not deny
that I did scrawl the scene down as tle very picture of a bit of
alander. I only wonder I'd not brought it to yourself'




<pb n="378"/>
378            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER. 
' Pray let me hear what she told you.'
' Oh I she said they two had been colloguing togethe
moonlight, and you came home in the midst, and Miss K,
fainted away, so he catches up the ink and throws it over
instead of water, and you and Mr. Kendal came in and 
mad entirely; and Mr. Kendal threatened to brain him 
the poker if he did no quit it that instant, and sent Gilbert 
a soldier for opening the door to him, but you and Lucy w
down on your bare knees to get him to relent.'
' Well, I own the poker does throw an air of improbabil
over the whole. Minus that and the knees, I am afraid it
only too true. I suppose it got abroad through the servantsa
' It was an unlucky goose-quill that lay so handy,' exclaim
Ulick; 'but you may credit me, no eye but my own ever s
the scrawl, nor would have seen it.'
'Then, Ulick, if we all own that something is to be regret
why do we stand aloof, and persist in quarrelling ?'
'I want no quarrel,' said Ulick, stiffly. 'Mr. Kendal intima
to me that he did not wish for my company, and I'm not
man to force it.'
'Oh, Ulick, this is not what I hoped from you !'
'I'll tell you what, Mrs. Kendal, you could talk over
Giant's Causeway if you had a mind,' said Ulick, with mu.
agitation; ' but you must not talk over me, for your own jud
nent would be against it. You know what I am, and what
came of, and what have I in the world except the honour ofi
gentleman ?  Mr. Kendal and yourself have been my kind
friends, and I'll be grateful to my dying day; but if Mr. Ken
thinks I can submit tamely when he resents what he nev
ought to have noticed, why, then, what have I to do but
show him the difference 1 If his kindness was to me as a gen
man and his equal, I love and bless him for it, but if it be
patronizing of the poor clerk, why, then, I owe it to myse
and my people to show that I can stand alone, without crin
and being thankful for affronts.'
' Did it ever occur to you to think whether pride be a sin
"Tis not pride i' cried Ulick. 'It is my duty to my fami
and my name. You'd say yourself, as you allowed before nowr
that it would be mere meanness and servility to swallow insul
for one's own profit; and if I were to say "you're welcome
with many thanks, to shuffle over my private papers, and all
myself to account," I'd better have given up my name at onoer
for I'd have leftthe gentleman behind me.'
I do believe it is solely for the O'Mores that you are making
a iuty of implacability 1'




<pb n="379"/>
~r ~           THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                37 9
' It is a duty not to run from one's word, and debase oneself
for one's own advantage.'
' One would think some wonderful advantage was held out to
yol.t
The pleasantest hours of my life,' murmured he sadly, under
his breath.
' Well, Ulick,' she said, holding out her hand,' I'm not quite
dissatisfied; I think some day even an O'More will see that
there is no exception from the law of forgiveness in their
special favour, and that you will not be able to go on resent-
ing what we have suffered from the young of the spider-monkey.'
Even this allusion produced no outward effect; he only shook
hands gravely, saying, 'I never did otherwise than forgive, and
regret the consequences: I am very thankful for all your past
kindness.'
Worse than the Giant's Causeway, thought Albinia as she
parted from him. Nothing is so hopeless as that sort of for-
giveness. because it satisfies the conscience.
Mr. Kendal predicted that, the Keltic dignity having been
asserted, good sense and principle would restore things to a
rational footing. What this meant might be uncertain, but he
certainly missed Prometheus, and found Maurice a poor sub-
stitute. Indulgence itself could hardly hold out in unmitigated
intercourse with an obstreperous dunce not seven years old,
and Maurice, deprived of Gilbert, cut off from Ulick, with
mamma busy, and Sophy out of spirits, underwent more snub-
bing than had ever yet fallen to his lot. Not that he was much
concerned thereat; and Mr. Kendal would resume his book
after a lecture upon good manners, and then be roused to find
his library a gigantic cobweb, strings tied to every leg of table
or chair, and Maurice and the little Awk enacting spider and
fly, heedless of the unwilling flies who might suffer by their
trap. Such being the case, his magnanimity was the less
amazing when he said,' Albinia, there is no reason that O'More
should not eat his Christmas dinner here.'
' Very well I trust he will not think it needful still to be
self-denying.'
'It is not our part to press advances which are repelled,'
said Sophy.
' Indeed, Sophy,' said her father, smiling, 'I see nothing attrac-
tive in the attitude of rocks rent asunder.'
The undesigned allusion must have gone deep, for she coloured
to a purple crimson, and said in a freezing tone, ' I thought you
considered that to take him up again would be a direct insult
to Lucy and her husband.'




<pb n="380"/>
3S0            THE YOUNGC STEP-MOTHER.
'They do not show much consideration for us,' said.
Kendal. ' How long ago was the date of her last letter 
'Nearly three weeks,' said Albinia. ' Poor child, how
she write with the catalogue raisonnee of the Louvre to l
by heart ?'
The Dusautoys yearly gave a Christmas tea-party to
teachers in the Sunday-school, who had of late become mo
numerous, as Mr. Dusautoy's influence had had more time 
tell. Mrs. Kendal was reckoned on asone of the chief suppor
of the gaiety of the evening, but on this occasion she was fo
to send Sophia alone.
Sophy regarded it as a duty and a penance, and submitted
the more readily because it was so distasteful. It was, howeve
more than she had reckoned on to find that the party had beer
extended to the male teachers, an exceedingly good and lugun4
brious-looking youth lately applrenticed to Mr. Bowles, and
Ulick O'More. It was the filtt time she had met the latter
since his offence. She avoided seeing him as long as possible
though all his movements seemed to thrill her, and so confused
the conversation which she was trying to keep up, that she:
found herself saying that G6nevieve Durant had lost an armi
and that Gilbert would spend Christmas in London.
She felt him coming nearer; she knew he was passing thle.
Miss Northover in the purple silk and red neck-ribbon; she':
heard him exchanging a few civil words with the sister with j
the hair strained off her face; she knew he was coming; shle,
grew more eager in her fears for Mr. Rainsforth's chest.
Tea was announced. Sophy held back in the general move
Ulick made a step nearer, their eyes met, and if ever eyes spoke ;
hers ordered him to keel) his distance, while he glanced affront
for affront, bowed and stepped back. 
Sophy sat by Miss Jane Northover, and endeavoured to make
her talk. Anything would have been better than the echoes 
of the sprightliness at the lower end of the table, where Ulickl
was talking what he would have called blarney to Miss Susan
Northover and Miss Mary Anne Higgins, both at once, till he 'o
excited them into a perpetual giggle. Mr. Dusautoy was de'i
lighted, and evidently thought this brilliant success ; Mrs. Du-
sautoy was less at her ease-the mirtll was less soler and more
exclusive than she had intended ; and Sophv, finding nothing
could be made of Miss Jane, turned round to her other neigh.
bour, Mr. Hope, and asked his opinion of the Whewell and
Brewster controversy on the Plurality of Worlds.
Mr. Hope had rather a good opinion of Miss Solhia, and as
hce had never molested him, could talk to her, so he straightway




<pb n="381"/>
F              m   sTHE YOUrNG STEP-MOTHER.         SS1
became engrossed in the logical and theological aspects of the
theory; and Mrs Dusautoy could hardly suppress her smile at
this unconscious ponderous attempt at a counter flirtation, with
Saturn and Jupiter as weapons for light skirmishing.
Ulick received the invitation to dinner, and did not accept
it. He said he had an engagement-Albinia wondered what
it could be, and had reason afterwards to think that he had the
silent young apothecary to a Christmas dinner in his own rooms
-an act of charity at least, if not of forgiveness.  Mr. Johns,
the senior clerk, whose health had long been failing, was about
to retire, and this announcement was followed by the appear-
ance of a smart, keen-looking young man of six or seven-and-
twenty, whom Miss Goldsmith paraded as hercousin, Mr. Andrew
Goldsmith, and it was generally expected that he would be
taken into partnership, and undertake old John's work; but in
a fortnight he disappeared, and young O'More was promoted to
the vacant post with an increase of salary. It was mortifying
only to be informed through Mr. Dusautoy, instead of by the
lad himself
The Eastern letters were the chief comfort. First came
tidings that Gilbert, not having yet recovered his contusion,
was to accompany Colonel Ferrars to Scutari, and then after a
longer interval came a brief and joyous note-Gilbert was
coming home I On his voyage from the Crimea he had caught
cold, and this had brought on severe inflammation on the in-
jured chest, which had laid him by for many days at Scutari.
The colonel had become the stronger of the two, in spite of a
fiagment of shell lodged so deeply in the side, that the medical
board advised his going to London for its removal. Both were
ordered home together with six months' leave, and Gilbert's
note overflowed with glad messages to all, including Algernon,
of whose departure he was still in ignorance.
Mr. Kendal knew not whether he was most gratified or dis-
comfited by the insinuating ringer who touched his hat, hoping
for due notice of the captain's arrival in time to welcome him
with a peal of bells. Indeed, Bayford was so excited about its
hero, that there were symptoms of plans for a grand reception
with speeches, cheers, and triumphal arches, which caused Sophy
to say she hoped that he would come suddenly without any
notice, so as to put a stop to all that nonsense; while Albinia
could not help nourishing a strange vague expectation that his
return would be the beginning of better days.
At last, Sophia, with a touch of the old penny club fever,
toiled over the school clothing wilfully and unnecessarily for
two hours, kept up till evening without owning to the pain in




<pb n="382"/>
3S2            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
her back, but finally returned so faint and dizzy that shg
forced to be carried helpless to her room, and the next'
could barely drag herself to the couch in the morning.
where she lay quite prostrated, and grieved at increasing 
of lessening her mother's cares.
'Oh, mamma, don't stay wizh me. You are much too 
'No, I am not. The children are out, and grand
asleep, and I am going to write to Lucy; but there's no h
Let me cool your forehead a little longer.'
'How I hate being another bother !'
'I like you much better so, than when you would not let
speak to you, my poor child.'
'I could not,' she said, stifling her voice on the cushion, 
averting her head ; but in a few moments she made ag
effort, and said, 'You think me unforgiving, mamma. It
not entirely that. It was hating myself for an old fa&ey,
mere mistake. I have got over it; and I will not be in e
again.'
'Souphy dear, if you find strength in pride, it will only won
youlrself.'
'I do not think I alm proud,' said Sophy, quietly.  I 
have been headstrong, but I despise myself too much
pride.'
'Are you sure it was mere fancy I  It was an idea 
occurred to more than to you.'
'IIu.ih !' cried Sophy. ' Had it been so, could he have ri
culed Lucy I Could he have flosvn out so against papal No
that caricature undeceived me, and I am thankful. He trea
us as cousins-no more-he would act in the same manner
any of the Miss O'Mores of Ballymakilty, nay, by Jane Nortih
over, herself. We did not allow for Irish manner.'
'If so, he had no right to do so. I shall never wish to 
him here again.'
'No, mamma, he did not know the folly he had to deal wi
Next time I meet him, I slail know how to be really indiffrent
Now, this is the last time we will mention the subject !'
Albinia obeyed, but still hoped.  It was well that ho
remained, for her task was heavier than ever; Mrs. Meado
was feebler, but more restless and wakeful, asking twen
times in an hour for Mrs. Kendal. The doctors thought
impossible that she should hold out another fortnight, but s
lived (,n fiom day to day, and at times Albinia hardly could 
absent from her for ten ninutes together. Sophy was so conm
pletely knocked up that she could barely creep about the house,
wad was forbidden the sick-room; but she was softened aLM




<pb n="383"/>
TlE YOUNG STEP-MIOTIIER.                   383
gentle, and was once more a companion to her father, while
cagerly looking forward to devoting herself to Gilbert.
A letter with the Malta post-mark was eagerly opened, as
the harbinger of his speedy arrival.
'Royal Hotel, Malta,
February 10th, 1855.
'Dearest Mrs. Kendal,
' I am afraid you will all be much disappointed, though your grief
cannot equal mine at the Doctor's cruel decree. We arrived here the day
before yesterday, but I had been so ill all the voyage with pain in the side
and cough, that there was no choice but to land, and call in Dr.--, who
tells me that my broken rib has damaged my lungs so much, that I must
keep perfectly quiet, and not think of going home till warm weather. If
I am well enough to join by that time, I shall not see you at all unless you
and my father could come out. Am I nourishing too wild a hope in think-
ing it possible ? Since Lucy has been so kind as to promise never to leave
grandmamma, I cannot help hoping you might be spared. I do not think
my proposal is selfish, since my poor grandmother is so little conscious of
your cares; and Ferrars insists on remaining with me till he sees me in
your hands, though they say that the splinter must be extracted in London,
and every week he remains here is so much suffering, besides delaying his
expedition to Canada. I have entreated him to hasten on, but he will not
hear of it. He is like a brother or a father to me, and nurses me most
tenderly, when he ought to be nursed himself.  We are famishing for
letters. I suppose all ours have gone up to Balaklava, and thence will be
sent to England. If we were but there ! We are both much better for
the quiet of these two days, and are to move to-morrow to a lodging that
a friend of Fred's has taken for us at Borenola, so as to be out of the Babel
of these streets-we stipulated that it should be large enough to take in
you and my father. I wish Sophy and the children would come too-it
would do them all the good in the world; and Maurice would go crazy
lamone the big guns; 1 am only afraid we should have him enlisting as a
drummer. The happy pair would be very glad to have the house to them-
selves, and would persuade themselves that it was another honeymoon.
' Good-bye. Instead of looking for a letter, 1 shall come down to meet
you at the Quarantine harbour. Love to all.
' Your most affectionate
'GILBERT KENDAL.'
How differently Gilbert wrote when really ill, from his de-
sponding style when he only fancied himself so, thought Albinia,
as, perplexed and grieved, she handed the letter to her husband,
and opened the enclosure, written in the laboured, ill-formed
characters of a left-hand not yet accustomed to doing the offices
of both.
'Dear Albinia
'Come, if poseible. His heart is set upon it, though he does not
realize his condition, and I cannot bear to tell hir. Only the utmost care
can save him. I am doing my best for him, but my nursing is as left-
handed as my writing.
'Ever yours,
'F. F.'




<pb n="384"/>
384            THE YOITNG STEP-MOTHER.
His wife's look of horror was Mr. Kendal's preparation i
this emphatic summons, perhaps a shock less sudden to '
than to her, for he had not been without misgivings ever si
he had heard of the situation of the injury. He read and spo
not, till the silence became intolerable, and she burst out almo
with a scream, ' Oh ! Edmund, I knew not what I did when
took grandmamma into this house !'
' This is very perplexing,' he said, his feelings so intense th
he dared only speak of acting; ' I must set out to-night.'
'Order me to come with you,' she said breathlessly.  T
will cancel everything else.'
'Would Mrs. Drury take charge of her aunt T said he, i
a moment's hesitation; and Albinia felt it implied his impressio
that they were bound by her repeated promises never to quilA
the invalid, but she only spoke the more vehemently- 
'Mrs Drury ?   She might-she would, under the circaunm
stances. She could not refuse. If you desire me to come, IC
should not be doing wrong; and grandmamma might never even;
miss me. Surely-oh surely, a young life, full of hope anca
promise, that may yet be saved, is not to be set against whabi
cannot be prolonged more than a few weeks.'
'As to that,' said Mr. Kendal, in the deliberate tone whicl
denoted dissatisfaction, 'though of course it would be tbh'
greatest blessing to have you with us, I think you may trnfu
Gilbert to my care. And we must consider poor Sophia.'
'She could not bear to be considered.'
'No; but it would be leaving her in a most distressing posiz
tion, when she is far from well, and with most uncongenial
assistants. You see, poor Gilbert reckons on Lucy being here,'
which would make it very different. But think of poor SophiW:
in the event of Mrs. Meadows not surviving till our return I'
'You are right! It would half kill her! My promise was
sacred; I was a wretch to think of breaking it. But when I
think of my boy-my Gilbert pining for me, and I deserting 
him-'
' For the sake of duty,' said her husband. ' Let us do right,
and trust that all will be overruled for the best. I shall go
with an easier mind if I leave you with the other children, and
I can he the sooner with him.'
'I could travel as fast.'
'I may soon bring him home to you. Or you might bring
the others to join us in the south of France. You will all need
chan ge.'
The decision was made, an(l her jid(lment acquiesced, though
she could hardly have cast the balance for herself. She urged




<pb n="385"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                385
no more, even when relentings came over her husband at the
thought of tle trials to which he was leaving her, and of those
which lie should meet in sclitude; yet not without a certain
7ecretdesire to make himself sufficient for the care and con-
;entment of his own son. He cast about for all possible helpers
for her, but could devise nothing except a note entreating her
brother to be with her as much as possible, and conmmending
her to the ])usautoys. It was a less decided kindness that he
)rdered Alaurice's pony to be turned out to grass, so as to
prevent rides in solitude, thinking the boy too young to be
trusted, and warned by the example of Gilbert's temptations.
Going up to the bank to obtain a supply of gold, he found
young O'More there without his uncle. 'The tidings of Gilbert's
danger liad spread throughout the town, and one heart at least
was softened. Ulick wrung the hand that lately he would not
touch, and Mr. Kendal forgot his wrath as he replied to the
wallil-hearted inquiry for particulars.
'lThen Mrs. Kendal cannot go with you ?'
' No. it is impossible. 'There is no one able to take charge of
Mrs. Meadows.'
' Ah ! and Mrs. Cavendish Dusautoy is gone ! I grieve for
the hour when my pen got the better of me. Mr. Kendal, this
is worse than I thought. Your son will never forgive me when
lie knows I'm at the bottom of his disappointment.'
'Thlere is something to forgive on all hands,' said Mr. Kendal.
Tlhat meddlesome boy of mine has caused worse results than
we cmld have contemplated. I believe it has been a lesson
to him.'
'I know it has to some one else,' said UTlick. 'I wish I could
do anytlinag! It would be the greatest comfort you could give
nme to tell mie of a thing I could do for Gilbert or any of you.
It y ou'd send me to find Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy, and tell him
'twa. all imy fault, and bring them back-'
'Ilather too wild a project, thank you,' said Mr. Kendal,
nliliig. '     No; the only tling you could do, would be-if that
boy of mine have not completely forfeited your kindness-'
' Maurice ? Ah ! how I have missed the rogue.'
'Poor little fellow, I am afraid he may be a burthen to him-
self and every one else. It would be a great relief if you could
be kind enough now and then to give himn the pleasure of a
walk.'
Maurice did not attend greatly to papa's permission to go out
with Mr. O'More. Either it was clogged with too many con-
ditions of discretion, and too nanly reminiscences of the past;
or Mlauri~ea' mind waa too nl!ich bent on the thought of his
i: A




<pb n="386"/>
3S6             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
brother. Both children haunted tle packing up, entreatiu
send out impossible presents. Maurice could hardly be 
suaded out of contributing a perilous-looking boomerang, wg
he argued had some sense in it; while he scofied at the 
Awk, who stood kissing and almost crying over the o
countenance of her favourite doll, entreatiug that papa w
take dear Miss Jenny because Gibbie loved her the best of
and always put her to sleep on his knees.  At last mat
were compromised by Sophy, who roused herself to do one
the few things for which slhe had strength, engrossing them
cutting out in paper an interminable hunt with horse8s 
dogs adhering together by the noses and tails, which, w
brilliantly painted according to their united taste, they mig
safely ilmagine giving pleasure to Gilbert, while, at any lrate
would do no harm in papa's pocket-boou..
CHAPTER XXVI.
THE day after Mr. Kendal's departure, Mrs. Meadows
anotler attack, but a fortnight still passed before the l
long task was over and the weary spirit set free. There 
been no real consciousness and Lo one could speak of regret;
anything but relief and thankfulness that relea.ie had come 
last, wlen Albinia had redeemed her pledge and knew 
should no more hear of the dreary 'very bad night,' nor
greeted ly the low, restless moan. Tie loug good-night wasco
and, on tlhe wlole, there was peace and absence of self-conde
nation in looking back on tile past connexion.  Forbearan
anl  i unselli.lhness were recomplensed by the calm tendern
with which she could regard one wlo at the outset 
allpeared likely to cause notLing but trets and nilisunderstan
inrs.
Had she and Sophy been left to themselves, there would havi
been nollingl to break upon this frame of mnind, but early t
next day arrive(d Mr. and Mrs. Drury, upsetting all her arran
lnents, implying that it had been preslumptuuus to exert aWl
authority without relationship.  It did seeml hard that t
claims of kindred slouild be only recollected in order to
settle ler plan.,, and ofiend her unostentatious tastes.
Averse both to tile proposals, and to the discussion, she fel
unprotected and forlorn, but ler spirit revived as she heard h
brother's voice in the hall, and she llastened to put herself i
his hand4  lie declined doing battie; he said it would 




<pb n="387"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               387
better to yield than to argue, and leave a grudge for ever. ' It
will not vex Edmulnd,' he said; 'and though you and Sophy
Ilay be l)ained by incongruities, they will hurt you less than
disputiig.'
She felt that he was right, and by yielding the main points,
he contrived amicably to persuade Mr. Drury out of the
pnunilcrous invitations anld grand luncheon as well as to adhere to
the day that she had originally fixed for the funeral, after which
he loped to take her and the young ones hoime with him and
give her the thorough change and rest of which the over-energy
of lier nanner betrayed the need.
Not that she consented. She could not bear not to meet her
l],tters at once; or suppose Edmund and Gilbert should return
to an etmpty, unaired house; and.she thought herself sellish,
when it might do so much good to Sophy, &c., &c., &c.-till
Mr. Ferrars, going home for a night, agreed with Winifred, that
domineering would be the only way to deal with her.
On his return hu found Albinia on the stairs, and boxes and
trunks carried down after her.  Running to himn, she ex-
claimeld, abruptly, 'I am going to Malta, Maurice, to-morrow
evenilg !'
' Has Edmund sent for you '
'Not exactly-lhe did not know-but Gilbert is dying,
and wretched at my not coming. I never wished him good-
by-le thinks I did not forgive him. Don't say a word-I
shall go.'
lie lield her trembling hands, and said, ' This is not the way
to be able to go. Come in here ; sit down and tell me.'
'It is no use to argue. It is my duty now,' said Albinia;
but she let him lead her into the room, where Sophy was changing
the blright border of a travelling-cloak to crape, and Maurice
stood watching, as if stunned.
' t is settled,' continued she, rapidly. ' Sophy and the children
go to the vicarale. Yes, [ know, you are very kind, but Maurice
would be troublesome, and Winifred is not well enough, and
the l)usautoys wish it.'
'Yes, that may be the best plan, as I shall be absent.'
She turned round, startled.
'I cannot let you go alone.'
'Nonsensese-Winifiied-Su nday-Lent-I don't want any one.
Nothing could happen to me.'
Mr. Ferrars caught Sophy's eye beaming with sudden relief
and gratitude, and repeated, 'If you go, I must take you.'
' can't wait for Sunday,' she said.
' What have you heard '
c c2




<pb n="388"/>
338               THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
She produced the letter, and read parts of it.       The
stood thus :
'Bormola,
I p.m., February 28th, iS
' Dearest Albinia,
'I lope' all has gone fairly well with you in my absence, and
Sophia is well again. Could I have fore een the condition of affairs
I doubt whether I could have resolved on leaving you at home, though.
may be spared much by not being with us. I landed at noon to-day
was met in the harbour by your cousin, who had come off in a boat in
of finding you on board. He did his best to prepare me for Gilbert's
pearance, but I was more shocked than I can express. There can noIo
be any doubt that it is a case of rapid decline, blrought on by exposure,
aggravated by tle injury at Balaklava. Colonel l'errars fancies that
bert's exertions on his behalf in tile early part of his illness may haved
harm, by preventing the broken bone froml uniting, and causing it to
on the lungs; but knowing the constitutional tendency, we need not
on secondary causes, and there is no one to whom we owe a deeper debt
gratitude than to your cousin, for his most assiduous and affectionatte
dance at a time when he is very little equal to exertion. They are
brothers together, and I am sure nothing has been wanting to Gilert t
he could devise for his comfort. They are in a tolerably commodious
lodging, where I found Gilbert propped up with cushions on a large h
by the window, flushed with eager watching. Poor fellow, to'see how
countenance fell when he found I was alone, was the most cutting rep
I ever received in mly life. IIe was so completely overcome, that he
not restrain his tears, though he strove hard to colmmand himself in
fear of wounding my feelings; but there are moments when the truthl
have its way, and you have been more to him than his father hasever
May it be granted that he may yet know how I feel towards him  Hisf
impression was that you had never forgiven him for his untortunate adv
ture with Maurice, and could never feel towards him as before ; and thou
I trust I have removed this idea, perhaps such a letter as you can
might set his heart at rest. Ferrars says that hitherto his spirits have
up wonderfully, though latterly lie had Ileen ev:,entt!y aware of his oa
tion, but he has been very much depressed this evening, probably from
reaction of excited expectation. On learning tlhe cause of Lucy's des
he seemed to consider that his participation in the transactions of thatni
had recoiled upon himself, and deprived him of your prescnce. It was 
painful to see how he took it. He was eager to be told of the children, 
the only time I saw him brighten was when I gave him their messageS
am writing while I hope lie sleeps. I am glad to be here to relieve
Oolonel, who for several nights past has slept on the floor, in his room,
thinking the Maltese servant trustworthy. He looks very ill and suffe
but seems to have no thought but for Gilbert, and will not hear of lea
him ; and, in truth, they cling together so affectionately, that I could
bear to urge their parting, even were Fred more fit to travel home
I will close my letter to-morrow after the doctor's visit.'
The conclusion was even more desponding; the physician
mpoken of the case as hopeless, and likely to terminate rapidly
and Gilbert, who was always at the worst in the morning, 
shown no symlptom that could lead his father to retract his 
illipression.




<pb n="389"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                 389
Mr. Ferrars saw that it would be useless and cruel to en-
deavour to detain his sister, and only doubted whether, in her
precil)itation, she might not cross and miss her husband in a
still sadder journey homeward, and this made him the more re-
solved to be her escort. When she dissuaded him vehemently,
as tholgh she were bent on doing something desperate, he
replied that he was anxious about Fred, and if she and her
huslal;nd were engrosseld by their son, he should be of service in
bringing him home; and this somewhat reconciled her to what
was so much to her benefit. Only she gave notice that he must
not prevent her from travelling day and night, to which he
madle no answer, while Solphy hoarsely said that but for know-
;i herself to be a mere impediment, she should have insisted on
going, and her uncle must not keep mamma back.      Then
IMaurice imitatively broke out, ' Mamma, take me to Gilbert; I
wont be a plague, I promise you.'  He was scarcely silenced
befre Mr. Dusantoy came striding in to urge on her that Fanny
and himself should be much happier if he were permitted to
conduct Mrs. Kendal to Malta (the fact being that Fanny was
peersiadled that Mr. Ferrars would obviate such necessity).
Allinia almost laughed, as she had declared that she had set all
the parsons in the country in commotion, and Mr. Dusautoy was
obliged to limit his good offices to the care of the children, and
the responsibility of the Fairmead Sunday services.
The good hard-worked brother had hardly time to eat his
luncheon, before he started to inform his wife, and prepare for
his journey. Winifred was a very good sister on an emer-
gency; she had not once growled since poor Mrs. Meadows had
been really ill; and though she had been feeding on hopes of
Albiliia's visit, and was far from strong, she quashed her hus-
band's misgivings, and cheerily strove to convince him that he
would be wanted by no one, least of all by herself. A slight
vitul)eration of the polysyllabic pair was all the relief she per-
mitted herself; and who could blame her for that, when even
Mr. DI)sautoy called the one 'that foolish fillow,' and the other
'poor dear Lucy I'
Allhinia and Sophy sat over the fire that evening, after their
sorrowful tasks unable to turn to anything else, wondering how
and when they should meet again, and their words conming slowly,
and with long intervals of silence.
'Dear child,' said Albinia, ' promise me to take care of your-
self, and to let Mrs. Dusautoy judge what you can do.'
'I'm not worth taking care of,' muttered Sop'ly.
'We think you worth our anxiety,' said Albinia, ten-
derly.




<pb n="390"/>
390            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
' I will not make it worse for you,' meekly replied Sophy,:
don't think I'm cross now; I could not be-' 2
'No, indeed you are not, my dear.   We have leant
each other, and when we come home, you will make 
welcome.'
'The children will.'
'Ah ! I think Maurice will behave well, He is very mn
subdued. I told him he was to do no lessons, and he faii
burst out crying.'
' Oh, mamma !' exclaimed Sophy, hurt, indignant, and near
ready-to follow his example.
'I do not think he has mastery over himself, so as to hel
being unruly and idle, when he is chained to a spelling-book. 
would not for the world set him and you to worry each othe
for an hour a day; and I shall start afiesh with him all t
better, when he knows what absence of lessons is, and has fox
gotten all the old associations.'
'How could you make him cry ?' said Sophy, in reproach.
'I believe the tears only wanted an excuse. I did put it on'
his naughtiness, which usually would have elated him; but hi4
heart was so full as to make even a long holiday a punishment
That boy often shows me what a thorough Kendal he is; thingl
sink into him as they never did into us at the same age, when
my aunts used to think I had no feeling. Oh, Sophy I hoti
will you comfort him I'
' His will be an unstained sorrow,' said Sophy, from the depthi
of her heart. '0, mamma, only tell Gilbert wlhat you know I
feel-no, you don't, no one can; but what I would not give, to
change all I have felt towards him I  If I had been like,
Edmund, and prized his gentleness and sweetness, and the
humility that was the best worth of all, how different it would
be ! But I was proud of despising where truth was wanting.' 
'I should have thought I should have done the same,' said
Albinia; 'but there was no keeping from loving Gibbie. Besides 
he was sincere, except when he was afraid; and he was miserable 
when he was deceiving.'
'Yes, after you came,' said Sophy; 'but I believe I helped
him to think truth disagreeable. I showed my scorn for hi 
want of boldness, instead of helping him. Think of my having,
fancied he had no courage.'
Kindness taught him courage.' said Albinia.  'It might
perhaps have earlier taught him moral courage. If you and'
he could have leant against each other, and been fused to-
gether, you would have made something like what Edmund waS
I supp)ose.'




<pb n="391"/>
THE YOUT  G STEP-MOTHE  _.            391
'I drove him off,' cried Sophy. 'I was no sister to him.
Will you bring me his forgiveness i'
' Indeed I will; and you may feel sure of it already, dearest.
It will make you gentler all your life.'
'No; I shall grow harder and harsher the longer I live, and
the fewer I have to love me in spite of myself'
'I think not,' said Albinia  'Humility will make your
severity more gentle, and you will soften, and win love and
esteem.'
She looked up, but cried, 'I shall never make up to Gilbert
nor to grandmamma !'
Albinia felt it almost as hard to leave her as the two little on
When once on her journey, and feeling each moment an
advance towards the goal, Albinia was less unhappy than she
could have thought possible; she trusted to her brother, and
enjoyed the absence of responsibility, and while he let her go
on, could give her mind to what pleased and interested him; and
he, who was an excellent courier, so managed that there were
few detentions to overthrow her equanimity on the way to
Marseilles.
But when the Vectis came in sight of the rocky isle, with its
white stony heights, the heart-sickness of apprehension grew
over her, and she saw, as in a mist, the noble crescent-shaped
harbour, the stately ramparts, mighty batteries, the lofty ter-
races of flat-roofed dwellings, apparently rather hewn out of,
than built on, the dazzling white stone, between the intense
blue of the sky above and of the sea below. Her eye roamed
as in a dream over the crowds of gay boats with white awnings,
and the motley crowds of English and natives, the boatmen
screaming and fighting for the luggage, and beggars plaintively
whining out their entreaties for small coins. Her brother Mau-
rice had been at Malta as a little boy, and remembered the
habits of the place enough, as soon as they had set foot on
shore, to secure a brown-skinned loiterer, in Phrygian cap, loose
trousers, and crimson sash, to act as guide and porter.
Along the Strada San Giovanni, a street of stairs, shut in by
high stone walls, with doors opening on either side, they went
not as fast as Albinia's quivering limbs would fain have moved,
yet too fast when her breath came thick with anxiety-down
again by the stone stairs called ' Nix .angiare' (nothing to eat),
from the incessant cry of the beggars that haunt them-then
again in a boat, which carried them amid a strange world of
shipping to the bottom of the dockyard creek, where, again
landing, she was told she had but to ascend, and she would be
at Bormola




<pb n="392"/>
392             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
She could have paused, in dread ; and she leant heavilyj
her brother's arm when they presently turned up a laune
broader than a passage, with low stone steps at irregular i
vals. They were come !
The summons at the door was answered by a dark-visah
Maltese, and while Maurice was putting the question wheth
Colonel Ferrars and Captain Kendal lived here, a figure appea
on the stairs, and beckoned, ascending noiselessly with langtd
bteps and slippered feet, and leading the way into a slightly fut~
nislied room, with green balcony and striped blind. There Lh 
turned and held out his hand; but All)inia hardly recognised
hint till lie said, ' 1 thought I heard your voice, iMaurice ;' and
then the low subdued tone, together with the gaunt wasted form,
hagg-ard aged face, the long beard, and worn undress uniform,
withi the arnless sleeve, made her so realize his sufferilngs, that,
clasping his remaining hand in both her own, she could uttoi
nothing but, ' Ol ! Fred ! Fred !'
lie looked at her brother with such inquiry, perplexity, and
compassion, that almost in despair Maurice exclaimed, ' We are
not too late !'
' No, tlhank God !' said Frederick. ' We did hope you mightb
come ! Sit down, Albinia; I'll-'
' Edlnund-? Is he there !' she said, scarcely alive to what 
wa as sing ; and casting another expressiv(.l  srrowfil look 
at Maurice, Fred answered, 'Yes, I will tell lim: I will see it 
you can come in.'
'Stay,' said Mr. Ferrars; she should compose herself, or she
will oily hurlt herself and Gilbert.'
I don't knlow,' murmured Fred, hastily leaving them.
Maurice understood that Gilbert was even then summoned by y
*one wlio would brook no del;ys ; but Allinia, too much agitated
to notice slight indications, was about to follow, when her brother
took her land, and checked her like a clild. ' Wait a minute
ny dear ; he will soon come back.'
' Where's Edmund I Why mayn't I go to Gilbert ?' she said,
still bewildered.                                        I 
'Fred is gone to tell them. Sit down, my dear; take of f
vonr bonnet; you are heated; you will be better able to go to. 
him, if you are quiet.'
She passively submitted to be placed on a chair, and to remove 
her bonnet; and seeing some dressing apparatus through an
open door, Maurice brought her some cold water to refresh bet 
burning face. She looked up with a smile, herself again. 'Therb
thank you, Maurice: I wont be foolish now.'




<pb n="393"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               393
God support you, my dear!' said her brother, for the longer
the Colonel tarried, the worse were his forebodings.
' Perhaps the doctor is there,' she proceeded. ' That will be
well. Ask him everything, Maurice. But oh! did you ever
see any one so much altered as poor Fred 1 He looks twenty
years older I Ah I I am quite good now I I may go now r
she cried, as the door opened.
But as Frederick returned, there was that written on his brow,
which lifted her out of the childishness of her agitation.
'My dear Alhinia,' he said in a trembling voice, 'Mr. Kendal
cannot leave him to come to you. He has been much worse
since last night;' and as her face showed that she was gathering
his meaning, he pursued in a lower and more awe-struck tone:
'We think he is sensible, but we cannot tell. It could not hurt
him for you to come in, and perhaps he may know you; but are
you able to bear it ? Is she, Maurice '
'Yes, I am,' she answered; and the calm firmness of her tone
proved that she was a woman again. Her hand shook less than
did that of her cousin, as silently and reverently he took it, and
led her into another room on the same floor.
There, in the subdued light, she saw her husband, seated on the
bed, h6lding in his arms his son, who lay lifted up and supported
upon his breast, with head resting on his shoulder, and eyes
closed. There was no greeting, no sound save the long, heavily
drawn, gasping breaths. Mr. Kendal raised his eyes to her;
she silently knelt down and took the wasted hand that lay help-
lessly on the coverlet, but it moved feebly from her as though
harassed by the touch.
' Gilbert, dear boy,' said his father, earnestly, 'she is come 1
Speak to him, Albinia.'
She hardly knew her own voice as she said, ' Gilbert, Gibbie
dear, here I am.'
Those large brown eyes were shown for a few moments beneath
the heavy lids, and met hers. The mouth, hitherto only gasp-
ing for air, endeavoured to form a word; the hand sought hers.
She kissed him, and his eyes opened wide and brightened, while
he said, 'I think it is pardon now.'
' Pardon indeed 1' said his father, with a greater look of relief
than Albinia understood; 'you are resting in His Merits.'
Gilbert's look brightened, and he said, ' I know it now.'
'Thank God,' said Mr. Kendal.
His eyes closed, and Fred whispered to the father, ' Maurice
is here too.'
Again the light woke in the eye, with almost a smile, the




<pb n="394"/>
539            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
look that always welcomed the little brother; and Al
grieved to say, ' Not little Maurice, though he longed to co
it is my brother.' But the air of eagerness did not pass a
and he seemed satisfied when Mr. Ferrars came in. It was 
priest, speaking words not his own; and Albinia and P
knelt with him. At the close of each prayer or psalm, Gilb
signed imploriug-ly for more, even like our mighty dying que
and at each short pause, the distressed agonized expression wo
again contract the brow, though in the sound of the holy wo
all was peace. The Psalm of the Good Shepherd with the
and Staff in the Valley of the Shadow of Death, recurred .
strongly to Maurice, that he repeated it like a cadence after e
penitential supplication, every time bringing a look of peace 
the countenance of the sufferer.
They must have remained long thus, Fred had grown ex
hausted with kneeling and had been forced to sit on the floor
and Maurice's voice waxed low and hoarse; yet he durst noi
pause, though doubting whether Gilbert could follow the meanu
ing. At length the eyes were again raised. With a start as 
haste, Gilbert looked full at Albinia, and said, 'Thank yoi
Tell Maurice-' He could not finish, and there was an agon
for breath; then as hli father raised him, lie contrived to say
'Father-nlother-kiss me; it is forgiven !'
Another look brought Fred to press his hand, and he smil
his thanks.
There were a few more terrible minutes, from which th
would fain have led away Albinia, but suddenly his brow gre
smooth, his eyes were eagerly fixed as on something beforehim
and as if replying to a call, he said, ' Yes !' with a start and a
quiver of all his limbs, and then-
The first words were Mr. Kendual's. 'Edmuud has come fo
him !'
It was to the rest as if the father had been in some manner
conscious of the presence of the one twin-brother, and wet
resigning the other to his charge, for he calmly kissed the fore
head, closed the eyes, laid down the form he had so long hel
in his arms, and after a few moments on his knees, with his 
hidden in his hands, he rose with composure, and said to hi
wife, ' I am glad you were in time.'
Had he given way, Albinia would have been strong; b
there was no need to support to counteract the force of diSp
pointment and grief, acting upon overwrought spirits, and 
fatigued, exhausted frame. Were these half-conscious looks and
broken words all she had come for, all she should ever haveof
Gilbert I This was the moment's predominant sensation; i s




<pb n="395"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                395
was past thinking; and though she still controlled herself, she
east a wild, piteous eye on her husband, and as he lifted her up,
she sank on his breast, not fainting, not solbing. but utterly
prostrated, and needing all his support as he led her out, and
laid her on a cc--ch in the next room. speaking softly as if
hoping his voice woti.d restore her. ' We ha.li some faint hops
of vou; we knew you would wish it, so you see all is ready.
But you have done too much, my dear: NMaurice should not
have let you travel so fist.'
'No, no,' said Albinia, catching her breath. 'Oh ! not to
have come sooner !' and she gave way to a violent burst of tears,
during which he fondled and soothed her till she suddenly said,
'I (lid not come here to behave in this way! I camne to help
you! Edmund, what shall I do ' and she would have started up.
' Only lie still, and let me take care of you,' said he. ' Nothing
could be to me like your coming ;' and she was forced to believe
his glistening eyes and voice of tenderness.
'Can you keep quiet a little while,' said Mr. Kendal, wistfully,
'while I go to speak to your brotier ? It was very good in him
to come ! Don't speak; I will come back directly.'
She did lie still, for she was too much spent to move, and the
silence was good for ler; for if tlhe overwhelming sensation of
grief would sweep over her, on the other hand, there was the
remembrance of the look of peace, and the perception that
her husband was not as yet so struck to the earth as she
had feared. He was not long in returning, bringing some
coflee for her and for himself, and speaking with the same
dreamy serenity, though looking excessively pale.  ' Your
brother told me to give you this,' he said. 'I am glad the
colonel is under such care, for he is terribly distressed and not
at all tit to bear it. I could not make him go to bed all last
nilght.'
'You were up all last night, and many nights Before,' said
Albinia; 'and all alone    Oh! why was 1 not here to
help !'
' Fred was a great comfort,' said Mr. Kendal. 'I cannot
describe my gratitude to hini. And dearest-' He paused,
and added with hesitation, ' I do not now regret the having
come out alone. After the first disappointment, I think that
ny boy and I learnt to know each other better. If he had left
me nothing but the recollection that I had been too severe and
unsympathizing to win his confidence, I hardly know how I
could have borne it.'
'He was able to talk to you, then P cried Albinia. 'That
was what I always wished ! Yes, it was right, so it came right.




<pb n="396"/>
S6)             THIE YOUNG STEP-M5OTHER.
I had got between you as I ought not to have done, and it 
well you should have him to yourself.'
'Not as you ought not,' he fondly answered. 'You alway
were his better angel, and you came at last as a messenger
petlce. There was relief and hope from the moment that h
knew you.' 
lie told her what could scarcely have passed hislips save inthog;
earlier hours of affliction. It had been a time of grievous mental
distress. Neither natural temperament nor previous life had
been such as to arm poor Gilbert to meet the King of Terrors;
and as day by day he felt the cold grasp tightening on him, ho
had fluttered like a bird in tie snare of tie fowler, physically
affrighted at the death-pang, shrinking from tie lonely entrance
into tile unknown future, and despairing of the acceptablenel 
of his own repentance. lie believed that he had too often
relapsed, and he could not take heart to grasp the hope of
mercy and rest in the great atonement. The last Communion
had been melancholy, tile contrite spirit unable to lift itself
up, and apparlently only sunk tlhe lower by the weight of love
and gratitude, deepening the sense of how much had been disre-
garded. There had since been a few hopeful gleams, but dimmed
by bodily suilering and terror; and doubly mournful had been
the weary hours of the night and morning. while he lay gasping
away his life upon his filther's breast. Having at first taken
the absence of his stepmother as a sign that she had not for.-
given him, he had only laid aside this notion for a more morbid
fttncy that the deprivation was a token of wrath fromn above;
and there could be little doubt that her final appearance was,
hailed as a seal of pardon not merely from her. Her brother,
who had raised hinm upl afer hihs last fall, was likewise tile person
above all others to bring the message of mercy to speed him to
the Unseen, wilere, as his look and gesture had persuaded him
father, his brother, or some yet more blessed one, had received
and welcelmed the fiail and trenmbling spirit.
JThat last farewell, that dawn otf leaee, so long prayed for, so
ardently desired, had given Mr. Kendal such tliankfulness and
relief as sustained him, an(l enabled him to support his wifg 
who knew not how to meet her first home grief; whereas to'
him sorrow ihad long been a household guest more familiar than
joy ; and lie was more at rest about his son than he lad been
for many a year. He could dwell on him together with Ed-
mund, instead of connecting him with shame, grief, and pain;
though how little could lie have borne to think that thus it
would end, when in the springtime of his manhood he had re-
joiced over his beautiful twin boys.




<pb n="397"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                 397
Ife knew his son better than heretofore. After the first
day's disappointment, Gilbert had found him all-sufficient, and
had rested on his tenderness. All sternness had ceased on one
silde, all concealment on tle other, and the sweetness of both
characters hI'd had full scope. Gilbert's ardent love of home
had shown itself in every word, and his last exertion had becn
to write a long letter to his little brother, which had been
colltleted and despatched by a private hand a few days pre-
viisly. He had desired that Maurice should have his sword,
and mentioned the books which he wished his sisters to share,
talking of' Sophy as one whoml he honoured much, and wished
he had known better; but much pained by hearing nothing
from Lucy, and lamenting his share in her union with Algernon.
lie had said solmething about his wish that the alnshouses
should be built, but his father had turned away the subject,
knowing that in case of his dN ing intestate and unmarried, the
prl)erty was settled on the sisters, and seeing little chance of
any such work being carried out with the co-operation of Mr.
C'aveudish Dusautoy. Latterly he had spoken of G6nevieve
Durant; lie knew better how unworthy of her he had been,
and how harassing his pursuit must have appeared ; but he
could not help entreating that her pardon might be asked in
his liamle, that she might hear that he had loved her to the last,
an(l above all, that his father would never lose sight of her;
and -Mr. Kendal's pronise to regard her as the next thing to
his daughters had been requited with a look of the utmlost
gratitude and affection.
'Tis was the substance of what Mr. Kendal told his wife as
they sat together, unwitting of the lapse of time, and shiniking
from any interruption that might mar their present peace and
renew the sense of bereavenlent.
Mr. Ferrars was the first to knock at the door. lie had
been doing his utmost to spare both them and Fred, who needed
all his care. These four months of mutual dependence had been
even more endearing than the rescue of Fred's life on the battle-
field; and he declared that Gilbert had done him more good
than aly one else. They had been so thrown together as to
make the 'religious sentiment' of the younger tell upon the
arnm though thoughtless heart of the elder. They had been
most fondly attached; and in his present state, reduced by
wounds and exhausted by watching, Fred was more overpowered
than those more closely concerned. He could hardly speak
collectedly when an officer of the garrison called to consult him
with regard to a military funeral ; and it was for this that
Maurice was obliged to refer to the father. There were in-




<pb n="398"/>
398            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
deed none of his regiment in the island, but there wa s
universal desire in the garrison to do honour to the di
guished young officer, for whom great interest had been felt
and the compliment brought aglow of exultation to Mr. Kenda
face, as he expressed his warm thanks, but desired that t
decision might rest with Fred himself, as his son's lieutenan
colonel.
Maurice lflt himself filly justified in his expedition when hbi
found that all devolved on him, even writing to Sophy, and
making the most necessary arrangements; for the colonel was'
incapable of exertion, Albiuia was prostrated by the shock, and
Mr. Kendal appeared to be lulled into a strange calm by the
effects of the excessive bodily weariness consequent on the
exhausting attendance of the last few days. They all depended
upon Mr. Ferrars, and recognised his presence as an infinite
comn fort.
In the morning Albinia came forth like one who had been.
knocked down and shattered, weary and gentle, and with the
tears ever welling into her eyes, above all when she endeavoured
to write to Sophy; and she showed her ordinary earnestness
only when she entreated to see her boy once more. Her hus-
band took her to look on the countenance settled into the ex-
pression of unearthly peace; hut she was not satisfied; it was
not her own Gilbert, boyish, sensitive, dependent, and shrinking.:
The pale brow, the marked manly features, the lower ones
concealed by the brown moustache, belonged to the hero who
had dared the deadly ride and borne his friend through the
storm of shot and shell; the noble, settled, steadfast face was
the face of a stranger, and gave her a thrill of disappointment. 
She gloried in the later Gilbert; but the last she had seen of
him whom she loved for his weakness, had been when she had
not heeded his farewell.
It made the pang the less when evening came and he was
carried to his resting-place.  They would have persuaded
Frederick to spare himself, but as the only officer of the same
corps, as well as for the sake of many closer ties, he would not
hear of being absent, and made his cousin Mlaurice do his best
to restore the smart soldierly air which he for the first time
thought of regretting.
Gilbert's horse had perished at Balaklava, but his cap, sword,
and spurs, were laid on the coffin, and from her shaded window
Albinia watched it borne between the files of soldiers with arms
reversed; and the procession of officers whose bright array
contrasted with the colonel's war-worn dress, ghastly cheek, anO.
empty sleeve, tokens of the reality of war amid its pageantry"




<pb n="399"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHEB.                 99
ei all moved slowly away to the deep tones of the solemn Dead
March, music well befitting the calm grandeur of the face she
had seen, and leaving her heart throbbing with the deep
exulting awe and pathos of a soldier's funeral. She knelt alone,
and followed the burial service in the stillness of the room
overlooking the broad expanse of blue sea and sky; and by-
and-by, through the window came the sound of the volley fired
over the grave, the farewell of the army to the soldier at rest,
his battles ended.
There was peace, and there was glory; but she could not
divest herself of a sense of unreality. She could not feel as if
it were really and truly Gilbert, and she were mourning for
him. All was like a dream-that solemn military spectacle-
the serene, grave sunshine on the fortress-harbour stretching its
mailed arms into the sea-the roofs of the knightly old monastic
city rising in steps from the bay crowded with white sails-and
even those around her were different; her husband pale and
still, as in a region above common life, and her cousin like
another man, without his characteristic joyousness and insou-
ciance. She could hardly induce herself, in her drowsy state, to
believe that all was indeed veritable and tangible.
There was nothing to detain them at Malta, and Mr. Ferrars,
who arranged everything, thought the calm of a sea-voyage
would be better for them all than the bustle and fatigue of a
land journey.
'Kendal himself does not care about getting home,' he sali
to Fred, who was afraid this was determined on his account. ' I
fear many annoyances are in store for him. His son-in-law will
not be pleasant to deal with about the property.'
With an exclamation Fred started from    the chairs on
which he had been resting, and dived into his sabre-tasch
which hung from the wall. 'I never liked to begin about it,'
he said; 'but I ought to have given them this. It was done
when he was so bad at Scutari. One night he worked himself
into a fever lest he should not live till his birthday, and said a
great deal about this Dusautoy making himself an annoyance,
Perhaps insisting on a sale and turning his father out. Nothing
pacified him till, the very day he was of age, we got the vice-
consul to draw up what he wanted, and witness it, and so did I
and the doctor; and here it is. Afterwards he warned me to
say nothing of it when Mr. Kendal came, for he said if the
other fellow made a row, it would be better his father should be
able to say he had known nothing of the matter.'
'Does he make his ather his heir' '
That's the whole of it. He said his sisters would see it was




<pb n="400"/>
400             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
the only way to get things even, and I was to tell Albinias
thing about building cottages or almshouses. Ay, " his ftl
was to do what onght to have been done."'
'Well, there's the best deed of poor Gilbert's life !'
'Thank you,' mumlbled Fred, hall drolly, half gravely.
'Ay, Kendal and Albinia will do more good with that pr'
perty than you have thought of in all your life, sir.'
'Their future and my past,' laughed Fred, adding more
gravely, 'Scaiip as I am, there's more respoinsibility coming on.
me now, and I have gone through some preparation for it. If
I can get out to Canada--'
'You will not lessen your responsibilities,' said Maurice,
smiling, 'nor your competency to meet them.'
'I trust not,' said Fred.
Mr. Ferrars read in his countenance far more than was im-
plied by those words. The General, by treating him as a boy, 
had kept him one, and perhaps his levity had been prolonged by
the rejection of his first love; but a really steady attachment
had settled his character, and he had been undergoing much
training through his own sufferings, Gilbert's illness, and the
sense of the new position that awaited him as commanding
officer; and for the first time Maurice, who had always been
very fond of him, felt that he was talking to a high-principled
and right-minded man instead of the family pet and laughing-
stock.
' I suppose,' he said, 'that you cannot have heard often from
Montreal since you have been in the East.'
' No. If my letters are anywhere. it is at the Family Office.
I desired them  to be forwarded thither from head-quarters, 
not expecting to be detained here. But,' cried Fred with ani-
mation, ' what think you of the General actually writing to Mr.
Kinnaird frot Balaklava 1'
' It would have been too bad if he had not.'
'I believe he did so solely to make me sleep, but it is the
first time he has deigned to treat the affair as anything but a
delusion, and he can't retract now. Since that, poor Gilbert has
made a scrap or two of mine presentable, and there's all that I
have been able to accomplish; but I hope it may have set her
mind at rest.'
Shall I be secretary 1'
'Thank you, I think not. She would only worry herself
about what is before me ; and if the doctors let me off easy, I
had rather report of myself in person.'
His eyes danced, and Maurice thought his unselfishness de-
served a reward.




<pb n="401"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                 401
M* y poor Gilbert's last secret,' said MIr. Kendal, as he laid
before his wife the brief document by which his son had ldesig-
nated hliml as his sole heir and executor. 'A gift to you, and a
trust to me.'
Allinia looked up for explanation.
' While he intrusts his sisters to my justice, he tacitly com-
mends to me the works which you wished to see accompllishe;l.'
' The almshouses!  The improvements! Do you mean to
undertake them V'
' It shall be my most sacred duty.'
'Oh ! that we could have planned it with him !'
' Perhaps I value this the more from the certainty that it is
spontaneous,' said Mr. Kendal. ' It showed great consideration
and forethought, that he said nothing of his intention to me.
Had he mentioned it, I should have thought it right to suggest
his leaving his sisters their share ; and yet, as we are situatedl
with young Dusautoy, it would have been awkward to have in-
terfered.  He did well and wisely to be silent.'
' You don't expect Algernon to be discontented. Impossible,
at such a time, and so well off as he is !'
'I wish it may be impossible.'
' What do you mean to do ?'
'As far as I can see at present, I shall do this. I fear neither
the mode of acquisition nor the management of that property
was such as to bring a blessing, and 1 believe my poor boy has
made it over to me in order to free his sisters from the necessity
of winking at oppression and iniquity. Had it gone to them,
matters must have been let alone till Sophia came of age, and
even then, all improvements must have depended on Algernon's
consent. The land and houses we will keep, and sufficient ready
money for the building and repairs; and to this, Sophia, at least,
will gladly agree. The rest-something under twenty thousand,
if' 1 remember correctly-is the girls' right. I will settle Lucy's
share on her so as to be out of her husband's power, and Sophia
shall have hers when she comes of age.'
'I am sure that will take from Algernon all power of grumb
ling, though I cannot believe that even he could complain.'
' You a)pprove, then ?'
' How can you ask ? It is the first thing that has seemed
like happiness, if it did not make one long for him to talk it
over !' The wound was still very recent, and her spirits very
tender, and the more she felt the blessing of the association with
Gilbert in the work of love, the more she wept, though not
altogether in sorrow.
Mortified at having come so much overworked and weakened
D D




<pb n="402"/>
402             THE YOUNG STEP MOTHER. 
as to occasion only trouble and anxiety, she yielded resig
when forbidden to wear out strength and spirits by a v
the burial-giound before her embarkation. She must oi
herself with Maurice's description of the locality, and
away in her eye only the general picture of the sapphire 
and white rock fortress of the holy warriors vowed to tende
and heroism, as the last resting-place of her cherished Gil
when 'out of weakness he had been made strong' in peui
and love.
CHAPTER XXVII.
[AD Sophia's wishes been consulted, she would have 
ferred nursing her sorrows at home; but no choice had 
left, and at the vicarage the fatherly kindness of Mr. Dusau
and the considerate let-alone system of his wife, kept her at
and not far from cheerful, albeit neither the simplicity of
one nor the keenness of the other was calculated to draw
into unreserve: comfort was in the children.
The children clung to her as if she made their home, ii
Albinia preferring her even to Uncle John, as he had ins
on being called ever since Lucy had become his niece,
Maurice invoking caresses, the bestowal of which was
mother's rare privilege. The boy was dull and listless,
though riot and mirth could be only too easily excited,
wildest shouts and most f.antic gesticulations were like eff
to throw off a load at his heart. Time hung heavy on hishan
and he would lie rolling and kicking drearily on the fi
watching with some envy his little sister as she spelt her J
prosperously through ' Little Charles,' or daintily and distin
repeated her hymns. 'Nothing to do' was the burthen of,
song, and with masculine perverseness he disdained every 
pation suggested to him. Sophy might boast of his obedi
and quiescence, hut Mlrs. Dusautoy pitied all parties, and w
dered when he would be disposed of at school.
Permission to open letters had been left with Sophy, who
silent resignation followed the details of poor G ilbert's rapid do
At last caime the parcel by the private hand, containing a sm
packet for each of the family. Sophy received a silver Mal
Cross, and little Albinia a perfuiny rose-leat bracelet. T h
was a Russian grape-shot for Maurice, and with it a letter.
With childish secrecy, he refused to let any one look at
much as the envelope, and ran away with it, shouting '
mine.' Sophy iwas grieved that it should be treated like a toy,




<pb n="403"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                     403
Daring that, while playing at importance, he would lose or
destroy it, without coming to a knowledge of the contents, she
durst not betray her solicitude, lest she should give a stimulus to
his wilfulness and precipitate its fate.  However, when he had
galloped about enough, he called imperatively, ' Sophy ;' and she
found him lying on his back on the grass, the black cat an un-
willing prisoner on his chest.
You may read it to Smut and me,' he said.
It bore date the day after his father's arrival, but it had evi-
dently been continued at many different times; and as the
handwriting became more feeble, the style grew more earnest,
*so that, but for her hoarse, indifferent voice, Sophy could hardly
have accomplished the reading.
'My dear Maurice,
' Many, many thanks to you and dear little Awkey for your present,
I have set it up like a picture, and much do I like to look at it, and guess
who chose the colours and who are the hunters. I am sure the fat man in
the red coat is the admiral It makes the place seem like home to see
what tells so plainly of you and baby.
' Kiss my little Awk for me, and thank her for wanting to send me Miss
Jenny, dear little maid; I like to think of it.  You will not let her quite
forget me. You must show her my name if it is put up in church, like
Edmund's and all the little ones'; and you will sometimes tell her about
dear old Ned on a Sunday evening when you are both very good.
'I think you know that you and she will never again run out into the
hall to pull Gibbie almost down between you. Perhaps by the time you
read this, you will be the only son, with all the comfort and hope of the
house resting upon you. My poor Maurice, I know what it is to be told
so, and only to feel that one has no brother; but at least it cannot be to
yoi as it was with me, when it was as if half myself were gone, and all my
tronger, better, braver self.
'My father has been reading to me the Rich Man and Lazarus. Maurice,
when you read of him and the five brethren, think of me; and how I pray
that I may not have left seeds of temptation for you. In the time of
my loneliness, Tritton was good-natured, but I ought to have avoided him;
and that to which he introduced me has been the bane of my life. Nothing
gives me such anguish as to think I have made you acquainted with that
let. Keep out of their way I Never go near those pigeon-shootings and
donkey-races; they seem good fun, but it is disobedience to go, and the
things that happen there are like the stings of venomous creatures; the
ioison was left to fester even when your mother seemed to have cured me.
Neither now nor when you are older resort to such things or such people.
Next time you meet Tritton and Shaw tell them I desired to be remem-
bered to them; after that have nothing to do with them; touch your hat
and pass on. They meant it in good nature, and thought no harm, but
they were my worst enemies; they led me astray, and taught me deception
a a matter of course. Oh ! Maurice, never think it manly to have the
smallest reserve with your parents. I would give worlds to have soonae
known that truth would have been freedom and rest. Thank Heaven, your
faults are not my faults. If you go wrong, it will be with a high hand, but
you would wring hearts that can ill bear further grief and disappointment.
Oh I that I were more worthy to pray that you may use your strength and
D D 2




<pb n="404"/>
4,04              THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
spirit the right way; then you will be gladness to our father and mo
and when you lie down to die, you will be happier than I am.
' I want to tell you more, but it hurts me to write long. If I could 
see you-not only in my dreams. I wake, and my heart sickens with  h
ing for a sight of my brave boy's merry face, till I almost feel as if it wO
make me well; but it is a blessing past hope to have my father with
and know him as I have never done before. Give little Albinia 
beads, with my love, and be a better brother to her than I was to 
Lucy.
'Good-by, Maurice. No one can tell what you have been to me s8i
vour mother put you into my arms, and I felt I had a brother again. 
bless you and cancel all evil you may have caught from me. Papa
give you my sword. Perhaps you will wear it one day, and under
colonel. I have never been so happy as in the time it was mine. 
you look at it, always say this to yourself: " Fear God, and fear no
else." 0 that I had done so!
' Let your dear, dear mother be happy in you: it will be the only w
to make her forgive me in her heart. Good-by, my own dear, brave boy.
'Your most affectionate brother,
' G. KENDAL.
'I say, Smut,' quoth Maurice, 'I think you and our Tab
would make two famous horses for Awkey's little cart.     I s
take you home and harness you.'
Sophy sat breathless at his indifference.  'You mustn't,'
said in hasty anger; ' Smut is not yours.'
' Well, Jack said that our Tabby had two kittens up in th
loft; I think they'll make better ponies.    I shall go and tr
them !'
' Don't plague the kittens.'
'I'll not plague them; I'll only make ponies of them.    (Gi
me the letter.'
' No; not to play with the cats.  I thought you would ha
cared about such a letter !'
'You have no right to keep it! It is mine; give it me
cried Maurice, passionately.
'Promise to take real care of it.'
He only tore it from her, and was gone.
'I'm  a fool to expect anything from       such a child,' l
thought. 
At two o'clock the Vicar hurried into the bank.        'G0
morning, Mr. Goldsmith; I beg your pardon; I wanted to 
it Mr. O'More has seen little Maurice Kendal.'                 ;
'Not since yesterday-what's the matter I'
'The child is not come in to dinner.      He is nowhere
home or at Willow Lawn.'
'Ha!' cried Ulick.     'Can he be gone to see his pony
Hobbs's !'
'No; it has been sent to Fairmead.   Then you have no noti




<pb n="405"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                 405
where the child can be t Sophy is nearly distracted. She saw
him last about ten o'clock, bent on harnessing some kittens, but
he's not in the hay-loft !'
I He may be gone to the toy-shop after the harness  Or has
anyone looked in the church-tower-he was longing to go up it,
and if the door were open-'
'The very thing f cried the Vicar. ' I'll go this moment.'
' Or there's old Peter, the sailor,' called Ulick; 'if he wanted
any tackle fitted, he might go to him.'
'You had better go yourself, More,' said Mr. Goldsmith. 'One
would not wish to keep poor Miss Kendal in suspense, though I
dare say the boy is safe enough.'
Mr. Goldsmith was thanked, and Ulick hurried out, Hyder
Ali leaping up in amazement at his master being loose at that
time of day.
Everybody had thought the child was with somebody else till
dinner-time, and the state of the vicarage was one of dire alarm
and self-reproach.' Sophy was seeking and calling in every pos-
sible place, and had just brought herself to own the message of
remembrance in Gilbert's letter, thinking it possible Maurice
miglht have gone to deliver it at Robbles Leigh; and Mr. Hope
had undertaken to go thither in quest of him. Ulick and Mr.
Dusautoy, equally disappointed by the tower and the sailor,
went again to Willow Lawn to interrogate the servants. The
gardener's boy had heard Maurice scolding and the cat squalling,
and the cook had heard his step in the house. They hurried
into his little room-he was not there, but the drawers had been
disturbed.
'He may be gone to Fairmead r cried the Vicar.
' How I' said Ulick. ' Ha! Hyder, sir I' holding up a little
shoe.  Seek! That's my fine doggie-they only call you a
mongrel because you have all the canine virtues united. See
what you can do as sleuth hound. Ha I We'll nose him out for
you in no time, Mr. Dusautoy I'
After sniffing round the drawers, the yellow tripod made an
ungainly descent of the stairs, his nose down all the way,
then across the hall and out at the gate; but when, after
I oking about, the animal set off on the turnpike-road, the Vicar
demurred.
'Stay; the poor dog only wants to get you out for a walk.
lie is making for the Hadminster road.'
'And why wouldn't he, if the child is nowhere in Bay-
ford 1'
'I can't answer it to his mother wasting time in this way.
You may do as you like. 1 shall go to the training-stables,




<pb n="406"/>
406            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER. 
where he has once been, if not on to Fairmead. I can
Sophy till he is found !'
'1 shall abide by my little Orangeman,' said Ulick; and 
parted.
Hyder Ali pursued his way in the March dust, while 
eagerly scanned for the traces of a child's foot. Four miles 
the dog go on, evidently following a scent; but Ulick's mi
misgave him as Hadminster church-tower rose before him, 
the dog took the ascent to the station.
Ulick made his way in as a train stood panting before 
platform. He had a glimpse of a square face and curly hair
the window of a second-class carriage.
'Maurice, come back !' he cried. 'Here, guard ! this li
boy must come back !'
'Go on !' shouted Maurice. 'I've got my ticket. No.
can stop me. I'm going to Malta !' and he tried to get to 
other side of a stout traveller, who defended his legs from hi
and said, ' Ha! Running away from school, young maste
Here's your usher.'
' No, I'm not running away! I'm not at school! I'm Maur
Kendal! I'm going to my brother at Malta !
' He is the son of Mr. Kendal of Bayford,' said Ulick to 
station-master; ' his parents are from home, and there will
dreadful distress if he goes in this way. Maurice, your ait
has troubles enough already.'
'I've my ticket, and can't be stopped.'
But even as he spoke, the stout traveller picked him up
the collar, and dropped him like a puppy dog into Ulick's a
just as the train was getting into motion; and a head p
truded from every window to see the truant, who was pommellib
Ulick in a violent fury, and roaring, Let me go; I will go
Gilbert !'
'Behave like a man,' said Ulick; ' don't disgrace yourself
that way.'
The boy coloured, and choking with passion and disappoi
ment, and straining against Ulick's hold of his shoulder.
'Indeed, sir,' said the station-master, 'if we had recogni
the young gentleman, we would have made more inquiries; b
he asked so readily for his ticket, not seeming at a loss, and
have so many young travellers, that we thought of noth
amiss. Will you have a fly, sir 1' 
'I'm not going home,' said the boy, undaunted.
' You must submit, Maurice. You do not wish to makep
Sophy miserable.'
'I must go to Malta,' the boy persisted. ' Gilbert says




<pb n="407"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               407
would make him well to see me. I know my way; I saw it
in the map; and I've a roll, and the end of a cold tongue,
and a clean shirt, and my own sovereign, and four shillings,
and a half-crown, and a half-penny, in my pocket; and I'm
going r
' But, Maurice, this gentleman will tell you that your whole
sovereign would not carry you a quarter of the way to Malta.'
The station-master gave so formidable a description of the
impossibilities of the route, that the hardy little fellow's look of
decision relaxed into dejection, his muscles lost their tension,
and he struggled hard with his tears.
He followed Ulick to the carriage, and hid his face in a
corner, while orders were given to stop at the post-office in case
there were fresh letters. There was one for Miss Kendal, in
Mr. Ferrars' writing, and with black borders. Uick felt too
surely what it must be, and hardly could bear to address Maurice,
who had shrunk from him with some remains of passion; but
hearing suppressed sobs, he put his hand on him and said, 'My
poor little man.'
' Get away;' said Maurice, shaking him off  'Why did you
come and bother '
'I came because it would have almost killed your sister
and mother for you to be lost. If you had seen Sophy's face,
Maurice I'
'I don't care. Now I shall never see Gilbert again, and he
did want me so!' Maurice bid his face, and his frame shook
with sobs.
' Yes,' said Ulick, ' every one knew he wanted you; but if it
had been possible for you to go, your mamma would have taken
you. If your uncle had to take care of her how could you go
alone '
'I'd have got there somehow,' cried Maurice.  I'd have seen
and heard Gilbert. He's written me a letter to say he wants to
see me, and I can't even make that out 1'
'Has not your sister read it to you r
'I hate Sophy's reading !' cried Maurice. 'It makes it all
grumpy, like her. Take it, Ulick-you read it.'
That rich, sensitive, modulated voice brought out the
meaning of the letter, though there were places where Ulick
had nearly broken down; and Maurice pressed against him
with the large tears in his eyes, and was some minutes without
speaking.
'He does not think of your coming; he does not expect you,
dear boy,' said Ulick. ' It is a precious letter to have. I holp
you will keep it and read it often, and heed it too.'




<pb n="408"/>
408            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
' I can't read it,' said Maurice, ruefully. 'IfI could, I bhold3
mnid.'
' You soon will. You see how he tells you you are to be
comfort; and if you are a good boy, you'll quickly leave
dunce behind.'
'I can't,' said Maurice.
'Mamma said I should not do a bit of a lesson with Sophy, 
should tease her heart out. Would it come quite out ?'
Well, I think you've gone hard to try to-day,' said Ulick.
' Mamma said my being able to read would be a comfort, an4
papa says he never saw such an ignorant boy ! so what's th!
use of minding Gilbert's letter? It wont let me.'
'What wont let you I'
'Fun 1' said Maurice, with a sob.
'He is a rogue !' cried Ulick, vehemently; 'but a stout heart
and good will can get him under yet. Think of what youw.
brother says of making your father and mother happy !'
'If I could do something to please them very, very much I
Oh ! if I could but learn to read all at once.'
' You can read-anybody can read !' said 'Tlick, pulling a
book out of his pocket. 'There ! try.'
There was some laughing over this; and then Maurice leant.
out of window, and grew sleepy. They had descended into the
wide basin of alluvial land through which the Baye dawdled its 
meandering course, and were just about to cross the first bridge
about two miles from Bayford, when Maurice shouted, 'There'
Sophy !-how funny.'                                    I
It was a tall figure, in deep mourning, slowly moving along'
the towing-path, intently gazing into the river; but so strange 
was it to see Sophy so far from  home, that Ulick paused a
moment ere calling to the driver to stop.
As he hastily wrenched open the door, she raised up her
face, and he was shocked. She looked as if she had lived year8
of sorrow, and even Maurice was struck with consternation.
'Sophy ! Sophy 1' he cried, hanging round her. ' I wouldn't
have gone without telling you, if I had thought you would mind
it. Speak to me, Sophy !'
She could say nothing save a hoarse 'Where ?' as with both
arms she pressed him as if she could never let him go again.
'In the train-intending to go to Malta,' said Ulick.
'I didn't know I could not; I didn't mean to vex you,
Sophy,' continued the child. 'I'm come home now, and I
wont try again.'
' Oh ! Maurice, what would have become of you V  She held
out her hand to Ulick, the first time for months.




<pb n="409"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOT1HE                409
'   And we've got a letter for you,' proceeded Maurice.
Ulick would fain have withheld it, but he had not the choice.
She caught at it, still holding Maurice fast, and ere he could
propose her opening it in the carriage while he walked home,
she had torn it open, and the same moment she had sunk down,
seated on the path, with an arm round her brother. 'Oh I
Maurice, it is well you are here I You would not have found
them-it is over r
She had found one brother to lose the other; but the relief
of Maurice's safety had so softened the blow, that her tears
gushed forth freely.
The sense of Ulick's presence restrained her; but raising her
head, she missed him, and felt lonely, desolate, deserted, almost
fainting, and in a strange place.
' Is he dead ' said Maurice, in a solemn low voice; and she
wept helplessly, while the little fellow stood sustaining her
weight like a small pillar, perplexed and dismayed.
Are you poorly, Sophy I What shall I do I' said he, as she
almost fell back; but a stronger arm held her up.
'Lean on me, dear Sophy,' said Ulick, who had returned, 
bringing some water from a small house near at hand, and
supported her and soothed her like a brother.
The mists cleared away, the sense of desertion was gone, and
she rose, but could not stand without his arm, and he almost
lifted her into the carriage, where her appealing eye and helpless
gesture made him follow her, and take Maurice on his knee.
No one spoke; Maurice nestled close to his friend; awe-struck
but weighed down by weariness and excitement. The blow had
in reality been given when he was forced to relinquish the hope
of seeing his brother again, and the actual certainty of his
death fell with less comparative force. Perhaps he did not
enter into the fact enough to ask for particulars. After a
short space Sophy recovered herself enough to take out the
letter, and read it over with greater comprehension.
'They were come ' she said.
'In time. I am glad.'
'In time to bring him peace, my uncle says! He knew
mamma. I could never have borne it if I had deprived him
of her f
' Nor I,' said Ulick, from his heart. ' Did one but know the
upshot of one's idle follies I'
Sophy looked towards Maurice.
' Asleep 1' said Ulick. 'No wonder. He has walked four
miles I He has a heart that might have been born in Ireland;'
aud as he looked at the fair young face softened and sweetened




<pb n="410"/>
I10            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER. 
by sleep, ' What an infant it is to have even fancied such 
undertaking !'                                       ':
' Poor child !' sighed Sophy. 'He will never be the same ir
'Nay, grief at that age does not check the spirits 
life.'
'You have never known,' said Sophy.
'No; our number has never yet been broken ; but for th
little man, I trust that the sense of duty may be deepened, an
with it his love to you all; and surely that is not what w
quench the blithe temper.'
'May it be so !' said Sophy. 'He may have enough of hi
mother in him to be happy.'
' I must think that the recollection of so loving a brothev,
and his pride in him for a hero, may make the stream flow more
deeply, but not more darkly.'
' There never was a cloud between them,' said Sophy.
'Clouds are all past and gone now between those who can
with him "take part in that thanksgiving lay,"' answered.
Ulick, kindly.
'Yes,' said Sophy. 'My uncle says it was peace at last I
Oh ! if humbleness and penitence could win it, one might be
sure it would be his.'
'True,' said Ulick. 'It was a beautiful thing to find the.
loving sweetness and kindness refined into self-devotion an4
patience, and growing into something brighter and purer as it'
came near the last. It will be a precious recollection.'
'To those who have no self-reproach,' sighed Sophy; andj
after a pause she abruptly resumed, ' You once blamed me fo
being hard with him. Nothing was more true.'
'Impossible-when could I have presumed I'
' When ? You remember. After Oxford.'
Oh I you should not have let what I said dwell with you.
I was a very raw Irishman then, and thought it barbarity to
look cold on a little indiscretion ; but I have learnt to think.
differently;' and he sighed. ' The severity that leads to re-
pentance is truer affection than is shown by making light of
foolishness.'
' If it had been affection and not wounded pride.'
'The dross has been refined away, if there were any,' said,
Ulick. 'You will be able to love him better now than ever
you did in life.'
His comprehension met her half way, and gave her more
relief and soothing than anything she had experienced for
months.  There was that response and intercommunion oi
spirit for which her nature had yearned the more because t ^




<pb n="411"/>
[f            ETHE YOUNG STEP MOTHER.               411
the inability to express the craving; the very turn of the dark
blue eyes, and the inflexions of the voice, did not merely convey
pity, but an entering into the very core of her sorrow, namely,
that she had never loved her brother enough, nor forgiven him
for not being his fellow-twin. Whatever he said tended to
reveal to her that there had been more justice, rectitude, sisterly
feeling, and wholesome training than she had given herself
credit for, and, above all, that Gilbert had loved her all the
time. She was induced to dwell on the exalting and touching
circumstances of his last redeeming year, and her tears streamed
calmly and softly, not with the harshness that had hitherto
marred her grief. Neither could have believed that there had
been so long and marked a separation in feeling, or that Ulick
O'More had not always been one with the Kendal family. It was
all too soon that the conversation ended, and Maurice wakened
suddenly at the vicarage wicket. Mrs. Dusautoy herself came
to meet them as the little boy was lifted out. She had never
been seen on her own feet so far from the house before I But
no one ever knew the terror she had suffered, when of all her
three charges not one was safe but the little Albinia, whose
' poor Maurice' and all gone' were as trying as her alterna-
tions of merriment. The vicar, the curate, the parish clerk,
the servants of the two establishments, and four policemen, were
all gone different ways; and poor Mrs. Dusautoy's day had been
spent in hearing the results of their fruitless researches, or in
worse presages, in which, as it now appeared, the river had
played its part.
She kissed Maurice, and he did not rebel I She kissed Sophy,
and could have shaken off Ulick's hand, but he only waited to
hold up Hyder Ali as the real finder, before he ran off to desire
the school-bell to be rung-the signal for announcing a dis-
covery. It was well that Maurice was too much stunned and
fatigued to be sensible what a commotion he had excited, or he
might have thought it good fun.
The tidings from Malta came in almost as something secondary.
The case had been too hopeless for anything else to be looked
for; and when Mrs Dusautoy consigned her charge to a couch,
with entreaties to her not to move, there was calm tenderness
in Sophy's voice as she told what needed to be told, and did not
shrink from sympathy. She was grateful and gentle, and lay
all the rest of the day, sad and physically worn out, but quietly
mournful, and no longer dwelling on the painful side of past
transactions; her remorse had given way to resigned acqui-
escence, and desolation to a sense that there was one who un-
derstood her. The sweet tones, and, above all, those two words,




<pb n="412"/>
412            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
'dear Sophy,' would come chiming hack from some involunn
echo, and the turbid depths were at peace.
When Mr. Dusautoy came to her side, and held out his ha
his honest eyes brimming over, there was no repulsion in h
manner of saying affectionately, ' You have had a great deal'
trouble for my naughty little brother.' So different was b
whole tone, that her kind friends thought how much better f
some minds was any certainty than suspense. She bethoug
herself of sending to the Drurys, and showed rather gratifi
tion than her ordinary impatience at the manifold reports of t
general sympathy, and of Bayford's grief for its hero. Th
poison was gone from her mind.
CHAPTER XXVIII.
TIHE Family Office had been asked to receive the whole party 
on their return. MIr. Kendal had business in London, and
could not hear to part with the colonel till he had seen him safelyi
lodged, and heard the surgeon's opinion.
Mr. Ferrars was laying himself out to guard his brother-in'
law from being oppressed by the sympathetic welcome of th
good aunts; but though the good ladies never failed in kind-
ness, all the excess was directed into a different channel; Al'
binia herself was but secondary to the wounded hero, for whom
alone they had eyes and ears. They would hardly let him stand
erect for a moment; easy-chairs and couches were offered, soup
and wine, biscuits and coffee were suggested, and questions were
crowded on him, while he, poor fellow, wistfully gazed at
the oft-directed pile of foreign letters on the side-table, and it
pure desperation became too fatigued to go down to luncheon.
When the others returned, he was standing on the rug, curl 
ing his moustaches.  There was a glow   of colour on hit
hollow cheek, and his eyes danced ; he put out his hand, and
catching Albinia's with boyish playfulness, he squeezed it triumi :
phantly, with the words, 'Albinia, she's a brick !'
They went their several ways, Fred to rest, Maurice to make
' an appointment for him  with the doctor, and Albinia to
Genevieve, whom Mr. Kendal regarded like his son's widow,
forgetting that the attachment had been neither sanctioned not
returned. He could not rest without seeing her, and delivering
that last message, but he was glad to have the way prepared by
his wife, and proposed to call for her when his law business
should be over.




<pb n="413"/>
F            mTHE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.              413
Albinia sent in her card, and asked whether Miss Durant were
at liberty. G6nevieve came hurrying to her with outstretched
hands: 'Dear Mrs. Kendal, this is kind I' and led her to thp
back drawing-room, where they were with one impulse enfolded
in each other's tearful embrace.
'Oh! madame, how much you have suffered 1'
You know all ?' said Albinia.
'O no, very little. My aunt knows little of Bayford now,
and her sight is too weak for much writing.'
G6nevieve pushed back her hair; she looked ill and heavy-
eyed, with the extinguished air that sorrow gave her. Gilbert
had distressed, perplexed her, and driven her from home;
but what could be remembered, save the warm affection he had
lavished on her, and the pain she had inflicted I Uneasiness
and sorrow, necessarily unavowed, had preyed on the poor girl
for weeks in secret; and even now she hardly presumed to give
way, relief, almost luxury, as it was to be pressed in those kind
arms, and suffered to weep freely for the champion of her
younger days. When she had heard how he had thought of
her to the last, her emotion grew less controllable; and Albinia
was touched by the idea that there had all along been a stifled
preference. Embellished as Gilbert now was, she could not but
wish to believe that his affection had not been wasted; and
his constancy might well be touching in one of the heroes
of the six hundred. At least, G6nevieve had a most earnest
and loving appetite for every detail, and though the afternoon
was nearly gone, neither felt as if half an hour had passed when
admittance was asked for Mr. Kendal.
It was a trying moment, but Geneviave was too simple,
genuine, and grateful to pause in selfish embarrassment.
Had she toyed with Gilbert's affection, she could not have
met his father with such maidenly modesty, and sweet
sympathy and respect in her blushing cheek and downcast, tear-
ful eyes.
He took her hand, speaking in the kindest tone of his mellow
voice: 'My dear, Mrs. Kendal has told you what brings us
here, and how much we feel for and with you.'
'So kind in you,' said G6nevieve, faltering.
'Poor child, she has suffered grievously for want of fuller
tidings,' said Albinia; 'she has been keeping her sorrow pent
up all this time.'
'She has acted, as she has done throughout, most consistently,'
said Mr. Kendal. ' My dear, though it was inexpedient to show
my sentiments, I always respected my son for having placed his
affections so worthily; and though circumstances were unfortu-




<pb n="414"/>
414             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTIIER. 
nately adverse, I cannot thank you enough for your course
action and the influence you exercised.'
'I never did,' murmured Genevieve.
'Not perhaps consciously ; but unswerving rectitude of co
duct is one of the strongest earthly influences. He was sensibi'
of it. He bade me tell you that whenever higher and bett
thoughts came to him, you were connected with them; an
when to his surprise, poor boy, he found that he was thought to
have distinguished himself, his first thought was that it migh.
be a step to your esteem. He desired me to thank you for 
that you have been to him, to entreat you to pardon the annoy-
ance of which he was the occasion, and to beg you to wear this
for his sake, if you could think of his presumption with forgive.
ness and toleration. Those were his words; but I trust youl
do not retain displeasure, for though, perhaps, foolishly and ob-
trusively expressed, it was sincere and lasting affection.'
'Oh, sir !' exclaimed G&nevieve, ' do not speak thus ! What
can I feel save that it will be my tenderest and deepest pride to
have been so regarded. Oh ! that I could thank him I but,
clasping her hands together, ' I cannot even thank you.'
'The best way to gratify us,' he said, ' will be always to re-
member that you have a home at Willow Lawn, and a daughter's.
place in our hearts. Think of me like a father, G6neviaveo
and he kissed her drooping forehead.
'Oh ! Mr. Kendal, this is goodness.'
He turned to Albinia to suggest, ' It must be intolerable to
be here at present. Speak to Mrs. Rainsforth; let us take her
home, if it be but for a week.'
Leaving him to make the proposition to Genevieve, Albinia
gained admittance to the other drawing-room, which she found
all over little children, and their mother looking unequal to'
dispensing with their deputy. She said she had feared Miss
DILrant was looking ill, and had something weighing on her
spirits, though she was always so cheerful and helpful; but baby
had not been well, and Mr. Raiusforth was not at all strong,
and her views had evidently taken no wider range.
Albinia began to think her proposal cruel, and pref;ced it by
a few words on the state of the case. The little bit of romance
touched the kind heart. Mrs. Rainsfoith was shocked to think
of the grief the governess must have suffered in secret while
aiding to bear her burdens, and was resolved on letting her
have this respite, going eagerly to assure her that she could
well be spared; baby was better, and papa was better, and the
children would be good.
But Genevieve knew too well how necessary she was, and




<pb n="415"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               41b
had been telling Mr. Kendal of the poor little mother's anxieties
with her many delicate children, and her husband's failing
health. She could not leave them with a safe conscience; and
she would not show how she longed after quiet, the country,
and her aunt. She stood firm, and Albinia could not say that
she was not right. Mrs. Rainsforth was distressed, though
much relieved, and was only pacified by the engagement that
LMis Durant should, when it was practicable, spend a long
holiday with her friends
'At home ' said Mr. Kendal; and the responsive look of
mournful gratitude from beneath the black dewy eyelashes dis.
pelled all marvel at his son's enduring attachment.
He was wonderfully patient when Mrs Rainsforth could not
be content without Mrs Kendal's maternal and medical opinion
.  of the baby, on the road to and from the nursery consulting her
on all the Mediterranean climates, and telling her what each
doctor had said of Mr. Rainaforth's lungs, in the course of which
Miss Durant and her romance were put as entirely out of the
little lady's mind as if she had never existed.
The next day the Kendals set their faces homewards, leaving
Maurice till the surgeon's work should be done, and Fred, as
the aunts fondly hoped, to be their nursling.
But, behold ! Sunday and Monday Colonel Fred spent in bed,
smiling incessantly; Tuesday and Wednesday on the sofa;
Thursday in going about London; Friday he was off to Liver-
pool; Saturday had sailed for Canada.
Albinia was coming nearer to the home that was pulling her
by the heart-string-. Hadminster was past, and she had heard
the welcome werds, ' All well,' from the servant who brought
the carriage; but how much more there was to know than
Sophy's detailed letters could convey-Sophy, whose sincerity,
though one of the most trustworthy things in the world, was
never quite to be relied on as to her own health or Maurice's
conduct.
At the gate there was a little chestnut curled being in a
short black frock, struggling to pull the heavy gate open with
her pllmp arms, and standing for one moment with her back to
it, screaming ' Mamma ! Papa 1' then jumping and clapping her
hands in ecstasy and oblivion that the swing of the gate might
demolish her small person between it and the horse. But there
was no time for fright. Sophy caught her and secured the
gate together; and the first glimpse assured Albinia that the
hard gloom was absent. And there was Maurice, leaning
agaist the iron rail of the hall steps; but he'hardly moved,
and his face was so strangely white and set, that Albinia caught




<pb n="416"/>
416             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER. 
him in her arms, crying, 'Are you well, my boy ? Sophy, isl
well ?'
'Quite well,' said Sophy; but the boy had wriggled hims
loose, stood but for an instant to receive his father's kiss, 
had hold of the sword. The long cavalry sabre was almost 
tall as himself, and he stood with both arms clasped round it
but no sooner did he feel their eyes upon him, than he turn
about and ran upstairs.
It was not gracious, but they excused it; they had their litt
Albinia comfortably and childishly happy, as yet without thos
troublesome Kendal feelings that always demonstrated them
selves in some perverse manner.
And Sophy stood among them-that brighter, better Soph
who had so long been obscured, happy to have them at home
talking and asking questions eagerly about the journey, an
describing the kindness of the Dusautoys and the goodness o
the children.
' Have you heard from Lucy?' asked Air. Kendal, as Albini
went in pursuit of her little boy.
'Yes-poor Lucy i'
'Is there no letter from him ?'
'Not for you, papa.'
'What ? Did he write to his uncle ?'
'No, papa-he wrote to me and to Mr. Pettilove. Canno
he be stopped, ppapa  Can he do any harm?  iMr. Dusautoy and
Mr. Pettilove think he can.'
'You mean that he wishes to question the will ? You may
be quite secure, my dear. Nothing can be more safe.'
'Oh, papa! I am so very glad. Not to be able to hinder
him was so dreadful, when he wanted to pit Lucy and me against
you. I could never have looked at you. I should always have
felt that you had something to forgive me.'
'I could not well have confounded you with Algernon, my
dear,' said Mr. KendaL  'What did Pettilove mean ? Do you
know ?'
'Not exactly; something about grandpapa's old settlement;
which frightened the Vicar, though Mrs. Dusautoy said that it
was only that he fancied nobody could do anything right with-
out his help. Mr. Dusautoy is more angry with Algernon than
I thought he could be with anybody.'
'No one but Algernon would have ever thought of it,' said
Mr. Kendal. 'I am sorry he has molested you, my dear. Have
you any objection to let me see his letter ?'
' I kept it for you, papa, and a copy of my answer. I thought




<pb n="417"/>
i-r  o         THE YOU-rG STEP-KOTHEI                417
though I am not of age, perhaps my saying I would have
nothing to do with it might do some good.'
Algernon magniloquently condoled with his sister-in-law on
the injustice from which she and her sister had suffered, in con-
sequence of the adverse influence which surrounded her brother;
and generously informed her that she had a ehampion to defeat
the machinations against their rights. He had little doubt of
the futility of the document, and had written to the legal ad-
viser of the late Mr. Meadows to inquire whether the will of
that gentleman did not bar any power on the part of his grand-
son to dispose of the property. She might rely on him not to rest
until she should be put in possession of the estate, unless it should
prove to have been her grandfather's intention, in case of the
present melancholy occurrence, that the elder sister should be
the sole inheritrix; and he congratulated her on having such a
protector, since, under the unfortunate circumstances, the sisters
would have had no one to uphold their cause against their
natural guardian.
Sophy's answer was-
'Dear Algernon,
' I prefer my natural guard.ian to any other whatever. I shall
for my part owe you no thanks for attempting to frustrate my dear brother's
wishes, and to raise an unbecoming dissension. I desire that no use of my
name may be made, and you may rest assured that I should find nothing so
difficult to forgive as any such interference in my behalf.
Yours truly,
'SOPHIA KENDAL.'
'Certainly,' said Mr. Kendal, 'no family ill-will is complete
unless money matters be brought in to aggravate it'
'Do you think I did right, and spoke strongly enough,
papa '
'Quite strongly enough,' said Mr. Kendal, suppressing a smile.
'I hope you wrote kindly to Lucy at the same time.'
'One could not help that, papa; but I did say a great deal
about the outrageous impropriety of raising the question, because
I thought Algernon might be ashamed.'
'Riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt,' said Mr.
Kendal. 'Your grandfathers acquisitions have brought us
little but evil hitherto; and now I fear that our dear Gilbert's
endeavour to break the net which bound us into that system of
iniquity and oppression, may cause alienation from poor Lucy.
Sophy, you must allow no apparent coldness or neglect on her
part to keep you from writing often and affectionately.'
Maurice here came down with his mother, and as soon &a
El




<pb n="418"/>
418            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER. 
there was a moment's pause, laid hold of the first bookj
with, and began:- 
' I do not see the justness of the analogy to which Onnphrio l
there are many parts of that vision on which I should wish to hear
planations of Philalethes.'
All broke out in amazement, 'Why, Maurice, has 
sautoy been making a scholar of you i'
'Oh I Maurice, was this your secret ' cried Sophy.  '
He had hidden his face in his mother's lap, and wh
raised it, struggled to keep it down, and she felt him sobbi
panting for breath. Mr. Kendal stroked his hair, and
tried to soothe him, but he started up abruptly.
' I don't mean ever to be a plague again ! So I did it
there-when Ulick said it would be a comfort, you are all
to cry again, papa and all, and that's worse !' and stampin
foot passionately, he would have rushed out of the roo
was held fast in his father's arms, and indeed tears were f
fast from eyes that his brother's death had left dry.
' My child ! my dear child !' said Mr. Kendal, ' it is c
No one can rule you as by God's grace you can rule yo
and your endeavours to do this are the greatest blessing I can
One more kiss from his mother, and she let him go. H
not know how to deal with emotion in himself, and hat
sight of it in others; so that it was better to let him burst
from them, while with one voice they admired, rejoiced, a
terrogated Sophy.
'I know now,' she said, the rosy glow mantling in her oli
'it must have been Mr. O'More.'
'Ah ! has he been with you ' said her father.
'Only once,' said Sophy, her colour deepening; 'but Ma
has been in a great hurry every day to go to him, and I
there was some secret. One day, Susan asked me to pre
Mlaster Maurice from teaching baby such ugly words, that
could not sleep-not bad words, hut she thought they were 
So I watched, and I heard Maurice singing out some of-
legend of Hiawatha, and insisting on poor little Awkey tel
him what m-i-s-h-e-n-a-h-m-a, spelt. Poor little Awkstar
well she might, and obediently made the utmost efforts to say
him, Mishenahma, king of fishes, but he was terribly discomp
at getting nothing but Niffey-ninny, king of fithes. I went to
rescue, and asked what they were about; but Maurice thund
down on me all the Delawares and Mohawks, and the Choctaws
Cameches; and baby squeaked after him as well as she could, t
fairly stopped myears. I thought Ulick mustbereadingthele
to him. Now I see he must have been teaching him to read




<pb n="419"/>
r              T  IsHE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.            419
' Can it be possible v said Mr. Kendal. 'He could not read
words of five letters without spelling.'
'He always could do much more when he pleased than when
he did not please,' said Albinia. 'I believe the impulse to use
his understanding was all that was wanting, and I am very glaW
the impulse came from such a motive.'
Mr. Kendal ordained that Maurice's reward should be learn-
ing Latin from himself a perilous trial; but it proved that Mr.
Kendal was really a good teacher for a child of spirit and
courage, and Maurice had early come to the age when boys do
better with man than with woman. Ho liked the honour and
the awe of papa's tutorship, and learnt so well, that his father
never believed in his past dunceship; but over studies that he
did not deem sufficiently masculine, he could be as troublesome
as ever, his attention absent, and his restlessness most weari-
some. To an ordinary eye, he was little changed; but his
mother felt that the great victory of the will had been gained,
and that his sef was endeavouring to get the better of the spirit
of insubordination and mischief. Night after night she found
him sleeping with the Balaklava sword by his aide, and his hand
clasped over it; and he always crept out of the way of Crimean
news, though that he gathered up the facts was plain when he
committed his sovereign to Ulick, with a request that it might
be devoted to the comforts preparing to be sent to the 25th
Lancers.
Ulick wished him to consult his mother, but this he repelled.
He could not endure the sight of a tear in her eye, and she
could not restrain them when that chord was touched. It was
a propensity she much disliked, the more because she thought it
looked like affectation beside Sophy, whose feelings never took
that course; but the more ill-timed the tears, the more they
would come, at the most common-place condolence or remote
allusion. It was the effect of the long strain on her powers,
and the severe shock coming suddenly after so much pressure
and fatigue; moreover, her habits had been so long disorganized
that her time seemed blank, and she could not rouse herself
from a feeling of languor and depression. Then Gilhert had
been always on her mind, whether at home or absent; and it
did not seem at first as if she had enough to fill up time or
thoughts--she absolutely found herself doing nothing, because
there Was nothing she cared to do.
Mr. Kendal's first object was the fulfilment of Gilbert's
wishes; but Albinia soon felt how much easier it is for women
and boys to make schemes, than for men to bring them to effect,
and how rash it is hastily to condemn those who tolerate abusea
E 2




<pb n="420"/>
420            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
The whole was carefully looked over with a surveyorl
was only then understood how complicated were the
and how varied the covenants of the numerous small te
which old Mr. Meadows had amassed. It was not po
be free of the legal difficulties under at least a year, andi
of drainage might be impeded for want of other people's
Even if all had been smooth, the sacrifice of income,. by d
ing Tibb's Alley, and reducing the number of cottages,
be considerable. Meantime, the inspection had brought t
worse iniquities and greater wretchedness than Mr. Ken
imagined, and his eagerness to set to work was tenfold.
table was heaped with sanitary reports, and his fits of 
tion were over the components of bad air or 
estimates.
I. only depended on Ulick to have resumed his int
Willow Lawn; but the habit once broken was not 
He was often there, but never without invitation; and 
not always to be had. He had less leisure; he was
clerk, and the junior was dull and untrained; and he o
work to do far into the evening. He looked bright and
as though possessed of a sense of being valuable in his own
more conducive to happiness than even congeniality of 
nent; and Sophy, though now and then disappointed
non-appearance, always had a good re&son for it, and on
to justify Mr. Dusautoy's boast that the air of the hill had
another woman of her.
Visiting cards had, of course, come in numbers to
Lawn; but Albinia seemed to have caught her hus
aversions, and it would be dangerous to say how long 
before she lashed herself into setting off for a round of 
Nothing surprised her more than Miss Goldsmith's 
Conscious of her neglect, she expected the stiff manner 
more formal than ever; but the welcome was almost warm
there was something caressing in her fears that Miss 
would be tired. Mr. Goldsmith was not quite well, there
threatenings of gout, and his sister had persuaded him to
the relations at Bristol next week; everything might
trusted to young More, and therewith came such praise
steadiness and ability, that Albinia did not know which
look when all was ascribed to Mr. Kendal's great kin
to him.
It was too palpable to be altogether pleasant. Sophia
was heiress enough to be a very desirable connexion for'
bank. Albinia was afraid she should see through the
graciousness, and took her leave in haste; but Sopbv only




<pb n="421"/>
F                  THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               421
.   Do you remember, mamma, when the Goldsmiths thought we
unsettled him I'
Before Albinia had disarmed her reply of the irony on the
tip of her tongue, the omnibus came lumbering round the
corner, and a voice proceeded from the rear, the door flew open,
and there was a rapid exit.
Face and voice, light step, and gay bearing, all were Fred-
the empty sleeve, the sole resemblance to the shattered con-
valescent of a few weeks back.
' There, Albinia I I said you should see her first. You haven't
got any change, have you ' the last being addressed either to
Albinia, the omnibus conductor, or a lady, who made a tender
of two shillings, while Albinia ordered the luggage on to Willow
Lawn, though something was faintly said about the inu.
'And there!' cried Fred, with an emphatic twist of his
moustache, ' isn't she all I ever told you I' 
'The last thing was a brick,' said Albinia, laughing, as she
looked at the smiling, confiding, animated face, not the less
pleasant for a French Canadian grace that recalled G6nevibve.
'The right article for building a hut, I hope,' she said,
merrily.
* But how and when could you have come i'
'This morning, from Liverpool. We did not mean to storm
you in this manner; we meant to have settled ourselves at the
inn, and walked down; Emily was very particular about it.'
' But you see, when he saw you, he forgot all my lectures 1'
said Emily, taking his welcome for granted.
'Very proper of him I But, Fred, I don't quite believe it
yet. How long is it since we parted f
'Six weeks; just enough to go to Canada and back, with a
fortnight in the middle to spare.'
' And pray how long has Mra Fred existed T
'Three weeks and two days;' and turning half round to give
her the benefit of his words, 'it was on purely philanthropic
principles, because I could not tie my own necktie.'
' Now could I,' said Emily pleadingly to Sophy-' now could I
let him go back again alone, when he came so helpless, and
looking so dreadfully ill I'
'And what are you going to do ' asked Albinia. ' You
can't join again.'
' Join ! why not I Here's a hand for a horse, and an arm for
a wife, and the rest will be done much better for me than ever
it was before.'
' But with her ? and at Sebastopol !'
'That's the very thing!' cried the colonel, again turning




<pb n="422"/>
422            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
about. ' Nothing will serve her but to show how a back
man's daughter can live in a hut.'
And what will the general say I'
'The general,' cried Emily,' will endure me better as A
than as a prospect; and we will teach him that a lady is
made of nerves and of fancies ! See what he will say if 
him into our paradise 1'
Fred brightened; though Albinia's inquiry had for a m
taken him a little aback. The one being whom he dreaded
General Ferrars, for whom he cared a thousand times more
for his own elder brother; and he was soon speculating, 
his usual insouciance, as to how his announcement might
been received by his lordship, and whether the aunts would
at them as they went through London.
Mr..Kendal met them at the gate, amazed at the aval
of luggage, but well pleased, for he had grown very fond of
and had been very anxious about him, thinking kim brokeni
enfeebled for life, and hardly expecting him to return from
mad expedition. He was slow to believe his eyes and ears
he beheld a hale, handsome, vigorous man, full of life and acti
hut his welcome and congratulations were of the warmest..
could far better stand a sudden inroad than if he had ba
meditate for a week on entertaining the bride. Not that
bride wanted entertainment, except waiting upon her hus
who let himself be many degrees less handy than at Malta, 
the pleasure of her attentions.
Perhaps the person least gratified was Maurice; for the 
shrank with shy reverence from him whom his brother had 
and would as soon have thought of making a plaything of
bert's sword as of having fun with the survivor. The sig
such a merry man was a shock, and he abruptly repelled
attempts at playing with him, and kept apart with a big
on a chair before him, a Kendalism for which he amply 
pensated when familiarity had diminished his awe.
Mr. Kendal, though little disposed to exert himself to
liked to watch his wife reviving into animation; and So
taking a full share in the glee with which Emily enjoyed turni
the laugh against the good-natured soldier. In the midst
their flush of joy there was a tender consideration about
young couple, such as to hinder their tone from jarring. Ind
it was less consideration than fellow-feeling, for Gilbert Ken
had become enshrined in the depths of Fred's heart; while'
Emily the visit was well-nigh a pilgrimage.  All her h
worship was directed to the youth who had guarded her soldi
life, nursed him in his sickness, and, as he averred, inspired 




<pb n="423"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHEBi                423
with serious thoughts. Poor, failing, timid, penitent Gilbert
was to her a very St. George, and every relic of him was viewed
with reverence; she composed a countenance for him from his
father's fine features, and fitted the fragments of his history into
an ideal, till Sophy, after being surprised and gratified, began to
view Gilbert through a like halo, and to rank him with his twin
brother. Friendship was a new and agreeable phase of life to
Sophy, who found a suitable companion in such an open-hearted
person, simpler in nature, and fresher than herself, free from
English commonplaces, though older and of more standing.
She expanded and brightened wonderfully; and Emily, ima-
gining her a female Gilbert, was devoted to her, and thought
her a marvel of learning, depth, goodness, and humility, the
more striking for her tinge of grave pensiveness
' Why, Albinia,' said the colonel, 'didn't I hear that it was
your handsome daughter who is married 1'                     -
' Yes; poor Lucy was always called our pretty one.'
'More admired than her sister I Why, she never could have
had a countenance!'
'Yes,' said Albinia, highly gratified by the opinion of such a
connoisseur. 'I always told Winifred that Sophy was the
beauty, but she has only lately had health or animation to set
her off'
'I declare, when we overtook you in the street, she looked a
perfect Spanish princess, in her black robes and great shady
hat. You ought always to keep her in black. Ha I Emily,
what are you smiling at '
His wife looked up into his face with mischievous shyness in
her eyes, as if she wanted him to say what would be a liberty
in her. Somebody else had overtaken the ladies nearly at the
same moment, and Albinia exulted in perceiving that the em-
bellishmnent had been observed by others besides herself. She
did not look so severe but that Fred was encouraged to repeat,
'Only lately had health or animation I When Irish winds blow
this way, 1 fancy- But what will the aunts say I'
'They are not Sophy's aunts, whatever they are to you.'
'What will Kendal say I which is more to the purpose.'
'Oh ! he saw it first; he will be delighted; but you must
not say a word to him, for it can't come to anything just now.'
Albinia was thus confirmed in her anticipations, and the
bridal pair, only wishing everybody to be as happy as them-
selves, took the matter up with such vivid interest and amuse-
ment, thatshe was ratherafraid of a manifestation such as to shock
either her husband or the parties themselves; but Fred was too
much of a gentleman, and Emily too considerate, for anythiug




<pb n="424"/>
42-            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHEE.         .
perilously marked. Only she thought Emily need noti
-o decided in making room for Ulick next to Sophy, 
were all looking out at the young moon at the couserva
that evening.
And then Emily took her husband's arm, and insisted o
down the garden to be introduced to English nightingalea
though she was told they never had come there in the 
of man, she was bent on doing as she -would be done 
drew him along the silvered paths, among the black shado
the trees; and Ulick asked Sophy if she wished to go too.
looked as if she should like it very miuch; he fetched a 
of cloaks out of the hall, put her into one, and ran after
Ferrars with the other.
' Well!' thought Albinia, as she stood at the conserv
door, ' how much more boldness and tact some people have
others I If I had lived a hundred years, I should not 
managed it so well I'
-' What's become of them I' said Mr. Kendal, as she went,
to the drawing-room.
' Gone to listen for nightingales !'
'Nightingales t How could you let them go into the riv
'Emily was bent upon it; she is too much of a bride n
have her way.
Umph ! I wonder Sophy was so foolish.'
They came back in a quarter of an hour. No nightin
and Fred was indulging in reminiscences of bull-fogs ; the
ladies were rapturous on the effect of the moonbeams iL
ripple of the waters, and the soft furry white mist rising.
the meadows. Ulick shivered, and leant over the fire to b
a drier air, bantering the ladies for their admiration, a.
daring that Mrs. Ferrars had taken the moan of an impris
house-dog for the nightingale, which he disdainfully imitated
buzz, zizz, and guggle, assuring her she had had no loss; bu
looked rather white and chilled. Sophy whispered somethin
her papa, who rang the bell, and ordered in wine and hot w
' There, Emily,' said Albinia, when he had taken his lea
what shall we say to your nightingales, if Mr. O'More cat
his ague again V'
'Oh, there are moments when people don't catch agues,'
Fred. 'He would be a poor fellow to catch an ague after
that, though, by-the-bye, it is not a place to go to at n
without a cigar.'
Albinia was on thorns, lest Sophy should be offended;
though her cheeks lighted up, and she was certainly aware
some part of their meaning, either she did not believe in




<pb n="425"/>
; '  TBE YOUNG STP-MOTBER.                42
possibility of any one bantering her, or else the assumption was
more agreeable than the presumption was disagreeable. She
eudured with droll puzzled dignity, when Fred teased her anxiety
the uext day to know whether Mr. O'More had felt any ill effects;
and it really appeared as if she liked him better for what might
have been expected to be a dire affront; but then he was a man
whose manner enabled to do and say whatever he pleased.
Emily never durst enter on the subject with her, but had
more than one confidential little gossip with Albinia, and re-
peatedly declared that she hoped to be in England when ' it'
took place. Indeed that week's visit made them all so intimate,
that it was not easy to believe how recent was the acquaintance.
The aunts had been so much disappointed at Fred's desertion,
so much discomfited at his recovery contrary to all predictions,
and so much annoyed at his marriage, that it took all their
kindness, and his Crimean fame, to make them invite him and
i    his colonial wife to the Family Office, to be present at the royal
distribution of medals. However, the good ladies did their duty;
and Emily and Sophy parted with promises of letters.
The beginning of the correspondence was as full a description
of the presentation of the medals as could be given by a person
who only saw one figure wherever she went, and to whom the
great incident of the day was, that the gracious and kind-
hearted Queen had herself fastened the left-handed colonel's
medal as well as Emily could have done it herself  There was
another medal, with two clasps, that came to Bayford, and which
was looked at in pensive but not unhappy silence. 'You shall
have it some day, Maurice, but not now,' said Mr. Kendal; and
all felt that now meant his own lifetime.  It was placed where
Gilbert would well have liked to see it, beside his brother
Ednund's watch.
Emily made Mrs. Annesley and Miss Ferrars more fond of
her in three days, than eleven years had made them of Winifred;
too fond, indeed, for they fell to preaching to Fred upon the
horrors of Sebastopol, till they persuaded him that- he was a
selfish wretch, and brought him to decree that she should stay
with them during his absence. But, as Emily observed, that
was not what she left home for; she demolished his arguments
with a small amount of playing at petulance, and triumphantly
departed tor the East, leaving Aunt Mary crying over her as a
predestined victim.
The last thing Fred did before sailing, was to send Albinia a
letter from his brother, that she might see 'how very kind and
cordial Belraven was,' besides something that concerned her
moro nearly.




<pb n="426"/>
426            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHERB 
Lord Belraven was civil when it cost him nothing, a
lately regarded his inconvenient younger brother with far
bringing him distinction, and having gained two steps wit
purchase, removed, too, by his present rank, and the pens
his wound, from being likely to become chargeable to 
he had written such brotherly congratulations, that good
Fred was quite affected. He was even discursive enou
mention some connexions of the young man who had been
Fred in the Crimea, a Mr. Cavendish Dusautoy, a very
sort ofi fellow, who gave excellent dinners, and was a pi
yachting companion. His wife was said to be very pretty.
pleasing; but she had arrived at Genoa very unwell, had:
since confined, and was not yet able to see any one. It wau
to be the effect of her distress for the death of her brother,
the estrangement from her family, who had behaved vey
about his property. Had not Albinia Ferrars married into
family t
Albinia knew enough of her noble relative to be aware
good dinners and obsequiousness were the way to his
and Algernon's was the sort of arrogance that would sto
adore a coronet. All this was nothing, however, to the id
Lucy, ill in that strange place, with no one to care for he
her hard master. Albinia sometimes thought of going to
her out at Genoa; but this was too utterly wild and impo
and nothing could be done but to write letters of affetio
inquiry, enclosing them to Lord Belraven.
Algernon's answer was solemn, and as brief as he could
anything. He was astonished that the event had escaped;
notice of the circle at Bayford, since he believed it had appe
in all the principal European newspapers; and his time
been so fully occupied, that he had imagined that intim&
sufficient, since it was evident from the tone of the recent
respondence, that the family of Bayford were inclined to
future intercourse. He was obliged for the inquiries for 
and was happy to say she was recovering favourably, though
late unfortunate events, and the agitation caused by letters 
home, had affected her so seriously, that they had been
tained at Genoa for nearly four months to his great in.'
venience, instead of pushing on to Florence and Rome. It
been some compensation that he had become extremely inti
with that most agreeable and superior person, Lord Belra
who had consented to become sponsor to his son.
Lucy wrote to Albinia. Poor thing, the letter was the 
childishly expressed, and the least childishly felt, she had o
written; its whole aspect was weak and wobegone; yet 




<pb n="427"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               427
was less self-pity, and more endeavour to make the best of it,
than before. She had the dearest little baby in the world; but
he was very delicate, and she wished mamma would send out
an English nurse, for she could not bear that Italian woman-
her black eyes looked so fierce, and she was sure it was not safe
to have those immense pins in her hair. Expense was nothing;
but she should never be happy till she had an Englishwoman
about him, especially now that she was getting better, and
Algernon would want her to come out again with him. .Dear
Algernon, he had lost the Easter at Rome for her sake; but
perhaps it was a good thing, for he was often out in Lord Bel-
raven's yacht, and she could be quiet with baby. She did wish
baby to have had her dear brothers' names, but Algernon would
not consent. Next Tuesday he was to be christened; and then
followed a string of mighty names, long enough for a Spanish
princess, beginning with Belraven I ! 1
Lucy Dusautoy's dreary condition in the midst of all that
wealth could give, was a contrast to Emily Ferrars' buoyant
delight in the burrow which was her first married home, and
-proved a paradise to many a stray officer, aye, maybe, to Lieu-
tenant-General Sir William Ferrars himself. Her letters were
charming, especially a detail of Fred meeting Bryan O'More
coming out of the trenches, grim, hungry, and tired, having
recently kicked a newly alighted shell down from the parapet,
with the cool words, ' Be off with you,'you ugly baste you;' of
his wolfish appetite after having been long reduced to simple
rations, though he kept a curly black lamb loose about his hut,
because he hadn't the heart to kill it; and it served him for
bed if not for board, all his rugs and blankets having flown off
in the hurricane, or been given to the wounded; he hlad been
quite affronted at the suggestion that a Galway pig was as well
lodged as himself-it was an insult to any respectable Irish
animal!
Albinia sent Maurice to summon Ulick to enjoy the letter
in store for him. He looked grave and embarrassed, and did
not light up as usual at Bryan's praises.  He said that
his aunt, who had written to him on business, had given a
bad account of Mr. Goldsmith; but Albinia hardly thought
this accounted for his preoccupation, and was considering how
to probe it, when her brother Maurice opened the door. 'Ulick
O'More I that's right; the very man I was in search of 1'
'How's Winifred, Maurice T
'Getting on wonderfully well. I really think she is going
to make a start, after all ! and she is in such spirits herself'
'And the boy '




<pb n="428"/>
428             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHERL.
' O. a thumping great fellow I I promise you he}
match for your Maurice.'                          !i
'I do believe it is to reward Winifred for sparing yow
spring when we wanted you so much! Come, sit do
wait for Edmund.' 
' No; I've not a moment to stay. Im to meet Bury 
Woodside at six o'clock; he drove me there, and I
looking in at your lodgings by the way, Ulick.'
'I'm not there now. I am keeping guard at the bank.'
'So they told me. Well, I hope your guard is not too;
for you to come over to Fairmead on Sunday; we want y'
do our boy the kindness to be his godfather' 
Sophy blushed with approving gratitude.
'I don't consider that it will be a sinecure-he squa1.
such a characteristio manner that I am convinced he will
his cousin here in all amiable and amenable qualities; so I
sider it particularly desirable that he should be well pro
with great disciplinarians.'
'You certainly could not find any one more accomplis
teaching dunces to read,' said Albinia.
'When their mammaH have taught them already '
Ulick, laughing. 'Thank you ; but you know I can't sleep
Hyder Ali and I are responsible for a big chest of sovr
and all the rest of it.'
'Nor could I lodge you at present; so we are agreed.:
,    proposition is that you should drive my sister over on S
morning. My wife is wearying for a sight of her; and
has not been at Fairmead on a Sunday since she left it
Albinia I' 
'I suppose for such a purpose it is not wrong to 
horse,' she said, her eyes sparkling.
' And you might put my friend Maurice between you, if
can't go out pleasuring without him.'
' I scorn you, sir; Maurice is as good as gold; I shall
him at home, I think, to prove that I can-'
'That's the reward of merit 1' exclaimed Sophy.
'She expects my children to corrupt him F quoth.
Ferrarm
'For shame, Maurice; that's on purpose to make me 
him. Well, we'll see what papa says, and if he thinks the
black horse strong enough, or to be trusted with Mr. O'Mo
'1 only wish 'twas a jaunting car !' cried Ulick.
'And what's the boy's name to be   Not Belraven, I
elude, like my unfortunate grandson-Maurice, I hope.'
'No; the precedent of his namesake would be too danger




<pb n="429"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER..               429
I believe he is to be Edmund Ulick. Don't take it as too per-
sonal, Ulick, for it was the name of our mutual oonnexion.'
'I take the personal part though, Maurice; and thank you,
said Albinia, and Mr. Ferrars looked more happy and joyous
than any time since his wife's health had begun to fail. Always
cheerful, and almost always taking matters up in the most lively
point of view, it was only by comparison that want of spirits
in him could be detected; and it was chiefly by the vanishing
of a certain careworn, anxious expression about his eyes, and
by the ring of his merry laugh, that Albinia knew that he
thought better of his wife's state than for the last five or six years.
Albinia and Ulick drove off at six o'clock on a lovely summer
Sunday morning, with Maurice between them in a royal state
of felicity. That long fresh drive, past summer hay-fields sleep-
ing in their silver bath of dew, and villages tardily awakening
to the well-earned Sunday rest, was not the least pleasant part
of the'day; and yet it was completely happy, not even clouded
by one outbreak of Master Maurice. Luckily for him, Mary
had a small class, who absorbed her superabundant love of rule;
and little Alby was a fair-haired, apple-cheeked maiden of five,
who awoke both admiration and chivalry, and managed to
coquet with him and Ulick both at once, so that Willie had no
disrespect to his sisters to resent.
He was exemplary at church, well-behaved at dinner, and so
little on his mamma's mind, that she had a delightful renewal
of her acquaintance with the Sunday-school, and a leisurable
gossip with Mrs. Reid and the two Miss Reids, collectively and
individually; but the best of all was a long quiet tte-a-t&te with
Winifred.
After the evening service, Mr. Ferrars himself carried his
newly-christened boy back to the mother, and paused that his
sister might come with him, and they might feel like the old
times, when the three had been alone together.
' Yes,' said Winifred, when he had left them, 'it is very
pretty playing at it; but one cannot be the same.'
'Nor would one exactly wish it,' said Albinia; 'though I
think you are going to be more the same.'
'Perhaps,' said Winifred; 'the worst of being ill is that it
does wear one's husband so I When he came in, and tried to
make me fancy we were gone back to Willie's time, I could not
help thinking how different you both looked.'
' Well, so much the better and more respectable,' said Albinia.
'You know I always wanted to grow old; I don't want to stop
short like your sister Anne, who looks as much the child of the
house as ever.'




<pb n="430"/>
430            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHE 
'I wish you had as few cares as Anne. Lopk; I.d
that's a grey hair 1'
'I know. I like it; now Sophy is growing young, 
growing old, it is all correct.' 
'Old, indeed I' ejaculated Winifred, looking at her fair
complexion and bright features; ' don't try for that, wb
Edmund is not grey.'
' Yes he is,' said Albinia, gravely; ' Malta sowed many
threads in his black head, and worry about those building
brought more.'
'Worry; Im very sorry to hear of it.'
'Yes; the tenures are so troublesome, and everybody 
cantankerous. If he wanted .to set up some pernicious 
facture, it could not be worse! The Osbornes, after
lived with Tibb's Alley close to them all their lives,.olbj
the almshouses I Mr. Baron wont have the new drains
through his little strip of land. The Town Council thinu,,
are going to poison the water; and Pettilove, and e
else who owns a wretched tenement, that we shall increase
wants of their tenants, and lower their rents. If it be 
through, it will be by that sheer force in going his own,
that Edmund can exert when he chooses.'
'And he will i'
'0, yes, no fear of that; he goes on, avoiding seei
hearing what he has not to act upon; but worse than
the people themselves; Tibb's Alley all has notice to quit
none of them can be got rid of till Martinmas, and some n
Lady-day; and the beer-house people are in such a rage I
turn-out of the public-houses come and roar at our ga
Saturday nights; and they write up things on the wall a
him I and one day they threw over into the garden what
Awkey called a poor dear dead pussy. I believe they tell t
all sorts of absurd things about his tyranny; poor creatur
' Can't you get it stopped r'
' Edmund wont summon any one, because he thinks it w
do more harm than good. He says it will pass off; but
grieves him more than he shows: he thinks he could once 
made himself more popular: but I don't know, it is a horrid
I thought you said he was in good spirits'        t
And so he is: he never gets depressed and unwilling to
spoken to. He is ready to take interest in everything;
always so busy I When I remember how he never seemedi
lie obliged to attend to anything, I laugh at the contrast;
yet he goes about it all so gravely and slowly, that it Pe
seems like a change.'




<pb n="431"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                431
In this and other home talk nearly an hour had passed, when
Mr. Ferrars returned. ' Are you come to tell me to go ' said
Albinia
'Not particularly,' he said, in a tone that made her laugh.
'No, no,' said Winifred. ' I want a great deal more of her.
Where have you been i'
'I have been to see old Wilks; Ulick walked down with me.
By-the-bye, Albinia, what nonsense has Fred's wife been talking
to his brother 1'
'Emily does not talk nonsense F fired up Albinia, colouring,
nevertheless.
' The worse for her, then I However, it seems Bryan has
disturbed this poor fellow very much, by congratulating him on
his prospects at Willow Lawn.'
' Oh I that is what made him so distant and cautious, is it f
laughed Albinia ' I think Mrs. Emily might as well not have
betrayed it.'
'Betrayed I What could have passed r
'Oh ! Emily and Fred saw it as plain as I did. Why, it
"does not do credit to your discernment, Maurice; papa found
it out long ago, and told me.'
'Kendal did i'
'Yes, that he did, and did not mind the notion at all; rather
liked it, in fact.'
' Well ' said Mr. Ferrars, in a different tone, ' it is a very
queer business I I certainly did not think the. lad showed any
symptoms. He said he had heard gossip about it before, and
had tried to be careful; his aunt talked to him once, but, as he
said, it would be nothing but the rankest treason to think of
such a thing, on the terms on which he is treated.'
Ay, that's it ' said Albiiia; ' he acts most perfectly.'
'Perfectly indeed, if that were acting,' said Mr. Ferrar.
'And what made him speak to you I' asked Winifred.
'He wanted to consult me. He said it was very hard on
him, for all the pleasure he had came from his intercourse with
Willow Lawn; and he could not bear to keep at a distance,
because it looked as if he had not forgotten the old folly about
the caricature; but he was afraid of the report coming to your
ears or Mr. Kendal's, because you would think it so wrong and
shameful an abuse of your kindness.'
'And that's his whole concern T
'So he told me.'
'And what advice did you give him '
'I told him Bayford was bent on gossip, and no one heeded it
less than my respected brother and sister.'




<pb n="432"/>
432            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
'That was famous of you, Maurice. I was afraid you
have put it upon his honour and the state of his own ho
'Sooth to say, I did not think his heart appeared.
ticklish.'
'Oh ! Maurice, Maurice! But you've not been there t
the hot fits and the cold fits ! It is a very fine thermo
whether he says Sophy or Miss KendaL'              .
'And you say Edmund perceived this i'
'Much you would trust my unassisted 'cuteness I I tell 
he did, and that it will make him happier than anything.' 
'Very well; then my advice will have done no harm. I
not think there had been so much self-control in an Ir
' Had he not better say, so much blindness in the rector
Fairmead 1' laughed Albinia.
'And pray what course is the affair to take T
'The present, I suppose. Some catastrophe will occur at
to prove to him that we honour him, and don't view itf
outrageous presumption; and then-oh ! there can be no d
that he will have a share in the bank; and Sophy may
toleration for his round 0. After all, he has the best ofi'
to ancestry, and we Kendals need not turn up our noeil
banking.' 
'I think he will be too proud to address her, except
equality as to money matters.' 
'Pride is sometimes quelled and love free,' said Albinia. 
no; content yourself with having given the best advice in.
world, with your eyes fast shut I'
And Albinia went home in high spirits.
CHAPTER XXIX.
NOT long afterwards, Ulick O'More was summoned to Br
where his uncle had become suddenly worse; but he 
only reached Hadminster when a telegraph met him with
news of Mr. Goldsmith's death, and orders, to remain at
post.
He came to the Kendals in the evening in great grief; he
really come to love and esteem his uncle, and he was ve
unhappy at having lost the chance of a reconciliation for 
mother. As her chief friend and confidant, he knew that 
regarded the alienation of her own family as the punishment 
her disobedient marrriage, and that his own appointment 
been valued chiefly as an opening towards fraternal feelin




<pb n="433"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                433
and reproached himself for not having made more direct efforts
to induce his uncle to enter into personal intercourse with her.
'If I had only ventured it before he went to Bristol,' he said;
'I was a fool not to have done so; and there, the Goldsmiths
detest the very name of us I Why could they not have tele-
graphed for me   I might have heard what would have done
my mother's heart good for the rest of her life. I am sure my
poor uncle wanted to ease his mind 1'
'May he not have sent some communication direct to her T
'I trust he did I I have long thought he only kept her aloof
from habit, and felt kindly towards her all the time.'
' And never could persuade himself to make a move towards
her until too late,' said Albinia.
' Yes. Nothing comes home to one more than the words,
" Agree with thine adversary quickly whiles thou art in the
way with him." If once one comes to think there's creditable
pride in holding out, there's no end to it, or else too much end.'
' Mr. Goldsmith was persevering in the example his father had
set him,' said Mr. KendaL
' Ay I my mother never blamed either, and I'm afraid, if the
truth were told, my father was hot enough too, though it would
all have been bygones with him long ago, if they would have
let it. But I was thinking just then of my own foolishness
last winter, when I would not grant you it was pride, M1s.
Kendal, for fear I should have to repent of it.'
' What has brought you to see that it was V' asked she.
'One comes to a better mind when the fit is off,' he said. 'I
hope I will not be as bad next time.'
' I hope we shall never give you a next time,' said Alhinia;
'for neither party is comfortable, perched on a high horse.'
' And you see,' continued Ulick, 'it is hard for us to give up
our pride, because it is the only thing we've got of our own, and
has been meat, drink, and clothing to us for many a year.'
'So no wonder you make the most of it.'
'True; I think a very high born and very rich man might
be humble,' said Ulick, so meditatively that they laughed; but
Sophy said,
'No. that is not a paradox; the real difficulty is not in
willingly yielding, but in taking what we cannot help.'
'Well,' said Ulick, 'I hope it is not pride not to intend
working under Andrew Goldsmith.'
'Do you consider that as your fate ' asked Albinia.
'Never my fate,' said Ulick, quickly; ' hardly even my alter-
native, for he would like to put up a notice, "No Irish need
apply." We had enough of each other last winter.'
V.V




<pb n="434"/>
431             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
'And do you suppose,' said Mr. Kendal, ' that Mr. Goldsmith
has left your position exactly the same I'
'I've no reason to think otherwise. I refused all connexion
with the bank if it was to interfere with my name. I don't
think it unlikely that he may have left me a small compliment
in the way of shares; but if so, I shall sell them, and make
them keep me at Oxford. I'm not too old yet !'
'Then the work of these four years is wasted,' said Mr.
Kendal, gravely.
'No, indeed,' cried Ulick; 'not if it takes me where I've
always longed to be ! Or, if not, I flatter myself I'm accountant
enough to be an agent in ny own country.'
'Anything to get away from here,' said Albinia, with a shade
of asperity, provoked by the spirit of enterprise in his voice.
' After all, it is a bit of a place,' said Ulick; 'and the office
parlour is not just a paradise ! Then 'tis all on such a narrow
scale, too little to absorb one, and too much to let one do any-
thing else; I see how larger transactions might be engrossing,
but this is mere cramping and worrying; I know I could do
better for my family in the end than by what I can screw out
of my salary now; and if it is no longer to give my poor mother
a sense of expiation, as she calls it, why, then, the cage-door is
open.
His eyes glittered, and Sophy exclaimed, ' Yes; and now the 
training is over, it has made you fitter to fly.'
' It has,' he said; 'and I'm thankful for it. Without being
here, I would never have learnt application-nor some better
things, 1 hope.'
They scarcely saw him again till after the funeral, when late
in the day he came into the drawing-room, and saying that his
aunt was pretty well and composed, hekneltdownon the floor with
the little Awk, and silently built up a tower with her wooden
bricks. His hand trembled nervously at first, but gradually
steadied as the elevation became critical ; and a smile of interest
lighted his face as he became absorbed in raising the structure
to the last brick, holding back the eager child with one han'l
lest she should overthrow it. Completion, triumph, a shock, a
downfall I
' \ell,' cried the elder Albinia, unable to submit to the
suspense.
' Telle est la vie,' answered Ulick, smiling sadly as he lpassed
his hand over his brow.
' It's too bad of him,' broke out Mrs. Kendal.
'I thought you were prepared,' said Sophy, severely, disap-
pointed to see him so much discomposed.




<pb n="435"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.              435
'How should I be prepared,' said he, petulantly, 'for the
whole concern, house, and bank, and all the rest of it T
' Left to you V' was the cry.
'Every bit of it, and an annuity apiece charged on it to my
mother and aunt for their lives I My aunt told me how it came
about. It was all that fellow Andrew's fault.'
'Or misfortune,' murmured Albinia.
'My poor uncle had made a will in Andrew's favour long
before my time, and at Bristol he wanted to make some arrange-
ment for my mother and for me; but it seems Mr. Andrew
took exception at me-would not promise to continue me on,
nor to give me a share in the business, and at last my uncle was
so much disgusted, that be sent for a lawyer and cut Andrew
out of his will altogether. My aunt says he went on asking for
me, and it was Andrew's fault that they wrote instead of tele-
graphing. You can't think what kind messages he sent to me;'
and Ulick's eyes filled with tears. ' My poor uncle, away from
home, and with that eelfish fellow.'
' Did he send any message to your mother r
' Yes ! he told my aunt to write to her that he was sorry
they had been strangers so long, and that-I'd been like a son
to him. I'm sure I wish I had been. I dare say he would have
let me if I had not flown out about my 0. I could have saved
changing it without making such an intolerable row, and then
he might have died more at peace with the world.'
' At peace with you at least he did.'
'I trust so. But if I could only have been by his side, and
felt myself a comfort, and thanked him with all my heart.
Maybe he would have listened to me, and not have sown ill-will
between Andrew and me, by giving neither what we would
like.'
' Do you expect us to be sorry '
' Nay, I came to be helped out of my ingratitude and discon-
tent at finding the cage-door shut, and myself chained to the
oar; for as things are left, I could not get it off my hands
without giving up my mother's interests and my aunt's. Besides,
my poor uncle left me an entreaty to keep things up creditably
like himself, and do justice by the bank. It is as if, poor man
it was an idol that he had been high priest to, and wanted me
to be the same-ay, and sacrifice too.'
'Nay, there are two ways of working, two kinds of sacrifice;
and besides, you are still working for your mother.'
' So I am, but without the hope she had before. To be sure,
it would be affluence at home, or would be if she could have it
in her own hands. Little Redmond shall have the best of edu-
F w 




<pb n="436"/>
436             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
cations I And we must mind there is something in advance by
the time Bryan wants to purchase his company.'
Albinia asked how his aunt liked the arrangement. It seemed
that Andrew had offended her nearly as much as her brother,
and that she was clinging to Ulick as her great comfort and
support; he did not like to stay long away from her, but he had
rushed down to Willow Lawn to avoid the jealous congratula.
tions of the cousinhood.
' You will hardly keep from glad people,' said Albinia. ' You
must shut yourself up if you cannot be congratulated. How
rejoiced Mr. Dusautoy will be !'
' Whatever is, is best,' sighed Ulick. 'I shall mind less when
the first is past I I must go and entertain all these people at
dinner 1' and he groaned.  'Good evening. Heigh hol I
wonder it' our Banshee will think me worth keening for ?'
'I hope she will have no occasion yet,' said Albinia, as he
shut the door; ' but she will be a very foolish Banshee if she
does not, for she will hardly find such another O'More  Well,
Sophy, my dear.'
' We should have missed him,' said Sophy, as grave as a
judge.
Albinia's heart beat high with the hope that Ulick would
soon perceive sufficient consolation for remaining at Bayford,
but of course he could make no demonstration while Miss Gold-
smith continued with him. She made herself very dependent
on him, and he devoted his evenings to her solace. He had few
leisure moments, for the settlement of his affairs occupied him,
and full attention was most important to establish confidence at
this critical juncture, when it might be feared that his youth,
his nation, and Andrew Goldsmith's murmurs might tell against
him. Mr. Kendal set the example of putting all his summer
rents into his hands, and used his influence to inspire trust; and
fortunately the world had become so much accustomed to
transacting affairs with him, that the country business seemed
by no means inclined to fall away. Still there was much hard
work and some perplexity; the Bristol connexion made them-
selves troublesome, and the ordinary business was the heavier
from the c'erks being both so young and inexperienced that he
was obliged to exercise close supervision. It was guessed, too,
that he was not happy about the effect of the influx of wealth
at home, and that he feared it would only add to the number
of horses and debts.
He soon looked terribly fagged and harassed, and owned that
he envied Mr. Hope, who had just received the promise of a
district church, in course of building under Colonel Bury's




<pb n="437"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.              437
auspices, about four miles from Fairmead. To work his way
through the University and take Holy Orders had been Ulick's
ambition; he would gladly have endured privation for such an
object, and it did seem hard that such aspirations should be so
absolutely frustrated, and himself forced into the stream of un-
congenial, unintellectual toil, in so obscure and uninviting a
sphere. The resignation of all lingering hope of escape, and the
effort to be contented, cost him more than even his original
breaking in; and Mr. Kendal one day found him sitting in his
little office parlour unable to think or to speak under a terrible
visitation of his autumnal tormentor, brow-ague.
This made Mr. Kendal take to serious expostulation. It war
impossible to go on in this way; why did he not send for a
brother to help him ?
Ulick could not restrain a smile at the fruitlessness of
thinking of assistance of this kind from his elder brothers; and
as to little Redmond, the only younger one still to be disposed
of, he hoped to do better things for him.
'Then send for a sister.'
He hoped he might bring Rose over when his aunt was
gone, but he could not shut those two up together at any
price.
'Then,' said Mr. Kendal, rather angrily, ' get an experienced,
trustworthy clerk, so as to be able to go from home, or give
yourself some relaxation.'
' Yes; I inquired about such a person, but there's the salary;
and where would be the chance of getting Redmond to school I'
'I think your father might see to that.'
Ulick had no answer to make to this. The legacy to Mrs
O'More might nearly as well have been thrown into the sea.
' Well,' said Mr. Kendal, walking about the room, ' why don't
you keep a horse ?'
' As a less costly animal than brother, sister, or clerk V said
Ulick, laughing.
' Your health will prove more costly than all the rest if you
do not take care.'
Well, my aunt told me it would be respectable and promote
confidence if I lived like a gentleman and kept my horse. I'll
see about it,' said Ulick, in a more persuadable tone.
The seeing about it resulted in the arrival of a genuine pro-
duct of county Galway, a long-legged, raw.boned hunter, with
a wild, frightened eye, quivering, suspicious-looking ears, and an
ill-omened name compounded of kill and of kick, which Maurice
alone endeavoured to pronounce; also an outside car, very
nearly as good as new. This last exceeded Ulick's commission,




<pb n="438"/>
438             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER 
but it had been such a bargain, that Connel had not been able
to resist it; indeed it cost more in coming over than the
original price; but Ulick nearly danced round it, promising
Mrs. and Miss Kendal that when new cushioned and new'
painted they would find it beat everything.
He was not quite so envious of Mr. Hope when he devoted
the early morning hours to Killye-kickye, as the incorrect world
called his steed, and, if the truth must be told, he first began to
realize the advantages of wealth, when he set his name down
among the subscribers to the hounds.
Nor was this the only subscription to which he was glad -
to set his name; there were others where Mr. Dusautoy
wanted funds, and Mr. Kendal's difficulties were lessened by
having another lord of the soil on his side. Some exchanges
brought land enough within their power to make drainage
feasible, and Ulick started the idea that it would be better to
locate the almshouses at the top of the hill, on the site of
Madame Belmarclh's old house, than to place them where Tibb's
Alley at present was, close to the river, and far from church.
Mr. Keudal's plans were unpopular, and two or three un-
toward circumstances combined to lead to his being regarded as
a tyrant. He could not do things gently, and had not a con-
ciliating manner. Had he been more free spoken, real oppres-
sion would have been better endured than benefits against
people's will. He interfered to prevent some Sunday trading;
and some of the Tibb's Alley tenants who ought to have gone at
midsummer, chose to stay on and set him at defiance till they
had to be forcibly ejected; whereupon Ulick O'.More showed
that he was not thoroughly Anglicised by demanding if, under
such circumstances, it was safe to keep the window shutters un-
closed at night, Mr. Kendal's head was such a beautiful mark
under the lamp.
If not a mark for a pistol, he was one for the disaffected
blackguard papers, which made up a pathetic case of a helpless
widow with her bed taken away from under her, ending with
certain vague denunciations which were read with roars of
applause at the last beer shop which could not be cleared till
Christmas, while the closing of the rest sent herds thither; and 
papers were nightly read, representing the Nabob expelling the
industrious from the beloved cottages of their ancestors, by
turns, to swell his own overgrown garden, or to found a con- 
vent, whence, as a disguised Jesuit, he meant to convert all
Bayford to popery.
As Albinia wrote to Genevieve, they were in a state of




<pb n="439"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               439
siege, for only in the middle of the day did Mr. Kendal allow
the womankind to venture out without an escort, the evening
was disturbed by howlings at the gate, and all sorts of petty
acts of spite were committed in the garden, such as injuring
trees, stealing fruit, and carrying off the children's rabbits. Let
that be as it might, G6nevigve owned herself glad to come to
hospitable Willow Lawn, though sorry for the cause.
Poor Mr. Rainsforth, after vainly striving to recruit his
health at Torquay during the vacation, had been sentenced to
give up his profession, and ordered to Madeira, and G6uevieve
was upon the world again.
The Kendals claimed her promise of a long visit, or rather
that she should come home, and take time and choice in making
any fresh engagement, nay, that she should not even inquire for
a situation till after Christma. And after staying to the last
moment when she could help the Rainsforths, she proposed to
spend a day or two with her aunt at the convent, and then
come to her friends at Bayford.
Mr. Kendal drove his ladies to fetch her. He had lately in-
dulged the household with a large comfortable open carriage
with two horses, a rival to Mr. O'More's notable car, where he
used to drive in an easy lounging fashion on one side, with
Hyder Ali to balance him on the other.
This was a grand shopping day, an endless business, and as
the autumn day began to close in, even Mr. Kendal's model
patience was nearly exhausted before they called for their little
friend. There was something very sweet and appropriate in
her appearance; her dress, without presuming to share their
mourning, did not insult it by gay colouring; it was a quiet
dark violet and white checked silk, a black mantle, and black
velvet bonnet with a few green leaves to the lilac flowers, and
the face when at rest was softly pensive, but ready to respond
with cheerful smiles and gratefil looks. She had become more
English, and had dropped much foreign accent and idiom, but
without losing her characteristic grace and power of disem-
barrassing those to whom she spoke, and in a few moments
even Sophy had lost all sense of meeting under awkward or
melancholy circumstances, and was talking eagerly to her dear
old sympathizing friend.
There was a great exchange of tidings; G6nevieve had much
to tell of her dear Rainsforths, the many vicissitudes of anxiety
in which she had shared, and of the children's ways of taking
the parting; and of the dear little Fanny who seemed to
have carried away so large a piece of her susceptible heart, that




<pb n="440"/>
440             TIIE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
Sophy could not help breaking out, ' Well, I do think it is very
hard to make yourself a bit of a mother's heart, only to have it 
torn out again.'
Albinia smiled, and said, 'After all, Sophy, happiness in this
world is in such loving, only we don't find it out till the rent 
has been made.'
'And some people can get fond of anything,' said Sophy.
' I'm sure,' said G6nevieve, ' every one is so kind to me I can't
help it.'
'I was not blaming you,' said Sophy. 'People are the better
for it, but I cannot like except where I esteem, and that does
not often come.'
'Oh ! don't you think so ' cried G6nevibve.
'I don't mean moderate approval. That may extend far, and
with it good-will, but there is a deep, concentrated feeling which
I don't believe those who like every one can ever have, and'
that is life.'
Perhaps the deepening twilight favoured the utterance of
her feelings, for, as they were descending a hill, she said,
' Mamma, that was the place where Maurice was brought back.
to me.'
She had before passed it in silence, but in the dark she was
not afiaid of betraying the expression that the thrill of exquisite
recollection brought to her countenance; and leaning back in
her corner indulged in listening to the narration, as Albinia.
unaware of the special point of the episode, related Maurice's
desperate enterprise, going on to dilate on the benefit of having
Mr. O'More at the bank rather than Andrew Goldsmith.
' Ah !' said Genevieve, 'it is he who wants to pull down our
dear old house. I shall quarrel with him.'
' Genevieve making common cause with the obstructives of
Bayford, as if he had not enemies enough !'
'What's that light in the sky ?' exclaimed Sophy, starting up
to speak to her father on the driving seat.
' A bonfire,' said Mr. Kendal. ' If we had remembered that
it was the 5th of November, we would not have stayed out so
late.' The next moment he drew up the horses, exclaiming,
' Mr. Hope, will you have a lift ?'
Mr. Hope, rather to the ladies' surprise, took the vacant place
beside Sophy, instead of climbing up to the box. He had heen
to see his intended parish, and was an enviable man, for he was
as proud of it as if it had been an intended wife; and Albinia,
who knew it for a slice of dreary heath, was entertained with
bis raptures. Church, schools, and parsonage, each in their way
were perfection or at least promised to be, and he had never




<pb n="441"/>
TILE YOUGO STEP-MOTHER.               441
been so much elevated or so communicative. The speechless
little curate seemed to have vanished.
The road, as may be remembered, did not run parallel with
the curve of the river, but cutting straight across, entered Bay-
ford over the hill, passing a small open bit of waste land, where
stood a few cottages, the outskirts of the town.
Suddenly coming from an overshadowed lane upon this com-
mon, a glare of light flashed on them, showing them each other's
faces, and casting the shadow of the carriage into full relief.
The horses shied violently, and they beheld an enormous bonfire
raised on a little knoll about twenty yards in front of them,
surrounded by a dense crowd, making every species of hideous
noise.
Mr. Kendal checked the horses' start, and Mr. Hope sprang
to their heads. They were young and scarcely trustworthy,
their restless movements showed alarm, and it was impossible to
turn them without both disturbing the crowd and giving them
a fuller view of the object of their terror. Mr. Kendal came
down, and reconnoitring for a moment, said, ' You had better
get out while we try to lead them round, we will go home by
Squash Lane.'
Just then a brilliant glow of white flame, and a tremendous
roar of applause, put the horses in such an agony, that thev
would have been too much for Mr. Hope, had not Mr. Kendal
started to his assistance, and a man standing by likewise caught
the rein. He was a respectable carpenter who lived on the
heath, and touching his hat as he recognised them, said, ' Sir, if
the ladies would come into my house, and you too. sir. The
people are going on in an odd sort of way, and Mr. Kendal
would be frightened. 'll take care of the carriage.'
Mr. Kendal went to the side of the carriage, and asked the
ladies if they were alarmed.
' 0 no r answered Albinia, ' it is great fun ;' and as the horses
fidgeted again, ' it feels like a review.'
'You had better get out,' he said; 'I must try to back the
horses till I can turn them without running over any one. Will
you go into the house t You did not expect to find Bayford so
riotous,' he added with a smile, as he assisted G6nevieve out.
' You are not going to get up again,' said Albinia, catching
hold of him, and in her dread of his committing himself to the
mercy of the horses, returning unmeaning thanks to the car-
penter's urgent requests that she would take refuge in his house.
In fact, the scene was new and entertaining, and on the farther
side of the road, sheltered by the carriage, the party were en-
tirely apart from the throng, which was too much absorbed to




<pb n="442"/>
442            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
notice them, only a few heads turning at the rattling of tb
harness, and the ladies were amused at the bright flame, and thei
dark figures glancing in and out of the light, the shouts of deo
light and the merry faces.
'There's Guy Fawkes,' cried Alhinia, as a procession of scare-
crows were borne on chairs amid thunders of acclamation ; 'but
whom have they besides ? Here are some new characters.'
' Most lugubrious looking,' said G6nevieve. ' I cannot make
out the shouts.'
'It is the Nabob,' said Mr. Kendal. ' Perhaps you do not
know that is my alias. This is my execution.'
The carpenter implored them to come in, and Mr. Hope added
his entreaties, but Mr. Kendal would not leave the horses, and
the ladies would not leave him; and they all stood still while
his effigy was paraded round the knoll, the mark of every squib,
the object of every invective that the rabble could roar out at
the top of their voices. Jesuits and Papists; EnglishmeD
treated like blackamoor slaves in the Indies ; honest folk driven
out of house and home; such was the burthen of the cries that
assailed the grim representative carried aloft, while the real man
stood unmoved as a statue, his tall, powerful figure unstirred,
his long driving-whip resting against his shoulder without be-
traying the slightest motion, neither firm lip nor steady eye
changing.  G6nevieve, with tears in her eyes, exclaimed,' Oh I
this is madness ! Will no one tell them how wicked they are V'
'Never mind, my dear,' said Mr. Kendal, pressing the hand
that in her fervour she had laid on his arm, ' they will come to
their senses in time. No, Mr. Hope, I beg you will not inter-
fere, they are in no state for it; they have done no harm as
yet.'
'I wonder what the police are about?' cried Albinia, indig-
nantly.
'They are too few to do any good,' said Mr. Kendal. ' It may
be better that they are not incensing the mob. It will all go
off quietly when this explosion has relieved their feelings.'
They felt as if there were something grand in this perfectly
dispassionate reception of the outrage. and they stood awed and
silenced, Sophy leaning on him.
'It will soon be over now,' lie said; 'they are poking up the
flame to receive me.'
' Hark ! what's that ?'
The mob came swaying back, and a rich voice swelled above
all the din, 'Boys, boys, is it burning your fiiends you are 
Then. for the first time, Mr. Kendal started, and muttered,
' Foolish lad! is lie here 1'




<pb n="443"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                443
Confused cries rose again, but the other voice gained the
mastery.
'So you call that undertaker-looking figure there Mr. KendaL
Small credit to your taste. You want to burn him. What
for 1'
'For being a Nabob and a tyrant,' was the shout.
'Much you know of Nabobs ! No; I'll tell you what it's for.
It is because his son got his death fighting for his queen and his
country a year ago, and on his death-bed bade him do his best
to drive the fever from your doors, and shelter you and save you
fiom the Union in your old age. Is that a thing to burn him
for 1'
' We want no Irish papists here r shouted a blackguard voice.
'Serve him with the same sauce.'
'I never was a papist,' was the indignant reply.  No more
was he; but Ive said that the place shan't disgrace itself,
and-'
'I'm with you,' shouted another above all the howls of the
mob. 'Gilbert Kendal was as kind-hearted a chap as ever
-lived, and rll see no wrong done to his father.'
Tremendous uproar ensued; then the well-known tones pealed
out again, I'rve given my word to save his likeness. Come on,
boys. Hurrah for Kendal r
The war-cry was echoed by a body of voices, there was a
furious melee and a charge towards the Nabob, who rocked and
toppled down, while stragglers came pressed backwards on all
sides.
' Here, Hope, take care of them. Stay with them,' said Mr.
Kendal, putting the whip into the curate's hand, and striding
towards the nucleus of the fray, through the throng who were
driven backwards.
' O'More,' he called, ' what's all this I Give over I Are you
mad I' and then catching up, and setting on his legs, a little
fallen boy, ' Go home; get out of all this mischief. What are
you doing    Take home that child,' to a gaping girl with a
baby. ' O'More, I say, I'll commit every man of you if you don't
give over.'
He was recognised, and those who had little appetite for the
skirmish gave back from him; but the more reckless and daring
small fry began shrieking, ' The Nabob!' and letting off crackers
and squibs, through which he advanced upon the knot of positive
combatants, who were exchanging blows over his prostrate
image in front of the fire.
One he caught by the collar, in the act of aiming a blow.
The fist was instantly levelled at him, with the cry, 'You




<pb n="444"/>
414             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER. 
rascal ! what do you mean by it ' But the fierce struggle failed
to shake off the powerful grasp; and at the command, 'Don't
lie such a fool!' Ulick burst out, 'Murder! 'tis himself!' and
in the surprise was dragged some paces before recovering his
perceltions.
The cry of police had at the same instant produced a universal
scattering, and five policemen, coming on the ground, found
scarcely any one to separate or capture. Mr. Kendal relaxed
his hold, saying, 'You are my prisoner.'
'I didn't think you'd been so strong,' said Ulick, shaking
biilself, and looking bewildered. ' Where's the effigy ?'
' What's that to you. Come away, like a rational being.'
'Ha I what's that ?' as a frightful, agonizing shriek rent the
air, and a pillar of flame came rushing across the now open
space. It was a child, one mass of fire, and flying, in its anguish,
from all who would have seized it. One moment of horror, and
it had vanished ! The next, G6nevieve's voice was heard crying,
'Bring me something more to press on it.'   She had con-
trived to cross its path with her large carriage rug, and was
kneeling over it, forcing down the rug to smother the flames.
Mr. Hope brought her a shawl, and they all stood round in
silent awe.
'The poor child will be stifled,' said Albinia, kneeling down to
help to unfold its face.
Poor little face, distorted with terror and agony ! One of the
policemen recognised it as the child of the public-house in Tibb's
Alley. There were moans, but no one dared to uncover the
limbs; and the policeman and Mr. Hope proposed carrying it
at once to Mr. Bowles, and then home. Mr. Kendal desired
that it should be laid on the seat of the carriage, which he would
drive gently to the doctor's. Genevieve got in to watch over
the poor little boy, and the others walked on by the side, passed
the battle-field, now entirely deserted, too much shocked for
aught but conjectures on his injuries, and the cause of the mis-
fortune. Either he must have been pushed in on the fire by the
runaway rabble, or have trod upon some of the scattered com-
bustibles.
Mr. Bowles desired that the child should be taken home at
once, promising to follow instantly; so at the entrance of Tibb's
Alley, the carriage stopped, and Mr. Hope lifted out the poor
little wailing bundle. Albinia was following, but a decided
prohibition from her husband checked her. 'I would not have
either of you go to that house on any account. Tell them to
send to us for whatever they want, but that is enough.'
There was no gainsaying such a command, but as they reached




<pb n="445"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHEB                45
the door of Willow Lawn, Mr. Kendal exclaimed, 'Where is
Mliss Durant '
' She is gone with the little boy, said Sophy. 'She told me
she hoped you would not be displeased. Mr. Hope will take
care of her, and she will soon come in.'
' Every one is mad to-night !' cried Mr. Kendal. 'In such a
place as that I I will go for her directly.'
' Pray don't,' said Albinia; ' no one could speak a rude word
to her on such an errand. She and Mr. Hope will be much
more secure from incivility without you.'
'I believe it may be so, but I wish-'
His wish was broken off, for his little Albinia, screaming,
'Papa ! papa !' clung to him in a transport of caresses, which
Maurice explained by saying, 'Little Awkey has been crying,
mamma; she thought they were burning papa in the bonfire.'
'Papa not burnt 1' cried little Awkey, patting his cheeks, and
laying her head on his shoulders alternately, as he held her
to his breast. ' Naughty people wanted to make a fire, but they
sha'n't burn papa or poor Guy Fawkes, or any of the good men.'
' And where were you, Ulick I' cried Maurice, in an impe-
rious, injured way. 'You said once, perhaps you would take
me to see the fire; and I went up to the bank, and they said
you were gone; and it was glaring so in the sky; and I did so
want to go.'
' I am glad you stayed away, my man,' said Albinia.
'I did want to go,' said Maurice; ' and I ran up to the top
of the street, and there was Mr. Tritton; and he said if I liked
a lark, he would take care of me; but-' and there he stopped
short, and the colour came into his face.
Albinia threw her arm round him, and kissed him, saying,
' My trusty boy ! and so you came home '
'Yes; and there was Awkey crying about their burning
papa, and she would not go up to the garret-window to see the
fire, nor do anything.'
'Why, what is the sword here for?' exclaimed Sophy, finding
it on the stairs.
' Because then Awkey was not so afraid.'
For once, Maurice had been exemplary, keeping from the
tempting uproar, and devoting himself to soothing his little
sister. It.was worth all the vexations of the evening; but he
wenton to ask if Ulick could not take him now, if the fire
was not out yet,
'Not exactly,' said Mr. Kendal, drily.
'I beg your pardon, Mr. Kendal,' said Ulick, who had
%pparently only just resumed the use of speech; 'don't know




<pb n="446"/>
446            THE YOUNG STEP-HOTHER.
what I may have done when you collared me, but I'd no more 
notion of its being you than the Lord Lieutenant.'
' And pray what took you there ' asked Mr. Kendal. ' The
surprise was quite as great to me.'
'Why,' said Ulick, 'one of the little lads of my Sunday
class gave me a hint the other day that those brutes meant to
have a pretty go to-light, and that Jackson was getting up a
figure of the Nabub to break their spite upon. So I told niy
little fellow to give a hint to a few more of the right sort, and
we'd go up together and not let the rascals have their own way.'
'Upon my word, I wonder what the Vicar will say to the
use you make of his Sunday-school.  Pretty work for his
model teacher.'
'What better could the boys be taught than to fight for the
good cause  Why, no one is a scratch the worse for it. And
do you think we could sit by and see our best friend used worse
than a dlog ?'
'Why not give notice to the police ?'
'And would you have me hinder a fight r cried Ulick, in
the most Irish of all his voices.
' Oh I very well, if you like-only there will be a run on
the bank to-morrow.'
What has Ulick been doing, Sophy ?' asked Maurice.
'Only what you would have done had you been older,
Maurice,' she said, in a hurt voice; 'defending papa's effigy,
for which he does not seem to meet with much gratitude.'
'Well,' said Mr. Kendal, who all the time had had more
gratitude in his eyes than on his tongue, ' if the burning had
had the same consequence as melting one's waxen effigy was
thought to have, it might have been worth while to interfere, 
but I should have thought it more dignitied in a respectable sub-
stantial householder to let those foolish fellows have their swing.'
'More dignified maybe,' smiled Albinia, 'but less like an
O'Mloie.' 
'No, you are not going,' said Mr. Kendal; 'I shall not
release my prisoner just yet.'
' You carried off all the honour of the day,' said Ulick. 'I
had no notion you had such an arm. 'Why, you swung me
round like a tom-cat, or-' and he exemplified the exploit upon
MIaurice, and was well buffeted.
'That's a little Irish blarney to propitiate me,' laughed MIr.
Kendal, who certainly was in unusual spirits after his execu- 
tion and rescue by proxy, 'but you wont escape prison fare.'
' There's no doubt who was the heroine of the day,' added
Sophy. ' How one envies her!'




<pb n="447"/>
THE YOUNG 8TEP-MOTHE2.              447
What ! your little governess friend ' said Ulick. ' Yes; she
drt show superior wit, when the rest of the world stood gaping
reund.'
' It was admirable-just like G6neviave's tenderness and dex-
terity,' said Albinia. 'I dare say she is doing everything for
the poor little fellow.'
'Yes, admirable,' said Mr. Kendal; 'but you all behaved
very creditably, ladies.'
'Ay,' said Albinia; 'not to scream is what a man thinks the
climax of excellence in a woman'
'It is generally all that is required,' said Mr. Kendal. ' I
don't know what I should have done if poor Lucy had been
there.'
Thereupon the ladies went upstairs, Maurice following
Sophy to extract a full account of the skirmish. The imp
probably had an instinct that she would think more of what
redounded to Ulick O'More's glory than of what would be
edifying to his own infant mind. It was doubtful how long
it would be before Guy Fawkes would arrive at his proper
standing in the little Awk's opinion, after the honour of an
auto-da,-f in company with papa.
Mr. Hope escorted G6nevieve home, and was kept to dinner.
They narrated that they had found the public-house open, and
the bar full of noisy runaways
The burns were dreadful, but the surgeon did not think they
would be fatal, and the child had held Genevieve's hand through-
out the dressing, and seemed so unwilling to part with her, that
she had promised to come again the next day, and had been
thanked gratefully. There seemed no positive want of comforts,
anl there was every hope that all would do well.
Genevieve looked pale after the scene she had gone through,
and could not readily persuade herself to eat, still less rally
her spirits to talk; but she managed to avoid observation at
dinner-time, and afterwards a rest on the sofa restored her.
She evidently felt, as she said, that this was coming home, and -
her exquisite gift of tact making her perceive that she was to
be at ease and on an equality, she assumed her position without
giving her friends the embarrassment of installing her, and
Mr. Hope was in such a state of transparent admiration, that
Albinia could not help two or three times noiselessly clapping
her hands under the table, and secretly thanking the rioters and
their tag-rag and bob-tail for having provided a home for little
Genevieve Durant.
There was indeed a pang as s&e thought of Gilbert; but she
believed that GeneviBve's heart had never been really touched,




<pb n="448"/>
448            TIIE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
and was still fresh and open. She thought she might nwalh
Mr. Keldal and Sophy equally nlagnanillous. Perhaps by that;
time Sophy would be too happy to have leisure to be hurt, and.
she had little fear but that Mr. Kendal's good sense would ~
conquer his jealousy for his son, though it might cost him
something.
Two lovers to befriend at once ! Two desirable attachments
to foster! There was glory ! Not that Albinia fulfilled her
mission to a great extent; shamefacedness always restrained her,
and she had not Emily's gift for making opportunities. Indeed,
when she did her best, so perversely bashful were the parties,
that the wrong pairs resorted together, the two who could talk
being driven into conversation by the silence of the others.
Of Mr. Hope's sentiments there could be no doubt. He was
fairly carried off his feet by the absorption of the passion, which
was doubly engrossing because all ladies had hitherto appeared
to him as beings with whom conversation was an impossible
duty ; but after all he had heard of Miss Durant, he might as
a judicious man select her for an excellent parsoness, and as a
young man fall vehemently in love. Nothing could be more
evident to the lookers:on; but AllIinia could not satisfy herself
whether Genevieve had any suspicion.
She was not very young, knew something of the world, and
was acute and observing; but on the other hand, she had made
it a principle never to admit the thought of courtship, and she
might not be sufficiently acquainted with the habits of the
individual to be sensible of the symptomatic alteration.
She had begged the Dusautoys to make her leisure profitable,
and spent much of her time upon the schools, on her little
patient in Tibb's Alley, and in going about among the poor;
she visited her old shoopkeeper friendls, and drank tea with
them much oftener than gratified Mr. Kendal, talking so openly
of the pleasure of seeing them again, that Albinia sometimes
thought the blood of the O'Mores was a little chafed.
'There,' said Genevieve, completing a housewife, filled with
needles ready threaded, ' I wonder whether the omnibus is too
protestant to leave a parcel at the convent I'
'I don't think its scruples of conscience would withstand
Lixpence, said Albinia.
' You might post it for less than that,' said Sophy.
'Don't you know,' said TUlick O'More, who was playing with
the little Awk in the window, 'that the feminine mind loves
exledients I  It would be less commonplace to confide the
parcel to the conductor, than merely let him receive it, as guard
of the mail bag and servant of the public.'




<pb n="449"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER               449
' Exactly,' laughed G6nevibve. ' Think of the moral influence
of being selected as bearer of a token of tenderness to my aunt
on her fete, instead of being treated as a mere machine, devoid
of human sympathies.'
' Sphy, where were we reading of a nation which gives the
simplest transaction the air of a little romance I' said Ulick.
' And I have heard of a nation which denudes every action of
sentiment, and leaves you the tree without the leaves,' was
Geneviave's retort.
' That misses fire, Miss Durant; my nation does everything
by the soul, nothing by mechanism'
'When they do do it.'
'That's a defiance. You must deprive the conductor of the
moral influence, whether as man or machine, and entrust the
parcel to me.'
' That would be like chartering a steamer to send home a
Chinese puzzle.'
'No, indeed; I must go to Hadminster. Bear me witness,
Sophy, Miss Goldsmith wants me to talk to the house agent.'
'Mind, if you miss St. Leocadia's day, you will miss my
aunt's fete.'
* Mr. O'More succeeded in carrying off the little parcel. The
next morning, as the ladies were descending the hill, a hurried
step came after them, and the curate said in an abrupt rapid
manner, ' I beg your pardon, I was going to Hadminster; could
I do anything for you 1'
'Nothing, thank you,' said Albinia, at whom he looked.
'Did I not hear-Miss Durant had some work to send her
aunt to-day 1'
'How did you know that, Mr. Hope I' exclaimed G6nevieve.
I heard something pass, when some one was admiring your
work,' he said, noi looking at her. ' And this-I think-is St.
Leocadia's day.'
'I am very much obliged to you for remembering it, but I
have sent my little parcel otherwise, so I need not trouble
you.'
'Ah I how stupid in me I I am very sorry. I beg your
pardon;' and he hurried off, looking as if very sorry were not a
mere matter of course.
' Poor man,' thought Albinia, ' I dare say he has reckoned on
it all this time, and hunted out St. Leocadia in Alban Butler,
and then tried to screw up his courage all yesterday. Ulick
has managed to traverse a romance; but perhaps it is just as
well, for what would be the effect on the public of Mr. Hope in
hat/ coat being seen ringing at the convent door I'
oG




<pb n="450"/>
460            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
' Well, Miss Durant,' said Ulick, entering the drawing-room
in the winter twilight, ' here is evidence for you !' 
' You have actually penetrated the convent, and seen my
aunt ? IImpossible I and yet this pencilled note is her own dear
writing !'
'You don't mean that you really were let in I' cried Sophy. '
'I entered quite legitimately, I assure you. It was all luck.
I'd just been putting up at the Crown, when what should I see
in a sort of a trance, staring right into the inn-yard, but as
jolly-looking a priest as ever held a station.  " An' it's long
since I've seen the like of you," says he aloud to himself  ' Is
it the car I" says I. " Sure it is," says he. "I've not laid my
eyes on so iligant a vehicle since I left County Tyrone."'
' Mr. O'Har !' exclaimed Genevieve.
(" And I'm mistaken if you're not the master of it," he goes
on, taking the measure of me all over,' continued Ulick, putting
on his drollest brogue. ' You see he had too much manners to
say that such a persortable young gentleman, speaking such
correct English, could be no other than an Irishman; so I made
my bow, and said the car and I were both from County Galway,
and we were straight as good friends as if we'd hunted together
at Ballymakilty. To be sure, he was a little taken aback when 
he found I was one of the Protestant branch of the O'Morea,
but a countryman is a countryman in a barbarous land, and he
asked me to call upon him, and offered to do me any service in
his power.'
' I am sure he would. Ha is the kindest old gentleman I
know,' exclaimed Genevieve. 'He always used to bring me
barleysugar-drops when I was a little girl, and it was he who
found out our poor old Biddy in distress at HadminsSr, and
sent her to live with us.'
' Indeed ! Then I owe him another debt of gratitude-in
fact, he told me that one of his flock, meaning Biddy, had
spoken to him honourably of me. " Well," said I, " the greatest
service you could do me, sir, would be to introduce me to
Mademoiselle Belmarchb; I have a young lady's commission
for her."  " From my little Gen.-vieve," he said, "the darling
tnat she is. Did you leave the child well ?"  And so when I
said it was a present for her saint's day, and that your heart
was set on it--'
'But, Mr. O'More, I never did set my heart on your seeing
her.'
'\Well, well, you would have done it if you'd known there
had i,,-en any chance of it; besides, your heart was set on her
gettiLn the work, and how could I make sure of that unless I




<pb n="451"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               451
gave it into her own hand I I wouldn't have put it into Mr.
O'Hara's snuffy pocket to hinder myself from being bankrupt.'
'Then he took you in I'
'So he did, like an honest Irishman as he was. He rang at
the bell, and spoke to the portress, and had me into the parlour
and sent up for the lady; and I have seldom spent a pleasanter
halt-hour. Mademoiselle Belmaroh6 bade me tell you that she
would write fuller thanks to you another day, and that her eyes
would thank you every night.'
' Was her cold gone I Did she seem well, the dear aunt 
G6neviave was really grateful, and had many questions to ask
about her aunt, which met with detailed answers
' By-the-by,' said Ulick, 'I met Mr. Hope in the street as I
was coming away, I offered him a lift, but he said he was not
coming home till late. I wonder what he is doing.'
Albinia and Sophy exchanged glances, and had almost said,
'Poor Mr. Hope I' It was very hard that the good fortune and
mere good nature of an indifferent person should push him
where the quiet curate so much wished to be. Albinia would
have liked to have had either a little impudence or a little
tact to enable her to give a hint to Ulick to be less officious.
St. Leocadia's feast was the 9th of December. Three days
after,'G6nevieve received a letter which made her change coun.
tenance, and hurry to her own room, whence she did not emerge
till luncheon-time.
In the late afternoon, there was a knock at the drawing-room
door, and Mr. Dusautoy said,' Can I speak with you a minute,
Mrs. Kendal 
Dreading ill news of Lucy, she hurried to the morning-room
with him.
' Fanny said I had better speak to you. This poor fellow is
in a dreadful state.'
' Algernon f
'No, indeed. Poor Hope I What has possessed the girl v
'G6neviave has not refused him I'
'Did you not know it   I found him in his rooms as white
as a sheet 1 I asked what was the matter; he begged me to let
him go away for one Sunday, and find him a substitute. I saw
how it was, and at the first word he broke down and told me.'
' Was this to-day '
' Yes. What can the silly little puss be thinking of to put an
excellent fellow like that to so much pain 1 Going about it in
such an admirable way, too, writing to old Mamselle first, and
getting a letter from her which he sends with his own, and pro-
mising to guarantee her fifty pounds a year out of his own
an 




<pb n="452"/>
452             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
pocket. 'I should like to know what that little Jenny me
by it. I gave her credit for more sense.'    .
' Perhaps she thinks, under the circumstances of her coming'
here, within the year-'
'Ah ! very proper, very pretty of her; I never thought ot
that; I suppose I have your permission to tell Hope i'
'I believe all the town knew it,' said Albiuia.
'Yes; he need not be downhearted, he has only to be patient,
and he will like her the better for it. After all, though he is.
as good a man as breathes, he cannot be Gilbert, and it will be
a great relief to him. I'll tell him to put all his fancies about
O'More out of his head.'
'Most decidedly,' said Albinia; 'nothing can be greater
nonssense. Tell him by no means to go away, for when she'
finds that our feelings are not hurt, and has become used to
the idea, I have every hope that she will be able to form a
new-'
' Ay; ay ;poor Gilbert would have wished it himself. It is:
very good of you, Mrs. Kendal; I'll put the poor fellow in'
spirits again.'                                       I
'Did you hear whether she gave any reasons I'
'Oh ! I don't know-something about her birth and station;
but that's stuff-she's a perfect lady, and much more.'
'And he is only a bookseller's son.'
'True; and though it might be awkward to have the parson's 
father-in-law cutting capers if he lived in the same town, yet
being dead these fifteen or eighteen years, where's the damage P:'
' Was that all 2'
I farcy that she said she never meant to marry; but that's )
all nonsense; she is the very girl that oullrit, and I hope you 
will talk to her and bring her to reason. There's not a couple
in the whole place that I should be so glad to marry as those 
two.'
Albinia endeavoured to discuss the matter with Geneviave 
that night when they went upstairs. It was not easy to do, for
G6nevieve seemed resolved to wish her good-night outside her
door, but she made her entrance, and putting her arm round
her little friend's waist, said, 'Am I very much in your way,i
my dear ? I thought you might want a little help, or at leasta
a little talk.'
'Oh ! Mrs. Kendal, I hoped you did not know I' and her eyes 
filledfwith tears.
Mr. Dusautoy told me, my dear; poor Mr. Hope's distress-'
betrayed him, and Mr. Dusautoy was anxious I should-'
Genevieve did not let her finish, but exclaiming, 'I did




<pb n="453"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHEB.                453
not expect this from you, madame,' gave way to a shower of
tears.
' My dear child, do we not all feel you the more one with
ourselves for this reluctanceS' said Albinia, caressing her
fondly. ' It shall not be forced upon you any more till you can
bear it.'
'Till I' exclaimed Genevieve, alarmed. ' Oh I do not say that 1
Do not hold out false hopes I I never shall !'
'I do not think you are a fair judge as yet, my dear.'
'I think I am,' said Genevieve, slowly; ' I must not let you
love me on false pretences, dearest Mrs. Kendal. I do not
think it is all for-for his sake-but indeed, though I must
esteem Mr. Hope, I do not believe I could ever feel for him
as-' then breaking off. ' I pray you, with all my heart, dearest
friend, never to speak to me of marriage. I am the little
governess, and while Heaven gives me strength to work for my
aunt, and you let me call this my home, I am content, I am
blessed. Oh I do not disturb and unsettle me '
So imploringly did she speak, that she obliterated all thought
of the prudent arguments with which Albinia had come stored.
It was no time for them ; there was no possibility of endeavour-
tng to dethrone the memory of her own Gilbert; and her im-
pulse was far more to agree that no one else could ever be loved,
than to argue in favour of a new attachment. She was proud
of Gilbert for being thus recollected, and doubly pleased with
the widowed heart; nor was it till the first effect of G6nevieve's
tears had passed off that she began to reflect that the idea might
become familiar, and that romance having been abundantly
satisfied by the constancy of the Lancer, sober esteem might be
the basis of very happy married affection.
Mr. Hope did not go away, but he shrank into himself, and
grew more timid than ever, and it was through the Dusautoys
that Albinia learnt that he was much consoled, and intended to
wait patiently. He had written to Mdlle. Belmarche, who had
been extremely disappointed. and continued to believe that so
excellent and well brought up a young girl as her niece would
not resist her wishes with regard to a young pastor so re-
spectable.
Sophy, when made aware of what was going on, did not smile
or shed a tear, only a strange whiteness came across her face.
She made a commonplace remark with visible effort, nor was
she quite herself for some time. It was as if the reference to
her brother had stirred up the old wound. G6nevieve seemed
to have been impelled to manifest her determination of resuming
her occupation, she wrote letters vigorously, answered adver-




<pb n="454"/>
454            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
tisements, and in spite of the united protest of her friends -
advertised herself as a young person of French extraction, but a
member of the Church of Enlgland, accustomed to tuition, and
competent to instruct in French, Italian, music, and all the ordi-
nary branches of education. Address, G. C. D., Mr. Richard-
son's, bookseller, Bayford.
CHAPTER XXX.
\/ TSS GOLDSMITH went to spend Christmas with an old
ll friend, leaving Ulick more liberty than he had enjoyed
for a long time. He used it a good deal at Willow Lawn, and
was there of course on Christmas-day. After dinner the deco-
ration of the church was under discussion. The Bayford neigh-
bourhood was unpropitious to holly, and Sophy and G6nevieve
had hardly ever seen any, except that G6nevieve remembered
the sooty bits sold in London. Something passed about sending
for a specimen from Fairmead, but Albinia said that would not
answer, for her brother's children were in despair at the absence
of berries, and had ransacked Colonel Bury's plantations in vain.
The next day, about twilight, Albinia and Sophy were
arranging some Christmas gifts for the old women, in the morn-
ing-room; Genevieve was to come and help them on her return
from the child in Tibb's Alley.
' Oh, here she comes, up the garden,' said Sophy, wko was by
the window.
Presently Albinia heard a strange sou.d as of tightened
breath, and looking up saw Sophy deathly pale, with her eyes
fixed on the window. In terror she flew to her side, but Sophy
spoke not, she only clutched her hand with fingers cold and
tight as iron, and gazed with dilated eyes. Albinia looked-
Ulick had come from the house-there was a scarlet-berried
spray in Genevieve's hand, which she was trying to make him
take again-his face was all pleading and imploring-she
turned hastily from him, and they saw her cheek glowing with
crimson-she tried to force back the holly spray-but her hand
was caught-he was kissing it. No; she had rent it away-she
had fled in through the conservatory-they heard the doors--
she had rushed up to her own room.
Sophy's grasp grew more rigid-she panted for breath.
' My child ! my child !' said Albinia, throwing her arms round
her, expecting her to faint. ' Oh ! could I have imagined such
treason V' Her eyes flashed, and her frame quivered with indig
nation. ' He shall never come into this house again !'




<pb n="455"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER                 453
' Mamma   hush f said Sophy, releasing herself from  her
embrace, and keeping her body upright, though obliged to seat
herself on the nearest chair. ' It is not treason,' she said slowly,
as though her mouth were parched.
'Contemptible fickleness 1' burst out Albinia; but Sophy
implored silence by a gesture.
'No,' she said; 'it was a dream, a degrading, humiliating
dream; but it is over.'
'There is no degradation except to the base trifler I once
thought better things of'
'He has not trifled,' said Sophy. ' Wait ! hush !'
There was a composure about her that awed Albinia, who
stood watching in suspense while she went to the bed-room,
drank some water, cooled her brow, pushed back her hair, and
sitting down again in the same collected manner, which gave her
almost a look of majesty, she said, ' Promise me, mamma, that
all shall go on as if this folly had never crossed our minda'
' I can't I I can't, Sophy !' said Albinia in the greatest agita-
tion. ' 1 can't unknow that you have been shamefully used.'
'Then you will lead papa to break his promise to G6eevieve,
and lower me not only in my own eyes, but in those of every
one.'
' He little knew that he was bringing her here to destroy his
daughter's happiness. So that was why she held off from Mr.
Hope,' cried Albinia, burning with such indignation, that on
some one she must expend it, but a tirade against the artfulness
of the little French witch was cut off short by an authori-
tative-
'Don't, mamma I You are unjust I How can she help being
loveable I
'He had no business to know whether she was or not.'
'You are wrong, mamma    The absurdity was in thinking I
ever was so.'
'Very little absurd,' said Albinia, twining her arms round
Sophy.
'Don't make me silly,' hastily said Sophy, her voice trembling
for a moment; 'I want to tell you all about it,' and you will
see that no one is to blame. The perception has been growing
on me for a long time, but I was weak enough to indulge in
the dream. It was very sweet 1 There again she struggled not
to break down, gained the victory, and went on, 'I don't think
I should have dared to imagine it myself, but I saw others
thought it, who knew more; 1 knew the incredible was some-
times true, and every little kindness he did-Oh ! how foolish !
as if he could help doing kindnesses I My better sense told me




<pb n="456"/>
456            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
he did not really distinguish me; but there was something that
would feed upon every word and look. Then last year I was
wakened by the caricature busituess. That opened my eyes, for
no one who had that in him would have turned my sister into 
derision. I was sullen then and proud, and when-when
humanity and compassion brought him to me in my distress-oh I
why-why could not I have been reasonable, and not have
selfishly fed on what I thought was revived ?'
'He had no right-' began Albinia, fiercely.
'He could neither help saving Maurice, nor speaking comfort
and support when he found me exhausted and sinking. It was
I who was the foolish creature-I hate myself! Well, you
know how it has been-I liked to believe it was the thing-I
knew he cared less for me than-but I thought it was always
so between men and women, and that I would not have petty
distrusts. But when she came, I saw what the true-true 
feeling is-I saw that he felt when she came into the room
-I saw how he heard her words and missed mine-I
saw-' Sophy collected herself, and spoke quietly and dis-
tinctly, 'I saw his love, and that it had never been for
me.'
There was a pause; Albinia could not bear to look, speak, or
move. Sophy's words carried conviction that swept away her
sand castle.
'Now, mamma,' said Sophy, earnestly, 'you own that he has
not been false or fickle.'
'If he has not, he has disregardedtbo choicest jewel that lay
in his way,' said Albinia with some sharpness.
'But he has not been that,' persisted Sophy.
'Well-no; I suppose not.'
'And no one can be less to blame than Gunevieve.'
'Little flirt, I've no patience with her.'
'She can't help her manners,' repeated Sophy; 'I feel them
so much more charming than mine every moment. She will
make him so happy.'
' What are you talking of, Sophy ? He must he mad if he is
in earnest. A man of his family pride ! His father will never
listen to it for a moment.'
'I don't know what his father may do,' said Sophy; ' but I
know what I pray and entreat we may do, and that is, do our
utmost to make this come to good.'
'Sophy, don't ask it. I could not, I know you could not.'
'There is no loss of esteem. I honour him as I always did,'
said Soply. ' Yes, the more since I see it was all for papa and
the right, all unselfish, on that 5th of November. Some day I
.hal. l .a  Srn nlt- f0lo -clfiuln- uz 




<pb n="457"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHERI              457
She kept her hand tightly pressed on her heart as she spoke,
and Albinia exclaimed,' You shall not see it; you overrate
your strength; it is my business to prevent you I'
' Think, mamma,' said Sophy, rising in her earnestness. 'Here
is a homeless orphan, whom you have taught to love you, whom
papa has brought here as to a home, and for Gilbert's sake. Is
it fair-innocent, exemplary as she is-to turn against her
because she is engaging and I am not, to cut her off from us,
drive her away to the first situation that offers, be it what it
may, and with that thought aching and throbbing in her heart t
Oh, mamma would that be mercy or justice 1'
' You are not asking to have it encouraged in the very house
with you 1
'I do not see how else it is to be,' said Sophy.
'Let him go after her, if there's anything in it but Irish folly
and French coquetry-'
'How, mamma      Where    When she is a governess in
some strange place I How could he leave his business t How
could she attend to him I Oh, mamma I you used to be kind:
how can you wish to put two people you love so much to such
misery I'
' Because I can't put one whom I love better than both, and
.who deserves it, to greater misery,' said Albinia, embracing her.
' Then do not put me to the misery of being ungenerous, and
the shame of having my folly suspected.'
Albinia would have argued still, but the children came in,
Sophy went away, and there was no possibility of a tte-&-ttte.
How strange it was to have such a tumult of feeling within, and
know that the same must be tenfold multiplied in the hearts of
those two girls, and yet go through all the domestic conven-
tionalities, each wearing a mask of commonplace ease, as though
nothing had happened I
Genevieve had, Albinia suspected, been crying excessively;
for there was that effaced annihilated appearance that tears pro-
duced on her, but otherwise she did her part in answering her
host, who was very fond of her, and always made her an object
of attention. Albinia found herself betraying more abstraction,
she was so anxiously watching Sophy, who acquitted herself
best of all, had kept tears from her eyes, talked more than usual,
and looked brilliant, with a-bright colour dyeing her cheeks.
She was evidently sustained by eagerness to obtain her generous
purpose, and did not yet realize the price.
The spray of holly was lying as if it had been tossed in vex-
ation upon the marble slab in the hall. Albinia, from the stairs,
saw Sophy take it up, and waited to see what she would do with
it. The Sophy she had once known would have dashed it into




<pb n="458"/>
458            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
the flames, and then have repented. No ! Sophy held it ten.
derly, and looked at the glossy leaves and coral fruit with no
angry eye; she even raised it to her lips, but it was to pierce
with one of the long prickles till her brow drew together at the
smart, and the blood started. Then she began to mount the
stairs, and meeting Albinia, said quietly, ' I was going to take
this to G6nevieve's room; it is empty now, but perhaps you
had better take care of it for her, out of sight. It will be her
greatest treasure to-morrow.'
Mr. Kendal read aloud as usual, but who of his audience
attended I Certainly not Albinia. She sat with her head bent
over her work, revolving the history of these last two years, and
trying to collect herself after the sudden shock, and the angry
feelings of disappointment that surged within, in much need of
an olbject of wrath. Alas! who could that object be but that
blind, warm-hearted, impulsive Mistress Albinia Kendal ?
She saw plain enough, now it was too late, that there had not
been a shadow of sentiment in that lively confiding Irishman, used
to intimacy with a herd of cousins, and viewing all connexions
as cousins. She remembered his conversation with her brother
and her brother's impression; she thought of the unloverlike
dread of ague in Emily's moonlight walk; she recalled the many
occasions when she had thought him remiss, and she could not
but acquit him of any designed flirtation, any dangerous tender-
ness, or what Mdlle. Belmarch6 would call legerete. He could not
be reserved-he was naturally free and open-and how could
she have put such a construction on his frankness, when Sophy
herself had long been gradually arriving at a conviction of the
truth ! It was a comfort at least to remember that it had not
been the fabrication of her own brain; she had respectable
authority for the idea, and& sb trusted to its prompter to par-
ticipate in her indignction, argue Ulick out of so poor a match,
and at least put a decided veto upon Sophy's Spartan mag-
nanimity-Sophy's health and feelings being the subject, she
sometimes thought, which concerned him above all.
Ah ! but the evil had not been his doing. He had but gos- 
siped out a pleasant conjecture to his wife as a trustworthy
help-meet. What business had she to go and telegraph that
conjecture, with her significant eyes, to the very last person who
ought to have shared it, and then to have kept up the mischief
by believing it herself, and acting, looking, and arranging, as on
a certainty implied, though not expressed? Mrs. Osborne or 
Mrs. Drury might have spoken more broadly; they could not 
have acted worse, thought she to herself.
The notion might never have been suggested; Sophy might




<pb n="459"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHEB                459
have simply enjoyed these years of intimacy, and even if her
heart had been touched, it would have been unconsciously, and
the pain and shame of unrequited affection have merely been a
slight sense of neglect, a small dreariness, lost in eagerness for the
happiness of both friends. Now, two years of love that she had
been allowed to imagine returned and sanctioned, and love with
the depth and forceof Sophy's whole nature-the shame of having
loved unasked, the misery of having lived in a delusion-how
would they act upon a being of her morbid tendency, frail con-
stitution, and proud spirit I As Albinia thought of the passive
endurance of last year's estrangement, her heart sank within
her I Illness-brain-fever-permanent ill-health and crushed
spirits-nay, death itself she augured-and all-all her own
fault I The last and best of Edmund's children so cruelly and
deeply wounded, and by her folly! She longed to throw herself
at his feet and ask his pardon, but it was Sophy's secret as well
as hers, and how could womanhood betray that unrequited love I
At least she thought, for noble Sophy's sake, she would not raise a
finger to hinder the marriage; but as to forwarding it, or pro-
moting the courtship under Sophy's very eyes-that would be
like murdering her outright; and she would join Mr. Kendal
with all her might in removing their daughter from the trying
spectacle. Talk of Aunt Maria ! This trouble was ten thou-
sand times worse 1
Albinia began to watch the timepiece. longing to have the
evening over, that she might prepare Mr. Kendal. It ended at
last, and G6nevieve took up her candle, bade good-night, and
disappeared. Sophy lingered, till coming forward to her father
as he stood by the fire, she said, 'Papa, did you not promise
Gilbert that Genevieve should be as another daughter I'
'I wish she would be, my dear,' said Mr. Kendal; ' but she
is too independent, and your mamma thinks she would consider
it as a mere farce to call her little Albinia's governess; but if
you can persuade her--
' What I want you to do, papa, is to promise that she shall be
married from this house, as her home, and that you will fit her
out as you did Lucy.'
'Ha    Is she beginning to relent '
'No, papa. It will be Ulick O'More.'
'You don't mean it ' exclaimed Mr. Kendal, more taken by
surprise than perhaps he had ever been, and looking at his wife,
who was standing dismayed, yet admiring the gallant girl who
had forestalled her precautions. Obliged to speak, she said, ' I
am afraid so; Sophy and I witnessed a scene to-day.'
' Afraid T said Mr. Kendal; ' I see no reason to be afraid,




<pb n="460"/>
4f60           THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
if Ulick likes it.  They are two of the most agreeable and
best people that ever fell in my way, and I shalla be delighted
if they can arrange it, for they are perfectly suited to each
other.'
' But such a match !' exclaimed Albinia.
'As to that, a sensible, economical wife will be worth more
to him than an expensive one, with however large a fortune.
And for the family pride, I am glad the lad has more sense than
I feared; he has a full right to please himself, having won the
place he has, and he may nake his father consent. He wants a
wife-nothing else will keep him from running headlong into
speculation, for want of something to do. Yes; I see what  ;
you are thinking of, my dear; but you know we could not
wish her, as you said yourself, never to form another attache
ment.'
'But here r sighed Albinia, the ground knocked away fiom
under her, yet still clinging to the last possible form of murmur.
'It will cost us something,' said Mr. Kendal, ' but no more
than we will cheerfully bear, for the sake of one who has iuch
claims upon us; and it will be amply repaid by having such a
pair of friends settled close to us.'
' Then you will, papa T said Sophy. 
'Will do what, my dear' 
'Treat her as-as you did Lucy, papa.'
'And with much more pleasure, and far more hope, than
when we fitted out poor Lucy,' said Mr. Kendal.
Sophy thanked him, and said 'Good-night ;' and the look
which accompanied her kiss to her step-mother was a binding
over to secrecy and non-interference.
'Is she gone V said Mr Kendal, who had been musing after
his last words. 'Gone to Wel her friend, I suppose ?  I wanted
to ask what this scent was.'
' Oh!' said Albinia, ' it was in the garden-we saw it from
the window-only he brought her a bit of holly, and was trying
to kiss her hand.'
'Strong premises, certainly.  How did she receive the
advance '
'She would not listen, but made her escape.' 
'Then matters are not in such a state of progress as for me
to congratulate her?  I suppose that you ladies are the best
judges whether he may not meet with the same fate as poor 
Hope I'
'Sophy seems to take it for granted that he will not.'
'Irishman as he is, he must be pretty secure of his ground
before coming to such strong measures.  Well! I hope we 




<pb n="461"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               461
may hear no more of brow-ague. But-' with sudden recollec-
tion-' I thought, Albinia, you fancied he had some inclination
for Sophy i'
Was it not a good wife to suppress the ' You did ' If she
could merrily have said, 'You told me so,' it would have been
all very well; but her mood would admit of nothing but a grave
and guarded answer-' We did fancy so, but I am convinced it
was entirely without reason.'
That superior smile at her lively imagination was more
than human nature could bear, without the poor relief of an
entreaty that he would not sit meditating, and go to sleep in his
%,.   chair.
Albinia thought she had recovered equanimity during her
night's rest; but in the midst of her morning toilette, Sophy
hurried in, exclaiming, ' She'll go away I She is writing letters
and packing !' and she answered, ' Well, what do you want me
to do t You don't imagine that I can rush into her room and
lay hands on her t She will not go upon a wishing-carpet. It
will be time to interfere when we know more of the matter.'
Sophy looked blank, and vanished, and Albinia felt excessively
vexed at having visited on the chief sufferer her universal cross-
ness with all mankind. She knew she had only spoken common
sense, but that made it doubly hateful; and yet she could not
but'wish Miss Durant anywhere out of sight, and Mr. O'More
on the top of the Hill of Howth.
At breakfast, Sophy's looks betrayed nothing to the uninitiated,
though Albinia detected a feverish restlessness and covert im-
patience, and judged that her sleep had been little. G6nevibve's
had perhaps been less, for she was very sallow, with sunken eyes,
and her face looked half its usual size; but Albinia could not
easily have compassion on the poor little unwitting traitress, even
when she began,' Dear Mrs. Kendal, will you excuse me if I
take a sudden leave I I find it will answer best for me to accept
Mrs Elwood's invitation; I can then present myself to any
lady who may wish to see me, and, as I promised my aunt
another visit, I had better go to Hadminster by the three o'clock
omnibus.'
Albinia was thankful for the loud opposition which drowned
the faint reluctance of her own; Mr. Kendal insisting that she
should not leave them; little Awk coaxing her; and Maurice
exclaiming, ' If the ladies want her, let them come after her I
One always goes to see a horse.'
'I'm not so well worth the trouble, Maurice.'
'I know Ulick O'More would come in to see you when all
the piebalds for the show were going by r'




<pb n="462"/>
462            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
' Some day you will come to the same good taste.' said his
tatner, to lessen the general confusion.
'See a lady instead of a piebald I Never 1' cried Maurice
with indignation, that made the most preoccupied laugh; under
cover of which G6nevieve effected a retreat. Sophy looked iu-
ploringly at Albinia--Albinia was moving, but not with alacrity,
and Mr. Kendal was saying, 'I do not understand all this,
when, scarcely pausing to knock, Ulick opened the door, cheeks
and eyes betraying scarcely repressed eagerness
' What-where,' he stammered, as if even his words were 
startled away; 'is not Miss Durant well T
' She was here just this moment,' said Mr. Kendal.
' I will go and see for her,' said Sophy. 'Come, children.'
Whether Sophy's powers over herself or over G6nevieve would
avail, was an anxious marvel; but it did not last a moment, for
Ma;urice came clattering down to say that Genevieve was gone
out into the town.   In such a moment     She must have
snatched up her bonnet, and fled one way while Ulick entered
by the other. He made one step forward, exclaiming, ' Where
is she gone ' then pausing, broke out, 'Mrs. Kendal, you must
make her give me a hearing, or I shall go mad !'
' A hearing ' repeated Mrs. Kendal, with slight malice.
' Yes; why, don't you know i'
'So your time has come, Ulick, has it T said Mr. Kendal.
'Well, and I were worse than an old ledger if it had not,
when she was before me !    Make her listen to me, Mrs.
Kendal; if she do not, I shall never do any more good in this
world!'
'I should have thought,' said Albinia, 'that an Irishman
would be at no loss for making opportunities.'
'You don't know, Mrs. Kendal; she is so fenced in with
scruples, humility-I know not what-that she will not so much
as hear me out. I'm not such a blockhead as to think myself
worthy ot her; but I do think, if she would only listen to me,
I might stand a chance: and she runs off, as it she thought it a
sin to hear a word from my mouth r
'It is very honourable to her,' said Mr. Kendal.
'Very honourable to her,' replied Ulick, ' but cruelly hard
upon me.'
'I think, too,' continued Mr. Kendal, stimulated thereto by
his lady's severely prudent looks, 'that you ought-granting
Miss Durant to be, as I well know her to be, one of the most
excellent persons who ever lived-still to count the cost of
opening such an affair. It is not fair upon a woman to bring




<pb n="463"/>
TiE YOUNGa STEP-MOTHm    .           463
her into a situation where disappointments may arise which
neither may be able to bear.'
'Do you mean my family, Mr. Kendal ? Trust me for getting
consent from home. You will write my father a letter, saying
what you said just now; Mrs. Kendal will write another to my
mother; and I'll just let them see my heart is set on it, and
they'll not hold out.'
'Could you bear to see her-looked down on I' said Albinia.
'Hat' he cried, with flashing eyes. 'No, believe me, Mrs.
Kendal, the O'Mores have too much gentle blood to do like that,
even if she were one whom any one could scorn. Why, what
is my mother herself but a Goldsmith by birth, and I'd like to
see who would cast it up to any of the family that she was not
as noble as an O'More I And G6nevieve herself-isn't every
look and every movement full of the purest gentility her fathers'
land can show '
' I dare say, once accepted, the O'Mores would heartily receive
her; but here, in this place, there are some might think it told
against you, and might make her uncomfortable.'
' What care I  I've lived and thriven under Bayford scorn
many a day. And for her- Oh I I defy anything so base to
wound a heart so high as hers, and with me to protect her !'
' And you can afford it ' said Mr. Kendal. ' Remember she
has her aunt to maintain.'
' I can,' said Ulick. ' I have gone over it all again and again;
and recalling his man-of-business nature, he demonstrated that
even at present he was well able to support Mdlle. Belmarch6, as
well as to begin housekeeping, and that there was every reason
to believe that his wider and more intelligent system of manage.
ment would continue to increase his income.'
' Well, Ulick,' mid Mr. Kendal at last, ' I wish you succsss
with all my heart, and esteem you for a choice so entirely founded
upon the qualities most certain to ensure happiness.'
' You don't mean to say that she has not the most glorious
eyes, the most enchanting figure 1' exclaimed Ulick, affronted at
the compliment that seemed to aver that G6neviave's external
charms were not equal to her sterling merit.
Mr. Kendal and Albinia laughed; and the former excused
himself, not quite to the lover's satisfaction, by declaring the
lady much more attractive than mary regularly handsome
people; but he added, that what he meant was, that he was sure
the attachment was built upon a sound foundation. Then lie
entreated that Mrs Kendal would persuade her to listen to him,
for she had fled from him ever since his betrayal of his senti-




<pb n="464"/>
464             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
ments till he was half crazed, and had been walking up and
down his room all night. He should do something distracted,
if not relieved from suspense before night ! And Mr. Kendal
got rid of him in the midst of his transports, and turning to
Albinia said, ' We must settle this as fast as possible, or he will
lose his head. and get into a scrape.'
'I do not like such wild behaviour. It is not dignified.'
'It is only temperament,' said Mr. Keudal. ' Will you speak
to her ?'
'Yes, whenever she comes in.'
'I suspect she has gone out on purpose. Could you not go to
find her at the school, or wherever she is likely to be '
'I don't know where to find her. I cannot give up the
children's lessons. Nothing hurts Maurice so much as irregu-
larity.'
He made no answer, but his look of disappointment excited
her to observe to herself that she supposed he expected her to
run all over the town without ordering dinner first, and she
wondered how he would like that !
Presently she heard him go out at the front door, and felt
some contrition.
She had not the heart to seek Sophy to report progress, and
did not see her till about eleven o'clock, when she came in
hastily with her bonnet on, asking, 'Well, mamma I'
'Where have you been, Sophy Y'
'To school,' she said. ' Has anything happened ?'
'We have had it out, and I am to speak to her when she
comes in,' said Albinia, glad as perhaps was Sophy of the enig-
matical form to which Maurice's presence restrained the com-
munication.
Sophy went away, but presently returning and taking up her
work, but with eyes that betrayed how she was listening; but
there was so entire an apparent absence of personal suffering,
that Albinia began to discharge the weight from her mind, and
believe that the sentiment had been altogether imaginary even
on Sophy's side, and the whole a marvellous figment of her
own.
At last, Mr. Kendal's foot was heard; Sophy started up, and
sat down again. He came upstairs, and his face was all smiles.
' Well,' lie said; 'I don't think she will go by the three o'clock
omnibus.'
' You have spoken to her ' cried Albinia in compunction.
'Has Maurice finished ? Then go out, my boy, for the pre-
Bent.'
'Well ?' said Albinia, interrogatively, and Sophy laid down




<pb n="465"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                465
her work and crossed one hand over the other on her knees, and
leant back as though to hinder visible tremor.
'Yes,' he said, going on with what had been deferred till
Maurice was gone. 'I thought it hard on him-and as I was
going to speak to Edwards, I asked if she were at the Union,
where I found her, taking leave of the old women, and giving
them little packets of snuff, and small presents, chiefly her own
work, I am sure. I took her with 'me into the fields, and per.
suaded her at last to talk it over with me. Poor little thing I
I never saw a more high-minded, conscientious spirit; she was
very unhappy about it, and said she knew it was all her unfor.
tunate manner; she wished to be guarded, but a little excite-
ment and conversation always turned her head; and she en,
treated me not to hinder her going back to a school-room, out of
the way of every one. I told her that she must not blame herself
for being more than usually agreeable; but she would not listen,
and I could hardly bring her to attend to what I said of young
O'More. Poor girl I I believe she was running away from her
own heart.'
' You have prevented her v cried Sophy.
'At least I have induced her to hear his arguments  I told
her my opinion of him, which was hardly needed, and what I
thought might have more weight-that he has earned the right
to please himself, and that I believed she would be better for
him than riches. She repeated several times "Not now," and
" Not here ;" and I found that she was shocked at the idea of
the subject being brought before us. I was obliged to tell her
that nothing would gratify any of us so much, and that this was
the time to fulfil her promise of considering me as a father.'
'Oh, thank you. murmured Sophy.
'So finally 1 convinced her that she owed Ulick a hearing,
and I think she felt that to hear was to yield. She had cer-
tainly been feeling that flight was the only measure, and between
her dread of entrapping him and of hurting our feelings, had
persuaded herself it was her duty. The last thing she did was
to catch hold of me as I was going, and ask if he knew what her
father was.'
' I dare say it has been the first thing she has said to him,'
said Albinia. 'She is a noble little creature I But what have
you done with them now '
' I brought him to her in the parsonage garden. I believe
they are walking in the lanes,' said Mr. Kendal, much gratified
with his morning's work.
'She deserves him,' said Sophy; and then her eyes became set,
as if looking into far distance.
1p 1r




<pb n="466"/>
466            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER. 
The walk in the lanes had not ended by luncheon-time, and
an afternoon loaded with callers was oppressive, but Sophy kept
up well. At last, in the twilight, the door was heard to open,
and G6nevieve came in alone. They listened, and knew she
must have run up to her own room. What did it portend t
Albinia must be the one to go and see; so after a due interval,
she went up and knocked. G6nevieve opened the door, and
threw herself into her arms. 'Dear Mrs. Kendal! Oh I have
I done wrong I I am so very happy, and I cannot help it !'
Albinia kissed her, and assured her she had done nothing to 
repent of.
' I am so glad you think so. I never dreamt such happiness
could be meant for me, and I am afraid lest I should have been
selfish and wrong, and bring trouble on him.'
'We have been all saying you deserve him.'
'Oh no-no-so good, so noble, so heroic as he is.  How
could he think of the poor little French teacher I And he will
pay my aunt's fifty pounds I I told him all, and he knew it
before, and yet he loves me ! Oh I why are people so very good
to me '
' I could easily find an answer to that question,' said Albinia
'Where is he, my dear I'
' He is gone home. I would not come into the town with
him. It is nothing, you know; no one must hear of it, for he
must be free unless his parents consent-and I know they never
can,' she said, shaking her head, sadly; 'but even then I shall
have one secret of happiness-I shall know what has been I But
oh ! Mrs. Kendal, let me go away-'
'Go away now ' exclaimed Albinia.
'Yes-it cannot be-here, in this house   Oh  it is out-
raging your kindness.'
'No,' said Albinia; 'it is but letting us fulfil a very precious
charge.'
Genevieve's tears flowed as she said, 'Such goodness! Mr.
Kendal spoke to me in this way in the morning, when he was
more kind and patient than I can express. But tell me, dearest
madame, tell me candidly, is my remaining here the cause of
any secret pain to him I'
With regard to him, Albinia could answer sincerely that
it was a gratification; and Genevieve owned that she should be
glad to await the letters from Ireland, which she tried to per-
suade herself she believed would put an end to everything, 
except the precious remembrance.
Sophy here came in with some tea. She had recollected that
Genevieve had wandered all day without any bodily sustenance.




<pb n="467"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.               467
There was great sweetness in the quiet, grave manner in which
she bent over her friend and kissed her brow. All she said was,
'Papa had gone to fetch him to dinner. Genevieve, you must
kt me d. you:' hair.'
It was in Ginevieve's eyes an astonishing fancy, and Albinia
said, ' Come away now, my dear; she must have a thorough rest
after such a day.'
Genevieve looked too much excited for rest, but that was the
more reason for leaving her to herself; and besides, it was so
uncomfortable not to be able to be kind enough.
However, when people are happy, a little kindness goes a
great way; and there was a subdued lustre like a glory in her
eyes when she came downstairs, with the holly leaves and
berries glistening in her hair, the first ornament she had ever
worn there.
' It was Sophy's doing,' she said. 'Naughty girl; she tried to
take me by surprise. She would not let me look in the glass,
but I guessed-and oh I she was wounding her poor hands so
sadly.'
I must thank her,' said Ulick, looking ecstatic. 'Why does
she not come down '
As she did not appear, Albinia went up, doubtful if it were
wise, yet too uneasy not to go in quest of her.
It was startling to have so faint an answer on knocking, and
on entering the room, she saw Sophy lying on her bed, upon her
back, with her arms by her sides, and with a ghastly whiteness
on her features
Scarcely a pulse could be felt, and her hands were icy cold,
her voice sank to nothing, her eyelids scarcely raised, as if the
strain of the day had exhausted all vital warmth or energy, and
her purpose accomplished, annihilation was succeeding. Much
terrified, Albinia would have hurried in search of remedies, but
she raised her hand imploringly, and murmured, ' Please don't.
I'm not faint-I'm not ill  If you would only let me be stil.'
Albinia teased her so far as to cover her with warmed shawls,
and force on her a stimulant. She shut her eyes, but presently
opened them to say, 'Please go.'
She was so often unable to appear at dinner, that no obser-
vation was made; and it was to be feared that her absence was
chiefly regretted by the lovers, because it prevented them from
sitting on the same side of the'table.
Always frank and unrestrained, Ulick made his felicity so
apparent, that Albinia had no toleration for him, and not much
for the amusement it afforded Mr. KendaL  She would have
approved of her husband much more if he had put her into a




<pb n="468"/>
468             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHEIL
great quandary by anxious inquiries what was the matter with his
daughter, instead of that careless, 'O you are going up to Sophy;
I hope she will be able to come down to tea,' when she left him 
on guard over the children and the lovers.
' So it is with woman's martyrdoms,' said she to herself as she
walked upstairs, chewing the cud of all the commonplaces by
which women have, of late years, flattered themselves, and been
flattered; ' but at any rate I'll have her out of sight of all their
absurdity. It is enough to kill her I'
Sophy hardly stirred at her entrance, but there was less ghastb
liness about her, and as Albinia sat down she did not remove
her hand, and turned slightly round, so as to lose that strange
corpse-like attitude of repose.
'You are not so cold, dearest,' said Albinia. 'Have you
slept 1'
'I think not.'
' Are you better ?  Have you been comfortable ?
'Oh yes.' Then, with a pause, 'Yes-it was like being
nothing I'
'You were not faint, I hope '
'No-only lying still. Don't you know the comfort of not
thinking or feeling '
' Yes; this has been far too much for you. You have done
enough now, my generous Sophy.'
' Not generous; one can't give away what one never had.'
'I think it more gracious to yield without jealousy or bitter-
ness-'
'Only not quite base,' said Sophy.  Then presently, turn-
ing on her pillow as though more willing to converse, she said,
'I am glad it was not last year.'
'We had troubles enough then 1'
'Not for that-because I should have been base then, and
hated myself for it all the time.'
' That you never could have been !' cried Albinia. ' But, my
dear, you must let me contrive for you; I would not betray you
for all the world, but the sight of these two is more than you
ought to undergo. I will not send G6nevieve away, but you
must go from home.'
'I don't think I shall be cross,' said poor Sophy, simply; ' I
should be ashamed.'
'Cross ! It is I who am cross, because I am to blame; but,
dearest, think if you are keeping up out of pride; that will never,
never do.'
' I do not believe it is pride,' said Sophy, meekly; ' at least, I
hope not. I feel humiliated enough, and I think it nmuy be a




<pb n="469"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-WTYIEM                469
sort of shame, as well as consideration for them, that would
make me wish that no difference should be made. Do you not
think we may let things go on ' she said, in so humble a man-
ner, that it brought Albinia's tears, and a kiss was the only
answer. 'Please tell me,' said Sophy; 'for I don't want to
deceive myself.'
'I am sure I am no judge,' cried Albinia, 'after the dreadful
mischief I have done.'
' The mischief was in me,' said Sophy, ' or you could not have
done it. I saw it all when I was lying awake last night, and
how it began, or rather it was before I can remember exactly.
I always had craving after something--a yearning for something
to fix myself on-and after I grew to read and look out into
the world, I thought it must be tha.  And when I knew I
was ugly and disagreeable, I brooded and brooded, and only in
my better moments tried to be satisfied with you and papa and
the children.'
And the All-satisfying, Sophy dear.'
'I tried-I did-but it was duty-not heart.   I used to
fancy what might be, if I shot out into beauty and'graoe-not
admiration, but to have that one thing to lean on. You see it
was all worldly, and only submissive by fits-generally it
was cross repining, yielding because I could not help it-and
so, when the fancy came the throne was ready made, empty,
swept, and garnished, for the idoL I wont talk of all that
time; but I don't believe even G6nevivve, though she knows
she may, can dwell upon the thought as I did, in just the way
to. bring punishment. And so I thought, by-and-by, at the
caricature time, that I was punished. I looked into the fallacy,
when I had got over the temper and the pride, and I saw it all
clear, and owned I was rightly served, for it had been an earthly
aim, and an idol worship. Well, the foolish hope came back
again, but indeed, indeed, I think I was the better for all the
chastening; I had seen grandmamma die, I was fresh from
hearing of Gilbert, and I did feel as I never had done before,
that God was first. I don't believe that feeling had pased,
though the folly came back, and made me feel glad to love all
the world.   There were-gleams of religious thought'-she
spoke with diffioulty, but her face had a strange beauty-'that
taught me how, if I was more good-there could be a fulness
of joy that all the rest flowed out from. And so when mis-
givings came, and I saw at times how little he could care for
me-oh I it was pain enough, but not the worst sort. And yet
I don't know-' She turned away and hid her face on the
pilluw. It was agony, though still, as she had said, not the




<pb n="470"/>
470             THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER
worst, untempered by faith or resignation. What a history of
that apparently cold, sullen, impassive spirit ! what an unlock-
ing of pent-up mysteries 
'It has been blessed to you,' said Albinia, affectionately. 
'My dear, we always thought your character one that wanted
the softening of such-an attachment. Perhaps that made me
wrongly eager for it, and ready to imagine where I ought not;
I think it did soften you; but if you had not conquered what
was earthly and exaggerated in it, how it would be hardening
and poisoning you now!'
'I hope I may have,' sighed Sophy, as if she were doubtful
'Then will you not listen to me ? You have done nobly so
far, and I know your feelings will be right in the main; but
do you think you can bear the perpetual irritation of being
neglected, and seeing-what I must call rather a parade of his
preference ?'
'I think it would be the best cure,' said Sophy; 'it would
make me feel it real, and I could be glad to see him-thenm-
so happy-'
'I don't know how to judge ! I don't know whether it be
right for you to have him always before your mind.'
' He would be so all the more while I was away with nothing
to do,' said Sophy; 'fancy might be worse than fact.  You
don't know how I used to forget the nonsense when he had
been ten minutes in the room, because it was just starved out.
Now, when it will be a sin, I believe that strength will be given
me to root it out;' her look grew determined, but she gasped
for breath.
'And your bodily strength, my dear ?'
' If I should be ill, then it would be natural to go away,'
said Sophy, smiling; 'but I don't think I shall be. This is
only the end of my fever to see it settled. Now I am thankful,
and my heart has left off throbbing when I am still. I shall
be all right to-morrow.'
'I hope so; but you must spare yourself.'
'Besides,' she added, ' one of the worst parts has been that;
in the fancy that a change was to come, I have gone about
everything in an unsettled way; and now I want to begin again
at my duties, my readings and parish matters, as my life's work,
steadily and in earnest.'
'Not violently, not to drive care away.'
'I have tried that once, and will not again.  You shall
arrange for me, and I will do just as you tell me;' and she
raised her eyes with the most deep and earnest gaze of con-
fiding love that had ever greeted Albinia from any of the three.




<pb n="471"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.                471
'll try not to grieve you, for you are too sorry for me ; and
she threw her arms round her neck. ' Oh, mamma I nothing is
so bad when you help me to bear it !'
Tears fell fast at this precious effusion from the deep, sincere
heart, at the moment when Albinia herself was most guilty
in her own eyes. Embraces were her only answer, and how
fervent!
' And, mamma,' whispered Sophy, ' if you could only let me
have some small part of teaching little Albinia.'
A trotting of small feet and a call of mamma was heard.
The little maiden was come with her good-nights, and in one
moment Albinia had lifted her into her sister's arms, where she
was devoured with kisses, returning them with interest, and
with many a fondling ' Poor Sophy,' and ' Dear Sophy.'
When the last fond good-night had passed, and the little one
had gone away to her nest, Sophy said in a soft, natural, un-
constrained voice, 'I am very sleepy. If you will be so kind
as to send up my tea, I will go to-bed. Thank you; good-
night.'
That was the redrawing of the curtain of reserve, the resig-
nation of sentiment, the resumption of common life.  The
romance of Sophia Kendal's early life had ended when she
wounded her fingers in wreathing G6neviave's hair. Her next
romance might be on behalf of her beautiful little sister.
Albinia was cured of her fretfulness towards the new order
of events, and her admiration of Sophy carried her through all
that was yet to come. It was the easier since Sophy did not insist
on unreasonable aelf-martyrdoms, and in her gratitude for being
allowed her purpose in the main, was submissive in detail, and
had mercy on her own powers of endurance, not inflicting the
sight of the lovers on herself more than was needful, and not
struggling with the languor that was a good reason for remain-
ing  much   upstairs.  She worked and read, but without
overdoing anything, and wisely undertook a French translation,
as likely to occupy her attention without forcing her to over-
exert her powers. Not that she said so; she carefully avoided
all reference to her feelings; and Albinia could almost have
deemed the whole a dream, excepting for the occasional detec-
tion of a mournful fixed gaze, which was instantaneously winked
away as soon as Sophy herself became aware of it.
Her trouble, though of a kind proverbially the most hardening
and exacerbating, had an entirely contrary tendency on her. The
rigidity and harsh judgment which had betokened her states
of morbid depression since she had outgrown the sulky form,
had passed away, and she had been right in predicting that she




<pb n="472"/>
472            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER 
should not be cross, for she had become sweet and gentle towards 
all  Her voice was pitched more softly, and though she looked
ill, and had lost the bloom which had once given her a sort of 
beauty, her eyes had a meek softness that made them finer than
when they wore the stern, steady glance that used to make
poor Gilbert quail  Her strength came not from pride, but
from Grace; and to her, disappointment was more softening 
than even the prosperous affection that Albinia had imagined.
It was love; not earthly but heavenly.
If her father had been less busy, her pale cheek might have
alarmed him; but he was very much taken up with builders
and estimates, with persuading some of the superfluous popu-
lation to emigrate, and arranging where they should go; and
while she kept the family hours and habits, he did not notice
lesser indications of flagging spirits, or if he did, he was wise,
and thought the cause had better not be put into words.
Albinia had brought herself to give fair sympathy to the
lovers; and when once she had begun it was easy to go on, not
as ardently as if she had never indulged in her folly, but enough
to gratify two such happy and grateful people, who wanted no
one but each other, and agreed in nothing better than in think-
ing her a sort of guardian angel to them both.
Genevieve had assuredly never given her heart to Gilbert,
and it was ready in all the freshness of maidenly bliss to meet
the manly ardour of Ulick O'More. He was almost over-
poweringly demonstrative and eager, now and then making game
of himself; but yet not able to help rushing down to Willow
Lawn ten or twelve times a day, just to satisfy himself that his
treasure was there; and if he could not meet with her, catching
hold of Mr. or Mrs. Kendal to rave till they drove him back to
his business. Such glee danced in his eyes, there was such
suppressed joyousness in his countenance, and his step was so
much nearer a dance than a walk, that his very air well-nigh
betrayed what was to be an absolute secret, till there had been
an answer from Ballymakilty, until which time G6nevieve would
not rest in the hope of a happy future, nor give up her fears
that she had not brought pain upon him.
In he came at last, so exulting and so grateful, that it was a
shock to discover that' the kindest letterand fullestconsent in the
world,' meant his father's 'supposing he would do as he pleased;
as long as he asked for nothing, it was no concern of his' It
was discovered, by Ulick's delight, that he had expected to have
a battle, and Albinia was scandalized; but Mr. Kendal told
her it somewhat depended on what manner of father it was,
whether an independent son could defer implicitly to his judg- 




<pb n="473"/>
THE YOUNG 8TEP-MOTE.'                473
ment; and though principle might withhold Ulick from flat
disobedience, he might not scruple at extorting reluctant
consent Besides his mother, whom he honoured far more really,
had written, not without disappointment, but with full con-
fidence in his ability to judge for himself.
Mr. Kendal and Mr. Ferrars both wrote warmly in Gene-
vivve's praise; and certainly her footing at Willow Lawn was
the one point dappui in bringing round the O'More family; so
that as Ulick truly said, ' It was Mrs Kendal whom he had to
thank for the blessing of his life' Had poor Miss Goldsmith's
description of Miss Durant's birth, parentage, and education
been the only one that had reached Ballymakilty, a prohibition
would assuredly have been issued; but he was left sufficiently
free to satisfy his own conscience; and before Genevieve had
surmounted half her scruples, the whole town was ringing with
the news, though no one could guess how it had got wind. To
be sure the Duwautoys had been put into a state of rapture, and
poor Mr. Hope had had the fatal stroke administered to him.
He looked so like a ghost that Mr. Dusautoy contrived to
release him at once, whereupon he went to try the most un-
wholesome curacy he could find, with serious intentions of
exchanging his living for it; but he fortunately became so
severely and helplessly ill there, that he was pretty well cured
of his mental fever, and quite content to go to his heath, and do
his work there like the humble and earnest man that he was,
iperhaps all the better for having been personally taught some-
thing more than could be gained from books and colleges
Miss Goldsmith was the most to be pitied. She would not
hear a word from her nephew, refused to go near Willow Lawn,
]acked up her goods and went to Bath, where Ulick promised
tie much distressed Genevieve that she would yet relent. Gene-
vieve was somewhat consoled by the increasing cordiality of
the Irish letters, and was carried along by the extreme delight
and triumph of her good oldaunt. By some wonderful exertion of
Irish faculties, Ulick succeeded in bringing mademoiselle to
Bayford in his jaunting car, when she laughed, wept, sobbed, and
embraced, in a bewilderment of transport; pronounced the
trousseau worthy of an angel of the cncien rginme; warned
Genevieve against expecting amour to continue instead of amiti2,
and carried home conversation for the nuns for the rest of their
lives.
lhat tousssau was Sophy's special charge, and most jealous
was she that it should in no respect fall short of that outfit of
Lucy's for which she had cared so little. A hard task it was
to make Genevieve accept what Lucy had exacted; but Sophy




<pb n="474"/>
474            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
held the purse-strings, wrote the orders, and had her own
way.
She and her little sister were the only available bridesmaids,
since Rose O'More was not allowed to come. Having made up
her mind to this from the first, when the subject came forward,
her open, cheerful look and manner were meant to show that
she was not afraid, and that her wish was real. Freely resign-
ing him, why should she not be glad to join in calling down the
blessing ?
The wedding was fixed for Easter week, which fell early, and
Albinia cast about for some excuse for taking her away after-
wards. An opportune occasion offered. Sir William Ferrars
wrote from the East to propose the Kendals meeting him in
Italy, and travelling home together; he was longing, he said,
to see something of his sister, and he should enjoy sight-seeing
ten times as much with a clever man like her husband to tel
him all about it.
Mr. Ferrars strongly seconded the project! Clever fellow,
not a word did he say; but did not he know the secrets of that
household as well or better than the inmates themselves ?
Now that Tibb's Alley was deserted, and plans fixed, architect
and clerk of the works chosen, March winds ready for building
and underground work to begin at once, what could be more
prudent than for the inhabitants of Willow Lawn to remove far
from the disturbance of ancient drains and no drains, and betake
themselves to a purer atmosphere ? Mr. Kendal was of no use
as a superintendent, and needed no persuasion to flee from the
chance ot typhus.
As to the children, the time had come early when Maurice's
whole nature cried out for school. He was much improved, and
there was that real principle within him which made it not
unsafe to launch him in a world where he might meet with
more useful trials than those of home.  Child as he was, his
propensities were too much limited by the bounds of the town-
house and garden, and the society of his sisters, one too old and
one too young to serve as tomboys. He needed to meet his
match, and work his way; Albinia felt that school had become
his element, and Mr. Kendal only wanted tojnake his education
the reverse of Gilbert's; so he ran nearly frantic between the
real jacket and the promise of going to school with Willie. He
knew not, though his mother mourned over, the coming heart-
sickness and mother-sickness of the first night, the first Sunday,
the first trouble. It was sure to be very severe in one of such
strong and affectionate feeling, but it must come sooner or later,
and the better that it should be conquered while home was 2till




<pb n="475"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER               475
a paradise.' Fairmead was not so far from his destination but
that his uncle would keep an eye on him; and Winifred held
out a hope that if the tour lasted long enough, he should bring
out both boys to spend their holidays with them. A very good
Winifred I
Albinia the Less was to become a traveller, for the good
reason that nobody could or would go without her. They were
to go direct to Lucy, who was at Naples with a second boy, and
pining for home faces and home comforts-the inducement which
perhaps worked most strongly to make Sophy like the journey,
for since her delusion had been swept away, a doubly deep and
intense feeling had sprung up towards her own only sister, whose
'oibles had been forgotten in long separation.
CHAPTER XXXL
THE Lake of Lucerne lay blue and dark in the shade of the
mountains, on whose summits the evening sunshine was
fast mounting, peak after peak falling into purple shadow.
There was a small inlet where a stream rushed downbe-
tween the hills; and on the green slope stood a chalet, the rich
red of the roof contrasting with the green pasture A little
boat was moored to a stump near the land, and in it sat Sophia
Kendal, her hat by her side, listening to and answering merrily
the chatter of Maurice, who tumbled about in the boat, often
causing it severe shocks, while he inspected the cut of the small
sail which she was making for the miniature specimen, which he
often tried in the clear cold water.
Farther off, a little up the hill-side, Willie Ferrars was hold-
ing the hand of the chestnut-curled, black-eyed fairy, ' little
Awk,' who was impressing him by her fluency in two languages
at once, according as she chattered to him in English, or in
French to a picturesque peasant, her great ally, who was mow-
ing his flowery crop of hay, glancing like an illumination, with
an under-current of brilliant blossoms among the grass.
Wandering with slow conversational pace up and down the
beach of the lake, were Mr. Kendal and Sir William Ferrars,
conversing as usual; the soldier, with quick alert comprehen-
sion, wide observation, and clearness of mind, which jumped to
the very points to which the scholar's deeply-read and long-
digested arguments were bringing him more slowly.
On a projecting point sat Albinia, her fair hair shaded under
her dark hat, beneath which her English complexion glowed




<pb n="476"/>
476            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
fresh and youthful, as with flat tin box by her side, and block
sketch-book on her knee, she mixed and she painted, and tried
to catch those purples and those blues with unabated ardour.
Suddenly a great trailing frond of mountain fern came over
the brim of her hat from behind. ' Oh, Maurice, don't !' Then
looking up and laughing, 'Oh, it is you, is it? I knew Maurice
would do, whichever it might be; but see, the other is quite out
of mischief.'
'Unless he should upset Sophy into the lake.'
'He can't do that, the rope is too short. But is not he very
much improved I   He has quite lost his imperious manner
towards her.'
'Nothing like school for making a boy behave himself to his
sisters.'
'Exactly, as I learnt by experience long ago. I am glad
William did not see him till he had learnt to be agreeable.
How he does admire him !'
'You'll never make anything of that sketch; the mountain
is humpbacked, and the face of that precipice is exactly like
Colonel Bury;' and he caught up a pencil to help out the re-
semblance with nostril and eyebrow.
'For shame, to be so ;ischievieous; such a great boy as you.'
'Well, we all came out here to be great boys, didu't we t I
am sure you look a dozen years younger than when I last saw
you, Mrs. Grandmother. By-the-by, it was a bold stroke to
cucumber yourself with that brat; what's become of him '
' Susan has taken him in asleep. You see, Maurice, I really
could not help it, the poor little thing was so sickly, and had
never thriven; but when they were a little while in bracing
air, Lucy was longing to have him in England, and his father,
who never believes in anything but what he likes, would not
see it; and what with those Italian servants, and Algernon hunt-
ing Lucy about as he does, it would have been the death of him.
Susan, good creature, had taken to him of her own accord the
moment we came to Naples, and could not have borne to leave
him; and you know the Awk is almost off her hands now; and
Sophy, who first proposed it, or I am sure I should never have
ventured, is delighted to do anything for either of them, and
always has her little sister in her room. As to papa, he was
very good; and the child is very little in his way, and has been
quite well ever since we have been in this delicious air.'
'How did you get Lucy to consent '
'Poor dear, it was a melancholy business; but she had so
often been in alarm about him, and had suflered so much from
having to leave him with people she did not trust, that she




<pb n="477"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-XOTHER               477
caught at the proposal before she fairly contemplated what the
parting would be; and when she did, Algernon was too glad to
be relieved from him not to keep her up to it; but it wont do
to think of it, she has her baby, who is healthier, and if they
remain abroad, I suspect we shall keep little Ralph altogether;
he is a dear little fellow, and Sophy has so taken possession of
Albinia, that I should be quite lost if I did not set up a private
child.
'What do you call him  I thought his name was Belraven.'
'I could not possibly call him so; and his aunts, by way of
adding to the aviary, made him Ralph the Raven, so I mean it
to stick by him; I believe papa has forgotten the other dreadful
fct, for I caught him giving his name as Ralph Cavendish Du-
sautoy. How the dear vicar of Bayford will devour him I and
what work I shall have to keep him from being spoilt '
'Then you think they will remain abroad 1'
'Algernon hates England; and all his habits are foreign'
'Did he make himself tolerably agreeable '
'He really did. One could bear to be patronized by one's
host better than by one's guest, and he was in wholesome awe
of William. Besides, he is really at home in Italy, and knows
his way about so well, that he was not a bad Cicerone. I am
sure Sophy could never have done either Vesuvius or Pompeii
without his arrangements; and as long as he bad a victim for
his catalogue raisonnre, he was very placable and obliging. That
was all extracts, so it really was not so bad.'
'So you were satisfied I'
'He has a bad lot about him, that's the worst-Polish counts,
desreputable artists and poets, any one who has a spurious sort
of fame, and knows how to flatter him. Edmund was terribly
disgusted.'
'Very bad for his wife.'
'You see, she is a thorough-going mother, and no linguist.
She really is improved, and I like her more really than ever I
could, poor dear. I believe her head was once quite turned,
and that he influenced her entirely, and made her forget every-
thing else; but she has a heart, though not much of a head, and
sorrow and illness and children have brought it out; and she is
what a 'very woman' becomes, I suppose, if there be any good
in her, an abstract wife and mother.'
'Was it not dangerous to take away her child ?
'There was another, you know, and it was to save his life.
The duties clashed, and were destroying all comfort.'
'How does he behave to her i'
'I believe she has all the love he has to spare; hL is proud




<pb n="478"/>
478            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.
of her, and dresses her up, and has endless portraits of her.
Luckily she keeps her beauty. She is more refined, and has
more expression; one could sometimes cry to watch her; and
he likes to have her with him, and to discourse to her, but with-
out the slightest perception or consideration of what she would
prefer, and with no notion of sacrificing anything for her or the
children. I know she is afraid of him; I have seen her tremble
if there were any chance of his being annoyed; and she would
not object to any plan of his if it were to cost herlife. I believe
it would be misery to her, but I think she would resist-ay, she
did resist, and in vain, for the sake of her child.'
'Does her affection hold out, do you think ?'
'Oh, yes, the spaniel and walnut-tree love, which is in us
all, and doubly in the very woman. It is very beautiful. She
is so proud of him and of her gilded slavery, and so uncon-
sciously submissive and patient; but it is a harder life, I guess;
than we can see. I am sure it must be, for every bit of per-
sonal vanity and levity is worn out of her; she only goes out
to satisfy him; dresses to please his eye, and talks, with her
eye seeking round for him, in dread of being rebuked for
mistakes or bad French. And for the rest, her joy is to be left
in peace with little Algernon upon her lap. Yes, I hope living
in all womanly virtues may be training and compensation; but
the saddest part of the affair is that he does not think it fashion-
able to be religious, and she has not moral courage to make
open resistance.'
'May it come,' fervently.
'It is strange, how much more real and good a creature she
is now, than when at home in the midst of all external obser-
vances. Yet it cannot be right! she surely ought to make
more stand; but it is too, too literally being afraid to say her
soul is her own, for she is unhappy. She does the utmost
she can without offending him, and feels it as she never did
before.'
'There is no judging,' said Maurice, as his sister looked
at him with eyes full of sorrowful yearning. ' No one can tell
where are the boundaries of the two duties. Poor girl I she
has put herself into a state of temptation and trial; but she
may be shielded by her exercise of so much that is simply
good, and her womanly qualities may become not idolatry, but
a training in reaching higher.'
' May it be so, indeed I' said Albinia. 'Oh, Maurice I how I
once disdained being told I was too young, and how true it
was I What visions I had about those three, and what failures
have resulted 1'




<pb n="479"/>
THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER.              479
Your visions may have vanished, but you did your work
faithfully, and it has not been fruitless.'
'Ay, in shipwrecked lives  Mischiefs wherever I meant to
do best I Why, I let even my own Maurice grow unmanage-
able while I was nursing poor grandmamma. The voluntary
duty choked the natural one, and yet-'
And yet,' interrupted her brother, 'that was no error.' 
'Oh, no I I would not have done it for anything.' 
' Nor do I think the boy the worse for it. I may venture
now on saying he was intolerable, and it hastened school; but
though your rein was loose, you never let it fall; and maybe,
the self-conquest was the best thing for him.  If you had
neglected him wilfully for your own pleasure, nothing but
harm could have been expected. As you were absorbed by a
sacred act of duty, I believe it will all be made up to you in
your son.'
'Oh, Maurice, if I might trust so I I believe I am doubly
set on that boy doing well, because his father must not, must
not have another pang '
'I think he knows that. I do not imagine that he will
never be carried astray by high spirits; but I am sure that he
has the strength, honour, and sweetness that are the elements
of greatness '
'Nothing we did so changed him as the loss of his brother.
Oh, Maurice! there was my most earnest wish to do right, and
my most fatal mistake I'
'And greatest success. Gilbert owed everything to you.'
'Had I but silenced my foolish pride, he might have been
safe in India now.'
'We do not know how safe he might be. I did indeed
think it a pity your influence led the other way, but things
might have been far worse; if you made some blunders, your
love and your earnestness were working on that susceptible
nature; and what better hope can we wish to have than what
rested with us at Malta what better influence than has re-
mained with Maurice or with Fred i'
Albinia had not yet learnt to talk calmly of Gilbert's last
hours, so she put this aside, and smiling through her tears, said,
' Ah I when Emily writes to Sophy, that their boy is to have his
name, since they can wish nothing better for him than to be
like him.' 
'The past vision always a little above what is visible f
'Hardly, Emily and Fred are as proud of each other as two
peacocks; and well they may be, for-stoop down,'tis an intense
secret; but do you know the effect of their Sebastopol den '




<pb n="480"/>
480            THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHERL 
'Eh I'
'Lieutenant-General Sir William Ferrars is going out m
quest of Emily's younger sister.'
'You ridiculous child I That's a trick of yours.'
'No, indeed. William was surprised into a moment of con-
fidence, walking home in the moonlight from the Coliseum. En
vrai mwilitaire, he has begun at the right end, and written to
Mr. Kinnaird to ask leave to come and try his luck; and cool
as he looks. I believe he would rather prepare for Inkermann.'
'Well! if he be not making a fool of himself at his time of
life, I am sure I am very glad I'
' Time of life I He's but three years older than Edmund.
If you are not more respectful, we shall have to go out to Canada
to countenance him.'
'I shall be rejoiced to see him with a home, and finding
life beyond his profession; but I had rather he had known
more of her.'
'That's what he never would do.  He cannot talk to a
young lady. Why he admires Lucy a great deal more than
Sophy !'
' Well, judging by the recent brides, I think if it had been me,
I should have gone in search of Mrs. Ulick O'More's younger
sister.'
'Ah   I wanted particularly to hear of your visit at the
bank. You had luncheon there, I think. How do they get on V
'It is the most charming menage in the world. She looks
very graceful and elegant, and keeps him in great order, and is
just the wife he wanted-a little sauciness and piquancy to
spur him up at one time, and restrain him at another, with the
real ballast that both have, makes such a perfect compound,
that it is only too delightful to see anything so happy and so
good in this world. They both seem to have such vivid enjoy-
ment of life.'
'Pray, has any one called on Genevieve ? though she could
dispense with it.'
' Oh, yes; Bryan O'More spent a fortnight there. And see
what a moustache will do I The Osbornes, Drurys, Wolfes,
and Co., all dubbed themselves dear Mrs. O'More's dearest
friends. I found a circle of them round her. and when I
observed that Bryan was not half such a handsome fellow as
his brother, you should see how I was scorned.'
'I hope Bryan may not play his father's game again. Do
you know how she was received in Ireland V'
'The whole clan adore her ! Ulick, with his Anglo-Saxon
truthfulness, got into serious scrapes for endeavouring to dis-




<pb n="481"/>
THEE YOUNG STEP-MOTHME                481
abuse them of the notion that she was sole heiress of the ancient
marquisate of Durant. I believe Connel was reag to call
Ulick out for disrespect to his own wife.'
'And was she happy there '
'Very much amused, and treated like a queen; oharmed
with his mother, and great friends with Rose. They have
brought Redmond home to lick him into shape, an4 I believe
Rose is to come and be tamed.'
'Always Ulick's wish,' said Albinia, as her eye fixed upon
Sophy.
And her brother, with perhaps too obvious a connexion of
ideas, said,' Is 8she quite strong i'
' Very well,' said Albinia. 'I am glad we brought her. The
sight of beauty has been like a new existence. I saw it on her
brow, in calmness and rest, the first evening of the Bay of
Naples. It has seemed to soothe and elevate her, though all
in her own silent way; but watch her as she sits with her face
to those mountains, hear her voice, and you will feel that the
presence of grandeur and beauty is repose and happiness to
her; and I think the remembrance will always be so, even in
work-a-day Bayford.'
' Yes; because remembrance of such glory connects with hope
of future glory.'
'And it is a rest from human frets and passions. She has
taken to botany, too; and I am glad, for I think those studies
that draw one off from men's works and thoughts, do most good
to the weary, self-occupied brain  And the children are a
delight to her 1'
Sophy is your greatest work.'
'Not mine ' cried Albiuia  'The noblest by nature, the
dearest, the most generous.'
'Great qualities; but they would have been only wretched
self-preying torments, but for the softening of your affection,'
said Maurice.
' Dear, dear friend and sister and child in one,' cried Albinia.
And then meeting her brother's eyes, she said, ' Yes; you know
to the full how noble she is, and how--'
' I can guess how imprudent a young step-mother can be,'
said Maurice, smiling.
' It is very strange. I don't know how to be thankful enough
for it; but really her spirits have been more equal, her temper
more even than ever it had been, and that just when I thought
my folly had been most ruinous.'
'Yes, Albinia. After all, it is more than man can hope or
expect to make no blunders; but I do verily believe that while




<pb n="482"/>
482              THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER 
an earnest will saves us, by God's grace, from wilful sins, the
effects of the inadvertences that teach us our secret faults will 
not be fatal; and while we are indeed honestly and faithfully
doing our best, though we are truly unprofitable servants, that 
our lapses through infirmity will be compensated, both in the
training of our own character and the results upon others.'
'If we are indeed     faithfully doing  our. best,' repeated 
Albinia
THE END.
R. CLAY, SON, AND TAYLOR, PRINTIERS, 
likl.:Al~ RPlVh, r Latl.




