<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
These images produced pretty good, though somewhat variable, results.

Odd pages 3 - 47 are slightly garbled along the left edge.

Many of the even pages have lost a little text from the right edge of the page.<pb n="3"/>
-  ,  -         ,
'FAITH AND UNFAITH.
- ' ';m  .     .    CHAPTER I.
r   1J. i )  A heap of dust alone remains of thee:
. i .tfi! 'Tis all thou art, and all the proud shall be I "-POPE.
.' dii anyupper chamber, through the closed blinds of which
-, -Isup is .vainly striving to enter, Reginald Branscombe,
.fith Earl of Sartoris, lies dead. The sheet is reverently
X .drawn across the motionless limbs ; the once restless, now
*l?  et! face is hidden; all around is wrapt in solemn unut-
7^..rable silence,-the silence that belongs to death alone !
:          "A s re nse of oppressive calm is upon everything,-a feel-
't   . of loneliness, vague and shadowy. The clock has
4 Aked its last an hour ago, and now stands useless in its
'iae. .Tihe world without moves on unheeding; the world
r 'lfiin knows time no more! Death reigns triumphant!
' -:fe siks into insignificance 
Q' r)nce, a little flickering golden fay, born of the hot sun
{a;' atue, flashes in through some unknown chink, and casts
lfgleefullyupon the fair white linen of the bed. It
' es vivaciously now here, now there, in uncontrolla-
.: ",ljoqusesss, as though seeking in its gayety to mock
ti llea .of the King of Terrors I At least so it seems
.J^   .i~  'atcher in the lonely chamber, as with an im-
;. . Off    4Jle raises his head, and, going over to the win-
[:ao..   the curtains still closer to shut out the obnox-
! ' i;  t; .after which he comes back to where he has
uding, gazing down upon, and thinking of, the
Jiswpi old man, tall and gaunt, with kind but passion-



<pb n="4"/>
4              FAITH AND UNFAITI
ate eyes, and a mouth expressive of impatience. His
hands-withered but still sinewy-are clasped behind his
back; every feature in his face is full of sad and anxious
thought.
What changes the passing of a few short hours have
wrought-so he muses. Yesterday the man now chilled
and silent for evermore was as full of animation as'he-
his brother-who to-day stands so sorrowfully beside his
corpse. His blood had run as freely in his veins, his
pulses throbbed as evenly, his very voice had been sound-
ing strong and clear and hearty, when Death, remorse-
less, claimed him for his own.
Poor Reginald ! Had he known of the fell disease that
had nestled so long within his heart ?-or had no symptoms
ever shown themselves to give him kindly warning ? Cer-
tainly no hint of it had ever passed his lips, even to those
most near and dear to him. He had lived. apparently
free from care or painful forebodings of any kind,-a good
and useful life tob, leaving nothing for those behind (who'
loved him) to regret. Indeed, of late he had appeared
even gayer, happier, than before; and now-
It seems such a little time ago since they both were
lads together. A tiny space taken from the great eter-,
nity, when all is told. How well the living man remem-
bers at this moment many a boyish freak and light-hearted
jest, many a kindness shown and gift bestowed by the
dead, that until now had wellnigh been forgotten !
He thinks of the good old college days, when they
worked little, and fought hard, and trained their fresh
young limbs to mighty deeds, and walked, and rode, and
held their own with the best, and showed open defiance of
dons and deans and proctors; he lingers, too, on the day
still farther on, when Reginald, having attained to his
kingdom, lavished with no meagre hand upon his more
extravagant brother the money so sorely needed.
Now Reginald is gone, and he, Arthur, reigns in his
X.      stead, and-Alas! alas! poor Reggy !-Poor, dear old
i~ ~    ~fellow !
He rouses himself with an effort, and, going very softly
to a small door that opens from the apartment, beckons
gently to somebody beyond. 
An old woman, dressed in deepest mourning, and of



<pb n="5"/>
\ XNOVELS BY 
THE DUCHESS,
All of which are now issued in Lovel's Library, in
handsome 12mo form' for
20 CXET:TS E:A.CH,
l''    '  VIZ:            .
Portia, or By Passions-R       ocked
Phyllis, 
Molly Bawn,
:AiryT Fairy Lillian,
Mrs. Geoffrey, Etc., Etc.
' ,  .'  ;         ,  .  . >  .,
The works lby The Dueesst have passed; and far/passed, all
competitors in the race for popularity and admnirer.,,, Editions
after editions have rapidly succeeded each other, both in England
and this Country, and it is an interesting fact (to the publishers)
to know that the supply does not equal the demand. Select and
read any one of the above, and you will not be happy till you have
read them all. It would be of little use giving extracts from the
thousands of eulogistic press criticisms.  Your only plan is to
buy one, and be convinced that the Novels by The Duchess are
the most intensely interesting light reading written for many a
year.
For sale by all booksellers and newsdealers, or sent postage paid
on receipt of price, by the publishers.
JOHN W. LOVELL CO.,
14 AND 16 VESEY STREET,
NEW Yoar.
,-,                              lCJ L   Pi- 
_  i.             ]A



<pb n="6"/>
LOVELL'S LIBRARY ADVERTISER
RECENTLY PUBLISHED:
UNDERG-ROUND RUSSIA:
Revolutionary Profiles and Sketches from Life.
By STEPNIAK, formerly Editor of "Zemlia f Volia" (Land and
Liberty). With a Preface by PETER LAVROFF. Translated
from the Italian. 1 vol. 12mo., paper cover, Lovell's Library,
No. 173 price 20cents. 
"The book is as yet unique in literature; it is a priceless contribution to
our knowledge of Russian thought and feeling; as a true and faithful reflection
of certain aspects of, perhaps, the most tremendous politicial movement in
history, it seems destined to become a standard work."-ATaHNfEIM..
An Outline of- the History of Ireland,
From the Earliest Times to the present day.
By JUSTIN     H. McCARTHY. I vol1 12mo., Lovell's Library
No. 115, price 10 cents. 
"A timely and exceedingly vigorous ana interesting little volume. The book
is worthy of attentive perusal, and will be all the more interesting because it
involves in its production the warm sympathies, the passionate enthusiasm, and
the vivid brilliancy of style which one is glad to welcome from the son of lhe
distinguished journalist and author."-CHRISTIAN WORLD.
"All Irishmen who love their country, and all candid Englishmen, ought to
welcome Mr. Justin H. McCarthy's little volume-'An Outline of Irish History.'
Those who want to know how it has come about that, as John Stuart Mill long
ago pointed out, all cries for the remedy of specific Irish grievances are now
mergfrd in the dangerous demand for nationality, will do well to read Mr.
McCarthy's little book. It is eloquentlywritten, and carries us from the earliei t
legends to the autumn of 1882. The charm of the style and the impetuousness
in the flow of the narrative are refreshing and stimulating, and, as regards his-
toric impartiality, Mr.McCarthy i Car more just than is Mr.Froude."-GRAaPHIC.
"A brightly written and inte4igent account of the leading events in Irish
annals .... Mr. McCarthy has performed a difficult task with commendable
good spirit and impartiality."-WHITErHALL REVIEW.
'To those who enjoy exceptionally brilliant and vigorous-wrting. as well
as to those who desire to post themselves up in ile Irish question, we cordially
recommend 'Mr. McCarthy's little book."-EVENING NEWs.
ENGLISH MEN OF LETTERS.
Edited by JOHN MORLEY.
Published in 12mo. vols., paper covers, price 10 cents each.
JoHNSON. By Leslie Stephen.          THACKERAY. By A. Trollope.
SCOTT. By R. H. Hutton.             BURKE. By John Morley.
GIBBON. By J C. Morison.            BUNYAN. By J. A. Froude.
SHELLEY. ByJ. A. Symonds.           POPE. By Leslie Stephen.
HUME. By Prof Huxley, P.R.S.        BYRON. By Profes-or Nichol.
GOLDSMITH. By William Black.        COWPEB. By Goldwin Smith.
DEFOE. By W. Minto                  LOCKE. By Professor Fowler.
BuRNs. By Principal Shairp.         WORDSWORTH. By F.W.H. Myers.
SPENSER. By the Very Rev. the Dean  MILTON. By Mark Pattison.
of St. Paul's.                   SOUTHEY. By Professor Dowden.
CHAUCER. By Prof. A.W. Ward.
New York: JOHN W. LOVELL COMPANY.
^------------------r^~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="7"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               7
fourth Lord Sartoris, died, leaving behind him three sons, 
-Reginald (who now, too, has passed info the land of
shadows), Arthur, the present earl, and Dorian, the
younger.
This Dorian alone, of all the brothers, had married.\
1,But his wife (who was notable for nothing beyond her 
deceitful temper and beautiful face, being as false as she
\\was fair) having died too, in giving birth to her second
child Horace, and her husband having followed her to the 
grave about three years later, the care of the children 
de'veloped upon their uncle Reginald, who had been ap-
,ointed guardian.
But Reginald-being a somewhat careless man in
mnany respects, and little given to children-took small
heed of them, and, beyond providing masters for them at
first, and later on sending them to school and college,
and giving them choice of professions, had left them very
much to their own devices.
T'Irue, when college debts accumulated, and pressing 
bills from long-suffering tradespeople came pouring in, he
would rouse himself sufficiently to remonstrate with them
in a feeble fashion, and, having received promises of
amendment from both boys, he would pay their bills,
make each a handsome present (as atonement for the
mild scolding), and, having thus dropped a sop to Cer-
berus,-or conscience,-would dismiss money matters,
nephews, and all from his thoughts.
So the children grew, from youth to boyhood, from boy-
hood to early manhood, with no one to whom to appeal
for sympathy, with no woman's voice to teach them right
from wrong,-with few hardships, fewer troubles, and no
affections.
Arthur Branscombe, indeed, who had come back from
India six months after his father's death, and had stayed
at Hythe for two interminable years (as they seemed to
him), had during that time so worked himself into the
heart of the eldest boy Dorian, and had so far taken him
into his own in return, that long years had failed to efface
the fondness of either. Indeed, now that.'.el as returned
from abroad (only, as fate has willedtl.t to take his
brother's place), he finds the love he had grafted in the
child still warm in the heart of the man.



<pb n="8"/>
8              FAITH AND UNFAITH.
Horace, the younger, had chosen his profession, and
gone in heavily for law. But Dorian, who inherited two
thousand a year from his father, and a charming resi-
dence,-situated about three miles from Hythe, and two
from the pretty village of Pullingham,-had elected to
try his hand at farming, and was at first honestly believed
in by confiding tenants, who discussed him as a being up
to his eyes in agricultural lore and literally steeped in
new. and improved projects for the cultivation of land.
But time undeceived these good souls.  And now,
though they love him better, they believe in him not at
all. To adore one's horses, and to be a perfect slave to
one's dogs, is one thing; to find a tender interest in the
price of guano, and a growing admiration for prize pigs, is.
quite another. When Dorian had tried it for six months,
he acknowledged, reluctantly, that to him mangels were
an abomination, and over-fed cattle a wearying of the 
flesh !
Every now and then, indeed, he tells himself that he
must " look about him," as he calls it, and, smothering a
sigh, starts for a quick walk across his land, and looks at
a field or two, or into the nearest paddock, and asks his
steward how things are going on, and if all is as satisfac-
tory now as in the old days when his father held the reins
of government, and, having listened absently to comfort-
able answers and cheerful predictions for the future, strolls
away again, thoroughly content, not caring to investigate
matters further.
He is fond of London life, and spends a good deal of
his time there; is courted and petted and made much of
by enterprising dowagers with marriageable daughters, as
a young man charming, well bred, altogether chic, and un-
doubted heir to an earldom; for of Arthur Sartoris's eve
marrying, now he has so long passed the prime of life, no
one ever dreams.
He knows all the best people in town, and puts in a
good time when there; is a fair hand at whist, and ca
beat most men at billiards; will now and then put mone
on a favoritfpr, the Oaks or the Grand National, but ca
not be said t4 regard gambling as an amusement. He ii
extravagant in many ways, but thoroughly unselfish an
kind-hearted, and generous to a fault. He is much



<pb n="9"/>
FA ITH AND UNFAITH               9
fected by women, and adored by children, who instinct-
ively accept him as a true friend.
Horace, both in face and in figure, is strangely like his
brother,-in character very different. He is tall and well
built, with eyes large, dark, and liquid, but rather too
closely set to be pleasing. His mouth is firm and some-
what hard, his smile soft, but uncertain. He is always
charming to women, being outwardly blind to their
caprices and an admirer of their follies, and is therefore
an immense favorite with a certain class of them, whose
minds are subservient to their bodies. Yet to every rule
there is an exception. And by women good and true,
and loyal, Horace has been, and is, well beloved.
*      *      *    *      #      #      *
As Lord Sartoris and Dorian cross the hall, they meet
Horace, and a pretty girl-tall, slender, and graceful-
coming towards them. She appears sad, and slightly dis-
tressed, but scarcely unnerved: there is a suspicion of
tears about her large gray eyes. Her gown, of violet vel-
vet (for, though they are in the merry month of May, the
days are still cold and fretful), sits closely to her perfect
figure; a Langtry bonnet, to match her dress, covers her
head and suits admirably her oval face and Grecian nose
and soft peach-like complexion.
Going up, with impulsive grace, to Lord Sartoris, she
lays both her ungloved hands upon his shoulders, and
presses her lips with tender sympathy to his cheek.
" How sad it all is ! " she says, with a little break in
her voice. " How can I tell you all I feel for you? If
you had only had the faintest warning ! But it was all so
sudden, so dreadful."
" What a kind child you are, Cissy I" says Sartoris,
gently; " and to come to us so soon that was so good of
you." 
"Was it? " says Clarissa, quickly. " That is what has
been troubling me. We only heard the terrible news
this morning, and papa said it would be intrusive to call
so early; but I-I could not keep away."
" Your presence in this gloomy house is an undeniable
comfort," says Sartoris, sadly. "I am glad you under-
stood us well enough to know that. It is my greatest
wish that you should regard us all with affection."



<pb n="10"/>
I10           4FATlY AND UA, A lA/IY 
He"glances from her to Dorian, as he speaks, with anx- 
ious meaning. But Dorian's gaze is fixed thoughtfully
upon the stained-glass window that is flinging its crimsonl
and purple rays upon the opposite wall, and has obviously 
been deaf to all that has been passing. As for Clarissa, 
she has turned, and is looking into Horace's dark eyes. 
Sartoris, catching the glance, drops Miss Peyton's
hand with a sigh. She notices the half-petulant action,
and compresses her lips slightly.
"Now I have seen you, I shall feel better," she says,  I
sweetly. "And-I think I must be going."                I
"Will you desert us so soon ? " says Sartoris, reproach-
fully. " At least stay to luncheon- ."  ie pauses, and
sighs profoundly. Just now the idea that the routine of
daily life must be carried on whether our beloved lie dead
upon their couches or stand living in our path, is hateful 
to him.
"1 hardly like," says Clarissa, nervously; " I fear-" 
,   Dorian, rousing himself from his thoughts, comes back 
to the present moment. 
"Oh, stay, Clarissa," he says, hurriedly. "You really 
must, you know; You cannot imagine what a relief you
are to us: you help us to bear our gloomy memories.
Besides, Arthur has tasted nothing for hours, and your 
being here may tempt him, perhaps, to eat."
"If I can be of any use-," says Clarissa, kindly. 
Whereupon Sartoris gives her his arm, and they all ad-
journ to the dining-room.
It is a large, old-fashioned, stately apartment, oak-pan- 
elled, with large mullioned windows, and a massive mar- 
ble chimney-piece that reaches high as a man's head. A  |
pleasant, sociable room at ordinary times, but now im- 
pregnated with the vague gloom that hangs over all the
house and seeks even here to check the gaudy brightness
of the sun that, rushing in, tries to illuminate it.
At the sideboard stands Simon Gale, the butler and   I
oldest domestic of Hythe, who has lived with the dead
lord as man and boy, and now regrets him with a grief 
more strongly resembling the sorrowing of one for a
friend than for a master.                              I
With downcast eyes and bowed head he stands, think-  I
ing sadly how much too old he is for new cares and fresh
i --__1,___I



<pb n="11"/>
FAITH AND UA'FAITY7.
faces. Reginald had been all the world to him: the new
man is as nothing. Coufting friendships as of little worth
unless years have gone to prove their depth and sincerity,
he feels no leaning towards the present possessor,-
knows him too short a time to like or dislike, to praise or
blame.
Now, as his eyes wander down the long table, to
where he can see the empty chair of him who rests with
such Unearthly tranquillity in the silent chamber above,
the thought of how soon a comparative stranger will fill it
causes him a bitter pang. And, as he so muses, the door
opens, and they all come in,-Sartoris first, with Clarissa,
pale, and quiet; the brothers-so like, yet so unlike-fol-
lowing.
Old Simon, rousing'himself; watches with jealous eyes
to see the place so long occupied by Reginald usurped by
another. But he watches in vain. Sartoris, without so
much as a glance in its direction, takes the chair at the
lower end of the table; and the others, following his lead,
seat themselves at the sides without comment of any kind;
whereupon Gale draws a long breath, and vows fidelity to
his new lord upon the spot.
It id a dismal meal, dull, and dispiriting. The ghastly
Egyptian mummy seems present in full force, if not in the
letter at least in the spirit. Sartoris, having taken a glass
of sherry, trifles with the meat upon his plate, but literally
eats nothing. No one appears possessed with a desire to
speak, and indeed there is little to be said. When lunch-
eon is nearly over, a small dark object, hitherto unseen,
creeps out from some forgotten corner, and stretches itself
forlornly; it is poor Reginald's favorite dog, that ever since
his death has lain crouching out of sight, but now, driven
by the pain of hunger, comes creeping forward, whining
piteously.
He goes up to the accustomed chair, but, finding it for
the first time empty and deaf to his complainings, turns
disconsolately away, and passes from seat to seat, without
accepting food at any of their hands, until he comes to Cla-
rissa. She stooping, raises him to her knee (her lashes
wet with tars), and feeds him tenderly wih the dainty
scraps upon her plate.
The whole scene, though simple, is suggestive of loss



<pb n="12"/>
12             i.11-ll AN (.\  I A//YH.
and loneliness. Sartoris, leaving the table wimin so-nic E
haste, goes to the window to hide his emotion. Dorian
follows him. Whereupon Horace, rising too, crosses to
where Clarissa sits, and, bending over her, says something|
in < low tone.
The moments fly. A clock upon the mantel-piece chimes
half-past four. Some bird, in the exuberance of its mad
joy, scurries wildly past the windows. Sartoris, with a
sigh, turns from the light, and, seeing Miss Peyton and
Horace still deep in conversation, frowns slightly.
" Horace, will you tell Durkin I want to see him at once,
in the library," he says, very quietly, yet with some latent
irritability.
"In one moment," replies Horace, unmoved, going back
to the low-toned dialogue he has been carrying on with
Clarissa.
"I am afraid I must lay myself open to the charge of
rudeness," says Sartoris, still very quietly, but with a pe-
culiar smile. " But it is important, and I must see. Dur-
kin at once. My dear Horace, oblige me in this matter."
" Shall I not see Clarissa to her carriage first ?" says
Horace, raisijng his dark eyes for one moment to his uncle's
face.
" Dorian will see to that," says the old man, slowly, but
so decisively that Horace, bidding the girl a silent but
warm farewell, with a bad grace departs.
" How late it grows," says Miss Peyton, glancing at the
clock; and, drawing from a side-pocket her own watch,
she examines it attentively, as though to assure herself the
huge timepiece on the mantel-shelf has not told a deliber-
ate lie. " I must go home! Papa will wonder where I
have been all this long time. Good-by, Mr. Branscombe "
(she is still, naturally, forgetful of the new-title). " I hope,"
very sweetly, "you will come to see us as soon as ever
you can."
" Thank you, yes, I shall come very soon," says Sartoris;
and then she bids him good-by, and Dorian follows her
from the room into the great dark hall outside.
"How changed he is ! " she says, turning suddenly to
him, and indicating, by a little backward motion of her
head towards the room she had just left, the person of whom
she speaks. " How altered !-Arthur, I mean. Not now,



<pb n="13"/>
FAITH AND UNFAI TH.              13
not by this grief; it isn't that: his manner, to me especially,
has been altogether different for a fortnight past. Ever
since that last picnic at Anadale-you remember it-he
has not been quite the same to me."
"Let me see; that, I think, was the evening you and
Horace drove home alone together, with that rather un-
certain brown mare, was it not ? " says Dorian, with no ap-
parent meaning in his tone. " My dear child, I dare say
you are mistaken about Arthur. Your imagination is
leading you astray."
"No, it is not. I am the least imaginative person. live,"
says Miss Peyton, with an emphatic shake of her pretty
head. "I can't bear that sort of people myself; they
are always seeing something that isn't there, and are gen-
crally very tiresome all around. I'm rather vexed about
Arthur, do you know ? "
"Don't mind him," says Branscombe, easily. "He'll
come all right in time. He is a peculiar fellow in many
ways, and when he sets his heart on any hobby, rides it to
the death."
" Has he a hobby now ?"
"Yes. He has just formed, and is now trying to work
out, a gigantic scheme, and cuts up a little rough every
now and then because all the world won't see it in the
light that he does."
"Poor man! " says Clarissa, sympathetically, " No won-
(ler he seems strange at times: it is so depressing to be
baffled. Why don't you help him, Dorian ?"
" It would take two to help him," says Mr. Branscombe,
looking faintly amused.
"Could I be of any use ? "-eagerly. " I would do any-
thing I could for him."
"No, would you ?" says Branscombe, his amusement
growing more perceptible. "I'm sure that's very good of
you. I dare say, if Arthur could hear you say that, he
would go wild with joy. 'Anything' is such a compre-
hensive word. You're sure you won't go back of it?"
" Quite sure,"-with some surprise.
" My dear Clarissa, is it possible you have not yet seen
through Arthur's latest and greatest design ?"
"If you intend to tell me anything? do so: beating
about the bush always fatigues me to death," says Miss



<pb n="14"/>
14             FAITH AND UNFAITH.
Peyton, in a tone of dignified rebuke. " What does Ar-
thur want ? "
" A little thing,-a mere trifle. He simply wants you
to marry me."
"'Really, Dorian," says Clarissa, coloring slowly, but
warmly, " I think you might find some other subject to
jest on."
" I never made a joke in my life; I hope I never shall,"
returns Branscombe, reproachfully. " What have I done,.
that you should accuse me of such a crime ? I have only
spoken the plain, unvarnished truth. To see you my wife
is the dream of Arthur's life, his sole ambition. And just
now, you know, you said you were quite prepared to do
anything for him. You can't, with any sense of honor,
back out of your given word."
" I never heard anything so absurd, so foolish, so non-
sensical! " says Miss Peyton, resentfully.
" Nonsensical I My dear Clarissa! pray consid
my    "
" It is more ! it is right down stupid of him," says Cla-
rissa, who plainly declines to consider any one's feelings.
" You needn't pile up my agony any higher," interposes
Branscombe, meekly. "To my everlasting regret I.ao-
knowledge myself utterly unworthy of you. But why tel'
me so in such round terms ? I assure you I feel excess-.
ively hurt and offended. Am  I to understand, then,
that you have refused me ? "
"You shall understand something worse, if you say
another word," says Clarissa, holding up before him a
little clinched hand in a would-be threatening manner.
And then they both laugh in a subdued fashion; and she
moves on towards the open hall-door, he following.
" Well, I forgive you," he says, as she steps into he
low phaeton, and he arranges the rug carefully aroun
her. "Though you don't deserve it. (What ridiculou
little hands to guide such refractory ponies !) Sure you
are quite comfortable ? Well, good-by; and look here,"
-teasingly,-" I should think it over if I were you. You
may not get so excellent a chance again; and Arthur will
never forgive you."
"Your uncle, though charming, and a very dear, is atso
a goose," says Miss Peyton, somewhat irreverently.



<pb n="15"/>
FAITH AND UYEAITHI.               15
" Marry you, indeed   hy,  I should quite as soon dream
of marrying my brother ! "
"Well, as I can't be your husband, it would be rather
nice to be your brother," says Mr. Branscombe, cheer-
fully. " Your words give me hope that you regard me in
that light. I shall always think of you for the future as
my sister, and so I am sure "-with an eloquent and
rather mischievous pause-" will Horace ! "
Miss Peyton blushes again,-much more vividly this
time,-and, gathering up the reins hastily, says " goo-by "
for the second time, without turning her flushed face to
his, and drives rapidly up the avenLue.
B3ranscombe stands on the steps watching her until she
is quite lost to sight behind the rhododendrons, and then
strokes his moustache thoughtfully.
"That has quite arranged itself, I should fancy," he
says, slowly. " Well, I hope he will be very good to her,
dlear little thing !"
CHAPTER II.
" Her form was fresher than the morning rose
When the dew wets its leaves."-THioMNSON.
PULLINGHAM-ON-THE-MOORS is a small, untidy, pictur-
esque little village, situated on the side of a hill. It boasts
a railway-station, a police-barrack, a solitary hotel, and
two or three well-sized shops. It is old-fashioned, sta-
tionary, and, as a rule, hopelessly harmless, though now
and then, dissensions, based principally on religious
grounds, will arise.
These can scarcely be avoided, as one-half of the par-
ish trips lightly after Mr. Redmond, the vicar (who has a
subdued passion for wax candles, and a craving for floral
decorations), and looks with scorn upon the other half, as,
\ilth solemn step and slow, it descends the high hill that
lea(ls, each Sabbath, to the " NMethod'v" Chapel beneath.
It never grows older, this village, and never younger;
is seldom cast down or elated. surprised or demonstrative,
a)outt anvthing. In a quaint, sleepy fashion, it has its
(lissipations, and acklnovledges its festive seasons,-such



<pb n="16"/>
16             FAITH ANb   VNFAITH.
as Christmas-tide when all the shops burst into a gener
bloom of colored cards, and February, when valentine
adorn every pane. It has also its fair days, when fat ca
tle and lean sugar-sticks seem to be everywhere.
A marriage is reckoned an event, and causes some go
sip: a birth does not,-possibly because of the fact tha
it is a weekly occurrence. Indeed, the babies in Pullin
ham are a " joy forever." They have their season all th&
year round, and never by any chance "go out; " though
have heard people very foolishly liken them to flowers,
They grow, and thrive, and blossom all over the place
which no doubt is greatly to the credit of the inhabitants
Occasionally, too, some one is good enough to cause
little pleasurable excitement by dying, but very seldom
as the place is fatally healthy, and people live here un
they become a social nuisance and almost wish themselve
dead. There is, I believe, some legend belonging to t
country, about an old woman who had to be shot, so
gressively old did she become; but this is obscure.
About two miles from the town one comes to Sartoris,
the residence of Dorian Branscombe, which runs in a line
with the lands of Scrope Royal, the property of Sir James
Scrope.
Sir James is a tall, rather old-young man of thirty-two,
with a calm, expressive face, kindly eyes, and a somewhat
lanky figure. He has a heart of gold, a fine estate, and
-a    step-sister.
Miss Jemima Scrope is not as nice as she might be
She has a face as hard as her manners, and, though con-
siderably over forty, is neither fat nor fair. She has
perfect talent for making herself obnoxious to all un
happy enough to come within her reach, a temper lik
" Kate the Curst," and a nose like the Duke of Welling
ton.
Somewhere to the left, on a hill as high and pompou
as itself, stands the castle, where three months out of th
twelve the Duke and Duchess of Spendleton, and some
their family, put in a dreary time. They give two ball
one fancy bazaar, a private concert, and three garden-pa
ties-neither more nor less-every year. Nobody like
them very much, because nobody knows them. Nobod
dislikes them verv much, for just the same reason.
I f



<pb n="17"/>
FAITH Ai'D UNFAITH.               17
The castle is beautifully situated, and is correct in every
detail. There are Queen Anne rooms, and Gothic apart-
ments, and Elizabethan anterooms, and staircases of the
most vague. There are secret passages, and panels, and
sliding doors, and trapdoors, and, in fact, every sort of
door you could mention, and all other abominations. Ar-
tista re'el in it, and grow frenzied with joy over its im-
po"si!ilities, and' almost every year some room is painted
oitm. and sent to the Academy. But outside lies its
chief beauty, for there are the swelling woods, and the
glimpse of the far-off ocean as it gleams, now green, now
steel-blue, beneath the rays of the setting sun. And beyond
it is Gowran, where Clarissa lives with her father, George
Peyton.
Clarissa is all that is charming. She is tall, slight,
svelte: indeed, earth has not anything to show more fair.
She is tender, too, and true, and very earnest,-perhaps a
degree too earnest, too intense, for every-day life. Her
eyes, " twin stars of beauty," are deep and gray; her hair
is dark; her mouth, though somewhat large, is perfect;
and her smile is indescribable, so sweet it is, so soft and
lingering.
Her mother died when she was nine years old, and from
that time until she was twelve she spent most of her life
with the ;Branscombe boys,-riding, fishing, sometimes even
shooting, with them. The effect of such training began
to make itself felt. She was fast degenerating into a tom-
boy of the first water (indeed, one of the purest gems of
its kind), when James Scrope, who even then was a seri-
ous young man, came to the rescue, and induced her
father to send her from Gowran to a school at Brussels.
"Virtue is its own reward," they tell us: let us hope
Scrope felt rewarded ! Whether he did or not, I know he
was considerably frightened when Clarissa (having dis-
covered who had been the instigator of this " plot " to drive
her from her beloved Gowran) came down to Scrope Hall,
'an dashing into his presence like a small whirlwind,
Ibpsea him for his well-meant interference in good round
trs, 'and, having refused even to say good-by to him,
ad anmed the door in his face, and, starting from
home next morning, had seen no more of him for six long
years.
2



<pb n="18"/>
rS            [/T7I! AND UNFAITIL.
At seventeen, her aunt, the Hon. Mrs. Greville, had
brought her back from Brussels to her own house in town,
where she kept her for twelve months, and where she once
more renewed acquaintance with her old friends, Dorian
and Horace Branscombe. Mrs. Greville took her to all the
most desirable balls of her season, to concerts and "sma
and earlies," to high-art entertainments of the most " to
too," and, having given her free scope to break the heart'
of half the men in town, had sent her at last to her father
hopelessly in love with a detrimental.
The detrimental was Horace Branscombe. Mrs. Gre
ville was intensely annoyed and disgusted. After all her
care, all her trouble, to have this happen ! She had mar-
ried her own girls with the greatest Idcat, had not mad
one false move with regard to any of them, and now to se
Clarissa (who, with her beauty and fortune, might hav
married any one) throw herself away upon a penniless b
rister seemed to her to savor of positive crime.
Horace, certainly, so far, had not proposed in form, bu
Mrs. Greville was not to be hoodwinked. He meant i
He was not always at her niece's side for nothing; and
sooner or later, Clarissa, with all her money, would g
over to him. When she thought of this shocking waste 
money, she groaned aloud; and then she washed her hand
of the whole affair, and sent Clarissa back to GowraN
where her father received her with open arms, and mad
much of her.
CHAPTER III.
" 0 Helen, fair beyond compare I
I'll make a garland of thy hair,
Shall bind my heart for evermair,
Until the day I die I "
ACROSS the lawn the shadows move slowly, and with
vague grace that adds to their charm. The birds a
drowsy from the heat, and, sitting half hidden in the gre'
branches, chant their songs in somewhat lazy fashio
All nature has succumbed to the fierce power of Phoeb
Apollo.
I



<pb n="19"/>
"The morn is merry Time, I trow
The rosc is (budding fain"
Each flower in the sunlit garden is holding up its head,
and breathing fragrant sighs as the hours slip by, unheeded,
yet full of a vague delight.
Miss Peyton, in her white gown, and with some soft rich
roses lying on her lap, is leaning back in a low chair in
the deep embrasure of the window, making a poor attempt
at working.
Her father, with a pencil in his hand, and some huge
volumes spread out before him, is making a lew desultory
notes. Into the library-the coseyest, if not the hand-
somest, room at Gowran-the hot sun is rushing, dancing
lightly over statuettes and pictures, and lingering with
pardonable delay upon Clarissa's bowed head.l.
" Who is this coming up the avenue ? " she says, pres-
ently, in slow, sleepy tones, that suit the day. " It is-
no, it isn't-and yet it is-it must be James Scrope ! "
" I dare say. He was to have returned yesterday. He
would come here as soon as possible, of course."  Rising,
he joins her at the window, and watches the coming visitor
as he walks his horse leisurely down the drive.
" What a dear little modest speech ! "savs Miss Peyton,
maliciously. " Now, if I had been the autlor of it, I know
some one who would have called me vain ! But I will
generously let that pass. How brown Jim has grown !
Has he not ?"
"Has he ? I can scarcely see so far. What clear eyes
you must have, child, and what a faithful memory to rec-
ollect him without hesitation, after all these years! "
"I never forget," says Clarissa, simply, which is quite
the truth. "And he has altered hardll anything. He
was always so old, you know, he really couldn't grow
much older. What is his age now, papa ? Ninety ?"
"Something over thirty, I fancy," says papa, uncertainly.
"Oh, nonsense !" sas   iss iPeyton. " Surely you ro-
mance, or else you are an invaluable friend.  When I
grow brown and withered, I hope you will prove equally
good to me. I shall expect you to say all sorts of impos-
sible things, and not to blush when saving them. Ah !-
here is Sir James," as the door opens, and Scrope-healthy
!~~~~~~~~0                 pes n co~-clb



<pb n="20"/>
20             FAITH AND UNFAITH H
and bronzed from foreign travel-enters quietly, staid
calm as ever.
When he has shaken hands with, and been warmly w
corned by, Mr. Peyton, he turns with some diffident
towards the girl in the clinging white gown, who is s
ing at him from the window, with warm red lips, half part
and some faint amusement in her friendly eyes.
"Why, you have forgotten me," she says, presently,
a low tone of would-be reproach. "While I-I knewy
at once."
" I have not forgotten," says Scrope, taking her han
and holding it, as though unconsciously. "I was on
surprised, puzzled. You are so changed. All seems
different. A little child when last I saw you, and now
lady grown."
" Oh, yes, I am quite grown up," says Miss Peyton, d
murely. " I can't do any more of that sort of thing,
oblige ·anybody,-even though papa-who adores a Juxi
and thinks all women should be divinely tall-has ofte
asked me to try. But," maliciously, " are you not goin
to ask me how I' habe progressed (isn't that the rig
word?) with my studies? You ought, you know, as it w
you who sent me tO school."
"I ? " says Sir James, rather taken aback at this unex
pected onslaught.
"Yes, you," repeats she, with a little nod. " Pa
would never have had the cruelty even to think of such 
thing. I am glad you have still sufficient grace left t
blush for your evil conduct. Do you remember," with
gay laugh, "what a terrible scolding I gave you befo
leaving home ?"
"I shall remember it to my dying day," says Sir Janmes
" I was never so thoroughly frightened before, or since
Then and there, I registered a vow never again to inter
fere with any one's daughter."
"I hope you will keep that vow," says Miss Peyton
with innocent malice, and a smile only half suppressed
that torments him in memory for many a day. And the
George Peyton asks some question, and presently S
James is telling him certain facts about the Holy Lan
and Asia generally, that rather upset his preconceiv
ideas,



<pb n="21"/>
FAITH AND UNrFAITH.              21
I "Yet I still believe it must be the most interesting
spot on earth," he says, still clinging to old thoughts and
settled convictions.
" Well, it's novel, you know, and the fashion, and that,"
says Sir James, rather vaguely. " In fact, you are no-
where nowadays if you haven't done tlh:e East; but it's fa-
tiuing, there isn't a doubt. The people aren't as nice as
they might be, and honesty is not considered the best
polrcy out there, and dirt is the prevailing color, and
there's a horrid lot of sand."
"What a dismal ending! "' says Clarissa, in a tone sug-
gestive of disappointment. " But how lovely it looks in
pictures --I don't mean the sand, exactly, but the East."
" Most things do. There is an old grandaunt of mine
hung in the gallery at Scrope- "
"How shocking ! " interrupted Miss Peyton, with an af-
fected start. "And in the house, too! So unpleasant!
Did she do it herself, or who hanged her ?"
" Her picture, you know," says Scrope, with a laugh.
" 't'hear that she had made away with herself would be
too'good to be true. She looks absolutely lovely in this
picture I speak of, almost too fine for this work-a-day
world; yet my father always told me she was ugly as a
nightmare. Never believe in paint."
"'Talking of Scrope," says Clarissa, "do you know,
thouagh  have been home now for some months, I have
rier been through it since I was a child ? I have rather
a passion for revisiting old haunts, and I want to see it
again. That round room  in the tower used to be my
special joy. Will you show it to me ?-some day ?-any
day?"
"What day will you come ?" asks Scrope, thinking it un-
necessary to express the gladness it will be to him to point
out the beauties of his home to this new-old friend,-this
friend so full of fresh and perfect beauty, yet so replete
with all the old graces and witcheries of the child he once
so fondly loved.
I am just the least little bit in the world afraid of Miss
Scrope," says Clarissa, with an irrepressible smile. " So
I shall prefer to come some time when you are-in. On
Thursday, if that will suit you. Or Friday; or, if not then,
why, Saturday."



<pb n="22"/>
22             FAITH AND UNFAITH.
"Make it Thursday.    That day comes first," said
Scrope.
" Now, that is a very pretty speech," declares Miss Pey-
ton, vast encouragement in her tone. " Eastern air, in.
spite of its drawbacks, has developed your intellect, Jim.
Hasn't it ? 
The old familiar appellation, and the saucy smile that
has always in it something of tenderness, smites some half-
forgotten chord in Scrope's heart. He makes no reply,
but gazes with an earnestness that almost amounts to scru-
tiny at Clarissa, as she stands in the open window leaning
against a background of ivy, through which pale rose-buds
are struggling into view. Within her slender fingers the
knitting-needles move slowly, glinting and glistening in the
sun's hot rays, until they seem to emit tiny flashes as they
cross and recross each other. Her eyes are downcast, the
smile still lingers on her lips, her whole attitude, and her
pretty graceful figure, clad in its white gown, is
"Like a picture rich and rare."
"On Thursday, then, I shall see you," he says, not be-
cause he has tired of looking at her, but because she has
raised her eyes and is evidently wondering at his silence.
"Good-by."
" Good-by," says Clarissa, genially. Then she lays down
the neglected knitting (that, indeed, is more a pretence
than a reality), and comes out into the middle of the room.
" For the sake of old days I shall see you to the hall door,"
she says, brightly. " No, papa, do not ring: I myself shall
do the honors to Jim."
CHAPTER IV.
"All thoughts, all passions, all delights,
Whatever stirs this mortal frame,
All are but ministers of Love,
And feed his sacred flame."-COLERIDGE.
ALL round the drawing-room windows at Scrope a wide
balcony has been built up, over which the creepers climbl
and trail. Stone steps leads to it from the scented garden.



<pb n="23"/>
FAITH AND UNAT/I11.               23
beneath, and up these runs Clarissa, gayly, when Thurs-
day morning had dawned, and deepened, and given place
to noon.'
Within the drawing-room, before a low table, sits Miss
Scrope, tattiug industriously. Tatting is Miss Scrope's
forte. -She never does anything else. bMultitudinous an-
timacasars, of all shapes, patterns, and dimensions, grow
beneath her untiring touch with the most alarming rapidity.
Whe fihished, nobody knows what becomes of thema, as
they' instantly disappear from view and are never heard 
of afterwards. They are as good as a ghost in Pullingham,
and obstinately refuse to be laid.  It was charitably, if
weakly, suggested at one time, by a member of the stronger
sex, that probably she sent them out in bales as coverings
fo1 the benighted heathen; but when it was explained to
this misguided being that tatted antimacassars, as a rule, 
run to holes, and can be seen through, even he desisted
from further attempts to solve the mystery.
Miss Peyton, throwing. up one of the window-sashes,
steps boldly into the drawing-room and confronts this emi-
nent tatter.
"Good-morning," she says, sweetly, advancing with
smiling lips.
Miss Scrope, who has not heard her enter, turns slowly
round: to say she started would be agross calumny. Miss
Scrope never starts. She merely raises her head with a
sudden accession of dignity. Her dignity, as a rule, is not
fascinating, and might go by another name.
"Good-afternoon, Clarissa," she says, austerely. " I am.
sorry you should have been forced to make an entrance
like a burglar. Has the hall door been removed? It
used to stand in the front of the house."
" I think it is there still," Miss Pevton ventures, meekly.
But "-prettily-t" coming in through the window enabled
te to see you at least one moment sooner. Shall I close
:    s/I beg you will not distress yourself about it," says
inss Scrope, nrsingto ringthe bell. "WhenCollins comes
int he will see to it."
t is  wild day, though warm and sweet, and the wind
Ouside is neng madly over lawn and shrubberies into the
'"ood beyond.



<pb n="24"/>
24            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
"But in the mean time you will perhaps catch cold, or
rheumatism, or something," says Clarissa, hesitating.
"Rheumatism ! pugh! nonsense ! " says Miss Scrope,
disdainfully. " I simply don't believe in rheumatism. It
is nothing but nerves. I don't have those ridiculous pains
and aches people hug nowadays, and I don't believe they
have either; it employs their idle time trying to invent
them."
"Is Jim in?" asks Clarissa, presently, having seated
herself in a horribly comfortless but probably artistic
chair.
"James is in," says Miss Scrope, severely. " Do you
mean mv brother? It is really almost impossible to un-
derstand young people of the present age."
"Don't you like the name Jim ?" asks Clarissa, inno-
cently, leaning slightly forward, and taking up the edge of
Miss Scrope's last antimacassar to examine it with tender
interest. " I think it such a dear little name, and so hap-
pily wanting in formality. I have never called him any-
thing else since I can remember, so it comes most naturally
to me."
" I think it a most unmaidenly way of addressing any
gentleman whose priest christened him James," says Miss
Scrope, unflinchingly. "What would you think of him
were he to call you by some hideous pet name, or, more
properly speaking, nickname ?"
"I shouldn't mind it in the least; indeed, I think I should
rather like it," returns Clarissa, mildly.
" I believe that to be highly probable," retorts Miss Je-
mima, with considerable scorn.
Clarissa laughs,-not an irritating laugh, by any means,
but a little soft, low, girlish laugh, very good to hear.
"If you scold me any more I shall cry," she says,
lightly. "I always give way to tears when driven into a
corner. It saves time and trouble. Besides," returning
with some slight perversity to the charge, " shall I tell you
a secret ? Your brother likes that little name. He does
indeed. -He has told me so a thousand times in the days
gone by. Very frivolous of him, isn't it ? But-ah ! her
he is," as the door opens, and Sir James comes in. " You
are a little late, are you not ? " leaning back in her chai
with a certain amount of languid, but pleasing, grace, an



<pb n="25"/>
FAITH ArND UNFAITH.              25
holding out to him a slender ungloved hand, on which
some rings sparkle brilliantly.
" Have I kept you waiting ? " asks he, eagerly, foolishly,
glad because of her last words, that seem to imply so
much and really mean so little. Has she been anxious for
his coming? Have the minutes appeared tedious because
of his absence ? "I hurried all I knew," he says: "but
stewards will be stewards."
" I have been quite happy with Miss Scrope; you need
not look so penitent," says Clarissa. " And who am I,
that I should compete with a steward? We have been
having quite a good time, and an excellent argument.
Come here, and tell your sister that you think Jim the
prettiest name in the world."
"Did any one throw a doubt on the subject? Lives
there a soul so dead to euphony as not to recognize the
music in those three letters ?-Jim ! Why, it is poetry it-
self," says Sir James, who is not so absent that he cannot
scent battle on the breeze. As he speaks, he smiles: and
when James Scrope smiles he is almost handsome.
"Some day you will regret encouraging that child in
her folly," remarks Miss Scrope, severely. At which the
child makes a saucy little grimace unseen, and rises to her
feet.
" What a solemn warning I" says Scrope, with a shrug.
"I hope," turning to Clarissa, "you have taken it to
heart, and that it will keep you out of imaginary mischief.
It ought, you know. It would be a shabby thing to bring
down public censure on the head of one who has so nobly
espoused your cause."
" My conduct from this day forth shall be above suspi-
cion," says Clarissa. "Good-by, Miss Scrope," stooping
to press her fresh warm lips to the withered cross old cheek
beneath her: "I am going to tread old ground with-
James."
She follows him across hall and corridor, through two
modern rooms, and past aportire, into another and larger
hall beyond. Here, standing before a heavy oaken door,
he turns the handle of it, and, as it swings back slowly and
sleepily, they pass into another room, so unexpectedly and
so strangely different from any they have yet entered, as al-
most to make one start.



<pb n="26"/>
26            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
It is a huge old-fashioned apartment, stone-floored an
oak panelled, that once, in olden days, must have been a r
fectory. Chairs carved in oak, and built like bishops'
thrones, line the walls, looking as though no man for many
a-hundred years has drawn them from their present posi
tion. Massive cabinets and cupboards, cunningly devise
by crafty hands in by-gone days, look out from dusky cor
ners, the hideous faces carved upon them wreathed in their
eternal ghastly smiles. From narrow, painted windows
great gleams of sunset from the gay world without pour in,
only to look sadly out of place in the solemn gloomy room.
But one small door divides it from the halls outside; ye
centuries seem to roll between it and them.
In one corner a door lies half open, and behind it a nar-
row flight of stairs runs upward to a turret chamber above;
-a tiny stairway, heavily balustraded and uncarpeted, tha
creates in one a mad desire to ascend and learn the secret
that may lie at its top.
Miss Peyton, scarce noticing the monkish refectory
runs to the stairs and mounts them eagerly, Sir James fol
lowing her in a more leisurely fashion.
" Now for my own room," she says, with some degree o
quickness in her tone. She reaches the turret chamber
she speaks, and looks around her. It is quite a circle, an
apparently of the same date as the one they have just quit
ted. Even the furniture, though of lighter make and size
is of a similar age and pattern. Ugly little chairs and un
pleasantly solid tables * are dotted here and there, a perfe
wealth of Old-World work cut into them. Everything
carved, and to an unsympathetic observer it might occ
that the carver must have been a person subject to fiend
ish visions and unholy nightmares.  But no doubt th
beauty of his designs lies in their ugliness, and his head
are a marvel of art, and his winged creatures priceless 1
The high chimney-piece is en rapport with all the res
and scowls unceasingly; and the very windows-long an
deep-have little faces carved on either side of them, of th
most diabolical.
Miss Peyton is plainly entranced with the whole scen
and for a full minute says nothing.
" I feel as though I were a child again," she says, pre
ently, as though half regretful. " Everything comes ba



<pb n="27"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               27
to me with such a strange yet tender vividness. This, I re-
member, was my favorite table, this my favorite chair.
And that little winged monster over there, he used to whis-
per in my ears more thrilling tales than either Grimm or
Andersen. Have you never moved anything in all these
years ?"
* " Never. It is your own room by adoption, and no one
shall meddle with it. When I went abroad I locked it, and
carried the key of it with me wherever I went; I hardly know
why myself." He glances at her curiously, but her face is
averted, and she is plainly thinking less of him than of the
many odd trifles scattered around. "When I returned,
dust reigned, and spiders; but it has been made spick and
span to day for its mistress. Does it still please you ? or
will you care to alter anything ? "
"No, nothing. I shall pay a compliment to my childish
taste by letting everything stay just as it is. I must have
been rather a nice child, Jim, don't you think ? if one passes
over the torn frocks and the shrewish tongue."
"I don't think I ever saw a tear in your frocks," says
Sir James, simply, " and if your tongue was shrewish I never
found it out."
Miss Peyton gives way to mirth. She sits down on a
wretchedly uncomfortable, if delightfully mediaval, chair
and laughs a good deal.
"Oh, wad some power the giftie gie us
To see oursels as others see us "
she quotes, gayly. " Those lines, meant by poor Burs as
a censure on frail humanity, rather fall short at this mo-
ment. Were I to see myself as you see me, Jim, I should
be a dreadfully conceited person, and utterly unbearable
What a good friend you make I "
"Abad one, you mean. A real friend, according to my
lights, is a fellow who says unpleasant things all round and
expects you to respect his candor. By and by, when I
tell you a few home truths, pethaps you will not like me as
you do now."
"Yes, I shall always like you," says Clarissa. "Long
ago, when you used to scold me, I never bore malice. I
suppose you are one of those rare people who can say the
ungracious thing in such a manner that it doesn't grate.



<pb n="28"/>
28            tAITH AND UNFAITH.
But then you are old, you know, Jim, very old,-thoug
appearance, wonderfully young for your years. I do h
papa, at your age, will look as fresh."
She has risen, and has slipped her hand through
arm, and is smiling up at him gayly and with a sweet
irresistible. Sir James looks as pleased as though he
received a florid compliment.
" What a baby you are ! " he says, after a pause, loo
down at her admiringly. Judging by his tone, babie
his eyes, must possess very superior attractions. " T
are a good many babies in the world, don't you think
he goes on, presently. " You are one, and Geoffrey B
combe is another. I don't suppose he will ever quite
up.")
"And Horace," says Clarissa, idly, " is he another?
But Sir James, though unconsciously, resents the q
tion.
" Oh, no ! " he says, hastily. " He does not come
in the category at all. Why," with a faint smile, "!
even older than I am I There is no tender baby-nons
about him."
"No, he is so clever,-so far above us all, where in
lect is concerned," she says, absently. A slight s
plays about her lips, and a light, that was not there a
ment since, comes to life within her eyes. With an eff
she arouses herself from what were plainly happy d
dreams, and comes back to the present, which, just n
is happy too.
"I think nature meant me to be a nun," she says, s
ing. "'This place subdues and touches me so.
sombre lights and shadows are so impressive i If it w
indeed mine (in reality), I should live a great part of,
time in it. Here, I should write my pleasantest le
and read my choicest books, take my afternoon teas,
make welcome my dearest friends,-you among them.
fact, if it were practicable," nodding her pretty head
phatically, " I should steal this room. There is ha
anything I would not do to make it my own."
Scrope regards her earnestly, with a certain amount
calm inquiry. Is she a coquette, or merely unthinki
If, indeed, the face be the index of the mind, one m
x >



<pb n="29"/>
,v  .    FAITH AND UNiFAITHI. 
iunther free of all unworthy thought or frivolous de-
Here is
41. c'    , "A countenance in Wrd.edo meet
/   '1 .  ' Sweet records, saltfs as sweet."
i4er eyes are still smiling' m ; her whole expres-
'iS ful of a gentle frien lss; and in his heart, at
moment, arises a sensation that is not hope, or glad-
or despair, but yet is a faint wild mingling of all three.
bAs for Clarissa, she stands a little apart, unconscious of
that is passing in his heart, and gazes lovingly upon the
jects that surround her, as one will gaze now and then
things that have been fondly remembered through the
eof many years. She is happy, wrapped in memories
-a past all sunshine and no shade, and is ignorant of
emeaning he would gladly attach to her last words.
"While I stay here I sin,-that is, I covet," she says, at
ith, surprised by his silence, " and it grows late. Come,
with me a little way through the park: I have not
seen the old path we used to call the' short cut'to
owran, long ago." 
so, down the dark stairs he follows her, across the stone
g, and into the hall outside, that seems so brilliant
Contrast, and so like another world, all is so changed, so
ferent. Behind, lie silence, unbroken, perfect, a sad
atd dreamy light, Old-World grandeur; here, all is rest-
sslife, full of uncertain sounds, and distant footsteps,
voices faint but positive.
V,.. Is it not like a dream ? " says Clarissa, stopping to
t backwards to the turret they have just quitted.
R  "The past is always full of dreams," replies he, thought-
CHAPTER V.
t-i. :  ·  A violet by a mossy stone
,/-~.-:    Half hidden from the eye I
Fair as a star, when only one
Is shining in the sky.'-WORDSWORTH.
TIM baby morn has flung aside its robes, and grown to



<pb n="30"/>
30             FAITH AND UNFAITH.
perfect strength. The day is well advanced. Already it
is making rapid strides towards rest and evening; yet still
no cooling breeze has come .to refresh the heart of man.
Below, in the quiet fidl the cattle are standing, knee-
deep in water, beneath te _afding branchesof the kindly
alder. They have no en6 idlat, but munch, sleepily, the
all-satisfying cud, and, wit gentle if expressionless eyes,
look out afar for evening and the milkmaid.
"'Tis raging noon; and, vertical, the sun
Darts on the head direct his forceful rays.
O'er heaven and earth. far as the ranging eye
Can sweep, a dazzling deluge reigns; and all,
From pole to pole, is undistinguished blaze.
Distressful Nature pants I
The very streams look languid from afar,
Or, through th' unsheltered glade, impatient, seem
To hurl into the covert of the grove."
A tender stillness reigns over everything. The very birds
are mute. Even the busy mill-wheel has ceased to move.,
Bright flashes of light, that come and go ere one can
catch them, dart across the gray walls of the old mill,--
that holds its gaunt and stately head erect, as though defy-
ing age,-and, slanting to the right, fall on the cottage,
quaint and ivy-clad, that seems to nestle at its feet. The
roses that climb its walls are drooping; the casements all
stand wide. No faintest breath of air comes to flutter
Ruth's white gown, as she leans against the rustic gate.
All millers' daughters should be pretty. It is a duty im-
posed upon them by tradition. Romance, of the most flora
description, at once attaches itself to a miller's daughter
I am not at all sure it does not even cast a halo round the
miller himself. Ruth Annersley at least acknowledge
this fact, and does her duty nobly; she gives the lie to n
old legends or treasured nursery superstitions; she is 
pretty as heart can desire,-
"Fresh as the month, and as the morning fair."
She is small, piquant, timid, with large almond-shap
eyes and light-brown hair, a rounded supple figure, an
hands delicately white. Perhaps there is a lack of for
in her face, an indefinable want, that hardly detracts fro
her beauty, yet sets one wondering, vaguely, where it li
_;__I



<pb n="31"/>
FAIIT*ND UNFAITH.                    31
and what it can be. The mouth, mobile and slightly parted,
betrays it  ost. .
Her lashes, overng her brown eyes, are very long, and
lie a ood deal on her cheeks. Her manner, without a
_smaj{be    gw&i      is nervous, almost appealing; and
hw per  i.aLmnte so rare, is very charming, and apt to
finlar Lbtememory.
'-l* ,iamf-t  y hild, and all through her young life has
*bumgaIed Land caressed rather more than is good for
*u xai.' - Her father had married, somewhat late in life,
*aw^niinnever way his superior, and, she dying two
yeas;fWrer marriage, he had fallen back for consola-
tiotfiah the little one left to his sole care. To him, she
pwas alde pi a delight, a creature precious beyond words,
on whom the sun must shine gently and the rain fall not
at a lk: 
salty child from the first, Ruth had declined acquaint-
ance with the villagers, who would, one and all, have been
glad   O W  rthe motherless girl. Perhaps the little drop
of gentle blood inherited from her mother had thriven in
hert'lis,;ad thus rendered her distant and somewhat
reedSgit  ehetrmanners to those in her own rank of life.
S-IPtd -been e4t early to a private school, had been
caunttli~c   cts tr .above her position, and had come
bha'liqs   lt-^rfather , with all the pretty airs and un-
conscious ,tness of manner that, as a rule, belong to
goodbyel
sl°°     hatfted; passionate, impulsive, and singu.
iti ejaemuch :so that few guess at the terrible
iM      brl. .erIhate, otsuffer, in silence, that lies within
.^l  BliPlpeWi favorite with Miss Peyton and the
,lc   f'X ii  titho'se at Hythe, and indeed with most of
tS     S      rbplcff   Miss Scrope excepted, who gives' it
S  Co" I^    n that she will come to no good "with
!1 ~6 f        her high society and general fiddle-fad-
' i1owW~ what this last means, and every
_ _ w  prett ad bare, and her hand shad-
; '^n np i.   gis     down the dusty road. Her
""; .kseBe           ea~sncy.  ' Every feature (she is
lettase and hopeful longing,-



<pb n="32"/>
3e            FAITH AND UNF^WJTH.
"Fiery Titan, who
---with his peccant heal 
Has dried up the lusty liquor newr
Upon the herbis in the greene mead.' 
has plainly fallen in love with her to-day, as he has clothed
her in all his glory, and seems reluctant to pass her by on
his homeward journey.
The heat has made her pale and languid: but just at this
moment a faint delicate color springs into her face; andi
as the figure of a young man, tall and broad-shouldered,  .
turns the corner of the road, she raises her hand to her
cheek with a swift involuntary gesture. A moment later,
as the figure comes closer, so near that the face is discern-
ible, she pales again, and grows white as an early snow
drop.
"Good-morning, Ruth," says Dorian Branscombe, wilh
a smile, apparently oblivious of the fact that morning has
given place to noon many hours agone.
Ruth returns his salutation gently, and lets her hand lie
for an instant in his.
"This is a summer's day, with a vengeance," says
Dorian, genially, proceeding to make himself comfortable
on the top of the low wall near which she is standing. He
is plainly making up his mind to a long and exhaustive con
versation. "Talk of India " he says disparagingly 
"this beats it to fits "
Ruth acquiesces amiably.
"It is warm,-very," she says, calmly, but indifferently
" 'Ot I call it,-werry 'ot," returns he, making his quot
tion as genially as though she understands it, and, pluc
ing. a little rose-bud from a tree near him, proceeds to ador
his coat with it.
t It seems a long time since' I have seen you," he goe
on, presently; and, as he speaks, his eyes again seek her
Something in her face touches some chord in his carele
kindly nature.
" How pale you are I " he says, abruptly.     ,
" Am    I? The heat, no doubt,"-with a faint smile. ,
"But thin, too, are you not? And-an4-' he paus
"Anything wrong with you, Ruth?"   ,ri.
"Wrong? No! How should there b.f," retorts s
in a curious tone, in which fear and annoyance fight L



<pb n="33"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.                33
mastery. Then the storm dies away, and the startled look
fades from her pretty face.
" Why should you think me unhappy because I am a lit-
tie pale ?" she asks, sullenly.
Branscombe looks surprised.
" You altogether mistake me," he says, gently. "I never
associated you in my mind with unhappiness. I merely
meant, had you a headache, or any other of those small ills
that female flesh is heir to ? I beg your pardon, I'm sure,
if I have offended you."
He has jumped off the wall, and is now standing before
her, with only the little gate between them. Her face is
still colorless, and she is gazing up at him with parted lips,
as though she would fain say something difficult to form
into satisfactory speech. At this moment, Lord Sartoris,
coming suddenly round the angle of the road, sees them.
Ruth lowers her eyes, and some slight transient color
creeps into her cheeks. Sartoris, coming quickly up to
them, makes some conventional speech to her, and then
turns to his nephew.
"Where are you going?" he asks, coldly.
"I was going to Hythe," returned the young man, easily.
"Just as well I didn't, eh ? Should have found you out."
" Found me out,-yes," repeats his uncle, looking at him
strangely. How long-how long it takes to find out some
people, on whom our very hearts are set. " I am going to
the village."
"Then so am I," says BHanscombe. "Though I should
think it would run the original 'deserted' one close on such
a day as this. Good-by, Ruth."
He holds out his hand; and the girl, silently returning
his warm pressure, makes a faint courtesy to Lord Sartoris.
There is no servility, but some nervousness, in the slight
salutation.
" How is your father, Ruth?" asks he, detaining her
by a quick movement of the hand.
" Quite well, thank you, my lord." Some timidity is dis-
cernible in her tone, caused by the unmistakable reproof
and sternness in his.
' I am glad to hear it. There is no worthier man in all
the parish than John Annersley. 'I hope nothing will ever
occur to grieve or sadden that good old man."
3



<pb n="34"/>
34             FAITH AND UNFAITH.
"I hope not, my lord," returns she, steadily, although
his voice has meaning in it. In another moment she is
gone.
"How does your farming go on, Dorian ?" asks Lord
Sartoris, presently, rousing himself from a puzzling revery.
"Quite in the model line," says Dorian, cheerful.
"That Sawyer is an invaluable fellow. Does all the work,
you know,-which is most satisfactory. Looks after the
men, pays their wages, and takes all trouble off my shoul-
ders. Never could understand what a perfect treasure is
till I got him. Every one says I am most fortunate in my
choice of a steward."
"I dare say. It is amazing the amount of informatiot)
people possess about other people's servants. But you look
after things yourself, of course?  However faithful andl
trustworthy one's hirelings may be, one's own eyes should
also be in the matter."
"Oh, of course," acquiesces Dorian, still cheerfully.
"Nothing like personal supervision, and so on. Every
now and then, you know, I do look over the accounts, and
ask a few questions, and show myself very learned in
drainages, and so forth. But I don't see that I gain much
by it. Horrid stupid work, too,"-with a yawn. "Luckily,
Sawyer is one of the most knowing fellows in the world,
or I suppose I should go to smash. He is up to every-
thing, and talks like a book. Quite a pleasure, I give you
my word,-almost a privilege,-to hear him converse on
short-horns and some eccentric riot they call mangels."
"It is possible to be too knowing," says his uncle, depre-
ciatingly.
"Eh ? oh, no; Sawyer is not that sort of person. He
is quite straight all through. And he never worries me
more than he can help. He looks after everything, and
whatever he touches (metaphorically speaking) turns to
gold. I'm sure anything like those pheasants--"
"Yes, yes, I dare say. But pheasants are not every-
thing."
"Well, no; there are a few other things," says Dorian,
amicably,-" notably, grouse.  Why this undying hatre
to Sawyer, my dear Arthur ? In what has he been foun
wanting ?"
"I think him a low, under-hand, sneaking sort of fellow, 
k               __~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~'i



<pb n="35"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.                35
says Sartoris, unhesitatingly. " l should not keep him in
my employ half an hour. However," relentingly, and some-
what sadly, " one cannot always judge bfappearances."
They have reached the village by this time, and are
walking leisurely through it. Almost as they reach the
hotel that adorns the centre of the main street, they meet
Mr. Redmond, the rector, looking as hearty and kindly as
usual. Lord Sartoris, who has come down on purpose to
meet him, having asked his question and received his an-
swer, turns again and walks slowly homeward, Dorian still
beside him.
As they again catch sight of the old mill, Sartoris says,
quietly, with a laudable attempt at unconcern that would
not have deceived the veriest infant, but is quite success-
ful with Dorian, whose thoughts are far away,-
What a nice girl that little Ruth has grown !"
" Awfully pretty girl," returns Dorian, carelessly.
" Yes,"-gravely,-"very pretty; and I think-I hope
-upright, as she is beautiful. Poor child, hers seems to
me a very desolate lot. Far too well educated to associate
with those of her own class, she is still cut off by the laws
of caste from mixing with those above her. She has no
friends, no mother, no sister, to love and sympathize with
her."
" My dear Arthur, how you do agonize yourself !" says
Dorian. " She has her father, and about as comfortable
a time altogether as I know of."
" She reminds me of some lowly wayside flower," goes
on the old man, musingly, heedless of the brilliant inter-
lude, "raising its little head sadly among gay garden-
plants that care not for her, whilst beyond the hedge that
bounds her garden she can watch her own species grow
and flourish in wild luxuriance. Her life can scarcely be
called happy. There must always boa want, a craving for
what can never be obtained. Surely the one that could
bring sorrow to that pure heart, or tears to those gentle
eyes, should be " 
" Asphyxiated," puts in Dorian, idly. He yawns lan-
guidly and pulls the.head off a tall dandelion, that adorns
the wayside, in a somewhat desultory fashion. The color
in the older man's cheeks grows a shade deeper, and a gest-
ure, as full of impatience as of displeasure, escapes Ahim



<pb n="36"/>
I   36       FAITH AND UNFAITIT.
"There are some subjects," he says, with calm severity,
"that it would be well to place beyond the reach of ridi-
cule."
"Am   I one of them?" says Dorian, lightly. Then,
glancing at his uncle's face, he checks himself, and goes
on quickly. " I beg your pardon, I'm sure. I have been
saying something unlucky, as usual. Of course I agree
with you on all points, Arthur, and think the man who
could wilfully bring a blush to Ruth Annersley's cheek
neither more nor less than a blackguard pur et simple.
By the by, that last little homely phrase comes in badly
there, doesn't it ? Rather out of keeping with the vitu-
perative noun, eh !"
"Rather," returns Sartoris, shortly.  He drops his
nephew's arm, and walks on in silence.  As a rule,
Dorian's careless humor suits him; it amuses and adds a
piquancy to a life that without it (now that Dorian's soci-
ety has become indispensable to him) would prove "flat,
stale, and unprofitable."  But to-day, he hardly knows
why,-or, perhaps, hardly dares to know why,-his
nephew's easy light-heartedness jars upon him, vexing him
sorely.
As they turn the corner of the road and go down the
hill, they meet Horace, coming towards them at a rapid
pace. As he sees them, he slackens his speed and ap-
proaches more slowly.                '
" Just as well I met you," he says, with an airy laugh,
"as my thoughts were running away with me, and Phoebus
Apollo is in the ascendant: veritably he 'rules the roast.'
This uphill work is trying on the lungs."
" Where have you been ? " asks Dorian, just because he
has nothing else to say, and it is such a bore to think.
"At Gowran."   ,
"Ah ! I'm going there now. You saw Clarissa, then ?"
says Sartoris, quickly. "When do you return to town,
Horace ?"
" To-morrow, I think,-I hope," says Horace; and, with
a little nod on both sides, they part. But when the bend
in the road again hides him from view, it would occur to a
casual on-looker that Horace Branscombe's thoughts must
once, mori have taken his physical powers into captivity,



<pb n="37"/>
FAiTH AND UNFAZITH.               37
as his pace quickens, until it grows even swifter than it
was before.
Sartoris goes leisurely down the hill, with Dorian beside
him, whistling " Nancy Lee," in a manner highly satisfac-
tory to himself, no doubt, but slightly out of tune. When
Sartoris can bear this musical treat no longer, he breaks
hurriedly into speech of a description that requires/an
answer.                                       II
" What a pretty girl Clarissa Peyton is I don t you think
so?"
When Dorian has brought Miss Lee to a triumphant
finish, with a flourish that would have raised murderous
longings in the breast of Stephen Adams, he says, without
undue enthusiasm,-
" Yes, she is about the best-looking woman I know."
"And as unaffected as she is beautiful. That is hef
principal charm.  So thoroughly, bred, too, in every
thought and action. I never met so lovable, a cieature I"
" What a pity she can't hear you !" says Branscombe.
" Though perhaps it is as well she can't. Adulation has
a bad effect on some people."
" She is too earnest, too thorough, to be upset by flat-
tery. I sometimes wonder if there are any like her in the
world."
" Very few, I think," says Dorian, genially.
Another pause, somewhat longer than the last, and
then S-rtoris says, with some hesitation, " Do you never
think of marrying, Dorian ?"'
" Often," says Branscombe, with an amused smile.
"'Yet how seldom you touch on the matter!  Why,
when I was your age, I had seen at least twenty women I
should have married, had they shpwn an answering regard
for me."
"What a blessing they didn't!" says Branscombe.,
":Fancy, twenty of them ! You'd have found it awkward
in the long run, wouldn't you ? And I don't think they'd
have liked it, you know, in this illiberal country. .So glad
you thought better of it."
"I wish I could once see you as honestly"-with a
slight, almost unconscious, stress on the word-" in love
as I have been scores of times."
1 What a melancholy time you must have put in I



<pb n="38"/>
38           FAITH AND UNFAITH
When a fellow is in love he goes to skin and bode, doesn't
he? slights his dinner, and refuses to find solace in the
best cigar. It must be trying,-very; especially to one's
friends. I doubt you were a susceptible youth, Arthur.
I'm not."
" Then you ought to be," says Sartoris, with some anger.
" All young men should feel their hearts. beat, and their
pulses quicken, at the sight of a pretty woman."
( My deaf fellow," says Branscombe, severely, removing
his glass from his right to his left eye, as though to scan
more carefully his uncle's countenance, " there is something
the matter with you this morning, isn't there ? You're not
well, you know. 'You have taken something very badly,
and it has gone to your morals; they are all wrong,-very
unsound indeed. Have you carefully considered the na-
ture of the- advice you are giving me ? Why, if I were to
let My heart beat every time I meet all the pretty women
I know, I should be in a lunatic asylum in a month."
" Seriously, though, I 'wish you would give the niatter
some' thought," says Lord Sartoris, earnestly: " you are
twenty-eight,-old enough to make a sensible choice."
Branscombe sighs..
" And I see nothing to prevent your doing so. You
want a wife to look after you,-a woman you could respect'
as well as love,-a thoughtful beautiful woman, to make
your home dearer to you than all the amusements town life
can afford. She would make you happy, and induce you
to look more carefully to your own interests, and-;
and-   " "
VYou mean you would like me to marry Clarissa Pey-
ton," says Dorian, good-humoredly. "Well, it is a charm-
ing scheme, you know; but I don't think it will come off.
In the first place, Clarissa would not have me, and in the
next, I don't want to marry at all. A wife' would bore me
to death ; couldn't fancy a greater nuisance. I like women.
very much, in fact, I may say, I am decidedly fond of a'
good many of them, but to have one always looking after1
me (as you style it) and showing up my pet delinquencies
would drive me out of my mind. Doh't look so disgusted I
I feel I'm a miserable sinneir; but I really can't help it.
I expect there is something radically wrong with me."  B
" Do you mean to tell me" -with some natural indigna-



<pb n="39"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.                39
tion-" that up to this you have never, during all your wan-
derings, both at home and abroad, seen any woman you
could sincerely admire ? "
" Numbers, my dear Arthur,-any amount,-but not one
I should care to marry. You see, that makes such a differ-
ence. I remember once before-last season-you spoke
to me in this strain, and, simply to oblige you, I thought I
would make up my mind to try matrimony. So I went in
heavily, heart and soul, for Lady Fanny Hazlett. You have
seen Lady Fanny ?" 
" Yes, a good deal of her."
" Then you know how really pretty she is. Well, I spent
three weeks at it; regular hard work the entire time, you
know, no breathing-space allowed, as she never refuses an
invitation, thinks nothing of three balls in one night, and
insisted on my dancing attendance on her everywhere. I
never suffered so much in my life; and when at last I gave
in from sheer exhaustion, I found my clothes no loner
fitted me. I was worn to a skeleton from loss of sleep, the
heavy strain on my mental powers, and the meek endur-
ance of her ladyship's ill tempers."
" Lady Fanny is one woman, Clarissa Peyton is quitean-
other. How could you fail to be happy with Clarissa?
Her sweetness, her grace of mind and body, her beauty,
would keep you captive even against your will,"
Dorian pauses for a moment or two, and then says, rery
gently, as though sorry to spoil the old man's cherished
plan,-
" It is altogether impossible. Clarissa has no heart to
give me."
Sartoris is silent. A vague suspicion of what now ap
pears a certainty has for some time oppressed and haunted
him. At this moment he is sadly realizing the emptiness
of all his dreaming. Presently he says. slowly,-,
" Are you quite sure of this-?"
" As certain as I can be without exactly hearing it from
her own lips."
" Is it Horace ?"
"Yes; it is Horace," says Branscombe, quietly.
.        ,~~~~;



<pb n="40"/>
I40           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
CHAPTER VI.
.0:.         "Tread softly; bow the head,-
In reverent silence bow,
No passing bell doth toll,
Yet an immortal soul
- Is passing now."-CAROLINE SOUTHEY.
A LITTLE room, scantily but neatly- furnished. A low
bed. A dying man. A kneeling girl,-half child, half
woman,-with a lovely, miserable face, and pretty yellow
hair 
It was almost dusk, and the sound of the moaning sea
without, rising higher and hoarser as the tide rushes in,
comes like-a wail of passionate agony into the silent room.
The rain; patters dismally against the window-panes.
The wind-that all day long has been sullen and subdued
.iis breaking forth into a fury long suppressed, and, dash
iIg ithrough the little town, on its way to the angry sea
makes the casements rattle noisily and the tall trees sway
and bend beneath its touch. Above, in the darkenin
heavens, gray clouds are scurrying madly to and fro.
"Georgie," whispers a faint voice from out the gather
ing gloom, " are you still there ?"
"Yes, dear, I am here, quite near to you. What i 
it '"
"Sit where I can see you, child,-where I can watc
your face. I have something to say to you. I cannot di
with this weight upon my heart."
" What weight, papa ? "
"The uncertainty about your future," says the dyin
man, with some excitement. " How can I leave you, m
little one, to fight this cruel world alone ? "
" Do not think of me," says the girl, in a voice so unnat
urally calm as to betray the fact that she is making a s-
prenrie effort to steel herself 'against the betrayal of em
tion of any kind. By and by, will there not be long yea
in which to make her moan, and weep, and lament, an
give herself wholly up to that grim giant, Despair ? " P
me out of your thoughts altogether. I shall do very, ve 
well. I shall manage to live as others have lived befo
we.,'



<pb n="41"/>
6FA ITH AND UNFAITH.             41
Your Aunt Elizabeth will take you in for a little while,
and then-then-"
' I shall go out as a governess. I shall get into some
kind, pleasant family, and every one will be very good-to
me," says the girl, still in a resolutely cheerful tone. "it
will just suit me. I shall like it. Do you understand me,
papa? I shall like it better than anything, because chil-
l    dren are always fond of me."
The father's face grows sadder, even grayer, as she
speaks. He sighs in a troubled fashion, and strokes fee-
bly the little fragile hand that clings so desperately to hi,
while the damps of death lie thick upon his brow.
"A governess," he murmurs, with some diffiqulty.
" While you are only a child yourself ? What a hard, hard
fate ! Is there no friend to help and comfort you ? "
" I have a friend," replies she, steadily. "You have
often heard me mention her. You remember the name,
now,-Clarissa Peyton ? She was my best friend at school,
and I know she will do what she can for me. She will-be
able to find me some nice children, and- "
" Friendship,"-interrupts he, bitterly,-" it is a breath,
-a name. It will fail you when you most need it."
" Clarissa will not fail me," replies she, slowly, though
with a feeling of deadly sickness at her heart. "And,
besides, you must not think of me as a governess always,
papa. I shall, perhaps, marry somebody, some day."
The dying man's eyes grow a shade brighter; it is a
mere flicker, but it lasts for a moment, long enough, to
convince her she has indeed given some poor hope to cheer
his last hours.
"Yes; to marry somebody," he repeats, wistfully,
" that will be best,-to get some good man, some kindly,
loving heart to protect you and make a safe shelter for
you. There is comfort in the thought. But I hope it will
be soon, my darling, before your spirit is broken, and your
youth dulled."
" I shall marry as soon as ever I can," says Georgie,
making a last terrible effort to appear hopeful and re-
signed. " I shall meet some one very soon, no doubt,_-
Very soon: so do not fret about me any more. Why
should I not, indeed ? I am very pretty, am I not, papa? "
In spite of the lightness of her words, a heavy choking



<pb n="42"/>
42            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
sob escapes her as she finishes her little set speech. Sh
buries her face in the bed-clothes, to stifle her rising grie
but her father is almost too far gone to notice it. ,
"YeS,-so like your mother," he mutters, somewha
thickly, clutching aimlessly at the quilt. "Poor Alice !-
poor girl I It was that day on the beach, when the wav
Were dancing, and the sun--or was it ?-   Did the o
man ever forgive-  ?"
He-is wandering, dreaming his death-dream of happie
days, going back, evem as he sinks into everlasting slee
to the gilded hours of youth.
The girl presses his hand to rouse him.
"Think of me now," she entreats, despairingly; "i
will only be for a little while,-such a little while,-an
then you will be with her forever. Oh, papa! my dea
my dear; smile at me once again. Think of me happily
let me feel when you are gone that your last hours with m
were peaceful."
'His eyes meet hers, and he smiles tenderly. Gent
she slips her arms round him, and, laying her golde
head upon the pillow, close to him, presses her lips to hi
-the soft warm lips, that contrast so painfully with tho
pale cold other ones they touch. So she remains for
long time, kissing him softly every now and again, an
thinking hopelessly of the end.            ,
She neither sighs, nor weeps, nor makes any outwa
sign of anguish. Unlike most people, she has realize
to its fullest the awfulness of this thing that is about t
befall her. And the knowledge has paralyzed her sens
rendering her dull with misery, and tearless.
Presently the white lids, weary with nights of watchin
droop. fler breath comes more evenly. Her head sin
more heavily against the pillow, and, like a child wo
out with grief and pain, she sleeps.
When next she wakes, gray dawn is everywhere. T
wind still moans unceasingly. Still the rain-drops patl
against the panes. She raises her head affrightedly, at
springing to his feet, bends with bated breath above 
quiet form lying on the bed.
'Alas ! alas! what change is here? He has not mov
no faintest alteration can be traced in the calm pose
the figure that liesjust as she last saw it, when sleep o
____-



<pb n="43"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITI.               43,
came her. The eyes are closed; the tender smile-the
last fond smile-still lingers on his lips; yet, he is dead!
The poor child stands gazing down upon him with
parted lips and clasped hands, and a face almost as
sen as that marble one to which her eyes grow with a
horror unspeakable. He looks so peaceful-so much as
hough he merely sleeps-that for one mad moment she
tles not to believe the truth. Yet she knows it is death,
mistakable and relentless, upon which for the first time
she looks.
He is gone, forever! without another kiss, or smile, or
arewell word beyond those last uttered. He had set out
upon his journey alone, had passed into the other happier
land, in the cold silence of the night, even while she slept,
-had been torn from her, whilst yet her fond arms encir-
ded him.
Impelled by some indefinable desire, she lays her fin-
gers softly on the hand that lies outside the coverlet.
she awful chill that meets her touch seems to reach even
to her heart. Throwing her arms above her head, with a
wild passionate cry, she falls forward, and lies senseless
across the lifeless body.
#      *      #      #      #      #      *
Misery hurts, but it rarely kills; and broken hearts are
out of fashion. All this unhappiness came to Georgie
Broughton about a year ago, and though brain-fever fol-
lowed upon it, attacking her with vicious force, and almost
handing her over as a victim to the greedy grave, yet she
had survived, and overcome death, and returned from the
land of shadows, weakened, indeed, but with life before
her.
tonths passed before she could summon up sufficient
energy to plan or think about a possible future. All this
bine her aunt Elizabeth had clothed and fed and sheltered
i, but unwillingly.  Indeed, so grudgingly had she
delt out her measure of "c brotherly love " that the girl
writhed beneath it, and pined, with a passionate longing,
for the day that should see her freed from a dependence
that had become unspeakably bitter to her.
To-day, sitting in her little room,-an apartment high
P in Aunt Elizabeth's house,-she tells herself she will
itate no longer, that she is strong now, quite strong,



<pb n="44"/>
o14           I   eTHI AND UNFAIITH.
.11ld able wo face the world. She holds up her delica
little hand between her eyes and the window, as a test
her returning strength, only to find she can almost
the light through it,-so thin, so fragile, has it grow
But she will not be disheartened'; and, drawing pen an
paper towards her, she tries to write.
But it is a difficult task, and her head is strangely hea
and her words will not come to her. A vague feeling, t
that her letter will be unsuccessful, that her friend
fail her, distresses and damps her power to explain h
position clearly.
Who can say if, Clarissa Peyton will be the same
heart as when last they parted, with many words of go
will and affection, and eyes dark with tears?
Grief and misery, and too much of Aunt Elitabeth, h
already embittered and generated distrust in her you
bosom. She is tired, too. All day she has toiled, h
worked[ religiously, and gone through wearying hou
hold labor, trying to repay in some faint wise the reluct
hospitality extended to her. At this moment a sense
utter desolation overpowers her, and with a brain on 1
and a heart half broken, she pushes from her the par
written letter, and, burying her face in her arms, bre
into low but heavy weeping.
" Papa! papa! she sobs, miserably. It is the comm
refrain of all her sorrowful dirges,-the sadder that no
sponse ever comes to the lonely cry. Of our dead, if
would believe them happy we must also believe that th
have forgotten us else how (when we think on our ble
ing hearts) could they keep their bliss so perfect?
Mournfully as Mariana in her moated grange, the p
child laments, while sobs shake her slender frame. A
the day dies, and the sun goes down, and happily so,
noise in the house-a step, a voice-arouses her, and, st
ing as though from some ugly dream, she takes up her
again, and writes eagerly, and without premeditation,
the one friend in whom she still puts faith.



<pb n="45"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.                45
CHAPTER VII.
"Life has rising ills."-DYERz
I   "PAPA, papa," says Miss Peyton, impatiently, without
eliciting any response.
- It is half-past ten, and breakfast is on the table I So
are two little white pigeons, who have flown in through the
open window, and are sitting, one on Clarissa's shoulder,
the other on the edge of the table, picking crumbs out of
her plate. The sun is streaming hotly in, the breath of
flowers floating faintly in his train. A bowl of roses, half
opened and filled with the dew of early morning, lies near
Clarissa's plate. Upon the window-sill, outside, another
little pigeon, brown-tinged and timid, stands peeping shyly
in, envying his bolder brothers, and longing for the pretty
coaxing voice of his mistress that shall make him brave to
enter.
But to-day the welcome summons does not come. Miss
Peyton has an open letter in her hand, the contents of which
.hate plainly disturbed and interested her to an unusual
degree ; so that the little bird, whose pretty brown plumage
-is being transformed by the sun into richest bronze, grows
each moment more dejected. Not for him the crumbs
and the "flesh pots of Egypt."
"One-two---If you don't answer me before I say
three, papa, I shall do something desperate," she says,
again, raising her voice a little.
But still papa takes no heed. At this moment, poor
man, he is deep in Mr. Forster's Irish Distress Bill, and is
deaf to all surroundings.
Clarissa loses patience. Taking up a teaspoon, she
makes a sharp "assault and battery" upon an unoffend-
Idt teacup, thereby creating a din compared to which the
noise of tomtoms would be sweetest music.
George Peyton is not proof against this tattoo. He
looks up irritably, and for a moment withdraws his mind
from Mr. Forster's Bill.
"My dear Clarissa," he says, very justly incensed,
"what is it ? What on earth is the matter with you ? M
dear, whatever it is, do stop that unpleasant noise: it
plays the very mischief with one's nerves."



<pb n="46"/>
rI
46            FAITH AND UNFAITTH.
" It is only a teaspoon," begins Miss Peyton, delighte
with her success.
" And a cup, I think," says Mr. Peyton.   " Se
arately they are unoffending, together they can annoy.
you will put that spoon out of your hand, my dear, y
will make me much happier."
" It was only when I was actually hoarse, from tryin
to attract your attention, that I resorted to violent mea
ures," says Clarissa, severely.
" I beg your pardon," returns he, submissively.
" Now listen to my letter," says Clarissa. " I w
your advice. It is such a dear letter, and such a sad on
and-and something must be done at once."
" I quite agree with you," murmurs her father, dreami
Once again his mind is losing itself in the folds of
fragrant" Times."
"MANNERTON, Tuesday, September 24.
" My DEAR CLARISSA,-
" So long a time has elapsed sinde last I saw or he
of you that I half fear, as you read this, it will puzzle y
to remember the writer. Am I quite forgotten? I hI
not; as I want you to do me a great service. This re
for wishing myself still in your memory sounds selfish;
almost rude; but what can I do ? Must I not speak
truth? And indeed I am in sore trouble. -I am friendl 1
all but homeless, and utterly alone.- in the world. But,
I am quite determined to fight my own way, I have
cided on going out as a governess, and I want you. dear,
Cissy, to get somebody to try me,-somebody who wo
-not be too hard upon me, just at first, until I had ac
tomed myself to the life and to the children's ways.
may say I can paint very well, and, though not a brillI
pianist, I have a good voice. (Do you recollect ho
school, you used to say you liked to hear me sing
the day was dying?) I can speak French and Ge
but I know nothing of Italian or Latin, and I was n
very much at arithmetic, or that. I think I could g
after a little training; and at all events I know I must
as life here is not endurable.
" Oh, Cissy, if time has changed you, if you have 
cold and careless, as all the rest of this cruel world,
shall I do? But I will not believe that even a hun



<pb n="47"/>
FAITH AIVD UNFAITH.               47
could make you unkind or unfeeling. Do you think
will be very long in answering this ? Every hour
shall be listening for the post: write to me, then, as
'- ioa as you can. I am very unhappy here with Aunt
Elizabeth, who does not care for me.
'armt'  h     "I am, dear Clarissa,
" Your affectionate friend,
I ',^J-i.            "~s GEORGIE BROUGHTON.
-I' dp.PS.-If you could get me pretty children, I should
S. Gi-  glad; but of course it must not make any difference,
and I dare say ugly ones are just as nice, when one gets
BI 'gd 'to them. I am dreadfully afraid of boys; but per-
ps there may be a fe- found somewhere amenable to
[. oin, and at least one or two who do not object to knees
I "itSeirkWickerbockers. Do you remember the gardener's
t iies at Brussels, and how fond they were of me? Dear
4 ,isy^;, irite soon."
T'.  isisthe letter, with all its pathetic little confidences,
-ij(; Ydo-:you remembers ?" and "have you forgottens ?"
d    itsnfo'e,..half proud and half beseeching,-that has
,d Cbed Mias Peyton so deeply.           v
I.:AtEl¼iouth trembles, there are tears in her voice and
AOM -46 she finishes the last word and turns her face to
hir father. Something she sees in that vague but kindly
'004ss       her enthusiasm  for the moment; a thought
J    f defined, a suspicion, disgraceful if true, crosses
brlsraj and fills her with indignation.
Jf'lfAapat   Have you been listening? " she asks, in her
r)_t tones.
my dear? Of course I have. Yes, cer-
XIyy th all my might," returns he, with unusual and
fo   e doubtful alacrity. As a matter of fact, I don't
uchewould be said about his" distinguished an-
I-'l   were he to be examined in the letter just read;
» S more for this reason does he assume an air of
at Clarissa's question, and cover* himself with an
P f    injured innocence. Unfortunately for him,
Miss Peytonis a   person not to be done.
.      you have not," she says, severe but calm. "You
I"tb arsingle syllable. Your mind was full of
le paper all the time, and I am  positive you
plntting together some silly speech that you imagine



<pb n="48"/>
|48           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
would electrify those absurd men in the House of Co
mons.''
"I don't think it was a very silly speech, my dear Cl
rissa," remonstrates Mr. Peyton, feebly. '
" Oh, then you do acknowledge you were miles away 
thought," says Clarissa, triumphant, if disgusted.
"My dear girl, how you do misjudge me l" protes
poor Mr. Peyton, at his wits' end. "I assure you, I w
all attention to that very excellent letter from beginni
to end."
" Were you ?" returns she, sweetly. "Then, of cours
you can tell me what was the last word."
She has placed her elbows on the table, and has let h
pretty face sink into the palms of her hands, and is no
regarding her father with a smile, half mocking, half m
licious.
"The last word! Oh, nonsense, my dear Cis! w
l~i ~       ever remembered the last word of anything, unless it ha
pened to be 'The Burial of Sir John Moore,' or 'Beau
ful Star,'. or something that way? But I know your lett
was all about a young woman who has got herself into
mess and wants to come to you now as maid or laundres
But there is always danger in that sort of thing, you kno
and you mightn't like it afterwards: add  -"
" Oh, what an engrossing speech that imaginary one
yours must have been !" says Clarissa, with a little 
tracted shake of her head. "I knew you were in t
room, didn't I ? No, no, no, you are altogether wron
this is no letter from maid or laundress, but from Geor
Broughton. (You must remember her name, I have
often mentioned it to you.) She is the dearest little thi
in the world,-quite that, and more. And she writes
tell me she is miserably poor, and wants to go out as
governess."
"Poor girl! Of all unhappy resources, the last." 
"Yes; isn't it wretched? But, you see, she is bound
do something, and wearing out one's heart in a dingy sch
room seems to be the only course left open to a pretty 
like Georgie."
"Try Mrs. Redmond, then. She is looking out f
governess for the children; and your friend might drop
there without further trouble."



<pb n="49"/>
FAITH' AN'D UN-FAITH.              49
t( Oh, papa, but all those children! and Mrs. Redmond
herself, too, so fretful and so irritable,-so utterly im-
possible in every way. Her very 'How d'ye do?' would
frighten Georgie to death."
t People don't die of chills of that description; and your
poor little friend can scarcely expect to find everything
coultcur Ite rose. Besides, ' all those children' you speak of
just resolve themselves into two, as the boys are at school,
and Cissy calls herself grown up. I should think Cissy
would be, in fact, a great comfort to her, and would be
amenable to her, and gentle-and that."
At this, Miss Peyton laughs a little, and bites her lip. 
" Amenable," she says, slowly. ",Do you know, I am
afraid my Georgie is evertyounger than Cissy ?"
"Younger !"
"Well, she will certainly look younger; she has such a
little, fresh, babyish rose-bud of a face. Do you think "-
anxiously-" that would matter much ?" 
" It doesn't sound promising; but, if she is a good girl,
one might forgive the great crime of being fresh and young.
Dear me, it is very awkward. If she had been a nice,
sensible, ugly, middle-aged person, now, all would have 
gone well; but, after all, poor child, of course she can't
help her appearance."
" No, she certainly cannot," says Clarissa, with a sigh,
heart-felt pity in her tone. "And her eyes are the very
color of forget-me-nots,-quite the prettiest I ever saw. 
It is really too bad."
" Redmond, himself, would make no difficulty about it.
He prefers to have young people about him, and was al- 
ways, you know, rather-  rather melancholy when in
Miss Prood's society, who was really a most estimable
woman, and one whose moral character one could not fail
to admire, when one forgot her nose, and her- "
l'emper ? "
"Well, yes, she was rather excitable. But, as I was say-
ing, Redmond and your friend would probably pull very
well; and then there's the curate. Why,"-brilliantly,-
"she might marry the curate! "
r. Hastings ?" says Clarissa, with animation, bright-
enng visibly  "Why, really, so she might. Such a good-
ookig man, too, and clever. It is only a day or two ago
4



<pb n="50"/>
S     -       FAITH AND UNFAITH.
since somebody said to me,' He has the very sort of fa
they make bishops of nowadays.'"
"What a very disinterested girl you are!" says he
father, with a smile, faint but amused: "without a m
nient's hesitation you surrender every hope of making thi
embryo bishop your own. Can devotion farthergo ? Well
take my advice; and, as your heart is set upon this thing
go down to the vicarage to-day; tell Mrs. Redmond yo
have secured a governess for her; do not discuss the su
ject,-simply state the fact; and I think you will find he
deeply grateful, in that you have put an end to her difi
culties, without compelling her brain to bear upon th
matter." 
"Machiavelli was a poor creature, when compared wi
you," says Miss Peyton, saucily. "What plots and plan
swell out your busy brain ! I shall go to the vicarage t
day, as you advise, and be as sweet as honey to Mrs. Red
mondc and win my cause against all obstacles. But first
-turning with a soft movement to caress 'the snowy pi
eon that rests upon her shoulder--"little home frien
must be fed."
The bird, as though comprehending her words, flie
through the open window to the balcony outside, to nestl
among-its more timid companions; whilst Clarissa, a crea
ure scarcely less fair than they, follows him, to fling bread
crumbs for their morning meal.
A little later, having dressed herself, she starts upon he
errand, ready to take the vicarage by storm.
CHAPTER VIII.
" 'Tis love, love, love, that makes the world go round."
THE hot September sun beats fiercely on her as sh
walks along; the day is full of languor and sweet peac
The summer is almost done, and is dying, rich in beaut
and warm with the ripeness of strength perfected. Fro
out the thickets, little birds, that three months agone scar
knew the power of breath, now warble soft melodies, th
thrill the air with joy. Clarissa, glad, and full of purpos
feels her heart at one with these tiny, heaven-taught mu
l______



<pb n="51"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH                 p
cians, as she follows the path beneath the leafy trees that
leads to the vicarage.
As she deserts the tinted wood, and gains the road that
runs by the old mill, she finds herself face to face with
Horace Branscombe, coming towards her in a somewhat
laggard fashion. His brow is darkened by a frown: his
whole expression is moody and oppressed with discontent.
As he sees Clarissa, his features-'as though compelled
by a powerful wvill-undergo a complete change, and he
smiles, and comes forward with outstretched hand to greet
her.
" Horace ! you here again, and so soon?" she says,
quickly. Surprise, lends haste to her tongue. She has
believed him in London; and now to see him thus unex-
pectedly, and without the usual friendly warning conveyed
by letter, causes her: not only pleasure, but a vague un-
easiness.
1" Does it seem ' so soon' to you ? " replies he, in a care-
fully inspired tone. " To me the last two months have ap-
peared almost a year, so heavily have dragged the days
spent away from Pullingham."
It is a very stereotyped little sentence, old and world-
worn, and smacking faintly of insincerity; but when a
woman loves a man she rarely measures his words.
" I seem rude," says Clarissa, with a soft smile. " But
you will understand me. And you know you told me you
did not intend to return before Christmas."
" Yes, I know."  He is silent for a little while, and then,
rousing himself, as though by an effort, says, slowly,-
"Did you miss me ?"
"I always miss you," returns she, simply: " you know
that." She flushes warmly, and lets her long lashes fall
leisurely, until at length they hide from view the sweet
confession of her eyes. There is a pause that embraces
a full minute, and then she speaks again. " You have not
yet told me the reason of your return," she says, gently.
* " I wearied of town," replies he. " A strange acknowl-
edgment for one like me, but true. For once, I honest-
ly pined for the country-insipid as I have always deemed
it-and craved unceasingly for something fresh, new, in-
nocent, somethin  unused to gas, and the glare and utr
4*   LiBP B  t<A-'     ¾
JUL 19, Y4          I



<pb n="52"/>
r
4e            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
He speaks bitterly-almost passionately-and as thoug
for-the moment he has altogether forgotten the existenc
of hi, companion. An instant later, however, he recover
himself.
uIfelt I should be happier, more fitted to cope «wi
my work, if I could get even one glimpse of you I"
"Are you not happy, then ? " asks she, gently, her hea
beating fast, her color growing and lessening rapidly.
"Happy? no. Can a man be happy while a per
petual doubt distracts him ? Can he know even the mean
ing of the word Peace, whilst devoured with a fear that h
shall never possess the one great good he desires ?"
Again, his thoughts appear to gander; and some pa
sion, not born of the present moment, but borrowed frorrA
some other hour, fills his tone.
"Yes," says Clarissa, nervously, questioningly, feeling
poor in words, now that the great crisis of her life ha
come. 
"So I am here," he goes on, softly, "to solve my
doubt, to gain at least a rest from the gnawing suspense
that for so long I have endured. Need I tell you that I
love you ?-that " (he pauses, and a faint contraction of
the features, that dies almost as it is born, disfigures his
face for a second)- " that you are the one woman in all
the world upon whom I have set my heart? "
There is silence. For Clarissa, an intense joy holds
her mute ; the very intensity of her happiness checks the
flow of speech. He, too, seems lost in thought. Presently,
however, he breaks the silence, and this time a faint anx-
iety may be discernible in his voice, though his face is
calm and composed, as usual.
"You do not speak, Clarissa. I have told you of my
love, and you are silent. I now ask if you can love me ?
At least, give me an answer. Dearest,"-glancing at her
averted face, and seeing the shy blush that adds another
charm to its beauty,-" tell me the truth."
"I can; I do love you I" says Clarissa, sweetly, and
with perfect trust. She slips her hand into his. Raising
his hat, he lifts the slender fingers to his lips, and kisses
them; and, then, together-still hand in hand-they walk
along, speechless, yet seemingly content.
The road is dusty; and a few drops of rain fall, like,



<pb n="53"/>
FAITH AND U'FAITH.                53
mild blessings, into its parched furrows. The roadside
flowers, drooping and languid, fling their rich perfume,
with lavish generosity, upon the motionless air. Some
sheep, in a far-off meadow, bleat mournfully, and answer
back the echo that mocks their lament.
«" You have made me happier than I ever hoped to be;
but you have not yet said you will marry me." The words
come from Horace, but sound curiously far away, the very
stillness and sadness of the evening rendering them more
distant. Clarissa, glancing at him, can see he is white as
Death.
<" How pale he is ! " she thinks, and then makes herself
happy in the belief that he is terribly in earnest about this
matter, and that his love for her is infinite.
" Yes, I shall marry you," she says, with tender serious-
ness. To her, this promise is a solemn bond, that nothing
but death or falsehood can cancel.
"When ? "
" Oh, Horace, I cannot answer that question so readily.
There are so many things. Papa must be told; and James
Scrope; and you must tell Dorian and your uncle."
" All that would hardly take half an hour."
" Perhaps ; but there are other reasons for delay, more
than I can tell you just now. And, besides, it is all so
new, so strange." She smiles, as though she would will-
ingly have added the words, " so sweet; " and a little happy
far-away look creeps into and illumines her eyes. " Why
are you so impatient ? "
" Impatient ! " returns he, a touch of vehemence in his
tone. " Of course I am impatient. The sooner it is all
got over the better." He checks himself, draws his breath
somewhat quickly, and goes on in a calmer fashion:
"What sort of a lover should I be, if I showed no anxiety
to claim you as soon as possible ?  You should be the last
to blame me for undue haste in this matter. When shall
it be, then ?-In one month? two ? three ?"  He speaks
again, almost excitedly.
,,Oh, no, no," gently, but shrinking from him a little.
That would be impossible. Why, think !-it is only this
moment you have told me you love me, and now you would
ha" me name our wedding-day! "
Not exactly that. But tell me some definite time, near



<pb n="54"/>
54            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
at hand, to which I can be looking forward. Everything rest
with you now, remember that." His last words convey a
unconscious warning, but Clarissa neither heeds or unde
stands it.
"Papa will miss me so terribly," she says, dreamily
" it seems selfish, almost as though I were wilfully desert
ing him. I should, at least, like another Christmas a
homelwith him. And see,"-turing to him, with gentl
earnestness,-"are we not quite happy as we now are
loving and trusting in each other ? Why, then, should w
not continue this present happiness for another year.
You are silent, Horace I You do not answer! Are you
angry with me ?" She lays her hand lightly n his arm.
"No; not angry." His eyes are on the ground; an
he takes no notice of the tender pressure on his arm.
" 'Buta year is a long time to wait I So many things ma
happen in twelve months; and deeds once done, forever
leave their mark."
"* Do not speak like that, it is as though you would fore
tell evil,'? says Clatissa, a faint feeling of superstitious hor
ror making her nervous.
Branscombe, raising his head, regards her curiously.
" Why should there be evil to foretell ? " he says, slowly.
"And yet, Clarissa,. I would ask you always to remembe
this hour, and the fact that it was you, not I, who wish
the postponement of our marriage. If it must be as yo
say, it will be better to keep our engagement as quiet a
possible; perfectly secret will indeed be best."
" Yes; if you wish it. That will please me, too. Onl
papa need know of it, and-James Scrope."
" And why Sir James ? " with a scrutinizing gaze.
" Why ? "-with some surprise. " Well, I suppose be-
cause papa and I never do anything important without tell
ing him of it.. He is quite our oldest friend. We should
hardly get on now without Jim."
"Not so old, either. I hope, by and by, you will 
able to manage without Sir James as a father-confessor."
" By and by I shall have you," says Clarissa, sweetly
with a smile arid a soft blush.
"True ! I wonder if you will find that sufficient ?
doubt I'm half such a good fellow, Clarissa, as you belie
me."
Lk.



<pb n="55"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.                55
hih he comes nearer the truth than he ever came
ou are good enough for me," says Clarissa, with fond
on.  Will you come with me as far as the vicar-
p- I must go there to-day, and the walk is such a
one, and,"--with a little happy laugh,-" now you
to my own property, I think I should like to make
Look ! there is Ruth Annersley standing at
e  -God-morning, Ruth I What a charming day,
it? after all yesterday's rain !"
*  ho, the moment before, had made a faint
ent as-though she would willingly have stepped be-
ehuge rose-bush nearest to her and so have escaped
E vion-comes slowly forward. She is pale; but the
eheat of the day makes itself felt by all, and has
eeven Miss Peyton's cheeks of some of their usual
.  She accepts Clarissa's proffered hand, and
ia faint welcome. But when Horace would, too,
laken- hands with her, she declines to see his mean-
bowing slightly, turns aside to listen to his corn-
words.
Wen you raking your walks ?" asks Clarissa, idly,
on the gate, and gazing down the trim-gravelled
altt leads to the ivy-clad cottage beyond.  "No-
£ walks are ever as clean as yours, I think. And
rUses are something too delicious, far better than
out-door flowers at Gowran. And so late in the sea-,
I give you one?" says Ruth, dimpling prettily
a you. How sweet they are ! No, no, Horace,
a ether too large for your coat. Ruth, will. you
Branscombe a tiny bud? That one over there,
1  A't think I see it," says Ruth, quietly. She has
*pale again, and her lips have lost a little of the
*  petulant pout that characterizes them,.
over there. Don't you see ? Why, you are al-
g at it, you stupid child."
: am  stupid, I- am  afraid,"-with- a faint smile.
'g  '  SMiss Peyton, and gather it yourself." * She
f^le gate, with a sort of determination in her man4_-



<pb n="56"/>
56 :FAITH AND UNFAITH.V
ner, and Clarissa, going up to the rose-tree, plucks the
delicate blossom in dispute. Horace has followed her
inside the gate, but, turning rather to the lefts falls ap-
patently in love with an artless white rose-bud that waves
gently to and fro upon its stem, as though eager to at-
tract and rivet admiration. 
" I think I prefer this flower, after all," he says, lightly.
"May I ask you to give it to me, Ruth? " His manne
is quite easy, very nearly indifferent, and his back is turne
to Clarissa. But his eyes are on Ruth; and the girl
though with open reluctance and ill-repressed defiance, i
compelled to pick the white rose and give it to him.
" Well, I really don't think you have shown very goo
taste," says Clarissa, examining the two flowers. " Min
is the most perfect. Nevertheless, I suppose wilful ma
must have his way. Let me settle it in your coat fo
yOU." 
Almost as she speaks, the flower drops accidentally fro
her fingers; and, both she And Horace making a step fo
ward to recover it, by some awkward chance they tread 
it, and crush the poor, frail little thing out of all sha
It lies upon the gravel, broken and disfigured, yet ve
sweet in death.
"You trod on it," says Horace, rather quickly, to C
rissa.
"No, dear; I really think-indeed I am sure--it, w
you," returns she, calmly, but with convictiol. .
.' ,      " It doesn't matter: it was hardly worth a discusion
says Ruth, with an odd laugh. "See how poor a thing.
looks now; and, yet, a moment since it was happy on
tree."
"Never mind, Horace: this is really a charming li
bud," says Clarissa, gayly, holding out the rose of her 
choosing: "at least you must try to be content with
Good-by, Ruth; come up to Gowran some day soon, a
take those books you asked for the other day." 
"Thank you, Miss Peyton. I shall come soon." 
"Good-by," says Horace.
"Good-by," returns she. But it is to Clarissa, not
him, she addresses the word of farewell. 
When the mill has been left some distance behind 
and Ruth's slight figure, clad in its white gown, has cea



<pb n="57"/>
FAITH AND UNFAI TH.              .
to be a fleck of coloring in the landscape, Clarissa says,
thoughtfully,-
What a pretty girl that is, and how refined! Quite a
little lady in manner; so calm, and so collected,-c6ld,
almost. I know many girls, irreproachably born, not to be
compared with her, in my opinion. You agree with me "
Birth is not always to be depended upon nowadays."
" She is so quiet, too, and so retiring. She would not
even shake hands with you, when we met her, though you
wanted her to. Did you remark that ?"
i Sometimes I am dull about trifles, such as that." 
" Yes. By the by, she did not seem surprised at seeing
you here to-day, although she thought you safe in town, as
we all did,-you deceitful boy."
Did she not?"
"No. But then, of course, it was a matter of indiffer-
ence to her."
"Of course."
They have reached the entrance to the vicarage by this
time, and are pausing to say farewell for a few hours. '
"I shall come up to'Gowran to-morrow morning first
thing, and speak to your father: is that what you will wish
me to do ?" asks Horace, her hand in his.
"Yes. But, Horace," looking at him earnestly, "I
think I should like to tell it all to papa myself first, this
evening."
"Very well, dearest. Do whatever makes you happiest,"
returns he, secretly pleased that the ice will be broken for
him before he prepares for his mauvais quart-dr'eure in
the library. "And if he should refuse his consent, Cla-
nssa, what then ? You know you' might make so much a
better marriage."
"Might I ? "-tenderly. "I don't think so; and papa
would not make me unhappy."
CHAPTER IX
"A generous friendship no cold medium knows."-PoPB
SMRS. REDMOND is sitting on a centre ottoman, darning
Stockings. This is her favorite pastime, and never fails



<pb n="58"/>
58 0          FAITH AND UNFAITH.
her. When she isn't darning stockings, she is alw
scolding the cook, and as her voice, when raised, is 
mellifluous, her family, in a body, regard the work-bask
with reverential affection, and present it to her notice wh
there comes the crash of broken china from the low
regions, or when the cold meat has been unfairly de
with.,
She is of the lean cadaverous order of womankind, 
is bony to the last degree. Her nose is aquiline, and, 
rule, pale blue. As this last color might also describe h
.eyes, there is a depressing want of contrast about her fa
Her lips are thin and querulous, and her hair-well, s
hasn't any hair, but her wig is flaxen.'
As' Clarissa enters, she hastily draws the stocking fr
her hand, and rises-to greet her. A faint blush manti
in her cheek, making one at once understand that in
gone days she had probably been considered pretty.
"So unexpected, my dear Clarissa," she says, with
pleased a smile as the poor thing ever conjures up, and
little weakness at the knees, meant for a courtesy. "
l.              very glad to see you,"-as, indeed, she is.
In her earlier days she had been called a. belle,---by 
own people,-and had been expected, accordingly,
draw a prize m the marriage-market. But Penelope Prou
had failed them, and, by so doing, had brought down e
nal condemnation on her head. In her second season
had fallen foolishly but honestly in love with a well-
but impecunious curate, and had married him in spite:
threats and withering sneers. With one consent her f
ily cast her off and consigned her to her fate, decla
themselves incapable of dealing with a woman who co
wilfully marry a man possessed of nothing. They alw
put a capital N to this word, and perhaps they were ri
as at that time all Charlie Redmond could call his 
was seven younger brothers and a tenor'voice of the v
purest.
As years rolled on, though Mrs. Redmond never, 
haps, regretted her marriage, she nevertheless secr
acknowledged to herself a hankering after the old lif
longing for the grandeur and riches that accrued to it 
Proudes for generations had been born and bred and 
thriven in the soft goods line), and hugged the demo
k__1



<pb n="59"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.                 59
ng thought to her bosom that a little more trade and a
little less blue blood would have made her husband a de-
gree more perfect.
It pleased her when the county families invited the
youthful Cissy to their balls; and it warmed her heart and
caused her to forget the daily shifts and worries of life
when the duchess sent her fruit and game, accompanied
by kind little notes. It above all things reconciled her
to her lot, when the heiress of Gowran Grange pulled up
her pretty ponies at her door, and running in, made much
of her and her children, and listened attentively to her
grievances, as only a sympathetic nature can.
To-day, Clarissa's visit, being early, and therefore un-
converntional, and for that reason the more friendly,,
sweetens all her surroundings. Miss Peyton might have
put in an appearance thrice in the day later on, yet her
visits would not have been viewed with such favor as is this
matutinal call.
" Cissy is out: she has gone to the village," says Mrs.
Redmond, scarcely thinking Clarissa has come all the way
from Gowran to spend an hour alone with her.
" I am sorry: but it is you I most particularly wanted
to see. What a delicious day it is ! I walked all the way
from Gowran, and the sun was rather too much for me;
but how cool it always is here ! This room never seems
stuffy or over-heated, as other rooms do."
" It is a wretched place, quite wretched," says Mrs. Red-
mond, with a depreciating glance directed- at a distant sofa
that might indeed be termed patriarchal.
-' What are you doing?" asks Clarissa, promptly, feel-
ing she cannot with any dignity defend the sofa. " Darn-
og¶? Why can't I help you ?-I am sure I could darn.
Ohs what a quantity of socks! Are they all broken?"
looking with awe upon the overflowing basket that lies
close to Mrs. Redmond's feet.
"  Every one of them," replies that matron, with unction.
I can't think how they do it, but I assure you they never
come out of the wash without innumerable tears."
Whether she is alluding, in her graceful fashion, to her
rhildren or their socks, seems at present doubtful.  " I
Ometimes fancy they must take their boots off and dance
0P the sharp pebbles to bring them to such a pass; but



<pb n="60"/>
6 6           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
they sayfthey don't. Yet how to account for this ?"  S
holds up one bony hand, decorated with a faded sock,
a somewhat triumphant fashion, and lets three emaciat
fingers start to life through the toe of it.
"Do let me help you," says Clarissa, with entreaty, a
stooping to the basket, she rummages there until she 
duces a needle, a thimble, and some thread. " I dare
I shall get on splendidly, if you will just give me a hint n
and then and tell me when I am stitching them up 
tightly."
This hardly sounds promising, but Mrs. Redmond he
her not.
" My dear, pray do not trouble yourself with such unin
egting work," she says, hastily. " It really makes me
happy to see you so employed; and that sock of all oth
-it is Bobby's, and I'm sure there must be some
wrong with his heels. If you insist on helping me, do
another."
"No, I shall stitch up Bobby, or die in the attem
says Miss Peyton, valiantly. " It is quite nice wo
should think, and so easy. I dare say after a time I s
love it."
",Should you ? " says Mrs. Redmond. "Well, pe
-but for myself, I assure you, though no one will beli
I abhor the occupation. There are moments when.
most overcomes me,-the perpetual in and out of th
dle, you will understand,-it seems so endless. Dear
there was a time when I was never obliged to do such -
services, when I had numerous dependants to wait
to do my bidding  But then "-with a deep sigh
sounds like a blast from Boreas-" I married the 
"And quite right, too," says Clarissa, with a c
little nod, seeing Mrs. Redmond has mounted he
horse and intends riding him to the death. "I
shouldn't hesitate about it, if I only got the chance.
deed where could any one get a more charming h
than the dear vicar."
"Well, well, it was a foolish match notwithstan
says Mrs. Redmond, with a smile and a wan sort of'
"though certainly at that time I don't deny he t
fascinating. Such a voice, my dear! and then ·
were remarkably fine."
·_



<pb n="61"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITI!.                61
" ' Were '-are, you mean," says the crafty Clarissa, know-
ing that praise of her husband is sweet to the soul of the
faded Penelope, and that the surest means of reducing her
to a pliant mood is to permit her to maunder on uninter-
ruptedly about past glories, and dead hours rendered bright
by age. To have her in her kindest humor, before men-
tioning the real object of her visit, must be managed, at
.all risks. " Yours was a love-match, wasn't it ?" she says,
coaxingly. "Do tell me all about it. (She has listened
patiently to every word of it about a hundred times before.)
I do so like a real love-affair."
" There isn't much to tell," says Mrs. Redmond, who
is quite delighted, and actually foregoes the charm of darn-
ing, that she may the more correctly remember each in-
teresting detail in her own " old story;" "but it was all very
sudden,-very; like a tornado, or a whirlwind, or those
things in the desert that cover one up in a moment. First we
met at two croquet-parties,-yes, two,-and then at a din-
ner at the Ramseys, and it was at the dinner at the Ram-
seys' that he first pressed my hand. -I thought, my dear,
I should have dropped, it was such a downright, not-to-be-
got-over sort of squeeze. Dear me, I can almost feel it
Inow," says Mrs. Redmond, who is blushing like a girl.
" Yes. Do go on," says Clarissa, who, in reality, is en-
joying herself, intensely.
"Well, then, two days afterwards, to my surprise, he
called with some tickets for a concert, to which my marm-
ma, who suspected nothing, took me. There we met again,
and it was there, right, as one might say, under mamma's
nose, he proposed to me. He was very eloquent, though
he was obliged to speak rather disconnectedly, owing to
the music stopping now and then and my mamma being
of a suspicious turn: but he was young in those days, my
dear, and well favored, no doubt. So we got married."
"That is the proper ending to all pretty stories. But is
t true," says Clarissa, with a wiliness really horrible in one
SO young, " that just at that time you refused a splendid
offer, all for the vicar's sake ? "
*    Splendid is a long word," says Mrs. Redmond, trying
to speak carelessly, but unmistakably elated, "yet I must
cSnfess there is some truth in the report to which you allude.
Si Hubert Fitz-Hubert was a baronet of very ancient lin.



<pb n="62"/>
r
62            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
eage, came over with the Conqueror, or King Alfred, I
quite forget which, but it was whichever was the oldest:
that I know. He was, in fact, a trifle old for me, perhaps,
and not So rich as others I have known, but still a baronet.
He proposed tb me, but I rejected him upon the spot with
scorn, though he went on his knees to me, and swore in
an anguished frenzy,'thatfhe w6uld cut his throat with his
razor if I refused to listen to his suit ! I did refuse, but F
heard nothing more about tlie razor: I am willing to be
lieve he put some restraint upon his maddened feelings, an
refrained from inflicting any injury upon himself."
" Poor fellow!" says Clarissa, in a suspiciously chok
tone.
; Then I espoused the vicar," says Mrs. Redmond, wi
a sentimental sigh. " One does foolish things sometimes.
"That, now, was a wise one. I would not marry
king if I loved a beggar. Altogether, you behaved bea
tifully, and just like a novel."
Feeling that the moment for action' has arrived, as Mr
Redmond is now in a glow of pride and vanity well mix
Clarissa goes on sweetly:
' t have some news for you." 
"For me ?" 
"Yes; for you. I know how delicate you are, and' ho
unable to manage those two strong children you have
home. And I know, too, you have been looking out for
suitable governess for some time, but you have found
difficulty in choosing one, have you not'?"
" Indeed I have."
"Well, I think I know some who will just suit y
She was at khool with me, and, though poor'-how, ha
lost both father and mother, is of very good family,
well connected."
" But the salary ? " says Mrs. Redmond, with some h'
tatiort. "The salary is the thing. I hear of no one A
who will come for less than sixty or seventy pounds a '
at the lowest; and with Henry at school, and Rupe
college expenses, forty pounds is as much as we can a
to give."                                     '
"Miss Broughton will, I think, be quite content 
that: she only wants to be happy, and a't rst, and :
will be all that with you and Cissy and Mr. Redio
h^------------«^



<pb n="63"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               63
She is young, and it is her first trial, but she is very
clever: she has a really lovely voice, and paints excessively
well. Ethel has rather a taste for painting, has she not? "
" A decided talent for it. All my family were remark-
able for their artistic tendencies, so she, doubtless, inherits
it; and-yes, of course, it would be a great thing for her
to have some one on the spot to develop this talent, and
train it. Your friend, you say, is well connected ? "
" Very highly connected, on her mother's side. Her
father was a lieutenant in the navy, and very respectable
too, I believe; though I know nothing of him."
*'That she should be a lady is, of course, indispensa-
ble," says Mrs. Redmond, with all the pride that ought to
belong to softgoods people. " I need hardly say that, I
think. But why does she not appeal for help to her
mother's relations?"
" Because she prefers honest work to begging from those
who up to this have taken no notice of her."
"I admire her," says Mrs. Redmond, warmly. "If you
think she will be satisfied with forty pounds, I should like
to try what she could do with the children."
" I am very glad you have so decided. I know no place
in which I would rather see a friend of mine than here."
" Thank you, my dear. Then will you write to her, or
shall I ?"
" Let me write to her first, if you don't mind: I think I
can settle everything."
" Mind ?-no, indeed: it is only too good of you to take
so much trouble about me."
To which Clarissa says, prettily,--
" Do not put it in that light: there is no pleasure so
keen as that of being able to help one's friends."
Then she rises, and, having left behind her three socks
that no earthly power can ever again draw upon a child's
foot, so hopelessly Ias she brought heel and sole together,
she says good-by to Mrs. Redmond, and leaves the room.
. Outside on the avenue she encounters the vicar, burry-
nmg home.
hi Turn with me," she says, putting her hand through
I',arm. "I have something to say to you."'
- Going to be married?" asks he, gayly. 
Nonsense ! "-blushing, in that he has so closely hit



<pb n="64"/>
64            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
the mark. " It is not of anything so paltry I would u
bur&n my mind."
"Then you have nothing of importance to tell me," sa
the vicar; "and I must go. Your story will keep:
work will not. I am in a great hurry: old Betty M
tin   -"
'- Must wait. I insist on it. Dying! nonsense  s
has been dying every week for three years, and you belie
her every time. Come as far as the gate with me."
" You command, I obey," says the vicar, with a sigh
resignation, walking on beside his pet parishioner. "
if you could only understand the trouble I am in with tho
Batesons you would know some pity for me."
"What I again ? " says Clarissa, showing, and feeli
deep compassion.
"Even so. This time about the bread.  You kn
what unpleasant bread they bake, and how Mrs. Redm
objects to it; and really it is bad for the children."
" It is poison," says Clarissa, who never does anuyth
by halves, and who is nothing if not sympathetic.
"Well so I said; and when I had expostulated
them, mildly but firmly, and suggested that better f
might make better dough, and they had declined to t
any notice of my protest,--why, I just ordered my br
from the Burtons opposite, and-"
The vicar pauses.
"And you have been happy ever since ? "
" Well, yes, my dear. I suppose in a way I have;
is, I have ceased to miss the inevitable breakfast-le
on the darkness and coarseness of the bread; but I
hardly gained on other points, and the Batesons are a!
petual scourge. Tlhey have decided on never again '
ening the church door' (their own words, my dear Cl
sa), because I have taken the vicarage custom from t
They prefer imperilling their souls to giving up the ch
of punishing me. And now the question is, whet
should not consent to the slow poisoning of my child
rather than drive my parishioners into the arms of
Methodists, who keep open house for all comers belo
hill."      -'
"I don't think I should poison the children,'
Clarissa.
4 : ^^^^                                                  ..*



<pb n="65"/>
-  ITH 'AND UNFAIT.               65
"But what is to become of my choir ? Charlotte Bate-
son has the sweetest voice in it, and now she will not
come to church. I am at my wits' end when I think of it
all."
"I am going to supply Charlotte's place for you," says
Clarissa, slyly.
"Thank you, my dear. But, you see, you would never
be in time. And, unfortunately, the services must begin
always at a regular hour. Punctuality was the one thing
I never could teach you,--that, and the Catechism."
"What a libel!" says Claiissa. "I shouldn't malign
my own teaching if 1 were you. I am perfectly certain I
could say it all now, this very moment, from start to finish,
questions and all, without a mistake. Shall I ? "
"No, no. I'll take yourword for it," says the xicar, has-
tily. " The fact is, I have just been listening to it at.the
morning school in the village, and when one has, heard a
thing repeated fourteen times with variations, one nat-
urally is not ambitious of hearing it again, no matter how
profitable it may be."
"When I spoke of filling Charlotte's place," says Cla-
rissa, " I did not allude in any way to myself, but to--
And now I am coming to my news." 
" So glad I" says the vicar ;"' I may overtake old Betty
yet."                                -
"I have secured a governess for Mrs. Redmond. Such
a dear little governess I And I want you to promise me
to be more than usually kind to her, because she is young
and friendless and itis her first effort at teaching.",
" So that question is settled at last," says the vicar, with
a deep-if carefully suppressed-sigh of relief. "I am
rejoiced, if only for my wife's .sake, who has been worry-
ing herself for weeks past, trying to replace the inestima-
ble-if somewhat depressing--Miss Prood." 
" Has she ?" says Clarissa, kindly. " Worry is a bad
thing. But to-day Mrs. Redmond seems much better than
she has been for a long time. Indeed, she said so."
" Did she ?" says the vicar, with a comical, transient
smile, Mrs. Redmond's maladies being of the purely im-
aginary order.
"What are you laughing at now ? " asks Clarissa, who
has rmarked this passing gleam of amusement.
5



<pb n="66"/>
66            FAITH AND tNFAITL|
" At you, my dear, you are so quaintly humorous," re-
plies he. "But go on: tell me of this new. acquisition to
our household. Is she a friend of yours ? " 
" Yes, a great friend."                     -
"Then of course we shall like her." -
"Thank you," says Clarissa. " She is very pretty, and
very charming. Perhaps, after all, I am doing a foolish
thingfor myself. How shall I. feel when she has cut me
out at the vicarage ?" 
"Not much fear of that, were she Aphrodite herself.
You are much too good a dhild to be liked lightly or by
halves. Well, good-by 3 you won't forget about the flannel
for the Batley twins ? "
" I have itiready,-at least, half of it. How could I tell
she was going to have twins," says Clarissa, apologetic-
ally. 
" It certainly was-very inconsiderate of her,'- says the
vicar, with a sigh, as he thinks of the poverty that clings
to the Batley mtung from year's end to year's end.
" Well, never mind; she shall have it all* next week," 
promises Clarissa, isoothingly, marking his regretful tone;
and--then she bids him farewell, and goes up the road
again in the direction of her home.
She is glad to be alone at last. Her mission success-
fully accomplished, she has now time to let her heart res
contentedly upon her own happiness. All the events of
the morning-the smallest word, the lightest intonation,:
the most passing smile, that claimed Horace as their father
-are remembered by her. She dwells fondly on each se
arate remembrance, and repeats to herself how he looked
and spoke at such-and-such moments.
She is happy, quite happy. A sort of wonder, too, mies
with her delight. Only a few short hours ago she h
left her home, free, unbetrothed, with only hope to sustain
her, and now she is returning to it with her hope a cer-
tainty,-bound, heart and soul, to the dearest, truest m
on earth, as she believes.
How well he loves her! She had noticed- his sudden
paling when she had begged for some delay before actually
naming her " brydale day." She had hardly believed hi ;
love for her' was so strong, so earnest: even she (ho
could she ? with tender self-reproach) had misjudged himn
'4.                                                        



<pb n="67"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.          .     0
had deemed him somewhat cold, indifferent; unknowing
of the deep stratum of feeling that lay beneath the out-
ward calm of his demeanor.
Dear, dearest Horace! She will never disbelt~ie in
him again; he is her own now, her very own, and she loves
him with all her heart, and he loves just the same, and
--Oh, if every woman in the world could only be as
happy as she is to-day, what a glorious place it would be!
Not that it is such a bad place, by any means, as some
people would lead one to imagine. Sufely these afe dis-
agreeable people, misanthropists, misogamists, and such
like heretics; or else, ;poor solds! they are in a bad
strait, without present hope and without any one to love
them! This last seems,.indeed, a misfortune.
Yet why abuse a lovely world? HoW bright the day is,
how sweet and fresh the air, though evening is nigh at
hand! She hardly ever remembers a September so fine,
so free from damp; the very birds- -      '
Had he thought her unloving or capricious when she
pleaded for a longer engagement ? (Heie the tears rise
unbidden in her eyes.) Oh, surely not; he understood
her thoroughly; for had he not smiled upon her after-
wards?               '     '                   .
So he will always smile. There shall never be any
cross words or angry frowns to chill their perfect-love!
Their lives will be a summer dream, a golden legend, a
pure, fond idyl.                :              -
Thus beguiling time with beliefs too sweet for earthly
power to grant, she hastens home, with each step building
up another story in her airy house, until at 'length she
carries a castle, tall and stately, into her fathers house.
CHAPTER X.
"I have no other but a woman's reason:
I think him so, because I think him so."
SHAKESPEARE.
"WHERE is papa ?" she asks, meeting one of the serv-
ants in the hall. Hearing he is out, and will not be back
for some time, she, too, turns again to the open door, and,
as though the house is too small to contain all the thoughts



<pb n="68"/>
68            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
that throng her breast, she walks out into the air again,
and passes into the garden, where autumn, though kindly
and slow in its advances, is touching everything with the
hand of death.
.   "Heavily hangs the broad sunflower
Over its grave i' the earth so chilly;
Heavily hangs the hollyhock,
Heavily hangs the tiger lily."
With a sigh she quits her beloved garden, and wanders
still farther abroad into the deep woods that "have put
their glory on," and are dressed in tender russets, and
sad greens, and fading tints, that meet and melt into
each other.
f',t      The dry leaves are falling, and lie crackling under foot.
'5*     The daylght' is fading, softly, imperceptibly, but surely.
'There is yqt a glow from the departing sunlight, that, sink-
ing lazily beyond the distant hills, tinges with gold the
$         browning earth that in her shroud of leaves is lying.
But death, or pain, or sorrow, has no part with Clarissa
to-day. She is quite happy,-utterly content. She marks
not the dying of the year, but rather the beauty of the
sunset. She heeds not the sullen roar of the ever-increas-
iu streamlets, that winter will swell into small but angry
.       rivers; hearing only the songs of the sleepy birds as they
*         croon their night-songs in the boughs above her.
~'    ~  When an hour has passed, and twilight has come up and
'*    . darkened all the land, she goes back again to her home,
4iij    and, reaching the library, looks in, to find her father sit-
ing there, engrpssed as, sual with some book, which he is
carefully annoating ias.he reads.
"Are you- very busy ?" asks she, coming slowly up to
'l         him. "I want to be with you for a little while."
" That is right. I am never too busy to talk to you.
lt   ~Why, it is quite an age since last I saw you!-not since
breakfast; where have you been all day ? "
"You are a pet," says Miss Peyton, in a loving whisper,
.-, -rubbing her cheek tenderly against his, as a reward for his
pretty speech. "I have been at the vicarage, and have
pleaded Georgie's cause so successfully that I have won it,
and have made them half in love with her already."
"A special pleader indeed. Diplomacy is your forte:
you should keep to it"



<pb n="69"/>
i'AJTI AND UN VFAnI  .            69
"I mean to. I shouldn't plead in vain with you, should
I ?"  She has grown somewhat earnest.
"Oh ! with me ! " says her father, with much self-con-
tempt; " I have given up all that sort of thing, long ago.
I know how much too much you are for me, and I amni too
wise to swim against the tide. Only I would entreat you
to be merciful as you are strong."
"What a lot of nonsense you do talk, you silly boy!"
says Clarissa, who is still leaning over his chair in such a
position that he cannot see her face. Perhaps, could he
have seen it, he might have noticed how pale it is beyond
its wont. " Well, the Redmonds seemed quite pleased, and
I shall write to Georgie to-morrow. It will be nice for
her to be here, near me. It may keep her from being
lonely and unhappy."
" Well, it ought," says George Peyton. " What did the
vicar say ? "
" The vicar always says just what I say," replies she, a
trifle saucily, and with a quick smile.
"Poor man ! his is the common lot," says her father;
and then, believing she has said all she wants to say, and
being filled with a desire to return to his book and his
notes, he goes on: " So that was the weighty matter you
wanted to discuss, eh ? Is that all your news ? "
" Not quite," returns she, in a low tone.
" No ? You are rich in conversation this evening. Who
is it we are now to criticise ? "
"The person you love best,-I hope."
" Why, that will be you," says George Peyton.
" You are sure ? " says Clarissa, a little tremulously; and
then her father turns in his chair and tries to read her
face.
" No; stay just as you are; I can tell you better if you do
not look at me," she whispers, entreatingly, moving him
with her hands back to his former position.
"What is it, Clarissa ?" he asks, hastily, though he is
far from suspecting the truth.  Some faint thought of
James Scrope (why he knows not) comes to him at this
moment, and not unpleasingly. " Tell me, darling. Any-
thing that concerns you must, of necessity, concern me
also."
"Yes, I am glad I know that," she says, speaking with



<pb n="70"/>
70            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
some difficulty, but very earnestly. "To-day I met Horace
Branscombe."
"Yes ?" His face changes a little, from vague expect-
ancy to distinct disappointment; but then she cannot see
his face.
" And he asked me to be his wife-and-I said, Yes-
if-if it pleases you, papa.' 
I't is over. The dreaded announcement is made. The
;I        words that have cost her so much to utter have gone out
*       into the air; and yet there is no answer !
For a full minute silence reigns, and then Clarissa lays
[,  ~   her hand imploringly upon her father's shoulder. He is
'^  ~   looking straight before him, his expression troubled and
grave, his mouth compressed.
" Speak to me," says Clarissa, entreatingly.
After this 'he does speak.
S         " ~"I wish it had been Dorian," he says, impulsively.
i;t   ~   Then she takes her hand from his shoulder, as though
Htj  ~  it can no longer rest there in comfort, and her eyes fill with
disappointed tears.
"Why do you say that?" she asks, with some vehe-
mence. " It sounds as if-as if you undervalued Horace I
Yet what reason have you for. doing so.? What do you
know against him ?"
"Nothing, literally nothing," answers Mr. Peyton, sooth-
~; ~    ingly, yet with a plaintive ring in his voice that might sug-
gest the idea of his being sorry that such answer must be
~}      made. "I am sure Horace is very much to be liked."
" How you say that! "-reproachfully. " It sounds un-
true! Yet it can't be. What could any one say against
],     HHorace'?" 
i<^       " My dear, I said nothing."
"No, but you insinuated it. You said Dorian was his
superior."
"Well, I think he is the better man of the two," said Mr.
Peyton, desperately, hardly knowing what to say, and feel-
ing sorely aggrieved in that he is compelled to say what
must hurt her.
"I cannot understand you; you said you know noth-
ing prejudicial to Horace (it is impossible you should), and
yet you think Dorian the better man. If he has done no
wrong, why should any one be a better man.? Why draw



<pb n="71"/>
AFAITH- AND UNFAITH.              71
ti comparison at all-? For the first time in all your life,
you are unjust." 
"No, Clarissa, I am not. At least, I think not. Injus-
tice is' a vile thing. But, somehow, Sartoris and I had
both made up our minds that you would marry Dorian,
and--"
::He pauses. 
2" " Then your only objection to poor Horace is that he is
not Dorian?" asks she, anxiously, letting her hand once
'more rest upon his shoulder.
"Well, ro doubt there is a great deal in that," returns
he, evasively, hard put to it to answer-his inquisitor with
discretion.
" And if Dorian had never been, Horace would' be the
ine person in all the world you would desire for me?"
pursues she, 'earnestly.
George Peyton makes no reply to this,-perhaps be-
cause 'he has not one 'ready.: Clarissa, stepping back,
draws her breath a little quickly- and a dark fire kindles
in her eyes. In her eyes, too, large tears rise and; shine.
" It is because he is poor," she says, in a low tonetthat
has sorme contempt in it, and some passionate disappoint-
inient.                              '    ;'
" Do not mistake me," says her father, speaking hastily,
but with dignity. Rising, he pushes back! hisi chair, and
turning, faces her in the gathering twilight. "Were he
the poorest man alive, and you loved him, and he was
woithy of you, I would give you to him without a murmur.
Not that "-hurriedly-" I consider Horace unworthy of
you, but the idea is new, strange, and- 'the other day,
Clarissa, you were a child."
" I am your child still,-always."  She is sitting on his
n'ee now, with her' arms round his neck, and her cheek
against his; and he is holding her svelteissome figure very
closely to him. She is the one thing he has to love on
Carth; and just now she seems unspeakably-almost pain-
fully-dear to him.
" 'Always, my dear," he reiterates, somewhat unsteadily.
' "You have seen so little of Horace lately," she goes on,
presently, trying to find some comfortable reason for what
seems to her her father's extraordinary blindness to her
lover's virtues. " When you see a great deal of him, you



<pb n="72"/>
72            FAITH AND UAVFAITH.
will lov, him I As it is, darling, do--do say you like him
very much, or you will break my heart!"
" I like him very much," replies he, obediently, repeat-
ing his lesson methodically, while feeling all the time that
he is being compelled to say something against his will,
without exactly knowing why he should feel so.
I  "And you are quite pleased that I am going to marry
him?" reading his face with her clear eyes; she is very
pale, and strangely nervous. 
"My darling, my one thought is for your happiness."'
There is evasion mixed with the affection in this speech;
and Clarissa notices it.
"No: say you are glad I am going to marry him," she
says, remorselessly.
"How can you expect me to say that," exclaims he,
mournfully, "when you know your wedding-day must part
us?"
"Indeed it never shall!" cries she, vehemently; and
then, overcome by the emotion of the past hour, and in-
deed of the whole day, she gives way and bursts into tears.
' Papa, how can you say that? To be 'parted from you !
We mpst be the same to each other always: my wedding-
day would be a miserable one indeed if it separated me
from you." 
Then he Comforts her, fondly caressing the pretty
brown head that lies upon his heart, as it had lain in past
years, when, the slender girl of to-day was a little lisping
motherless child. He calls her by all the endearing
names he had used to her then, until her sobs cease, and
only a sigh, now and again, tells of the storm just past.
"When is it to be ?" he asks her, after a little while.
"Not too soon, my pet, I hope ?"
" Not for a whole year. He said something about No-
vember, but I could not leave you in such a hurry. We
must have one more Christmas all to ourselves.",
"You thought of that," he says, tenderly.: "Oh,. Cla
rissa, I hope this thing is for your good. Think of it seri
ously, earnestly, while you have time. Do not- rush
blindly into a compact that must be binding on you all 
your life." 
" I hope.it will be for all my life," returns she, gravely. 
"To be parted from Horace would be the worst thing that



<pb n="73"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITII.              73
could befall me. Always remember that, papa. I am
bound to him with all my heart and soul."
I' :So. be itl" says George Peyton, solemnly. A sigh
skcpes him.
l.iiFor some time neither speaks. The twilight is giving
place to deeper gloom, the night is fast' approaching, yet
,c'fy do not stir. What the girl's thoughts may be.. at this 
p.oment, who can say.? As for her father, he is motion-
aoess, except that his lips move, though no sound comes
' ff   them. He is secretly praying, perhaps, for the wel-
ft of his only child, to her mother in heaven, who at
ia time must surely be looking down upon her with
ttenderest solicitude. Clarissa puts her lips softly to his
si Out engagement will be such a long one, that we
think-"
, B Ye1?"
*     We should like it kept quite secret.  You will say
;aothing about it to any one ?"
" Not until you giveme leave. You have acted wisely,
,I think,in putting off your marriage for a while." Almost
,unconsciously he is telling himself how time changes all
fthiogs, and how many plans and affections can be altered
iR.tweqlvq months.
"But surely you will tell James Scrope," he goes on,
ater a while: " that will not be making it public. He
.as known you and been fond of you ever since you were
:a baby; and it seems uncivil and unfriendly to keep him
-i the dark."
" Then tell him; but no one else now, papa. I quite
- arranged for James, he is such an old friend, and so nice
in every way."
-.Here she smiles involuntarily, and, after a little bit,
laughs outright, in spite of herself, as though at some ri-
; Aculous recollection.
^ i." Do you know," she says, "when I told Horace I
*tbought I should like Sir James to know of our engage-
*  eunt, I really think he felt a little jealous ! At least, he
ididn't half like it. How absurd!-wasn't it? Fancy
ing jealous of dear old Jim ! "
Old !-old ! He is a long way off that. Why,. all you
lillyJlittle girls think a man past twenty-nine to be. hov-



<pb n="74"/>
*fe    ,   74            FAITH AND UNJFAITI. 
ering on the brink of the grave. He can not be more
thirty-three, or so."
" He is very dreadfully old, for all that," says Miss Ty
ton, wilfully. "He is positively ancient; I never J
any one so old. He is so profound, and earnest, andsi
ous,. and-  "                              -
" What on earth has he done to you, that you sh
call him all these terrible names?" says Mr. Pe
laughing.
"He scolds me," says Clarissa, "he lectures me,
tells me I should have an aim in life. You have beena
aim, darling, and I have been very devoted to it, haven
I?"                .     -               -  · !;,,
" You have, indeed. But now I shall be out in thei
of course." His tone is somewhat wistful. "That is
all one gains by lavishing one's affection upon a-pretty
-'; gchild and centring one's every thought and hope upon
her."
"No, you are wrong there; it must be something 
gain love that will last for ever." She tightens her an
around his neck. "What a horrid little, speech! I coul
almost fancy James dictated it to you. He is a scept
an unbeliever, and you have imbibed his notions.
hi         ical people are a bore. You wouldn't, for example,
me fall in love with James, would you ?"
"Indeed I would," says George Peyton, boldly. "  -
is just the one man I would choose for you,-'not
*'4 I      celot, nor another.' He is so genuine, so thorough i
every way. And then the estates join, and that. I r
wish you had fallen in love with Scrope."
" I love you dearly,-dearly," says Miss Peyton; "but y
I i      are a dreadful goose ! James is the very last man to grol
sentimental about any one,-least of all, me. He thi
me of no account at all, and tells me so in very polite laI
guage occasionally. So you see what a fatal thing it woul
.et·      have been if I had given my heart to him. He would
a,>        have broken it, and I should have died, and you would hai
K '        put up a touching and elaborate tablet to my memo
and somebody would have planted snowdrops on my gra
A: ,There would have been a tragedy in Pullingham, withJl
.         for   u itshero."  * den .i  .  c     m   .'
"!You take a different view of the case from miine .t



<pb n="75"/>
FAZKITVAND UNPAIW7n.             75
there would have been no broken heart, and no
grave, and you would have been happy ever after."
That is a more comfortable theory, certainly for me.
nk what a miserable life he would have had with me
by his side."
A very perfect life, I think," says Mr. Peyton, looking
irdonable pride upon the half-earnest, half-laughing,
olly lovely face so near him. " I don't know what
afellow could expect."
You see 'was right. I said you were a goose," says
Peyton, irreverently. But she pats his hand, in the
sweetest manner possible, as she says it. Then she
race said he would come up to-morrow to speak to
.eq well, dear. That is the usual thing, I suppose.
t be long-winded, or lachrymose, or anything
ay. When a thing is done it is done, and discussion
sary."
'me to be very, very kind to him."
9~t eat him, if you mean that," says Mr. Peyton,
! ly. " What do you think I am going to say to
thy fatler an ogre, that he should do this thing ? '
/liki quite made up your mind to this step ? Re-
wiere  ll be no undoing it."
ithat; but I feel no fear." She has grown pale
'J. love him. How should I know regret when
A,  I believe in him, and trust him; and I know
y of all my trust."
n sighs. Some words come to his memory,
lepeats them,-slowly, beneath his breath,-
,,iTh.ere are no tricks in plain and simple faith I"
,l: r faith is pure and simple, and free from thought
ewhat James Scrope will say to it all ?" he says,
never says very much on any subject, does he?
gdMifgo6er to the Hall, will you tell him about
4,'~1 him yourself," says her father, in a curious
ft i:   --; iJ1



<pb n="76"/>
76             lA&ITI AVND UNVAITH,
;r         *' "There is the dressing bell," says Clarissa, getting
lazily.  I don't feel a bit like eating my dinner, do
know?" 'P
"Nonsense! The love-sick rKe won't suit you.
people who don't eat dinner get pale, and lose all 
pretty looks. Run away, now, and don't be long. I
it would be injudicious to put cook into a tantrum 
to-night, after last night's explosion. So go and
, yourself lovely."                           '
r" I'll do lny best," says Clarissa, modestly.
;,                                                   4
-  c      CHAPTER XI.
I                 U"I cannot but remember such things were,
That were most precious to me.
*I'f ^Oh I I could play the woman with mine eyes."Mta
",'  To tell him herself" has some strange attracrion
Clarissa. To hear face to face, what this her oldejst
will say to her engagement with Horace is a matte
great anxiety to her. She will know at once by Pis
:'and smile whether he approves or disapproves her ch
Driving along the road to Scrope, behind, her p
.hi .       ponies, "Cakes" and "Ale," with her little rough 
M· -         terrier, "Secretary Bill," sitting bolt upright beside hr
solemn as half a dozen judges, she wonders anxiously
f,.         she shall begin to tell James about it. 
1t VShe hopes to goodness he won't be in his ultra-g
mood, that, as a rule, leads up to his finding fault.
,everything, and picking things tq pieces, and gen
condemning the sound judgment of others. (As a'
Clarissa is a little unfair in her secret comments on J
Scrope's character.) It will be somuch better if sbh
.  only come upon him out of doors, in his homeliest 
with a cigar between his lips, or his. pipe. Yes, his
will be even better. Men are even more genial, wi
pipe than with the goodliest habana.  .I '
Well, of course, if he is the great friend he Priofesfj
'' .be,-heavy emphasis on the verb, and a little flick on.
f. u        whip on " Cakes's " quarters, which the spirited but 
creature resents bitterly,-he must be glad at the tho
It,-
..             ?



<pb n="77"/>
FAITHi AND UNFAITH.               77
t she is not going to leave the country,-is, in fact,
ilkely to spend most of her time 'still in Pullinghamn.
et all of it, bf course. Horace has duties, and though
Mr secret soul she detests town life, still there is a joy
Se thought that she will be with him, helping him, en-
tging him in his work, rejoicing in his Successes,
pathyzing with his fai---, but no, of course there
.he no failures! How stupid of her to think of that,
en he is so clever, so learned, so-
-et it would be sweet, too, to have him fail once or
ce (just a little, insignificant, not-worth-speaking-about
of a defeat), if only to let him see how she could love
even the more for it.
She blushes, and smiles to herself, and, turning sud-
Iy, bestows a most unexpected caress upon " Secretary
I' who wags his short tail in return-that is, what they
i him of it-lovingly, if somewhat anxiously, and
ces at her sideways out of. his wonderful eyes, as
qgh desirous of assuring himself of her sanity.
ih, yes, of course James will be delighted. And he
tell her so with the gentle smile that so lights up his
and he will take her hand, and say he is so glad, so
ed, and
Witha sharp pang she remembers how her father was
*jl pleased nor glad when she confided her secret to
aH; Ie had been, indeed, distressed and confounded.
e had certainly tried his hardest to conceal from her
.ese facts, but she had seen them all the same. She
ll..not be deceived where her father was concerned.
i' ad felt unmistakable regret-" Be quiet, Bill!
ou shah't come out driving again if you can't sit still!
*at a bore a dog is sometimes ! "
.iWell after all, he is her father. It is only natural he
ould dislike the thought of parting from her.  She
pki, with an instant softening of her heart, of how
l .esary she has become to him, ever since her final re-
t"h ome. Before that he had been dull and distrait;
w he is bright and cheerful, if still rather too devoted
his books to be quite good for him.
eimnight, indeed, be forgiven for regarding the man
) should take her from him as an enemy. But Jim is
rent; he is a mere friend,-a dear an valued one, it



<pb n="78"/>
t   78        FAITH AND UNFAITH.
is true, but still only a friend,-a being utterly indepen4
H ' , :ent of her, who can be perfectly happy without her, an
ll[ ^therefore, of course, unprejudiced.
He will, she feels sure, say everything kind and swee
to' her, and wish her joy sincerely.
James, too, is very ,sensible, and will see the goo
points in Horace. He evidently likes him; at least, they
have always appeared excellent friends when together.
lj~i     Dorian, of course, is the general favorite,--she acknowl-
edges that,-just because he is a little more open, more
r[,    ',outspoken perhaps,-easier to understand; whereas, she
firmly believes, she alone of all the world is capable of
fully appreciating the innate goodness of Horace !
Here she turns in the huge gateway of Scrope; and
the terrier, growing excited, gives way to a sharp bark,
and the ponies swing merrily down the avenue; and just
|.~ ~    before she comes to the hall door her heart fails her, and
ll[ 'something within her-that something that never errs-
tells her that James Scrope will not betray any pleasure
at her tidings.
Before she quite reaches the hall door, a' groom comes
from a side-walk, and, seeing him, Clarissa pulls up the
ponies sharply, and asks. the man,-
I^^B      " Is Sir James at home ? "
"Yes, miss; he is in the stables, I think: leastways,
he was half an hour agone. Shall I tell him you are
here?" ' '
"No, thank you. I shall go and find him myself."
See flings her reins to her own groom, and, with Bill
't"'       trotting at her heels, goes round to the yard, 'glad, at
least, that her first hope is fulfilled,-that he is out of
doors.
As she goes through the big portals into the ivied
yard, she sees before her one of the. stablemen on his
knees, supporting in his armn an injured puppy: with all
a woman's tenderness he is examining the whining little
brute's soft,.yellow paw, as it hangs mournfully down-
wards.                       ' 
Sir James, with a pipe in his' mouth,-this latter fact
Atl jClarissa hails with rapture,-is also bending, anxiously
;I~ ' iover the dog, and is so absorbed in his contemplation of
fAD



<pb n="79"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITIL                79
itas not to notice Clarissa's approach until she is close
beside him.
- "What is the matter with the poor little thing ?" she
asks, earnestly, gazing with deep pity at the poor puppy,
that whines dismally and glances up at her with the pecu-
liarly tearful appealing expression that belongs to setters.
," "A knock of a stone, miss, nayther more nor less," ex-
claims the man, angrily. "That's the honest truth, Sir
$Jaes, you take my word for't. Some o' them rascally
boys as is ever and allus about this 'ere yard, and spends
their lives shyin' stones at every blessed sign they sets
.heir two eyes on, has done this. 'Ere's one o' the best
pups o' the season a'most ruined, and no satisfaction for it.
L's a meracle if he comes round (quiet there, my beauty,
ad easy there now, I tell ye), and nobody does anything."
The old man stops, and regards his master reprov-
.iagly, nay, almost contemptuously.
'I really don't see why you should think it was the boys,
Joe? " ays Sir James, meekly.
L'"'Twarn't anythin' else, anyway," persists Joe, dog-
,dsly.
i -.,tf Poor little fellow !-dear fellow ! " murmurs Miss Pey-
caressingly, to the great soft setter pup, patting its
Joyvingly, as it barks madly, and makes frantic efforts
to get from Joe's arms to hers, while Bill shrieks in con-
rt, being filled with an overwhelming amount of sympa-
"!'Beqtfer leave him to me, miss," says Joe, regarding
lheinjured innocent with a parent's eye. "He knows me.
I'll treat him proper," raising his old honest weather-beaten
fage, to Clarissa, in a solemn reassuring manner, " you be
bound. Yet them pups " (disgustedly) "is like children,
allus ungrateful. For the sake o' your handsome face,
1ow):he'd go to you if he could, forgetful of all my kind-
;ess qo him. Well, 'tis the wa,y o' the world, I believe,"
winds up old Joe, rising from his kfiees,-cheered, perhaps,
,ythe thought that his favorite, pup, if only following the
tcoimon dictates of animals: is no worse than all others.,
I- gHe, grumbles something else 'in an undertone, and finally
arries off the puppy to his kennel.
" I am too amazed for speech," says Sir James, rising
alsoto his feet, and contemplating Clarissa with admira.



<pb n="80"/>
80            FAITH AND UNFAZITh. 
tion. "That man," pointing to Joe's retiring figure, "h
been in my father's service, and in mine, for fifty years, an
never before did I hear a civil word from his lips. I thin
*H fhe said your face was handsome, just now ?-or was I d
ceiled "
"I like Joe," says Miss Peyton, elevating her rounde
chin: "I downright esteem him. He knows where beaut
lies."
"How he differs from the rest of the world!" says
Scrope, not looking at her.
" Does he? That is unkind, I think. Why," says Cla-
~i  ~    rissa, with a soft laugh, full of mischief, " should any one
be blind to the claims of beauty ?"
"Why, indeed? It is, as I have been told, ' a joy for-
ever.' No one nowadays disputes anything they are told,
do they ?"
"Don't be cynical, Jim," says Miss Peyton, softly.
What an awful thing it will be if, now when her story is
absolutely upon her lips, he relapses into his unsympa-
thetic mood I
" Well, I won't, then," says Scrope, amiably, which much
relieves her. And then he looks lovingly at his pipe, which
he has held (as in duty bound) behind his back ever since,
her arrival, and sighs heavily, and proceeds to knock the
ashes out of it.                          '
"Oh, don't do that," says Clarissa,. entreatingly. "I
really wish you wouldn't! " (This is the strict truth.)
"You know you are dying for a smoke, and I-I perfectly
love the smell of tobacco. There is, therefore, no reason
why you should deny yourself."
"Are you really quite sure ?" says Scrope, politely and
hopefully.
"Quite,-utterly. Put it in your mouth again. And-
do you mind ? "-with a swift glance upwards, from under
her soft plush hat,-" I want you to come for a little walk
with me."
"To the end of the world, with you, would be a 'short
walk," says Serope, with a half laugh, but a ring in his tone
that, to a woman heart whole and unoccupied with thoughts
of another man, must have meant much. "Command me,
madam."
" I have something very-vvery-very important to tell



<pb n="81"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.                81
," says Miss Peyton, earnestly. This time she looks
her long black gloves, not at him, and makes a desper-
ffort to button an already obedient little bit of ivory.
They have turned into the orchard, now bereft of blos-
mand are strolling carelessly along one of its side-paths.
earth is looking brown, the trees bare; for Autumn-
edy season-has stretched its hand " to reap the ripened
it the which the earth had yold."
.Are you listening to me ?" asks she, presently, seeing
makes no response to her first move.
B'Itently." He has not the very faintest idea of her
ng, so speaks in a tone light and half amused, that
* her to betray her secret sooner than otherwise she
thave done. " Is it an honest mystery," he says,
essly, "or a common ghost-story, or a state secret?
it to me gently."
*here is nothing to break," says Clarissa, softly. Then
oks down at the strawberry borders at her side,-
rown and aged,-and then says, in a very low tone,
going to be married I "
reis a dead silence. Sir James says nothing. He
,on beside her with an unfaltering footstep, his head
as ever, his hands clasped in their old attitude be-
Ais back. The sun is shining; some birds are war-
aintly (as though under protest) in some neighbor-
icket; yet, I think Scrope neither sees the sun, nor
the birds, nor knows for the moment that life flows
him, after that little, low-toned speech of hers.
en he awakes from his stupor, and, rousing himself,
huskily, yet with a certain amount of self-possession
ceives her,-
You were saying-  "
ply that I am going to be married," repeats Clarissa,
mlewbat changed tone. The nervousness had gone
/it, and the natural hesitation; she is speaking now
Comiposedly and clearly, as if some surprise betrays
pl her voice.
ieis aware that his heart is beating madly. He
, and is leaning against the trunk of an apple-
ein Clarissa, who is standing in the middle of the
*   .f ace is ashen gray, but his manner is quite calm.
is it?" he asks, presently, very slowly . 
-~~~~~~~~ 



<pb n="82"/>
83            FAIt17  AND UNA1'AI.
"Mr. Branscombe,"-coldly.
"fDorian?'" 
"No. Horace."
"I wish it had been Dorian," he says, impulsively.
'It is the last straw.
"And why ?"demands she, angrily. She is feeli
wounded, disappointed at his reception of her news; an
now the climax has come. Like her father, he, too, prefer
Dorian,-nay, by his tone, casts a slur upon Horace. Th
implied dislike cuts her bitterly to the heart.
"What evil thing have you to say of Horace," she goe
on, vehemently, " that you so emphatically declare in fa
vor of Dorian ? When you are with him you profess grea
friendship for him, and now behind his back you seek 
malign him to the woman he loves."
" You are unjust," siays Scrope, wearily. " I know not
ing bad of Horace. I merely said I wished it had been
Dorian. No, I have nothing to say against Horace."
/" Then why do you look as if you had ? " says Miss Pey
ton, pettishly, frowning a little, and letting her eyes rest
on him for a moment only, to withdraw them again with a
deeper frown. "Your manner suggests many things.
You are like papa-" She pauses, feeling she has
made a false move, and wishes vainly her last words un-
said.
I"Does your father disapprove, -then ?" asks he, more
through idleness than a desire to know.
Instinctively he feels that, no matter what obstacles may
be thrown in this girl's way, still she will carry her point
and marry the man she has elected to love. Nay, will not
difficulties but increase her steadfastness, and make strong
the devotion that is growing in her heart ?
Not until now, this moment, when hope has died and
despair sprung into life, does he know how freely, how al-
together, he has lavished the entire affection of his soul.
upon her. During all these past few months he has lived
and thought and hoped but for her; and now- all this
is at an end.
Like a heavy blow from some unseen hand this terrible
news has fallen upon him, leaving him spent and broken,
aid filled with something that is agonized surprise at the
depth of th! misfortune that has overtaken him. It is as



<pb n="83"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.                83
revelation, the awakening to a sense of the longing that
been his,-to the knowledge of the cruel strength of
!tenderness that binds his heart to hers. 
With a slow wonder he lifts his eyes and gazes at her.
*te is a petulant expression round her mobile lips, a
tbendiig of her brows that bespeaks discontent, border-
upon anger, yet, withal, she is quite lovely,-so sweet,
t so unsympathetic; so gentle, yet so ignorant of all he
i;present feeling.
'With a sickening dread he looks forward to the future
tstill may lie before him. It seems to him that he can
w, lying stretched out in the far distance, a lonely cheer-
Iroad, over which he must travel whether he will or
t,-a road bare and dusty and companionless, devoid of
e, or rest, or joy, or that love that could transform the
friness into a " flowery mead."
biHe that loses hope "-says Congreve-" may part
anything."  To Scrope, just now, it seems as though
lland he have parted company forever. The past has
. so dear, with all its vague beliefs and uncertain dream-
1:all too sweet for realization,-that the present ap-
unbearable 
he very air seems dark, the sky leaden, theclouds sad
a lowering. GVainly Wltries to understand how he has
' to love, with such: boundless passion, this girl, who
him not at all, eW'as surrendered herself.wholly to
. Unworthy of her,'-one utterly incapable of compre-
dig the nobility and truthfulness of her nature.
le world, that only yesterday seemed so desirable a
e, to-day has lost its charm.
'What is life, when stripped of its disguise ? A thing
desired it cannot be." With him it seems almost at
.end. An unsatisfactory thing, too, at its best,-a mere
* .pse into the world of might have been." 
e words read a week ago come to him now, and
heir changes on his brain. " Rien ne va plus,"-the
Iflwords return to him with a pertinacity not to be
ed. , It is with difficulty he refrains from uttering
tloud.
*Noi he does not disapprove," says Clarissa, interrupt-
s'rflections at this moment :i ".he has given his full
set to my engagement." She speaks smewhat slow



<pb n="84"/>
84            FAITH AND UNhAITH.
as if remembrance weighs upon her. "And, even ifh
had'not, there is still something that must give me happ
ness: it is the certainty that Horace loves me, and that
love him."
Though unmeant, this is a cruel blow. Sir James turn
away, and, paling visibly,-had she cared to see it,-pluc
a tiny piece of bark from the old tree against which he
leaning.
There is something in his face that, though she unde
stands it not, moves Clarissa to pity.
" You will wish me some good wish, after all, Jim, won
you?" she says, very sweetly, almost pathetically.
" No, I cannot," returns he, with a brusquene forei
to him. "To do so would be actual hypocrisy."
There is silence for a moment: Clarissa grows a litf
pale, in her turn. In his turn, he takes no notice of 
emotion, having his face averted. Then, in a low, fain
choked voice, she breaks the silence.
" If I had been wise," she says, " I should have staye
at home this morning, and kept my'confidences to myse
Yet I wanted to tell you. So I came, thinking, believi
I should receive sympathy from you; and now what ha
I got ? ' 0y harsh and cruel words'l If I had known-
"Clarissa I"
"Yes! If any one had tol     u would so treat 
I should-should-    "    a' 
It is this supreme moment sl"elses to burst out c
ing; aid she cries heartily (by which I mean that she giv
Way to grief of the most vehement and agonized descri
tion) for at least five minutes, without a cessation, maki
her lament openly, and in a carefully unreserved fashio
intended to reduce his heart to water. And not in va
is her "weak endeavor." 
Sir James, when the first sob falls upon his ear, tu
from her, and, as though unable to endure the sound, d
liberately walks away from her down the garden path.
When he gets quite to the end of it, however, and kno
the next turn will hide him from sight of her tears or sou
of her woe, he hesitates, then is lost, and finally comi
back again to where she is standing, hidden by a cambi
handkerchief, lays his hand upon her arm. At his tol
her sobs increase.



<pb n="85"/>
RFAITH AND UNFAITIL.              85
Don'tdo that! " he says, so roughly that she knows
at is bleeding. " Do you hear me, Clarissa ? Stop
Ad It isn't doing you any good, and it is driving me
tWhat has happened ?-what is making you so un-
eware," says Miss Peyton, with a final sob, and a
le octave of reproach in her voice. " Anything so un-
I never knew. And just when I had come all the
bver here to tell you what I would tell nobody else
pt papa! There was a time, Jim " (with a soft but
ading glance), "when you would have been sweet
kind and good to me on an occasion like this."
moves a step nearer to him, and lays her hand-
little, warm, pulsing hand he loves so passionately-
his arm. Her glance is half offended, half beseech-
:.Scrope's strength of  gives way, and, metaphori-
speaking, he lays h     her feet.
"f I have been uncivi  o   forgive me," he says,
,pg her hand from his; iG and holding it closely in
own. "You do not kno; you cannot understand;
tJam glad you          happy ! There is no sub-
tial reason wh         not extract from life every
t it can afford  y     oung, the world is before
; and the.             is yours. Dry your eyes,
issa: youers       h   eart."
He has quite regai  l   f-control by this time, and
ing conquered em      aks dispassionately. Cla-
as he has said,       t understand the terrible
Ic it costs him to d  ese words in an ordinary
and with a face whic   till pale, betrays no men-
excitement.
She smiles. Her tears vanish. She sighs contentedly,
d moves the hand that rests in his.
"I am so glad we are friends again," she says. " And
w tell me why you were so horrid at first: you might
t as well have begun as you have ended : it would have
ed trouble and time, and " (reproachfully) "all my
"Perhaps I value you so highly that I hate the thought
losing you," says Scrope, palliating the ugliness of his
duct as best he may. His voice is very earnest.
_3



<pb n="86"/>
86             FAITH AND UNFAITTH.
" How fond you are of me I " says Miss Peyton, with
some wonder and much pleasure.
To this he finds it impossible to make any answer,
" Whenever I wish I had had a brother, I always think
of you," goes on she, pleasantly, "you are so-so-quiet,
and your scoldings so half-hearted.' Now, even though
rather late, wish me joy."
"My dear, dear girl," says Scrope, "if I were to speak
forever, t could not tell you how I long for and desire
your happiness. If your life proves as calm: and peaceful
as I wish it, it will be a desirable life indeed ! You have
thought of me as your brother: let me be your brother
indeed,-one in whom you can confide and trust should
trouble overtake you."
He says this very solemnly, and again Clarissa's eyes
fill with teats. She does no gwhat she has not done since
she was a little, impulsvi  g girl: she:lifts her head
and presses her lips to HlB k 
For one brief momen e  i.l*s  her in his arms, return-
ing her caress, warmly,- it i!ttrue, but with ineffable sad-
ness. To her, this emb             sealing of a fresh
bond between them. To              nt farewell, a final
wrenching of the old sweetv e endured so long.
Up to this she has bee           i     fn,-far more
than he ever dreamed un          aAWing came,-
the one bright spot in his e~    t now all is changed,
and she belongs to anoth           :
He puts her gently fr      nd, with a kindly word
and smile, leads her to t   en gate, and so round to
where her ponies are i   ntly awaiting her coming:
after which he bids her good-by, and, turning, goes in-
doors, and locks himself into his own private den.
,-    -     CHAPTER XII.
*The snow is on the mountai,,'
The frost is on the vale,
The ice hangs o'er the fountain,  : .
t.   The storm rides on the gale."-OUSELvEY, 
CLARISSA'S letter to Georgie Broughton receives a mos
tender response,-tender as it is grateful. The girl write



<pb n="87"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.                87
thankfully, heartily, and expresses almost passionate de-
light at Clarissa's instantaneous and ready sympathy.
The letter is short, but full of feeling. It conveys to
Clarissa the sad impression that the poor child's heart is
dry and barren for lack of that gracious dew called love,
without which not one of us can taste the blessedness of
life.
" Nothing is true but love, nor aught of worth;
Love is the incense which doth sweeten earth."
So sings Trench. To Clarissa, just now, his words con-
vey nothing less than the very embodiment of truth.
That Georgie should be unhappy for want of this vital es-
sence cuts her to the heart,-the more so that Georgie per
sistently refuses to come to Gowran.'
"DEAREST CLARISA,-Do not think me cold or ungrate-
ful,"-so she writes,-" but, were I to go to you and feel
again the warmth and tenderness of a home, it might unfit
me for the life of trouble and work that must lie before me.
'Summer is when we love and arebeloved,' and, of course,
such summer is over for me. I.know my task will be no
light or easy one; butt ,ave made up my mind to it, and
indeed am thksb ful e  aany change from this must of
necessity be pleasant- ' igd, besides, I may not be agov-
erness forever. I have yet another plan in my head,-
something papa and I agreed upon, before he left me,-
that may put an end to my difficulties sooner than I think.
I will tell you of it some time, when we meet."
"Poor darling," says Clarissa, " what a wretched little
letter. l"  She sighs, and folds it up, and wonders vaguely
what this other plan of Georgie's can be. Then she writes
to her again, and describes Mrs. Redmond as well as is
possible.
" Accept her offer by return of post," she advises, ear-
nestly. "Even if, after a trial, you do not like her, still this
will be an opening for you; and I am glad in the thought
that I shall always have you near me,-at least until that
mysterious plan of yours meets the light. Mrs. Redmond
is not, of course, everything of the most desirable, but she
is passable, and very kind at heart. She is tall and angu-
lar, and talls all day long-and all night, I am sure, if one



<pb n="88"/>
88            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
would listen-about her ailments and the servants' d
quencies. She is never without a cold in her head, an
lhalf-darned stocking! She calls the children's pinafo
'pinbefores,'-which is quite correct, but very unpleas
and she always calls terrible ' turrible;' but beyond th
small failings she is quite bearable."
And so on. When Miss Broughton receives this le
in her distant home, she is again solemistress of a si
room. Her aunt-the hard taskmaster assigned to her
fate-lies on her bed stricken to the earth by fever.
come to Pullingham now will be impossible. "Will M
Redmond wait for a month, or perhaps two?" She
treats Clarissa to do what she can for her; and Clar
does it; and the worried wife of the vicar, softened
Miss Peyton's earnest explanations, consents to expo
Pinnock and " Little Arthur" to the small Redmonds
til such time as Miss Broughton's aunt shall be conv
cent.
*,0              "The inaudible and noiseless foot of Time " creeps
apace, and Christmas at last reaches Pullingham. Such
Christmas, too !-a glorious iunny Christmas morning,
of light and life, snow-crowned on every side. The gli
AI 'r  ~   ing sunbeams lie upon the frozen hills, kissing them wi
tender rapture, as though eager-to impart -some heat
comfort to their chilly hearts. '?'
"Now trees their leafy hats do bare
: j|t~ . , .       ·To reverence Winter's silver hair."
The woods are all bereft of green; the winds sigh w
ily through them  "no grass the fields, no leaves the 
me;·  ~    ests wear;" a shivering shroud envelops all the land.
^; t ~       But far above, in the clear sky, Sol shines triumph
A:.~ ~     Nor ice, nor snow, nor chilling blast has power to dead
5^!V  ~    him to-day. No "veil of clouds involves his radiant head.
He smiles upon the earth, and ushers in the blessed mo
A,^   ~    with unexpected brilliancy. Innumerable sounds sw
+,*·       through the frosty air; sweet bells ring joyously. All
i~ '          ·world is astir.
Except Clarissa. She lies, still sleeping,-dreaming,
',-   ~   may be, that first glad dream of youth in which all see
,ir '  ~   perfect, changeless, passion-sweet I
Upon her parted lips a faint soft smile is lingering,



<pb n="89"/>
FAI4TH AND UNFAITH.               89
hlo  to depart. Her face is lightly tinged with
as it were a " ripened rose."  Upon one arm her
s pillowed; the other is thrown, with negligent
iabove her head.
alf-past eight, Miss Peyton, and Christmas morning,
says a voice more distinct than musical, and rather
chful. It rushes into Clarissa's happy dream like a
t'hare, and sends all the dear shades she has been
uring to her side back into their uncertain home.
emtiid pokes the fire energetically, and arranges
fting upon the dressing-table with much unnecessary
rissa, slowly bringing herself back from the world in
H ester, however admirable in every respect, bears
tsighs drowsily, and sits up in her bed.
eally that hour ?" she says. "Quite too disgracefully
l A happy Christmas, Hester! "
ank you, miss. The same to you, and very many
- it a cold morning?" asks Clarissa, with a little
. She pushes back the soft waving masses of her
i hair from her forehead, and gazes at Hester en-
ily, as though to implore her to say it is warm as a
! June.
it Hester is adamant.
e"rible cold, miss," she says, with a sort of gusto.
frosty it would petrify you where you stand."
en I won't stand," declares Clarissa, promptly sink-
c once more into her downy couch. " I decline to
Iied, Hester,"-tucking the clothes well round her.
ime again next week."
. ?e master is up this hour, miss," says the maid,
fingly; " and see how beautifully your fire is burn-
i can't see anything but the water over there. Is that
smy bath ?"
es, miss. Will you let me throw a little hot water
tto melt it for you ? Do, miss. I'm sure them mis-
ecold oblations is bitter bad for you."  Perhaps she
ablutions. Nobody knows. And Clarissa, though
ed with a desire to know, dares not ask. Hester
l g a few yards from her, looking the very person-



<pb n="90"/>
90             FAITH AND UNFAIrTH.
ification of all pathos, and is plainly an-angered of 
frozen bath.
"Well4 then, Hester, yes; a little-a very little-h
water, just for once," says Clarissa, unable to resist t
woman's pleading, and her own fear of the "bitter chill
that awaits her on, the other side of the blankets. "M
courage has flown; indeed, I don't see how I can get
at all,"-willfully, snuggling down even more closely iri
the warm sheets.
"Oh, now get up, miss, do," implores her maid. "
is getting real late, and the master has been up as
for you twice already."
"Is papa dressed, then "   .-. ' 
"An hour ago, miss. He was standing on the doo
steps, feeding the sparrows and robins, when I came up
f ';Dear papa l" says Clarissa; tenderly, beneath h
breath; and then she springs out of bed, and gets in,
her clothes by degrees, and presently runs down-stais 
the great old hall, where she finds her father awaiting he
He is standing at the upper end, with his back to t
huge central window, through which
," Gleans the red'sun athwart the misty haze
'Which veils the cold earth from its loving gaze."
A calm, clear light illumesthe hall, born of .the "widl
and glittering cloak of snow" which last night lung upo
the land. At its other end stand all! the servants,--silen
expectant,-to hear what the master shall say to them o
this Christmas morning.       .
That George Peyton should refuse to address them'o 
this particular day is out of all hearing. His fthe
grandfather, and great-grandfather had done it before hi
to the then' servants; therefore (according to the prim
tive notions of the county) he must do the same. Yet 
is undeniable that to the present proprietor this task is
terrible one, and not to be performed at any price, could
escape from it be shown.
Eloquence is not Mr. Peyton's forte. To find himsel
standing before an expectant audience, and to know the
are prepared to hang upon his accents, is not sweet to hin,
--in fact, fills him with terrors vast and deep. Yet here
they are awaiting his speech, in a goodly row, with ali



<pb n="91"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.                91
eyes Axed on his, and their minds prepared to receive
he may say.
breathes a small sigh of relief as he sees Clarissa
chin, and gives her his customary morning kiss in
r warmer fashion than usual, which has only the
of raising mirth in Clarissa's mind. She. smiles in
Alflial fashion, and, slipping her hand through. his
awaits what fate may have in store.
-father, when he has cast upon her one reproachful
turns to the servants, and, with a heightened color
ewhat lame delivery, says as follows:
am very glad to see you all again-" here he
shimself, and grows a degree redder and more em-
d  It occurs to him that, after all, he saw, them
y and the day before, and that it is on the cards
see them again to-morrow. Therefore why express
jt joy at the fact that he can see them at this
zment 
kiances, in a despairing fashion, at Clarissa; but
vPt ly delighted at. his discomfiture, and refuses to
any assistance, unless a small approving nod can
nted such.
himself, therefore, unsupported, he perforce, re-
charge.
is great pleasure to me to know that no changes
en place during the past year. I hope "-(long
" I hope we shall always have the same story to
is fearfully absurd, and he knows it, and blushes
. least," he goes on, " I hope we shall not part
pother. without good cause,-such as a wedding,
he looks at the under-housemaid, who looks at the
dener, who looks at his boots, and betrays a wild
toget into them forthwith.
ris no occasion for me, I think, to make you a
! I--the fact is, I-   couldn't make you a
-<you must excuse me. I wish you all a happy
I I'm sure you all wish me the same. Eh ?
-is is interrupted by a low murmur from the serv-



<pb n="92"/>
92             FAITH AND UNFAITH.
ants, wno plainly feel it their duty to let him know,'
this juncture, that they do hope his Christmas will be
successful one.
"Well-eh ?-      thank you-you know," says 1
Peyton, at his wits' end as to what he shall say ne
"You are all very kind, very kind indeed- very
Mrs. Lane,"-desperately,-" come here and take y
Christmas-box."
The housekeeper advances, in a rounded stately fashi
and, with an elaborate courtesy and a smile full of be
nity, accepts her gift and retires with it to the backgrou
The' others having all performed the same ceremo
and also retired, Mr. Peyton diaws !a deep sigh of re
and turns to Clarissa, who, all through, has stoodd be
him; '       ' 
"I think you might have put in a word or two," he s
"B uut you are a traitor; you enjoyed my discomfitu
Bless me, how glad I am that 'Christmas conies
brice a year I'"
" And how sorry  am " says Clarissa, making a sl
grimace. " It is the one chance I get of listening to
quence that I feel sure is unsurpassable." 
They are still standing in the hall. At this' moment
servant throws open the hall door and Dorian and H
Branscombe, coming in, walk'up to where they are, n
the huge pine fire that is roaring and making merry on
hearth-stone; no grate defiles the beauty of the Go
hall. They are flushed from the rapidity of their w
and are looking rather more like each other than usual.
(;i: ~      " Well, we have had a run for it," says Dorian, "
been to breakfast, I hope ? If you say you have finis
that most desirable meal,!I shall drop dead; s6 break
carefully. I have a wretched appetite, as a rule, but 
now I feel as if I could eat you, Clarissa."
"We haven't thought of breakfast, yet," says Cla
"I am so glad I was lazy this morning I A happy C
mas, Dorian !"
" The same to you !" says Dorian, raising her hand
pressing it to his lips. " By what luck do we find you
the hall ?"
" The servants have just been here to receive their 
ents. Now, why were you not a few minutes earlier,



<pb n="93"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITI.               93
,might have been stricken dumb with joy at papa's
och?" 
.I don't believe it was half a bad speech," says Mr.
lon, stoutly.
IfBadl It was the most enchanting thing I ever list-
tot-in fact, faultless,-if one omits the fact that
looked as if you were in torment all the time, and
med utterly hopeless as to what you were going to say
sfames, is breakfast ready ? " says Mr. Peyton, turning
to hide a smile, and making a strenuous effort to
ress the fact that he has heard one word of her last
yal. "Come into the dining-room, Dorian," he says,
the man has assured him breakfast will be ready in
'ominutes: "it is ever so much more comfortable
nscombe goes with him, and so, presently, Clarissa
I o;ace find themselves alone.
race going up to her, as in duty bound, places his
jropnd her, and presses his lips lightly, gently, to her
You never wished me a happy Christmas," he says, in
ow soft tone he always adopts when speaking to
In. "You gave all your best wishes to Dorian."
You knew what was in my heart," replies she, sweetly,
ethat he has noticed the omission.
wonder if I have brought you what you like," he
llaying in her little palm a large gold locket, oval-
, and with forget-me-nots in sapphires and diamonds,
e side. Touching a spring, it opens, and there,
up at her, is his own face, wearing its kindliest ex-
Bil and seeming-to her-to breathe forth love and
'a little minute she is silent; then she says softly,
wred eyes, and a warm, tender blush,-
id you have this picture taken for me, alone ? "
i evident the face in the locket is even dearer to her
locket itself.
- you alone," says Horace, telling his lie calmly.
mit was finished I had the negative destroyed.
ht only of you. Was not that natural? There was
moment in which I assured myself that it would



<pb n="94"/>
')4            FA ITI  AND UNIFAIT1L.
please you to have my image always near you. Was I
wrong ?-presumlptuous ?"
Into his tone he has managed to infuse a certain amount
of uncertainty and anxious longing that cannot fail to
flatter and do some (lamage to a woman's heart. Clarissa
raises her trustful eyes to his.
Please me "   she repeats, softly, tears growing be-
neath her lids: "it pleases me so much that it seems to
me impossible to express my pleasure. You have given
me the thing that, of all others, I have most wished for."
She blushes, vividly, as she makes this admission. Hor-
ace, lifting her hand, kisses it warmly.
"I am fortunate," he says, in a low tone. " Will you
love the original, Clarissa, as you love this senseless pict-
ure ? After long years, how will it be ? " There is a
touch of concern and doubt-and something more, that
may be regret-in his tone.
"I shall always love you," says the girl, very earnestly,
laying her hand on his arm, and looking at him with eyes
that should have roused all tenderness and devotion in his
breast:
"For at each glance of those sweet eyes a soul
Looked forth as from the azure gates of heaven."
He is spared a reply. Dorian, coming again into the
hall, summons them gayly to breakfast.
'             #               *      *       *      *       *
In the little casemented window of the tiny chamber that
calls her mistress, sits Ruth Annersley, alone.
The bells are ringing out still the blessed Christmas
morn; yet she, with downcast eyes, and chin resting in
her hand, heeds nothing, being wrapped in thought, and
unmindful of aught but the one great idea that fills her to
overflowing. Her face is grave-nay, almost sorrowful-
and full of trouble; yet underlying all is gladness that
will not be suppressed.
At this moment-perhaps for the first time-she wakes
to the consciousness that the air is full of music, borne from
the belfries far and near. She shudders slightly, and
draws her breath in a quick unequal sigh.
"Another long year," she says wearily. "Oh that I
could tell my father !"
She lifts her head impatiently, and once more her eyes
l



<pb n="95"/>
FAIT .AND UN'VF,  TIL.            95
upon the table on which her arm is resting. There
re before her a few opened letters, some Christmas cards,
very beautiful Honiton lace handkerchief, on which her
Iitials, "R. A.," are delicately worked, and-apart from
the rest-a ring, set with pearls and turquoises.
Taking this last up, she examines it slowly, lovingly,
ipping it on and off her slender finger, without a smile,
ad with growing pallor.
A step upon the stairs outside ! Hastily, and in a some-
what guilty fashion, she replaces the ring upon the table,
d drops the lace handkerchief over it.
'"Miss Ruth," says a tall, gawky country-girl, opening
edoor, "the maister he be waitin' breakfast for you.
o ee come down now."    Then, catching sight of the
dkerchief, " La ! now," she says, " how fine that be !
lbeauty, surely, and real lace, too! La ! Miss Ruth, and
sent you that, now ? May I see it ? "
She stretches out her hand, as though about to raise the
ity fabric from its resting-place; but Ruth is before
tDo not touch it," she says, almost roughly for her.
n,seeing the effect her words have caused, and how
egirl shrinks back from her, she goes on, hurriedly and
Idly, "You have been in the dairy, Margery, and per-
your hands are not clean. Run away and wash them,
come to attend table. Afterwards you shall come up
and see my handkerchief and all my pretty cards."
She smiles, lays her hand on Margery's shoulder, and
tly, but with determination, draws her towards the door.
Once outside, she turns, and, locking the door, carefully
the key in her pocket.
Slowly, reluctantly, she descends the stairs,-slowly, and
a visible effort, presses her lips in gentle greeting to
father's care-worn cheek. '1 he bells still ring on joy-
my, errily; the sun shines; the world is white with
,more pure than even our purest thoughts; but no
of rest or comfort comes to Rutih. Oh, dull and
.heart that holds a guilty secret. Oh, sad (even
yet innocent) is the mind that hides a hurtful
utl Not for you do Christmas bells ring out their
gteeting! Not for such as you does sweet peace
'kumphant.



<pb n="96"/>
9;6            FAITH A4D UNFAITH.
CHAPTER XIII.
"Is she not passing fair? "-Two Gentlemen of Verona.
\THE day at length dawns when Miss Broughton chooses
to put in an appearance at Pullingham. It is Thursday
evening on which she arrives, and as she has elected to go
to the vicarage direct, instead of to Gowran, as Clarissa
desired, nothing is left to the latter but to go down on Fri-
day to the Redmonds' to welcome her.
She (Clarissa) had taken it rather badly that pretty Geor-
gie will not come to her for a week or so before entering
on her duties; yet in her secret soul she cannot help admir-
ing the girl's pluck, and her determination to let nothing
interfere with the business that must for the future repre-
sent her life. To stay at Gowran,-to fall, as it were, into
the arms of luxury,-to be treated, as she knew she would
be, by Clarissa, as an equal, even in worldly matters, would
be only to unfit her for the routine that of necessity must
follow. So she abstains, and flings far from her all thought
of a happiness that would indeed be real, as Clarissa had
been dear to her two years ago; and to be dear to Georgie
once would mean to be dear to her forever.
The vicar himself opens the door for Clarissa, and tells
her Miss Broughton has arrived, and will no doubt be over-
joyed to see her.
"What a fairy you have given us !" he says, laughing.
"Such a bewildering child; all golden hair, and sweet dark
eyes, and modrning raiments. We are perplexed-indeed,
I may say, dazed-at her appearance; because we have
one and all fallen in love with her,-hopelessly, irretriev-
ably,-and hardly know how to conduct ourselves towards
her with the decorum that I have been taught to believe
should be shown to the instructress of one's children.
Now, the last young woman was so different, and-"
" Young," says Miss Peyton.
"Well, old, if you like it. She certainly, poor soul. did
remind one of the 'sere and yellow.' But this childis all
fire and life; and really," says the vicar, witlh  sigh thiat
may be relief, " I think we all like it better; 59'8W.ite a
break-in upon our monotony."     s        ' 
"I am so glad you all like her;" says Clar-siU



<pb n="97"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.                9     -
teng with satisfaction. "She was such a dear little
when last I saw her; so gentle, too,-like a small
3Oh, was she?" says the vicar, anxiously. "She is
ted a little, I think. To me she is rather terrify\-il.
for instance, this morning at breakfast, she asked mce,
rethe children, 'if I didn't find writing sermons a
And when I said-as I was in duty bound to say,
dear Clarissa-that I did not, she laughed out quite
*  iy, and said she ' didn't believe me'! Need I say the
ldren were in raptures ? but I could have borne that,
when Mrs. Redmond forsook me and actually laughed
I felt the end of all things was come. Clarissa,"
ely), "I do hope I don't see you laughing, too."
'"Oh, no !-not-not much," says Miss Peyton, who is
Imly enjoying the situation to its utmost. "It is very
on you, of course." "
:Well, it is," says the vicar, with his broad and rather
ome smile, that works such miracles in the parish
*among the mining people, who look upon him as their
fspecial property. " It is difficult for a man to hope to
em his own household when his nearest and dearest
him into open ridicule. Your little friend is a witch.
t shall we do with her? "
"Submit to her," says Clarissa. "Where is she? I
t to see her."
,"Cissy will find her for you. I dare say they are to-
er, unless your ' Madam Quicksilver,' as I call her, has
n to herself wings and flown away."
<'He turns, as though to go with her.
"No, no," says Clarissa; " I shall easily find her by my-
ib  Go, and do what you meant to do before I stopped
"Moving away from him, she enters the hall, and seeing
rant, is conducted by her to a small room literally
mwith work of all kinds. Books, too, lie here in pro-
and many pens, and numerous bottles of ink, and a
l sofa that never saw better days than it sees now,
all the children prance over it, and love it, and make
of it, as being their very own.
this ancient friend a tiny fairy-like girl is sitting, smil.
.7



<pb n="98"/>
98             FAITH AND UNFAITH.
ing sweetly at Cissy Redmond, who is chattering to her
gayly and is plainly enchanted at having some one of her
own age to converse with.
The fairy is very lovely, with red-gold hair, and large
luminous blue eyes, soft and dark, that can express all
emotions, from deepest love to bitterest scorn. Her nose is
pure Greek; her lips are tender and mobile; her skin is
neither white nor brown, but clear and warm, and some-
what destitute of color. Her small head is covered with
masses of wavy, luxuriant, disobedient hair, that shines in
the light like threads of living gold.
She is barely five feet in height, but is exquisitely
moulded. Her hands and feet are a study, her pretty
rounded waist a happy dream. She starts from the sofa to
a standing position as Clarissa enters, and, with a low, in-
tense little cry, that seems to come direct from her heart,
runs to her and lays her arms gently round her neck.
Once again Clarissa finds herself in Brussels, with her
chosen friend beside her. She clasps Georgie in a warm
embrace; and then Cissy Redmond, who is a thoroughly
good sort, goes out of the room, leaving the new governess'
alone with her old companion.
"At last I see you," says Miss Broughton, moving back
a little, and leaning her hands on Clarissa's shoulders that
she may the more easily gaze at her. "I thoughtyou would
never come. All the morning I have been waiting, and
watching, and longing for you ! "
Her voice is peculiar,-half childish, half petulant, and
wholly sweet. She is not crying, but great tears are stand-
ing in her eyes as though eager to fall, and her lips are trem-
bling.
" I didn't like to come earlier," says Clarissa, kissing her
again. " It is only twelve now, ydu know; but I was long-
ing every bit as much to see you as you could be to see me.
Oh, Georgie, how glad I am to have you near me 1 and
you have not changed a little scrap."
She says this in a relieved tone.
" Neither have you," says Georgie: "you are just the
same. There is a great comfort in that thought. If I had
found you changed,-different in any way,-what should I
have done ? I felt, when I saw you standing tall and slight
in the doorway, as if time had rolled back, and we were



<pb n="99"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.                99
>qgain at Madame Brochet's. Oh, how happy I_
I  And now-now--"
fl tears in her pathetic eyes tremble to their fall,
eher face with her hands.
the everything," says Clarissa, tenderly.
is there to tell ?-except that I am alone in the
dl 'very desolate. It is more than a year ago now
] ince    papa left me. It seems like along cen
B[  first I was apathetic; it was despair I felt, I sup-
deed, I was hardly conscious of the life I was lead-
-with my aunt. Afterwards the reaction set in;
the sudden desire for change, the intense long-
ork of any kind; and then-"
you thought of me! " says Clarissa, pressing her
is true. Then I thought of you, and how ready
paihy had ever been. When-when he died, he
a hundred pounds. It was all he had to leave."
sthis hastily, passionately, as though it must be
ough, no matter how severe the pain that accom-
lthe telling of it. Clarissa, understanding, draws
sr to her. This gentle movement is enough. A
o full, breaks beneath affection's touch. Georgie
I tears.
a# all on earth he had to give," she sobs, bitterly;
think he must have starved himself to leave me even
Oh, shall I ever forget "
time," whispers Clarissa, gently. "Be patient:
/,Then, with a sigh, "How sad for some this sweet
/I   be "I "
'[ve my aunt forty pounds," goes on the fair-haired
glad to find somebody in whom she can safely con-
to whom her troubles may be made known. " I
pt her because I had lived with her some time, and
pot kind to me, and so I felt I should pay her
g. And then I put a little white cross on his
ere I left him, lest he should think himself quite
It was all I could do for him," concludes she,
i er heavy sob that shakes her slight frame.
t seems broken ! Clarissa, who by this time is
in tears, places her arms round her, and presses
Xt her cheek.



<pb n="100"/>
too            FAITH AND (INFAITH.
"Try, fry to be comforted," entreats she. "The world,
they tell me, is full of sorrow. Others have suffered, too.
And nurse used to tell me, long ago, that those who are
unhappy in the beginning of their lives are lucky ever
after. Georgie, it may be so with you."
'It may," says Georgie, with a very faint smile; yet,
somehow, she feels comforted.
" Do you think you will be content here ? " asks Clarissa,
presently, when some minutes have passed.
" I think so. I am sure of it. It is such a pretty place,
and so unlike the horrid little smoky town from which I
have come, and to which" (with a heavy sigh), "let us
hope, I shall never return."
'Never do," says Clarissa giving her rich encourage-
ment. "It is ever so. much nicer here." As she has never
seen the smoky town in question, this is a somewhat gra-
tuitous remark. " And the children are quite sweet, and
very pretty; and the work won't be very much; and-and
I am only just an easy walking-distance from you."
At this termination they both laugh.
Georgie seems to have forgotten her tears of a moment
since, and her passionate burst of grief. Her lovely face
is smiling, radiant; her lips are parted; her great blue
eyes are shining. She is a warm impulsive little creature,
as prone to tears as to laughter, and with a heart capable
of knowing a love almost too deep for happiness, and as
surely Capable of feeling a hatred strong and lasting.
The traces of her late emotion are still wet upon her
cheeks. Perhaps she knows it not, but, " like some dew.
spangled flower, she shows more lovely in her tears."  She
and Clarissa are a wonderful contrast. Clarissa is slight
and tall and calm; she, all life and brightness, eager, ex-
cited, and unmindful of the end.
Cissy Redmond, at this juncture, summons up sufficient
courage to open the door and come in again. She ignores
the fact of Georgie's red eyes, and turns to Clarissa. She
has Miss Peyton's small dog in her arms,-the terrier,
with the long and melancholy face, that goes by Xftl name
of Bill.
" Your dog," she says to Clarissa, "and such a pet.
He has eaten several legs off the tables, and all my fingers.
His appetite is a credit to him. How do you provide for



<pb n="101"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.              ' 1ot
him at Gowran ? Do you have an ox roasted whole occa-
sionally, for his special benefit ?"
"Oh, he is a worry," says Clarissa, penitently. "Billy,
come here, you little reprobate, and don't try to look as if
you never did anything bad in your life. Cissy, I wish
you and Georgie and the children would all come up to
Gowran to-morrow."
"We begin lessons to-morrow," says the new governess,
gravely, who looks always so utterly and absurdly unlike a
governess, or anything but a baby or a water-pixie, with
her yellow hair and her gentian eyes. " It will be impossi-
ble for me to go."
." ut lessons will be over at two o'clock," says Cissy,
who likes going to Gowran, and regards Clarissa as "a
thing of beauty."  "Why not walk up afterwards ?"
,. ' I shall expect you," says Clarissa, with decision; and
Ihen the two girls tell her they will go with her as far as
. {he vicarage gate, as she must now go home.
* There she bids them good-by, and, passing through the
Fite, goes up the road. Compelled to look back once
ain, by some power we all know at times, she sees Geor-
gie's small pale face pressed against the iron bars, gazing
,iter her, with eyes full of lonely longing.
" Good-by, Clarissa," she says, a little sad imploring ca-
dence desolating her voice.
" Until to-morrow ' replies Clarissa, with an attempt at
gayety, though in reality the child's mournful face is op-
pressing her. Then she touches the ponies lightly, and
disappears up the road and round the corner, with Bill, as
.eternaturally grave as usual, sitting bolt upright beside
I The next morning is soft and warm, and, indeed, almost
altry for the time of year. Thin misty clouds, white and
:'/iidowy, enwrap the fields and barren ghost-like trees and
·weep across the distant hills. There is a sound as of com-
ran,-a rushing and a rustling in the naked woods. " A
wild music is abroad," as though a storm is impending,
ihall rise at night and shake the land the more
ybecause of its enforced silence all this day.
. ? 



<pb n="102"/>
102            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
"But now, at noon,
Upon the southern side of the slant hill,
And where the woods fence oft the northern blast
The season smiles, resigning all its rage,
And has the warmth of May. The vault is blue,
Without a cloud: and white without a speck,
The dazzling splendor of the scene below."
The frost has gone, for the time being; no snow fell las
night; scarcely does the wind blow. If, indeed, "there is
in souls a sympathy with sounds, " I fear Georgie and Cissy
and the children must be counted utterly soulless, as they
fail to hear the sobbing of the coming storm, but with gay
voices and gayer laughter come merrily over the road to
Gowran. Upon the warm sullen air the children's tones
ring like sweet silver bells.
As they enter the gates of Gowran, the youngest child,
Amy, runs to the side of the new governess, and slips her
hand through her arm.
" I am going to tell you about all the pretty things as we
go along," she says, patronizingly yet half shyly, rubbing
her cheek against Miss Broughton's shoulder. She is a tall,
slender child, and to do this has to stoop a little. " You
fairy," she goes on, admiringly, encouraged perhaps by
the fact that she is nearly as tall as her instructress, "you
are just like Hans Andersen's tales.  I don't know why."
"Amy I Miss Broughton won't like you to speak to her
like that," says Cissy, coloring.
But Georgie laughs.
"I don't mind a bit," she says, giving the child's hand
a reassuring pressure. " I am'accustomed to being called
that, and, indeed, I rather like it now. I suppose I am
very small. But " (turning anxiously to Cissy, and speak-
ing quite as shyly as the child Amy had spoken a mo-
ment since) "there is a name to which I am not accus-
tomed, and I hate it. It is 'Miss Broughton.'  Won't
you call me ' Georgie ?'"
"Oh, are you sure you won't mind ?" says the lively
Cissy, with a deep and undisguised sigh of relief. "Well,
that is a comfort I it is all I can do to manage your name.
You don't look a bit like a 'Miss Anything,'you know,
and ' Georgie' suits you down to the ground."
" Look, look I There is the tree where the fairies dance
at night," cries Amy, eagerly, her little, thin, spiritual face



<pb n="103"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               103
with earnestness, pointing to a magnificent old oak-
tstands apart from all the others, and looks as
it has for centuries defied time and storm and
itself indeed " sole king of forests all."
ry night the fairies have a ball there," says Amy,
ct good faith. " In spring there is a regular wreath
bes all round it, and they show where the 'good
read."
1w I should like to see them! "says Georgie, gravely.
,in her secret soul, she is impressed by the child's
* , and would prefer to believe in the fairies rather
rwise.
1e; you ought to know all about them," says Amy,
ttahsient but meaning smile: " you belong to them,
I      ou  Well "(dreamily), " perhaps some night we
tout hand in hand and meet them here, and dance
al1 the way to fairy-land."
s Broughton,-there-through the trees I Do you
letbing gleaming white ?" asks Ethel, the eldest pu-
Yes ? Well, there, in that spot, is a marble statue
, and underneath her is a spring. It went dry
l l.miany years ago, but when Clarissa's great grand-
died the waters burst out again, and every one said
statue was crying for him, he was so good and noble
rowell beloved."
thitnk you might have let me tell that story," says
indignantly. " You knew I wanted to tell her that
dida't," with equal indignation; "and, besides, you
about the fairies' ball-room. I said nothing about
at all events," says Georgie, " they were two of
est stories I ever heard in my life. I don't know
has the prettier."
look at that tree," breaks in Amy, hurriedly,
it is honestly her turn now, and fearing lest Ethel
in before her. " King Charles the Second spent
le of one night in that identical tree."
t4e whole of it," puts in Ethel, unwisely.
w, I suppose this is my story, at all events," de-
Amy, angrily, "and I shall just tell it as I like."
King Charles!" says Georgie, with a laugh,



<pb n="104"/>
104          FAITH AND UNFAITH.
" If we are to believe all the stories we hear, half his life-
time must have been spent 'up a tree.'"
A stone balcony runs before the front of the house.
On it stands Clarissa, as they approach, but, seeing them,
she runs down the steps and advances eagerly to meet
them.
"Come in," she says. "How late you arel I thought
you had proved faithless and were not coming at all."
" Ah I what a lovely hall I" says Georgie, as they enter,
stopping in a childishly delighted fashion to gaze round
her.
"It's nothing to the drawing-room: that is the most
beautiful room in the world," says the irrepressible Amy,
who is in her glory, and who, having secured the unwill-
ing but thoroughly polite Bill, is holding him in her arms
and devouring him with unwelcome kisses.
"You shall see the whole house, presently," says
Clarissa to Georgie, "including the room I hold in re-
serve for you when these children have driven you to des-
perhtion.'
"That will be never," declares Amy, giving a final kiss
to the exhausted Billy. " We like her far too much, and
always wil, I know, because nothing on earth could make
me afraid of her "
At this they all laugh. Georgie, I think, blushes a lit-
tle; but even the thought that she is not exactly all she
ought to be as an orthodox governess cannot control her
sense of the ludicrous.
"Cissy, when is your father's concert to come off?"
asks Clarissa, presently.
"At once, I think. The old organ is unendurable. I
do hope it will be a success, as he has set his heart on
getting a new one. But it is so hard to make people at-
tend. They will pay for their tickets, but they won't
come. And, after all, what the-the others like, is to
see the county."
"Get Dorian Branscombe to help you. Nobody ever
refuses him anything."
"Who is Dorian Branscombe ? " asks Georgie, indiffer-
entty, niore from want of something to say than an actiua 
desire 't know.                                h
- "Dorian ?" repeats Clarissa, as though surprised i i
1                                                 .~~~~~~~~~~~~~,,



<pb n="105"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.                105
correcting herself with a start, " I thought every one
w Dorian. But I forgot, you are a stranger. He is a
t friend of mine; he lives near this, and you must
him."
Ervery one likes him," says Cissy, cordially.
'"Lucky he," says Georgie. "Is he, y9ur lover, Cla-
' Oh, no;"-with a soft blush, born of the thought that
ie is not the rose he is very near to it. " He is only
friend, and a nephew of Lord Sartoris."
'"So great as that? "-with a faint grimace. "You
me. I suppose he will hardly deign to look at
*As she speaks see looks at herself in an opposite mir-
and smiles a small coquettish smile that is full of in-
cet childish satisfaction, as she marks the fair vision
is given back to her by the friendly glass.
I hone he won't look at you too much, for his own
e of mind," says Cissy, at which Clarissa laughs
n; and then, the children getting impatient, they all
utto'see the pigeons and the gardens, and stay lin-
in the open air until afternoon tea is announced.
CHAPTER XIV.
" Where music dwells
: ringenng, and wandering on, as loath to die,
-: Like thoughts whose very sweetness yieldeth proof
-That they were born for immortality."-WORDSWORTH.
parish church of Pullingham is as naught in the
Bthe parishioners, in that it is devoid of an organ.
-eet sounds can be produced from the awful and
ig instrument that for years has served to electrify
rs of those unfortunate enough to possess sittings
urch. It has at last failed ! 
nemorable Sunday it groaned aloud,-then squeaked
p;cr-r-r-k went something in its inside; there
al shriek, more weird than the former, and then
still! How thankful should they have been for
L I believe they were truly and devoutly so, but love



<pb n="106"/>
1o6           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
for the " heavenly maid " still reigned in all their hearts,
,g  ~   and with joy they hearkened to their vicar when he sug-
gested the idea of a concert to be given for the purpose of
raising funds wherewith to purchase a new organ, or, at
least, to help to purchase it. The very thought was enough
to raise high Jubilee within their musical hearts.
Now, the one good thing still belonging to Mrs. Red-
tmond is the remains of what must once have been a very
beautiful voice. With this she possesses the power of im-
parting to others her own knowledge of music,-a rather
rare gift. With her own children, of course, she can do
nothing; they are veritable dead-letters in her hands,-
she being one of those women who spend their lives ad-
monishing and thrusting advice upon the world, yet find
F-  ~   themselves unequal to the government of their own house-
hold. But with the village choir all is different; here she
reigns supreme, and is made much of, for Pullingham is
decidedly musical, and all its young men and all its young
women either sing, or think they sing, or long after singing.
Tenors, sopranos, and basses are to be met with round
every corner; the very air is thick with them. The Pull-
inghamites will sing, whether they can or not, with a go
and a gusto that speaks well for their lungs, if a trifle try-
ing to the listeners.
Vocal music being the thing held highest in favor in the
Methodist chapel, where Mr. Leatham, the " Methody "par-
son, holds unorthodox services, many were the seceders
from the parish church to join the choir in the whitewashed
chapel and shout the hymns of Moody and Sankey, just at
the commencement of this story.
Such secessions went nigh to breaking Mr. Redmond's
heart. The organ had failed him; it had wheezed, indeed,
valiantly to the last, as though determined to die game;
but a day had come, as I said, when it breathed its last
sigh and the ancient bellows refused to produce another
note.
.What was to be done ? The villagers phould and would
have music at any cost, and they never could be brought
to see the enormity of worshipping in the whitewashed
edifice that was, and is, as the temple of Belial in the eyes
of their vicar.
r 1ft      It would take some time to procure funds for another



<pb n="107"/>
FAITH AND UNFAIYH.               107
more satisfactory organ. In the mean time, the whilom
as falling to pieces. The late organist had accepted
and more lucrative post: there was literally no
to keep the members together. What was to be
desperation, the vicar asked himself this, whilst look-
*inly round for some one to help him drag back his
from the vicious influence of the " American song-
B  as he most irreverently termed Messrs. M. and S.
itwas then, when he was at his wits' end, that Mrs.
ond most unexpectedly came to the rescue. It was
first and the last time in her life she ever rose to the
Ion; but this one solitary time she did it perfectly,
coming boldly to the front, carried all before her.
e would undertake a singing-class ; she would arrange,
,teach, and keep together a choir that should reduce
.iginificance the poor pretensions of a man like Lea-
i The vicar, dazzled by all this unlooked-for energy,
H  his consent to her scheme, and never afterwards re-
d it; for in three short months she had regulated and
ed a singing-class that unmistakably outshone its
distical rivals.
d then came the question of the new organ.
We have some money, but not enough money," said
vicar, one evening, to the partner of his joy s "and
ing should be done to bring the want of afrfgan
re the public."
l should think it must be sufficiently brought before
every Sunday," said Mrs. Redmond, triumphantly lay-
her tenth mended sock in the basket near her.
The parish is all very well, my dear, but the county
t to hear of it, and ought to help. I insist upon the
putting its hands in its pockets?'
sthink you are quite right to insist," said Mrs. Red-
placidly; " but how are you going to do it ? "
ift Us give a concert," said the vicar, at last bringing
'light of day his great project, that fairly took his
-breath away. " Yes, a concert, to which the whole
shall come and hear my-nay, your-choir surpass
.Redmond was struck dumb by this bold proposi-
,.but, finally giving in, she consented to teach the



<pb n="108"/>
icS           LA1Z7! AND) LA ,\.1 /
choir, assiduously twice a week, all the quarteltes and trios
and solos she knew; while still declaring, in a dismal
fa.hion, that she knew tile whole thing would be a dismal
failure, and that the great cause would lose by it more
than it would gain.
Many days, many hours, has Mr. Redmond spent ar-
ranging and disarranging all the details of the proposed
concert. 
The idea is in itself a "happy thought,"-far happier
than any of Burnand's (so he tells himself); but a concert, 
however unpretentious, is a prodigious affair, and not to
be conducted by half a dozen raw recruits.
Besides, the county admires the county, and would pre-
fer seeing itself represented on the boards to listening to 
the warblings, be they never so sweet, of an outsider. It
is so far more delicious to laugh behind one's fan at the
people in one's own set than at those outside the pale of
recognition. And, of course, the county must be hu-
mored.
The vicar grows nervous as he masters this fact, and
strives diligently to discover some among the upper ten
who will come forward and help to sweeten and gild the
" great unwashed."
The duchess, unfortunately, is from home; but Lady
Mary and Lady Patricia are at the Castle, and Lady Mary
-when she can be heard, which, to do her justice, is very
seldom, even in a very small room-can sing nice little
songs very nicely. Indeed, she is fond of describing her
own voice as " a sweet little voice," and certainly all truth
is embodied in the word " little."
i~,       Then there is young Hicks, the surgeon's son, who
boasts a good baritone, and is addicted to Molloy and
Adams and all of their class, and who positively revels in
Nancy Lees, and such gentle beings as those to whom the
" Tar's Farewell " may be gently breathed.
Then there is the long gawky man staying with the Bel-
lews, who can shout from afar, and make music of his own
that will probably, nay, surely, go a long way towards
bringing down the house, as far as the farmer class is con-
cerned; and with him will come Miss Bellew, who can
produce a very respectable second in any duet, and who



<pb n="109"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               tog
go anywhere with the long gawky young man, if
peaks truly.
McConkie, from the neighboring parish, will lend
a hand, her husband being a brother clergyman;
a  is, besides, Mr. Henly, who plays the violin, and
son, who can recite both comic and melancholy
t witb such success as to bring tears or laughter, as
se, may be, into the eyes of any one with half a
nobody will confess to anything less than a whole
erybody in Pullingham laughs or cries immoder-
whenever Mr. Johnson gives way to recitations.
Iast, but not least, there is always Sarah Martin,
r of the village choir, and the principal feature
whose strong if slightly ear-piercing soprano must
IwFr:worthy of a new organ.
the vicar's intense chagrin, Dorian Branscombe is
t,-has, indeed, been up in town since the day be-
rgie Broughton's arrival, now a fortnight old.
would have been such a comfort ! Not that he
or plays, or fiddles, or, indeed, does anything in
ar, beyond cajoling the entire neighborhood; but
si it happens, is, in this case, everything. To cajole,
treat, to compel the people to come in and fill the
benches, is all the vicar would require at his
Dorian could do all this. No one ever refuses him
Both old women and young women acknowl-
his power, and give in to him, and make much
* and hardly feel the worse because of their subser-
,-he having a little way of his own that makes
believe, when they have been most ignominiously
into saying " yes " to one of his wildest proposi-
he has been conferring a favor upon them, more or
for which he is just too generous to demand thanks.
this. invaluable ally is absent. The vicar, in the pri-
of his own sanctum,-where no one Can witness the
ly 'eed,-stamps his feet with vexation as he
sno this, and tells himself he is unlucky to the last
and acknowledges a worth in Dorian Branscombe
Leained before I
rissa is perfectly delighted with the whole idea, and



<pb n="110"/>
*         ( rIo0        FAITH AND UN4FAZTH.
somewhat consoles him by her ready offers of assistance,
and her determination to step into the absent Dorian's
shoes and make love to the county in his stead. 
She persists in calling it the "first concert of the sea-
son," which rather alarms the vicar, who is depressed by
his wife's prognostications of failure, and sees nothing but
ruin ahead. She declares her intention of publishing it
in all the London papers, and offers the whole of the win-
ter conservatories to decorate the school-house (where it
is to be held), so that those accustomed to the sight of its
white and somewhat barren walls will fail to recognize it
in its new-born beauty.
" Then, shall we name the 4th as the day ?" says the
vicar, with some trepidation. It is now the end of January,
and he is alluding to the first week in the ensuing month.
"I wish you could sing, Clarissa I I dare say you would
help me."
"Indeed I would. But Nature has proved unkind to
me. And, after all, you want no one else. The choir, in
itself, is very efficient; and if you must call for 'out-door
relief,' why, you have Lady Mary, and the others. That
fearful young man at Bellew is a fortune in himself; and
Mr. Johnson makes everybody cry-and it is so nice to
cry."
" Yes,-yes,-I dare say," says the poor vicar, who is
somewhat distrait, and, to say the truth, a little miserable
about the whole undertaking. "Now, there is Sarah
Martin. Do you think she will pull through? On her I
build all my hopes; but some inward doubt about her
e          oppresses me. Willie Bealman has a capital tenor; but
he and Sarah don't speak,-she refused him, I think,-
and so they won't sing their duet together. Then there
is Lizzie Bealman. she might stand to me; but she loses
her voice when neivo's. and has a most uncomfortable
trick of giggling \v lin ille le least excited."
"Put her in thle background," says Clarissa. "She is
of no use, except in a cicorils."
" Her people v.oltd't saud it. They look upon her as
a rising prima dolna. I assure you, my dear Clarissa,"
says the vicar, Iur tively wiping his brow, "only for the
sin of it, there are molnelts when I could wish myself be-



<pb n="111"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.                xIt
sod. The incessant worry is more than I can
now, don't say that," says Miss Peyton, patting
lovingly. " It will be a great success, this con-
CHAPTER XV.
S    !.     "- As sweet and musical
Asbright Apollo's lute, strung with his hair;
. And when Love speaks, the voice of all the gods
i' Makes heaven drowsy with the harmony."
Love's Labor's Last
night, and the 4th of February. Already is Pull-
lturning out, dressed in its very Sunday best, and
g its way towards the school-house, where the
is to be held.
the last week it has been deep in the mysteries of
duets, and trios. Indeed, there is hardly a family
whole village that does not know by heart every
thing that is going to be sung, each family possess-
son or a daughter engaged in the common work,
longing to the choir; yet nevertheless it now goes
ody to the school-house, as possessed with curiosity
uh music is an art unknown to them, and the
i f small trebles a thing unheard of.
ng can exceed the excitement and jealousy that
:everywhere,-principally in the hearts of Mr. Lea-
. followers, who hope wildly, but secretly, that fail-
ay be the only crop their rivals may reap.
a heavenly night, for which the Vicar is devoutly
il. The moon is riding high in the dark-blue
* the stars are all alight; the air, swift and keen,
_along the high-roads, sweeping all before it. There
gnof rain; the sky above, " star-inwrought," shows
of many fair to-morrows. "There is no excuse
ir non-attendance," murmurs the vicar to himself,
stands inside the school-house door, wording his
; as he might, were he thinking of the collecting



<pb n="112"/>
7T2           FAITII AND UNFAITH.
together of his flock on Easter Sunday or to the Hol
Communion.
"Vast night comes noiselessly up the eastern slope,
And so the eternal chase goes round the world.'
But for the soughing wind, the world is still. One by
one, or two by two, or sometimes as a whole family, t
villagers drop in, arranging themselves modestly in 
' back rows, and exchanging greetings with each other in.a
subdued and whispered fashion.
A little while after the door is opened, the lower h
of the hall is crowded to excess. The vicar is weU belov
by his parishioners; but above and beyond all is the desir
to see Maria, and Susan, and Ezekiel upon the boar
" a singing for the quality !" 
The room itself is what reporters would term " a bla
of light."  Much ingenuity has been exercised in the 
oration of it; and certainly the designs in laurels, 
the designs in moss, and the one grand design in pa
roses, at the far end of the room, are all that heart 
desire.
To Clarissa, I think, this last outburst on the part'
the village is a heart-break; but, if so, she represses 
grief valiantly, and even, with her own forgiving finge
condescends to brighten the monstrosity with some
house flowers. But, when all is told, it remains an
sore,-a regrettable. bloe, not to be eradicated under p
of bringing down the rage of the entire village uponl
devoted head of him or her who should interfere. 
- :'       Mrs. Redmond, seated on the small platform, with
piano before her, and the choir arranged, with carefuL
gard to its different sizes, on each side of her, waits
tiently the coming of the county. She is looking thin
more miserable, than usual, and has a general air a
her of being chilled to the bone. Her fingers, lying
in her lap, clutch and unclutch each other aimlessly'
though vainly searching for the accustomed sock. ' 
Miss Broughton, who is taking no part in the perf
ance,-having suppressed the fact of her having a"
beautiful voice, ever since her arrival at Pullingham,,
sitting oh a side-seat, longing eagerly for Clarissa's ar
The children have wandered a little away from hei''



<pb n="113"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITZ.               113
.as lost in admiration, at the huge rose-construc-
eIwall before them.
thef Greys of Greymount come in, with a little
O digust at finding themselves almost the first;
i esely by Lady Mary and Lady Patricia Hort,
not shudder at all, but go straight up the small
tw~een the seats, with their patrician noses high
Iand smile and nod cheerfully, and not at all
ndingly, at Mrs. Redmond, who, poor soul, is
/eved at sight of them.
tay goes on to the platform; Lady Patricia sinks
t seat specially provided for her, whilst Lord
Weir brother,-who has been inveigled into com-
. against his will,-having conversed with Lady
or a few minutes, and told her several lies about
ntements for the evening,-not intentionally, but
ignorance, being under the false impression that
in a village is the same as a concert in town,-
'to one side of the building, and plants himself
,with his back against a wall, from which position
l in a gloomy fashion at everything in general,
/  roughton in particular.
I.pmes everybody, and makes a great fuss about
--Clarissa Peyton and her father excepted, who
7ght to where Georgie is sitting, and stay with her
evening.
H   :ranscombe, who has come down expressly for
ert, at great trouble to himself, and simply to
the vicar, saunters leisurely up the room towards
dle of the evening, and looks round him dubiously,
huncertain where to put in his time.
Clarissa, he goes up to her, and, with a faint
.elief, leans over the back of her chair and says,
lening," in a languid tone.
you, Dorian ? "says Clarissa, very pleased. "Now,
of -you to come."
always good," says Dorian. " I'm a model boy.
so strange that people won't recognize the fact.
t    of give me to understand I'm quite the other
r.htever that may be. Very full house, don't you
/* d awfully swagger? What's Lady Patricia got
; 3ias slightly terrifying, don't you think?"



<pb n="114"/>
114           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
" She isn't very well got up, certainly," says Clarissa,
reluctantly.
"She's anyhow," says Mr. Branscombe, freely; and then
his eyes fall upon Georgie, who is gazing, in her rapt,
childish fashion, at the singer of the moment; and then
he doesn't speak again for a little while.
lI^Hi" Is Horace quite well ?" asks Clarissa, presently.
"Quite well. He always is, you know. Who-who
is the girl next your father ?"
"That is my friend, Georgie Broughton. I think I told
you about her. She is governess at the vicarage, now.
Is she not lovely,-quite sweet ?" asks Clarissa, eagerly.
But Mr. Branscombe does not answer her. He is still
staring at the unconscious Georgie, and seems almost deaf
to Clarissa's praise of her. At this Miss Peyton is some-
what disgusted, and declines any further attempt at lauda-
tion.
"A governess ! " he says, at length, raising his brows,
but without removing his eyes from the fair and perfect
face that, even now, he tells himself, is without its equal.
" Yes. She is none the less sweet for that," says Clarissa,
rather coldly. She tells herself it is unlike Dorian to look
down upon any one because he or-she may be in a worse
position than his own.
"They are going to sing again," she says, in a tone she
seldom uses to him: " we must not talk, you know." She
had some faint idea of introducing him to Georgie, but
she abandons it, and gives him to understand that she has
at present nothing more to say to him.
Whether he quite comprehends all she intends to con-
vey, I know not; but, raising himself slowly from his
lounging position on the back of her chair, he takes a last
look at Georgie's profile, and moves into the background.
" Good-evening, Branscombe," says Lord Alfred, pres-
ently; and Dorian, finding himself beside him, returns
the greeting, and props himself up in his turn against the
friendly wall, that shows its appreciation of them by giv-
ing them finely whitewashed coats.
fThe concert is getting on swimmingly. As yet no flaw
has occurred to mark the brilliancy of its success. The
opening chorus has been applauded to the echo, especially
by Lord Alfred, who feels it his duty to do something, and
/1



<pb n="115"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.              115
who keeps on applauding, in the most open-hearted man-
ner each thing and everything, until he discovers he has
split his right glove all up the palm, when he caves in, and,
' having said something impossible, puts his hands behind
, his back and refuses to applaud again.
Lady Mary has come forward, and entreated her audi-
ence to "Love not," in the faintest and most plaintive of
voices. The county is delighted with her, and smiles un-
restrainedly behind its fans. "Dear Lady Mary is so
fanny, don't you know," says Miss Grey of Greymount, in
an indescribable tone.
. Then comes a solo on the violin, that charms all the
back benches, and reduces the farmers' wives and daugh-
ters to tears, as it tells them how that the poor player's
" lodging is on the cold ground."
Lord Alfred, who has not yet recovered his temper, says
this is "disgusting," and "wonders what the-so-and-so-
brought him here at all."
i'- I suppose the night brougham," says Dorian, equably,
who is now engaged in a minute examination of Miss
Broughton's head, round which her soft yellow hair is
twisted in a loose artistic coil.
* He is in quite a happy mood, if somewhat silent, and
says the solo isn't half bad; and now Mr. Hastings, the
, curate, reads something from the "Ingoldsby Legends,"
that seems to displease Cissy Redmond extremely, as she
will not lift her head during the reading, or even look at
* him, and expresses herself as quite charmed when it is at
an end.
And now comes the event of the evening,-the thing
-that is to convince the county of the necessity for a good
tgan, and to show them the rare excellence of the Pull-
lighamn choir.'
.4iSarah Martin, the leading soprano-all muslin and blue
hbws-comes forward, and begins the solo upon which all
ltoe vicar's hopes are centred.
" The shades of night are falling fast"
lbegins Sarah, nobly, and goes on in a hopeful manner to
le end of the first verse.
-The vicar draws a deep sigh of relief I



<pb n="116"/>
t16           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
- " His brow was sad, his eye beneath,"
goes on Sarah victoriously, her whole soul in the safe f
filment of her task. She gets through to the end of 
secohd verse as successfully as she did to the end of 
first, and then pauses to draw breath.
The vicar exchanges a triumphant glance with M
Peyton.
" In happy homes they saw the light,"
continues Sarah. And then-then   something horrible
happens. A sound, very terrible to the vicar, smites upon
'his ear,-a sound that fills his clerical bosom with dismay.
Sarah's voice-the voice of his chief prop-has proved
false. It has given way; it has cracked upon a high note
and the solo of the evening has proved a dead failure.
Talk of failing for a million; talk of Isandula or Majtba
Hill; talk of Mr. Parnell and the Coercion Bill I But
was ever defeat so disastrous as this? The vicar, but for
his sex, and the publicity of the thing, couldthankfully
have given way to tears. Miss Peyton flushes to her tern-
ples and feels as if she herself has been guilty of the mis-
erablefiasco.
Of course it is hushed up. The piano comes out quite
strong again, under Mrs. Redmond's bony fingers; the de-
faulter is gently pushed into the background, and a chorus
introduced. Nevertheless, after the breakdown, things
somehow seem to go wrong. The other singers are dis-
heartened, and will not do their best; while Sarah, who is
dissolved in tears in the cloak-room, and who has another
!song on the programme, obstinately refuses to try her pow-
ers again.
The vicar is in despair, although he walks about val-
|iantly among the audience, trying, most unsuccessfully, to
appear unconcerned; whilst the coughing and sneezing,
that generally distinguish every place where silence is the
thing most to be desired, seem now on the increase, to an
alarming degree, and threaten to drown Lady Mary's see,
ond effort.
"Who is that blowing his nose ?" demands the poor
vicar, testily, looking daggers in the direction of the sound.
Clarissa, who is the nearest to him as he makes this obser.
vation, just saves herself from laughing aloud.



<pb n="117"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.              itr
ings have taken a bad turn," says the vicar, regard-
reproachfully. " I am afraid my first attempt will
*ezrnembered as a wretched failure; and that girl
er song, and she will not venture again, and
no one to take her place."
Redmond, I will sing for you, if you wish it," says
childish voice, that has always something pathetic
it Georgie has overheard his last speech, and hasssss
her soft, fair little face to his, and is speaking to
^ a flush and a smile.
emy dear, can you sing? " says the vicar, anxiously.
mris full of music; but then he has never heard
During her fortnight's stay at the vicarage she
sung one note, has never betrayed the fact that
t tue daughter of Polyhymnia.
indeed,-really; I can sing very well," says
in her little earnest fashion, and without the very
suspicion of conceit. She is only eager to reas-
to convince him of the fact that she is worthy to
* his telief.
thesong? " says Mr. Redmond, still hesitating, and
to the second solo chosen by the lodefaulter.
ijsl old Irish song; I know it. It is' Shule, agra,'
begins, 'My Mary with the curling hair,"' says
with a slight nod. " I used to sing it long ago,
es very pretty."
11, come," says the vicar, though with trepidation,
ds her on to the platform, and up to Mrs. Redmond,
good woman's intense surprise.
Mary has nearly brought her little vague whisper
She has at last disclosed to a listening audi-
she has discovered the real dwelling-place of the
ce,"-who is uncomfortably ensconced " amidst
," if all accounts be true,-and is now quaver-
on a last and dying note.
isthe song," says Mrs. Redmond, putting Sarah's
olo into her hand.
you," says Miss Broughton  She looks neither
'nor concerned, only a little pale, and with a
iain her eyes, born, as it were, of an earnest de-
evictory for the vicar's sake.
£lbty Mary's final quaver dies, and she moves to
. -



<pb n="118"/>
1 8            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
one side, leaving the space before the piano qui
clear.
There is a slight pause; and then the slight childish fi
ure, in its gown of thin filmy black, comes forward, an
stands before the audience. She is quite self-possesse
but rather white, which has the effect of rendering her
large plaintive eyes darker and more lustrous than usual.
Her arms are half bare; her throat and part of her neck
can be seen gleaming white against the blackness of her
dress. She is utterly unadorned. No brooch or ear-rings,
or bracelets or jewels of any kind, can be seen. Yet she
stands there before them a perfect picture, more sweet
than words can tell.
She holds her small shapely head erect, and seems un-
conscious of the many eyes fixed upon her. Rarely has
so fair a vision graced the dull daily life of Pullinghani.
Even the sturdy, phlegmatic farmers stir upon their seats,
and nudge the partners of their joys, and wonder, in a
stage whisper, who " you can be ?"
Mrs. Redmond plays a few faint chords, and then
Georgie begins the plaintive Irish air Sarah should have
sung, and sings it as, perhaps, she never sang before.
During the second verse, borne away by her passionate
desire to please, she forgets the music-sheet she holds, so
that it flutters away from her down to the floor, and lies
there; while her hands, seeking each other, grow en-
twined, and hang loosely before her, showing like little
flakes of snow against the darkness of her gown.
, Her voice is beautiful, sweet, and full, and quick with
passion,-one of those exquisite voices that sink into the
soul, and linger there forever, even when the actual earthly
sound has died away. She carries the listeners with her,
holding them as by a spell, and leaving them silent, almost
I*         breathless, when she has finished her " sweet song."
Now she has come to the end of " Shule, agra," and
turns away somewhat abruptly to Mrs. Redmond, as
though half frightened at the storm of applause that greets
heir.
" Did I really sing so well ?" she asked the vicar, pres-
ently, when he has sought her out to thank. her.
" Well ?" repeats he. " What a word to use I It was
divine; the whole room was spell-bound.  What a gift



<pb n="119"/>
C  FAITH AND UNFAITH.              119
possess! My dear, you have saved the evening, and
honor, and the organ, and everything. I am deeply
ul to you."
How glad I am " says the girl, softly; "and don't
me. I liked it,-the singing, the applause, the feel- f -
tat I was doing well. I will sing for you again later  " 
you wish it."
t is too much to ask," says the vicar; "but, if you
ly don't mind ? Lady Patricia is in ecstasies, and says
uld listen to you forever."
orgie laughs.
Well, at least she shall listen to me once more," she 
-gayly.
dy Patricia is not the only one enthralled by the
ul singer. Dorian Branscombe has never once re- 
his eyes from her face: he is as one bewitched 
even at this early moment, wonders vaguely within: \y
lf what can be the meaning of the strange pleasure,  at
tis so near akin to pain, that is tugging at his heart- 
Alfred, too, is plainly impressed, and stares at the
y creature with the black gown and the snowy arms,
61speech becomes a necessity. 
fl:ell, I never in all my life," he begins, emphatically,  c
*lten stops. "Who is she, Branscombe?"                '9
Don't know, I'm  sure," says Branscombe, rather
y. What right has Hort-what right has any fellow
see beauty in her, except himself? The words of  -
aong are still running in his ears,-" My love, my
It"  How well they suit her!  What a little baby  (
she has, so pure and sweet I yet how full of feel-
"hat's her name ?" asks Lord Alfred, nothing(k%
ted.                                         \   '-.
web. quite forgotten," returns Branscombe, eve ,
His second answer hardly tallies with hi
t of.this he is quite oblivious. 
Alfred raises his brows. " She has a magnificent ~
d is very beautiful," he says, evenly. " Yet-do (
w ? she reminds me somewhat of Harriet."
let is a third and a favorite sister of Lord Alfred's,
estimable young woman, much given to the ref-
.t    ~  t ~,'..a.~,r '  -  _ 



<pb n="120"/>
o12           FAITH AND UNFA ITH. 
ormation of drunkards, who,. though rather deficient 
nose, makes up for it in prodigality of mouth. 
"I can't say I see the likeness," says Dorian, withA
little disgust as he can manage at so short a notice. '
t.     -  4    ~"My dear fellow," expostulates Lord Alfred, shi
his glass from one eye to the other and looking palpab
amused, "there is no reason in the world why you shou
be grumpy because you are in love with the girl. I don
l~ nwant to interfere with you." 
" In love !" says Branscombe. "Nonsense I I never
spoke a word to her in my life."
"Well, it is uncommon like it," says Lord Alfred.
"Is it ? Well, I can't help that, you know. Neverthe-
less, I am not in lovwwith any one."
"Then you ought to take that look off your face,"
persists his lordship, calmly. 
"I'll take off anything you like," replies Dorian, som
what nettled.
At this, Lord Alfred laughs beneath his breath, and tells
him he will not keep him to this rash promise, as probabl
the Pullingham folk, being pre-Adamites, might object to
the literal fulfilment of it.
"But she is a very lovely girl, and I don't wonder at
your infatuation," he says, mildly.
"Foregone conclusions seem to be in your line," returns;
Dorian, with a shrug. "It seems a useless thing to tell
you again I have not lost my heart to Miss Brough-
ton."
"Oh, so you have remembered her name!" says his
lordship, dryly.
Meantime, the concert has reasserted itself, and things
once more are going on smoothly. The vicar, all smiles
and sunshine, is going about accepting congratulations on
all sides.
"Such a charming evening," says Mrs. Grey; " and such
H|' -music I Really, London could not surpass it.' Ad' what
a delicious face that girl has got-like Spring, or May, or
--er--Morning, or that. I quite envy her to yot.  Now
all my governesses are so unpleasant,-freckled, ytn know,
or with a squint, or a crooked nose, or that. Some people
l* i' i:have all the luck in this world," winds up Mrs. Greyj with
a gentle sigh, who has ten thousand a year and no earthly
li~~~~~~~~



<pb n="121"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               121
H and who aliway speaks in italics whenever she gets
$elightest chanei.
lSo glad you are pleased," says the vicar, genially.
, she is as beautiful as her voice. After all, I think
concert will prove a success."
i,a_ has proved itself one," says Mrs. Grey, who adores
b  and would flirt with him if she dared. "But
iyjou fail in anything you undertake? Really,
r. Redmond, you should not let the idea die out
'skhould give us a good time like this at least once in
very month, and than see what delicious windows you
uld have. I for one "-coquettishly-" will promise to
e to every one of them."
" At that rate, I should soon have no poor to look after,"
ys the gratified vicar, gayly.
"And a good thing, too. The poor are always so op-
sive, and-er-so dirty, but still "-seeing a change
his face4-" very interesting,-very /"
'FAnd then the concert comes to an end, and adieux are
, and fresh congratulations poured out, so to speak,
on the Redmonds; and then every one goes home.'
Dorian Branscombe climbs into his dog-cart, and drives
iftly homeward, under the glistening stars, whose
beauty makes unhappy,"-his mind filled with many
u'tMy love, my pearl I "--the words of Georgie's song
nt hi incessantly, and ring their changes on his brain.
'What words could be more appropriate, more suited to
I" (Alas, when we come to pronouns it is generally all
erwith us !) "A pearl ! so fair so pure so solitary I It
texpressed her. By what right has Fate cast that pret-
'child upon the cruel world to take her chance, to live or
'in: it?
"How large her eyes are, and what a heavenly blue,
what a sad expression lies within them! 'Grand-
pma, grandmamma, what big eyes you have I "'  Here
rouses himself, and laughs a little, and wishes, with
mepetulance, that he could put her out of his head.
' 4- My love, my pearl ' Yes, it was a very pretty song,
hu.nts one somehow; but no doubt a good night's
will kill it. Hold up, you brute,"-this to the kind
patient mare, who is doing her good nine miles an



<pb n="122"/>
122           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
hour, and who has mildly objected to a sharp sta
"Why didn't Clarissa introduce me to her  I wish
goodness I hadn't to go back to town.to-morrow I"
so on, until he reaches Sartoris, and flings himself, w
some impatience, out of the trap, to the amazement of 
groom, who is accustomed to think of his master as
young man to whom exertion is impossible.  ". t
Then he goes to bed, and spends the next f6ot l
miserably, as he falls into a heavy slumber, and dr
that oysters, pearl-laden, are rushing boisterously over 
body.
CHAPTER XVI.
*There was a sound of revelry by night."-BYnoN.
So Dorian returns to town, and stays there until
annual hunt ball, of which he is a steward, summons h
back to Pullingham.
It is, of course, the event of the season, this ball, a
occurs early in March. Clarissa, going down to the vI
arage,-where, now, indeed, she spends a good deal 
her time,-speaks to the girls about it.
"I am so glad Georgie is in time for it," say Ciss
who is a warm-hearted little soul, and who desire go
for every one. " There is something so nice about a r
*big ball."
" A ball I " says Georgie, growing a delicate pink, wi
excitement. "I never was at a real ball in my life. O
Clarissa, will you take me? "
"Georgie I As if it isn't a real joy to ne to have you,
says Clarissa, reproachfully. "I can't bear going an
where by myself, and Mrs. Grey always insists on taki
Cissy."
"Well, she is very kind, you know," says Cissy, i
some regret. " But I do so wish she would let me 
with you. However, mamma would not like me to ref
her, and, after all, I shall meet you both in the room.
wish we could manage to arrive just at the same moment."
"Well, I'll settle that with Mrs. Grey," says Class
"Dorian will get me a ticket for Georgie."
E;] 4 



<pb n="123"/>
F4ITH AND UNFAITH.               123
"Who is Dorian ?" asks Georgie, idly. Literally, she
nothing about him, regarding him in this instance
erely a means to an end,-a person who can obtain
'het an entrance into a desired haven. She has, in-
l , forgotten that once before she asked this same
tion and received her answer.
tWhy, I told you," says Clarissa. "He is Lord Sar-
's nephew,-the tall handsome young man who spoke
e at the concert."
I didn't see him. When is this ball to be "
"On the 5th. And now, about your dresses ?"
I Mine goes without telling," says Cissy, in a resigned
.    The whole county knows it by heart by this
. After all, there is a sort of comfort in everything,
in one's misfortune. Now, all my young men won't
the trouble of looking for me, they will know me di-
y, the instant their eyes light upon my gown, which
t becoming an heirloom."
If it is the gown you wore the otheer night at the Bel-
',.you look very sweet in it," says Clarissa, looking
sweet herself as she utters this comforting speech.
you are an angel, you know," says Cissy, with a
little laugh. " You see everybody through rose-
spectacles."
*  i't she rude ? " says Clarissa. " One would think
an old fogy of ninety-five. Spectacles, indeed I "
1 must run," says Miss Cissy. " I entirely forgot all
t the dinner, and mamma left it to me, as she had to
and see old Mrs. Martin. Good-bye, dear, dearest
ssa  How I wish I could go with you to this lovely
ever mind; people always meet," says Clarissa, con-
[es,-at Philippi," returns the irrepressible, and,
a faint grimace, she vanishes.
walks as far as the entrance-gate with Clarissa.
i  , she looks at the iron bars wistfully, and then
i  her pretty childish way, " Let me go a little- way
ou, Clarissa, will you ? "
Peyton, who is walking, is delighted.
far as ever you will. Indeed, I want to speak to
What-what is your dress like, Georgie? "



<pb n="124"/>
124           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
Georgie hesitates. Clarissa, misunderstanding her si
lence, says, gently, " Let me give you one, dearest?"  .
"Oh, no, no," says Miss Broughton, quickly.  "
have one,-I have, indeed; and it is rather pretty."
But you told me you had never been at a ball."
"Neither have I. The gown I speak of was bough
for a musical party. It was given while I was with Aunt
Elizabeth." 
"Who gave it ?" 
"The gown?"
"Oh, no,-the party."
"Lady Lincoln. She has one son, Sir John, and I
think it is he gives the parties. Aunt Elizabeth was so
pleased that I was asked that she insisted on my going;
though I cried, and prayed hard to be let stay at home
It was only "-dropping her voice, with a heavy sigh-
"eleven months after papa had-had left me."
"It was cruel to force you to go against-your will: but4
when you were there, did you enjoy yourself ?" 
"I did," confesses Miss Broughton, with a blush. "-
enjoyed myself more than I can say. I do not think I eve
enjoyed myself so much in all my life, I forgot everything
for the time being, and was quite happy. To me the flow
ers, the lights, the music, the pretty dresses,-everything,
-were new and fresh, and helped to take me out of myself
And then, everybody was so kind, and Mr. Kennedy----?
"Who was he ?" asks Clarissa, interested at once.
"A tall thin dark man, in the Guards,-the Coldstreams
or the Grenadiers, I quite forget which. He talked to me
all the evening; and, indeed, so did Sir John, Lady Lin,
coln's son; but I liked Mr. Kennedy best.."
"Poor Sir John                  , 1
"Oh, no. Of course he cared nothing. When I leWt.Mr;t
Kennedy, and Sir John, and Aunt Elizabeth's maid, walked
home with me; and I think they were cross,-the men, i
mean. When I got home I found one of my gloves was
missing, and Aunt Elizabeth said I was very careless; and
then she asked me where was the crimson rose I had on
my bosom when starting, and, you see,"--apologetically,
\ -" I had given it to Mr. Kennedy, because he asked me
for it; but when I told her so, she said I was very forward I
Did you ever hear such a word?" says Miss Broughton,



<pb n="125"/>
FAITIZ AVND UN/ AAITI.           125
tears of indignation in her eyes. " Was it forward to give
adead rose to a man who had been very kind to me for a
hole evening ?"
i " Certainly not," says Clarissa, emphatically. "I would
gve a rose to any one who was kind to me,-if they asked
for it. Did you ever see Mr Kennedy again ?"
;^" Yes; he called next day, to return me my glove, which,
be declared, he had kept by mistake. But somehow I
ever got that glove again, so I suppose he took it away
with him when he left."
"I suppose so. Well, I shall write to Dorian for your
ticket."
;/" Perhaps ' Dorian' will think me a great bother."
- "Let him," says Clarissa, impatiently: as yet she has
t forgiven him that speech (so much mistaken) at the
: The 5th has arrived. The day has dawned, lived, grown
bits full size, and then sunk, as we all must, into the arms
Death. The night has come, with sound of music and
ath of dying flowers, and the drip, drip of the softly-
i ng fountains.
rooms are looking lovely; fair faces smile, and soft
gleam; and figures, round and svelte as Venus's own,
r with the music and mingle with the throng.
The ball is at its height, when Clarissa, seeing Dorian,
ons to him with her fan. It is a very slight invitation
,her side, but one instantly obeyed.
^lKeep one dance for a friend of mine," she says, ear-
estly.
-'ILet me keep one dance for you."
"That, too, if you wish it; but I have a little friend here
*night, and she knows nobody, and, though I know you
n't like it" (calling to mind again his supposed disparag-
*tone at the concert), "still, for my sake, be kind to
"I shall be nectar to her, if you entreat me in that fash-
Who is she ?"
'EWell, she is only a governess," begins Clarissa, beating
t the bush: she is quite determined, nevertheless, that
gie shall not be neglected or left out in the cold at
s her first ball.



<pb n="126"/>
i26           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
" A governess !" says Dorian, unthinkingly. "Oh, Cla-
rissa, don't let me in for that. I don't mind them a bit;
but I'm afraid of them. She is safe to ask me if I don't
think Murray's Grammar the most artfully compiled book
in the world, and I shan't know what to say in reply."
" You need not be afraid of my governess," says Clarissa,
earnestly: "she will not trouble you about Murray or his
Grammar."
"Of course, if you say I must dance with her, I must,"
says Branscombe, with a heavy sigh.
"I see her now. Come, let me introduce you to
her."
"But not for this dance. I am engaged-I am, I give
you my word-to the prettiest girl in the room,-the pret-
tiest child, I should say."
"You can dance with your child, of course; but at
least let me introduce you to my friend."
With a faint and carefully subdued shrug he submits to
the inevitable, and goes where Clarissa leads. He finds
himself presently at the other end of the room, near where
a little dainty black-robed figure stands, with three men.
before her, all evidently possessed with an overpowering
desire to inscribe their names upon the morsel of tinted
and gilded paper she holds in her hand.
Her large blue eyes are almost black with excitement;
her lips are parted, and, like Herrick's "Julia," are like
"rubies," soft and rich. She is glancing up, in a little
puzzled fashion, at the tall fair man who is bending over
her whilst going through the usual formula, "May I have
the pleasure," etc.
"Well, where is this dreadful woman ?" says Dorian,
at this moment, almost impatiently; he is watching Geor-
gie and the fair man, and feels distinctly savage.
"Why, here," says Clarissa.
"Here? Not the-the girl in black, talking to Bel-
lew !"
"Yes; that is youz dreadful woman."
"Oh, look here, you know, it is too absurd," says Do-
rian, with a low laugh. " I have danced twice with her al-
ready, and am engaged to her for this I "
" She is your ' child,' then ? " asks Clarissa, opening her
eyes.



<pb n="127"/>
FAITH AND UNlA7'YI.             127
"Yes; but a governess, my dear Clarissa ?"
'She is teaching the Redmond children. I told you so
at the concert."
" I quite forgot,-utterly. How couldone think of her
s that, you know ?"
"Now, please, do try and write plainly," breaks in
Georgie's voice, plaintively. "Up to this I have not been
able to read a single name upon my card."
"I'll do my best," says the fair young man. "Is that
legible?"
" Bellew, is it ? Yes, I can read that. Thank you, so
much. Do you know, I haven't the faintest idea who I
am going to dance this with, because"--examining her
card-" it looks like ' Barleycorn,' and it can't be that; you
know?"
" There once was a John Barleycorn," says Mr. Bellew,
thoughtfully.
Clarissa has been claimed by Horace Branscombe, and
has disappeared. Dorian, coming to the front, goes up to
thy little beauty in black and silver, and says, in a contrite
tone,-
"I am so sorry I can't write; yet nevertheless I am
John Barleycorn, and this dance belongs to me."
".Why, so it does," says Georgie, recognizing him in a
naive manner, and placing her hand upon his arm. - She
performs this last act slowly and with hesitation, as though
not entirely sure of his identity, which has the effect of
piquing him, and therefore heightening his admiration
for her.
"You have forgotten me," he says, reproachfully.
" Oh, no,"-slowly. " It was with you I danced the last
waltz, I think."
" No. The last polka." He is even more piqued now.
"It has slipped your memory; yet there are some things
one neiver forgets."
"Yes," says Miss Broughton, with a suppressed sigh;
"but those are unhappy things. Why think of them now?
Let us dance again, and forget while we can."
"You mistake me," says Dorian, hastily. "I thought
of nothing unhappy. I thought of you. I shall never for-
get this night"
"Ah, neither shall I! " says Miss Broughton, very ear



<pb n="128"/>
128          FAITH AND UNFAITH.
nestly indeed. By an artificial observer, it might be thought
somewhat sentimentally.
" Do you mean that ? " says Dorian, hopefully, if curi- 
ouslya "Am I to understand you-mean to keep this par-
ticular ball forever in mind ? "
"You may, indeed."             ' 
"But why ? "-with much animation, and an over-increas.
ing show of hope. 
"Because it is my first," says Miss Broughton, cohfiden-
tially, with a little quick-drawn sigh of utter content, and
a soft, if rather too general, smile.'  
"I see,"-disappointedly.  : Is'thatyourureason? What
a curious one!"             :- : :'
"You think it ridiculous; don't you ?' says Georgie,
faintly, ashamed of herself; "but it is quite true, and I
can't help it. I was eighteen last month, and never before
was I at any ball. I shall never forget this room,--
know that,-or the lights, or the flowers, or-the man over
there beating time for the band, or--or anything."
"I think ' the man over there' has much the best of it,"
says Dorian. "I wish I was the leader of that band. Is
there any chance that your partners of this evening will be
remembered by you ?" 
"Well, I suppose I sha'n't quite forget you," says
Georgie, seriously, after a moment's careful reflection.
" I11 take jolly good care you don't," says Mr. Brans-
combe, ratherlosing his head, because of herintense calm-
ness, and speaking with more emphasis than as a rule be-
longs to him. "You are staying at the vicarage aren't
you?" 
" Yes," says. Georgie.
" And I live just three miles from that---;' Here he
pauses, as though afraid to make his insinuation too plain.
"At Sartoris, isn't it ?" asks Georgie, sweetly. - "Yes?
Clarissa showed me the entrance-gate to it last week. It
looks pretty."
"Some day will you come up and see it? " asks he, with
more earnestness than he acknowledges even to himself;
"and," with a happy thought, " bringthe children. It will 
be a nice walk for them."
"But you are always in London, are you not " sayd
Georgie.



<pb n="129"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               129
"Oh, no, not always:  I sha'n't go there again, for ever
so long. So promise, will you "
"I'll ask Mrs. Redmond. But I know we can. She
never refuses me anything," says this most unorthodox
governess.
" I'm sure I'm not surprised at that," says Branscombe.
"Who could ?"
"Aunt Elizabeth could," says Miss Broughton.
"I haven't the misfortune to know your aunt Elizabeth,
for which I am devoutly grateful, because if she 'could,'
as you say, she must be too good. for hanging. By the by,
this is not my first ball; yet you have never taken the
trouble to ask me (though I asked you) why I intend keep-
ing this night as a white spot in my memory."
"Well, I ask you now," says Georgie, penitently.
" Do you care to know ?"
"I do, indeed."
"Then it is because to-night I met you for the first
time."
He bends his head a little, and looks into her eyes,-
the beautiful eyes that smile back so calmly into his, and
are so cold to him, and yet so full of fire,--eyes that some-
how have power to charm him as no others have yet been
able to.
He is strangely anxious to know how his words will be
received, and is proportionately aggrieved in that she takes
them as a matter of course.
"After all, my reason is better than yours," she says, in
her sweet, petulant voice. "Coime, let us dance: we are
only wasting time."
Branscombe is at first surprised, then puzzled, then fas-
cinated. Almost any other woman of his acquaintance
would have accepted his remark as a challenge,-would
have smiled, or doubted, or answered him with some speech
that wbuld hasre' hben a leading question. But with this
girl all is dAife!'ent."'She takes his words literally, and,
while believing them, shows herself utterly careless of the
belief.
Dorian, passing his arm round her waist, leads her out
into the room, and again they waltz, in silence,-he having
nothing to say to her, she being so filled 'with joy at the
bare motion that she cares no more for converse. At last,
9
'i. 



<pb n="130"/>
30o          FAITH AND UNFAITH.
"Like some tired bee that flags
Mid roses over-blown,"
she grows languid in his arms, and stops before a door that
leads into a conservatory. It has been exquisitely fitted
up for the occasion, and is one glowing mass of green and
white and crimson sweetness. It is cool and faintly lit.
A little sad fountain, somewhere in the distance, is mourn-
ing sweetly, plaintively,-perhaps for some lost nymph.
"You will give me another dance ? " says Branscombe,
taking her card.
"If I have one. Isn't it funny ?-I feared when coming
I should not get a dance at all, because, of course, I knew
nobody; yet I have had more-partners than I want, and
am enjoying myself so.much."
"Your card is full," says Branscombe, in a tone that sug-
gests a nationatcalamity. "Would you-would you throw
over one of these fellows for me ?"
"I would, in a minute," says Miss Broughton, naively;
"but, if he found me out afterwards, would he be angry ?"
"He: sha'n't find you out. I'll take care of that. The
crowd is intense. Of course "-slowly-" I won't ask you
to do it, unless you wish it. Do you?"
"There is one name on that card I can't bear," says
Miss Broughton, with her eyes fixed upon a flower she
holds. Her dark lashes have fallen upon her cheeks, and
lie there like twin shadows. He can see nothing but her
mobile lips and delicately pencilled brows. He is watch-
ing her closely, and now wonders vaguely if she is a baby
or a coquette.
" Show me the man you would discard," he says, run-
ning her pencil down her programme.
"There,-stop there. The name is Huntley, is it iat ?
Yes. Well, he is old, and fat, and horrid; and I knowte
can't dance. You may draw the pencil across his name,--
if you are sure, quite sure, he won't And me out." 
' He shall not. But I would far rather you condemned
that fair-haired fellow you were talking to just now," says
Dorian, who is vaguely, faintly jealous of young Bellew.
"But he is so much nicer than Mr. Huntley," declares
Georgie, earnestly: "and he was my first partner, and I
promised him so faithfully to keep this dance for him."



<pb n="131"/>
FA ITH AND UNFAITI.                I
" He'll never see you in the crush," says Branscombe.
t"But I told him exactly where t9 find me."
[(' It is the most difficult thing in the world to be any-
ere at the precise moment stated,"
.i',But I should like to dance with him again," declares
Lss Broughton, innocently, being driven into a corner.
" Oh, of course: that ends the matter," says Dorian, in
an impossible tone, drawing the pencil with much uncalled-
r energy across Mr. Huntley's name.
,-,Then some other mar comes up, and claims the little
wilful beauty for the waltz then playing, and, carrying her
off in triumph, leaves Branscombe alone.
CHAPTER XVII.
" It is the hydra of calamities,
The sevenfold death: the jealous are the
'.  Danin'd."-YoNG.   i
HAVING watched her until the last fold of her gown has
disappeared, Branscombe turns abruptly away,afind, pass-
,ing through a glass door that leads into the gardens out-
side, paces slowly up and down the winding paths beneath
the subdued tight of countless Chinese lanterns, that, hang-
ing amidst the foliage, contrast oddly with the cold-white
brilliancy of the stars overhead, that   ;
"Rush forth in myriads, as to wage : 
War with the lines of darkness.  .
Cold as the night air is, not a breath. of wind comes to
disturb the strange calm that hangs over land and sea.
Far down in the bay the ocean lies at rest. From, the. dis-
tance a faint sound of music from the band comes softly,
seductively to the ear T but beyond and above it comes the
song of the nightingale that, resting in yonder thicket,
Tpours forth itiheart in tender hurried melodyigas though
fearful the night will be  .       . 
"Too short fos him to utter forth his loe.chant,
And dishArtlh%   full nl o.f,all its musc."



<pb n="132"/>
r3 #tH AND UNPAIH.
The notes.rise and fall, and tremble on the air. No
other sound comes from the breast of nature to mar the
richness of its tone. No earthly thing seems living but
itself. For it the night appears createdi and draws its
'      sa3ole curtain stained with gold " over the sleeping world.
This'nightingale, of all the feathered tribes, is wakeful,
andS chants its hymn of praise' at midnight, whilst all its
brethren rest in peaceful slumber.
The intense and solemn stillness of all around renders
more enchanting the trills and tender trembles that shake
itS' tiny throat. There is
"No whispering but of leaves, on which the breath
Of heaven plays music to.the birds that slumber."
Yet this one sweet bird refuses rest, and, as though one of
those "small foules"'that 'slepen alle night with open
eye," sings oricourageously amidst the gloom.
Dorian, strolling absently through the walks, and into
the shrubberies beyond, listens, and feels some sense of
comfort (that has yet with it a touch of pain) creep through
himnas the nightingale's sweet song smites upon his ear.
Yet: this is not the only sound that disturbs the quiet of
the night. Sadly, mournfully, a half-suppressed sob falls
upon the air.
Branscombe starts, and looks round suddenly, but can
see nothing. No footsteps make themselves heard. The
shrubs are sufficiently thick to conceal the presence of any
one, yet it seems to him as if the thought of that sob was
born of fancy, and that the earthly owner of it is unborn.
Then some ray from the brilliant moon opens his eyes,
and he sees a woman's figure standing in a somewhat dis-
cofnblate, attitude, with her back against a tall elm, and
her eyes fixed wistfully upon the distant windows, through
which the lights are streaming, and the passing to and fro
of the dancing crowd may be distinctly seen.
Dorian, recogniting her, goes quickly up to her and lays
ia: hand upon her shoulder; It is Ruth Annersley'l
'She stiflesa lw cry, and; turning to him, grows even a
shade paler than she was a moment sincte. '
"Ruth," says Dorian, "what oa earth brings you here
at thishouritr     :     .
For a moment she makes Riho answer. She raises



<pb n="133"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               133
her hand to brush away the tears that still lie heavily upon
her cheeks, and then moves a little away from him, so as
to elude his touch.
"I came to see them dancing," she says, at length, with
difficulty; "I thought it would be a pretty sight; and-it
is-I have been so-so pleased."
The words seem to choke her. With a movement that
is terribly pathetic she laysher hand upon her heart; and
then Dorian, following the direction her eyes have taken,
sees what they see.
In an open window, directly opposite to where they are
standing, two figures can be seen in very close proximity
to each other. Beyond are the forms of the dancers; the
faint sweet strains of the band float out to meet the mid-
night air; but the two in the window seem lost to all but
the fact of their own existence, and that they are together.
At least, so it seems to the onlookers in the shrubberies.
See, now he takes her hand,-the kindly curtain hiding
the act from those within; he stoops towards her; the girl
leans a little forward; and then Dorian knows them.; the
man is Horace, and the girl Clarissa Peyton I
Instinctively he glances from them to Ruth. She, too,
is leaning forward, her whole attention concentrated upon
the picture before her. ,Her eyes are wide and miserable,
her cheeks pale and haggard.,
"You have seen enough of this ball, Ruth," says Brans-
combe, very gently. " Go home nqw."
"Yes; enough,-too much," says the girl, starting into
life again. She draws her breath quickly, painfully: her
brow contracts. As though unable to resist the move-
ment, she again lays her hand upon her heart, and holds
it there, as though in anguish.
"What is it ? " asks Dorian. " Are you in pain ? How
white you are 1" 
"I am tired. I have a pain herilpressing,,her bhand
still more closely against her side. "Thip morning,i felt
well and strong-and nowi,-. My mother died ,lieart-
disease; perhaps I shall die of it too. I pkii4k6; I hope
so I"
"You are talking very great .nonsewn%' 'iy  an,
roughly, though in his soi. shocket tp ae. st'  g  by
the girl's manner, which is fullof ieckles misery.- 'WFt



<pb n="134"/>
134          FAITH AND UNFAITH.
body sees any amusement in dying. Come, let me see
you home."'
"Oh, no I Please do not come, Mr. Branscombe," en-
treats she, so earnestly that he feels she has a meaning in
her words. "I have the key of the small gate, and can
run home in five minutes once I pass that."
-.' Then at least i shall see you safely as far as the gate,"
says Branscomhbe, who is tender and gentle in his manner
to all women.
Silently they walk through the damp night grass, neither
speaking, until, coming to a curve in the way, she breaks
silence.
"How beautiful Miss Peytpn looks tonight," she says,
in a tone impossible tb translate.
"Very,"'says Dorian, unkindly, yet with very kindly in-
tent. " Bit then she is always one of the most beautiful
women I know."
" Is she-very much admired ? "-this rather timidly.
"One can Understand that at once," says Dorian,
quietly. " Both her face and figure are perfect." As he
says this, quite calmly, his heart bleeds for the girl be-
side him.
"Who has she been dancing most with?" Eagerly,
almost painfully, this question is put. The utter simplicity
of it touches DoAan to his heart's core.
"With my brother, of course.  She-she would not
care to dance very much with any one else now, on ac-
count of her engagement."
"Her engagement ? "
"Yes. She is to be married to my brother some time
next year."
He hates himself bitterly as he says this': but some-
thing within him compels him to the cruel deed, if only
through pity for the girl who walks beside him.
They are now within the shade of trees, and he cannot
see her face; though in very truth, if he could have seen
it at this moment, he would not have looked at it. No
word escapes her; she walks on steadily, as though act-
ually made strong by the receiving of the blow.
friap wopld gladly believe that her Silence means in-
difft.eie'; but to-night has foriced a truth upon him that
f*r months he has determinedly put behind him.' Her



<pb n="135"/>
FAIT H. AND UNFAITTH.            135
tears, her agitation, the agony that shone in her eyes as
she fixed them upon Horace's form in the window, have
betrayed only too surely the secret she would so gladly
hide.
She makes no further attempt at conversation, and,
when they Come to the little iron gate that I ads on to the
road, would have passed through, and gone on her home-
ward way mechanically, without bidding.him even good-
night, as if (which is indeed the case) she has forgotten
the very fact of his near presence.
But he cannot let her go without a word.
"Good-night," he says, very kindly, his tone warmer
*because of his pity for her.  "Take care of yourself.
Are you sure you do not fear going alone? " ..
"Yes."  Her voice is low, and sounds strange, even in
her own ears.
"Wrap your shawl more closely round you. Theinight
is cold. Is the pain in your side better ?"
"Yes,"-almost regretfully.
"That is right. Well, good-by. I shall stand here un-
til I see .you have safely turned; the corner; then I shall
know you are out of all danger."  He has been holding
her hand somewhat anxiously all this time, not quite liking
the strained expression in her face.  Now he presses it,
and then drops it gently.
Y Good-night," returns she, slowly, and then turns away
from him, never remembering to thank him for his kind-
ness,-hardly, indeed, conscious of having spoken the
farewell word.
Her brain seems on fire; her body cold as death. Oh,
to be in her own room, free from all watching eyes, where
she can fling herself upon the ground, and moan and cry
aloud against her fate, with only the friendly darkness to
overhear her ! She hurries rapidly onward, and soon the
corner hides her from sight.
Dorian, when she has safely passed the spot agreed
upon, goes back once more in the direction of the house.
He has hardly, however, gone two hundred yards, when
the voice of his uncle, Lord Sartoris, calling to him
through the gloom, stays his steps, and rouses him from
the painful revery into which he is fast falling.
"Who were you parting with at the gate?  asks Lord



<pb n="136"/>
136           FAITH AND UNFAI4H.
Sartoris, iti so unusual a tone that Dorian looks at him in
some-surprise." He is;a little sorry, for reasons that do
not touch himselfr, that the question should have been
asked at all.
" Ruth Annersley," he answers, without hesitation, feel-
ing that anyprevarication at this moment will only make
matters worse for the unhappy girl.  May not Arthur
have seen and known her?
"Ruth Annersley ?"
"Yes. You will, of course, say nothing about it. She
was foolish enough to wish to see a few people dancing,
so came here, and, standing among the shrubs, obtained
her wish,-which, no doubt, proved as satisfactory as
most of our desires, when gained."
"At this hour of the night to be here, alone !"
"Yes. Very imprudent of her, of course, and all that."
"There must have been some strong inducement to
make a girl of. her gentle nature undertake so bold, so
daring, a step. It was a strictly improper action," says
the old man, in his most stilted style.
"I dare say. Imprudent, however, was the word I used.
I am rather glad I was the one to meet her, as she knew
me; and, as a rule, people talk so much about nothing,
and make such mountains out of mole-hills."
"It was fortunate, indeed, your meeting her. It might,
in fact, almost be termed a curious coincidence, your man-
aging to be on this deserted walk just at the required mo-
ment."
There is something so unpleasant, so sneering, about
his tone that Dorian colors hotly.
"I confess I hardly see it in the light you do," he says,
easily enough, but very coldly. "And I think I should
term the coincidence ' lucky,' rather than curious. I see
no difference between this walk and half a dozen others.
People don't seem to affect any of them much."
"No," says Lord Sartoris.
" Any other fellow might have been here as well as me.
You, for example."
·' Just so I" says Lord Sartoris.
"Then why bring in the word curious ?"
"It merely occurred to me at the moment," says his -
lordshi .drily. " Been dancing much ?"



<pb n="137"/>
FAITH AAfD UNPAITH.              to
"Yes,-no,-pretty well. Are you coming in ?"
They are again in front of the house, and near the steps
that lead to the conservatory.
"Not just yet, I think."
"Then I fear. I must leave you. I am engaged for this
dance."
So, for the first time, these two part coldly. The old
man goes slowly, moodily, up and down the gravelled path
beneath the brilliant moon, that-
" From her clouded veil soft gliding,
Lifts her silvery lamp on high,"
and thinks of many things in a humor more'sad than bit-
ter; while the young man, with angry brbw and lips corzn-
pressed, goes'swiftly onward to the house.
As he regains the ball-room, the remembrance of the
little partner he has come to claim rushes back -upon him
pleasantly, and serves to dissipate the gloomy and somewhat
indignant thoughts that have been oppressing him. But 
where is she ? He looks anxiously'atouid ; and, after five
minutes' fruitless search, lo! there are her eyes smiling
out at him from the arms of a gay and (doubtlessi gallant
plunger. 
The next instant she is gone; but he follows her slight
form with eager glance, arid at length crosses the room to
where she is now standing with her soldier. As he does
so he flings from him all tormenting thoughts, forgetting
-as it is his nature to do-the possible misery of the fu-
ture in the certain: happiness of the present.
" The next is ours, is it not ?" he says; and she smiles
at him, and-can it be ?--willingly transfers her hand from
the heavy's arm to his; and then they dance; and pres-.
ently he takes her down to the Peytons' carriage and puts
her carefully into it, and presses her hand, :I thil ever so
slightly, and thii dites home, beneath ;the silent stars,
with an odd sensation at his heart--tlf pain;,half pleasure
--he has never felt bdor.                   '



<pb n="138"/>
13S           FAITH AND 'UNFAITH.
CHAPTER XVIII.
"Known mischiefs have their cure but doubts have none; 
And better is despair than friendless hope.
Mixed with a killlng fear."-MAY.              i
IT is two o'cioek on the following day. Horace,-who'
came down from town for the ball, and is staying wi
Dorian,-sauntering leisurely into the smoking-room 
Sartoris, finds Branscombe there, overlooking some fishing-
tackle.
This room is a mingled and hopelessly entangled ma
of guns, pipes, whips, spurs, fishing-rods, and sporting pict.
ures; there are, too, a few other pictures that might not ex
actlv come under this head, and a various and most remarki
able collection of lounging-chairs.             J
There is a patriarchal sofa, born to create slumber; 
an ancient arm-chair, stuffed with feathers and dreams 
many sleepers. Over the door stand out the skeleton 
mains of a horse's head, bleached and ghastly, and alt
gether hideous, that, even now, reminds its master of'
former favorite hunter that had come to a glorious but u
timely end upon the hunting-field. A stuffed setter, i
very glassy eyes, sits staring, in an unearthly fashion, t
one corner. Upon a window-sill a cat sits, blinking laz
at the jmerry spring sunshine outside.      . 
" Ate you really going back to town this evening, H
ace ?" asks the owner of all these gems, in a somew
gloomy fashion, bending over a fishing line as he speaks.
"Yes., I feel I am bound.to be back there again as so
as possible."            ..
"Business                                  .
" Well, I' can hardly say it is exactly press of business,.
says the candid Horace; "but if a man  ants to gain
he must be on the spot, I take it ?" 
"Quite so.  Where have you been all the mor
Sleeping?"
"Nothing half so agreeable." By this time Horace 
looking at him curiously, and with a gleam in his eyes
is half amusement, half contempt: Dorian, whose hea
is bent over his work, sees neither the amusement nor 
scorn. "I did not go to bed at all. I walked down 



<pb n="139"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.              139
to the farms to try to get some fresh air to carry back with
me to the stifling city."
"Ah! past the mill? I mean -in that direction ?-to-
wards the upper farms ? "
" No; I went past Biddulph's," says Horace, easily, half
closing his eyes, and Dorian believes him. "It is lighter
walking that way; not so hilly. Did you put in a good
time last night ?"                     . 
" Rather so. I don't know when I enjoyed an affair of
the kind so fiiuch."
"Lucky you!" yawns Horace, languidly.   "Of all
abominations, surely balls are the worst.  One goes on
when one ought to be turning in, and one turns in when
one ought to be going out. They upset one's whole cal-
culationsi  When I marry I shall make apoint of forgetting
that such things be."
"And Clarissa?" asks Dorian, dryly; "I can't say
about the dancing part of it,-you may, I suppose, abjure
that if you like,-but I think you will see a ball or two
more before you die. She likes that sort of thing. By
the by, how lovely she looked last night I"
"Very. She cut out all the other women, I thought; 
they looked right doWn'cheap beside her,"
She had it very much her'own way," says Dorian; yet,
even as he speaks, there rises before him the vision of a
little lithe figure gowned in black and crowned with yellow
hair, whose dark-blue eyes look out at him with a smile
and a touch of wistfulness that adds to their beauty.
" That little girl' at the vicarage isn't bad to look at,"
says Horace, idly, beating a tattoo on the window-pane.
" Miss Broughton? I should call her very good to look
at," says Dorian, for the first time making the discovery
that there may be moments when it would be a sure and
certain joy to kick even one's own brother.
"Here is Arthur," says Horace, presently, drawing him-
self up briskly from his lounging position. '"A little of
him goes a long way and I should say, judging from the
expression of his lips, that he is in his moodiest mood to
day. Youmay interview him, Dorian: I feel myself un-
equal to the task. Give him my love and a kiss, and say
I have gone for a ramble in the innocent woods."
He leaves the room, and, crowing te aills, make. his



<pb n="140"/>
140           FAITH AND UA'FAITH.
way into the openair through the conservatory; while Lord
Sartdris, entering by the hall door, and being directed by
a servant, goes on to Dorian's den.
He is looking fagged and care-worn, and has about him
that look of extreme ,lassitude that belongs to those to
whom sleep overnight has been. a stranger. Strong and
painful doubts of Dorian's honesty of purpose had kept
him wakeful, and driven him now down from his own home
to Sartoris. 
A strange longing to see his favorite nephew again, t9
look upon the face he had always deemed so true, to hear
the voice he loves best on earth, had taken possession of
him; yet now he finds himself oafronting' orian with
scarcely a word to say tq him.
"I hardly, hoped t find you at home;" he says, with an
effort.
"What a very flattering speechl ' Was that why you
came ? Sit here, Arthur: you will find it much more com-
fortable."
·He, pushes towards him the cosily-cushioned chair in
which Horace had been sitting a minute ago.
" Do I looktTired enough to require this ?" says Sartoris,
sinking, however, vvery willingly into the chair's embrace.
As he does so, something lying on the ground (that has
escaped Dorian's notice) attracts him;
":What is this ? " he asks, stoppipg- to,pick it up.
-It is a lace handkerchief, of delicate-and exquisite work-
manship, with some letters embroidered in one corner.
" You have been receiving gentle visitors very early,"
says Lord Sartoris, turning the pretty thing round and
round curiously. 
"Not unless you can count Horape as one," says Dori-
an, with a light laugh. "How on earth did that come
here?" Stooping, he, too, examines minutely the fragile
piece of lace and cambric his uncle is still holding. Sar-
toris turning it again, the initials in the corner make them-
selves known, and stand out, legibly and carefully worked,
as"R. A.'
Dorian's face changes. He knows the handkerchief
only too well now. He himself had given it to Ruth at
Christmas; but how had it come here ? No one had en-
tered the room to-day-eocept himself and-Horne I



<pb n="141"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.              -41
Notwithstanding the scene with Ruth the night before,
lhen she had so unmistakably betrayed her love for Hor-
ace, Dorian had never for one- moment suspected that
things had gone farther than a mere foolish girlish liking
for a man rather handsomer than the ordinary run of men.
His brother's honor he had not doubted, nor did he deem
him capable of any act calculated to bring misery upon
ofie who had trusted him.
;'' Now, in spite of himself, a terrible. doubt arises, that
will not be'suppressed; like a blow conviction falls; and
many past actions and past words crowd to his mind that,
at the time of their occurrence, seemed as mere nothings,
Ibut now are-" confirmations strong " of the truth that has
just flashed upon him.
Had he lied to him when he told him a few minutes
since he had been to Biddulph's farm and not anywhere
in the direction of the Old-Mill ? Doubt, having once as-
serted itself, makes rim now distrustful of his brother's
every look and every tone. And the handkerchief I He
must have had it from Ruth herself, and dropped it here
inadvertently before leaving the room.' To him the idea
that Horace- should have chosen a timid, fragile, gentle
girl, like Ruth Annersley, upon whom to play off the fas-
cinations and wies taught him by a fashiodfable world, is
nothing less th'ai' despicable. - A deep sense'of contempt
for the man who, to pass away pleasantly a few dull hours
in the country, would make a target of a woman's heart,
fills his mind.' He is frowning heavily, and his face has
grown very white. Looking up, he 'becomes aware that
his uncle is watching hiffi-inarrowly.
To the old man, the altered countenance of his nephew,
his pallor and hesitation, all betoken guilt. Dorian's eyes
are still clear and calm, as usual, but his expression has
strangely altered.
"'R. A.,'" remarks Lord Sartoris, slowly. "Why, that
might mean Ruth Annersley."
"It might," returns Dorian, absently. He dares not
speak his inmost thoughts. After all, Horace may not be
in the wrong: the girl's own vanity, or folly, may have led
her to believe a few words spoken in jest to mean more
than was ever intended. And, at all events, no matter
what comes of it, he cannot betray his brother.



<pb n="142"/>
142           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
"How could it have come here ?" asks Lord Sartoris,
without raising his eyes from the luckless handkerchief.
"Do you know anything of it? "
"Nothing; except that it belongs to Ruth. I gave it to
her last Christmas."
"You I A curious gift to a girl in her rank in life ?"
"She wished for it," returns Branscombe, curtly.
" Then she is no doubt heart-broken, imagining she has
lost it. Return it to her, I advise you, without delay," says
his uncle, contemptuously, throwing it from him to a table
near. " I need not detain you. any longer, now,"-rising,
and moving towards the door. 
"Going so soon ?" says the younger man, roused from
his galling reflections, by his uncle's abrupt departure, to
some sense of cordiality. "Why, you have hardly stayed
a moment."
"I have stayed long enough,-too long," says Lord Sar-
toris, gloomily, fixing his dark eyesghat age have failed to
dim) upon the man who has been to him as his own soul.
"Too long ?" repeats Branscombe, coloring darkly.
"Yes. Have you forgotten altogether the'motto of our
race ?-' Leal friend, leal foe.' Let me bring it to your
memory."
" Pray do not trouble yourself. I remember it perfect-
ly," says Dorian, haughtily, drawing up his figure to its
fullest height. . "I am sorry, my lord, you should think it
.necessary to remind me of it."
;, He bows and opens the door as he finishes his speech.
14ord Sartoris, though sorely troubled, makes no sign;
and, without so much as a pressure of the hand, they part.
.          ' '     . * 



<pb n="143"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.                 143
CHAPTER XIX
"Lock you, how she eometh, trilling
Out her gay heart's bird-like bliss I
Merry as a May-morn thrilling
With the dew and sunshine a kiss.
* C     B     C   ' 0     0     0
Ruddy gossips of her beauty
r\ .v· Are her twin cheeks; and her mouth,
In its ripe warmth, smileth fruity
As a garden of the south."-GERALD MASSEY.
To Georgie the life at the vicarage is quite support-
able,-is, indeed, balm to her wounded spirit.    Mrs.
Redmond may, of course, chop and change as readily as
the east wind, and, in fact, may sit in any quarter, being
somewhat. erratic in her humors; but they are short-
lived; and,'if faintly trying, she is at least kindly and
tender at heart.
As for the vicar, hI is-as Miss Georgie tells him, even
'without a blush-" simply adorable;" and the children
are sweet good-natured little souls, true-hearted and ear-
nest, to whom the loss of an empire would be as dross in
comparison with the gain of a friend.
They are young!
To Dorian Branscombe, Miss Broughton is " a thing of
beauty, and- a joy forever; her loveliness increases " each
moment, rendering her more dear. Perhaps he. himself
hardly knows how dear she is to his heart, though day
after day he haunts the vicarage, persecuting the vicar
with parochial business of an outside sort. It ought, in-
deed, to be "had- in remembrance," the amount of char-
ity this young man expended upon the poor during all this
early part of the year.
Then there is always Sunday, when he sits opposite to
her in the old church, watching her pretty mischievous
little face meditatively throughout the service, and listening
to her perfect voice 'as it rises, clear and full of pathos, in
anthem and in hymn.
The spring has comie at last, though tardy and slow in
s approach. Now-      '
"Buds are bursting on the brier,
And all the kindled greenery glows
And life hath richest overflows,
, And morning fields are fringed with fire."



<pb n="144"/>
44         T.417FAI'H AND UNFAITH.
Winter is almost forgotten,  The snow and frost and
ice are as a dream that was told.: No one heeds them
now, or thinks of them, or feels aught about them, save a
sudden chill that such things might have been.
To-day is beautiful beyond compare. The sun is high
in the heavens; the birds are twittering and preening their
soft feathers in the yellow light that Phoebus flings broad-
cast upon the loving earth.  The flowers are waking
slowly into life, and stud the mossy woods with colorings
distinct though faint:
" Nooks of greening gloom
Are rich with violets that bloom
In the cool dark of dewy leaves."
Primroses, too, are all 'alive, and sit staring at the
heavens with their soft eyes, as though in their hearts they
feel they are earth's stars. Each suble green is widening,
growing. All nature has arisen from its long slumber,' and
"beauty walks in bravest dress.?
Coming up the road, Dorian meets Georgie Broughton,
walking with quick steps, and in evident haste, towards
the vicarage. She is lilting some merry little song of her
own fancy, and has her hat pushed well back from her
forehead, so that all her sunny hair can be seen. It is a
lovely hat,-inexpensive, perhaps, but lovely, nevertheless,
in that it is becoming to the last 4egree. It is a great big
hat, like a coal-scuttle,-as scuttles used to be,-and
gives her all the appearance of being the; original of
one of Kate Greenaway's charming impersonations.
"Good-morning," says Dorian, though, in truth, he
hardly takes to heart the full beauty of the fair morning
that has been sent, so rapt he is in joy at thie very sight of
her. " Going back to'the vicarage now ?"
" Yes." She is smiling sweetly at him,-the little, kind,
indifferent smile that comes so readily to her red lips.
" Well, so am I," says Dorian, turning to accompany her.
Miss Broughton glances at him demurely.
"You can't want to go to the vicarage again ? " she sayp,
lifting her brows.
" How do you know']have been there at all to-day " says
Dorian.
"Oh, because you are always there, aren't you 1" says



<pb n="145"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.              145
'Georgie, shrugging her shoulders, and biting a little flower
she has been holding, into two clean halves.
" As you know so much, perhaps you also know why I
am always there," says Branscombe, who is half amused,
half offended, by her wilfulness.
"No, I don't," replies she, easily, turning her eyes, for
the first time, full upon his. "Tell me."
She is quite calm, quite composed; there is even the very
faintest touch of malice beneath her long lashes. Dorian
colors perceptibly. Is she coquette, or unthinking, or mere-
ly mischievous?
" No, not now," he says, slowly. " I hardly think you
would care to hear. Some day, if I may--. What a
very charming hat you have on to-day!"
She smiles again,-what true woman can resist a compli-
ment ?-and blushes faintly, but very sweetly, until all her
face is like a pale "rosebud brightly blowing."
",This old hat.?" she says, with a small attempt at scorn
and a very well got-up belief that she has misunderstood
him: "why, it has seen the rise and fall of many gener-
ations, You can't mean this hat ?"
"Yes,.I do. To me it is the most beautiful hat in the
world, no matter how many happy generations have been
permitted to gaze upon it. It is yours! "
"Oh, yes; I bought it in the dark ages," says Miss
Broughton, disdaining to notice the insinuation, and treat-
ing his last remark as a leading question. "I am glad you
like it."
"Are you? I like something else, too: I mean your
voice."
"It is too minor,-too discontented, my aunt used to
say..
" Your,aunt seems to have said a good deal in her time.
She reminds me of Butler's talker: 'Her tongue is always
in motion, though very seldom to the purpose; ' and-a1ain,
'She is a walking .pilpwy, and punishes more ear. thn a
Aozen standing ones.' But I wasn't talking exactly of
fir everyday voice: I imeant your singing: it is quite per-
fect,":
"Two compliments in five minutes I" says Miss Georgie,
calmly., Then, changing her tone with dazzling, because
unexpected, haste, she says, "N otflng pieads  me so much
10



<pb n="146"/>
146           FAIT7  AND UNFAITH.
as having my singing praised. Do you know," with hesita-
tion,-" I suppose-I am afraid it is very great vanity on
my part, but I love my own voice. It is like a friend to me,
-the thing I love best on earth."
"Are you always going to love it best on earth ?"
"Ah I Well, that, perhaps, was an exaggeration. I love
Clarissa. I am happier with her than with any one else.
You "-meditatively-" love her too ?"
"Yes, very much indeed. But I know somebody else
with whom I am even happier."
"Well, that is the girl you are going to marry, I suppose,"
says Georgia, easily,-so easily that Dorian feels a touch
of disappointment, that is almost pain; fall on his heart.
"But as for Clarissa,"-in a puzzled tone,-" I cannot
understand her. She is going to marry a man utterly un-
suited to her. I met him at the ball the other night, and"
-thoughtlessly-" I don't like him."
"Poor Horace!" says Dorian, rather taken aback.
Then she remembers, and is in an instant covered with
shame and confusion.
" I beg your pardon," she says, hurriedly. " I quite for-
got. It never occurred to me he was your brother,-never,
really. You believe me, don't you? And don't think me
rude. I am not"-plaintively--" naturally rude, and-
and, after all,"-with an upward glance full of honest liking,
-" he is not a bit like you !"
"If you don't like him, I am glad you think he isn't,"
says Dorian; " but Horace is a very good fellow all through,
and I fancy you are a little unjust to him."
"Oh, not unjust," says Georgie, softly. "I have not ac-
cused him of any failing; it is only that something in my
heart says to me, 'Don't like him."'
"Does something in your heart ever say to you, 'Li e
some one' ?"
"Very often." She is (to confess the honest truth) just
a little bit coquette at heart, so that when she says this she
lifts her exquisite eyes (that always seem half full of tears)
to his for as long as it would take him to know they had
been there, and then lowers them. " I shall have to hurry"
she says ;" it is my hour for Amy's musiclesson."
" Do you like teaching? " asks he, idly, more for the ake



<pb n="147"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.                  147
of hearing her plaintive voice again, than from any great
desire to know.
"Like it ?" She stops short on the pretty woodland
path, and confronts him curiously: " Now, do you think I
could like it? :I don't, thenl I perfectly hate it  The
perpetual over and over again, the knowledge that to-mor-
row will always be as to-day; the feeling that one can't
get away from it, is maddening. And then there are the
mistakes, 'and: the false notes, and everything. What a
question to ask me ! Did any one ever like it, I wonder! "
There is some passion, and a great deal of petulance,
in her tone; and her lovely flower-like face flusheswarmly,
and there is something besides in her expression that is
reproachful.  Dorian begins to hate himself. How could
he have asked her such a senseless question? He hesi-
tates, hardly knowing what to say to her; so deep is his
sympathy; and so, before he has time to decide on any
course, she speaks again.
"It is so monotonous," she says, wearily. "One goes
to bed only to get up again; and one gets up with no
expectation of change except to go to bed again."
-" 'One dem'd horrid grind,'" quotes Mr. Branscombe,
in a low tone. He is filled with honest pity for her. In-
stinctively he puts out his hand, and takes one of hers, and
presses it ever so gently. " Poor childl " he says, from
his heart. To him, with' her baby faco, and her odd im-
pulsive manner, that changes and varies with every thought,
she is merely a child.
She looks at him, and shakes her head.
"You must not think me unhappy," she says, hastily. " I
am not that. I was twice as unhappy before I came here.
Everybody now is so kind to me,-Clarissa, and the Red-
monds, apd "-with another glance from under the long
lashes ,-"you, and--  Mr. Hastings."
" The curate -" Say- Dorian, in such a tone as compels
Miss Broughton, o-a the instant, to believe that he and
Mr. Hastings are, at deadly feud. :       :,
"I thought you knew him," she says, with some hesita-
tion.                  ;    -
" Iave met him," returns he, "generally, I think, on
tennis-groun   H.e can runA about a good deal, but it
seems a pity to waste a good bat on him. He never hits



<pb n="148"/>
148           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
a ball by any chance, and as for serving-I don't think I
swore for six months until the last time I met him."
"Why, what did he do ?"
"More than I can recall in a hurry. For one thing, he 
drank more tea than any four people together that ever I
knew."
"Was that all? I see no reason why any one should
be ashamed of liking tea."
" Neither do I. On the contrary, one should be proud
of it.  It betrays such meekness, such simplicity, such
contentment. I myself am not fond of tea,-a fact I de-
plore morning, noon, and night."
" It is a mere matter of education," says Georgie, laugh-
ing. " I used not to care for it, except at breakfast, and
now I love itJf.'
"Do you? I wish with all my heart I was good sou-
chong," says Mr. Branscombe, at which she laughs again.
"One can't have all one's desires," she says. "Now,
with me music is a passion; yet I have never heard any
of the great singers of the age. Isn't that hard ?"
"For you it must be, indeed. But how is it you haven't ?"
"Because I have no time, no money, no-no anything."
"What a hesitation I Tell me what the 'anything'
stands for."
"Well, I meant no home,-that is, no husband, I sup-
pose," says Georgie.  She is quite unconcerned, and
smiles at him very prettily as she says it. Of. the fact that
he is actually in love with her, she is totally unaware.
"That is a regret likely to be of short standing," he
says, his eyes on hers. But her thoughts are far away,
and .she hardly heeds the warmth of his gaze or the evi-
dent meaning in his tone.
"I suppose if I did marry somebody he would take me
to hear all the great people ? " she says, a little doubtfully,
looking at him as though for confirmation of her hope.
" I should think he would take you wherever you wanted
to go, and to hear whatever you wished to hear," h isays,
slowly.                              "   f. 
"What a charming picture you conjure up I" says
Geotgie, lookingat him.  ' Y enouencourage me. The very
first nch man that asks me tomarylhi, I Abllsy. 'Y '
hidef', .             · .:  . '  ' , -   'Y I.



<pb n="149"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.              49
"You have made up your mind, then, to marry for
money ? " He is watching her closely, and his brow has
contracted a good deal, and his lips show some pain.
"I have made up my mind to nothing. Perhapsg I haven't
one to make up,"-lightly. " But I hate teaching, and I
hate being poor. That is all. But we were not talking of
that. We were thinking of Mr. Hastings. At all events,
you must confess he reads well, and that is somethifng 
Almost everybody reads badly."
"They do9" says Branscombe, meekly. "I do. Unless
in words of one syllable, I can't read at all. So the curate
has the pull over me there. Indeed, I begin to feel my-
self nowhere beside the curate. He can read well, and
drink tea well, and I can't do either."
"Why, here we are at the vicarage," says Georgie, in a
tone of distinct surprise, that is flattering to the last de-
gree. " I didn't think we were half so close to it. I am
so glad I met you, because, do you know, the walk hasn't
seemed nearly so long as usual. Well, good-by."
"May I have those violets ?" says Branscombe, point-
ing to a little bunch of those fair comers of the spring
that lies upon her breast.
"You may," she says, detaching them from her gown
and giving them to him willingly, kindly, but without a
particle of the tender confusion he would gladly have seen
in her. "They are rather faded," she says, with some dis-
appointment; "you could have picked yourself a sweeter
bunch on your way home." 
"I hardly think so."
"Well, good-by again," she says, turning up to him the
most bewitching and delicious of small faces, " and be
sure you put my poor flowers in water. They will live
the longer for it."
"They shall live forever. A hundred years hence, were
you to ask me where they were, I swear I should be able
to show tl6m." 
"A very safe oath," says Miss Broughton; and then
she gives him her hand, and parts from him, and-runs all
the way down the short avenue to the housaeleaving him
to turn and go on to Gowran. 
~~~~~~~~~·.



<pb n="150"/>
150           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
- : -    CHAPTER     XX.
" There have been hearts whose friendship gave
Them thoughts at once both soft and grave."
IN the drawing-room he finds Clarissa sitting among in-
nume'table spring offerings. The whole'place seems alive
with them. " The breath of flowers is on the air." Prim-
roses and violets shine out from tiny Etruscan vases, and
little baskets 'of pale Belleek are hidden by clustering
roses brought from the conservatory to make sweet the
sitting-room of their mistress.
"I am so glad you have come," says Clarissa, rising
with a smile to welcome him, 'as he comes up to her.
"The day was beginning to drag a little. Come over
here, and make yourself comfortable.'
"That will I, right willingly, so it pleases you, madam,"
says Dorian, and straightway, sinking into the desirable
lounging-chair she has pointed out, makes himself thor-
oughly happy.
A low bright fire is burning merrily; upon the rug a
snow-white Persian cat sinks blinking; while Billy, the
Irish terrier, whose head is bigger than his body, and
whose hair is of the shabbiest, reclines gracefully upon an
ottoman near. Clarissa, herself, is lying back upon a
cushioned chair, looking particularly pretty, if a trifle in-
dolent.
"Now for your news," she says, in the tone one adopts
when expecting to be amused.
Dorian, lifting his arms, lays them behind his head.
"I wonder if ever in all my life I had any news," he
says, meditatively. "After all, I begin to think I'm not
much. Well, let me see: would it be news to say r met
and talked with, and walked with your 'lassie wi' the lint-
white locks' ?"
"Georgie ? You-. She was with me all the morn-
ing."
"So she told me."
"Ah ? And how far did you go with her "
"To the vicarage. As I had beenthere all the morn-
ing, I couldn't well go in again,-a fact I felt and de-
plored."



<pb n="151"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITIIt.             151
' I am glad you walked back with her," says Miss Pey-
ton; but she doesn't look glad. "I hope you were nice
to her ?"
"Extremely nice: ask her if I wasn't. And our con,
versation was of the freshest. We both. thought it was
the watiest spring dayJwe had ever. known; until we re-
membered last Thursday, and then we agreed haf was the
warmest spring day we had ever known. And' then we
thought spritg was - prefeiable to summer. And, then,
that Cissy Redmond would be very pretty if she hadn't a
cocked nose. Don't look so amazed, my dear Clarissa:
it was Miss Broughton's expression, not mine, and a very
good one too, I think. We say a cocked hat; therefore why
not a cocked nose ? And then we said all education was
a bore and a swindle, and then-. How old is she,
Clarissa ?"
"You mean Georgie ?"
"Yes."        -
" Neither nineteen nor twenty."
"So much 1 Then I really think she is the youngest-
looking girl I ever met at that age. She looks more like
sweet seventeen."
"You think her pretty ?"
"Rather more than that: she reminds me always of
'Maggie Lauder:'
"' Her face is as the summer closd, whereon
The dawning sun delights to rest his rays.'
And, again, surely Apollo loves to
"Play at hide-a-seek amid her golden hairs.'"
"Dorian, don't--don't make her unhappy," says Cla-
rissa, blushing hotly.
"I wish I could," says Doriari  He laughs as he
speaks, but there is truth hidden in his jesting tone. Oh,
to make her feel something,-that cold indifferent child !
" No, no. I am in earnest," says Clarissa, a little anx-
iously. " Don't pay her too much attention, if you don't
mean it."
"Perhaps I do mean it."
"She is very young,"--ignoring shis last speech al-
together. " She is a perfect baby in some ways. It isn't
kind of you, I think."



<pb n="152"/>
152           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
"My dear child, what am I doing? If I hand M
Broughton a chair, or ask her if she would like anoth
cup of tea, is that 'making her unhappy' ? I really beg
to think society is too moral for me. I shall give it u
and betake myself to Salt Lake City.'.        -
"You won't understand me," begins she, sitting mI
upright, as though desirous of .argument; but he inte
rupts her.
" There you mistake me," he says. " My motives a.r
quite pure. I am dying to understand you, only I can't
If you would try to be a little more lucid, all would bl
well; but why I am to be sat upon, and generally mal!
treated, because I walked a mile- or so with a friend of
yours, is more than I can grasp."
"L don't Want to sit upon you," says Clarissa a little
vexed.
" No ! I dare say that chair is more comfortable."
" I don't want anything; I merely ask you to be care-
ful. She is very young, and has seen few men; and if
you persist in your attentions she may fall in love with
you."
" I wish to goodness she would," says Branscombe; and
then something in his own mind strikes him, and he leans
back in his chair, and laughs aloud. There is, perhaps,
more bitterness than mirth in his laugh; yet Miss Peyton
hears only the mirth.
"I hope she won't," she says, severely. " Nothing would
cause me greater sorrow. Underneath her childish map.
ner there lies a passionate amount of feeling that, once
called into play, would be impossible to check. Amuse
yourself elsewhere, Dorian,, unless you,mean to marry
her."
"Well, why shouldn't I marry her ?" says Dorian.
' I see no reason why you shouldn't. I only know you
have no intention whatever of doing.so."
"If you keep on saying that over and over again, I
dare say I shall want to marry her,!' says Dorian.
"There is nothing like opposition for that kind of thing;
you go and tell a fellow he can't and 1aha'ntt -marry such-
and-such a girl, and ten to one but he goes and -does it
directly.".



<pb n="153"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               1S3
"Don't speak like that," says Clarissa, entreatingly:
she is plainly unhappy.
" Like what ? What nonsense you have been talking
-all this time I Has it never occurred to you that though,
no doubt, I am endowed with many qualities above the
average, still I am not an ' Adonis,' or ant' Apollo,' or an
'Admirable Crichton, or any thing of that sort, and that
it is probable your Miss Broughton might be in my society
from this till the day she dies without experiencing a
pang, as far as I am concerned."
" I don't know about' Apollo' or Ciichton,' " says Cla-
rissa; " but let her alone. I want her to marry Mr. Hast-
ings."
" The curate ?" says Dorian, for the second time to day.
"Yes. Why should you be so amazed? He is very
charming, and I think she likes him. He is very kind-
hearted, and would make her happy; and she doesn't like
teaching."
"I don't believe she likes Hastings," says Dorian; yet
his heart dies within him as he remembers how she defended
him about his unlimited affection for the cup that " cheers
but not inebriates."
" I believe she does," says Clarissa.
" Can't you do something for me, Clarissa ? " says Dorian,
with a rather strained laugh: "you are evidently bent on
making the-entire country happy, yet you ignore my case.
Even when I set my heart upon a woman, you instantly
marry her to the curate. I hate curates! They are so
mild, so inoffensive, so abominably respectable. It is al-
most criminal of you to insist on handing over to one of
them that gay little friend of yours with the yellow hair.
She will die of Hastings, in a month. The very next time
I have the good fortune to find her alone, I shall feel it my
duty to warn her off him."
"Does anybody ever take advice unless it falls in with
their own wishes ? " says Clarissa.  ' You may warn her
as you will."
"I sha'n't warn her at all," says Dorian.
When he has left Clarissa, and is on his homeward way,
this thought still haunts him. Can that pretty-child be in
love with the lanky young man in the long-tailed coat ?
She can't 1 No; it is impossible I Yet, how sure Clarissa



<pb n="154"/>
154           rzFAITH AND UNFAITH.
seemed J and. of course women understand each other, and
perhaps Georgie had been pouring confidences of a tender
nature into her ears. This last is a very unpleasant idea,
and helps to decapitate three unoffending primroses.
Certainly she had defended that fellow very warmly (the
curate is now "that fellow "), and had spoken of him a 
though she felt some keen interest in him.: After all, what
is it to him? (This somewhat savagely, and with the aid
of a few more flowers.) If he was in love with her, it
would be another thing; but as it is,-yes, as it is.
How often people have advised him to marry and settle
down ! Well, hang it all, he is surely, as good to look at
as the curate, and his position is better; and only a few.
hours ago she had expressed a desire to see something of
life. What would Arthur think of-
His thoughts change. Georgie's riante lovely face fades
into.some deeper recess of his heart, and a gaunt old figure,
and a face stern and disappointed, rises before him. Ever
since that day at Sartoris, when the handkerchief had been
discovered, a coldness, a nameless but stubborn shadow,
had fallen between him and his uncle,-a shadow impossi-
ble to lift until some explanation be vouchsafed by the
younger man.
Such an explanation it is out of Dorian's power to give.
The occurrence altogether was unhappybut really nothing
worthy of a violent quarrel, Branscombei as is his nature,
pertinaciously thrusts the whole affair out of sight, refus-
ing to let it trouble him, except on such occasions as the
present, when it pushes itself upon him unawares, and will
not be suppressed. 
Horace has never been to Pullingham since the night
of the ball, and his letters to Clarissa have been many and
constant, so that Dorian's suspicions have somewhat lan-
guished, and are now, indeed, almost dead, he being slow
to entertain evil thoughts of any one.
Ruth Annersley, too, though plainly desirous of avoiding
his society ever since his meeting'with her in :the shrub-
beries, seems happy and content, if very quiet and sub-
dued. Once, indeed, coming upon her unexpectedly, he
had been startled by an expression in her eyes foreign to
their usual calm; it was a look half terrified, half: defiant,
and it haunted him for some time afterwards. But the rq-



<pb n="155"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               155
membrance of that faded, too; and she had never afterwards
risked the chance of a tfte2-tfte with him.
#             # *           #      #*     * 
Meantime, Miss Peyton's little romance about the
Broughton-Hastings affair rather falls to bits. Georgie,
taking advantage of an afternoon that sees the small Red-
monds-on the road to a juvenile party, goes up to Gowran,
and, making her way to the morning room, runs to Clarissa
and gives her a dainty little hug.
" Aren't you glad I have come ?" she says, with the ut-
most naivcc   " I'm awfully glad myself. The children
have all gone to the Dugdales', and so I am my own mis-
tress."
" And so you came to me," says Clarissa.
" Yes, of course."
"And now, to make you happy," says Clarissa, medita-
tively.
"Don't take any thought about that. It is already an
accomplished fact. I am with you, and therefore I am
perfectly happy."
"Still, you so seldom get a holiday," goes on Clarissa,
regretfully, which is a little unfair, as the Redmonds are
the easiest-going people in the world, and have a sort of
hankering after the giving of holidays and the encourage-
ment of idleness generally. The vicar, indeed, is laden
with a suppressed and carefully hidden theory that chil-
dren should never do anything but laugh and sit in the sun.
In his heart of hearts he condemns all Sunday-schools, as
making the most blessed day one of toil, and a wearying
of the flesh, to the little ones.
" Why,-why," said he, once, in an unguarded moment,
bitterly repented of afterwards, " forbid them their rest on-
the Sabbath day?" 
"What a pity the afternoon is so uncertain " says
Clarissa. " We might have gone for a nice long drive."
She goes over to the window, and gazes disconsolately
at the huge shining drops that fling themselves heavily
against the panes, and on the leaves and flowers outside;
while                                                       '
The thirsty earth soaks up the rain,
And drinks, and gapes for drink again."



<pb n="156"/>
56            FAITR' AND UNFAITH.
"I cannot feel anything to be a pity to-day," says
Georgie. "I can feel only a sense of freedom. Clarissa,
let us play a game of battledore and shuttlecock. I used
to beat you at Brussels; try if you can beat me now."
Into the large hall they go, and, armed with battledores,
comhience their fray. Hither and thither flies the little
white bird, backwards and forwards move the lithe figures
of the girls. The game is at its height: it is just the ab-
sorbing moment, when u99 has been delivered, and re.
ceived, and returned, when Georgie, stopping short sud-
denly, cries " Oh !" and 200 flutters to the ground.
Clarissa, who is standing with her back to the hall
door, turns instinctively towards it, and sees Dorian Brans-
combe.
"I have disturbed you. I have come in at the wrong
moment ?" asks that young man, fearfully.
"Ah! you have spoiled our game. And we were so
well into it. Your sudden entrance startled Georgie, and
she missed her aim."            -
"I am sorry my mere presence should reduce Miss
Broughton to a state of abject fright," says-Dorian, speak-
ing to Clarissa, but looking at Georgie.
Her arm is still half raised, her color deep and rich, her
eyes larger, darker than usual; the excitement of the game
is still full upon her. As Dorian speaks, her lips part, and
a slow sweet smile creeps round them, and she looks ear-
nestly at him, as though to assure him'that she is making
him a free present of it,-an assurance that heightens her
beauty, to his mind. Galing at her with open and sincere
admiration, he tells himself that
"Nature might no more h'er child advance."
"Your presence would not frighten me," she says, shak-
ing her head; "but it was-I don't know what; I only
know that I forgot myself for the moment and missed my
aim. Now, that was hard, because we were so near our
second hundred. Why did you not come a little sooner
or a little later ?"
"Because 'a thoughtless animal is man,*" quotes he,
his blue eyes full of contrition. " And the door was wide
open, and the picture beforeTnie put all other thoughtsou
of my head. I wish I was a girl! I should do nothin



<pb n="157"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.              157
bti play' battledore and shuttlecock from morning till
nitgct' Then, reproachfully, " I think you might both
shake hands with me, especially as I can say only 'how
d'ye do' and ' good-by' in one breath: I am bound to meet
Arthur at three precisely."
"What a comfort I" says Clarissa, devoutly. "Then
there is some faint chance we may be allowed to end our
afternoon in peace "
"If there is one thing on earth for which I have a keen
admiration, it is' candor," says Branscombe; "I thank
you, Clarissa, for even this small touch of it. Miss
Broughton, be candid too, and say you, at least, will re-
gret me."
" I shall," says Georgie, with decided-and, it must be
confessed, unexpected-promptness.
"Hal" says Dorian, victoriously. "Now I am con-
tent to go. A fig for your incivility, Clarissa 1 At least I
leave one-true mourner behind."
"Two," says Clarissa, relentingly.
"Too late now; apology is useless I Well, rm off.
Can.I do anything for either of you "
" Yes; bring me up that little dog you promised me,-
one of Sancho's puppies."
" You shall have the very prettiest to-morrow, in spite
of your ill-treatment. And you, Miss Broughton, what
can I do for you ?"
He is looking tenderly at the small childish face, framed
in gold, that is gazing at him smilingly from the distance.
"Me? " she says, waking, as if from a revery, with a
faint blush. "Oh! give me my liberty." She says it
jestingly, but with a somewhat sad shrug of her rounded
shoulders, as she remembers the dismal school-room, and
the restraint that, however gentle, is hateful to her gay,
petulant nature. Her smile dies, and tears creep into
her eyes. 
In another moment she is laughing again; but months
go by before Dorian forgets the sad little petition and the
longing glance that accompanied it, and the sigh that was
only half repressed.
"I like Mr. Branscombe so much," says Georgie, a lit-
tle later on, when Dorian has disappeared. They have
forsaken their late game, and are now in Clarissa's own
I



<pb n="158"/>
158           FAITH AND UNFA ITH.
room, standing in a deep oriel window that overlooks tfC
long sweep of 'avenue on one side, and the pahteire  l-.
neath where early spring flowers are gleaming wkt -ith
the'rain that fell so heavily an hour ago. 
"Every one likes Dorian," says Clarissa, pleasantly,
but without her usual warmth when speaking of Brans-
combe. " He. is a general favorite, and I think he knows'
it. He is like a spoiled child; he says what he likes to
every one, but nobody takes anything he says seriously."
This friendly hint is iltterly thrown away; Miss
Broughton understands it not at all.
"Yet sometimes he looks quite grave," she says,-
"nearly as grave as Mr. Hastings when in his surplice,
only not so solemn. That is all the difference."
"I like Mr. Hastings in his surplice," says Clarissa;
"I think him very handsome: don't you ?"
"Well-yes-. Only I wish his ears didn't stick out so
much. Why do they? He always, somehow, makes me.
think of Midas."
" Bit you like him,' persists Clarissa, feeling, however,
a little crestfallen. It doesn't sound promising, this allu-
sion to Mr. Hastings's ears.
"Ever so much," says Georgie, enthusiastically; "and
really, you know, he can't help his ears. After all, how
much worse a crooked eye would be !"
"Of course. And his eyes are really beautiful."
"You are not in love with him, are you ? " says Miss
Georgie,'with an amused laugh; and again Clarissa's
hopes sink to zero.
' No. But I am glad you area friend of his. Does
he-like you ?"               :
"Yes, I think so: I am sate of it. Clarissa,"-with
hesitation,-" if I tell you something, will you promise me
faithfully not to tell it again ?"
" I promise faithfully, darling, if you wish it."
" It is something Mr. Hastings said to me last night,
and though I was,not told in words to keep' it secret, still
I think he would wish me to be silent about it ifr-.ibr a
while. There can't be any harm in confiding:it to you,
can there ? You are such an old friend qf both.''
"Not the slightest- harm,"' says Miss Peyton, with con-
viction. Woman-like, she is burning with curi6sity4 ' Not



<pb n="159"/>
[f          2SFAITH AND UINFAITH             159
for an instant does she doubt that one of her greatest
wishes is' about to be fulfilled: Mr. Hastings, who has a
small though not insignificant"income of his own, inde-
pendent of the Church, is about to marry her dearest
Georgie.' :
" Her dearest'Georgie," raising hersef ittle fro  her
recumbent position, leais her afth .Oi (Clarisa's knee,
and 'loks up into her face :- thie' is Importance :largely
mingled with delight in herfaii'ffeatites. >  ' '
"Well, then,'e sie say's,'lowly,'-ithougb loath to part
all at once with her treasured ier*s, "MfSt right-he told
me-that he-was in love !"    '" -' ,' ,' ,iT
"Did he ?"-with suppressed excitement.  "And--
and you-what did you say?" -   '
"I didn't say much'Y says Miss Broughton, regretfully.
"I might have said a 'reat dealF; 'boi, something kinder,
more encouraging, you know ;i.ut I was so surprised and
so--"           ·               ' .   '
" Pleased ? "-tenderly.
"Pleased ! I should think so," with so much emnfresse-
ment that even Claiissa is taken ababk. "-I was never so
delighted in my life, only,'as  'said before; a little con-
fused, and couldn't think of anythiig'pretty to say."
"I think it was 'far n'iier your'saying nothing," says
Clarissa, very genfly. She is a little disappointed in Geor-
gie; a woman may be glad to marry a man, but she
shouldn't say so, at least not exactly in 'such a cold-blooded
fashion. "I can quite understand "-*ith sufficient hesi-
tation to convince herself, at least, that she does not under-
stand-" how you felt nervous in spite of your happiness."
"Oh, you always know everything," says Georgie, so
lovingly that Clarissa hates herself for thinking even one
unpleasant thought of her. " Well, he went on to say he
never loved before. Now, honestly, Clarissa,"-inda thor-
;oughlypiatter-of-fact tone,-" do "ou think. that could be
true ? "
, "Why .shouldn't it be true?" says Clarissa, wishing
with all her heart the other would be a little more senti-
mental over her own first love-affair, as she believes it to
be. 
"Well, yes, of course; he is rather young, and beauty
goes a long way 'with some men.' 



<pb n="160"/>
100            FAITH AND UNFAITIZ.
Again Clarissa stares. She hadn'tthought Georgie vain
of her own charms.. How.dif4icult it is to know any one,
even one's chiefest friend          ' . 
"Then he went on to say he could never l'ee teal happi-
ness again until he knew he,was loved in return."
";Well?    l ,^-3       adid then '.   , .
" said, -waitI bAe(t.litte laugh Imaginable,- "1
thought he was lopv4.  rut.i            . 
'¥ You ,^ Fti,'e9    i,. W t a strange :answer I I
do think:lyp: .'a      It e bit' coquette I I am so glad,s
though. Po you know, I guesed all al onrig ob it would
be?"     .J... II
"So did I. I            Pkw  yewy :'.b  it woul :nd -  felt
he would f.avic "   p P er or later. It i  ratht -soon,
isn't it  t"W1 i        s;tn  only natural I should know
about it?",:  ,.   T  ,,r. ..              ' 
"Yes, only natural" ' larissa can think of nothing else
to say. Not like this had she felt; whenn  . To talk of
him as a victim!, .  -,  , .   .' "'
"I hope everythinl,. i ~,$et tled ,pon," goes on Miss
Broughton gaylyy, '  app.js fthe wodng-that isn't long
adoing.' And I sh1ud l'te-'tiei; 1ia'triage to be soon;
wouldn't you? I ti ane xt time J see him I shall ask
him   aboutit."',,, ,- : /. '..: '  :  - '_  ". '
"Oh, Georgie, doa't I; Indeed I, would not, if I were
you," excdaiims CC ar  i  ss i anIagony, : Good'gacidus Is
she lost to all senser of.shame? "He *on't 'ike it. It is
surely the man's part to, speak firt .ai&out that." 
"Oh, very well,"--anmcably. "$tut there couldn't be
any harm in my speaking about it" '
" Just as much, as,jan any other woman's."'
" Not so,muci 4e it iPvas Cissy ? ".
" Twice asmh It       has she got to do with it?"
'9 Well, a greatd qal, t "e it,"-laughing Alain.
"As a friend she may (eel some interest in hi, I sup
pose. But she is not going.to marry him."
"Well, I think she is. You don't think she jUll refuse
him, do you? "-anxiously. , 
"Cissy Redmond I"
"Cissy Redmond.' .
-" Do you mean to tell m,'" says Clarissa, growing ve



<pb n="161"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               i61
red, "that it is 9issy you have been talking about all this
time, and not--yourself."        ' -
"Myself ! What on earth are you thinking of?"  It is
now Georgie's turn to blush crimson, and she does it very
generously.' Then she breaks into wild mirth, and, laying
her head On Clarissa's knees, laughs till she! nearly cries.
" Oh, When I think of all I have said " she 'goes on, the
keenest enjoyment' in her tone, -"how I' prised my-
self, and hyw cavalierly I treated his proposal, and-what
was dit-,d[ about asking him -lo name the wedding-day ?
Oh, Clitsia, what a dear you are I-and what a goose I"
"Well; certainly, I neter was so taken in in my life,"
confest Miss Peyton, and then she laughs too, and pres-
entlyri as deeply interested in Cissy's lover as if he had
indeed beeni Georgie's. 
,       'C "HAPTER XXI.
" Sin and shame are ever tied together                   .
. lth Kgordian knots,.of ;uch astrong thaet4 spun, -
, Tje cannot without violence be undone.-P-WEBSTE.zi
. SIaf qthan the stings of death I "-Rf OLDS. 
UPokWPullingham a great cloud has descended. It has
gathered in one night,-swiftly, secretl,-and has fallen
without warning, crushing many hearts beneath it. : Shame,
and sinitn'd sorrow,' and that most terrible of all things-
uncertintry-have come together tD form 'it, while doubt
and suspicion lie in its train. 
Ruth Annersley is missing LI) She has. disappeired;-
utterly ! entirely I-leaving no trace behind her, no word,
no line to relieve the heart of the old man, her father, and
which is slowly beginning to break, as the,.terible truth
dawns upon him.
Only yester eve -he had pouredout kist;ea as,usual, had
bidden him good-night,-lovingly, indeed, but not, as one
would bid an eternal farewell. Afterwards, he remembered,
she had not given him--on that night ;of all others-the
customary kiss, but had passed away from him coldly, cal-
lously-or was'it that she feared?
Tired out with his day's work, the miller had gone to bed.
I'



<pb n="162"/>
162           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
The girl, as was her habit ever since the longer evenings
had set in, had gone for a little walk into the dewy woods,
\ where -we ate told " every bough that moves over our head
has an oracular wisdom." Alas! that they should have
taught her so little. She had crossed the road before the
very eyes of her household, had entered the green forest of
early-breaking leaves, had faded from sight, and never
\  came back again.                    .       ,
The old man, who rises and goes to bed wi e s
(most constant companion of simple minds), :ha  slept 
peacefully all night, never doubting that the child of his
heart lay dreaming calm and, hppy drenias in i; own
room. Not until thoe T' irg w  far advanced did he dis-
cover that Ruth's bed had known no occupant. thlJnigit
-  before.
i Afterwards, too, he remembered how little this tlought
had jarred upon him just at first. It was strange, vAing;
she should have told hin where she meant to speni her
evening; but, beyond ftat, it caused him no pang,-nb sus-
picion.                      . .           n  .: X.-  .
Her aunt' live4i'  a neighboring town,--piibt   she 
had gond there. -It -aS- only four miles away ,- walk
Ruth had taken riny a day, and thought notling'bof it;
, but it was imprudent starting on such a journey so late in
--. the evening; and,.besides, there was always the old mare
- -  to drivd her there amid back..              . ,
~r.  9   Messengers were despatched to her aunt's house but
i they returned bringing no tidings. She was not :there-
C'Kj-   had not been for over a fortnight.
.ql.    Day wanes; twilight is descending,-
"Melting heavep with earth,
Leaving on qaggy hills and running streams 
A softness like the atmosphere of dreams.'
All day: the miller tas sat aparty his snow-white head upon
his arms, in the' room her hands had beautified and nmade
sso dear. With passionate indignation he has thrust from
\ him all the attenmpts t  sympathy, all the hurtful, though
l-.wetreant, offerges  assistance held out to him by kindly
neighbors. Silent, and half maddened by his thoughts, he
sits dogged and silent, refusing food, and waiting only for
her who never comes.



<pb n="163"/>
FAITH AND UNFAlTH.               z63
But when, at length, the gloaming comes, and day islover,
without bringing to him the frail fotii .of her he so desires,  Na
e rises, and,' pushing back'his chair, goes up to Hythe, 
and into the presence of Lord Sartoris. 
"You will find me my girl," he says, and then he tells
him all the story. 
Sartoris listens, and, as he does so, sickehs, with doubt '
that is hardly a doubt, and fear that is nearly a certainty."'
Is this the end he has so dreaded ? Is this the creeping,"
horror that has of late so tortured him ? Alas for the un-.
blemished honor of the old name that for centuries has r'
held itself sanspeur et sans reproche. 
How can he dare to offer consolation to old Annersley ? a*
He covers his face with his hands, and bends forw'ard over \
the table. There is something in his attitude that denots AN
despair, and'renders more keen the agony in Annersley\I
bosom. 
"Why do you do that ? he cries, fiercely. "What is
there to groan about? Nothing, I tell you! The child
has gone too far,-has lost her way. She didt't uihder-t
stand. She cannot find her road home.--No mor6--no- k,
more"                                         .
His excitement and grief are pitiful to see. He wrings 
his hands; his whole bearing and expression ate at vari-  N
ance with his hopeful words. "She will come back iii an \K
hour or two, mayhap," he. says, miserably, "and then I 
shall feel that I have disturbed your lordship: but I am - .
in a hurry, you see: I want her, and I cannot Wait.'  ' '
"What do you want me to do for you ?" says Sartoris,  '
very humbly. He feels that he can hardly lift his eyes in ·
this man's presence.                               4
"Find her! That is all I ask of you. Find her, dead "
or alive ! You are a great man,-high in authority, with
power, and servants at command. Find me my 'cfild!( \
Oh, man, help me, in some way!"                   M "
He cries this in an impassioned tone. He is tOtally6 )
overcome. His poor old white head falls helplessl' upon -
* his clasped arms.
Sartoris, pale as death, ard 'isibly affected cdni 'iiake
no reply. -He trembles, 4ad  sitnds befoire. the humble\
miller as one oppressed with guilt.          , 
m   /                                -l -r
- ' I ' '   ^ j   /   ~ /          j



<pb n="164"/>
164           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
Annersley mistakes his meaning, and, striding forward,
lays his hand upon his arm.
"You are silent," he says, in a terrible tone, made up of
grief and anguish more intense than words can tell. "You
do not, think she is in the wrong, do you? You believe
her innocent ? Speak !-speak I"
"I do," responds Sartoris, and only his own heart
knows that he lies. Yet his tone is so smothered, so unlike
his usual one, that he hardly recognizes it himself.
"If Mr. Branscombe were only here," says Annersley, in
a stricken voice, after a lengthened pause, " he would help
me. He has always been a kind friend to me atid mine."
Lord Sartoris draws a deep breath, that is almost a sob.
"When does he return, my lord ?"
"On Saturday. He said so, at least, when leaving."
"A long time," murmurs the old man, mournfully. " She
will be home before that,-if she ever comes at all." His
head sinks upon his breast. Then he rouses himself, and,
glancing at Lord Sartoris, says entreatingly, "Won't you
write to him, my lord ? Do, I implore of you, and conjure
him to return. If any one can help me it will be Mr. Do-
rian 1"
" I shall write to him now,-now,-at once," says Sar-
toris, mechanically, feeling how hideous is the mockery of
this,, promise, knowing what he thinks he knows. Even
yet he clings to the hope that he has been mistaken.
Thus he soothes the old man with vain promises, and so
gets rid of him, that he may be left alone with his own
thoughts.
Shall he go to Dorian ? This is the first engrossing idea.
Yet it affords but little consolation. To see him, to hear
him, to listen to a denial from his lips; that is what it holds
out to him, and it is all insufficient. How shall he believe
him, knowing the many things that have occurred ? How
treat his very most eager denial as anything but a false-
hood ?
For hours he paces to and fro, pondering on what is the
best course to pursue. He is not his father, that he can
coerce him. By nature suspicious (though tender-hearted
and indulgent in ther ways), it comes easily to him to
believe that even the man in whom' he has trusted has
been found wanting.



<pb n="165"/>
FAITH AND UNFXITY.               165
"To doubt is worse than to have lost," says Massinger;
and surely he is right. Sartoris, in deep perplexity, ac-
knowledges the truth of this line, and tells himself that in
his old age he has been sorely tried. The whole world
seems changed. Sunshine has given placeto gloom; and
he himself stands alone,- 
"Stoynde and amazde at his own shade for dreed,
And fearing greater daungers than was nede.".
Not until he is thoroughly exhausted, both in mind and
body, does he decide on leaving for town by the mid-day
train next day.
In the mean time he will telegraph to Claridge's, some
faint remembrance lingering with him of Dorian's having
made mention of that hotel as being all any one's fancy
could possibly paint it.
But the morrow brings its own tidings.
It is almost noon, and Sartoris, sitting in his library, writ-
ing some business letters,-preparatory to catching the up
train to town,-is disturbed by a light knock at the door.
"Come in," he calls out, impatiently; and Simon Gale,
opening the door, comes slowly in.
He is a very old man, and has been butler in the family
for more years than he himself can count. His head is
quite white, his form a little bent; there is, at this mo-
ment, a touch of deep distress upon his face that makes
him look even older than he is.
"Are you busy, my lord ?" asks he, in a somewhat
nervous tone.
"Yes; I am very much engaged. I can see no one,
Gale. Say I am starting for town immediately."
" It isn't that, my lord. It is something I myself have
to say to you. If you could spare me a few minutes-."
He comes a little nearer, and speaks even more earnestly.
"It is about Ruth Annersley."
Lord Sartoris, laying down his pen, looks at him in-
tently.
"Close the door, Simon," he says, hurriedly, something
in the old servant's manner impressing him. "I will hear
you. Speak, man: what is it ?"
"A story I heard this morning, my lord; which I feel
it my duty to repeat to you. Not that I believe one word



<pb n="166"/>
i66           'FAITH AND UNi   AIH /I. l
of it. You will remember that, my lord,-not one word." 
The grief in his tone belies the truth of his avowal. His
head is bent. His old withered hands clasp and unclasp
each ober nervously.
":you are trembling," says Lord Sartoris. "Sit down.
This news, whatever it is, has unstrung you."
"It has," cries Simon, with vehemence. "I am trem-
bling; I am unstrung. How can I be otherwise when I
hear such a slander put upon the boy I have watched
froi his cradle ?"
"you are speaking of-   ? " demands Sartoris, with
an effort.
"Mr. Dorian." 4e says this in a very low tone; and
tears, that always come so painfully and so slowly to the
olc, shine in his eyes. " His sad complexion wears grief's
mourning livery."  He covers his face with his hands.
Sartoris, rising from his seat, goes over to the window,
and so stands that his face cannot be seen.
What have you got to say about Mr. Branscombe ?"
he asks, in a harsh, discordant tone.
"My lord, it is an impertinence my speaking at all,"
says Gale.
"Go on. Let me know the worst. I can hardly be
more miserable than I am," returns Sartoris.
" It was Andrews, the under-gardener, was telling me,"
begins Simon, without any further attempt at hesitation.
"This morning, early, I met him near the Ash Grove.
'Simon,' he says, 'I want to speak wi'ye. I have a se-
cret on my mind.'
"'If you have, my man, keep it,' says I. 'I want
none o' your secrets.' For in truth he is often very
troublesome, my lord, though a well-meaning youth at
bottom.
"' But it is on my conscience,' says he, 'and if I don't
tell it to you I shall tell it to some one else, because tell
it I ,ust, or bust!'
i"So when he went that far, my lord, I saw as how he
w.s re4l uneay, and  n made up my mind to Jisten. And
Aen ie says,-,,
"'Night before last feyther was coning through the
copse gd that runs t'other side or the fece from Mas-
. !Ansi'ie'ys tand there, in the thickest part o' it, he
·F# ,! ~  ~.  .            .  .



<pb n="167"/>
FA171IT AND UvNFAITIL.          x,
saw Miss Ruth a standing, and wi' her was Mr. Brans-
combe.'
"'Which Mr. Branscombe ?' says I.
"'Mr. Dorian,' he says. 'He seen him as plain as
life, though it was dusk, standing wi' his back half turned
towards him, but not so turned but wha. he could see his
ear and part o' his face. He had a hold o' Miss Ruth's
hands; and was speaking very earnest to her, as though
he were persuading her to something she were dead
against. And she were crying very bitter, and trying to
draw her hands away; but presently she got quiet like;
and then they went away together, slowly at first, but
quicker afterwards, in the direction of the wood that leads
to Langham. He did not stir a peg until they was out o'
sight, he was so afeard o' being seen. And now it is onr
his conscience that he did not speak sooner, ever since he
saw old Mr. Annersley yesterday, like a mad creature,
looking for his girl.'
"That was his story, my lord. And he told it as though
he meant it. I said to him as how Mr. Dorian was in
Lonnun, and that I didn't believe one word of it; and
then he said,-
"'Lonnun or no Lonnun, there is no mistake about it.
If, as you say, he did go up to Lonnun, he must ha'
come down again by the Langham train, for he see him
wi' his two eyes.'
"'Mr. Horace is very like- Mr. Dorian,' I said. (For-
give me, my lord, but there was a moment when I would
gladly have believed the blame might fall on Mr; Horace.)
'There are times when one can hardly know them asun-
der;' but he scouted this notion.
"' Feyther seen him,' he said. ' He had one o' them light
overcoats on he is so fond o' wearing. It was him, and
no other. He noticed the coat most perticler. And a
damn'd shame it is for him I If you don't believe me, I
can't help you. I believe it: that is enough for me."'
Gale ceases speaking. And silence follows that lasts
for several minutes.  hen he speaks again:
"I ask your pardon, my lord, for having so spoken 
about any member of the family. But I thought it was
only right you should know."
"You have acted very kindly." Even to himself his



<pb n="168"/>
,6-              17T RFfl  AND UNFAITH.
tone is strained and cold. " This Andrews must be si-
lenced," he says, after a little pause, full of bitterness.
"I have seen to that, my lord. After what I said to
him, he will hardly speak again to any one on the sub-
ject."
"See to it, Simon. Let him fully understand that dis-
missal will be the result of further talk."
" I will, my lord."  Then, very wistfully, " Not that any
one would distrust Mr. Dorian in this matter. I feel-I
know, he is innocent."
Lord Sartoris looks at him strangely; his lips quiver;
he seems old and worn, and as a man might who has just
seen his last hope perish.
"I envy you your faith," he says, wearily; "I would
give half-nay, all I possess, if I could say that hon-
estly."
Just at this moment there comes an interruption.
",A telegram, my lord," says one of the men, handing in
a yellow envelope.
Sartoris, tearing it open, reads hurriedly.
" r shall not go to town, Gale," he says, after a minute
or two of thought.  "Counter-order the carriage. Mr.
Branscombe comes home to-night."
CHAPTER XXII.
"When there is a great deal of smoke, and no cl6ar flame, it argues
much moisture in the matter, yet it witnesseth, certainly, that there is
fire there."-LEIGHTON.
LONG before the night has set in he comes; and, as he
enters the room where his uncle sits awaiting him, Lord
Sartoris tells himself that never before has he seen him so
handsome, so tall, so good to look at.
"Your telegram made me uneasy," he says, abruptly,
"so I came back sooner than I had intended. Had you
mine ?"
"Yes; some hours ago."
" Did you want me, Arthur?"
"Yes; but not your return here. I sent my telegram



<pb n="169"/>
FAITH AND UNFA IT.              169
principally to learn your address, as I had made up
my mind to go up to town. You have frustrated that 
plan."
There is a meaning in his tone that puzzles Dorian.
" You going to trust yourself alone in orir.great Baby-
lon ? " he says, raising his brows. " Why, the world must
be coming to an end. What business had you there that
I could not have managed for you ?"
" My business was with you."
"Anything wrong ?" says the young man, impatiently,
tapping a table lightly with his fingers, and frowning some-
what heavily. "Your tone implies as much. Has any-
thing happened in my absence to cause you annoyance ?
If so, let me know at once, and spare me any beating
about the bush. Suspense is unpleasant."
"It is," says Sartoris, rising from his chair, and mov-
ing a few steps nearer to him. " It is slowly murdering
poor old John Annersley I"
"I am still hopelessly in the dark," says Dorian, shrug-
ging his shoulders. " What has suspense got to do with
old Annersley ?"
" Are you really ignorant of all that has occurred ? Have
you not heard of Ruth's mysterious disappearance ? "
" Ruth's disappearance ?' I have heard nothing.
Why, where can she have gone ?"
" That is exactly what no one knows, except she herself,
of course, and-one other." Then, turning impulsively to
face his nephew, " I thought you could have told me where
she is," he says, without giving himself time to think of all
the words may convey to Dorian.
"What do you mean?" demands Branscombe, throw-
ing up his head, and flushing darkly. His eyes flash, his
nostris dilate. "Am I to infer from your last remark that
you suspect me of having something to do with her disap-
pearance ?"
"I do," returns Sartoris, slowly, but with his eyes upon
the ground. "How can I do otherwise when I call to
mind all the causes you have given me to doubt you ?
Have you forgotten that day, now some months ago, when
I met you and that unhappy girl together on the road to the
village ? I, at least, shall never forget the white misery of
her face, and the unmistakable confusion in her manner,



<pb n="170"/>
170           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
as I greeted her. Even then the truth began to dawn
upon me."
"The trut ?" says Branscombe, with a short and bit-
ter laugh.
"At that time I was unwilling to harbor unkind doubts
of you in my breast," goes on Sartoris,. unmoved, nay,
rather confirmed in his suspicions by Branscombe's sneer;
"but then came the night of the Hunt ball, when I met
you, alone with her, in the most secluded part of the
grounds, and when you were unable to give me any reason-
able explanation of her presence there.; and then, a little
later, I find a handkerchief (which you yourself acknowl-
edge having given her) lying on your library floor; about
that, too, you were dumb: no excuse was ready to your
lips. By your own actions I jdge you."
"Your -suspicions make you unjust, my lord," says the
young man, haughtily. " They overrule your better judg-
ment. Are such paltry evidences as you have just put for-
ward sufflicint to condemn me, or have you further
proofs?" .
"I have,-a still stronger one than any other I have
mentioned. The last place in which Ruth Annersley was
seen in this neighborhood was in Hurston Wood, at eight
o'clock.on the evening of her departure, and-you were
with her!' 
"7 Swat "               "
'i The man who saw you will swear toi this."
' HIe must be rather a clever fellow. I congratulate
you on your ' man.'"'
" Do you deny it ?" There is something that is almost
hope in his tone. " If not there last Tuesday, at that hour,
where were you i"
Well, really, it would take me -all my time to remem-
ber. Probably dining: got to my fish by that time, no
doubt. Later on I was at Lady Chetwoode's crush; but
that "--with a sarcastic laugh-" is a very safe thing to
say, is it not ? One can hardly prove the presence of any
oep at a gathering together of the clans, such as there was
at her 'at home.' I wouldn't believe I was there, if I
. lag;4s aain. Sartoris flushes hotly all over his
lean earnest face.



<pb n="171"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.              171
"It is needless lying," he says, slowly. "The very coat
you wore-a light overcoat,-probably" (pointing to it)
"the one you are now wearing-was accurately described."
Dorian starts visibly. " Do you still hope to brave it out ?"
"A coat like this, do you say ?" asks Brarfscombe, with
a nervous attempt at unconcern, laying his hand upon his
sleeve.
"A light overcoat. Such was the description. But"
(with a longing that is terribly pathetic) " many overcoats
are alike. And-and I dare say you have not worn that
one for months." 
" Yes, I have. I wear it incessantly: I have taken rather
a fancy to it," replies Branscombe, in an uncompromising
tone. "My persistent admiration for it:has driven my
tailor to despair. I very seldom (except, perhaps, at mid-
night revels or afternoon bores) appear in public without
it."  '"'                   " '"'"::  '  '  ....: . .  '  ':. :' .
" Then you deny nothing ?"
" Nothing ! "-contemptuously, making a movement as
though to depart. "Why should I? If, after all these
years that you'have known me, you can imagine me capa-
ble of evil such as you describe so graphically, it would
give me no'pleasure to vindicate myself in your 'eyes.
Think of me as you will: I shall take no steps to justify
myself."
"You dare not! " says Sartoris, in a stifled tone, con-
fronting him fully for the first time.
"That is just as you please to think," says Branscombe,
turning uponi him with fashipg eyes. He frowns heavily,
and, with a little gesture common to him, raises his hand
and pushes the <end of his fair moustache between his
teeth. "Then, with a sudden effort, he controls himself,
and goes on more quietly: " I shall always feel regret in
that you 'dound jt so easy a matter to believe me guilty of
so monstrous a deed. I think we can have nothing further
to say to each other, eithe' now'6r iri the future. I wish
you good-evening."
Sartoris, standing with his back almost turned to his
nephew, takesno heed of this angry farewell' aiid Dorian,
going but, closes the door calmly behind him.
Passing' thtbogh the Long Hall, as it has been called
frolp time inmmeorial, he encointers Simon Gale, the old



<pb n="172"/>
172           FAITH AND UNWAITH.
butler, and stops to speak to him, kindly, as is his wont,
though in truth his heart, is sore.
"Ah, Simon I How warm the weather grows I" he says,
genially brushing his short hair back from his forehead.
The,attempt is praiseworthy, as really there is no hair to,
speak of, his barber having provided against that. He
speaks kindly, carelessly-if a little wearily. His pulses
are throbbing, and his heart beating hotly with passionate
indignation and disappointment.
"Very warm, sir," returns the old man, regarding him
wistfully. He is not thinking of the weather, either of its
heat or cold. He is only wondering, wit a foreboding sad- 
ness, whether the man before him'-who has been to him
as the apple of his eye-ris guilty or not of the crime im-
putei,.- to, him. With an effort he recovers himself, and
asks, hastily, though almost without purpose, " Have you
seen my lord ? "
" Yes; I have only just left him."
" You will stay to dinner, Mr. Dorian ?" He has been
"Mr. Dorian" to him for so many years that now the
more formal Mr. Branscombe is impossible.
"Not to-night. Some other time when my uncle-"
He pauses.
"You think him looking well ?" asks the old man, anx-
iously, mistaking his hesitation.
"Welll Oh, that doesn't describe him," says Brans-
combe, with a shrug, and a somewhat ironical.laugh.
"He struck me as being unusually lively,-in fact, 'strong
as Boreas on the main.' I thought him very well indeed."
"Ay, he is so I A godly youth brings a peaceful age;
and his was that. He has lived a good life, and now is
reaping his reward."
"Is he ? " says Dorian, with a badly-suppressed yawn.
"Of course I was mistaken, but really it occurred to me
that he was in an abominable temper. Is a desire to in-
sult every one part of the reward ?
"You make light of what I say," returns Simon, re-
proachfully, "yet it is the very truth I speak. He has no
special sin to repent, no lasting misdeed to haunt him, as
Vyears creep on. It were well to think of it," says Simon,
with a trembling voice, "while youth is still with us. To
you it yet belongs. If you have done aught amiss, I en-



<pb n="173"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.             173
treat you to confess, and make amends for it, whilst there
is yet time."
Dorian, laying his hands upon the old servant's shoul-
ders, pushes him gently backwards, so that he may look
the more readily into his face.
"Why, Simon ! How absolutely in earnest you are!"
he says, lightly. " What crime have I committed, that I
should spend the rest of my days in sackcloth and ashes !"
"I know nothing," says old Gale, sadly. " How should
I be wiser than my masters ? All I feel is that youith is
careless and headstrong, and things once done are diffi-
cult of undoing. If you would go to your grave happy,
keep yourself from causing misery to those who love you
and-trust in you." 
His voice sinks, and grows tremulous. Dorian, taking
his hands from his shoulders, moves back from the old
man,. and regards him meditatively, stroking his fair mous-
tache slowly, in a rather mechanical fashion, as he does
so.
"The whole world seems dyspeptic to-day," he says, iron-
ically. Then," It would be such a horrid bore to make any
one miserable that I daresay I sha'n't try it. If, however,
I do commit the mysterious serious offence at which you
broadly hint, and of which you plainly believe me fully ca-
pable, I'll let you know about it."
He smiles again,-a jarring sort of smile, that hardly
accords with the beauty of the dying day,-and, moving
awayfrom the old man, crosses the oaken flooring to the
glass!door that lies at the farther end of the room, and that
opens on to a gravelled path outside; on which lilacs are
flinging baoadcast their rich purple bloom. As he moves,
with a pale face and set lips (for the bitter smile has
faded), he tramples ruthlessly, and without thought for
their beauty, upon the deep soft patches of coloring that
are strew    n upon the flooring- from the stained-glass win-
dows above.
Throwing open the door; he welcomes gladly the cool
evening air that seems to rush to meet him.
"Pah I" he says, almost aloud; as he strides onwards
beneath the budding elms. "To think, after all these
years, they should so readily condemn ! Even that old
man, who has known me from my infancy, believes me
guilty."



<pb n="174"/>
174            FAITH AND UNFLAJTH.
Then a change sweeps over him. Insults to himself 
are forgotten, and his thoughts travel onward to a
fir that for many days has been growing and gaining
strength.
Can Horace have committed this base deed?  This
fear usurps all other considerations. Going back upon
what he has just heard, he examines in his mind each
little detail of the wretched history imparted to him by his
uncle. All the suspicions-lulled to rest through lack of
matter wherewith to feed them-now come to life again, and
grow in size and importance in spite of his intense desire
to suppress them.
On Tuesday night the girl had left her home. On Tues-
day morning he had been to Horace's rooms, had found
him there, had sat and conversed with him for upwards
of an hour pn different s'ubjects,-chiefly, he now re-
members, of Cl(rissa Peyton.
The day had been warm, and he had taken off his coat
(the light overcoat he had affected for the past month),
and had thrown it on a chair, and--y it t there when
going! 
The next morning he had called again and, found the
coat in the very self-same place where he had thrown it.
But in the mean time, during all the hours that intervened
between the afternoon of one day and the forenoon of an-
other, where had it been ?
"The very coat you wore was minutely described."-
The words come back upon him with a sudden rush, caus-
ing him a keener pang than any he has ever yet known.
Must he indeed bring himself to believe that his own brother
had made use of the coat with the deliberate intention
(should chance fling any intruder in the way) of casting
suspicion upon' him-Dorian ?
In the dusk of the eveningany one might easily mistake
one brother for the other. They are the same height; the
likeness between them is remarkable. He almost hates
himself for the readiness with which he pieces his story
together, making doubt merge with such entirety into con-
viction. 
The evening is passing fair, yet it brings no comfort to
his soul ;the trees towering upwards lie heavily against the
s'y ;:r the breath of many flowers makes rich the air.  Al-
_                                                   W .



<pb n="175"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               175
ready the fairit moon arising, throws' hei " silver light
o'er half the world," and m akes more blue the azure depths
above: ,
" Star follows star, though yet day's gplden light
Upon the hills and headlands faintly streams."
The far-off-grating sound of the corncrake can be heard;
the cuckoo's tuneless note, incessant and unmusical, tires
the early night. The faint sweet chirrups of many insects
come from far and near, and break upon the sense with a
soft and lulling harmony:
" There is no stir, nor breath of air; the plains
Lie slumbering in the close embrace of night"
All nature seems sinking into one grand repose, wherein
strife and misery and death appear to have no part.
To Dorian the tender solemnity of the scene brings no
balm. To go again to town by the night mail-to confront
Horace and learn from him the worst-is his one settled
thought, among the multitude of disordered ones; and
upon it he determines to act.
But what if he shall prove innocent, or deny all knowl-
edge of the affair ? What then can clear Dorian in his
uncle's eyes ? And even should he acknowledge the fact
that he had enticed the girl from her home; how can it
benefit Doriar ? He is scarcely the one to defend himself
at another's expense; and to betray Horace to clear him-
self would be impossible to him.
He grows bewildered and heart-sick. Reaching home,
he orders hi§ dog-cart to be brought round, and, by taking
it a good deal out of his good gray mare, he manages to
catch the evening train to town.
Lord Sartoris, sitting brooding over miserable thoughts
in the library at Hythe, has tidings brought him of his
nephew's speedy return to London, and endures one stab
the more, as he feels now more than ever conviiicd of his
duplicity.
Arrived in town, Branscombe drives to Horace's:ioons,
hoping against hope that he may find him at home. To
his surprise he does so find him,-in the iiidstof papers,
and apparently up to his eyes in business.
"Working so, late?" says Dorian, involuntarily, beiiig
accustomed to think of Horace, at this hour, as one of a



<pb n="176"/>
176           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
chosen band brought together to discuss the lighter topics
of the day over soup and fish and flesh. In truth, now he
is on the spot and face to face with his brother, the enor-
mity of his errand makes itself felt, and he hardly knows
what to say to him.
"You, Dorian ?" Horace, raising his eyes, smiles upon
him his usual slow impenetrable smile. " Working? Yes;
we others, the moneyless ones, must work or die; and
death is unpopular nowadays. Still, law is dry work when
all is confessed." He presses his hand to his forehead
with affected languor, and for an instant conceals his face.
" By the by, it is rather good of you to break in so unex-
pectedly upon my monotony. Anything I can do for you ? "
" Let me speak to you," says Dorian, impulsively, laying
his hand upon his arm. " If I am wronging you in my
thoughts I shall never forgive myself, and you, in all prob-
ability, will never forgive me either; yet I must get it off
my mind."
" My dear fellow, how you have flung away undoubted
talent! Your tone out-Irvings Irving: it is ultra-tragic.
Positively, you make my blood run cold. Don't stand
staring at me in that awful attitude, but tell me, as briefly
as you can, what I have done."
He laughs lightly.
Dorian regards him fixedly. Has he wronged him?
Has instinct played him false ?
"Where is Ruth Annersley ?" he asks, awkwardly, as
though getting rid of the question at any price and with-
out preamble. He has still his hand upon his brother's
arm, and his eyes upon his face.
" Ruth Annersley ? " reiterates Horace, the most perfect
amazement in his tone. If purposely done, the surprise
is very excellent indeed. "Why? What has happened
to her ?"
"Have you heard nothing ? "
"My dear fellow, how could I ? I have not been near
Pullingham for a full month; and its small gossips fail to
interest our big city.. What has happened ?"
'"The girl has left her home; has not been heard of
since last Tuesday. They fear she has wilfully flung up
happiness and honor to gain-misery."
"What a charitable place is a small village!" says



<pb n="177"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITI1.             177
Horace, with a shrug. " Why should the estimable Pulling-
hamites imagine so much evil? Perhaps, finding life in
that stagnate hole unendurable, Ruth threw up the whole
concern, and is now seeking a subsistence honorably.
Perhaps, too, she has married. Perhaps-"
" Why do you not suppose her dead ?" says Dorian, tap-
ping the table with his forefinger, his eyes fixed moodily
on the pattern of the maroon-colored cloth. "All such
speculations are equally absurd. I hardly came to Lon-
don to listen to such vain imaginings."
" Then-I think I barely understand you," says Horace,
amicably; "you came because-?"
"Because I fancied I had here the best chance of hear-
ing about her," interrupts Dorian, bluntly, losing patience
a little.
"How fearfully you blunder!" returns Horace, still
quite calmly,-nay, in even a tone that might be called
amused. "If you mean that I have had anything to do
with her vamoose, I beg to say your imagination has run
wild. You can search the place if you like. The old lady
who attends to my wants will probably express some faint
disapprobation when you invade the sanctity of her cham-
ber, but beyond that no unpleasantness need be anticipat-
ed. This is her favorite hour for imbibing brandy-my
brandy, you will understand (she takes it merely as a tonic,
being afflicted-as she tells me-with what she is pleased
to term 'nightly trimbles'): so if, in the dourse of your
wanderings, you chance to meet her, and she openly mo-
lests you, don't blame me."
"Is that all you can tell me?"
"All about my old lady, certainly."
"And of Ruth ?"
"I know nothing, as you should understand." He
laughs significantly.
" What do you mean ?" demands Dorian, a little fiercely.
His eyes are dark and flashing, his lips compressed.
"What can I mean, except that you are ridiculously ab-
surd ? "'says Horace, rising. "What is it you expect me
to say ? I can't get you out of it. I always knew you had
a penchant for her, but never thought it would carry you so
far. If you will take my advice, however, you will be
milder about it, and take that look off your face. If you
12



<pb n="178"/>
178           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
go in for society with that cut-up expression in your eyes,
people will talk."
" Then you know nothing ? " repeats Branscombe, tak-
ing no notice of-perhaps not even hearing-the forego-
ing speech.
"Absolutely nothing. How should I ?" says Horace,
with his soft smooth smile. " Have a brandy-and-soda,
Dorian, or a little curagoa ? Perhaps, indeed, the brandy
will be best (always allowing Mrs. McGinty has left me
any), you look so thoroughly done up."
" Thank you,-nothing." He gazes at his brother long
and earnestly. " The Branscombe word ought to be sure,"
he says, moodily.
"Still unconvinced I" says Horace, with an airy laugh.
"I know I ought to take you by the shoulders, Dorian,
and pitch you down the stairs; but, somehow, I haveh't
the pluck to-night. I am overdone through this abomina-
ble law, and-you are such a tremendous fellow when
compared with me. Must you really be off so soon?
Stay and have a cup of coffee ? No ? Well, if it must be, -
good-night."
Dorian goes down the stairs,-puzzled, bewildered,
almost convinced. At the foot of the staircase he looks
up again, to see Horace standing above him still, candle
in hand, radiant, smiling, dtbonnaire, apparently without a
care in the world.
He,,ods to him, and Dorian, returning the salute in
grave and silent fashion, goes out into the lighted streets,
and walks along in momentary expectation of a hansom,
when a well known voice smites upon his ear:
" What in the name of wonder, Branscombe, brings you
here ?"
Turning, he finds himself face to face with Sir James
Scrope.
"My presence is hardly an eighth wonder," he says,
wearily. "But how is it you are not in Paris? "
"Fate ordained it so, and probably fortune, as I just
want a friend with whom to put in an evening.  -
"You have chosen a dull companion," says Dorian,
stupidly. "What brqught you hoie so soon? or, rather,
what took you to Paris originally ? 



<pb n="179"/>
FAITZI AND UNFAITH.             179
"Business partly, and partly because-er-that is, I
felt I needed a little change."
"Ah! just so," says Branscombe. But he answers as
one might who has heard nothing. Sir James casts upon
him a quick penetrating glance.
"Anything wrong with you, Branscombe ?" he asks,
quietly. " Anything in which I can be of use to you ?"
"Thank you, nq. I'm just a little down on my luck,
that's all." Then, abruptly, ",I suppose you have heard
of the scandal down in Pullingham?"
"About that poor little girl ?" says Sir James. "Oh,
yes. ' ll news flies apace;' and this morning Hodges,
who came to town to see me about Bennett's farm, gave
me a'garbled account of her disappearance. I think I
hardly understand even now. How did it happen ? "
For a full minute Dorian makes no reply. He is look-
ing earnestly in James Scrope's face, to see if in it there
lurks any hidden thought, any carefully concealed ex-
pression of mistrust. There is, indeed, none. No shad-
ow, no faintest trace of suspicion, lies in Scrope's clear
and honest eyes.  Branscombe draws a deep breath.
Whatever in the future this friend may come to believe,
now, at least, he holds him-Dorian-clear and pure from
this gross evil that has been imputed to him.
He throws up his head with a freer air, and tries, with
a quick effort, to conquer the morbid feeling that for
hours past has been pressing upon him heavily.
"I know nothing," he says, presently, in answer to Sir
James's last remark.
' It is such an unaccountable story," says Scrope, lift-
ing his brows.  "Where did .she go ? and with whom?
Such a quiet little mouse of a girl, one hardly understands
her being the heroine of a tragedy. But how does it par-
ticularly affect you ?"
Branscombe hesitates. For one brief moient he won-
ders whether he shall or shall not reveal to Scrope the
scene that has passed between him and his uncle. Then
his whole sympathies revolt from the task, and he deter-
mines to let things rest as they now are.
"Arthur has tormented himself needlessly about the
whole business," he says, turning his face from Scrope.
,- .   .       . ~.  _  ·



<pb n="180"/>
180            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
"He thinks me-that is, every one-to blame, until the
girl is restored to her father."
"Ah I I quite see," says James Scrope.
CHAPTER XXIII.
" Ier eyes were deeper than the depth
Of waters stilled at even."
"DORIAN I" says Clarissa.
"Clarissa I" says Dorian.
"I really think I shall give a ball."
"What ?" cries a small, sweet, plaintive voice from the
corner, and Georgie, emerging from obscurity and the tre-
mendous volume she has been studying, comes to the
front, in her usual vehement fashion, and stands before
Miss Peyton, expectation in every feature. "Oh, Cla-
rissa, do say it again."
" Papa says I must entertain the county in some way,"
says Clarissa, meditatively, "and I really think a ball
will be the best way. Don't you ?"
"Don't I, though ?" says Miss Broughton, with much
vivacity. "Clarissa, you grow sweeter daily. Let me
offer you some small return for your happy thought."
She laughs, and, stooping, presses her warm ripe lips
against her friend's cheek. She blushes as she performs
this graceful act, and a small, bright, mischievous gleam
grows within her eye. The whole action is half mocking,
half tender:
"A rosebud set with little wilfulthorns,
And sweet as English air can make her, she."
The lines come hurriedly to Branscombe's mind, and linger
there. Raising her head again, her eyes meet his, and
she laughs, for the seond time, out of the pure gladness
of her heart.
" I think it was my happy thought," says Branscombe,
mildly. "I suggested this dance to Clarissa only yester-
day. Might not I, too, partake of the 'small return' ?"
"It no longer belongs to me; I have given it all away,
-here," says Georgie, touching Clarissa's cheek with one



<pb n="181"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               18t
finger; "but for that," with a slow adorable glance, "I
should be charmed."
"I think I shall get pencil and paper and write down
the names," says Clarissa, energetically, rising and going
towards the door. "Dorian, take care of Georgie until
I return."
" I wish I knew how," says Branscombe, in a tone so
low that only Georgie can hear it. Then, as the door
closes he says, " Did you mean your last speech ?"
"My last ? What was it ? I never remember anything."
She very seldom blushes, but now again a soft delicate
color creeps into her face.
" If you hadn't given it all away, would you have given
me a little of that small return ? "
"No."
"Not even if I were to give a ball for you ?"
" N-o-no."
"Not if I were to do for you the one 'thing you most
desired ?"
"No-no-no "      She speaks hastily, and glances at
him somewhat confusedly from beneath her long lashes.
" Well, of course, it is too much to expect," says Brans-
conmbe; "yet I would do a good deal for you, even with-
out hope of payment."
He comes a little nearer to her, and lays his hand upon
the table close to hers.
" If you really made the suggestion to Clarissa, you de-
serve some reward," says Georgie, nodding her head.
"Now, what shall it be ?"
"Dance half the night with me."
"That would bore you,-and me. No; but if dancing
delights you-sir-may I have the pleasure of the first
quadrille ?"
" Madam," says Branscombe, laying his hand upon his
heart, "you do me too much honor; I am at your service
now and forever."
"It is too large a promise."
"A true one, nevertheless,"
A little earnest shade shows itself upon his face, but
Georgie laughs lightly, and moves away from him over to
the window, and at this moment Clarissa returns, armed
with paper and pencils and a very much pleased smile.



<pb n="182"/>
182           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
"Can't I have the gardens lighted ?" she says, "with
Chinese lanterns, and that?. I have been thinking of it."
" I don't know about 'that,"' says Dorian. "I'm  not
sure, but it might blow us all to atoms; but the celestial
lights will be quite 'too, too !' It must be a splendid
thing, Clarissa, to have a brain like yours. Now, neither
Miss Broughton nor I have a particle between us."
"Speak for yourself, please," says Miss Broughton, very
justly incensed.
" I'm doing even more than that, I'm speaking for you
too. Don't put up too many Chinese lanterns, Clarissa,
or it will be awkward: we shall be seen."
"What matter ? I love light," says Georgie, innocently.
"How I do hope there will be a moon! Not a mean
effort at one, but a good, round, substantial, vast old moon,
such as there was two months ago."
*      #      *      *      *      *      *
She has her wish: such another moonlight night as
comes to Pullingham on the night of Miss Peyton's ball
has been rarely, if ever, seen. It breaks over the whole
place in a flood of light so whitely brilliant that the very
sleeping flowers lift up their heads, as though believing
the soft mystic light to be the early birth of morn.
All around is calm and drowsy sweet. Tle stars come
forth to light the world, and, perhaps, to do homage to
Clarissa on this the night of her first ball.
About six weeks have passed since Ruth Annersley left
her home, and as yet no tidings of her have reached Pull-
ingham. Already people are beginning to forget that
such an esclandre ever occurred in their quiet village. The
minutest inquiries have been made (chiefly by Lord Sar-
toris, who is now very seldom at home); rewards offered;
numerous paragraphs, addressed to "R. A.," have ap
peared in the London papers, but without result. The
world is growing tired of the miserable scandal, and Ruth's
disappearance ceases to be the one engrossing topic of
conversation at village teas and bar-room revelries.
To-night is fair enough to make one believe sin impos-
sible. It is touched by heaven; great waves of light, sent
by the " silver queen of night," lie languidly on tree and
bower; the very paths are bright with its stray beams.
"Bats and grisly owls on noiseless wings " flit to and



<pb n="183"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITI.               183
fro, " and now the nightingale, not distant far, begins her
solitary song."
Within, music is sounding, and laughter, and the faint
sweet dropping of fountains.  Clarissa, moving about
among her guests, is looking quite lovely in a pale satin
trimmed heavily with old gold. She is happy and quite
content, though her eyes, in spite of her, turn anxiously,
every now and then, to the doorway.
Every one is smiling, radiant Even Dorian, who is
waltzing with any one but the Woman he desires, is look-
ing gracious all through, and is creating havoc in the
bosom of the damsel who has rashly intrusted herself to
his care.
Cissy Redmond, in the arms of a cavalry-man, is float-
ing round the room, her unutterable little nez retroussi
looking even more pronounced than usual. Her face is
lit up with pleasurable excitement; to her-as she tells
the cavalry-man without hesitation-the evening is " quite
too awfully much, don't you know !" and the cavalry-man
understands her perfectly, and is rather taking to her,
which is undoubtedly clever of the cavalry-man.
He is now talking to her in his very best style, and she
is smiling,-but not at him.
Within the shelter of a door, directly opposite, stands
Mr. Hastings, and he is answering back her smile four-
fold. He will not dance himself,-conscience forbidding,
-yet it pleases him to see his Cissy (as she now is) enjoy-
ing herself. The band is playing "Beautiful Ferns"
dreamily, languidly; and I think at this very moment Mr.
Hastings's reverend toes are keeping excellent time to
the music. But this, of course, is barest supposition; for
what human eye can penetrate leather ?
The waltz comes to an end, and Dorian, having suc-
cessfully rid himself of his late partner, draws Georgie's
hand within his arm and leads her into a conservatory.
Her late partner was a fat, kindly squire, who wi/ldance,
but who, at the expiration of each effort to eclipse Terp-
sichore, feels devoutly thankful that his task has come to
an efid. lie is, to say tIe rpil4est least of him, exceed-
ingly tiring, and Georgie is rather 'glad than othertwise that
Dorian s hou'i lead her into t'he cool recess,where flowers
and perfumed fountains hold fall isway.' She sinks into a



<pb n="184"/>
184           FAITHI AND UNFAITII.
seat, and sighs audibly, and looks upwards at her compan-
ion from under half-closed lids, and then, letting them
drop suddenly, plays, in a restless fashion, with the large
black fan she holds.
Branscombe is stupidly silent; indeed, it hardly occurs'
to him that speech is necessary. He is gazing earnestly,
tenderly, at the small face beside him,-
"A face o'er which a thousand shadows go."
The small face, perhaps, objects to this minute scrutiny,
because presently it raises itself, and says, coquettishly,-
"How silent you are ! What are you thinking of ?"
" Of you," says Dorian, simply. " What a foolish ques-
tionl You are a perfect picture in that black gown,
with your baby arms and neck."
" Anything else ? " asks Miss Broughton, demurely.
" Yes. It also seems to me that you cannot be more
than fifteen. You look such a little thing, and so young."
"But I'm not young," says Georgie, hastily. "I am
quite old. I wish you would remember I am nearly nine-
teen."
" Quite a Noah's Ark sort of person,-a fossil of the
pre-Adamite period. How I envy you! You are, in-
deed, unique in your way. Don't be angry with me be-
cause I said you looked young; and don't wish to be old.
There is no candor so hateful, no truth so unpleasing, as
age."
"How do you know ?" demands she, saucily, sweetly,
half touched by his tone. " You are not yet a Methuse-
lah." Then, "Do you know your brother has come at
last ? He is very late, isn't he ?"
"He always is," says Dorian.
"And he has brought a friend with him. And who do
you think it is ? "
" I haven't the faintest idea," says Branscombe, turn-
ing a vivid red.
"Why, my Mr. Kennedy !"
" Your Mr. Kennedy ?" reiterates he, blankly, his red
becoming a crimson of the liveliest hue.
"Yes, the dark thin young man I met at Sir John
Lincoln's. I dare say I told you about him ?"
"Yes, you did," says Dorian, grimly.



<pb n="185"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.              185
"I see him over there," pointing airily with her fan
through the open conservatory door to a distant wall
where many young men are congregated together.
"The man with the nose?" asks Branscombe, slight-
ingly, feeling sure in his soul he is not the man with the
nose.
"He has a nose," says Miss Broughton, equably,
"though there isn't much of it. He is very like a Chinese
pug. Don't you see him? But he is so nice."
Dorian looks again in the desired direction, and as he
does so a tall young man, with a somewhat canine expres-
sion, but very kindly, advances towards him, and, enter-
ing the conservatory, comes up to Miss Broughton with a
smile full of delight upon his ingenuous countenance.
"Miss Broughton," he says, in a low musical voice, that
has unmistakable pleasure in it. "Can it really be you?
I didn't believe life could afford me so happy a moment
as this."
"I saw you ten minutes ago," says Georgie, in her
quick bright fashion.
"And made no sign? that was cruel," says Ken-
nedy, with some reproach in his tone. He is looking
with ill-suppressed admiration upon her fair uplifted face.
" Now that I have found you, what dance will you give
me ?"
"Any one I have," she says, sweetly.
"The tenth? The dance after next,-after this, I
mean?"
Branscombe, who is standing beside her, here turns his
head to look steadfastly at her. His blue eyes are almost
black, his lips are compressed, his face is very pale. Not
an hour ago she had promised him this tenth dance. He
had asked it of her in haste, even as he went by her with
another partner, and she had smiled consent. Will she
forget it ?  '
"With pleasure," she says, softly, gayly, her usual
lovely smile upon her lips. She is apparently utterly un-
conscious of any one except her old-new friend. Ken-
nedy puts her name down upon his card.
At this Dorian makes one step forward, as though to
protest against something,-some iniquity done; but, a
sudden thought striking him, he draws back, and, bring-



<pb n="186"/>
1FAIT  AND UNFAITH.
ing his, teeth upon his under lip with some force, turns
abruptly away. When next he looks in her direction, he
finds both Georgie and her partner have disappeared.
'The. night wanes. Already the "keen stars that falter
nrever" are dropping, one by one; to slumber, perfect and
serene. Diana, tired of her ceaseless watch, is paling,
fadling, dying imperceptibly, as though feeling herself soon
to be conquered by the sturdy morn.
Dorian, who has held himself carefully aloof from Miss
Broughton ever since that last scene, when she had shown
herself so unmindful of him and his just claim to the dance
then on the cards, now, going up to her, s.ays, coldly,-
"I think the next is our dance, Mists Broughton."
Georgie, who is laughing gayly wlth Mr. Kennedy, turns
her face to his, some surprise mixed With the sweetness of
her regard.- Never before has he addressed her in such
a tone.
"Is it?" she says, gently. "I had forgotten; but of
course my card will tell."
" One often forgets, and one's card doesn't always tell,"
replies he, with a smile tinctured with bitterness.
She opens her eyes, and stare's at im blankly. There
is some balm in Gilead, he tells 'hilmself, as he sees she is
totally unaware of his mieaniig. Perhaps, after all, she
did forget about that tenth dance, and did not purposely
fling hin over for the man now beside lher, who is grinning
at her in a supremfiely idiotic fashion. How he hates a fel-
low who sirnpers straight through everything, and looks
always as i the world and he were eternally at peace!
She flushes softly,--a gentle, delicate flush, born of dis-
tress, coldness from even an ordinary friend striking like
ice upon her heart. She looks at her card confusedly.
"Yes, the next is ours;" she says, without raising her
eyes; and then the band begins again, and Dorian feels
her hand upon his arm, and Kennedy bows disconsolately
and disappears amid the crowd.
"    Do you particularly want to danice thti ?"s asks Dorian,
with an effort. 
" No not much."                     '
';"Wlt yoi com'e' oii inhto the gaiddfinifle ita?  I want
-t must speak to you."  ,         ;'
"You may speak to me here, orin ttie garden, or any-



<pb n="187"/>
4AITH AND UNrAITH.              r7
where," says eorgie, rather frightened by the vehemence
of his tone.
She lets him lead her down the stone steps that lead to
the shrubberies outside, and from thence to the gardens.
The night is still. The waning moonlight clear as day.
All things seem calm and full of rest,-that deepest rest 
that comes before the awakening.
"Who is your new friend?" asks he, abruptly; when
silence any longer has becbme impossible.
"Mr. Kennedy. He is not exactly a friend. I met him
one night before in all my life, and he was very kind to
me-
"'One night !" repeats IDorian, ignoring the fact that she
yet has something more to say. "One night! Whit an
impression "--unkindly-"he must have made on that
memorable occasion, to account for the very warm recep-
tion accorded to him this evening I "
She turns her head away from him, bui makes no reply.
" Why did you promise me that dance if yoi didn't mean
giving It'?" he goes on, with something in his voice that
resembles passion, mixed with pain. " I certainly believed
you in earnest when you promised it to me."
"You believed right: I did mean it. Am I riot giving
it?" says Georgie, bewildered, her eyes gleaming, large
and troubled~ in the white light that illumines the sleeping
world. " It is your fault that we are not dancing now. I,
for my part, would much rather be inside, with the music,
than out here with you, when you talk so unkindly."
"I have no doubt you would rather be anywhere than
with me," says Dorian, hastily; "and of course this new
friend is intensely interesting."
"At least he is not rude," says Miss Broughton, calmly,
plucking a pale green branch from a laurestinus near her.
"I am perfectly c6ninced he is one of the few faultless
people upon earth," says Branscotnbe, now in a white heat
of fuy., " I houldn't dream of aspiring to his level. But
yet I think you needn't have given him the dance you
promisea me."
"I didn't," says Miss Broughton, indignantly; in all good
faith.
"You miean to tell me you hadn't given me the tenth
dance half an hour before ?"



<pb n="188"/>
188           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
"The tenth I You might as well speak about the hun-
dred and tenthl If it wasn't on my card how could I
remember it?"
"But it was on your card: I wrote it down myself."
"I am sure you are making a mistake," says Miss
Broughton, mildly; though in her present frame of mind,
I think she would have dearly liked to tell him he is lying.
"Then show me your card. If I have blundered in this
matter I shall go on my knees to beg your pardon."
" I don't want you on your knees,"-pettishly. "I de-
test a man on his knees, he always looks so-silly. As for
my card,"-grandly,-" here it is."
Dorian, taking it, opens it, and, running his eyes down
the small columns, stops short at number ten. There,
sure enough, is " D. B." in very large capitals indeed.
" You see," he says, feeling himself, as he says it, slightly
ungenerous.
"I am very sorry," says Miss Broughton, standing far
away from him, and with a little quiver in her tone. "I
have behaved badly, I now see. But I did not mean it."
She has grown very pale; her eyes are dilating; her
rounded arms, soft and fair and lovable as a little child's,
are gleaming snow-white against the background of shin-
ing laurel leaves that are glittering behind her in the moon-
light. Her voice is quiet, but her eyes are full f angry
tears, and her small gloved hands clasp and unclasp each
other nervously. 
"You have proved me in the wrong," she goes on, with
a very poor attempt at coolness, " and, of course, justice
is on your side. And you are quite right to say anything
that is unkind to me; and-and I hate people who are
always in the right."
With this she turns, and, regardless of him, walks hur-
riedly, and plainly full of childish rage, back to the house.
Dorian, stricken with remorse, follows her.
"Georgie, forgive me! I didn't mean it; I swear I
didn't I " he says, calling her by her Christian name for the
first time, and quite unconsciously. " Don't leave me like
this; or, at least let me call to-morrow and explain."
"I don't want to see you to-morrow or any other day,"
declares Miss Broughton, with cruel emphasis, not even
turning her head to him as she speaks.



<pb n="189"/>
FAITI  AND UNFAITtZ.              189
"But you shall see me to-morrow," exclaims he, seizing
her hand, as she reaches the conservatory door, to detain
her. "You will be here; I shall come to see you. I
entreat, I implore you not to deny yourself to me." Rais-
ing her hand, he wresses it with passionate fervor to his
lips.
Georgie, detaching her hand from his grasp, moves away
from him.
.   "'Must is for the queen, and shall is for the king,"'
quotes she, with a small pout, "and to-morrow-catch me
if you can !"
She frowns slightly, and, with a sudden movement, get-
ting behind a large flowering shrub, disappears from his
gaze for the night.
CHAPTER XXIV.
"But sweeter still than this, than these, than all,
Is first and passionate love: it stands alone."-BYRON.
NEXT day is born, lives, grows, deepens; and, as the
first cold breath of even declares itself, Dorian rides down
the avenue that leads to Gowran.
Miss Peyton is not at home (he has asked first for her,
as in duty bound), and Miss Broughton is in the grounds
somewhere. This is vague. The man offers warmly to
discover her and bring her back to the house to receive
Mr. Branscombe; but this Mr. Branscombe will not per-
mit. Having learned the direction in which she is gone,
he follows it, and glides into a region wherein only fairies
should have right to dwell.
\ A tangled mass of grass, and blackberry, and fern; a
dying sunlight, deep and tender; soft beds of tawny moss.
Myriad bluebells are alive, and, spreading themselves, far
and wide, in one rich carpeting (whose color puts to shame
the pale blue of the heavenly vault above), make one har-
imonious blending with their green straight leaves.
Far as the eye can reach they spread, and, as the light
land wanton wind stoops to caress them, shake their tiny
bells with a coquettish grace, and fling forth.perfume to
him with a lavish will.



<pb n="190"/>
g90           FAITH AND UNVAITII.
The solemn trees, that "seem to hold mystical converse
with each other," look down upon the tranquil scene that,
season after season, changes, fades away, and dies, only
to return again, fairer and fresher than of yore. The fir-
trees tower upwards, and gleam green-black against the
sky. Upon some topmost boughs the birds are chanting
a paean of their own; -while through this "wilderness of
sweets "-far down between its deep banks (that are rich
with trailing ivy and drooping bracken)-runs a stream, a
slow, delicious, lazy stream, that glides now over its moss-
grown stones, and anon flashes through some narrow ra-
vine dark and profound. As it runs it babbles fond love-
songs to the pixies that, ,perchance, are peeping out at it,
through their yellow tresses; from shady curves and sun-
kissed corners.
It is one of May's divinest efforts,-a day to make one
glad and feel that it is well to be alive. Yet Branscombe,
walking through this fairy glen, though conscious of its
beauty, is conscious, too, that in his heart he knows a want
not to be satisfied until Fate shall again bring him face to
face with the girl with whom he had parted so unamicably
the night before.
I Had she really meant him not to call to-day ? Wtil she
receive him coldly ? Is it even possible to find her in such
an absurd place as, this, where positively everything seems
mixed up together in such a hopeless fashion that one can't
see,father than one's nose ? Perhaps, after all, she is not
here,,has returned to the house, and is now-
Suddenly, across the bluebells, there comes to him a
fresh sweet voice, that thrills him to his very heart. It is
hers; .nd there, in the distance, he can see her, just where
the sunlight falls athwart the swaying ferns.
She is sitting.down, and is leaning forward,.having taken
herknees well into her embrace. Her broad hat is tilted
backward, so that the sunny straggling hair upon her fore
head cap be plainly seen. Her gown is snow-white, with
just a touch of black at the throat and wrists; a pretty
frill of soft babyish lace caresses her throat.
iClear and happy, as though it were a free bird's her
v9iqe,jeses op the ;wind and reaches Branscombe, and
mavpihnAs, o.othervoice ever,had-or will ever again
have-power to move him.



<pb n="191"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               191
"There has fallen a splendid tear
From the passion-flower at the gate;
She is coming, my dove, my dear;
She is coming, my life, my fate."
The kind wind brings the tender passionate love-song
to him, and repeats it in his ear as it hurries onward:
" My dove, my dear." How exactly the words suit her !
he says them over and over again to himself, almost losing
the rest of the music which she is still breathing forth to
the evening air.
"My life ! my fate!"  Is she his life,-his fate ? The
idea makes him tremble. Has he set his whole heart up-
on a woman who perhaps can never give him hers in re-
turn ? The depth, the intensity of the passion with which
he repeats the words of her song astonishes and perplexes
him vaguely. Is she indeed his fate?
He is quite close to her now; and she, turning round
to him her lovely flower-like face, starts perceptibly, and,
springing to her feet, confronts him with a little frown,
and a sudden deepening of color that spreads from chin to
brow.
At this moment he knows the whole truth. Never has
she appeared so desirable in his eyes. Life with her means
happiness more than falls to the lot of most; life without
her, an interminable blank.
"Love lights upon the hearts, and straight we feel
More worlds of wealth gleam in an upturned eye
Than in the rich heart or the miser sea."
"I thought I told you not to come," says Miss Brough-
ton, still frowning.
" I am sure you did not," contradicts lie, eagerly; " you
said, rather unkindly, I must confess,-but still you said
it,-' Catch me if you can.' That was a command. I have
obeyed it. And I have caught you."
"You knew I was not speaking literally," says Miss
Broughton, with some wrath. " The idea of your suppos-
ing I really meant you to catch me I You couldn't have
thought it."
"Well, what was I to think? You certainly said it.
So I came. I believed "-humbly-" it was the best thing
to do."
"Yes; and you found me sitting-as-I was, and sing-



<pb n="192"/>
T92           FAITH AND UNFAITH,
ing at the top of my voice. How I dislike people "-says
Miss Broughton, with fine disgust-" who steal upon other
people unawares !"
"I didn't steal; I regularly trampled "-protests Brans-
combe, justly indignant-" right over the moss and ferns
and the other things, as hard as ever I could. If bluebells 
won't crackle like dead leaves it isn't my fault, is it? 
hadn't the ordering of them !"
"Oh, yes, it is, every bit your fault," persists she, wil-
fully, biting, with enchanting grace largely tinctured with
viciousness, the blade of grass she is holding.
Silence, of the most eloquent, that lasts for a full min-
ute, even until the unoffending grass is utterly consumed.
"Perhaps you would rather I 'went away," says Mr.
Branscombe, stiffly, seeing she will not speak. He is
staring at her, and is apparently hopelessly affronted.
"Well, perhaps I would," returns she, coolly, without
condescending to look at him.
" Good-by,"-icily.
"Good-by,"-in precisely the same tone, and without
changing her position half an inch.
Branscombe turns away with a precipitancy that plainly
betokens hot haste to be gone. He walks quickly in the
home direction, and gets as far as the curve in the glen
without once looking back. So far the hot haste lasts, and is
highly successful; then it grows cooler; the first deadly
heat dies away, and, as it goes, his steps grow slower and
still slower. A severe struggle with pride ensues, in
which pride goes to the wall, and then he comes to a stand-
still.
Though honestly disgusted with his own want of firm-
ness, he turns and gazes fixedly at the small white-gowned
figure standing, just as he had left her, among the purple
bells.
Yet not exactly as he had left her: her lips are twitch-
ing now, her lids have fallen over her eyes. Even as he
watches, the soft lips part, and a smile comes to them,-
an open, irrepressible smile, that deepens presently into
a gay, mischievous laugh, that rings sweetly, musically
upon the air.
It is too much. In a moment he is beside her again,
and is gazing down on her with angry eyes.



<pb n="193"/>
FAITH AND UANFAIT'.             193
" Somethiz is amusing you," he says. "Is it me ?"
'".Yes," says' the sp6iled beauty, moving back from him,
and lifting her lids from her laughing eyes to cast upon
him a defiant glance.
-  "I dare say-i do amuse you," exclaitms he, wrathfully,
goaded to deeper anger by the mockery of her regard.
" I have no doubt you can find enjoyment in thb situation,
but Lcannot I I dare say "--passionately--" you think it
capital fun to make me fall in love with you,-to play with
my heart until you can bind me hand and foot as your
slave,-only to fling me aside and laugh at my absurd in-
fatuation when the game has grown old and flavorless."
He has taken her hand whether she will or not, and, I
think, at this point, almost unconsciously, he gives her a
gentle but very decided little shake.
" But there is a limit to all things,' he goes on, vehe-
mently, "and here, now, at .this moment, you shall give
me a plain answer to a plain question I am going to ask
you."
He has grown very pale, and his nostrils are slightly
dilated. She has grown very pale, too, and is shrinking
from him, -Her lips are white and trembling; her leauti-
ful eyes are large and full of an undefined fear.'-The
passion of his tone has carried her awaywith it, and has
subdued within her all desire for mockery or mirth. Her
whole face has changed its expression, and has become
sad and appealing. This sudden touch of fear and en-
treaty makes her so sweet that Dorian's anger melts be-
fore it, and the great love of which it was part again takes
the upper hand.
Impulsively he takes her in. his arms, and draws her
close to him, as though he would willingly shield her from
all evil and chase the unspoken fear from her eyes,/ i
·" Don't look at me like ,that," he says, earnestly,  I
deserve it, I know., I.should not have spoken to you as
I have d6ne, but I could hot help it. You made me so
miserable-do you know how miserable ?-that I forgot
myself. ! Darling, don't turn from me; speak to me; for-
give.me !'" 
This sudden change from vehement reproach 'to as ve-
hement .tenderness !frightens Georgie just a little more
than the anger of.a-moment since. Laying her hand upon
'3



<pb n="194"/>
194           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
his chest, she draws back from him;! and he, seeing she
really wishes to get away from him, instantly releases
her. 
As if fascinated, however, she never removes her gaze
from his, although large tears have risen, and are shining
in her eyes. 
"You don't hate me? I won't believe that," says
Branscombe, wretchedly. " Say you will try to love me,
and that you will surely marry me."
At this-feeling rather lost, and not knowing what else
to do-Georgie coveTs her face with her hands, and bursts
out crying. 
It is now Branscombe's turn to be frightened, and he
does his part to. perfection. He is thoroughly and des-
perately frightened.                             .
" I won't say another word/: he says, hastily; " I won't,
indeed.: My dearest, what have I said that you should be
so distressed ? I only asked you to marry me."
" Well, I'm sure I don't know what more you could have
said," sobs she, still dissolved in tears, and in a tone full
of injury.
" But there wasn't any harm in that," protests he, taking
one of her hands from her face and pressing it softly to his
lips.; i It; is a sort of thing" (expansively) "one does
every day."- 
"Do you do it every day ?"
"No: I never did it before. And " (very gently) you
will answer me, won't you ?"
No answer, however, is vouchsafed. 
"Georgie, say you will marry me."
But'Georgie either can't or won't say it; and Dorian's
heart dies within him.
" Am I to understand by your silence that you fear to
pain me ?" he says, at length, in a low voice. " Is it im-
possible to you to love me ? Well, do. not speak. I can
see by your face that the hope I have been cherishing-for
so many weeks has been a vain one. Forgive me for
troubling you: and believe I shall never forget how ten-
derly you shrank from telling me you could never return
my love."
Again he presses her hand to his lips; and she, turning
her face!slowly to his, looks up at him. Her late tears
.~~~~



<pb n="195"/>
FAITH 4AND UNFATH. .95
were butasummer shower, and have faded away, .eaving
no traces as they passed. .  -. - - i   .    , , i
"But I didn'tmean one wbdrof ,all Jth'4,",she,:!says,
naively, letting her.long lashesfall once more over her eyes.
"Then what did you mean ? "-demands bhFwith some par-
donable impatience. "Quite the contrary, all through ?"
"N-ot quite,"-with hesitation.       r      .
'i At least, that some day- you .wil be my wife '  .
"N-ot altogether."
' ell, you ca'Ah be half my .vife"' says Mr. Branscombe
promptly. "Darling, darging, pup me: out of, my misery,
and say what I want you to say'            .!,, 
"Well, then, yes." :She gives fhe promise softly, shyly,
but without the faintest touch of any deeper, tendeter
emotion. Had Dorian been one degree less in love with
her, he.could have hardly failed to notice this-fact.. As it
is, he is radiant, in a. vey seventh heaven of contet,  ..
" But you must promise me faithfully never to .e, ,nkind
to me again," says Gcorgie, impressively, laying ,a inger
on.his lips.  .                .            , .. 
"Unkind?"                         .    . ,.'
' Yes ; dreadfully unkind: justthink, of all thtecorible
things y6u said, and the way you said them. .Your eyes
were as big as :half-crowns, and: ypu looket exactly, as if
you would like to eat me. Do you kqow,.you reminded
me of Aunt Elizabeth!"   *       ..1      ;
"     Oh, Georgie I '.says .Bjanscoqnme, eproachfully, .'He
has grown rather intimate.,with Aunit Elizabeth and.her
iniquities by this time1, nd fully understands that to be
compared with her hardly tends,to raise him in his 4eltyed's
estimation.      , -                   ,-     /
There is silence between them after this, that lasts a full
minute,-a long time for lovers freshly made.
"What are, you: thinking of ? asks Dorian, presently,
bending to look tenderlyinto her downcast eyes. Perhaps
he is hoping eagerly that she has been wasting a .thought
upon him.
" I shall never have to teach those horrid lessons again,"
she says, with a quick sigh of relief.
If he is disappointed, he carefully conceals it. He
laughs, and, lifting her exquisite face, kisses her gently.
"Never," he says, emphatically. " When you go home,



<pb n="196"/>
'r6           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
tell Mr. Redmond all about it; and to-morrow Clarissa
will go down to the vicarage and bring you up to Gowran,
where you must stay until we are married."
''1 shall like that," says Georgie, with a sweet smile.
"But, Mr. Branscombe-"
"Who on earth is Mr. Branscombe ?" asks Dorian.
"Don't you know my name yet ?"
" I do. 1 think it is almost the prettiest name I ever
heard,-Dorian."
"Darling/  I never thought it a nice name before;
but now that you have called me by it, I can feel its
beauty., But I dare say if I had been christened Jehosh-
aphat I should, under these circumstances, think just the
same. Well, you were going to say--  "
Perhaps Clarissa will not care to have me for so long."
"So long? How long? By the by, perhaps she
wouldn"; so I suppose we had better be married is soon
as ever we can."
"'I haven't got any clothes," says Miss Broughton; at
which they both laugh gayly, as though it were the merri-
eest est in the world.
l ou terrify me," says Branscombe. "Let me beg
you will rectify such a mistake as soon as possible."
" "We have been here a long time," says Georgie, sud-
derily, glancing at the sun, that is almost sinking out of
sight behind the solemn firs.             ,    .
",It hasn't been ten minutes," says.Mr. Branscombe,
conviction making his tone brilliant.
"Qh, nonsense I" says Georgie. "I am sure it must
bp 'ie two hours since you came."
. As it has been barely one, this is rather difficult to en-
dure with equaimmity.
"How long you have found it I" he says, with some
regret. He is honestly pained, and his eyes grow darker.
Looking at him, she sees what she has done, and, though
ignorant of the very meaning of the word " love," knows
that she has hurt him more than he cares to confess.
I "I have been happy,-quite happy," she says, sweetly,
coloring warmly as she says it. " You must not think I
iave found the time: you have been with me dull or dreary.
Only,-f am afraid Clarissa will miss me."
"I should think any one'would miss you," says Dorian,



<pb n="197"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               197
impulsively. He smiles at her as he speaks; but there
is a curious mingling of sadness: aind longing and uncer-
tainty in his face. Laying one arm round her, with his
other hand he draws her head down en his breast.
"At least, before we go, you will'kisS-:ine once," he
says, entreatingly. All the gayety-the gladness-has
gone from his voice; only the deep and lasting love re-
mains. He says this, too, hesitatingly, as though half
afraid to demand so great a boon.
"Yes; I think I should'like to kiss you," says Georgie,
kindly; and then she raises herself from his embrace,
and, standing on tiptoe, places both hands upon his
shoulders, and with the utmost calmness lais her lips on
his.
" Do you know," she says, a moment later, in no wise
disconcerted because of the warmth of the caress he has
given her in exchange for hers,-" do you know, I never
remember kissing any one in all my life before, except
poor papa, and Clarissa; and you."
Even at this avowal she does not blush. Were he her
brother, or an aged nurse, she could scarcely think less
about the favor she has just conferred upon the mana who
is standing silently regarding her, puzzled and disap-
pointed truly, but earnestly registering a vow that stooner
or later, if faithful love can accomplish it, he will make
her all his own, in heart and soul.
Not that he has ever yet gone so deeply into the matter
as to tell himself the love is all on his own side. In-
stinctively he shrinks from such inward confession. It
is only when he has parted from her, and is riding quietly
homeward through the wistful gloaming, that he remem-
bers, with a pang, how, of all the thousand and one things
asked and answered, one alone has been forgotten. He
has never desired of her whether she loves him.
....



<pb n="198"/>
198           FAITH AND UNFAITZ.
CHAPTER XXV.
" Love set me up on high: when I grew vain
Of that my height, love brought me down again.
*      *      *      *      *      *
"The heart of love is with a thousand woes
Pierced, which secure indifference never knows.
* '*         *     *    *      *  ·
"The rose aye wears the silent thorn at heart,
And never yet might pain for love depart."-TRENCH. 
WHEN Mrs. Redmond, next morning, is made aware of
Georgie's engagement to Dorian Branscombe, her curiosity
and excitement know no bounds.' For once she is literally
struck dumb with amazement.    That Dorian, who is
heir t; an earldom, should have fixed his affections upon
her governess, seems to Mrs. Redmond like a gay contin-
uation of the "Arabian Nights' Entertainments."  When
she recovers her breath, after the first great shock to her
nervous system, she'lays dotvn the' inevitable sock she is
mending, and says as follows:
" My dear 'Georgina, are you quite sure he meant it?
Young men, nowadays, say so many things without ex-
actly knowing why,-more especially after a dance, as I
have been told."
"I am quite sure," says Georgie, flushing hotly. She
has sufficient self-love to render this doubt very unpalata-
ble.
Something that is not altogether remote from envy
creeps into Mrs. Redmond's heart. Being a mother, she
can hardly help contrasting her Cissy's future with the
brilliant one carved out for her governess. Presently,
however, being a thoroughly good soul, she conquers these
unworthy thoughts, and when next she speaks her tone is
full of heartiness and honest congratulation. Indeed, she
is sincerely pleased. The fact that the future Lady Sar-
toris is at present an inmate of her house is a thought
full of joy to her.
"You are a very happy and a very fortunate girl," she
says, gravely.
"Indeed yes, I think so," returns Georgie, in a low
tone, but with perfect calmness. There is none of the
blushing happiness about her that should of right be-



<pb n="199"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.              x99
long to a young girl betrothed freshly to the lover of her
heart. 
"Of course you do," says Mrs.'Redmond, missing some-
thing in her voice, though she hardly knows what. " And
what we are-to do without you, I can't conceive; no one
to sing to us in the evening, and we have got. so accus-
tomed to that." ' 
"I can stilt Oome and sing to you sometimes," says
Georgie, with tears in her eyes and voice.
"Ah, yes,-sometimes;' That is just the bad part of
it; when one has known- an ' always,' one does not take
kindly to a 'sometimes.' And now here come all my
governess troubles back upon my shoulders once more.
Don't think me selfish, my dear, to think of that just now
in the very morning of your new happiness, but really I
can't .help it. I have been :so content with you, it never
occurred to me others might want you too."
"I will ask Clarissa to get you some one else nicer than
me," says Georgie, soothingly.
"Will you? Yes, do, my dear: she will do anything
for you. And, Georgina,"-from the beginning she has
called her thus,-nothing on earth would induce Mrs.
Redmond to call her anything more frivolous,-" tell her
I should prefer somebody old and ugly, if at all bearable,
because then she may stay with me. Dear, dear I how
Cissy will miss you ! And what will the vicar say? "'
And so on. She spends the greater part of the morn-
ing rambling on in this style, and then towards the even-
ing despatches Georgie to Gowrafi to tell Clarissa, too,
the great news.                      . 
But Clarissa knows all about it before her coming, and
meets her in the hall, and kisses her then and there, and
tells her she is so glad, and it is the very sweetest thing
that could possibly have happened, .
"He came down this morning very early and told me
all about it," she says, looking as pleased as though it is
her own happiness and not another's she is discussing.
" Now, what a pity!" says Georgie: "and I.did so
want to tell you myself, after the disgraceful way in which
you tried towed me to Mr. Hastings."  !
"He could not sleep; he confessed that to me. And
you had forbidden him to go to the vicarage to see you



<pb n="200"/>
200           FAITH AND UNFAAITH.
to'day. What else then could he do but come over and
put in a good time here? And he did. We had quite a
splen4did-time," says Miss Peyton, laughing;.," I really
don't know which of us was the most delighted about it.
We both kept on saying pretty things about you all the
time,-more than you deserved, I think."
"Now, don't spoil it," says Georgie: "I am certain I
deserved it all, and more. Well, if he didn't sleep, I did,
and dreamed, and dreamed, and dreamed all sorts of
lovely things until the day broke. Oh, Clarissa,"-throw-
ing out her arms with a sudden swift gesture of passionate
relief,-" I am free I Am I not lucky, fortunate, to have
deliverance sent so soon ?"
"Lucky, fortunate;" where has the word "happy"
gone, that she has forgotten to use it? Clarissa makes
no reply. - Something in the girl's manner checks her.
She is standing there before her, gay, exultant, with all a
child's pleasure in some new possession; "her eyes as
stars of twilight fair," flashing warmly, her whole manner
intense and glad; but there are no blushes, no shy half-
suppressed smiles, there is no word of love; Dorian's
name has not been mentioned, except as a secondary
part of her story, and then with the extremest unconcern.
Yet there is nothing in her manner that can jar upon
one's finer feelings; there is no undue exultation at the
coming great-change in her position,-no visible triumph
at the fresh future opening before her; it is only that in place
of the'romantic tenderness that should accompany such a
revelation as she has been making, there has been nothing
but a wild passionate thankfulness for freedom gainecd-
" When are you coming to stay with me altogether ?-I
mean until the marriage ?" asks Clarissa, presently.
" I cannot leave Mrs. Redmond like that," says Georgie,
who is always delightfully indefinite. " She will be in a
regular mess now until she gets somebody to take my
place. I can't leave her yet."
" Dorian will not like that."
" He must try to like it. Mrs. Redmond has been very
good to me, and I couldn't bear to make her uncomforta-
ble. I shall stay with her until she gets somebody else.
I don't think; when I explain it to him, that Dorian will
mind my'doing this." 



<pb n="201"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               so1
"He will think. it very sweet of you," says Clatissa,
"considering how you detest teaching, and that."
While they are at tea, Dorian drops in, and, seeing the
little yellow-haired fairy sitting in the huge lounging-chair,
looks so openly glad and contented that Clarissa laughs
mischievously.
"Poor Benedick !" she says, mockingly: (' so it has
come to this, that you know no life but in your Bettrice's
presence I"
"Well, that's hardly fair, I think," says Branscombe;
"you, at least, should not be the one to say it, as you are
in a position to declare I was alive and hearty at half-past
twelve this morning."' 
"Why, so you were," says Clarissa, "terribly alive,-
but only on one subject. By the by, has any one seen
papa lately ? He had some newbooks from town to-day,-
some painully -old books, I mean,-and has,:not been
found since. I am certain he will be discovered stbm day
buried beneath ancient tomes; perhaps, indeed,"it will be
this day. Will you two forgive me if I go to see if it is
yet time to dig him out?"         ' 
They forgive her; and presently find thehselVes! alone.
* ' ·                          : - .  ' *  *
"Is it all true, I wonder ?  says Dorian, after a little
pause. He is holding her hand, and is looking.down at
her with a fond sweet smile that betrays the d'ep love of
his heart..                               . ,
"Quite true.; at least, I hope so," with an answering
smile. Then, "I am so glad youare going to marry me,"
she says, without the faintest idea of shyness; "more
glad than I can tell you. Ever since-since I was left
alone, I have had no one belonging:to me,-that is,:no
one quite my own; and now I: have you. Y Yoiwill always
be fonder of me than of anybody else in :the-workl won't
you?"        '
She seems really anxious as she asks this.
"My darling, of course: I shall. ,How:could .youi ask
me such a question? . And you, Georgie, do; you love
me?"
"Love you ? Yes, I suppose so; I don't know,"-with
decided hesitation. "I am. crtain I like you very,.very



<pb n="202"/>
203           FAITH AND UNPFAITH.
much,-- I am quite happy when with you, and you don't
bore me a. bit, r I that t ?"  . 
This definition of what love may be, hardly comes up to
the. mark: in Mr. Branscombe's estimation.
She has risen, and is now looking up at'him inquiringly,
with eyes earnest and beautiful and deep, but so cold.
They chill him in spite of his efforts to disbelieve in their
fatal truthfulnessc 
"Hardly, 1 think," he says, with an attempt at gayety.
"Soething i else is' wanting, surely. Georgie, when I
asked you to marry me yesterday, and when you gave the
promise that has made me so unutterably happy ever since,
what was it you thought of ?"
"Well, -11 tIll. you," says;Miss Brgughton, cheerfully.
"First, . said to myselfi,-' Now I shall never again have
to teach,4urray's Gramma..'"
"Was that your.firs thought? "  He is both surprised
and pained. -. 
" Yes, my very first.' You look as if you didn't believe
me," says Miss Broughton, with a little laugh. " But if
you had gone through as many moods and tenses as I
have during tlhe past week, you would quite understand.
Well, then I thought how good it would be to have nothing
to do but amuse myself all day long. And then I looked
at you, and felt so glad you had no crooked eyes, or red
hair, or anything that way. And then, above all things, I
felt howmsweet it was to know I had found somebody who
would have to look after me and take care of me, so that
I need' never trouble about myself any more."
"Did you never once think of me ?" asks he, in a curi-
ous tone; 
" Of you ? Oh, no I You are quite happy," says Georgie,
with a sigh. " You have nothing to trouble you."
"Nothing! Of course not." Going up to her, he takes
her dear little face between both his hands, and looks
long and earnestly into her clear unconscious eyes. How
gladly would .he;have seen them droop and soften be-
neath his .gaze'! I"" Now let me tell you how I feel towards
you," he: says, 'smoothing her soft hair back from her fore-
head.
" I don't think I am a bit pretty with my hair pushed
baok,.kshe ltsysn-moving away from the caressing hand,



<pb n="203"/>
FAITH AND UNFAWITI.              203
Qind, with a touch, restoring her "amber locks " to their    C
original position. She smiles as she says this,-indeed,
ill temper, in any form, does not belong to her,-and,
when her hair is once more restored to order, she again
slips her fingers into his confidingly,.and glances up at
him. " Now tell me all about it," she says,:
"What am I to tell you ?-that when I am, away from
you I am restless, miserable; when with you, more than
satisfied. I know. that I could sit for hours content-
edly with this little hand in mine" (raising.it to his lips), 
" and I also know that, if fate so willed it, I should gladly
follow you through the length and breadth of the land, If
you were to die, or-or forsake me, it would break my
heart., ,And all this,is because I love you."i
"Is it? "-in, a very low tone, "Does all that mean 
being in love? Then "-in a still lower tone-" I know I
am not! re bit in love with you." 
"Then why are you marrying me ?" demands he, a
little roughly, stung to pained anger by her words.
" Because I promised papa, when-when he was leaving
me, that, I would marry the very first rich man that asked
me," replies she, again lifting her serious eye, :to his. 
"I thought it would make him happier. And it ;did. I
am keeping my promise now," with a sigh that may mean       a
regret for her. dead, or, indeed, anything.   .
"Are you not afraid to go too far ?" demands he, very
pale, moving back from her, and regarding her with
moody eyes. "Do you quite know what you are say-
ing ?-what you are compelling me, against my will, to
understand ?"                       , 
She is plainly not listening to him. She is lost in- a
mournful revery, and, leaning back in et chair, is staring
at her little white fingers in an absent: fashion, and.istwist-
ing roundand round lpon her third finger an old worn-
out gold ring. ., Poor little ring, so full; of sweet and mov-
ing memories !'    :. · ;
"It was very fortunate," she says, suddenly, with a
smile,.an4 without looking up at him, being still engrossed
in her! occupation of twisting the ring round her slender
finger,-" it was more than fortunate that the first rich
man should ehJsty". 
"Much more," he says, in an indescribable tone. Then



<pb n="204"/>
204           PII771 AND UVAfAITI. 
with an effort, "Would you have thrown me over had I
been poor ?"   .                -
"I shouldn't ;have consented to marry you, I think,"
says Miss Broughton, quite calmly.
"As I said before, to be candid is yourforte," exclaims
he, with extreme bitterness. " I wonder even if you loved
a man to distraction (I am not talking of myself, you
know,-that is quite evident, is it not ),would you reject
him if he was not sufficiently-bonpiari M "
"I don't think I could love any one to distraction," re-
plies she, quite simply. It seems the very easiest answer
to this question. 
"I believe you speak the very hotesttruth when you say
that," says Dorian, drawing his breath; quickly. ' You are
indeed tCrribly honest.' Ydu don't even shrink fromt tell-
ig the hiat-youwhaveelected to marry that he is no more
to you than any other man might be who was equally pos-
sessed of filthy-if desirable--lucre I"  ' 
He turns from her, and, going to the window, states out
blindly upon the dying daylight, and the gardens stretched
beneath, where, dying flowers' seem breathing of, and
suggesting, higher thoughts. 
He, is junutterably wretched.  All through 'his short
courtship he had entertained'doubts of her affection ; but
now, to have her so openly, sa carelessly, deolare her in-
difference is almost more than he can bear. " We forgive
so longas we Iove." To Doriani, though his love is geater
than that of most, forgiveness now seems difficult. Yet
can he resign her ? She has so woven herself into his
very heart-strings-this cold, cruel, lovely child-that he
cannot teir her. out withouta still further surrender of him-
self to death. To live without her--to get through end-
less days and interrinable nights without hope o seeing
her, with no certainrknowledge that thi morrow will bring
him sure tidings of her--seems impossible. He iighs;
and then, even as he sighs, five slim cold little fingers
steal within his.                             T
"I have made you angry," says the plaintive voice, iull
of contrition. A shapely yellow head pushes itself tnder
one of his arms, that is upraised, and a lovely sorrowful
pleading face looks up into his. How ean any one be an-
gy with a face like that ?



<pb n="205"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITtI.               205
"No, not angry," he says. And indeed the anger has
gone from his face,-her very touch has banished it,-and
only a great and lasting sadness has replaced it. Perhaps
for the first time, at this moment she grasps some faint
idea of the intensity of his love for her. Her eyes fill with
tears.
"I think-it will be better for you-to-give me up,"
she says, in a down-hearted way, lowering her lids over
her tell-tale orbs, that are like the summer sea now that
they shine through their unwonted moisture
" Tears are trembling in her blue eyes,
Like drops that linger on the violet,"
and bQrian, with a sudden passionate movement,- takes
her in his arms and presses her head down upon his breast.
"Do you suppose I can give you up now," he says, ve-
hemently, " when I have set .my whole heart upon you ?
It is. to late tposuggest such a course. That you do not
love me is my misfortune, not your fault. 'Surely it is mis-
ery enough to know that,-to feel that I am nothing to
you,-without telling me that you wish so soon to be re-
leased from your promise ?"
"I don't wish it," she says, earnestly, shaking her head.
"No, indeed I It was only for your sake I spoke. Per-
haps by and by you will regret having married some one
who does not love you altogether.  Because I know I
could not sit contentedly for hours with my hand in any
one's. And there are a great many things I would not do
for yoq. And if you were to die-"
"There! that will do," he says, with sudden passion.
"Do you know how you hurt, I wonder? Are you utterly
heartless?."
Her eyes 'darken as he' speaks, and, releasing herself
from 'his embrace,-which, in truth, has somewhat slack-
ened,-she moves back from him. She is puzzled, fright-
ened; her cheeks lose their soft color, and-
"With that, the water in her eie 
Arose, that she ne might it stoppe;
.,   And, as men sene the dew be droppe
'The leves and the floures eke,
Right'so'upon her white cheke
:  The wofull salt teres felle."



<pb n="206"/>
206           FAITH AND UAFAITH.
" I don't want to hurt you," she says, with a sob; " and
I know I am net heartless." There is a faint tinge of in-
dignation in her tone.
"*Of course you are not. It was a rather brutal thing
my saying so. Darling, whatever else may render me un-
happy, I can at all events find comfort in the thought that
you never loved any other man."
" But I did," says Miss Broughton, still decidedly tearful:
"you must always remember that. There was one; and'
-she is plainly in the mood for confessions-" I shall 
never love you or any one as I loved him."
"What are you going to tell me now? "says Dorian, des-
perately. He had believed his cup quite full, and only
now discovers his mistake. Is there a still heavier amount
of misery in store for him ? "Is the worst to be told me
yet?" he says, with the calmness of despair, being quite
too far gone for vehemence of any description. "Why did
you keep it from me until now ?"
"I didn't keep anything," cries she: " I told you lon '
ago-at least, I- "
"What is the name ?" demands he, gloomily, fully ex-
pecting the hated word " Kennedy " to fall from her lips.
"Better let me know it. Nothing you can possibly say can
make me feel more thoroughly stranded than I am."
," I think you are taking it very unreasonably," says Miss
Broughton, with quivering lips. "If I cannot bring my-
self to love anybody as well as poor papa, I can't help it
-and it isn't my fault-and you are very unkind to me-
and    "
"Good gracious! what a fright all about nothing ! " says
Mr. Branscombe, with a sigh of intense relief. "'I don't
mind your poor father, you know,-I rather admire your
faithfulness there,-but I thought-er-it doesn't in the
least matter what I thought," hastily: "every one has sil-
ly fancies at times." He kisses her lids warmly, tenderly,
until the heavy drops beneath press through and run all
down her charming childish face. " I am sure of this, al
least," he says; hopefully, "that you like me better than
any living man."
"Well, I do, indeed," replies she, in a curious tone,
that might be suggestive of surprise at her own discovery
of this fact. "But, then, how-bad you are to me at times i



<pb n="207"/>
fAITH AND UNFAITH.               aoy
Dear Dorian,"-laying one hand, with a pathetic gesture,
on his cheek,-" do not be cross to me again."
"My sweetest 1-my best beloved!" says Mr. Brans-
combe, instantly, drawing his breath a little quickly, and
straining her to his heart.
CHAPTER XXVI.
" The wisdom of tis world is idiotism."-DECKER.
"If thou desirest to be borne with, thou must bear also with
others."-KEM PS.
IT takes some time to produce another governess suited
to the Redmonds' wants. At length, however, the desired
treasure is procured, and forwarded, "with care," to the
vicarage.
On inspection, she proves to be a large, gaunt, high-
cheek-boned daughter of Caledonia, with a broad accent,
a broader foot, and uncomfortably red hair! She comes
armed with testimonials of the most severely compliment-
ary description, and with a pronounced opinion that " sal-
ary is not so much an object as a comfortable home."
Such a contrast to Georgie can scarcely be imagined.
The Redmonds; in a body, are covered with despair, and
go about the house, after her arrival, whispering in muffled
tones, and casting blanched and; stricken glances at each
other. Dire dismay reigns in their bosoms; while the
unconscious Scot unlocks her trunks, and shakes out her
gowns, and shows plainly, by her behavior, that she has
come to sit down before the citadel and carry on a pro-
longed siege.
To tea she descends with a solemn step and slow, that
Amy designates as a " thud." But yet at this first tea she
gains a victory. Arthur, the second boy, who has been
wicked enough to get measles at school, and who is now
at home to recruit himself and be the terror of his family,
is at this time kept rather on short commons by his mother
because of his late illness. This means bread-and-butter
without jam,-a meaning the lively Arthur rather resents.
Seeing which, the Caledonian, opening her lips almost for
the first time, gives it as her opinion that jam, taken mod-
erately; is wholesome.



<pb n="208"/>
-28s           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
She goes- even farther, and insinuates it may assist di-
gestion, which so impresses Mrs. Redmond that Arthur
forthwith finds himself at liberty to "tuck into " (his own
expression) the raspberry jam without let or hindrance.
This marvellous behavior on the part of the bony Scot
tells greatly in her favor, so far as the children go. They
tell each other later on that she can't be altogether an in-
pleasant sort, Master Arthur being specially loud in her
praise. He even goes so far as to insinuate that Miss
Broughton would never have said as much; but this base
innuendo is sneered down by the faithful children who
have loved and lost her. Nevertheless, they accept their
fate; and, after a week or two, the new-comer gains im-
mense ground, and is finally pronounced by her pupils to
be (as she herself would probably express it) "no' that
bad." Thus, Miss McGregor becomes governess at the
vicarage, vice Georgie Broughton promoted.
To be maried at once, without any unnecessary delay,
is Dorian's desire; and when, with some hesitation, he
broaches the subject to Georgie, to his surprise and great
content he finds her quite willing to agree to anything he
may propose. She speaks no word of reluctance, appears
quite satisfied with any arrangement he or Clarissa may
think proper, makes no shrinking protest against the undue
haste. She betrays no shyness, yet no unseemly desire
for haste. It seems to her a matter of perfect indifference.
She is going to be married, sooner or later, as the case
may be. Then why not the sooner?
This is, perhaps, the happiest time of her life. She
roams all day among the flowers and in the pleasure-
grounds, singing, laughing, talking gayly to any one she
may meet at Gowran, where, since Miss McGregor's ad-
vent, she has been. When at length it is finally settled
that the marriage is to take place next month, she seems
rather pleased than otherwise, and is openly delighted at
the prospect held out to her by Dorian of so soon seeing,
with her own eyes, all the foreign lands and romantic scenes
her fancy has so often depicted.
Just now, even as the tiny clock inside the room is
chiming four, Dorian is standing outside the low French
window of Miss Peyton's morning-room, and, leaning half
in, half out of it, is conversing with her, alone. Georgie,



<pb n="209"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.              209
for the time being, is lost to sight,-happy, somewhere, no
doubt, in the warm sunshine she-loves so well.
" Clarissa," he is saying, in a somewhat halting fashion,
-he is coloring hotly, and is, looking as uncomfortable as
a man can look, which is saying a good deal,-" look
here."
An ignominious break-down.
" I'm; looking,' says Clarissa, somewhat unkindly; "and
I don't see much."
"-Well, 'tis this, you know. You won't think it queer of
me, will you ? ".
" I won't; I promise that. Though I haven't the faintest
idea- whether I shall or not."
"When she is getting her things, her trousseau,-I want
her to. have every earthly thing she can possibly fancy,"
he says, at last, desperately. " Can't you manage that for
me ? cfDo; and make any use you like of this."
Hie:flings a cheque-book into her lap. through the open
windw ds:he. speaks.
"She shall have everything she wants,' says Clarissa;
"but I don't think "-taking up the book-" we shall re-
quire this."      . 
" Nevertheless, keep it.- You must want it; and -don't
mention me in; the matter at all. And-look here again-
what do.you.thifik she would like as a wedding-present?"
Of course he has- given her long ago the orthodox en-
gagement ring, the locket, the bracelet, and so forth.
"Why don't you ask her.? " says Miss Peyton.
,.Because the. other day she said she adored surprises.
And I am sure she doesn't care about being asked what
she likes.",
' You have your. mother's diamonds."
"Oh, of course "-airily--" all my mother's things.will
be hers; that goes without telling; but I hate old rubbish.
I want to!giVe her something from myself to wear on her
marriage morning. Don't you see ? or is it that 'you grow
imbecile in your old age, my good Clarissa ?"
"No; it only means that you -are growing extravagant
in, you i dotage, my good Dorian. Well, mention some-
thing, that I may object to it."
'E Emeralds, then?"
"No: papa has set his heart on giving her those."



<pb n="210"/>
210           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
"Rubies ?"
"Oh, nothing red: they would not suit her."
"Opals?" 
"Too unlucky, she would die or run away from you."
"Pearls? But of course,"-quickly: "why did I not
think of them before ?"
"Why, indeed? They will. be charming. By the by,
Dorian, have you told Lord Sartoris of your engagement ?"
Dorian's brow darkens.
"No,, He has been from home, you know, either in
Paris or the Libyan desert, or somewhere. He only
turned up again two days ago. Seen him since?"
"He was here, but I was out :Have you seen him ?"
"Well, yes,-at a distance." . 
"Dorian, there is certainly something wrong between
you and Lord Sartoris. I have noticed it for some time.
I don't ask you what it is, but I entreat you toibreak
through this coldness and be friends with hirm again."
She stoops towards him, and looks earnestly into his face.
He laughs a little.
" I'm tremendous friends with him, really," he says, " if
you would only try to believe it. I think him no end of a
good fellow, if slightly impossible at times. When he re-
covers from the attack of insanity that is at present ren-
dering him very obnoxious, I shall be delighted to let
by-gones be by-gones. But until then--
" You will tell him of your engagement ?"
" Perhaps: if occasion offers."
"No, not perhaps. Go to-day, this very evening, and
tell him of it."
"Oh, I can't, really, you know," says Mr. Branscombe,
who always finds a difficulty in refusing any one anything.
"You must,"-with decision: "he -surely deserves so
much at your hands."
"But how few of us get our deserts!" says Dorian, still
plainly unimpressed.
"Well, then, I think you should speak of it openly to
himl-if only for Georgie's sake."
"Fer'her sake ? " He colors again, and bites his lips.
"If you really think I owe it to her, of course I shall do
it, however distasteful the task may be; though I cannot
see how it will benefit her."



<pb n="211"/>
FAI4TH AND UNFAIT7'   .            211
"He is your uncle; you will wish your own family to re-
ceive her?"  .   :"  !  - '  :        -.
"I dare say you ar' right," says Branscombe, with a
shrug. " People always are when'they suggest to you an
unpleasant course."'" '   ,           .'; · 
" What is unpleasant now ? How canithere be anything
to distress:any one-on'such a heavenly day as this ?" cries
the soft petulant voice he loves:so well, calling;to thbm
across a flower-bed near.                  i 
Springing over it; she comes -up to the window,; arid,
leaning her elbows on the sill close to' him,' laughs gayly
up into his face.                   ; .;.
"There shall be nothing to distress you, at all events,
my 'amber witch,"' returns he, gayly, too. "Come, show
me once more these gardens you love so well."
.*      *      #       *      *       *      *  -
A promise with Dorian is not made of pie-crust: though
sorely against hi will, he goes up to Hythe after dinner
to acquain.this uncle formally of his approaching marriage.
The evening is calm and full of rest and quiet, a fit end-
ing to the perfect day that has gone before:
"The long day wanes,'the broad fields fade; the night-
The sweet June night-is like a curtain drawn-
The dark lanesknow no faintest sound, and white
The pallid hawthorn lights the smooth-bleached lawn;
The scented earth drinks from the silent'skies
Soft dews, more sweet than softest harm6nies."
Going through the woods that lie upon his right, he
walks silently onward, impressed by the beauty of the swift-
coming night, yet too restless in: mind to take in all -its
charms that are rich enough to satisfy a hungry' soul. A
soft wind is sighing; beneath its touch the young and ten-
1r hltrrahea arve .ity\wIg lightly to nl.l frn a atll the "4 fanth-
uy p'sUAe °f  t \d-nir a rw prsntnp- tiht d * ..rww flhram
and murmuring sleepy hymns ere sinking to.theirrest..
Scarce a sound can be heards: save the distant lowingiof
cattle, and the drowsy drone' of a'.slumberous; bee as it
floats idly by. The very sound of. Dorian's fdotsteps up-
on the soft grass can be distinctly-heard, so deadly is the
calm that. ushers in- the -night; when, .lo . fromn out some
thicket, the:nightingale,-   -           .- 
.  : -  :- **  ^.  J-^ ;   <'-J J r . CJ  - I.  .



<pb n="212"/>
2t2           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
"Who is silent all day long;
But when pale eve unseals her clear throat, looses
Her twilight music on the dreaming boughs
Until they waken "-
bursts into song. High and clear and exquisite rise the
notes one above the other, each vying in beauteous har-
mony with the. last, until one's very heart aches for love
and admiration of their sweetness.
Dorian, though oppressed with many discordant thoughts,
still pauses to listen, until silence following upon the pas-
sionate burst of melody,, he draws his breath quickly and
goes on to Hythe, and into the dinning-room there, where
he finds Lord Sartoris still over his wine.
He is sitting at the head of the long table, looking
strangely solitary, and very much aged,. considering the
short time that has elapsed since last he left Pullingham.
"Sq you are home again, Arthur," says Dorian, coldly,
but wIth apparent composure. They have. not been face
to face since that last meeting, when. bitter words' and
still mote bitter looks, had passed between them.
Now, letting the quickly spoken sentence take the place
of a more active greeting, they nod coolly to each other,
and carefully refuse. to let their hapds touch..
"Yes," says Sartoris,.evenly; " I returned two days ago.
Business recalled nhe; otherwise I was sufficiently com-
fortable where I.was to make me wish to remain there."
"And Constance, is she quite well ?"
"Quite well, thank you. Your other cousins desired to
be, remembered to you. So did she, of course."
A pause, prolonged and undesirable.
* "You will take some claret?" says Sartoris, at last,
pushing the bottle towards him,
A"No, thank you; I have only just dined. I came up
to-night to tell you what I. dare say by this you have heard
from somebody else 1I am going to be married on the 9th
of next month."
* Lord Sartoris turns suddenly to confront him.
"I. had not heard it," he says, with amazement. "To
be.married I This is very sudden." Then, changing his
tone, "I am glad," he says, slowly, and with an unmis-
takable sneer, " that at last it has occurred to you to set
that girl right in the eyes of the world. As a man of honor
there was no other course left open to you."
/



<pb n="213"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               213
"To whom are you alluding ? " asks Branscombe, grow-
ing pale with anger, an ominous flash betraying itself in
his gray eyes.
" I hope I understand you to mean to offer full, though
tardy, reparation to Ruth Annersley."
With an effort Branscombe restrains the fierce outburst
of wrath that is trembling on his lips.
" You still persist, then, in accusing me of being acces-
sory to that girl's disappearance ?"
" You have never yet denied it," exclaims Sartoris, push-
ing back his glass, and rising to his feet. "Give me the
lie direct, if you can,-if you dare,-and I will believe
you."
" I never will," returns Dorian, now thoroughly roused,
-" neverl If my own character all these past years is
not denial enough, I shall give no other. Believe what
you will. Do you imagine I shall come to you, like awhipped
school-boy, after every supposed offence, to say, ' I did do
this,' or, ' I did not do that' ? I shall contradict nothing,
assert nothing: therefore judge me as it may please you.
I shall not try to vindicate my actions to any living man."
His tone, his whole bearing, should have carried con-
viction to the hearts of most men; but to the old lord,
who has seen so much of the world in its worst phases,-
its cruelties and falsehoods,-and who has roughed it so
long among his fellowmen, faith, in its finer sense, is want-
ing.
"Enough," he says, coldly, with a slight wave of his
hand.  "Let us end this subject now and forever.
You have come to tell me of your approaching marriage;
may I ask the name of the lady you intend making your
wife?"
"Broughton; Georgie Broughton," says Branscombe,
briefly.
" Broughton,-I hardly fancy I know the name; and
yet am I wrong in thinking there is a governess at the
vicarage of that name ?"
"There was. She is now staying with Clarissa Peyton.
I am to be married to her, as I have already told you,
early next month."
" A governess/" says Sartoris. There is a world of un-
pleasant meaning in his tone. " Really,"-with slow con-



<pb n="214"/>
214           'FAITH AND UNFAITH.
tempt,-" I can hardly congratulate you on your tastes!
You, who might have chosen your wife almost anywhere,
can find nothing to suit you but an obscure governess." 
"I don't think there is anything particularly obscure
about Georgie," replies Dotian, with admirable composure,
though he flushes hotly. "Have you ever seen her ? No ?
Then, of course, you are not in a position to judge of either 
her merits or demerits. I shall thank you, therefore,"-sur-
veying his uncle rather insolently, from head to heel,-" to
be silent on the subject."
After a slight pause, he turns again to Saftoris, and,
forcing him to meet his gaze, says haughtily,-.
"May we hope you will be present at our wedding, my
lord'?" -  '           '    - 
"I thanF you-, no. I fear not," returns the older man,
quite as- haughtily. "I hope to be many miles from here
before the end of Lnext week."
Dorian smiles unpleasantly.             ' :      i
"You will at least call upon Miss Broughton before
leaving the neighborhood ?" he says, raising his brows.
*At this Sartoris turns-upon him fiercely, stung by the
apparent unconcern of his manner.
" Why should I; call ?i he says, his; voice full of indig-
nant anger. ." Is it to' congratulate her on her coming
union with you ? I tell you, were I to do so, the face of
another-Woman would rise before me and freeze the false
words upon my lips. To you, Dorian, in my old age, all
my heart went -ut. My hopes, my affeetions, my ambi-
tions, began and ended with you. And what a-reward has
been mine t Yours has been the hand to drag our name
down to a level with the dust. Disgrace follows hard upon
your footsteps. Were I to go, as you desire, to this inno-
cent girl,' d you imagine'I cohld speak fair words to her?
I tell you, no ! I should rather feel it my duty to warn
her against entering a -house so dishonored as yours. I
should- -"                    ' -  :     ' 
"Pshaw !" says Branscombe, checking hii -with an im-
patient gesture. " Don't let us introduce tragedy into this
very commonplace affair. Pray don't trouble yourself to
go and see her at all. In your present mood, I rather
think you would frighten her ;to death.  I am sorry I in-
tiuded' my privatej inatters upon you: but Clarissa quite



<pb n="215"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITI.               215
made a point of my coming to I.ythe to-night for that pur-
pose, and, as you know, she is 'a difficult person to refuse.
I'm sure I beg your pardon for having so unwarrantably
bored you." 
"Clarissa, like a great many other charming people, is
at times prone to give very unseasonable advice," says
Sartoris, coldly.
"Which, interpreted, means that I did wrong to come. I
feel you are right."  He laughs faintly again, and, taking
up his hat, looks straight at his uncle. He has drawn
himself up to his full height, and is looking quite his hand-
somest. He is slightly flushed (a dark color that becomes
him), and a sneer lies round the corners of his lips. "I 
hardly know how to apologize," he says, lightly, "for hav-
ing forced myself upon you in this intrusive fashion. The
only amends I can possibly make is to promise you it
shall never occur agaiid,' and:to still further give you my
word that, for the future, I shall not even annoy you by
my presene'nce,"'
So saying, he turns away, and, inclining his head, goes
out through the door, and, closing it gently after him,
passes rapidly down the long hall, as though in haste to
depart, and, gaining the entrance-door, shuts it, too, behind
him, and breathes more freely as he finds the air of heaven
beating on his brow. 
Not until he has almost reached Sartoris once more
does that sudden calm fall upon him that, as a rule, follows
hard upon all our gusts of passion. The late interview
has hurt him more-than he cares to confess even:'to him-
self. 'His regard-nay, his affection-for Sartoris is deep
and sincere; and, though wounded now, and estranged
from him, because of his determination to believe the
worst of him, still it remains hidden in his heart, and is
strong enough to gall and torture 'him after such scenes as
he has just gone through.         i
Hitherto his life has been unclouded,-has been all
sunshine and happy summer and glad with laughter. Now
a dark veil hangs over it, 'threatening to deaden all things
and dim the brightness of his golden hours." ' 
"He'who hath most 'f heart knows most' of sorrow."
To Dorian' to be wroth with 'those h'e''lves is, indeed, a
sort of madness that affects 'his heart, if hbt his brain.
* 4, ,, S  .,  .   f   T.   7~~~~~~



<pb n="216"/>
2I6            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
He frowns as he strides discontentedly onward through
the fast-falling night: and then all at once a thought
comes to him-a fair vision seems to rise almost in his
path-that calms him and dulls all resentful memories.
It is Georgie,-his love, his darling! She, at least, will
be true to him. He will teach her so to love him that no
light winds of scandal shall have power to shake her faith.
Surely a heart filled with dreams of her should harbor no
miserable thoughts.  He smiles again; his steps grow
lighter! he is once more the Dorian of old; he will-he
must-be, of necessity, utterly happy with her beside him
during all the life that is to come.
Alas that human hopes should prove so often vain !
CIAPTER XXVII.
"'Tis now the summer of your youth; time has not cropt the roses
from your cheek, though sorrow long has washed them."- The Game- -
ster.
THE wedding-a very private one-goes off charmingly.
The day breaks cain{, smilingly, rich with beauty. " Lovely
are the opening eyelids of the morn."
Georgie, in her wedding garments, looking like some
pale white lily, is indeed "passing fair."  She is almost
too pallid, but the very pallor adds to the extreme purity
and childishness of her beauty, and makes the gazer confi-
dent "there's nothing ill can dwell in such a temple."
Dorian, tall and handsome, and unmistakably content,
seems a very fit guardian for so fragile a flower.
Of course the marriage gives rise to much comment in
the county, Branscombe being direct heir to the Sartoris
title, and presumably the future possessor of all his uncle's
private wealth. That he should marry a mere governess,
a positive nobody, horrifies the county, and makes its shrug
its comfortable shoulders and give way to more malicious
talk than is at all necessary. With some, the pretty bride
is an adventuress, and, indeed,-in the very softest of soft
whispers, and with a gentle rustling of indignant skirts,-
not altogether as correct as she might be. There are a few
who choose to believe her of good family, but "awfully
out-at-elbows, don't you know;" a still fewer who declare



<pb n="217"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               2!7
she is charming :all round and fit for anything; and hardly
one who does not consider her, at heart, fortunate and de-
signing.            .                   y 
One or two rash and unsophisticated girls ¥enture on
the supposition that perhaps, after all, jt i a real bonaifie
love-match, and make the still bolder, suggestion that a
governess may have a heart as well as other-pepple. But
these silly children are pushed out of sight, and yery sen-
sibly pooh-poohed, and are wold, with a little clever laugh,
that they " are quite too sweet, and quite dear babiespand
they must try and keep on thinking all that sort of pretty
rubbish as long as ever they can. It is so successful,
and so very taking nowadays." 
Dorian is regarded as an infatuated, misguided young
man, who should never have been allowed out without a
keeper. Such a disgraceful flinging away of opportunities,
and birth, and positiont, to marry a woman so utterly out of
his own set! No wonder his poor uncle refused to be pres-
ent at the ceremony,-actually ran away from  home to
avoid it. -And-so-by the'by, talking of running away,
what was that affair about that little girl at the mill?
Wasn't Branscombe's name mixed up with it unpleasantly ?
Horrid low, you know, that sort of thing, when: one is
found out.  , -
The county is quite pleased with its own gossip, and
drinks innumerable cups of choicest tea over it, out'of the
very daintiest Derby and Sevres and " Wooster," and is
actually merry at the expense of the newly-wedded. Only
a very few brave men, among whom is Mr. Kennedy, who
is staying with the Luttrels, give. it as their opinion that
Branscombe is a downright lucky fellow and has got the
handsomest wife in the neighborhood.
Towards the close of July, contrary to expectation, Mr.
and Mrs. Branscombe return to Pullingham, and, in spite
of censure, and open protest, are literally inundated with
cards from all sides.  ' 
The morning after her return, Georgie drive :.d6own to
Gowran, to see Clarissa, and tell her' "all the news," as
she declares in her first breath.
" It was all too enchanting," she says, n her quick, viva-
cious way. "I enjoyed it so. All the lovely old churches,
and the lakes, and the bones of the dear saints, and



<pb n="218"/>
t8             FAITH AND UNrFA-TH.
everything. -But I  rtissed you, do you kknow,-,yes really,
without fflattery,; I mean. Every t-ime -;I; saw anythi'g4,
specially desirable, I felt I wanted you to see it too. An.'
so one day I told Dorian I Was filled with ac madi, longing
todtalk to you once again, and I thiik' he rather jumped
at the suggestion of 'oming home forthwith; and-why,
here  we are." -  -    ;:  - 1          ., .  .  ,, -
'  I can't say how glad I am that you are here," says
Clarissa. "It was too dreadful' without you both. I am
so delighted you had such a really goodtime and were so
happy."                              ; .; 
" Happy --I am quite that," says Mrs. Branscombe,:
easily. " I can always do justiwhatlE please,-and there is'
nobody now .to scold or annoy.me- in anr ,way." 
t" Anid' you ha  nve rian to lo "says Clarissa, a little
gravely,-shae hardly :knows .why.. It is perhaps the old
curious want in Georgie's.:tone that has again impressed
her.                                ;       .-- · ";
" Love, love, love," cries that young, woman, a little im-
patiently: f -Why are people always talkingjaboit love?
Does it !really make the world go',ound, I wonder ? Yes,
of course' I have Dorian: to be .fond: ofi now,"; She .riss..r
impulsively, a;.;,: walking to. oine. i; Qf he-: windows, gazes
out upon the gardens beneath. "Come," she says,,step-
ping aon tp the veranda';, "'come out with ',-l  :;1 -, waxt to
'breathe'your flowers again."  ... ,  ,    ;  -.: '.
Clarissa follows'hdr, and together they( w.nder sup and
down ai6ng the heavy roses and: drooping lilies, that are
languid ,with heat and sleep. Here all the children of .the
sun and dew seem to-grow and flourish,.      -
' "'No daihtie flowre or herbe that growei- otn 'grownd,
No arborett with paintfed blossom 0drest'  :  ''
And smelling sweete, but there, it might be fownd  . 
,  TO bud pout: faire and throwe her sweete smels al arownd."
Dorian, coming up presently to meet his wife and drive
her home, finds her and Clarissa laughing gayly over one
of Georgie's foreign reminiscences. He walks so slowly
over the soft'green grass that they do not hear him until
he is quite close to them.
"Ahb! you have come, Dorian," says Dorian's wife,
with a pretty smile, "but too soon. Clarissa and I
haven't half said all we have to say yet."



<pb n="219"/>
FAITH A ND UNFAIT TH.             219
" At least I hawe said how-glad I am to have you- both
back," says Clarissa.  ' The whole thing has been quite
too awfully dismal without you, ';But for Jim: and papa. I
should have gone mad, or something. I never put in such
a horrid time. Horace! came down. occasionally,--very
occasionally-out: of sheer pity, I believe ; and iLrd Sar-
toris-was ;a.real ccomfort, he visited so often; -but he .has
gone away again."                           ',
"Has he ? I suppose ouztreturn frightened .hiti;' says
Branscombd,.in;.a peeoulia;rtonr  . . ;  ',  , .
:  I have been telling Clarissa how we tired df each
other long before the right.time,'? says Georgte, airily,
"and how.we. ame home to escape being bored to death
by our own dulness." :                       . - 
Dorian laughs.                   :: :
"She says what shed likes,'? he tells Clarissa. ," Has
:she' yet put on the dignified stop for you ?  It would quite
subdue any one to see her at the head of 'het table. Last
night it was terrible. She seemed to grow. several inches
taller, ad4'ilooked-so severe. that4. long before it was time
for him to retire,.Martin was:on the:verge of nervoustears.
I couldc-have-wept for him, he looked so disheartened."
"I'm; perfectly certain iMartin. adored me,'", says- Mrs.
Branscoibe4.ndignantly, " add I couldn't be severe or.dig-
nified to save my life. iClarissa, you must' forgive me if I
remove Dorian at once, before he says anything worse.
He i§ quite untrustworthy. Good-by, dearest, an4d be sure
you come up to see .me to-morrow. I want to ask you ever
so many more questions."                     '
*      *  :  . -  *   .      *      *      . *
"Cards from the duchess for a garden-party," says
Georgie, throwing the invitations in question across the
breakfast-table to her husband. It is quite a week later,
and she has almost settled down into the conventional
married woman, though not altogether. To be entirely
married-that isj sedate  and sage-is quite beyond
Georgie. Just now some worrying thought is oppressing
her, and spoiling the flavor of her tea; her kidney loses
its grace, her toast its crispness. She peeps at Dorian
from behind-the huge silver urn that seeks jealously to
conceal her from view, and says, plaintively,-
" Is the duchess a very grand person, Dorian ?"



<pb n="220"/>
2O            -FAITH AND UNFAITH.
" She is an awfullyi fat person, at al-l events," says
Dorian,. cheerfully. " I never saw any one who coul
beat her in that line. She'd take a prize, I think. , She
is not a bad old thing when in a good temper, but that is
so painfully seldom.: Willyou;go?"    . 
· I' don't know,"-doubtfully. Plainly, she is in the
lowest depths of despair. '" I-I-think I would rather
not."
" I think you had better, darling."       . 
"But you said just now she was always in a.bld temper."'
"Always? Oh, no; I am sure I couldn't have said
that. And, besides, she won't go for you, you know, even
if she is. The duke generally comes in for it. And by
this time he rather enjoys it, I suppose,-as'custom makes
us love most things."
"But, Dorian, really now, what is she like ?" -
"I can't say that: it isa tremendous question. I don't
know what she is; I only know what she is not."
"What, then ?"                   :. .. 
" 'Fashioned so slenderly, young and sb fair/'" quotes
he, promptly. At which they both laugh.   ; 
"If she is an old dowdy," says Mrs. Byanscombe, some 
what irreverently, " I sha'n't'be one scrap afraid of her,
and I do so want to go right over the castle. 'Somebody
-Lord Alfred;-would take me,^I dare say. Yes,"--with
sudden animation,-" let us go."     .. 
"I shall poison Lord Alfred presentlyi" sass Dbrian,
calmly. "Nothing shall prevent me. ' Your evident de.
termination to spend your day with him has sealed his
doom. Very well: send an answer, and let us spend a
'nice long happy day in the country.'"   ; 
"We are always spending that, aren't we? ' says, Mrs.
Branscombe, adorably. Then, with a sigh, ': Dorian;wha
shall I wear?" 
He doesn't answer. For the moment he is engrossed
being deep in his " Times," busy studying the murders, di
vorces, Irish atrocities, and other pleasantries it contain
" Doriai, do put down that abominable paper,". exclain
she again, impatiently, leaning her arms on the table, an
regarding him anxiously from the right side of .the vet
forward urn that still will come in her way. '" WFat sb'.
I wear'?"                        ,     , 
~   :~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="221"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               221
"It can't matter," says Dorian: "you look lovely in
ieveryting, so it is impossible for you to make a mistake."
"IFis a pity you can't talk sense,"-reproachfully.
Then, with a glance literally heavy with care, " There is
that tea-green satin trimmed with Chantilly."
"I forget it," says Dorian, professing the very deepest
interest, "but I know it is all things."
"No, it isn't: I can't bear the sleeves. Then "-discon-
tentedly-" there is that velvet."
"The very thing,"--enthusiastically.
"Oh, Dorian, dear! What are you thinking of ? Do
remember how warm the weather is."
"Well, so it is,-grilling," says Mr. Branscombe, nobly
confessing his fault.
" Do you like me in that olive silk ?" asks she, hope-
fully, gazing at him with earnest intense eyes.
"Don't I just ?" returns he, fervently, rising to enforce
his words.
"Now, don't be sillier than you can help," murmurs
she, with a lovely smile. " Don't! I like that gown my-
self, you know: it makes me look so nice and old, and
that."
"If I were a little girl like you," says Mr. Branscombe,
" I should rather hanker after looking nice and young."
"But not too much so: it is frivolous when one is once
married." This pensively, and with all the air ofone who
has long studied the subject.
"Is it ? Of course you know best, your experience be-
ing greater than mine," says Dorian, meekly, "but, just
for choice, I prefer youth to anything else."
"Do you? Then I suppose I had better wear white."
"Yes, do. One evening, in Paris, you wore a white
gown of some sort, and I dreamt of you every night for a
week afterwards."
"Very well. I shall give you a chance of dreaming of
me again," says Georgie, with a carefully suppressed sigh,
that is surely meant for the beloved olive gown.
The sigh is wasted. When she does don the white
gown go despised, she is so perfect a picture that. one
might well be excused for wasting seven long nights in
airy visions filled all with her. Some wild artistic mar-
guerites are in her bosom (she plucked them herself from



<pb n="222"/>
222           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
out the meadow an hour agone); her lips are red, and
parted; her hair, that is loosely knotted, and hangs low
down, betraying the perfect shape of her small head, is
"yellow, like ripe corn."  She smiles as she'places her
hand in Dorian's and asks him how she looks; while he,
being all too glad because of her excessive beauty, is
very slow to answer her. In truth, she is " like the snow-
drop fair, and like the primrose sweet."
At the castle she creates rather a sensation. Many, as
yet, have not seen her; and these stare at her placidly, in-
different to the fact that breeding would have it otherwise.
"What a peculiarly pretty young woman,'" says the
duke, half an hour after her arrival; staring-at her through
his glasses. He had been absent when she came, and so
is only just now awakened to a sense of her charms.
"Who?-what ?"- says the duchess, vaguely, she being 
the person he has rashly addressed. She is very fat, very
unimpressionable, and very fond of argument. " Oh ! over ·
there, I quite forget who; she is. But I do see that
Alfred is making. himself, as usual, supremely ridiculous..
with her. .With all his affected devotion to Helen, he
runs after every fresh face he sees."
"'There's nothing like a plenty,'" quotes the duke,
with a dry chuckle at his-own wit; indeed he prides him-
self upon having been rather a " card " in his day, and
anything but a " k'rect" one, either. 
"Yes, there is,-there is propriety," responds the duch-
ess, in an awful tone.
"That wouldn't be a bit like it," says the duke, still-J
openly amused at his' own humor; after which-thinking .
it, perhaps, safer to withdraw while there is yet time-
he saunters off to the left, and, as he has a trick of look- 
ing over his shoulder while walking, nearly falls into
Dorian's arms at the next turn.
"Ho, hah !" says his Grace, pulling himself up very
shortly, and glancing at his stumbling-block to see if he
can identify him..
"Why, it is'you, Branscombe," he says, in -his usual
cheerful, if rather fussy, fashion. " So glad to see you, I-
so glad."  He has made exactly- this remark to Dorian-
every time he has come in contact 'with him during the-
past twenty -years and more. " By the: by, I dare say you



<pb n="223"/>
lFAITH AND UNFAITH.              223
can tell me,-who is that pretty child over there, with the
white frock and the blue eyes?"
"That pretty. child in the frock is my wife," says Brans-
combe, laughing.
" Indeed !  Dear me! dear me ! I beg your pardon.
My dear boy, I congratulate you. Such a face,-like a
Greuze; or a-h'm-yes."  Here he grows slightly mixed.
"You must introduce me, you know. One likes to do
homage to beauty. Why, where could you have met her
in this exceedingly deficient county, eh? But you were
always a sly dog, eh ?"  :
The old gentleman gives him a playful slap on his shoul-
der, and then, taking his arm, goes with him across the
lawn to where Georgie is standing talking gayly to Lord
Alfred.
The introduction is gone through, and Georgie makes
her very best bow, and blushes her very choicest blush;
but the duke will insist upon shaking hands with her,
whereupon, being pleased, she smiles her most enchanting
smile.
" So glad to make your acquaintance. Missed you on
your arrival," says the duke, genially. " Was toiling through
'the conservatories, I think, with Lady Loftus. Know her ?
Stout ofl lady, with feathers over her nose. She always
will go to hot places on hot days."
" I wish she would go to a final hot place, as she affects
them so much," says Lord Alfred, gloomily. "I can't
bear her; she is always coming here bothering me about
that abominable boy of hers in the Guards, and I never
know what to say fo her."
"Why don't you learn it up at night and say it to her
in the morning ?" says Mrs. Branscombe, brightly. "I
should know what to say to her at once."
"Oh! I dare say," says Lord Alfred. "Only that
doesn't help me, you know, because Idon't."
" Didn't know who you were, at first, Mrs. Branscombe,'
breaks in the duke. " Thought you were a little girl-eh ?
-eh ? "-chuckling again.  " Asked your husband who
you were, and so on. I hope you are enjoying yourself.
Seen everything, eh? The houses are pretty good this
year."
.



<pb n="224"/>
22_4 IL rn            AIv  uJ'f iirll. 
"Lord Alfred has just shown them to me. They ar
quite too exquisite," says Georgie. 
"And the lake, and my new swans ?" 
"No; not the swans." 
"Dear me ! why didn't he show you those ? Finest birds
I ever saw. My dear Mrs. Branscombe, you really must1
see them, you know."
" I should like to, if you will show them to me," says l
the little hypocrite, with the very faintest, but the most
successful, emphasis on the pronoun, which is wine to the
heart of the old beau; and, offering her his arm, he takes
her across the lawh and through the shrubberies to th':
sheet of water beyond, that gleams sweet and cool throu ,;
the foliage. As they go, the county turns to regard them;
and men wonder who the pretty woman is the old fellow
has picked up; and women wonder what on earth the duke
can see in that silly little Mrs. Branscombe.
Sir James, who has been watching the duke's evident
admiration for his, pretty guest, is openly amused.
" Your training ! " he says to Clarissa, over whose chair
he is leaning. " You ought to be ashamed of yourself and
your pupil. ' Such a disgraceful little coquette I never saw.
I really pity that poor duchess: see there, how miserably
unhappy she is looking, and how- er-  pink."
"Don't be unkind: your hesitation was positively cruel.
The word ' red' is unmistakably the word for the poor duch-
ess to-day."
"Well, yes, and yesterday, and the day before, and prob-
ably to-morrow," says Sir James, mildly. "But I really
wonder at the duke,-at his time of life, too ! If I were
Branscombe I should feel it my duty to interfere."
He is talking gayly, unceasingly, but always with his
grave eyes fixed upon Clarissa, as she leans back languidly
on the uncomfortable garden-chair, smiling indeed every
now and then, but fitfully, and without the gladness that
generally lights up her charming face.
Horace had promised to be here to-day,-had faithfully
promised to come with her and her father to this garden-
party; and where is he now ? A little chill of disappoint-
ment has fallen upon her, and made dull her day. No
smallest doubt of his truth finds harbor in her gentle bosom,



<pb n="225"/>
PAITH AND UNFAITH.                 25
yet grief sits heavy on. her, " as the mildews hang upon
the bells of flowers to blight their bloom ! "
Sir James, half divining the cause of her discontent,
seeks carefully, tenderly, to draw her from her sad thoughts
in every way that occurs to him; and his efforts, though
not altogether crowned with success, are at least so far
happy in that he induces her to forget her grievance for
the time being, and keeps her from dwelling too closely
upon the vexed question of her recreant lover.
To be with Sir James is, too, in itself a relief to her.
With him she need not converse unless it so pleases her;
her silence will neither surprise nor trouble him; but with
all the others it would be so different: they would claim.
her attention whether she willed it or not, and to make or-
dinary spirited conversation just at this moment would be
impossible to her. The smile dies off her face. A sigh
replaces it.
"How well you are looking to-day!" says Scrope,
lightly, thinking this will please 'her. She is extremely
pale, but a little hectic spot, born of weariness and fruit-
less hoping against hope, betrays itself on either cheek.
His tone, if not the words, does please her,, it is so full of
loving kindness.
"Am I ?" she says. " I don't feel like looking well;
and I am tired, too. They say,-
'A merry heart goes'all the day,
Your sad tires in a mile-a;'
I doubt mine is a sad one, I feel so worn out. Though,"-
hastily, and with a vivid flush that changes all her pallor
into warmth,-" if I were put to it, I couldn't tell you
why."
" No ? Do you know I-have often felt like that," says
Scrope, carelessly. "It is both strange anidnatural. One
hasfits of depression that come and go at will, and that
one cannot account for; at least,i[ have, frequently. But
you, Clarissa, you should not know what depression
means."
"I know it to day." For the moment her courage fails
her. She feels weak; a craving for sympathy overcomes
her; and, turning, she lifts her large sorrowful eyes to
his.
15



<pb n="226"/>
226            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
She would, perhaps, have spoken; but now a sense of
shame and a sharp pang that means pride come to her,:
and, by a supreme effort, she conquers emotion, and lets
her heavily-lashed lids fall over her suffused eyes, as though
to conceal the tell-tale drops within from his searching
gaze.
So, you see,"-she says, with a rather artificial laugh,
-" your flattery falls through: with all this weight of im-.
aginary woe upon my shoulders, I can hardly be looking
my best."
"Nevertheless, I shall not allow you to call my true
sentiments flattery," says Scrope: "I really meant what
I said, whether you choose to believe me or not. Yours'
is a
'Beauty truly blent, whose red' ahd white
Nature's own sweet and cunning hand laid on."'
"What a courtier you become!" she says, laughing
honestly for almost the first time to-day. It is so strange
to hear-James Scrope say anything high-flown or senti-
mental. She is a little bit afraid that he. knows why she
is sorry, yet, after all, she hardly frets over the fact of his.
knowing. Dear Jim ! he is always kind, and sweet, and
thoughtful ! Even if he does understand, he is quite safe
to look as if he didn't. And that is always such a comr
fort !
And Sir James, watching her, and marking the grief
upon her face, feels a tightening at his heart, and a long-
ing to succor her, and to go forth-if need be-and fight
for her as did the knights of old for those they loved,;un-
til "just and mightie death, whom none can advise," en-
folded him in his arms.
For long time he has loved her,-has lived with only
her image in his heart. Yet what has his devotion gained
him ? Her liking, her regard, no doubt, but nothing that'
can satisfy the longing that leaves desolate his faithful
heart. Regard, however deep, is but small comfort to
him whose every thought, waking and sleeping, belongs.
alone to her.
"Full little knowest thou, that hast not tride,
What hell it is, in swing long to bide;
To loose good dayes that might be better spent,
To wast long nights in pensive discontent;



<pb n="227"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITHI.                227
To speed to-day, to be put back to-morrow;
To feed-on hope, to-pine with feare and sorrow;
To fret thy soVl with crosses and with cares;  .
To'eate thy heart through comfortlesse dispaires'"
He is quite assured she lives in utter"'ignorance of his
love. No word has escaped him, no -sriallest hint, that
might declare to her the passion that daily, hourly, grows
stronger, and of which she is the sole object.  The no-
blest mind the best contentment has," and he cbtents
himself as best he may on a smile here, a gentle
word there, a kindly pressure of the hand to-day, a look
of welcome to-morrow. These are liberally given, but
nothing more. Ever since her engagement to Horace
Branscombe he has, of course, relinquished hope; but
the surrender of all expectation has not killed his love.
He is silent because he must be so, but his heart wakes,
and       ,.
" Silence in love bewrays more woe
Than words, though ne'er so witty."
"See, there they are again," he says now, alluding to
Georgie and her ducal companion, as they emerge from
behind some thick shrubs. Another man is with them, too,
-a tall, gaunt yoiWng man, with long hair, and a cadaver-
ous face, who is staring at Georgie as though he would will-
ingly devour her-but only in the interest of art. He is
lecturing on the. " Consummate Daffodil," and is comparing
it unfavorably with the " Unutterable Tulip," and is plainly
boring the two, with whom he is walking, to extinction.
He is Sir John Lincoln, that oldLnew friend of Georgie's,
and will not be shaken off.
"Long ago," says Georgie, tearfully, to herself, "he was
not an aesthete. Oh, how I wish he would go back to his
pristine freshness !" 
But he won't: he maunders on unceasingly about impos-
sible flowers, that are all very well in their way, but whose
exaltedness lives only in his own-imagination, until the
duke, growing weary (as well he might, poor soul), turns
aside, and greets with unexpected cordiality a group upon
his right, that, under any other less oppressive circum-
stances, would be abhorrent to him. But to spend a long
hour talking about one lily is not to be borne.
Georgie follows his example, and tries td escape Lincoln



<pb n="228"/>
228           FAITH AND UNFAITH. 4
and the tulips by diving among the aforesaid group. She
is very successful,-groups do not suit esthetics,-and
soon the gaunt young man takes himself, and his long hair,
to some remote region, 
"How d'ye do, Mrs. Branscombe ?" says a voice at her: 
elbow, a moment later,, and, turning, she. finds herself face
to face with Mr. Kennedy.
"Ah ! you?" she says, with very flattering haste, being 
unmistakably pleased to see him, "I had no idea you
were staying in the country."
"I am staying with the Luttrells'. Molly asked me down:
last month."
"She is a great friend of yours IEknow," says Mrs. Brans-
combe; "yet I hadn't the. faintest notion I should meet
you here to-day." 
"And you didn't caxe either, I dare say," says Mr. Ken-
nedy, in a tone that ispositively-sepulchral, and, consider-
ing all things, very well done indeed.
" I should have cared, if I had even once thought about
it," says Mrs. Branscombe, cheerfully. 
Whereupon he says,--            s
" Thank you !" in a voice that is all reproach.
Georgie colors, "I didn't mean what you think," she
says, anxiously. "I didn't indeed."
"Well, it sounded exactly like it," says Mr. Kennedy,
with careful. gloom. "Of course it is not to be expected
that you everz would think of me, but-   I haven't seen
you: since that last night at Gowran, have I ?"
" No."
" I think you might have told me then you were going to
be married."
"I wasn't going to be married then," says Georgie, indig-
nantly: " I hadn't a single idea.of it. Never thought of it,
until the next day."
" I quite thought you were going to marry me," says Mr.
Kennedy, sadly; " I had quite made up my mind to it. I
never "-forlornly-" imagined you as belonging to any
other fellow. It isn't pleasant to find that one's pet doll
is stuffed with sawdust, and yet-"
"I can't think what you are talking about," says Mrs.
Branseombe, coldly, and with some fine disgust; she can- 
not help thinking that she must be the doll in question,



<pb n="229"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               229
and to be filled with sawdust sounds anything but dig-
nified.
Kennedy, reading her like a book, nobly suppresses a
wild desire for laughter, and goes on in a tone, if possible,
more depressed than the former one.
"My insane hope was the doll,'"he says: "it proved
only dust. I haven't got over the shock yet that I felt on
hearing of your marriage. I don't suppose I ever shall
now."
"Nonsense !" says Georgie, contemptuously. "I never
saw you look so well in all my.life. You are positively fat."
"That's how it always shows with me," saysr Kennedy,
unblushingly. " Whenever green and yellow melancholy
marks me for its own, I sit on a monument (they always
keep one for me at home) and smile incessantly at grief,
and get as fat as possible. It is a refinement of cruelty,
you know, as superfluous flesh is not a thing to be hank-
ered after."
"How you must have fretted," says Mrs. Branscombe,
demurely, glancing from under hqQ-long lashes at his figure,
which has certainly gained both in size and in weight since
their last meeting.-
At this they both laugh. 
"Is your husband here to-day ? "asks he, presently.
"Yes."
"Why isn't he with you ?"
"He has found somebody more to his fancy, perhaps."
Asfshe says this she glances round, as though for the
first tne alive to the fact that indeed he is not beside
her. 
"Impossible ! " says Kennedy. "Give any other rea-
son but that, and I may believe you. I am quite sure he
is missing you terribly, and is vainly searching every
nook and corner by this time for your dead body.  No
doubt he fears the worst. If you were my-   I mean
if ever I were to marry (which;of course is quite out of
the question now),'I shouldn't let my wife out of my sight."
"-Poor woman! what a time she is going to rp1pt in! "
says Mrs. Branscombe, pityingly. " Don't :go about tell-
ing people all that, or you will never ,get ,a wife. By this
time Dorian and I ihave made 'the idisrovery that we- can
do excellently-well without each other sometimes."



<pb n="230"/>
230           FAITH AND UNFAIXTH.
Dorian coming up behind her just as she says this,
hears her, and changes color.
"How d'ye do!" he says to Kennedy, civilly, if not
cordially, that young man receiving his greeting with the
utmost bonhommie and an unchanging front.
For a second, Btrascombe refuses to meet his wife's
eyes, then, conquering the momentary feeling of pained
disappointment, he turns to her, and says, gently,--
"Do you care to stay much longer ? Clarissa has gone,
and Scrope, and the Carringtons."
"I don't care to stay another minute: I should like to
go home now," says Georgie, slipping her hand through
his arm, as though glad to have something to lean on;
and, as she speaks, she lifts her face and bestows upon
him a small smile. It is a very dear little smile, and has
the effect of restoring him to perfect happiness again.
Seeing which, Kennedy raises his brows, and then his
hat, and, bowing, turns aside, and is soon lost amidst the
crowd.
"You are sure y9goawnt to come home ?" says Dorian,
anxiously. " I amf not in a hurry, you know."
"I am. I have walked enough, and talked enough,
to last me a month."
"I am afraid I rather broke in upon your conversation
just now," says Branscombe, looking earnestly at her.
" But for my coming, Kennedy would have stayed on with
you; and he is a-a rather amusing sort of fellow, isn't
he ?"
"Is he??  He was exceedingly stupid to-   at all
events. I don't believe he has particle of btis, or
else he thinks other people haven't. I enjoyed myself a
great deal more with the old duke, until that ridiculous
Sir John Lincoln came to us. I don't think he knew a
bit who the duke was, because he kept saying odd little
things about the grounds and the guests, right under his
nose; at least, right behind his back: it is all the same  A
thing."
"What is? His nose and his back ?" asks Dorian; a a
which piece of folly they both laugh as though it was the
best thing in the world.                           t 
T-hen they make their way over the smooth lawns, an
past the glowing flower-beds, and past Sir John Lincol  i



<pb n="231"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.                23I
too, who is standing in an impossible attitude, that makes
him all elbows and knees, talking to a very splendid young
man-all bone and muscle and good humor-who is
plainly delighted with him. To the splendid young man
he is nothing but one vast joke. 
Seeing Mis. Branscombe, they both raise their hats,
and Sir John so far forgets the tulips as to give it as his
opinion that she is "Quite too, too intense for every-day
life." Whereupon the splendid young man, breaking
into praise too, declares she is "Quite too avfully jolly,
don't you know," which commonplace remark so horrifies
his companion that he sadly and tearfully turns aside,
and leaves him to his fate. 
Georgie, who has been brought to a standstill for a
moment, hears both remarks, and laughs aloud.
"It is something to be admired by Colonel Vibart,
isn't it ?" she says to Dorian; " but it is really very sad
about poor Sir John. He has bulbous roots on the brain,
and they have turned him as mad as a hatter."
CHAPTER XXVIII.
"There's not a scene on earth so full of lightness
"That withering care
Sleeps not beneath the flowers and turns their brightness
To dark despair."-HON. MRS. NORTON.
IT is a day of a blue' and goldness so intense as to make
one believe these two are the only colors on earth worthy
of admiration. The sky is cloudless; the great sun is
wide awake; the flowers are drooping, sleeping,-too lan-
guid to lift their heavy heads.
"The gentle wind, that like a ghost doth pass,
A waving shadow on the cornfield keeps."
And Georgie descending the stone steps of the. balcony,
feels-her whole nature thrill and glow beneath the warmth
and richness of the beauty spread all around with lavish
hand. Scarcely a breath stirs the air; no sound eomes
to mar the deep stillness of the day, save the echo of the, ;
"swallows' silken wings skimming the water of the sleep-
ing lake."



<pb n="232"/>
232            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
As she passes the rose-trees, she puts out her hand, and,
from the very fulness of her heart, touches some of the
drowsy flowers with caressing fingers. She is feeling pe-
culiar4y happy to-day: everything is going so smoothly-
with her; her life is devoid of care; only sunshine streams
upon her path; storm and rain and nipping frosts seem
all forgotten.
Going into the garden, she pulls a flower or two and
places them in the bosom of her white gown, and bending
over the basin of a fountain, looks at her own image, and
smiles at it, as well she may.
Then she blushes at her own vanity, and, drawing back
from nature's mirror, tells herself she will go a little far-
ther, and see what Andrews, the under-gardener (who has
come to Sartoris from Hythe), is doing in the shrubbery.
The path by which she goes is so thickly lined with
shrubs on the right-hand side that she cannot be seen
through them, nor can she see those beyond. Voices
come to her from the distance, that, as she advances up
the path, grow even louder. She is not thinking of them,
or, indeed, of anything but the extreme loveliness of the
hour, when words fall upon her ear that make themselves
intelligible and send the blood with a quick rush to her
heart.
" It is a disgraceful story altogether; and to have the
master's name mixed up with it is shameful !"
The voice, beyond doubt, belongs to Graham, the upper-.
housemaid, and is full of honest indignation.
Hardly believing she has heard aright, and without any
thought of eaves-dropping, Georgie stands still upon the
walk, and waits in breathless silence for what may come
next.
"Well, I think it is shameful," says another voice,
easily recognized as belonging to Andrews. "But I be-
lieve it is the truth for all that. Father saw him with his
own eyes. It was late, but just as light as it 'is now, and
he saw him plain."
"Do you mean to tell me," says Graham, with increas-
ing wrath (she is an elderly woman, and has lived at Sar-
toris.for many years), " that you really think your master
had either hand, act, or part in inducing Ruth Annersley
, to leave her home ?"



<pb n="233"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH..             233
' Well, I only say what father told me," says Andrews,
in a half-apologetic fashion, being somewhat abashed by
her anger. "And he ain't one to lie much. He saw!him
with her in the wood the night she went ato Lunnun, or
wherever 'twas, and they walked together in--the way to
Langham Station. They do say, too, that ;--"-
A quick light footstep, a putting aside of branches -and
Georgie, pale, but composed, appears before them. An-
drews, losing his headi drops the knife he ;is holding, and
Graham grows a fine purple. 
"I don't think you are doing much good here, Andrews,"
says Mrs. Branscombe, pleasantly. " These trees :look
well enough: go to the eastern walk, and see what can be
done there."
Andrews, only too thankful for the chance of escape,
picks up his knife again and beats a hasty retreat.
Then Georgie', turning to Graham, says slowly,-
' Now, tell me every word of it, from beginning to end."
Her assumed unconsciousness has vanished. Every
particle of color has flown from her facg.her brow is con-
tracted, her eyes are shining with a ne anad most-'unenvi-
able brilliancy. Perhaps she knows this llrself, as, after
the first swift glance at the woman on Andrews's departure,
she never lifts her eyes again, but keeps them deliberately
fixed upon the ground during the entire interview. She
speaks in a low concentrated tone, but with firm com-
pressed lips..
Graham's feelings at this moment would be impossible
to describe. Afterwards-many months afterwards-she
herself gave some idea of them when she declared to the
cook that she thought she should have "swooned right
off."
"Oh, madam! tell you what ?" she says, now, in a terri-
fied tone, shrinking away from her mistress, and turning
deadly pale.
"You know what you were speaking about just now
when I came up."
"It was nothing, madam, I assure you, only idle gossip,
not worth-"
" Do not equivocate to me. You were sp'eaking of Mr.
Branscombe. Repeat your 'idle gossip.' I will have it
: -      -~~



<pb n="234"/>
234           FAITH AND UNFAITZH.
word for word. Do you hear ?" She beats her foot with,
quick impatience against the ground.
"Do not compel me to repeat so vile a lie," entreats
Graham, earnestly.  "It is altogether false. Indeed,
madam,"-confusedly,-" I cannot remember what it was
we were saying when you came up to us so unexpectedly." 
"Then I shall refresh your memory. You were talk-
ing of your master and-and of that girl in the village
who-   "": The words almost suffocate her; involuntarily
she raises her hand to her throat. "Go on," she says,
in a low, dangerous tone.
Graham bursts into tears.
"It was the gardener at Hythe-old Andrews-who
told it to our man here," she sobs, painfully. " You know
he is his father, and. he said he had seen the master in the
copsewood the evening-Ruth Annersley ran away."
" He was in London that evening."
"Yes, madam, we all know that," says the woman,
eagerly. " That alone proves how false the whole story is.
But wicked people will talk, and it is wise people only who
will not give heed to them."
"What led Andrews to believe it was your master?"
She speaks in a hard constrained voice, and as one who
has not heard a word of the preceding speech. In truth,
she has not listened to it, her whole mind being engrossed
with this new and hateful thing that has fallen into her
life.
" He says he saw him,-that he knew him by his height,
his figure, his side-face, and the coat he wore,-a light
overcoat, such as the master generally uses."
"And how does he explain away the fact of-of Mr.
Branscombe's being in town that evening ?"
At this question Graham unmistakably hesitates before
replying. When she does answer, it is with evident reluc-
tance.
"You see, madam," she says, very gently, "it would be
quite possible to come down by the mid-day train to
Langham, to drive across to Pullingham, and get back
again to London by the evening train."
"It sounds quite simple," says Mrs. Branscombe, in 
strange tone. Then follows an unbroken silence that las
for several minutes and nearly sends poor Graham out 



<pb n="235"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               235
her mind. She cannot quite see her mistress's face as it
is turned carefully aside, but the hand that is resting on a
stout branch of laurel near her is-steady as the branch it-
self. Steady,-but the pretty filbert nails show dead-white
against the gray-green of the bark, as though extreme press-
ure, born of mental agitation and a passionate desire to
suppress and hide it, has compelled the poor little fingers
to grasp with undue force whatever may be nearest to
them.
When silence has become positively unbearable, Georgie
says, slowly,-
"And does all the world know this?"
"I hope not, ma'am. I think not. Though, indeed,"
-says the faithful Graham, with a sudden burst of indig-
nation,-" even if they did, I don't see how it could matter.
It would not make it a bit more or less than a deliberate
lie."
" You are a'good soul, Graham," says Mrs. Branscombe,
wearily.
Something in her manner frightens Graham more than
all that has gone before.
'COh, madam, do not pay any attention to such a wicked
tale," she says, anxiously, " and forgive me for ever having
presumed to lend my ears to it. No one knowing the
master could possibly believe in it."
"Of course not." The answer comes with unnatural
calmness from between her white lips. Graham bursts
into fresh tears, and flings her apron over her head.
Mrs. Branscombe, at this, hrows up her head hastily,
almost haughtily, and, drawing her hand with a swift
movement across her averted eyes, breathes a deep linger-
ing sigh.  Then her whole expression changes; and,
coming quite near to Graham, she lays her hand lightly
on her shoulder, and laughs softly.
Graham can hardly believe her ears : has that rippling, 
apparently unaffected laughter come from the woman who
a moment since appeared all gloom and suppressed an-
ger ?
"I am not silly enough to fret over a ridiculous story
such as you have told me," says Georgie, lightly. "Just
at first it rather surprised me; I confess, but now-now I
can see the absurdity of it. There; do not cry any



<pb n="236"/>
236          PFAITH AND UNFAITH.
more; it is a pity to waste tears that later on you may
long for in vain."
But when she has gained the house, and has gone up
to her own room, and carefully locked her door, her as-
sumed calmness deserts her. She paces up and down
the floor like some chained creature, putting together bit
by bit the story just related to her. Not for a moment
does she doubt its truth : some terrible fear is knocking
at her heart, some dread that is despair and that convinces
her of the reality of Andrews's relation.
Little actions of Dorian's, light words, certain odd re-
marks, passed over at the time of utterance as being of 
no importance, come back to her now, and assert them-
selves with overwhelming persistency, until they declare
him guilty beyond all dispute.
When she had gone to the altar and sworn fidelity to
him, she had certainly not been in love with her husband,
according to the common acceptation of that term. But
at least she had given him a heart devoid of all thought
for another, and she had fully, utterly, believed in his af-
fection for her. For the past few months she had even
begun to cherish this belief, to cling to it, and even to
feel within herself some returning tenderness for him.
It is to her now, therefore, as the bitterness of death,
this knowledge that has come to her ears. To have been
befooled where she had regarded herself as being most
beloved,-to have been only second, where she had
fondly imagined herself to be first and dearest,-is a
thought bordering upon madness.
Passionate sobs rise in her throat, and almost overcome
her. An angry feeling of rebellion, a vehement protest
against this deed'that has been done, shakes her slight
frame. It cannot be true; it shall not; and yet-and.
yet-why has this evil fallen upon her of all others?
Has her life been such a happy one that Fate must needs
begrudge her one glimpse of light and gladness? Two
large tears gather in her eyes, and almost unconsciously
roll down her cheeks that are deadly white.
Sinking into a chair, as though exhausted, she leans
back among its cushions, letting her hands fall together
and lie idly in her lap.
Motionless she sits, with eyes fixed as if riveted to



<pb n="237"/>
FAITH AND UNIAZITH.              237
earth, while tears insensibly steal down her pensive cheeks,
which look like weeping dew fallen on the statue of
despair.
For fully half an hour she so rests, scarce moving,
hardly seeming to breathe. Then she rouses herself, and,
going over to a table, bathes her face with eau-de-Co-
logne. This calms her in a degree, and stills the out-
ward expression of her suffering, but in her heart there
rages a fire that no waters can quench.
Putting her hat on once again, she goes down-stairs,
feeling eager for a touch of the cool evening air. The
hot sun is fading, dying; a breeze from the distant sea is
creeping stealthily up to the land. At the foot of the
staircase she encounters Dorian coming towards her from
the library.
"I have been hunting the place for you," he says, gayly.
"Where on earth have you been hiding? Visions of
ghastly deaths rose before me, and I was just about to
have the lake dragged and the shrubberies swept. Mar-
tin is nearly in tears. You really ought to consider our
feelings a little. Why, where are you off to now ? "-for
the first time noticing her hat.
"Out," returns she, coldly, looking straight over his
head: she is standing on the third step of the stairs,
while he is in the hall below. "I feel stifled in this
house."
Her tone is distinctly strange, her manner most un-
usual. Fearing she is really ill, he goes up to her and
lays his hand upon her arm.
"Anything the matter, darling ? How white you look,"
he begins, tenderly; but she interrupts him.
"I am quite well," she says, hardly, shrinking away
from his touch as though it is hateful to her. "I am go-
ing out because I wish to be alone."
She sweeps past him through the old hall and out into
the darkening sunlight, without a backward glance or an-
other word. Amazed, puzzled, Branscombe stands gazing
after her until the last fold of her dress has disappeared,
the last sound of her feet has echoed on the stone steps
beyond; then he turns aside, and, feeling, if possible, more
astonished than hurt, goes back to the library.
From this hour begins the settled coldness between



<pb n="238"/>
238           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
Dorian'and his wife that is afterwards to bear such bitter
fruit. -She assigns no actual reason for her changed de-
meanor; and Dorian, at first, is too proud to demand an
explanation,-though perhaps never yet has he loved her
so well as at this time, when all his attempts at tenderness
are coldly and obstinately rejected.
Not until a full month has gone by, and it is close upon
the middle of August, does it dawn upon him why Georgie
has been so different of late.
Sir James Scrope is dining with them, and, shortly after
the servants have withdrawn, he makes some casual men-
tion of Ruth Annersley's name. No notice is taken of it
at the time, the conversation changes almost directly into
a fresh channel, but Dorian, happening to glance across
the table at his wife, sees that she has grown absolutely
livid, and really, for the instant, fears she is going to faint.
Only for an instant! Then she recovers herself, and
makes some careless remark, and is quite her usual self
again.
But he cannot forget that sudden pallor, and like a flash
the truth comes to him, and he knows he is foul and de-
spicable in the eyes of the only woman he loves.
When Sir James has gone, he comes over to her, and,
leaning his elbow on the chimney-piece, stands in such a
position as enables him to command a full view of her
face.'
"Scrope takes a great interest in that girl Ruth," he
says, purposely introducing the subject again. "It cer-
tainly is remarkable that no tidings of her have ever since
reached Pullingham."
Georgie makes no reply. The nights have already
grown chilly and there is a fire in the grate, before which
she is standing warming her hands. One foot,-a very
lovely little foot,-clad in a black shoe relieved by large
silver buckles, is resting on the fender, and on this her
eyes are riveted, as though lost in admiration of its beauty,
though in truth she sees it not at all.
" I can hardly understand her silence,' persists Dorian.
"I fear,-wherever she is, she must be miserable."
Georgie raises her great violet eyes to his, that are now
dark and deep with passionate anger and contempt.



<pb n="239"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               239
"She is not the only miserable woman in the world,"
she says, in a low, quick tone.
"No, I suppose not. But what an unsympathetic tone
you use ! Surely you can feel for her ?"
"Feel for her! Yes. No woman can have as much
compassion for her as I have."
"That is putting it rather strongly, is it not?  You
scarcely know her; hardly ever spoke to her. Clarissa
Peyton, for instance, must think more pitifully of her than
you can."
"I hope it will never be Clarissa's lot to compassionate
any one in the way I do her."
"You speak very bitterly."
"Do I? I think very bitterly."
"What do you mean ?" demands he, suddenly, straighten-
ing himself and drawing up his tall figure to its fullest
height. His tone is almost stern.
"Nothing. There is nothing-to be gained by continu-
ing this conversation."
"But I think there is. Of late, your manner towards
me has been more than strange. If you complain of any-
thing, let me know what it is, and it shall be rectified.
At the present moment, I confess, I fail to understand
you. You speak in the most absurdly romantic way about
Ruth Annersley (whom you hardly knew), as though there
existed some special reason why you, above all women,
should pity her."
"I do pity her from my heart; and there is a special
reason: she has been deceived, and so have I."
"By whom?"
" I wish you would discontinue the subject, Dorian: it
is a very painful one to me, if-if not to you." Then she
moves back a little, and, laying her hand upon her chest,
as though a heavy weight, not to be lifted, is' lying there,
she says, slowly, "You compel me to say what I would
willingly leave unsaid. When I married you, I did not
understand your character; had I done so- "
"You would not have married me ? You regret your
marriage? " He is very pale now, and something that is
surely anguish gleams in his dark eyes. Perhaps had she
seen his expression her answer would have been different,
or, at least, more merciful.



<pb n="240"/>
240            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
"I do," she says, faintly.
"Why?"    All heart seems gone from his voice. Heis
gazing mournfully upon the girlish figure of his wife as she
stands at some little distance from him. " Have I been
such a bad husband to you, Georgie ? " he says, brokenly.
"No, no. But it is possible to be cruel in more ways
than one."
" It is, indeed !" Then he sighs wearily; and, giving
up all further examination of her lovely unforgiving face,
he turns his gaze upon the fire. "Look here," he says,
presently; "  heard unavoidably what you said to Ken-
nedy that afternoon at the castle, that we could manage
to get on without each other excellently well on occasion:
you alluded to yourself, I suppose. Perhaps you think
we might get on even better had we never met."
" I didn't say that," says Georgie, turning pale.
" I understand,"-bitterly: "you only meant it. Well,
if-you are so unhappy with me, and if-if you wish for a
separation, I think I can manage it for you. I have no'
desire whatever "-coldly-" to keep you with me against
your will."
"And have all the world talking ? " exclaims she, hastily.
"No. In such a case the woman goes to the wall: the
man is never in fault. Things must now remain as they
are. But this one last thing you can do for me. As far
as is possible, let us live as utter strangers to each other."
"It shall be just as you please," returnse, haughtily.
Day by day the dark cloud that separates them widens
and deepens, drifting them farther and farther apart, until
it seems almost impossible that they shall ever come to-
gether again.
Dorian grows moody and irritable, and nurses his wrongs
in sullen morbid silence. He will shoot whole days with-
out a companion, or go for long purposeless rides across
country, only to return at nightfall weary and sick at heart.
" Grief is a stone that bears one down."  To Dorian,
all the world seems going wrong; his whole life is a fail-
ure. The two beings he loves most on earth-Lord Sar-
toris and his wife-distrust him, and willingly lend an open
ear to the shameless story unlucky Fate has coined for
him.,



<pb n="241"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.              241
As for Georgie, she grows pale and thin, and altogether
unlike herself. From being a gay, merry, happy little girl,
with "the sun upon her heart," as Bailey so sweetly ex- 
presses it, she has changed into a woman, cold and self-
contained, with a manner full of settled reserve.
Now and again small scenes occur between them that
only render matters more intolerable. For instance, com-
ing into the breakfast-room one molning, Georgie, meet-
ing the man who brings the letters, takes them from him,
and, dividing them, comes upon one directed to Dorian,
in an unmistakable woman's hand, bearing the London
post-mark, which she throws across the table to her hus-
band.
Something in the quickness of her action makes him
raise'his head to look at her. Catching the expression of
her eyes, he sees that they are full of passionate distrust,
and at once reads her thoughts aright. His brow darkens;
and, rising, he goes over to her, and takes her hands in
his, not with a desire to conciliate, but most untenderly.
"It is impossible you can accuse me of this thing," he
says, his voice low and angry.
'"Few things are impossible,' re6:turns shle with'cold'dls-
dain. " Remove your hands, Dorian: they hurt me."
"At least you shall be convinced that in this instance,
as in all the others, you have wronged me."
Still holding her hands, he compels her to listen to him
while he reads aloud a letter from the wife of one of his
tenants who has gone to town on law business and who
has written to him on the matter.
Such scenes only help to make more wide the breach
between them. Perhaps, had Georgie learned to love her
husband before her marriage, all might have been well;
but the vague feeling of regard she had entertained for
him (that, during the early days of their wedded life, had
been slowly ripening into honest love, not having had time
to perfect itself) at the first check had given in, and fallen
-hurt to death-beneath the terrible attack it had sus-
tained. 
She fights and battles with herself at times, and, with
passionate earnestness, tries to live down the growing
emptiness of heart that is withering her young life. All
night l-ong sometimes she lies awake, waiting wearily
n6



<pb n="242"/>
242             FAITH AND UNFAITH.
for the dawn, and longing prayerfully for some change in
her present stagnation.
And, even if she can summon sleep to her aid, small is
the benefit she derives from it. Bad dreams, and sad as
bad, harass and perplex her, until she is thankful when her
lids unclose and she feels at least she is free of the horrors
that threatened her a moment since.
"Thou hast been called, O sleep I the friend of woe;
But, 'tis the happy that have called thee so I"
CHAPTER XXIX.
"The waves of a mighty sorrow
Have whelmed the pearl of my life;
And there cometh to me no morrow
Shall solace this desolate strife.t
** * * ! -* * *
"Gone are the last faint flashes,
Set in the sun of my years,
And over a few poor ashes
I sit in darkness and tears."-GERALD MASSEY.
ALL night the rain has fallen unceasingly; now the sun
shines forth again, as though forgetting that excessive
moisture has inundated the quiet uncomplaining earth.
The "'windy night " has not produced a " rainy morrow; "
on the contrary, the world seems athirst for drink again,
and is looking pale and languid because it comes not.
"Moist, bright, and green, the landscape laughs around:
Full swell the woods."
Everything is richer for the welcome drops that fell last
night. " The very earth, the steamy air, is all with fra-
grance rife ;" the flowers lift up their heads and fling their
perfume broadcast upon the flying wind;
"And that same dew, which sometime within buds
Was wont to swell, like round and Orientpearls,
Stood now within the pretty flowerets' eyes,
Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail."
Georgie, with scarcely any heart to see their beauty, passes
by them, and walks on until she reaches that part of Hythe
wood that adjoins their own. As she passes them, the gen-
tle deer raise their heads and sniff at her, and, with their
...



<pb n="243"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               243
wild eyes, entreat her to go by and take no notice of
them.
Autumn, widi his "f goldihand," iS
"Gilding the'falling leaf,
Bringing up winter to fafil the year,
Bearing upon his back the riped sheaf."
All nature seems lovely, and, in coloring, intense. To look
upon it is to have one's heart widen and grow stronger and
greater as its divinity fills one's Soul to overflowing. Yet
to Georgie the hour gives no joy: with lowered head and
dejected mien she goes, scarce heeding the glowing tints
that meet her on every side. It is as though she tells her-
self the world's beauty can avail her nothing, as, be the day
" Foul, or even fair,               -
Methinks her hearte's joy is stained with some care."
Crossing a little brook that is babbling merrily, she en-
ters the land of Hythe; and,. as she turns a corner (all rock,
and covered with quaint ferns and tender mosses), she
comes face to face with an old man, tall and lean, who is
standing by a pool, planted by nature in a piece of granite.
He is not altogether unknown to her. At church she
has seen him twice, and once in the village, though she has
never been introduced to him, has never interchanged a
single word with him: it is Lord Sartoris.
He gazes at her intently. Perhaps he too knows who
she is, but, if so, he makes no sign. At last, unable to bear
the silence any longer, she says, naively and very gently,-
"I thought you were in Paris."
At this extraordinary remark from a woman he has never
spoken to before, Sartoris lifts his brows, and regards her,
if possibly, more curiously.
"So I was," he says; "but I came home yesterday."
Then, "iAnd you are Dorian's wife ?"
Her brows grow clouded.
" Yes," she sayssiand no more, and, turning aside, pulls
to pieces the flowering grasses that grow on her right
hand.
'"I suppose I am unwelcome in your sight," says the
old man, noting her reserve. " Yet if, at the time of your
marriage, I held aloof, it was not because you were the
'bride ."    '-:-           '  ....            ..



<pb n="244"/>
244           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
"Did you hold aloof?" says Georgie, with wondering-
eyes. " Did our marriage displease you? I never knew:
Dorian never told me." Then, with sudden unexpected
bitterness, " Half measures are of no use. Why did you
not forbid the wedding altogether? That would have
been the wisest and kindest thing, both for him and
me."
"I don't think I quite follow you," says Lord Sartoris,
in a troubled tone. " Am I to understand you already re-
gret your marriage ? Do not tell me that."
"Why should I not?" says Georgie, defiantly. His
tone has angered her, though why, she would .have found
a difficulty in ,explaining.  "You are his uncle," she
says, with some warmth: "why' should you not know?
Why am I always to pretend happiness that I never
feel ?"
"Do you know what your words convey ?" says Sar-
toris, more shocked than he can express.
"I think I-do," says the girl, half passionately; and
then she turns aside, and moves as though she would leave
him.
"This is terrible," says Sartoris, in a low voice full of
pain. "And yet I cannot believe he is unkind to you."
" Unkind ? No," with a little scornful smile: "I hear
no harsh words, my lightest wish is law; yet the veriest
beggar that crawls the road is happier than I am."
"It seems impossible," says Sartoris, quietly, looking
intently at her flower-like face and lovely wistful eyes,-
" seeing you, it seems impossible to me that he can do
anthying but love you."
"Do not profane the words," she says, quickly. Then
she pauses, as though afraid to continue, and presently
says, in a broken voice, " Am I-the only woman 'he has
-loved ?"
Something in the suppressed passion of her tone tells
Lord Sartoris that she too is in possession of the secret that
for months has embittered his life. This discovery is
horrible to him.
"Who has been cruel enough.to make you wise on that
subject ?" he says, impulsively, and therefore unwisely.
Georgie turns upon hirn eyes brilliant with despair and
grief. " So "-she says, vehemently-" it is the world's



<pb n="245"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.              245
talk. You know it: it is, indeed, common property, this
disgraceful story."  Something within her chokes her
words; she can say no more. Passion overcomes her,
and want of hope, and grief too deep for expression. The
gentle wells that nature supplies ate dead within her; her
eyes, hot and burning, conceal n& water wherewith to cool
the fever that consumes them.
"You are a stranger to me," she says, presently. " Yet
to you I have laid bare my thoughts. You think, perhaps,
I am one to parade my griefs, but it is not so; I-would
have you-  "
"I believe you," he interrupts her hastily. He can
hardly do otherwise, she is looking so little, so fragile, with
her quivering lips, and her childish pleading eyes, and
plaintive voice.
"Take courage," he says, softly: "you are young:
good days may yet be in store for you; but with me it is
different. I am on the verge of the grave,-am going
down into it with no one to soothe or comfort my declining
years. Dorian was my one thought: you can never know
how I planned, and lived, and dreamed for him alone;
and see how he has rewarded me ! For youth there is a
future, and in that thought alone lies hope; for age there
is nothing but the flying present, and even that, for me,
has lost its sweetness. I have staked my all, and-lost !
surely, of we two, I should be the mist miserable."
"Is that your belief ? " says Mrs. Branscombe, mournfully.
"Forgive me if I say I think you wrong. You have but
a little time to endure your grief, I have my life, and per-
haps "-pathetically-" it will be a long one. To know I
must live under his roof, and feel myself indebted to him
for everything I may want, for many years, is very bitter to
me."
Sartoris is cut to the heart: that it should have gone so
far that she should shrink from accepting anything at
Dorian's hands, galls him sorely. And what a gentle tender
boy he used to be, and'how incapable of a dishonest thought
or action ! At least, something should be done for his
wife,-this girl who has grown tired and saddened and out
of all heart since her luckless marriage. He looks at her
again keenly, and tells himself she is sweet enough to
keep any man at her side, so dainty she shows in her
|                .                             5~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="246"/>
246           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
simple linen gown, with its soft Quakerish frillings at the
throat and wrists.  A sudden thought at last strikes him.
" I am glad I have met you," he says, quietly. "By
and by, perhaps, we shall learn to be good friends. In
the mean time will you do me a small favor? will you
come up to Hythe on Thursday at one o'clock ?"
"If you want me to' come," says Georgie, betraying
through her eyes the intense surprise she feels at this re-
quest.
"Thank you. And will you give Dorian a written mes-
sage fromt me ?"
"I will," she says again. And tearing a leaf from his
pocket-book, he writes, as follows:
"When last we parted, it was with the expressed deter-
mination on your part never again to enter my doors until
such time as 1 should send for you. . do-so now, and
-beg you will come up to Hythe on Thursday next at half-
past one o'clock. I should not trouble you so far, but
that business demands your presence. I give you my
word not to detain you longer than is absolutely neces-
sary."
'Folding up this note, he gives it to her, and pressing
her hand warmly, parts from her, and goes back again to
Hythe.
When in answer to his uncle's summons, Dorian walks
into the library at Hythe on Thursday afternoon, he is
both astonished and disconcerted to find his wife there
before him. She had given the letter not to him, but to one
of the men-servants to deliver to him: so that he is still
in utter ignorance of her meeting in the wood with his
uncle.
" You here ?" he says to her, after he has acknowledged
Lord Sartoris's presence by the coldest and haughtiest of
salutations.
She says, "Yes," in a low tone, without raising her
eyes.
" I was not aware you and Lord Sartoris were on such
intimate terms."
"We met by chance last Monday for the first time,"
returns she, still without troubling herself to turn her eyes
in his direction.
"You will sit down ? "says Sartoris, nervously pushing
i



<pb n="247"/>
FAITH Y4AND UNFAITI.            247
a chair towards him. Dorian is looking so pale and hag-
gard, so unlike himself, that the old man's heart dies with-
in him. What "evil days "has he not fallen on!
"No, thank you: I prefer standing. I must, however,
remind you of your promise not to detain me longer than
you can help."
"Nor shall I. I have sent for you to-day to let you
know of my determination to settle upon your wife the
sum of twenty thousand pounds, to be used for her own
exclusive benefit, to be hers absolutely to do with as may
seem best to her."
"May I ask what has put this quixotic idea into your
head ?" asks Dorian, in a curious tone.
Georgie, who, up to this time, has been so astounded
at the disclosure of the earl's scheme as to be unable to
collect her ideas, now feels a sudden light break in upon
her. She rises to her feet, and comes a little forward,
and, for the first time since his entrance, turns to confront
her husband.
" Let me tell you," she says, silencing Lord Sartoris by
a quick motion of the hand. "On Monday I told your
uncle how-how I hated being indebted to you for every-
thing I may require. And he has thought of this plan,
out of his great kindness," turning eyes dark with tears
upon Lord Sartoris,-'"to render me more independent.
I thank you," she says, going up to Sartoris and slipping
her icy cold little hands into his, "but it is far-far too
much."
"So you have been regaling Lord Sartoris (an utter
stranger to you) with a history of all our private griefs and
woes!" says Dorian, slowly, utter contempt in his tone
and an ominous light in his eyes.
"You wrong her, Dorian," says his uncle, gently. "It
is not as you represent it. It was by the merest chance
I discovered your wife would feel happier if more her own
mistress."                                   :
"And by what right, may I inquire, do you seek to come
betwee, my wife and me ?" says Dorian, white with an-
ger, standing, tall and strong, with his arms folded and
his eyes fixed upon his uncle. "Is it not my partfto sup-
port and keep her ? Whose duty is it, if not mine ? I
- 



<pb n="248"/>
248           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
wish to know why you, of all men, have dared to inter-
fere."
"I have not come between you: I seek no such ungra-
cious part," replies Sartoris, with quiet dignity. "I am
only doing now what I should have done on her marriage
morning had-had things been different."
"It seems to me that I am brought up here as a crimi-
nal before my judge and accuser," says Branscombe, very
bitterly. " Let me at least have the small satisfaction of
knowing of what it is I am accused,-wherein lies my
crime. Speak," he says, turning suddenly to his wife.
She is awed more than she cares to confess by his man-
ner, which is different from anything she has ever seen in
him before. The kind-hearted, easy-going Dorian is gone,
leaving a stern, passionate, disappointed man in his place.
" Have I ill-used you ?" he goes on, vehemently. "Have
I spoken harsh words to you, or thwarted you in any way ?
.Ever since the first hour that saw you my wife have I re-
fused to grant your lightest wish ? Speak, and let us hear
the truth of this matter. I am a bad husband, you say,-
so infamous that it is impossible for you to receive even
the common necessaries of life at my :hands! How have
I failed in my duty towards you?"
"In none of the outward observances," she says, faintly.
"And yet you have broken my heart!"
There is a pause. And then Dorian laughs aloud,-a
terrible, sneering, embittered laugh, that strikes cold on
the hearts of the hearers.
"Your heart! " he says, witheringly. "Why, supposing
for courtesy's sake you did possess such an inconvenient
and unfashionable appendage, it would be still absurd to
accuse me of having broken it, as it has never been for
five minutes in my possession."
Taking out his watch, he examines it leisurely. Then,
with an utter change of manner, addressing Lord Sartoris,
he says, with cold and studied politeness,-
" If you have quite done with me, I shall be glad, as I
have another appointment at three."   v 
"I have quite done," says his uncle, wistfully, looking
earnestly at the handsome face 'before him that shows no
sign pf feeling whatsoever. " I thank you much for hav-
ing so far obliged me."



<pb n="249"/>
J4AITH AND UNF4AIITH.            249
"Pray do n6t mention it. Good-morning."
"Good-morning," says Sartoris, wearily. And Brans-
combe, bowing carelessly, leaves the room without another
word.                                      '-
When he has gone, Georgie, pale and' trembling, turns
to Sartoris and lays her hand upon his arm.
"He hates me. He will not even look at me,"' she says,
passionately. "What was it he said, that I had no'heart ?
Ah ! what would I not give to be able to prove his words
true?"
She bursts into tears, and sobs long and bitterly.
"Tears are idle," says Sartoris, sadly. "Have you yet
to learn that? Take comfort from the thought that all
things have an end."
CHAPTER XXX. 
"Oh that the things which have been were not now -
In memory's resurrection I But the past
Bears in her arms the present and the future."-BAILEY.
OF course it is quite impossible to hide from Clarissa
Peyton that everything is going wrong at Sartoris.
Georgie's pale unsmiling face (so different from that of
old), and Dorian's evident determination to absent him- 
self from all society, tell their own tale.
She has, of course, heard of the uncomfortable gossip
that has connected Ruth Annersley's mysterious disappear-
ance with Dorian, but-stanch friend as she is-has
laughed to scorn all .such insinuations: that Georgie can
believe them, puzzles her more than she cares to confess.
For a long time she has fought against toqught that
Dorian's wife can think aught bad of b9tut time
undeceives her.                     -.; -
To-day, Georgie, who is now always feverihly restless,
tells herself Mie will go up to Gowran and see Clarissa.
To her alone she clings,-not outwardly, in any marked
fashion, but in her inmost soul,-as to one who at her
worst extremity will support and comfort her.
The day is warm and full of color. Round her "flow
the winds from woods and fields with gladness laden:"



<pb n="250"/>
250            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
the air is full of life. The browning grass rustles beneath
her feet. The leaves fall slowly one by one, as though
loath to leave their early home; the wind, cruel, like all
love, 'ooes them only to their doom.
"The waves, along the forest borne," beat on her face
and head, and half cool the despairing thoughts that now
always lie hidden deep down within her breast.
Coming to Gowran and seeing Clarissa in the drawing-
room window, she beckons to her, and Clarissa, rising
hastily, opens the hall door for her, herself, and leads her
by the hand into another cosier room, where they may
talk without interruption.
It so happens that Georgie is in one of her worst moods;
and something Clarissa says very innocently brings on a
burst of passion that compels Clarissa to understand (in
spite of all her efforts to think herself in the wrong) that
the dissensions at Sartoris have a great deal to do with
'1Rth Annersley,
-."t is impossible," she says, over and over again, walk-
ing up and down the room    in an agitated manner.
"I could almost as soon believe Horace guilty of this
thing!"
Georgie makes no reply. Inwardly she has conceived
a great distaste to the handsome Horace, and considers
him a very inferior person, and quite unfit to mate with
-   her pretty Clarissa.
"In your heart," says Miss Pey  ton, stoppig before her,
" I:doln't believe you think .Dorian guilty of this thing."
"Yes I do," says Mrs. Branscombe, with dogged calm-
ness. " I don't ask you to agree with me.. I only tell you
what I myself honestly believe."  She has given up fight-
ing against her fate by this time.
"There^ is soane terrible mistake somewhere," says
Clarissa, i 'tvery distressed voice, feeling it wiser not to
argue the point further. "Time will surely clear it up
sooneror ¶r4l, but it is very severe on Dorian while it
lasts. I have known the dear fellow all myife. and can-
not now begin to think evil of him. I hae always felt 
more like a sister to him than anything else, and I cannot
believe him guilty of this thing."
"I am his wife, and I can,"' says Mrs. Branscombe,
icily.



<pb n="251"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.              251
"If you loved him-:as you ought, you could not." This
is the one rebuke she cannot. refrain from.
Georgie laughs unpleasantly, and then, all in a little
moment, she varies the performance by bursting into a
passionate; and most unlooked-for flood of tears.
"Don't talk to.me of love ! " she cries, miserably. " It
is useless. I don't believe in it.  t is a delusion, a mere
mockery, a worn-out superstition. You will tell me that
Dorian loved me; and yet in the very early days before
our marriage, when his so-called love must have been at
its height, he insulted me beyond all forgiveness."
"You are making yourself wretched about nothing,"
says Clarissa, kneeling beside her, and gently drawing her
head down on her shoulder. " Don't, darling,-don't cry
like that. I know, I feel, all will come right in the end.
Indeed, unless Dorian were to come to me and say,' I
have done this hateful thing,' I should not believe it."
" I would give all the world to be able to say that from
my heart," says Mrs. Branscombe, with excessive sadness.
"Try to think it. Afterwards belief will be easy. Oh,
Georgie, do not nourish hard thoughts; tear them from
your heart, and by and by, when all this is explained away,
think how glad you will be that, without proof, you had
faith in him. Do you know, unless my own eyes-saw it, I
should never for any reason lose faith in Horace."
A tender, heavenly smile creeps round her beautiful lips
as she says this. Georgie, seeing it, fels heart-broken.
Oh that she could have faith like this! i . -
"It is too late," she says, bitterly: "and; deserve all
I have got. I myself have been the cause of my own un-
doing. I married Dorian for no other reason than to escape
the drudgery of teaching. Yet now "-with a sad smile-
"I know there are worse things than Murray's Grammar.
I am justly punished." Her lovely face is white with
grief. I have tried, tried, TRIED to disbelieve, but nothing
will raise this cloud of suspicion from my breast. It
weighs me down and crushes me more cruelly day by day.
I wish-I wish"'.-cries poor little Georgie, from her very
soul-" that I iid never been born, because I shall never
know a happy moment again." 
The tears run silently down her cheeks one by one,



<pb n="252"/>
252            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
She puts up her small hands to defend herself, and the
action is pitiable in the extreme.
"How happy you were only a month ago!" says Cla- 
rissa, striken with grief at the sight of her misery.
"Yes, I have had my day, I suppose," says Mrs. Brans-
combe, wearily.  "One can always remember a time
when
-Every morning was fair,
And every season a May 1'
But how soon it all fades !"
"Too soon for you," says Clarissa, with tears in her
eyes. "You speak as though you had no interest left in
life."
"Yes, I have," says Georgie, with a faint smile.  "I
have the school-children yet. You know I go to them
every Sunday to oblige the dear vicar. He would have.
been so sorry if I had deserted them, because they'grew
fond of me, and he said, for that reason, I was the best
teacher in the parish, because I didn't bore them?'
Here she laughs quite merrily, as though grief is unknown
to her; but a minute later, memory returnirng the joy
fades from her face, leaving it sadder than before. "I-
might be Irish," she says, "emotion is so changeable with
me. Come down with me now to the village, will'you? 
It is my day at the school." 
"Well, come up-stairs with me while i put on my
things," says Clarissa; and then, though really sad at
heart, she cannot refrairn' from smiling. "You are just
the last person'ih the world," she says, "one would ac-
cuse 6f teaching Scripture, or the Catechism, or that."
"What a very rude remark!" said Georgie,, smiling
naturally for the first time to-day.  "Am r such a very
immoral young woman ?"
"No. Only I could not teach Genesis, or the Ten
Commandments, or Watts, to save my life," says Clarissa.
" Come, or we shall be late, and Pullingham Junior with-
out Watts would, I feel positive, sink- into an abyss of
vice. They might bark and bite, and:idoi'oer dangerous
things."            ':              '
*      *      *      *      *  .''-' ^1    *
Mrs. 1gkanseombe (with Clarissa) reaching the school-
house just in time to take her class, the latter sits down in a



<pb n="253"/>
FAITH AND UINFAITH.              253
disconsolate fashion upon a stray bench, and surveys the
scene before her~with wondering eyes.
There sits Georgie, a very fragile teacher for so rough
a class; here sits the vicar with the adults before him,
deep in the mysteries of the Thirty-nine Articles.
The head teacher is nearly in tears over the Creed, be-
cause of the stupidity of her pupils; the assistant is rag-
ing over the Ten Commandments. All.     loom! Cla-
rissa is rather delighted than otherwise^t,.having sur-
veyed everybody, comes back to Georgi' .l'e being the
most refreshing object on view.
At the top of the class, facing the big window, sits John
Spriggs (etat. ten) on his hands. He has utterly de-
clined to bestow his body in any other fashion, being
evidently imbued with the belief that his hands were made
for the support of the body,-a very correct idea, all
things considered.
He is lolling from side to side in a reckless way, and
his eyes are rolling in concert with him, and altogether
his behavior is highly suggestive of fits.
Lower down, Amelia Jennings is making a surreptitious
cat's cradle, which is promptly put out of sight, behind 
her back, every time her turn comes to give an answer;
but, as she summarily dismisses all questions by deplar-
ing her simple ignorance of every matter connected with
Biblical history, the cradle progresses most favorably, and
is very soon fit to sleep in.
Mrs. Branscombe, having gone through the seventh
chapter of St. Luke without any marked success, falls
back upon the everlasting Catechisri, and swoops down
upon Amelia Jennings with a mild request that she will
tell her her duty to her neighbor.
Amelia, feeling she has no neighbors at this gtying mo-
ment, and still less catechism, fixes her big round blue
eyes on Mrs. Branscombe,,and, letting the beloved cradle
fall to the ground behind her back, prepares to blubber at
a second's notice. 
"Go on," says Georgie, encouragingly, '
Miss Jennings, being thus entreated, takes heart, and
commences the difficult injunction in excellent hope and
spirits. All goes " merry as a marriage bell," until she
comes' to the words " kLove your : eighbor as yourself,"



<pb n="254"/>
254           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
when John Spriggs (who is not by nature a thoroughly
bad boy, but whose evil hour is now full upon him) says audi-
bly, and without any apparent desire to torment, "and
paddle your own canoe."
There is a deadly pause, and then Amelia Jennings
giggles out loud, and Spriggs follows suit, and, after a bit,
the entire class gives itself up to merriment.
Spriggs, instead of being contrite at this flagrant breach
of discipline, sypia inly elated with his victory. No small-
est sign of shale disfigures his small rubicund counte-
nance.
Georgie makes a praiseworthy effort to appear shocked,
but, as her pretty cheeks are pink; and her eyes great
with laughter, the praiseworthy effort rather falls through.
At this moment the door of the school-house is gently
pushed open, and a new-comer appears on the threshold:
it is Mr. Kennedy.
Going up unseen, he stands behind Georgie's chair, and
having heard from the door-way all that has passed, in-
stantly bends over and hands the notorious Spriggs a
shilling.
"Ah! you again ?" says Mrs. Branscombe, coloring
warmly, merely from surprise. "You are like Sir Boyle
Roche's bird: you can be in two places at the same mo-
ment. But it is wrong to give him money when he is bad.
It is out of all keeping; and how shall I manage the chil- -
dren if you come here, anxious to reward vice and foster
rebellion?"
She is laughing gayly now, and is looking almost her
own bright little self again, when, lifting her eyes, she
sees Dorian watching her. Instantly her smile fades;
and she returns his gaze fixedly, as though compelled to
do it by some hidden instinct.
He has entered silently, not expecting to find any one
before him but the vicar: yet the very first object his eyes
meet is his wife, smiling, radiant, with Kennedy beside
her. A strange pang contracts his heart, and a terrible
amount of reproach passes from his eyes to hers.
He is sad and' dispirited, and full of melancholy. His 
whole life has proved a failure; yet in what way has he
fallen short?
Kennedy, seeing Mrs. Branscombe's expression change,



<pb n="255"/>
FAITH AND UNFAI J'..             255
raises his head, and so becomes aware of her husband's
presence. Being a wise young man in his own genera-
tion, he: smiles genially upon Dorian, and, going forward,
shakes his hand as though years of devotion have served
to forge, a link likely to hind them eachlto each forever.
"Charming day, isn't it ?" he says,; With a beatific smile.
"Quite like summer."   . -     .. ,r
"Rather more like January, I think," .says Dorian,,
calmly, who is in his very worst mood. "First touch of
winter, I should say."  He laughs as _he says- this; but
his laugh is as wintry as the day, and chills the hearer.
Then he turns aside from his wife and her companion,
and lays his hand upon the vicar's shoulder, who has just
risen from his class, having carried it successfully through
the best part of Isaiah.
" My dear boy,--you ? ': says the vicar, quite pleased to
see him. " But in bad time: the lesson is over, so you
can learn nothing. I don't like to. give them too much
Scripture on a week-day. It has a disheartening effect,
and      . 
"I wish they could hear you," says Branscombe, with
a slight shrug. 
"It is as well they cannot," says the viear; " though I
doubt if free speaking does much harm; and, really, per-
petual grinding does destroy the genuine love for our
grand old Bible that we should all feel deep down in our
souls."
"Feeling has gone out of fashion," says Dorian, so dis-
tinctly that Georgie in the distance hears him, and winces
a little.
"Well, it has," says the vicar. "There .can't be a
doubt of it, when one thinks of the alterations they 1jze:i
just made in that fine old Book. There are innovati't'~'
from morning till night, and nothing gained by them.-
Surely, if we got to heaven up to this by the teaching of
the Bible as it was, it serves no cause to alter a word here
and there, or a sentence that was dear to us from our
childhood. It brings us no nearer God, but only unsettles
beliefs that, perhaps, up to this were sound-enough. The
times are not to be trusted."-.
" Is anything worthy of trust p"' says Dorian, bitterly.
"I doubt I'm old-fashioned," says the dear vicar, with



<pb n="256"/>
253           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
a deprecating smile. "I dare say change is good, aind.
works wonders in many ways. We old people stick fast,
and can't progress. I suppose I should be content to be. 
put on one side."
" I hope you wiff 6e put on my" sdc," "-ays. hrrt' 
should feel pretty safe then. Do you know, I have not
been in this room for so many years that I am afraid to.
count them ? When last here, it was during a holiday
term; and I remember sitting beside you. and thinking
how awfully jolly glad I was to be well out of it, when
other children were doing their lesson." 
"Comfortable reflection, and therefore, as a rule, selfish,'"
says the vicar, with a laugh.
"Was it selfish ?. I suppose so." His face clouds again:
a sort of reckless defiance shadows it,.. -" You must not ex-
pect much from me," he says, slowly: "they don't accredit
me with any good nowadays."
" My dear fellow," says the vicar, quietly, " there is some-.
thing wrong with you, or you would not so speak. I don't
ask you now what it is: you shall tell me when and where
you please. I only entreat you to believe that no one,
knowing you as I do, could possibly think anything of you.,
but what is kind. and good and true."          . ;
Branscombe draws his breath quickly. His pale face
flushes; and a:gleam, that is surely born of tears, shines 
in his eyes. Clarissa, who, up to this, has been talking
to some of the children, comes up to him at this moment
and slips her hand through his arm. Is he not almost her
brther ?
Only his wife stands apart, and, with white lips and 
dry eyes and a most miserable heart, watches him without
cav*.-or daring-to go near to him. She is silent, dis- 
trdk, and has altogether forgotten the fact of Kennedy's
existence (though he: still-stands close beside her),-a state 
of things that young gentleman hardly affects.
' Has your class been too much for you? - Or do other
things-or people--distress you ? " he asks, presently, in.
a meaning: tone. ' Because you have not uttperd one
word for quite five minutes."., .
"You have guessed correctly : some people do distress
me--after. a time,'' says t4i[, Branscombe, so pointedly



<pb n="257"/>
PA1T7A'ND A U2 FAVITl                      2
that Kennedy iakes the hint, apd, shaking hands with-her
somewhat stiffly, disaDpeai through the doo-way.' 
" Oh, yes," the vica fis say ir!to ' Ctaris'sa; in a glad tone,
that even savors of triumph, "'the: 'B-tesons have given up
the IMethodist chapel and iahve c0  bak-to hme. They
have forgiven about the -read, fhough they'made a heavy
struggle for it. Mrs. Redmond and I put olir heads to-
gether and wobdered What'we should do, -and if'we cdutiTn't
buy anythiigr there .so as, to make p for th  lbss'T-f 'the
daily loavde':icaud'Se she u]ifi;i&jd' c6fi§Ent t86oisoti the
children."
"And you would !" says' Cldanssa, reproachfully. "Oh,
what a terrible admission "
" We won't go into that; niydear Clarissa, if you please,"
says the viqar, contritely,, "There are moments in every
life that one regrets, lut.the eqnd of our cogitations was
this: that we wwent down to the village,-Mrs. Redmond
and I,-and, positively, for one bar of soap and a package
of candles we bobii'ht them all badck t6 tiheir pew inifhiuth.
You w6burdnrt havi thduglit iferef was so much grad in soap
and candles, would you ? " says the viarf;' with a; curiost,
gleamt in his eyes .that is' half 'amusement, half'contempt.
Even Georgie laughs a little iat lithis, andt cofie nearerf
to then, a'Ad staAds:'ldise beside Clarissa, as if ,hy and un-
certain, and glal ro have 'a sure partisan so fiear , to het-;
all which is only additional pain to Dorian, who ntices'
every lightPst-.wotd 'nd' abtion of 'the twofmiAihe' has :iar-
ried : - ,:                 ..   ,. .g. ti s:
" How did youget on to-day with yotWr little people ?I"
asks3' Mr. gedriond, talSing notlfiiE of her-at Ofne,e- some-
thing, too, iA her dbWnhn st' attitude appealing to his sense
of pity.  Was thaftboytof the Briktbfi':itrre thatiisually
tryingi " i '  :" -, ;i ; r - : :    -:: .     ' ! ,-.  > T'
Well, he was bad enough,'? says.Georgie, in a tone that
implies she .is;tatlier'le'ttin* off 'the 'nfortitUate Brixton
from future punishefin-t.,,-; "1'B;t--I have ko wn. inm wo rse:
indeed, I think he improves."     ;   .,,, .
"Indeed, I think a son of his father "eq.ld. -  Ier im-
ptwve," says the vicar,Twir-a ,mqanchbly sigh.. t,' There
isn't' anon{ceq of brains in. '1' that familyr, ] I  'ng ago, when
first I came here, Sam,,Brixton; (the faiher of yorp, pupil)
bought.a cow.from a neighboring farmer called George Gil
17



<pb n="258"/>
258            FAITH AND UNFAITH. 
bert, and he named it John. I thought that an extr#or
nary name to call a cow, so I said to him one day, Sa'nS  
on earth did you christen that poot inofaensive bastf'^j
' John ?' said- he, somewhat indignantly, John ?" ,l
wouldn't I call him John, when I bought him from i(
Gilbert?' I didn't see his meaning then,-and, I co . -
I haven't seen it since,-but I was afraid to expose';i,
stupidity, so I held my tongue. ,Do you see iqt?"~'' .
turns to Dorian.                             ,
"Not much," says Dorian,.with  faint laugh.  r ;^--.
CHAPTER XXXI.                  '.
'. One woe dotb tread.upon another's heel,  -
So fast they follow. "-Hamlet.         i '.  :T'
"One, that was a woman, sir."-Hamtet.  -
AcRoss the autqwnp grass, that has browned beneath 
scorching summer riys, and through the fitful -sunnii
comes James Scrope.. 
Through the woods, under the dyi.g. beech-treesr,.t
lead to Gowran, he saunters slowly, . thinking only of. h]
girl beyond, who is not thinking of himn at .all, kpt of.the
man wh, -in his soul, $ir James believes utterly- unwxrtjh
of her,  ,  ...  ..
This thoghtl;,so, ngrosseshifr as4ie walfks A ,h,-t-ht'
he fails to hear Mrs. Branscombe, until she is close be.i'
him, and until sh-saysj gently,- ;...,  . 
" How d'ye dp,. r-j aes'?." -'at this hs start isa so. i,-
ible that She laughs, and says, with ajaaint blush,-  "
" What ! isjy cpming so light that one fails, to.hear it f '
To which he, recovering himself,''makes ready respoqs e;-'
-  ;: :':"  .  "So light.afoot  ; -  .   : 
Will ne'er wea:r out the ev'ylasing flint."  -
Th7A, Mfur2eckagfomigIOrnf Gownfu ^^^ ':
"Yes; from Clarissa."        .             -;
"Sheiswel?'."                  .        -"       '
"Yes, and, I.suppse, :happy,"-with a shrug.  'She.
expects Horace to-morro:w5 'There is a certain scOrn mti
her iianmer, that attracts his notice.  -
't Is: tht sufficient to create happiness ?" he says, some-'
-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="259"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               259
what bitterly, in spite of himself. "But of course it is.
You know Horace?-" '  ;,
"Not well, but 'well eiough," says Mrs. Branscombe,
with a frown. " Iknow him well enough to hate him.",
She pauses, rather ashamed; of herself for her impulsive
confidence, and not at all aware that by this hasty speech
she has made a friend of Sir James for life. 
"Hate him ? " he says, feeling he could willingly .embrace
her on the spot were society differently constituted.
"Why, what has he done to you ?     : i 
"Nothing; but he is nut good enough for Clarissa,' pro-
tests she, energetically. " But then who is good- enough?
I 'really think," say'Mrs. -BrAnscombe, with earnest con-
viction, "she is far t6oosweet to be thrown away upon'any
man."                                          . 
Even this awful speech fails to cool Sir James's;admira-
tion for the speaker. She has declared herself a nonrad-
mirer of theJall-powerful :Hodrace, and -this goes so far a
way with him that he cannot bring himself to find fault with
her on-any score.             - 
"I don'tUno,:Wwhy- I; express: my likes and dislikes to
you so openly," she says, gravely, a little later on; " and
I don't know, either, why I -distrust Horace:  I have
only a wo'nan's reason. It is Shakespeare slightly altered:
'I hate him so, because I hate him so.' And I hope, with
all my: heart, Clarissa will never marry him."  :: 
Then she blushes again at her openness; and gives him
her hand, and bids him good-by.and:presently he goes-on
'his way once more to Gowran.
On the balcony there stands Clarissa, the solemn Bill
close lAside her; She-4is leaning on the parapet, with her
prettyith4e  hands crossed and-hanging loosely over'it.
As .s5 .se.s him coming, -with a little touch of coquetry,
common to most womel- she draws her broad-brimmed hat
from her-head, and, letting it fall upon the baldony, Jets
the unceitaitisunlight totui warmly her fair brown hair
and ten-dcex-quift i&       - ,  . 
BilIs f,.   If  ½W'fi4fW.,eg S   ir es tkes
his shaizv sides. and, with his heavv head still drdb rI
and his most hang-dogi:expisstior tarefuly ,put hji, goes
cautiouisy do- n'f i  s-^&A4e s-fo greet him ;"
Hafing been pattedrl'and mnade, much :of, and having
an  hain



<pb n="260"/>
260             FAITH AND UNFAITH. 
shown a scornful disregard for all such friendly attentions,
he trots behind Sir James at the slow. funeral pace he
usually affects, until Clarissa is. reached· ,i
* " Better than my ordinary luck to find you here," says
Sir James, who is in high good humor. " Generally yqu
are miles away when I get to Gowran. And-forgive me
-how exceedingly charming you,are looking this morn-
ing!" 
Miss Peyton is clearly not above,.praise. She laughs,-
a delicious rippling little laugh,-and colors faintly.
"'A compliment from you 1," she says. "No wonder I
biush, Am I really lovely, Jim, or only commonly pretty ?
I should hate to be commonly pretty."  She lifts her
brows disdainfully.
:,- "Yoau 'need4't hate yourself," says Scrope, calmly.
"' Lovely is the.word; for: you?' 
"I'm rather glad," says Miss Peyton, with, a sigh of
relief. " If only forr-Horace's sake !"
Sir James pitches his cigar over the balcony,, and
frowns. Always Horace !. Can, she not forget him for
even one moment ? 
;  What brought you ?" asks she, presently.
: " What a gracious speech "!-"-with a rather short laugh.
."To see you, I fancy. By the by, I met Mrs. Branscombe
on my way here. She didn't look. particularly happy."
: ' No."  Clarissa's eyes grow sad. "After all, that mar-
riage ,was a terrible mistake, and it seemed such ,a satis-
factory one. Do you know," in a half-frightened tone, " I
.begin to, think they hate each other ?"
"They don't seem to hit it off very well, certaini6,", says
Sir- James, moodily. "But I believe there i&souwmthing
more on Branscombe's mind ;than his domestic, worries:
I am afraid he is getting into trouble over the, farm, and
that, and nothing hits a man like want of rmoney. That
Sawyer is a very slippery fellow, in my opinion-, ad of
late Dorian has neglected everything and taken no interest
in his land,;;and, in fat, lets,everything gg without ques-
tionr<,;           ,             *    -,    - it 
' I rhave no patience with Georgie," says Clarissa,, indig-
nantly. " She is positively breaking his heart."  .:
- -She is unhappy, poor little thing," says Sope,::who



<pb n="261"/>
FAIITH AND UNATAITZ.             261
cannot find it in his heart to condemn the woman who
has just condemned Horace Branscombe.
"It is her own fault if she is. I know few people so lov-
able as Dorian. And now to think he has another trouble
makes me wretched. I ddhope you are wrong about Saw-
yer."
"I don't think I am," says Scrope; and time justifies
his doubt of Dorian's steward.
*     *      *'   *      *     *      *     *
"SARTORIS, Tuesday, four o'clock.
"DEAR SCROPE,-
"Come up to me at once, if possible. Everything here
is in a deplorable state. You have heard, of course, that
Sawyer bolted last night; but perhaps you have not heard
that he has left things ih a ruinous state. I must see you
with as little delay as you can manage. Come straight to
the library, where you will find me alone.
"Yours ever,
" D. B."
Sir James, who is sitting in his sister's room, starts to
his feet on reading this letter.
"Patience, I must go at once to Sartoris,"he says,
looking pale and distressed.
"To see that mad boy ?"
" To see Dorian Branscombe."
"That is quite the same thing. You don't call him sane,
do you ? To marry that chit of a girl without a grain of
common sense in her silly head, just because her eyes were
blue and her hair yellow, forsooth. And then to go and
get mixed up with that Annersley affair- -
"My dear Patience !"
"Well, why not? Why should I not talk? One must
use one's tongue, if one isn't a dummy. And then there is
that man Sawyer: he could get no one out of the whole
country but a creature who-"
"Hush !" says Sir James, hastily and unwisely2 "Bet-
ter be silent on that subject." Involuntarily he lays. his
hand upon the letter just received.
"Ha !" says Miss Scrope, triumphantly, with astonish-
ing sharpness. " So I was right, was I ? So that pitiful
being has been exposed to the light of-day, has- he ? I
always said how it would be; I knew it I-ever since last



<pb n="262"/>
262           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
spring, when I sent to him for some cucumber-plants, and
he sent me instead (with wilful irtent to insult me) two vile
gourds. i always knew how it would end."
"Well, and how has it ended ? " says Sir James, with a
weak effort to retrieve his position, putting on a small air
of defiance.
" Don't think to deceive me," says Miss Scrope, in a
terrible tone; whereupon Sir James flies the apartment,
feeling in his heart that in a war of words Miss Scrope's
match is yet to be found.
Entering the library at Sartoris, he finds Dorian there,
alone, indeed, and comfortless, and sore at. heart
It is a dark dull day. The first .breath of winter is in
the air. The clouds are thick and sullen, and are lying
low, as if theywould willingly come down to sit upon the
earth and there rest themselves,-so weary they seerm, and
so full of heaviness.
Above them a wintry sun is trying vainly to recover its
ill temper. Every now and then a small brown bird, fly-
ing hurriedly past the windows, is almost blown against
them by the strong and angry blast.
Within, a fire is burning, and the curtains are half drawn
across the windows and the glass door, that leads, by steps,
down into the garden. No lamps are lit, and the light is
sombre and severe.
"You have come," says Dorian, advancing eagerly to
meet him. " I knew I could depend -upon you, but it is
more than good of you to be here so soon. I have been
moping a good deal, I am afraid, and forgot all about the
lamps. Shall I ring for. some one now to light them  "
"No: this light is what I prefer," says Scrope, laying
his hand upon his arm. " Stir up the fire, if you like."
"Even that I had not given one thought to," says Brans-
combe, drearily. " Sitting here all alone, I gave myself
up a prey to evil thoughts."
The word "alone " touches Sir James inexpressibly.
Where was his wife all th. Pime. ythe, TDh ,nyver tamy tt
him to comfort and support him in his hour of need ?
Is everything as bad as you say ? " he asks, presently,
in a subdued tone.
" Quite as bad; neither worse nor better. There are no
gradations about utter ruin. You heard about Sawyer, of



<pb n="263"/>
FAITH. AND UNFAITH.              263
course ? Harden has been with me all last night and to-
day, and between us we havie' een able to make out that
he has muddled away almost all the p.roperty,-whlici, you
know, is small. As yet we hardl lpoQw how we' tand.
But there is one claim of fifteen thiousand p6unds that must
be paid without delay, and I have not onie penny to meet
it, so am literally driven to the wall."
"-You speak as if  " 
" No, I am speaking quite rationally. I know what you
would say; but if I was starving I would not accept one
shilling from Lord Sartoris. That would be impossible.
You can understand why, without my going into that in-
famous scandal. I suppose I can sell Sartoris, and pay my
-that is, Sawyer's-debts; but that will leave mie a beggar
Then, in a low tone, " I should hardly care, but for her.
That is almost more than I can bear."
"You say this debt of fifteen thousand pounds is the
one that presses hardest? "
"Yes. But for that, I might, by going in for strict econ-
omy, manage to retrieve my present position in a year or
two."
" I wish you would explain more fully," says Sir James;
whereupon Dorian enters into an elaborate explanation
that leaves all things clear.
" It seems absurd," says Scrope, impatiently, " that you,
the heir to an earldom and unlimited wealth, should be
made so uncomfortable for the sake of a paltry fifteen
thousand pounds."
" I hardly think my wealth unlimited," says Branscombe;
"there is a good deal of property not entailed, and the
ready nroney is at my uncle's own disposal. You know,
perhaps, that he has altered his will in favor of Horace,-
has, in fact, left him everything that it is possible to
leave ?" 
"This is all new to me," says Sir James, indignantly.
"If it is true, it is the most iniquitous thing I ever heard
in my life."
" It is true," says Branscombe, slowly. " Altogether,
in many ways, I have been a good deal wrong ' and the
money part of it has not hurt me the most.""
"If seven thousand pounds would be of any use to you,"
says Scrope, gently, delicately, " I have it lying idle. It



<pb n="264"/>
264            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
will, indeed, be a great convenience if you will take it at a
reasonable-   "
- "That is rather unkind of you," says Dorian, interrupt-
ing him hastily. "Don't say another word on that subject.  l
I shall sink or swim without aid from my friends,-aid, I 
mean, of that sort. In other ways you can help me. Hard-
en will, of course, see to the estate; but there are other,
more private matters, that I would intrust to you alone. -
Am -I asking too much ?"
"Don't be unkind in your own turn," says Scrope, with
tears in his eyes.
" Thank you,", says Dorian, simply. His heart seems
quite broken.   ,.
"'What of your wife ? " asks Sir James, with some hes-
itation. "Does she know?" 
" I think not. Why should she be troubled before her
time? It will come fast enough. She made a bad match,
after all, poor child! But there is one thing I must tell
you, and it is the small drop of comfort in my cup. About
a month ago, Lord Sartoris settled upon her twenty thou-
sand pounds, and that will keep her at least free from care.
When I am gone, I want you to see to her, and let me
know, from time to time, that she is happy and well cared
for."
",But will she consent to this separation from you, that
may last for years ?"
" Consent !" says Dorian, bitterly. "That is not the
word. She will be glad, at this chance that has arisen to
put space between us. I believe from my heart that  "
"What is it you believe ? " says a plaintive voice, break-
ing in upon Dorian's speech with curious energy. The
door leading into the garden is wide open: and now the
curtain is thrust aside, and a fragile figure, gowned in
some black filmy stuff, stands before them. Both men
start as she advances in the uncertain light. Her face is
deadly pale; her eyes are large, and almost black, as she
turns them questioningly upon Sir James Scrope. It is
impossile for either man to know what she may, or may
not, haiV heard.
"'I -vas in the garden," she says, in an agitated tone,
' antrl.heard voices; and something about money; and
b)oriani's going away: and-" (she puts her hand up to



<pb n="265"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               26
her throat). "and about gruin. - I could not understand:
but you will tell me. Yoiuu "'' .        ''
"Tell her, Dorian,', says Sir James.: But Dorian looks
doggedly away from her, through the ppe, ' Window, into
the darkening garden beyond.            . ' 
" Tell me, Dorian," she says, nervously, going up to him,
and ;aying a small white trembling hand upon his arm."
"There- is no reason why, you should be distressed,"
says Branscombe, very coldly, lifting her 'hand from his
arm, as though her very touch is displeasing to him. "You
are .quite safe. Sawyer's mismanagement of the estate
has brought me to the verge, of ruin; but' Lord Sartoris
has taken care that you will not suffer."
She is trembling violently.
"And you ?" she says.
"I shall go abroadc;until things look brighter." Then
he turns to her for the first time, and, taking both her
hands, presses them passionately. "I can hardly expect
forgiveness from ,you," he says: "you had, at least, a
right to expect position when you made your unhappy mar-
riage, and now you have nothing."             ' -
I think she hardly hears this cruel speech. Her thoughts
still cling to the word that has gone before.
"Abroad ?" she says, with quivering lips.
"Only for a time," says Sir James, taking pity upon her
evident distress.
"Does he owe a great deal ?" asks she, feverishly. " Is
it a very large sum? Tell me how much it is."
Scrope, who is feeling very sorry for her, explains mat-
ters, while Dorian maintains a determined silence.
"Fifteen thousand pounds, if procured at once, would
tide him over his difficulties," says Sir James, who does
her the justice to divine her thoughts correctly., "Time
is all he requires."
:"I have twenty thousand pounds," .says Georgie, eagerly.
"Lord Sartoris says I may do what I like with'it. Do-
rian,"-going up to him again,-" take it,- do, o. You
will make me happier than I have beep for a long time if
you will accept it."
- A curious -expressio, lights Dorian's face. It is half
surprise, half contempt: yet, after all, perhaps .there is
some, genuine gladness in it.



<pb n="266"/>
266           FAITH A4D UN'FAITH.
"I cainiot tahk ybu sufficieritly,' he says, in a low tone.
"Your offer is more than':kind:4it is generous. But I
cannot accept it. It is impossible I should receive-any-
thiig';at ybour hahds."'                     - 
"Why?" she says, her lips white, her eyes large and
earnest. 
"Does' that question require an answer?" asks Dorian,
slowly." "There was a time, even in our short married
life, when I believed in your friendship for me, and then
I vould have taken anything from you,-from my wife;
but now, I tell you again, it is impossible. You yourself
have put it' ut of my power.'" -'                -
He turns from her coldly, arnd C'hcntrates his gaze
once more upon the twilit garden. -  '
"Don't speak to me like that,-at least; now," says
Georgie, her breath coining in short quick gasps. "It
hurts me so ! Take this wretched money, if-if you still
have any love for me."
He turns deliberately away from the small pleading
face.
"And leave you penniless," he says.
"No, not that. Some day you can pay me back, if
you wish it. All these months you have given me every
thing I could possibly desire, let me now make you some
.small return."
Unfortunately, this speech angers him deeply.
"We are wasting time," he says, quickly. "Under-
stand, once for all, I will receive nothing from you."
"James," Says Mrs. Branscombe, impulsively, going up
to Scrope and taking his hand. She is white and nervous,
and; in her agitation, is hardly aware that, for the first
time, she has called himn by his Christian name. "Per-
suade him. Tell him he should accept this money. Dear
James, speak for me: I am nothing to him."
For thg second time Branscombe turns and looks at
hera long 'and earnestly.
" I must say I, think your wife quite right," says Scrope,
enietgetically. "S e wants you to take this money; your
rot taking it distresses her very much, and you have no
iht{.' the world to marry a woman and then make her
iunily.'"- This is faintly quixotic, considering all the
circumstaees, but nobody says anything. "You ought



<pb n="267"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.                267
to save Sartoris from  the hammer no matter at what
price,-pride or anything else. It isn't: a fair thing, you
know, Branscombe, to lift the roof from off her head for
a silly prejudice."
When he has finished this speech, Sir James feels that
he has been unpardonably impertinent.
"She will have a home with my uncle," says Brans7
combe, unmoved,--"a far happier and more congenial
home than. this has ever been."  A faint sneer disfigures
his handsome mouth tf6r a moment.... Then his mood
changes, aiid"he turns" almost fierc6ly upon Georgie.
"Why will you fight against your own good fortune? " he
says. "See howxit is favoring you. YQU will, get rid of
me for years, perhaps-I hope--forever, and you will be
comfortable with him."
" No, I shalr not,'" says Mrs. Branscombe, a brilliant
crimson has grown upon her pale cheeks, her eyes are
bright and full of anger, she stands back fromi him and
looks at tbi'm with. passionate reproachland determination
in her gaze. "You think I will onsent to live calmly
here while you ar' an exile from.your hiome ? In so much
you wrong me. When you leave' Satris, i leave it too,
-to be a governess once more."        .
"I forbid you to do. that," says Branscombe. "I am
your husband, and, as such, the law allows me some
power over you. But this is only an idle threat," he says,
contemptuously. "When I remember how you .onsented
to marry even me to escape such a life of drudgery, I can-
not believe you will willingly return to it again."
" Nevertheless I- shall," says Georgie,, slowly.,, " You
abandon me: why,; then,. should you have power to con-
trol my actions?.' And ' will not live.at Hythe, and I-will
not live at all inh.Pullingha'ii uiless I live here."
"Do6i'ti be' obstnsate, 'rTnali," says-Sir James, implor-
ingly. "Give in to her :,it 'will be more. manly. Don't
you see she hats conceived an' 'afftion' for thep place by
this time, and can't bear to see if pass into strange hands ?
In tth niame of ommofibn sense, accept thia hi-ance of res-
cue, and.putt:an e,nd to a most unhappy business ."
Dorian leans his arms upon the mantel-piece, and( his
head.,upon his^ arms. Shall he', or shall he not, conlent



<pb n="268"/>
268            FAITH ATND Ul;ATAITH.
to this plan ? Is he really behaving, as Scrope has just"
said, in an unmally manner?      ,"' ..        '
A lurid4 name 'frdmi the fire 1iglts utp the 'roomn, afid falls 
warmTy'ipon Georegies anxiilts face and'fclasped hand'
and sombre clinging gown; upon Dorian's bowed hied;'
andi r idioiless figure, arnd'ipon  it 'Jamies' standing Valli
and silent within the shadow 'that 'teis tse !'coden'f&  herbf
he'is.:; Al i's sad, afid'dtear, an'd'almost tragic ! - 
Georgie, with both hands pressed against her bosom,'
waits brethlessly for Dorian's answ'er.' At Iast' it- comtes.
Lifting hTs head, he says, in a. dull tone that is more de-':
pressing than louder grief,-
"J consent.: iut I carinot-ive -her-.Jtist. yet. I-shall'
go away for a time. I b.eg yoi6t'8h; ' tunderstand thgt 'I
do this thing aiairnst rily'wilfi'or hiT yvif'saki-noit' fo
my own, Death itself could, not bemore:' bitfer'to: 'me' 
thai-'life has'- teet!r'f' Iate."' For the'lat time 'he turns
and looks at Georgie  " You know who has emhbittered-
it," he says. 'And then, "Go-: I wish to be alone! "
-Scrope, taking' 'Mrs. Branscombe's cold hand -in his,
leads--her from the'rooiii. ' When- outside, she presses her
fingers on his in a grateful fashion, and, whispering some-
l.ing t01oJim in aJ ttb e!n voice,-iwh'ch he silW9 to hear,-
she goes heavily up the staircase to her own room.
When inside, she closes the doof, and lodks it, andj go-
ing as if with a purpose to a drawer in a cabinet, draws'
from it a velvet' frame. Opening it, phe gazes long and
earnestly upon the face it contains: it is pdriai's. '.  ;
It is a charming, Iovable face, with is smiling lips and:
its large blue honest eyes. Distrustfully she gazes at it, as
if seeking to' discover some trace-of 'duplicity in the clear
open features. Then slowly she takes th: photograph from
the frame, and with a scissors cuts out the head, and, lift-
ing the glass from a dull gold lo.ket upon the' table neat
her, carefully plades the picture in it.        ' 
When her tasklis finished, she: looks at it once again, and
then laughs softly to herself,-a sneering unlovable laugh.
full of self-contempt. Her whole expression is dfiforgiv-
ing; yet suggestive of deep regret. Somehow, 'at this mo- 
ment his last words 'came back to her and strike coldly on
her heart: "I wish to be alone "' '
''"Alone !" H'-ow sadly the word had fallen from his
E



<pb n="269"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.                269
lips! How'stern'his:face had been, how broken and mis-
erable his voice I Some, terrible grief was tearing at. his
heart, and there was no one to comfort ,o love him, or-
She gets up from her chair, and paces the room impa-
tiehtly, as though inaction hald ceas'edto be possible to
her. An intense.'craving to see him agaihn fills', her soul.
She mudst go to him, if only to know what he has'beent do-
ing since last she' left him. Actin!g on impulse, she goes
quickly dd6wn the stairs, and across the hall to the library,
and enters, with a beating heart.       .
Alf is dfark'-and dreary -nough 'to 'chill any expectant
mind. iThe fire, though warm and gIowing still, has buried
to a dull red, and no bright'flames fash up to illumine the
gloom. Blinded by the sudden'change'from'light to dark-
ness,, she goes fotward nervously until she reaches the
heartl-ug ''then she discovers that Dorian is no longer
there..                      '
t   '                                .4, -no4  .   :   - .  9  _
CHAPTER XXXII. 
--. :. , - "Shake hands forever, cancel.all our vows; 
,  And when we meet; t any ti.e again, 
13e'it not seen ini either 6f our Brows 
'Thta'-we one jot of former love retain."'
DRAYTCN.;
NOT until Ofrs. Branscombe has dismissed her maid for
the night does she discover that the plain gold locket in
which she had placed Dorian's picture is missing. She
had (why,, she hardly cares to explain even to herself) hung
it round'herneck; and now, where is it?
After carefully searching her memory for a few moments,
she remenmbers that Useless visit to the library before din-
ner, and tells'herself she mus't have dropped it then. She
will go and find it. St'iptng intf a    pale-blue dressing-
gown, that serves to make'softer arid more adorable her
tender face and golden hair, she thrusts her feet into slip-
pers of the same 'hue, 'aftd' rns downstairs for the third
time to-day, to the library.
Opening the door, the brilliant light of many lamps greets
her, and, standing by th' fire is her husband, pale and hag-



<pb n="270"/>
270            FAIIT  AND UNBAITH. 
gard, with the missing locket in his hand. He has opened
it, and is gazing. at his own face with a strange expression.
" Is this yours " he asks, as she comes up to him. "Did
you come to look for it ?" 
"Yes."  She holds out her hand to receive it from him,
but he shows some hesitation about giving it.
"Let me advise you to take this out of it," he says, coldly,
pointing to his picture. "Its being here must render the
locket valueless. What induced you to give it such a
place ?"
"It was one of my many mistakes," returns she, calmly,
making a movement as though to leave him; "and you are
right. The 'ocket is, I think, distasteful to me. I don't
wa t it any more: ou can keep it.
"I don't want t, eithr," returns he, hastily; and then,
with ta gesture ull .of passion, he flings it deliberately into'
the'vey he art of the glowing fire. IThere it melts, and
grows black, and presently sinks, with a crimson coal; ut-
terly out of sight.
"The best place for it," says he, bitterly. "I wish I
could as easily be obliterated and fbrgotten."
Is it forgotten ? She says nothing, makes no effort to
save the fated case that holds his features, but, with hands
tightly clenched, watches its ruin. Her eyes are full of
tears, but she feels benumbed, spiritless, without power to
shed them.
Once more she makes a movement to leave him.
"Stay," he says, gently; "I have a few things to say
to you, that may as well be got over now. Come nearer
to the fire: you must be cold."
She comes nearer, and, standing on the hearth-rug,
waits for him to speak. As she does so, a sharp cough,
rising to her throat, distresses her sufficiently to bring
some quick color into her white cheeks. Though in itself'
of little importance, this cough has now annoyed her for at
least a fortnight, and shakes her slight frame with its ve-
hemence. 
"Your cough is worse to-night," he says, turning to
regard her more closely.
"No, not worse." 
'' Why do- you walk about the house so insufficiently
clothed?" asks he, angrily, glancing at her light dressing- 
.i
A_          Li~~~~~~!



<pb n="271"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.              271
gown with great disfavor. "One would think you were
seeking ill health. Here, put this round yo." -H.e tries to
place upon her shoujlders th ctk s gSb e J   sJwl ahe ad
worn when coming in from the garden in the earlier part
of the evening. But she shrinks from him.
"No, no," she says, petulantly; "I am warm enough;
and I do not like that thing. It is black,-the color of
Death!"
Her words smite cold upon his heart. A terrible fear
gains mastery over.him. Death! What can it have to do
with one so fair, so young, yet, alas ! so frail ?
"You will go somewhere for change of air?" he says,
entreatingly, going up to her and laying his hand upon
her shoulder. "It is of this, partly, I wish to speak to
you. You will find this house lonely and uncomfortable
(though doubtless pleasanter) when I am gone. Let me
write to mny aunt, Lady Moncktoin. She will be very glad
to have you for a time."
"No; I shallstay here. Where are you going ?"
" I hardly know; and I do not care at all."
" How long will you be away?"
"How can I answer that question either ? There is
nothing to bring me home."
"How soon do you go ?"  Her voice all through is ut-
terly without expression, or emotion of any kind.
" Immediately," he answers, curtly. "Are you in such
a hurry to be rid of me? Be satisfied, then: I start to-
morrow." Then, after an unbroken pause, in which even
her breathing cannot be heard, he says, in a curious voice,
"I suppose there will be no occasion for me to write to
you while I am away ? "
She does not answer directly. She would have given
half her life to be able to say, freely, " Write to me, Dorian,
if only a bare line, now and then, to tell me you are
alive ;" but pride forbids her.
"None, whatever," she says, coldly, after her struggle
with her inner self. "I dare say I shall hear all I care to
hear from Clarissa or Sir James."
There is a long silence. Georgie's eyes are fixed dream-
ily upon the sparkling coals. His eyes are fixed on her.
What a child she looks in her azure gown, with her yellow
hair falliging inthick masses over her shoulders. So white,
i*



<pb n="272"/>
272             FAITH AND UNFAITH.
so fair, so 'cuelly.cold I Has she no heart, that she can 
stand in that chnl,' thoughtful attitude, while his heart is
slowly breaking ?
' She-has destroyed all his happy life, this "amber witch," |.
with her loveliness, and her pure girlish face, and her bit- 
te'infdifferen ce; and yet his love for her at this moment'
is stronger, perhaps, than it has ever been. He is leaving
her. Shall he ever see her again ?
Something at this moment overmasters him. Moving a
step nearer to her, he suddenly catches her in his arms,
and, holding her close to his heart, presses kisses (unfor-
bidden) upon'her lips and cheek and brow.
In another instant she has recovered herself, and, plac-
ing her hands against iis chest, frees herself, by a quick
gesture, fromn his embrace.
','Was that how yQui'sed to kiss her ? 'Ishe says, in a.
chiked vdice, her face the color of death. "Let me go:
your touch is contamination."
Almost'before the last word has passed her lips, he re-
leases her, and, standing back, confronts her with a' face
as livid as her own.
In the one hurried glance she casts at 'him, she knows
that all is, indeed, over between them now; never again
will he sue to her for love or friendship. She would have
spoken again,-would, perhaps, have said something to
palliate the harshness of her last words,-but by a gesture
he forbids her. He points to the door.
"Leave the room," he says, in a stern commanding
tone; and, utterly subdued and silenced by his manner,
she turns and leaves him.
CHAPTER XXXIII.
"A goodly apple, rotten at the heart.
Oh, what a goodly outside falsehood hath "
Merchant of Venice.
"No hinge nor loop
To hang a doubt on."
Othello.          .
:DORIAN has been two months gone, and it is once
again close on Christmas-tide. All the world is beginning
i



<pb n="273"/>
FAITH AND UNPAIZTH.               73
to think of gifts, and tender reetings, and a coming year.
Clarissa is dreaming of wedding garments white as the
snow that fel' last night.
The post has just come in. Clarissa, waking, stretches
her arms over her'head with a little lazy delicious yawn,
and idly turs ,over her letters one by one. But presently,
as she treaks the seal of an envelope, and reads-what
lies inside it, her moodchanges,, and, springirig fro;m i'he
bed, she !begifns to dress herself with nervous rapidity.'
Three hours later, Sir James, sitting in his library, is
startled 'by the apparition of Clarissa standing in the
door-way with a very miserable face.    .
" vWhat on earth has happened ? " says Sir' James, who
is a very practical young man and always gdes at once to
the root of a mystery.
"Horace is ill," says Miss Perton, in a tone that might
have suited the occasion had the skies just fallen. "Oh,
Jim, what shall I do?"
"     My dearest girl," says Scrope, going up to her. and
taking hef hands.' '
"Yes, he is very ill! I had not heard from him for a
fortnight, and was growing wretchedlyuneasy, when to-day
a letter came from Aunt Emily telling me he has be.en
laid up with low fever for over ten days. And he is rvery
weak, the doctor says, and no one is with him. And papa
is in Paris, and Lord Sartoris is with Lady Monckton, and
Dorian-no one knows where Dorian is! "
" Most extraordinary his never getting any one to write
you a line ! "
"Doesn't that only, show how fearfully'ill he must be ?
Jim, you. will help me, won't you ?"
This appeal is not to be put on one side.
" Of; course I will," says Scrope: "you know that-or
you ought. What do you want me to do ?"
"To take me to him. I want to see him with' my owa
eyes."        '                                * 
"To go yourself i' says Sir James, extreme disappro-'
bation in his tone. "You must be out of your' in." ' 
-  I am not," returns she, indignantly. "I ,never wns
more ii it. And I am going, any-way."
"What will your father say ? 
.  :   '    .* :                  '  ' v  :  :,



<pb n="274"/>
274.            AITH AND UNFAITH.
" He will say I was quite right. Dear, dear, DEAR'
JiAm,"-slipping her hand through his arm, and basely e- 
scending from hauteur to coaxing,-" do say you will tale
me to him. It can't be wrong ! Am I riot going. to be.
his wife in a month's time ? "                  .
.-Sir James moves a chair out of his way with most un-.
necessary vehemence.                             ,I
"How that alters the case'I can't see," he says, obsti-
nately, 
"'You forsake me !" says Miss Peyton, her ey's filling
with tears. "Do. I can't be much unhappier than I aim
but I did depend on you, you were always so much my
friend."  Here two large tears run down her cheeks, and 
they, of course, decide everything.
"I will, take you," he says, hastily. "To-day ?-The
sooler the better, I suppose."
"Yes; by the next train. Oh, how obliged to you I
am! Dear Jim, I shall never forget it to you l "
This is supposed to be grateful to him, but it is quite 
the reverse.
"I think you are very foolish to go. at all," he says,
somewhat gruffly.
"Perhaps I an," she says, with a rueful glance., "But'
you' cannot understand. Ah! if you loved, yourself, you
could sympathize with me."
"Could I? " says SirJames, with a griimace that is meant 
for a smile, but as such is a most startling specimen of its
class.
So they go up to town, and presently arrive at the house
where Horace lies unconscious of all around him. The
door is opened to them by an unmistakable landlady,-a
fat, indolent person, with sleepy eyes, and a large mouth,
and a general air about her suggestive of perpetual beef- '
steaks and bottled stout.
This pdotly dame, on being questioned, tells them, " Mr.
Branscum has just bin given his draft, and now he is<
snoozint away as peaceable as a hinfant, bless 'i.m "
"Is he-in bed? "asks Sir James, diffidentry, this large
person having the power to reduce him to utter subjec-
tion..
"Lawks! no, sir. He wouldn't stay there: he's that
contrairy. Beggin' yore parding, sir, he's yore brother? "



<pb n="275"/>
FAITH ANDA UNFAITH.               275
i Sit James'hods. Shei'may-pove difficult, this stout old
lady, if he declares himself no'relative. 
"To'be shore !" says she. "'I might 'a' knowed by the
speakin' likeness :between you. You're thed'born himage
of im. After his draft we laid 'irm on the sdfy, and there
he is now, sleepin' the sleep of the just. Just step up and
see him; do, now. He is in a state of co6rms,'- ad not
expectit to get out of it for two hours. - 
"The-young--lady--will go up," says Sir James, feel-
ing, somehoW,: aii t]he' hbas i!risllted Clarissa by calling her
"a young lady."  "She would like " (in a confidential tohe
that wins oni the stdut landlady) "to sbe hith- al'one, just at
first."  .                               -
" Just s'o," says ,Mrs. G6bdbody, with a broad wink; and
Clarissa is fotthwithfshbwh' up-stairs, and told to open the
first door she comes to.'
"A'nd you;" says Mrs. Goodbody to Sir James, " will
please just -tb stepih 'ere and wait for her, Wvhile I see
about Tfie chidkihig' broth!"
"'What a charming room !" says Sir James, hypocritic-
ally; whereupon the'good woman, being intensely flattered,
makes her exit with a's much grace as circumstances and
her size will-permit.' 
Clarissa opening the door with a beating heart, finds
herself in a pretty, carefully-shaded' room, at the farther
end of which, on a sbfa, Horace lies calmly sleeping. He
is more altered than even her worst fears had imagined,
and as she bends over him she marks, with quick grief,
how thinr and -woti and haggard he has grown.
The blue veins stand out upon his nerveless hands.
Tenderly, with the very softest touch, she closes het own
fingers over his. Gently she'brufshes back the diso/rdered
hair'frotifhi flusIn  fiehead, and then, with a quick ac-
cession of colortfis:eps to-lay a kiss upon the cheek of
the main Who i4 to-Wh15th i ubafid in one short month.
A hand laid''u6oidhe? shoulder startles ahd deters her
from her purpose. ¶:t'is  a lightigentle touch, but firm and
decided and evide'flycmeaiit'to- prevent her from ngiving
the' daress. Quickly' raising herself, Clarissa draws back,
and, turning her head', seds-              '
Whb is"'it:' HI tfie 'rollfed 'baclkwards?-  A small,
light, gray-clad figure ttknd's Befoie' her, a figure only too



<pb n="276"/>
276           FAITH AND UINfAITHZ.
well remembered I The brown hair brushed back from
the white temples with the old Quakerish neatness, the
dove-like eyes, the sensitive lips, cannot be mistaken. Cla-
rissa raises her hands to her eyes to shut out the sight.
Oh !; not that! Anything but that I Not Ruth Anners-
ley I
A faint sick feeling overcomes her; involuntarily she
lays a hand upon the back of a chair near her, to steady
herself; while' Ruth stands opposite tp her, with fingers
convulsively clinched, and dilated nostrils,, and eyes dark
with horror.                      . 
" What.brings you here ? " asks R'ih,,t leang. in a.
voice hard and unmusical. 
".To, see the, man whose wife i wasrtg have .been next
month," says .Clarissa, feeling compelled to: answ.er.
"And "-in a terrible tone-" who are you? "
"'The woman who ought to be his wife,"' says guth,.in
the same..hard tone, still with her hands tightly.clasped..
Clarissa draws her breath hard, but returns no answer;
and then. there falls upon them a long, long silence, that
presently becomes unbearable. The two women stand
facing eaph other, scarcely breathing. The unnatural
stillness is undisturbed save by the quick irregular gasps
of the sick man.
Once he sighs heavily, and.throws one hand and arm
across his face. Then Ruth stirs, and, going swiftly and
noiselessly to his side, with infinite tenderness draws away
the, arm and replaces it in its former position.; She moves
his pillows quietly, and passes her cool hand across his fe-
vered brow.
" Ruth ?" he moans, uneasily, and she answers,." I am
here, darling," in the faintest, sweetest whisper. .
Something within Clarissa's he4  ii.ms to 'give way.
At this moment, for the -first time, ihe rali4es :the true
position in which he has placed'her.: A sensation of
faintness almost overcomes her, .but by a supreme effort
she conquers her weakness, and. crushes back, too, the
rising horror and anger thai have sprung into life. A curi-
ous calm falls upon her,"-a state .tat often follows, upon
keen mental anguish. She is still copjEtfng the victory
she has gained over herself, whopiuthtpeaks again.
"Ths is Ao place for you "she says, coldly, et with
-.~.  p.  yo · ,  Y.  d~3r, 7. th~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="277"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               277
her hand up to her cheek, as though to shield her face
from the other's gaze.  '
Clarissa goes up to her-then.
"So you are found at last," she says, somewhat monoton-
ously. "And,.of all places, here !  Is there any truth in
the world, I wonder ? Was it shame kept you from writ-
ing, all these months, to your unhappy father? Do you
know that an innocent man-his brother "-pointing with a
shivering gesture to the unconscious Horace-" has been
suffering all this timne for his wrong-doing ?" 
" I know nothing," replies Ruth, sternly. "I seek to
know nothing. My intercourse with the world ceased with
my innocence."
"You knew of my engagement to him ?" says Clarissa,
again motioning towards the couch.
"Yes." 
"Before you left Pullingham ?"
"No! oh, no !-not then," exclaims Ruth, eagerly. "I
did not believe it then. Do not judge me more harshly
than you can help."
The dull agony that flashes into her eyes quickens into
life some compassionate feeling that still lies dormant in
Clarissa's breast.
"I do not judge you at all," she sayis,;ith infinite gen-
tleness. Then, with an impulsive -movement, she turns
and lays her hand upon her shoulder. -'" Come home with
me-now !" she says. "Leave this place, Ruth, I implore
you, listen to me !"
"Do not," says Ruth, shrinking from her grasp; "I
am not fit for you to touch.  Remember all that has
passed."
"Do you think I shall ever forget I " says Clarissa, slowly.
"But for your father's sake he is ill,-perhaps dying.
Come. For his sake you will surely return ?"
"It is too late ! " says the girl, in a melancholy voice.
And then, again, "It is impossible." Yet it is apparent
that a terrible struggle is taking place within her breast:
how it might have ended, whether the good or bad angel
would have gained the day, can never now be said; a sigh,
a broken accent, decided her. 
"My head " murmurs the sick man, feebly, drawing his
breath wearily, and as if with paini. "Ruth, Ruth, are you



<pb n="278"/>
278           FAITH AND UNFAITH. 
there? " The querulous dependent tone rouses into ir
stant life all the passionate tenderness that is in Rutht
heart. Having soothed him by a touch, she turns onc
more to Clarissa.                               ": as
"He-too is sick,-perhaps dying," she says, feverishly.
"I cannot leave him ! I have sacrificed all for him, and it
shall be faithful unto the end. Leave me: I have done you
the greatest wrong one woman can do another. Wht
should you care for my salvation ? " Through all the d&e
fiance there is bitter misery in her tone. 
"I don't know why; yet I do," says poor Clarissa, ear-'
nestly.
"You are a saint," says Ruth, with white lips. And
then she falls upon her knees. " Oh, if it be in your:
heart," she cries, "grant me your forgiveness!"
Clarissa bursts into tears.
"I do grant it," she says. "But I would that my
tongue possessed such eloquence as could induce you to
leave this house."  She tries to raise Ruth from her kneel-
ing position.
"Let me remain where I am," says Ruth, faintly. " It
is my right position. I tell you again to go; this is no
place for you. Yet stay you, sweet woman,"-she cries,
with sudden fervor, catching hold of the hem of Clarissa's
gown and pressing it to her lips,-"let me look at you
once again! It is my final farewell to all that is pure;
and I would keep your face fresh within my heart."
She gazes at her long and eagerly.
"What ! tears? " she says; "and for me ? Oh, believe
me, though I shall never see you again, the recollection of
these tears will soothe my dying hours, and perhaps wash
out a portion of my sins I "
Her head drops upon her hands. So might the sad
Magdalen have knelt. Her whole body trembles with
the intensity of her emotion, yet no sound escapes her.
"Ruth, for the last time, I implore you to come with 
me," says Clarissa, brokenly. And once more the parched
lips of the crouching woman frame the words, " It is too 
late !"
A moment after, the door is opened, and closed again,
and Clarissa has looked her last upon Ruth Annersley.
How she makes her way down to the room where Sir



<pb n="279"/>
FAITH AND UNFAiTH.                279
James sits awaiting her, Clarissa never afterwards remem-
bers.
"It is all over: take me away!" she says, quietly, but
somewhat incoherently.                - 
He isn't dead ?" says Sir James, who naturally con-
ceives the worst from her agitationi.
No: it is even worse," she says. And thenr she-covers
her face with her hands, and sinks into a chair. '" Ruth
Annersley is here !" When she has said this, she feels that
life has almost come to an end. How shall she make this
wretched revelation to her father, to Georgie, to all the
rest of the world ?
As for Sir James, he stands at some distance from her,
literally stunned by the news. Words seem to fail him.
He goes up to her and takes one of her small icy-cold
hands in his.
"Did you see her?"
"Yes."
"The scoundrel!" says Sir James, in a low tone.
Then, a Is he very ill ?" There is unmistakable meaning
in his tone.
" Very."  And here she falls to bitter weeping again.
It is a cruel moment: Sir James still holds her hand,
but can find no words to say to comfort her; indeed,
where can comfort lie ?
At this instant a heavy footfall resounds along the pas-
sage outside. It warns them of the sylph-like approach of
Mrs. Goodbody. Sir James going quickly to the door,
intercepts her.
"My-my sister is quite upset," he says, nervously.
"Mr. Branscombe was-was worse than she expected to
find him."
"Upset !-and no wonder, too," says Mrs. Goodbody,
with heavy sympathy, gazing appfovingly at Miss Peyton.
"There's no denying that he's so worn out, the pore dear,
as it's quite dispiritin' to see 'ii, what with his general
appearings and the fear of a bad turn at any mingit. For
myself, I take my meals quite promiscuous like, since he
fell ill,-just a bit here and a bit there, it may be, but
nothing reg'larlike. I ain't got the'art. Howsoever, 'hope
on, hope never,' is my motter, miss; and we inust aUus
hope for the best, as the sayin' is."



<pb n="280"/>
280             AITH AND UNFA ITI.
"Just so," says Sir James, who doesn't know, in the
very least, what to say.
"A good wife, sir, I allus say, is half the battle; and 
that lady up-stairs, she is a reg'lar trump, she is, and so de-
voted, as it's quite affectin' to witness. Good-mornin' sir
-thank you, sir. I'll see to him, you be bound; and,
with his good lady above, there ain't the smallest-- -
Sir James, opening the hall door in despair, literally
pushes Clarissa out and into the cab that is awaiting them.
For a long time she says nothing; and just as he is begin-
ning to get really anxious at her determined silence, she
says, with some difficulty,-
" Jim, promise me something ?"
"Anything," says Jim. 
"Then never.again allude to this day, or to anything 
connected with it; and never again mention-his-name 
to me, unless I first speak to you."
"Never! "returns he, fervently.  "Be sure of it."
"Thank you," she says, like a tired child; arid then,
sinking back in her corner of the cab, she cries long and
bitterly.
CHAPTER XXXIV.
" Our doubts are traitors,
And make us lose the good we oft might win."
SHAKESPEARE.
"The day goeth down red darkling,            .
The moaning waves dash out the.light,
And there is not a star of hope sparkling
On the thresholdof my night.' 
GERALD MASSEY. 
THE morning after her unfortunate visit to town, Cla-
rissa sends to Mrs. Branscombe, asking her to come to her
without delay. The secret that is in her heart weighs
heavily, and Georgie must be told. Yet, now, when the
door opens, and Georgie stands before her, she is dumbi 
and cold, and almost without power to move. 
"What is it ?" says Mrs. Branscombe, suddenly. Thei
sad little smile that of late has been peculiar to her fade%
at sight of Clarissa's grief-stricken face. She advancer
-    1:i  



<pb n="281"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.                 81r
and lays a hand upon her arm. "You look positively ill,
Clarissa: something dreadful has happened. I can see it
in your eyes. It is bad news. Dorian,-he is not--"
She puts her, hand to her throat, and leans on a chair.
"It is n'o bad news for you," says 'Clarissa, faintly,
"but for me."  She pauses.
'" Are you in trouble, dearest ?" says Mrs. Branscombe,
sadly. " I.thopght you the happiest girl alive. Is there
nothilng but misery in this wretched world ?"
"I was in town yesterday," Clarissa begins, with an
effort, and then stops. How is' she to betray her l0ver's
falseness ?
"And you saw Horace, and he is ill ?" says Georgie,
anxiously. "Tell me all, Clarissa."
"It is so hard to tell," says poor Clarissa; and then she
turns her face to the wall, and wishes honestly that all
things for hei: might now be at an end:
"Love, art thou bitter ?
Sweet is death to me."
At this moment she could have gladly welcomed. death.
"There are many things," she says, "but this worst of
all. He does not love me; he has never loved me. And
there is some one else; and:--'"
"Who is it?" asks- fleorgie, breathlessly, though the
truth as yet is far fromA, .fe
"Ruth Annersley I -Sh. was there,-in his rooms I"
says Clarissa; and, after this, there is a silence that lasts
for several minutes.
The' unhappy truth is fold.  Clarissa, shamed and
heartbroken, moves away, that her companion may not see
her face. As for Mrs. Branscombe, at first' intense won-
der renders-her motionless; and then, as the exact: meai-
ing of Jhis. terrible story breaks in upon her, a great and
glorious gleam of unmistakable 'rapture lights all her face,
and, sinking uponp  a prie-Dieu inear her, she presses her
hands tightly together. That Dorianris exonerated, is her
first thought; that he::will; never forgive her, is her second;
and this drives all,'the blood from her cheeks, and the
gladness from her: heart, and.,brings her back again to
the emptiness and barrenness' that have made life a wil-
derness,to her for so many months. '
'   ~



<pb n="282"/>
'a82           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
Going over to Clarissa, she lays her arms gently round
her neck. There seems to be a new bond, born of grief, 
between thiem now.
" Do not pity me," says Clarissa, entreatingly. 
"Pity you ? no ! There is no occasion for it. You are
fortunate in having escaped such a, fate as was in store
for you. In time you will forget all this, and be happy in
some oth6r way."
"Shall I ? " says Clarissa, drearily. " But, in the mean
time, what shall I do ? How shall I fill the blank here ?"
She lays her hand upon her heart. 
," He is a wretch," says Georgie, with sudden fire.  If 
I were a man, I should kill him." 
"You should rather be thankful to him," says Clarissa,
with some bitterness. " My misery has: pr.oved your joy.
The shadow has been raised from DQrian.". 
"Clarissa, if you speak to me like that. you will break
my heart," says Georgie, deeply grieved. "-How could I
know joy when you are unhappy? And-and, besides,
there is no joy for me anywhere.  Dorian will never
forgive me. How could he,?' I, his wife, was theqohe
who most heartily condemned him and believed In'his
guilt."   - 
"When you see him, all witbe well. But he should be
told; you will see to that." -.:r  :- 
"Of course, darling. He it*abing -home nest week.
But how shall I meet him anckfyy allhris to-hiin-! The
very thought of it is terrible.'"r fl -1 
"Next week ?-so soon ?"
-(' Yes; I had a. line from himi this morning,-the only
one hJe wrote me since his departure; but that was my
own fault.- I at almost sorry he is coming now, says
Mrs.: Branscombe, nervously. " I sha4l die'ad the look in
his eyes when I confess to him how readily I believed in
that false rumor." '       .. 
"You hardly desere pity," says Clarissa, suddenly,
turning upon her with some just anger.: "You under-
valued him all through.' Instead of going ' dowi on your
knees to thank heaven, fasting; for a'good mai's love,'
you deliberately-flng ittaway. How different it has been
with me ! I trusted blindly; and -see my reward! ' 'Even
yet I cannot realize it. ',It seems'like sbme strahge 'horni-



<pb n="283"/>
FAITH AND UNiFAITH.                283
ble nightmare, from which I must awake. Yesterday I
was so happy; to-day'--" 
She breaks down, and bursts into bitter weeping.
Georgie throws herself on her knees before her.
'*    '*      *      *# '  '' . ':  '' *  ' ! *
"Is this yqur luggage, sir ? Glad to see you back again,
sir."
"Thank you, Jeffers. Yes, that is mine. All. right at
home, I hope? Your mistress quite well ?"   ' 
"Quite well, sir. $She, is :at home, awaiting you."
Dorian turns away with 'a bitter smile. "At home,
awaiting him ! " What a wretchedfool hie once was, when
he used to really picture to himself a: fair fbod 'woman
waiting arid longing for his return, whenever Fate had
called him from her side !             ' 
Arriving at Sartoris, he''runs up the stairs' to his own
room, .meeting no one on his way. He>smiles again-the
same unlovely smile-as he tells himself that Jeffers ex-
aggerated. thecase a little,-as, plainly, Georgie has, taken
special. pains to be out of .theway to avoid meeting him
on his first arrival.
Opening his door, he goes in, closing 'it firmly,behind
him. Everything in the r9om is just as he had left it.
Nothing has been changed; the very book'he had been
reading is lyig, now open at the page he had fast Iooked
into. A glorious fire is burning in the grate. A  delicate
Bohemian vase isfilled with some rare sweet flowers.
Whqose ,.ard had gathered them? If it:was one of the
servants,' it was ver ,thoughtful. He is very fond of flow-
ers. He moves istlessly about, wondering vaguely how
everything can look, after ,.ome months' absence, so ex-
actly as if he had seen it only yesterday, when a small ob-
ject lying on a side-table attracts his notice.
It is,a little ,gry:g!gloye, soiled, finger-pressed, warm as
if its owner but .-ust 'a, mijtte, since had'drawn' itfrom her
hand. It is yet'almost a part of the white, soft flesh it
had povered. -tHS hrqw contracts, and a pained expres-
sion 9roPses, his faqe. Takirg it up, he lays it in.his open
palm, and regards it earnestly; he hesitates, and \then, as
othough ~,r  l.kftto prSvent himself, he r,aises it and presses
it pasionftely, to his lips. ' An instant later,; with a con-
temptuus gesture and an.Dpward anathema upon his own.



<pb n="284"/>
284           FAITH AND UNFAITr.
weakness, he flings it far from him through the open wa- 
dow down on to the balcony beneath,-where it flutter'
to Mrs. Braiscombe's feet           '   ' 
Mechanically she stoops and picks it up. She his'been
hurrying towards the house, having only just heard of her.
husband's arrival, she not having expected him for some 
time later, trains at Pullingham being none of the most
punctual. 
Gazing at the luckless glove, her whole 'exprestWl i
changes.  She is beneath hiswindow: was it his -and
flung it so disdainfully to the ground,-the glove sh.' had
worn'such a short time before, when gathering the flores
that are now making his room so sweet ? Claspingthe ui-
offending bit of kid closely in her handl, she enters tfe-
house, by, a wide French window, and''goes straight'ih b
Dorian's room.               -
At the door she hesitates, and then knocks somewh'at
nervously.                                ' ."'
" Come in."  His voice has been so lboA a strfigcfro
her that she alm6st starts on hearing it,,and the last'tiffi-
nant of her courage vanishes. She opens the dobr'andi
goes slowly'in.
Dorian's back is turned to her. His coat-is off a4d'l
is brushing his hair before a glass in the furiotls*!fi'i6
men, as a rule,-affect. As she enters, he turns, and puit-
'ting down the brushes, regards her with undisguised ;ift-
prise. Plainly, he has not expected her.
'I-" How d'ye do ?" he says, presently. It is perfectIy ab-
ujidc.'lyet neither of them laughs. 'It is the niost'itltfi-
blus greeting he could possibly have made 'her, 'donsiider-
ing, all things; yet no sense of ridicule touches theii.,
They are too near to tragedy to harbor a thought "f, /ii-
edy.                         '      '  .  - ' -  f
"I did' not expect you uritil five,'"-says'Georgie, in a
constrained tone. " If I had known, I'should lhave beeh
ready to receive you."'                          1i
"Pray do not apologize," he says, coldly;  ' It is veif
good of you to come here now. It is m'orel'tIai 'ex-
,pected." 
something to tell you, that should be told without 'd~etay
"What is it? " he asks, quickly. I' Is mty unicleCWli W
C    Is Yny unc~~~~'»   "



<pb n="285"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.                285
"Quite well. I saw him yesterday. It has nothing to
do with him; though, of course, it must touch him very
nearly."
"You will be tired, " he says, with grave but distant po-
liteness. " Sit down while you tell me your news."
"No; I prefer standing."  She clasps one hand tightly
over the other, and leans against the wall; she cannot,
try as she will, remove her eyes from his face. "Wh'at I
want to say is this: I have heard of Ruth Annersley !'
"Have you ?." with an ominous calm in look and tone.
"Where is she?"
"With-your brother !" 
Dorian walks abruptly to the window, and, stands there
so that his face cannot be seen. He is distressed beyond
measure. So his old suspicions have proved true, after all,
and Horace's protestations were as basest lies. He'feels
sick at.heart for his brother's honor,-that miserable rem-
nant of a once fair thing; that costly garment, now reduced
to rags. After a while he forces himself to speak again.
" Who found her there ?" he asks, huskily  . 
" Clarissa."
" Clarissa?"  He is now thoroughly shocked. ' "'(.Wat
cruel fate made her the discoverer ?  "'
"Chance. He was ill, and she went to see him, out of
pure love for him., She was rewarded by a sight of Ruth
Annersley!"
"Poor girl !" says Branscombe, sadly. "So' true,-so
trusting."
Georgie draws-her breath quickly. Are not his. words
a reflection upon her ?-she, who has so failed' ini-faith
and love ? 
"I suppose that is all you have to tell me," says Dorian,
presently, in an absent, weary way.
"Not quite all,": she.says, with a trembling voice. She'
forces herself to c6me nearer to him, and now stands be-
fore him like a small' pale culprit, unable to lift her-eyes to
his.  "I want to tell -you how deeply I regret the 'in-
justice, the-"           :.          - 
"No, no," interrupts he, impatiently. "Let nothing be
said about that. It would be worse than useless. Why
waste- words over what can never be undone ?"



<pb n="286"/>
286           FAITH AND UNFA1TH.
Still she perseveres bravely, although her breath is coming
quicker, and her lips are trembling.
"I must tell you how sorry I am," she says, with a sup-
pressed sob. " I want to ask you, if possible, to forg-"
"Believe me, it will be better to leave all this unsaid,"
he initerrupts her, gravely.
"Then you do not care to hear how I have regretted
the wrong I did you, and   ? '"
"As you ask me the question, I will answer you. No,
I do not. Had you, at any time, felt one particle of affec-
tion for me, you could never have so misunderstood me.
Let things now remain as they are. -Though I think that
perhaps, for the short time I shall remail'at home, it will
be better for your sake that we shiuld appear before the
world, at least, as friends."
' You -are leaving home again?" she asks, timidly.
Novw .as he stands before her, so tall, and strong, and un-
forgiving, with this new-born dignity upon- him, she fully
realizes, for the first time, all she has recklessly resigned.
He had loved her at ohe time, surely, and she had tram-
pled on that love, until she had crushed out of it all life
and sweetness: 
"For it so falls out
That what we have we prize not to the worth
- While we enjoy it; but, being lacked and lost,
Why, then we rack the value; then we find
The virtue that possession would not show us
While it was ours."
"Yes, as soon as I can finish the business that has
brought rie back. I fear that will keep me two months,,
at least. I wish I could hasten it, but it would be impossi-
ble."  He grows slightly distrait, but, after a, moment,
rouses himself with a start, and looks at her. "Am  I
keepingyou ? " he asks, courteously. (To her the courtesy 
is a positive cruelty.) " Do not let me detain you any lon-
ger. Is there anything more you wish to say to me ?"
"Nothing." 'His last words have frozen within her all 
desire for reconciliation. Is he, indeed, in such great haste
to be gone ? . Without another word, she goes to the door,  j
but, as she puts out her hand to open it, something within
her grasp becomes known to her. It is the glove she had 
lf



<pb n="287"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               2S7
picked up on the balcony half an hour ago, and has held
ever since almost unconsciously.
" Was it-was it you that threw this from the window ?"
she says, suddenly, for the last time raising her beautiful
eyes to her husband's face.
"Yes. This was no place for it," returns he, sternly.
Going down the staircase, full of grief and wounded
pride, she encounters Lord Sartoris.
" He has come ? "asks-the old man, in an agitated man-
ner, laying his hand on her arm.
"He has. If you wish t6 see him, he is in his own
room," replies she, in a singularly hard tone.
"Have you told him everything ?" asks Sartoris, nerv-
ously. " It was a fatal mistake. Do you think he will for-
give me?"
" How can I say ?" says Mrs. Branscombe, with a bit-
ter smile. " I can only tell you he has not forgiven me."
"Bless me !" says Lord Sartoris; "then, I suppose, I
haven't a chance."
He is disheartened by her words, and goes very slowly
on his way towards his nephew's room. When they are
once more face to face, they pause and look with uncer-
tainty upon each other. Then the older man holds out
his hands beseechingly.
"I have come to demand your forgiveness," he says,
with deep entreaty. "Dorian- grant it !-I am very
old-"
In an instant Dorian's arm is round his neck, as it used
to be in the days long ago, before the dark cloud had rolled
between them.
"Not another word, or I shall never forgive you !" says
Branscombe, tenderly, with the old smile upon his lips.
And Sartoris, strong, obstinate, self-willed man that he is,
lays his head down upon his "boy's" shoulder, and sobs
aloud.
:.. ... )0 ~..... :--'..  .
_                     ... .



<pb n="288"/>
288            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
CHAPTER XXXV.
"Oh, what a deal of scorn looks beautiful
In the contempt and anger of her lips."
Twelfth Night.
THE dark day is growing colder and more drear. The
winds are sighing sadly. A shivering sobbing breeze,
that rushes in a mournful fashion through the naked twigs,
tells one the year is drawing to a close, and that truly it is
"faint with cold, and weak with old."
Clarissa, riding along the forest path that leads to Sar-
toris, feels something akin to pleasure in the sound of the
rushing torrent that comes from above and falls headlong
into the river that runs on her right hand.
There is, too, a desolation in the scene that harmonizes
with her own sad thoughts. She has watched the summer
leaves and flowers decay, but little thought her own hopes
and longings should have died with them. Is shenever
to know peace, or joy, or content again ? On her " rests
remembrance like a ban:" she cannot shake it off.
"Rest ! rest! Oh, give me rest and peace !" she cries
aloud to her soul, but no rest cometh. The world seems
colorless, without tint or purpose. She would gladly for-
get, if that might be, but it seems impossible to her.
"Ourselves we cannot recreate,
Nor get our souls to the same key
Of the remembered harmony."
The past-that is, her happy past-seems gone; the
present is full of grief; the future has nothing to offer.
This fact comes to her, and, with her eyes full of tears, she
turns the corner and finds herself face to face with Hor-
ace Branscombe.
The old smile is on his face; he comes to her and holds
out both his hands to take hers. He is worn and thin, and
very handsome.
"I am too fortunate to meet you so soon," he says.
"Yet I hardly think I should shake hands with you." Evi-
dently, some thought unknown to her is in his mind.
"I am glad you have come to that conclusion," she says,
"as there is no desire whatever on my part that our hands
should meet."



<pb n="289"/>
FAITH AND UlFATH.              -289
He is plainly puzzled.
"What a strange welcome !" he says, reproachfully.
"My letters during the past week should have explained:
everything to you."-  - 
"I have had none," says Clarissa, shortly.
"No ? Was that why-I received no answers ? I have
risen frdm a sick-bed to come to you, and demand the
reason of your silence." 
" am sorry you troubled yourself so far.; Ruth Anners-
ley could have given you the answer you require."
His face blanches perceptibly; and his eyes, in their
usual stealthy fashion, seek the ground.
" What have I to do with her ? " he says, sullenly.
" Coward ! " says Miss Peyton, in a low tone. "'Do you,
then, deny even all knowledge of the woman you have so
wronged?"
"Take care! do not go too far," cries he, passionately,
laying his.hand upon her bridle, close to the bit. " Have
you no fear ?"
"Of you? none!" returns she, with such open con-
tempt as stings him to the quick. "Remove your hand,
sir."
"When I have said all I wish to say," returns he,
coarsely, all his real brutality coming to the surface. "You
shall stay here just as long as I please, and hear every
word I am going to say. You shall-"
"Will you remove your hand?"
"When it suits me," returns he; "not before."
Passionate indignation conquers her self-control. Rais-
ing her arm, she brings down her riding-whip, with swi4f
and unexpected violence, upon his cheek. The blow 'i
so severe that, for the moment, he loses his presence of
mind, and, swaying backward, lets the bridle go. Clarissa,
finding herself free, in another moment is out of his reach
and on her way to Sartoris.
As she reaches the gate, she meets James Scrope coming
out, and, drawing rein, looks at him strangely.
" Have you seen a ghost ? " asks he, slipping from his
saddle, and coming up to her. " Your face is like death."
"I have, the ghost of an old love, but, oh, how disfig-
ured ! Jim, I have seen Horace."
19



<pb n="290"/>
290            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
She hides her face with her hands. She remembers the
lat, scene with painful distinctness, and wonders if she
ha) bee  unwomanly, coarse, undeserving of pity. She
will tell him,-that is, Scrope,-and, if he condemns her,,
her cup will be indeed full.
Sir James-who, as a rule, is ti'e most amiable of men 
-is now dark with anger. 
"Branscombe-here ? " he says, indignantly.
"Yes. He had evidently heard-nothing. But   told
him; and-and then he said things he should not have
said; and he held my reins; and I forgot myself," says
poor Clarissa, with anguish in her eyes; "and I raised
my whip, and struck him across the face. Jim, if you say
I was wrong in doing this thing, you will kill me."
"Wrong!" says Scrope.- "Hanging would be too good 
for him. Oh, to think you should have been alone on' i
such an occasion as that!"
"But it was a hateful thing to do; wasn't it ?" says Miss
Peyton, faintly.
" Hateful? Why? I only wish you had laid his cheek
open," says Sir James, venomously, "But of course this.
poor little hand could not manage so much."  Stooping. §
involuntarily, he presses his lips to the hand that rests 
upon her knee.
"That wasn't the hand at all," says Miss Peyton, feel-:
ing inexpressibly consoled by his tone and manner. 
"Wasn't it?  Then I shall kiss the right one now,"
says Sir James, and caresses the other hand right warmly.
" I can't go on to Sartoris to-day," says Clarissa, in a
troubled tone, checking her horse in the middle of the
broad avenue.
"No; come home instead," says Scrope; and, turning,
they go slowly, and almost silently, back to Gowran.
*             #      #      * *  *         * * 
Horace, rousing himself after his encounter with Cla- -.
rissa, puts his hand impulsively to his face, the sting of the
blow still remaining. His illness has left him somewhat
prostrate and weak; so that he feels more intensely than
he otherwise would the pain that has arisen from the sud-.
den stroke.  A bitter execration rises to his lips; and ;i
then, feeling that all hope of reconciliation with Clarissa'
is at an end, he returns to Langham Station, and, with a -i



<pb n="291"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               291
mind full of evil thoughts and bitter revenge, goes back
to town.
Wild and disturbed in appearance, he breaks in upon
Ruth as she sits reading alone in the very room where she
had last seen Clarissa. As he enters, she utters a glad
little cry of welcome, and, springing to her feet, goes over
to him.
"So soon returned ?" she says, joyfully; and then some-
thing she sees in his face freezes within her all further ex-
pressions of pleasure: his eyes are dark, his whole face is
livid with rage.
"So you betrayed me ?" he says, pushing her away from
him. " Now, no lies! I saw Clarissa Peyton to-day, and
I know everything."
"You have been to Pullingham ? " exclaims she, with a
little gasp. " Horace, do not blame me. What was I to
do? When she came in here, and saw me-"
" Clarissa, here? "
"Yes, here. I was afraid to tell you of it before, you
seemed so weak, so fretful.  Last Tuesday week-the
day you had the sleeping-draught from Dr. Gregson-she
came; she entered the room, she came near you, she
touched you, she would "-faintly-" have kissed you.
But how could I bear that ? I stepped forward just in time
to prevent her lips from meeting yours."
"And so," he says, with slow vindictiveness, taking no
notice of her agony, "for the sake of. a mere bit of silly
sentimentality you spoiled every prospect I have in life."
"Horace, do not look at me like that," she entreats,
painfully. "Remember all that has passed. If for one
moment I went mad and forgot all, am I so much to be
blamed? You had been mine-altogether mine-for so
long that I had not strength in one short moment to relin- 
quish you. When she would have kissed you, it seemed to
me more than I could endure."
"Was it ? It is but a little part of what you will have to
endure for the future," he says, brutally. You have wil-
fully ruined me, and must take the consequences. My
marriage with Clarissa Peyton would have set me straight
with the world once more, and need not have altered our
relations with each other one iota."
" You would have been false to your wife ?" murmurs



<pb n="292"/>
292        IFAITH AND UNFAITH.
she, shrinking back from him. "Oh, no! that would have
been impossible!" 
I-e laughs ironically.
"I tell you candidly," he says, with reckless emphasis,-
"I should have been false to one or other of you, and it
certainly would not have been to you."
"You malign yourself," she says, looking at him with
steadfast love.
" Do I ?  What a fool you are!" he says, roughly.
"Well, by your own mad folly you have separated us ir-
retrievably. Blame yourself for this, not me. My affairs
are so hopelessly entangled that I must quit the country
without delay. Your own mad act has rolled an ocean
between us."
He turns, and goes towards the door: Wild with grief
and despair, she follows' him, and lays a detaining hand
upon his arm.
"Not like this, Horace !" she whispers, desperately.
"Do not leave me like this. Have pity. You shall not
go like this t Be merciful: you are my all! "
"Stand out of my way," he says, between his teeth: and'
then, as she still clings to him in her agony, he raises his
hand and deliberately strikes her.  Not violently, not
severely, but still with sufficient force to make her stagger
backwards and catch hold of a chair to keep her from fall-
ing,
He is gone: and she, stunned, quivering, half blind with
nervous horror, still stands by the chair and tries to realize
all that has passed. As she draws a deep breath, she
places her hand, with a spasmodic movement, to her left
side, as though to quell some darting pain that lies there. 
The action brings back consciousness, and that saddest of
all things, memory.
"He dtid not meman it," she whispers to herself, with
white set lips. " It was not a blow; it was only that he
wished to put me to one side, and I was in his way, no
doubt: I angered him by my persistency. Darling! How
could I think that he would hurt me ?"
Languid, heart-broken, she creeps to her bed, and, fling-
ing herself upon it, dressed as she is, sleeps heavily until
the morn, "diffusing round a trembling flood of light,"
wakes her to grief once more.



<pb n="293"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               293
CHAPTER XXXVI.
"Have mind that eild aye follows youth;
Death follows life with gaping mouth;
Sen erdly joy abidis never,
Work for the joy that lastis ever 
For other joy is all but vain,
And erdly joy returns in pain."--W. DUNBAR.
SOMETHING within her knows he will return. Yet all
the next day long she sits in terrible suspense, not being
certain of the end. Towards noon he comes, sullen, dis-
dainful, and dark with depression.
He sinks into a chair, looking tired and careworn.
"You have over-fatigued yourself ?" she says, gently,
going over to him and touching his hand lightly. .
" No. I have been to Pullingham again and back; that
is all."
"There again ?" she says. "And you saw- ?"
"Only Dorian. Don't trouble yourself about Clarissa,"
he says, with an unpleasant laugh: " that game is played
out. No, Dorian, alone, I went to see." He shades his
face with his hand, and then goes on: "There are few
like him in the world. In spite of all that has come and
gone, he received me kindly, and has given me what will
enable me to commence life afresh in a foreign land."
There is remorse and deep admiration in his tone.
But Ruth makes no reply: she cannot. Those last
words, "a foreign land," have struck like a dying, knell
upon her heart. She watches him in despairing silen-e,
as he walks restlessly up and down the room in the uncer-
tain twilight.
Presently he stops close to her.
"I suppose there is some orthodox way of breaking bad
news," he says, "but I never learned it. Ruth, your fa-
ther is dead."
The girl shrinks back, and puts her hand to her forehead
in a dazed, pitiful fashion.
"Not dead ! " she says, imploringly, as though her con-
trition could bring him back to life. "Not altogether
gone beyond recall. Sick, perhaps,-nay, dying,-but
not dead !"



<pb n="294"/>
294          FAITH AND UNFAITI.
"Yes, he is dead," says Horace, though more gently.
"He died a week ago."
A terrible silence falls upon the room.  Presently,
alarmed at her unnatural calm, he lays his hand upon her
shoulder to rouse her.
"There is no use in fretting over what cannot be re-
called," he says, quickly, though still in his gentler tone.
"And there are other things I must speak to you about to-
night. My remaining time in this country is short, and I
want you to understand the arrangements I have made for
your comfort before leaving you."
"You will leave me?" cries she, sharply. A dagger
seems to have reached and pierced her heart. Falling
upon her knees before him, she clasps him, and whispers,
in a voice that has grown feeble through the intensity of
her emotion, " Horace, do not forsake me. Think of all
the past, and do not let the end be separation. What can
I do? Where can I go ?-with no home, no aim in life !
Have pity ! My father is dead; my friends, too, are dead
to me. In all this wide miserable world I have only
you !"
"Only me ! " he echoes, with a short bitter laugh. " A
prize, surely. You don't know what folly you are talking.
I give you a chance of escape from me,-an honorable
chance, where a new home and new friends await you."
" I want no friends, no home." (She is still clinging to
his knees, with her white earnest face uplifted to his.)
"Let me be your slave,-anything; but do not part from
me. I cannot live without you now. It is only death you
offer me."
"Remember my temper," he says, warningly. "Only
last night I struck you. Think of that. I shall probably
strike you again. Be advised in time, and forsake me,
like all the others."
" You torture me," she says, still in the same low pant-
ing whisper. "You are my very heart,-my life. Take
me with you. Only let me see your face sometimes, and
hear your voice. I will not trouble you, or hinder you in
any way only let me be near you." She presses her pale
lips to his hand with desperate entreaty.
"Be it so," he says, after a moment's hesitation. "If
ever, in the days to come, you repent your bargain, blame



<pb n="295"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               295
yourself, not me. I have offered you liberty, and you
have rejected it. I shall leave this country in a week's
time; so be prepared. But before going, as you are so
determined to cast in your lot with mine, I shall marry
you."
She starts to her feet.
"Marry me ?" she says, faintly. "Make me your wife!
Oh, no ! you don't know what you are saying."
She trembles violently, and her head falls somewhat
heavily against his arm.
"It isn't worth a fainting fit," he says, hastily enough;
but his arm, as he places it round her, is strong and com-
passionate. "Can anything be more absurd than a
woman? :Sit down here, and try to be reasonable. You
must be quick with your preparations, as we start on
Tuesday. I will see about a special license, and we can
get the marriage ceremony over to-morrow. I know a fel-
low who will manage it all for me."
"You are quite sure you will never regret this step?"
she says, earnestly, even at this supremely happy moment
placing his happiness before her own.
" I don't suppose so. If it is any satisfaction to you to
know it," he says, with a shrug, " you are the only woman
I have ever loved, and probably the only one I ever shall
love."                                        >
A  smile-radiant, perfect-lights her face. Surely,
just then, the one moment of utter happiness, that they
tell us is all that is ever allowed to poor mortals, is hers.
It is broken by the clock of a neighboring church clang.
ing out the hour.
"So late!" says Horace, hurriedly. "I must go.
Until to-morrow, Ruth, good-by."
"Good-by !" She places her hands upon his shoulders,
and, throwing back her head, gazes long and earnestly
into his face, as though reading once again each line in
the features she loves with such devotion.  Before you
go," she says, solemnly, "call me what I shalf be so soon.
Say, 'Good-by, my wife ! "
"Good-by, my wife I " returns he, with more love in his
accents than she has heard for months.
She presses her lips passionately to his, and again, for
the last time, breathes the word "Farewell !"



<pb n="296"/>
296           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
His rapid footsteps descend the stairs. She listens to
them until they have ceased and all is still. Then she
goes to the window, and presses her forehead against the
cold pane, that she may once more see him as he crosses
the street. The lamps are all alight, and a lurid glare
from one falls full upon her as she stands leaning eagerly
,forward to catch the last glimpse of him she loves. 
Presently she sinks into a seat, always with her eyes
fixed upon the spot where she last has seen him, and sits
motionless, with her fingers twisted loosely in her lap; she
is so quiet that only the red gleam from the world without
'betrays the fact of her presence.
Once her lips part, and from them slowly, ecstatically,
come the words, " His wife."  Evidently her whole mind
is filled with this one thought alone. She thinks of him,
and him only,-of him who has so cruelly wronged her,
yet who, in his own way, has loved her, too.
The moments fly, and night. comes on apace, clothed
in her " golden dress, on which so many stars like gems
_ are strewed; " yet still she sits before the window silently.
-Sie-s-anguid, yet happy,-weak and spent by the
excitement of the past hour, yet strangely full of peace
Now and again she presses her hand with a gesture that is
almost convulsive to her side; yet whatever pain she
feels there is insufficient to drown the great gladness
that is overfilling her.
To-morrow,-nay, even now, it is to-day,-and it is
bringing her renewed hope, fresh life, restored honor!
He will be hers forever ! No other woman will have the
right to claim him. Whatever she may have to undergo
at his hands, at least he will be her own. And he has
loved her as he never loved another. Oh, what unspeak-
able bliss lies in this certainty! In another land, too, all
will be unknown. A new life may be begun in which the
old may be swallowed up and forgotten. There must be
hope in the good future.
"When we slip a little
Out of the way of virtue, are we lost ?
Is there no medicine called sweet mercy ?"
Only this -morning she had deemed herself miserable
beyond her fellows; now, who can compete with her in



<pb n="297"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.                 297
utter content ? In a few short hours she will be his wife !
Oh that her father could but-
Her father! Now, all at once, itxushes back upon her;
she is a little dazed, a good deal unsettled, but surely some
one had said that her-her father-was-dead!
The lamps in the street die out. The sickly winter
dawn comes over.the great city. The hush and calm still
linger; only now and then a dark phantom form issues
from a silent gateway, and hurries along the pavement,
as though fearful of the growing light.
Ruth has sunk upon her knees, and is doing fierce bat-
tle with the remorse that has come to kill her new-
born happiness. There is a terrible pain at her heart,
even apart from the mental anguish that is tearing it.
Her slight frame trembles beneath the double shock; a
long shivering sob breaks from her; she throws her arms
a little wildly across the couch before which she is kneel-
ing, and gradually her form sinks upon her arms. No
other sob comes to disturb the stillness. An awful silence
follows. Slowly the cold gray morning fills the chamber,
and the sun,-
"Eternal painter, now begins to rise,
And limn the heavens in vermilion dyes." 
But within deathly silence reigns. Has peace fallen upon
that quiet form ? Has gentle sleep come to her at last ?
Horace, ascending the stairs cautiously, before the
household is astir, opens the room where last he had seen
Ruth, and comes gently in. He would have passed on to
the inner chamber, thinking to rouse her to prepare in
haste for their early wedding, when the half-kneeling half-
crouching figure before the lounge/attracts his notice.
" Ruth," he says, very gently, fearful lest he shall frighten
her by too sudden a summons back to wakefulness; but
there is no reply. How can she have fallen asleep in such
an uncomfortable position ? "Ruth," he calls again, rather
louder, some vague fear sending the blood back to his heart;
but again only silence greets his voice. And again he
says, "Ruth !" this time with passionate terror in his tone;
but, alas! there is still no response. For the first time
she is deaf to his entreaty.
Catching her in his arms, he raises her from her kneel-



<pb n="298"/>
298            FAITH AND UNFAAITH.
ing posture, and, carrying her to the window, stares wildly
into her calm face,-the poor, sad, pretty face of her who
had endured so much, and borne so long, and loved so
faithfully.
She is dead !-quite dead! Already the limbs are stiff-
enirig, the hands are icy cold, the lips, that in life would
so gladly have returned kiss for kiss, are now silent and
motionless beneath the despairing caressds he lavishes upon
them in the vain hope of finding yet some warmth remaining.
But there is none. She is gone, past recall, past hear-
ing all expressions of remorseful tenderness. In the ter-
rible lonely dawn she had passed away, with no one near
to hold her dying hand, without a sigh or moan, leaving no
farewell word of love or forgiveness to the man who is now
straining her lifeless body to his heart, as though to make
one last final effort to bring her back to earth.
There is a happy smile upon her lips, her eyes are quite
closed, almost she seems as one that sleepeth. The aw-
ful majesty of death is upon her, and no voice of earth,
however anguished and imploring, can reach her ice-bound
heart. As the first faint touch of light that came to
usher in her wedding morn broke upon the earth, she had
died, and gone somewhere
"Above the smoke and stir of this dim spot
Which men call earth."
CHAPTER XXXVII.
"Was I deceived, or did a sable cloud
Turn forth her silver lining on the night ?"
MILTON.
THE two months that Dorian has given himself in which
to finish the business that, he said, had brought him home,
have almost come to an end. Already winter is passing
out of mind, and " Spring comes up this way."
The " checkered daffodil" and the soft plaintive prim-
ros  are bursting into bloom. The gentle rain comes
wit a-passing cloud, and sinks lovingly into the earth's
bosom and into the hearts of the opening buds.
The grass is springing; all the world is rich with fresh



<pb n="299"/>
FAITH AND UVFAITH.                  299
young life. The very snowdrops-pale blossoms, born of
bitter winds and sunless skies-have perished out of sight.
Ruth is lying in her grave, cold and forgotten save by 
two,-the man who has most wronged her, and the woman
who had most to forgive her. As yet, Clarissa cannot rise
out of the depression that fell upon her when Horace's
treachery was first made known to her. Her love had
seemed so good, so tender, it had so brightened all her life,
and had been so much a part of her existence, that it
seemed to carry to the grave with it all her youth and
gladness. However untrue this young love of her life had
been, still, while she believed in it, it had been beautiful
to her, and it is with bitterest grief she has laid it aside;
to her it had been a living thing, and even-as it fades
from her she cries to it aloud to stay, and feels her arms
empty in that it no longer fills them.
"But, oh, not yet, not yet
Would my lost soul forget
How beautiful he was while he did live,  . 
Or, when his eyes were dewy and lips wet,
What kisses, tenderer than all regret,
My love would give.
"Strew roses on his breast,-
He loved the roses best;
He never cared for lilies or for snow.
Let be this bitter end of his sweet quest;
Let be the pallid silence, that is rest,
And let all go I"
Mr. Winter's exquisite words come often to her; and yet,
when the first great pang is over, a sensation that may be
almost called relief raises her soul and restores her some-
what to her old self.
She isgraver-if possible, gentler, more tender-than in
the days before grief had touched her. And, though her
love has really died beyond- all reawakening, still the mem-
ory of what once had been has left its mark upon her.
To Sir James she-has never since mentioned the name
of the man in whom she had 6nce so firmly believed,
though oftentimes it has occurred to her that relief might
follow upon the bare askiig of a question that might
serve to make common the actual remembrance of him.
To-day, as Scrope comes up the lawn to meet her, as she
bends over the'" bright children of the sun," a sense of



<pb n="300"/>
300            FAZITH AND ULFAITE.T 
gadncess that he is coming fills her. She feels no nerv-
OUsness or weariness with him, only rest and peace, and
something that is deeper still, though yet vague and abso-
lutely unknown to her own heart.
She goes forward to meet him, a smile upon her lips, 
treading lightly on the young grass, that is emerald in hue,
-as the color of my own dear land,-and through which
"The meek daisies show
Their breasts of satin snow,
Bedecked with tiny stars of gold mid perfume sighs."
"You again ?" she says,: with a lovely smile. He was
iaere only yesterday.
"What an uncivil speech ! Do I come too often ?"  He
has her hand in his, and is holding it inquiringly, but it is
such a soft and kind inquiry. 
"No-: half often enough," she says, and hardly knows
why his face flushes at her words, being still ignorant of
the fact that he loves her with a love that passeth the love
of most.
"Well, you sha'n't have to complain of that any longer,"
he says, gayly. " Shall I take up my residence here ?"
"Do," says Miss Peyton, also in jest.
"I would much rather you took up yours at Scrope,"
he says, unthinkingly, and then he flushes again, and then
silence falls between them. 
Her foot is tapping the sward lightly, yet nervously.
Her eyes are on the " daisies pied." Presently, as though
some inner feeling compels her to it, she says,-" Why
do you never speak to me of-Horace ?"
"You forbade me," he says: "how could I disobey you ?
He is well, however, but, I think, not altogether happy.
In his last letter to me he still spoke remorsefully of
-her."   It is agony to him to say this, yet he does it brave-
ly, knowing it will be the wisest thing for the woman he
himself loves.
"Yes," she says, quite calmly. At this instant she
knows her love for Horace Branscombe is quite dead.
"Her death was terrible."
" Yet easy, I dare say. Disease of the heart, when it car-
ries one off, is seldom painful. Clarissa, this is the very first
time you have spoken of her, either."
"Is it?" She turns away from him, and, catching a



<pb n="301"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.               30X
branch, takes from it a leaf or two. " You have not spoken
to me," she says.
"Because, as I said, you forbade me. Don't you know
your word to me is law?"
"I don't think I know much," sas Miss Peyton, with a
sad little smile; but she lets her hand lie in his, and does
not turn away from him. " Horace is in Ceylon," she says
presently.
" Yes, and doing very well. Do you often think of him
now?"
"Very often. I am glad he is getting on successfully."
" Have you forgotten nothing, Clarissa? "
" I have forgotten a great deal. How could it be other-
wise? I have forgotten that I ever loved any one. It seems
to me now impossible that I could have felt all that I did
two months ago. Yet something lingers with me,-some-
thing I cannot explain'" She pauses, and looks idly down
upon her white hands, the fingers of which are twining and
intertwining nervously.
" Do you mean that you have ceased to think of Horace
in the light of a lover?" he asks, with an effort certainly,
yet with determination. He will hear the truth now or
never.
"What ! wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice ?"
she says, turning to him with some passion; and then her
anger fades, and her eyes fill with tears.
" If you can apply such a word to him, your' love must
b'e DinccCa t. A," -r. .j., ;n  a r-,rniiq tone. and. raising
one of her hands, he lays it upon his breast.
" I wish it had never been born," she says, with a sigh,
not looking at him.
"But is it dead? " persists he, eagerly.
"Quite. I buried it that day you took me-to his-
rooms: you remember ?"
" How could I forget? Clarissa, if you are unhappy, so
am I. Take pity upon me.'
"You unhappy ?" She lifts her eyes to his.
"Yes. All my life I have loved you. Is your heart
quite beyond my reach?" 
She makes him no answer.
"Without you I live but half a life," he goes on, entreat-
ingly. "Every hour is filled with thoughts of you. I have



<pb n="302"/>
302            FAITH AND UNFAITH.
no interests apart from you. Clarissa, if there is any hope
for me, speak; say something."
" Would not his memory be a shadow between us always ?"
whispers she, in trembling accents. " Forgiveness is with-
in our power, forgetfulness is beyond us ! Jim, is this thing
wise, that you are doing ? Have you thought of it ?"
"I have thought of it for more than a long year," says
Sir James. " I think all my life, unconsciously, I have loved
you."
"For so long ?" she says, softly; and then, " How faith-
ful you have been !"
"When change itself can give no more,
'Tis easy to be true,"
quotes he, tenderly; and then she goes nearer to him,-tears
in her eyes.
"You are too good for me," she says.
" Darling," says Scrope, and after that, somehow, it seems
but a little thing that his. arms should close around her,
and that her head should lie contentedly upon his shoulder.
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
"There is no life on earth but being in love I" 
BEN JONSON.
"Love framed with Mirth a gay fantastic round; 
Loose were her tresses seen, her zone unbound;
And he, amidst his frolic play,
As if he would the charming air repay,
Shook thousand odors from his dewy wing."
COLLINS.
IT is the afternoon of the same day, and Dorian, with a
keeper behind him, is trudging through the woods of Hythe,
two trusty setters at his heels. He cannot be said to be alto-
gether unhappy,, because he has had a real good day with his
gun, as his bagTan testify, and, be a man never so dis-
turbed by conflicting emotions, be he five fathoms deep in a
hopeless attachment, still he will tramp through his heather,
or ride to hounds, or smoke his favorite cigars, with the best,
and find, indeed, pleasure therein. For, truly,-
"Man's love is of man's life a thing apart;
'Tis woman's whole existence."
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~. 



<pb n="303"/>
PAITH AND UNiFAITH.               303
The sun is sinking to rest; the chill of a spring evening 
is in the air. Dismissing the man who holds his bag, he
sends him home to the house by a nearer route, and, light-
ing a fresh cigar, follows the path that leads through the
fragrant wood into the grounds of Sartoris. The breath
of the bluebells is already scenting the air; the ferns are
growing thick and strong. He has come to a turn, that is
all formed of rock, and is somewhat abrupt, because of the
sharp angle that belongs to it, over which hart's-tongues
and other graceful weeds fall lazily, when, at a little dis-
tance from him, he sees Georgie sitting on the fallen trunk
of a tree, her head leaning against an oak, her whole ex-
pression full of deep dejection.
As he comes nearer to her, he can see that she has been
crying, and that even now two tears are lying heavily upon
her cheeks.
A troubled expression crosses his face. She looks- so
childish, so helpless, with her hat upon the ground beside
her, and her hands lying listlessly upon her lap, and no one
near to comfort her or to kiss the melancholy from her
large mournful eyes.
As she hears him coming, she starts to her feet, and,
turning aside, hastily dries the tears upon her cheeks, lest
he shall mark her agitation. 
"What is the matter with you ?" asks he, with quick
but suppressed concern.
" Nothing," returns she, in a low tone.
" You can't be crying for nothing," says Dorian; " aid
even your very voice is full of tears ! Are you unhappy
about anything ?"
"What a question to ask me ! " says Mrs. Branscombe,
reproachfully; with a fresh irrepressible sob, that goes to
his heart. He shifts his gun uneasily from one shoulder
to the other, hardly knowing what to say. Is it his fault
that she is so miserable.? Must he blame himself because
she has found it impossible to love him ?
"I beg your pardon;', he says, in a low tone.  "Of
course I have no rightto ask you any questions."
" Yet I would answer you if I knew how," returns she,
in a voice as subdued as his own.
The evening is falling silently, yet swiftly, throwing "her



<pb n="304"/>
304           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
dusky veil o'er nature's face." A certain chill comes from
the hills and damps the twilight air.
" It is getting late," says Branscombe, gently. '( Will
you come home with me ? "
":Yes, I will go home," she says, with a little troubled
submissive sigh, and, turning, goes with him down the
narrow pathway that leads to the avenue.
Above them the branches struggle and wage a goblin
war with each other, helped by the night-wind, which even
now is rising with sullen purpose in its moan.
Dorian strides on silently, sad at heart, and very hope-
less. He is making a vigorous effort to crush down all
regretful memories, and is forcing himself to try and think
with gladness of the time, now fast approaching, when he
shall be once more parted from her who walks beside him
with bent head and quivering lips. His presence is a
grief to her. All these past weeks have proved this to him:
her lips have been devoid of smiles; her eyes have lost
their light, her voice its old gay ring. When he is gone,
she may, perhaps, recover some of the gayety that once
was hers. And, once gone, why should he ever return ?
And-
And then-then ! A little bare cold hand creeps into
the one of his that is hanging loosely by his side, and, nest-
ling in it, presses it with nervous warmth.
Dorian's heart beats madly. He hardly dares believe
it true that she should, of her own accord, have given her
hand to him; yet he holds it so closely in his own that his
clasp almost hurts her. They do not speak; they do not
turn even to look at each other, but go on their way, silent,
uncertain, but no longer apart. By that one tender touch
they have been united.
" You are going abroad again ?" she says, in a tone so
low that he can scarcely hear her.
"I was going," he says, and then their fingers meet again
and press each other gently.
-Coming to the stile that leads into the next path, he lays
down his gun, and, mounting the steps, holds out his hand
to help her to gain the top.
Then, springing down to the other side, he takes her in
his arms to bring her to the ground beside him.
But when his arms have closed round her he leaves them



<pb n="305"/>
FAITH AND UNFAITH.       ,      30
there, and draws her to his heart, and lays his cheek against
hers. With a little soft happy sob she lifts her arms and
laysthem round his neck; and then, he tells himself, there
is nothing more on earth to be wished for.
" My wife !-my darling !" he says, unsteadily.
The minutes pass; then she looks up at him with soft
speaking eyes. There are no tears upon her cheeks, but
her face is pale as moonlight, and on it is a new deep
meaning that Dorian has never seen there in all his life be-
fore,-a gentle light, as kind as death, and as soft as holy
love !
As she so stands, gazing solemnly into his face, with all
her heart in her eyes, Dorian stoops and lays his lips on
her. She colors a lovely trembling crimson, and then re-
turns the caress.
" You do love me at last?" he says. And then she,
says,-
" I do, with all my soul,"-in a tone not to be mistaken.
Afterwards, '" Are you happy now ? "
"Yes. How can I be otherwise ? For
'Thou with softest touch transfigurest
This toil-worn earth into a heaven of rest.'
How could you so far have misjudged me?" he says, re-
proachfully, referring to the old wound. "What had I
done to you, that you should believe me capable of such a
thing? "
"It was my one sin," whispers she, nervously. "Is it
too bad to be forgiven ? '
"II wonder what you could do, I wouldn't forgive," re-
plies he, tenderly, " now I know you love me."
" I think you needn't have thrown my poor glove out of
the window! " she says, with childish reproach. "That
was very unkind, I think."
" It was brutal," says Branscombe. " But I don't believe
you did love me then."
"Well, I did. You broke my heart that day. It will
take you all you know "-with an adorable smile-"to
mend it again."
"My own love," says Dorian, "what can I do ? I would
offer you mine in exchange, but, you see, you broke it
20



<pb n="306"/>
3o6          FAITH AND UNVAII7H.
many a month ago, so the bargain would do you no good.
Let us both make up our minds to heal each other's wounds,
and so make restitution."
" Sweet heart, I bid you be healed," says Georgie, lay-
ing her small hand, with a pretty touch of tenderest coquet-
ry, upon his breast. And then a second silence falls upon
them, that lasts even longer than the first. The moments
fly; the breezes grow stronger, and shake with petulant
force the waving boughs. The night is falling, and " weeps
perpetual dews, and saddens Nature's scene."
"Why do you not speak ? " says Georgie, after a little
bit, rubbing her cheek softly against his. , What is it that
you want ?"
"Nothing. Don't you know that' Silence is the per-
fectest herald of joy: I were but little happy, if I could
say hdw much '?"
" How true that is ! yet somehow, I always want to talk,"
says Mrs. Branscombe,-at which they both laugh.
"Come home," says Dorian: "it grows cold as charity,
and I'm getting desperately hungry besides. - Are you ?"
"I'm starving," says Georgie, genially. "There, now;
they say people never want to eat anything when they are
in love and when they are filled with joy. And I haven't
been hungry for weeks, until this very moment."
" Just shows what awful stuff some fellows will talk,"
says Mr. Branscombe, with an air of very superior con-
tempt. After which they go on their homeward journey
until they reach the shrubbery.
Here voices, coming to them from a side-path, attract
their notice.
"That is Clarissa," says Georgie: "I suppose she has
come out to find me. Let us wait for her here."
" And Scrope is with her. I wish she would make up
her mind to marry him," says Branscombe. "I am certain
they are devoted to each other, only they can't see it.
Want of brain, I suppose."
"They certainly are exceedingly foolish, both of them,"
says Georgie, emphatically.
The voices are drawing nearer; as their owners ap-
proach the corner that separates them from the Brans-
combes, Clarissa says, in a clear, audible tone,-
"I never in all my life knew two such silly people I"



<pb n="307"/>
FAITH AND UNFAIT1H.              307
"Good gracious !" says Branscombe, going up to her.
"What people?"     : 
"You two]! " says Clarissa, telling the truth out of sheer
fright.-
" You will be so kind as to explain yourself, Clarissa,"
says Dorian, with dignity.' I' Georgie and I have long ago
made up our minds that Solon when compared with us
was a very poor creature indeed."
"A perfect fool I" says Mrs. Branscombe, with convic-
tion.
The brightness of their tone, their whole manner, tell
Clarissa that some good and wonderful change has taken
place.
"Then why is Dorian going abroad, instead of staying
at home like other people? " she says, uncertainly, feeling
still puzzled.
"He isn't going anywhere: I have forbidden him!"
says Mrs. Bransconmbe, with saucy shyness. 
"Oh, Jim, they have made it up ! " says Miss Peyton,
making this vulgar remark with so much joy and feeling
in her voice as robs it of all its commonplaceness. She
turns to Scrope as she says this, her eyes large with de-
.light.-
"We have," says Georgie, sweetly. "Haven't we Do-
rian ?"  And then again slipping her hand into his, "He
is going to stay at home always for the future: aren't you,
Dorian ?"
" I am going to stay just wherever you are for the rest
of my life," says Dorian; and then Clarissa and James
know that everything has come all right.
" Then you will be at home for our wedding," says
Sc'rope, taking Clarissa's hand and turning to Branscombe.
Clarissa blushes very much, and Georgie, going up to
her, kisses her heartily"
"It is altogether quite too nice," says Mrs. Branscombe,
with tears in her eyes.
" If you don't look out, Scrope, she will kiss you too,"
says Dorian. " Look here, it is nearly six o'clock, and
dinner will be at seven. Come back, you two, and dine
with us."
" I should like to very much," says Clarissa, "as papa
is in town."
..i



<pb n="308"/>
308           FAITH AND UNFAITH.
"Well, then, come," says Georgie, tucking her arm
comfortably into hers, "and we'll send you home at
eleven."
"I hope you will send me home too," says Scrope,
meekly.
"Yes, by the other road," says Mrs. Branscombe, with a
small grimace. And then she presses Clarissa's arm
against her side, and tells her, without the slightest provo-
cation, that she is a " darling," and that everything is
quite, quite, quite TOO delicious! "
*      *      *      *      *      *      *
That evening, in the library, when Georgie and Dorian
are once more alone, Branscombe, turning to her, takes
her in his arms.
" You are quite happy ?" he asks, questioningly. " You
have no regrets now ?"
"Not one," very earnestly.  "But you, Dorian,"-she
slips an arm round his neck, and brings his face down
closer to her own, as though to read the expression of his
eyes more clearly,-" are you satisfied ? Think how un-
kind I was to you; and, after all,"-naively,-" I am
only pretty; there is really nothing in me. You have my
whole heart, of course, you know that; I am yours, indeed,
but then "-discontentedly-" what am I ? "
" I know: you are my own darling," says Branscombe,
very softly.
THE END.
.ii:                        ·



