<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
These images produced uniformly excellent text files, with the following exception:

Odd pages 9-121 (except 39) could not be processed by the OCR program. I could not detect anything wrong or different about these files, but despite everything I tried I could not get the program to process them.<pb n="10"/>
to  GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
bers of the busy household, though they could
not count on the trail, as shall be shown.
Before the twins were born, Tom Lockhart,
their father, his wonderful wife, the three
eldest children, and Raa, the wolf-dog, had
come over the great divide by the Yellow Head
Pass from Vancouver to Saskatchewan. They
had settled where Battle River comes down
from the foothills, and built a big log-house
on the slope among the woods.
Tom Lockhart was a thoroughly sound man.
He was " white " all through; but also he had
rather a " Hans-in-luck" temperament-that
is to say, he was inclined to try something new
that would be sure to make his fortune, instead
of sticking to the job on hand. He was an
engineer by training; but hearing rumours of
fortunes made by trapping, he threw up that
and took the trail to Battle River as beforesaid.
He did make a good deal of money with the
help of old Dick Hearne, a lonely squatter who
had joined up with the Lockharts, because of
the children chiefly. He built and improved
his log-house, cleared the slope down to the
river into something like a garden, banked up
a watercourse close to the house to make a
good supply-in fact, he made the place a
home; and the whole family had become hard-
bitten " old-timers "-" sour-doughs "-from the



<pb n="12"/>
12 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
till at last, six months before this story begins,
came a letter that startled the whole family
into thrills of joyful excitement.
He had won through. He had struck a " pay
streak" in the summer, and was coming back
with the "dust" as fast as he could travel.
It appeared that his wanderings had taken him
up within the Arctic Circle, and his plan was
to take the ice-trail, as soon as it would bear,
all the way: by the Mackenzie River to Great
Slave Lake, by the Slave River across the three
big lakes, Athabasca, Wollaston, and Deer Lake,
into the Missinnippi River, and so join up
with Battle River and the homeland, where he
hoped to be before Christmas-hundreds and
hundreds of miles on the ice-trail, perhaps
the quickest method of travel in the far north.
After that more than hopeful news came
nothing further. Nothing-no traveller, no
more letters I Christmas came and passed,
but the weeks brought only rumours, the ru-
mours that drift from mouth to mouth in the
wild lands, vague and with no apparent founda-
tion in fact. Not good in this case, for the
mysterious messages suggested that Tom Lock-
hart was dead; more, that he had died as far
north as Great Slave Lake at the end of Nov-
ember.
At first the family at the Log House refused



<pb n="14"/>
14 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
away on the free water with crashings and
splitting noises you could hear for miles.
When this going out of the ice happened on the
Yukon and Mackenzie Rivers, the great water-
ways, it was an amazing scene; but even on this
comparatively narrow river it was impressive.
The depth of the ice made it so.
Every one had been busy up at the Log House
till the dusk began to fall; there was always
a lot to do to keep the household machinery
running smooth. The big stove wanted so
much wood to feed it; there was bread to make
and cooking to do; also the everlasting curing
of pelts, especially as trapping was really over
now. The skins-the fur, rather-grew poor as
the winter ended. When you make your own
clothes and moccasins, your own candles and
wicks, everything except your ammunition,
you are bound to be busy I
An observer with nothing much to do but
watch the Lockhart family at work on this
particular evening, might have noticed that
Elspeth, alias "Peter," was trying to have
speech with her brother Jim without drawing
attention. She was a tall, slim girl, with a
brown face of the hawk type, not exactly
pretty-that was not the word-but very at-
tractive because of its look of keen cleverness,
the flash of white teeth, and hazel eyes set deep



<pb n="16"/>
i6 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
"Well, I can't explain here. It's very
weird-in fact, it's just about as rum as it
can be."
" Won't it do to-morrow-some other time,
Pete ? I'm awfully busy."
" Oh no, you're not," contradicted his sister
in the same urgent whisper. "It won't wait.
You'll jolly well understand when you hear.
Something might happen, and then you'd be
sick that you hadn't listened to me. Come
on."
Jim got up and laid aside the mink pelt.
" What's up ? " asked Peggy, who was busy
over the stove cooking. " Don't go far, Pete;
supper will soon be ready."
" I only want Jim to come down to the shore
for ten minutes," said the other girl. And
they went, Jim without enthusiasm.
Donald, busy with fishing lines and hooks,
looked after them as they passed out-looked
with a shrewd understanding in his hazel eyes;
then he did a significant thing. He made a
noiseless plunge after Raa, the wolf-dog, who
had risen from his place by the stove, threw
his arms round the dog's neck and dragged
him back and down on to the bearskin bed
where he had been lying. Peter glanced back
with an understanding look. Donald simply
rolled over with the dog, and engaged in a



<pb n="18"/>
i8  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
"All right; you will in a minute. Keep
down out of sight entirely, with your eye
skinned for the farthest bank, and I'll tell you.
It's an Indian." Jim made an impatient grunt.
" I know, you think an Indian is pretty common,
which is true, but this one's behaviour is not
particularly common. He's been over there
about three days-at least I saw him by chance
three days ago. He may have been watching
longer."
" Watching I"
"He's watching the house. The first time
I saw him the moon sort of nipped up suddenly
over the wood and showed him up. He cached
himself jolly soon, but I saw him, and I saw
his face. I think he's a Cree."
" Why ? " Against his will Jim was growing
interested. Peter saw it and went on encour-
aged.
"He's ugly like the Crees; sort of flatter
in the face, and eyes close together. Honestly,
Jim, he's not a nice-looking specimen, and I
can't think what he's up to. I've kept a pretty
keen look-out in the evenings just here as the
cover is thick. Now, if we wait till the moon
comes up the odds are that we both see him
again."
The girl spoke with studied coolness, but
it was plain she was keenly interested in this



<pb n="20"/>
2o GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
There was small need to give such an order
to Pete Lockhart. The brushwood swallowed
her lithe figure with hardly a crack or rustle
to testify she had disappeared. But hidden
though they were, both sister and brother were
watching the shadowy shape crossing the
cracked and oozing ice. He travelled on
snowshoes, light and silent, and went a zigzag
course, choosing the safest path, no doubt.
Presently he was close under the bank in
the black shade of the canoe cache. The two
in hiding knew he was taking off his snow-
shoes to climb, but he did it in silence, every
movement was veiled in caution-a mink could
not have been more quiet. Then he passed
up the steep, bush-covered shore, and just at
that moment the slip of moon, silvery and
young, drifted into the clear evening sky above
the woods, and showed the branches and boles
of the forest trees painted in Indian ink on
the snow. The man went like a wolf. When
he was clear of the broken bank he put on his
snowshoes again and disappeared, going up
and up, it seemed, towards the woods, not
to the house.
Just at that moment the noisy barking of a
dog broke the stately silence of the scene. It
was Jenny, the collie dog. Being a collie, she
barked a good deal, either for joy or warning.
(2.896)



<pb n="22"/>
22 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
"How do you mean ' other side ? ' He
stood still when he slipped his shoes off. I
saw him pretty clear afterwards, when he was
putting them on." Suddenly the boy laughed
with a low chuckle of amusement. "Just
fancy foxing a Cree ! It's not bad. I don't
believe a lynx could have heard us. Do you,
Pete ?"
" Well, we might be jolly well ashamed if we
couldn't move without breaking twigs after all
these years," said Peter with scorn. " But I
wasn't thinking about that. I wanted to know
if you saw something remarkable about that
man ? I saw it, and it was rather startling."
Jim asked " What ? " but he was still a little
inclined to discount Peter's discoveries.
" One of his ears was cut off."
The boy made an exclamation under his
breath. "I say ! But are you sure ? "
"Rather. It was the ear next to me that
wasn't there."
Jim suddenly gurgled with laughter. Peter
was serious and much in earnest. She went
on, " If it wasn't cut it had been shot off. He
had a scar all along his cheek, and his hair was
shaved off, or singed off, on that side of his
head. He must have had a jolly narrow squeak
for his life. I wonder what happened."
" Oh, some fight, or perhaps he blew himself



<pb n="24"/>
24 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
-the interpretation of the collie's noisy pro-
tests echoed from the heights in a perfect riot
of barking, the frenzied yelping made by a
team of husky dogs when they greet, or rather
insult, the dogs of any dwelling they are
coming to.
" Hullo I " ejaculated Jim.
" There !" said Peter. "Now, who on
earth "
They stood still and gazed up through the
trees to where the long, dark frontage of the
Log House showed on a natural terrace backed
by higher ground and the forest. The door
was open, and in the glow from lights within
the big living-room black shapes flitted, while
others showed up on the snow outside. Rough
voices of men cursing the dogs spoiled the
lovely quiet of the evening.
"I know," jerked out Peter, smacking her
mitt-covered hands together. "Jim, I know,
it's that chipmunk, Louis La Perle, you know,
squirrel-faced creature, and his pard-what's
his name ?-the pig I I hate him worse than
Louis    "
" You mean Fritz Neumann ? What's the
matter with him ? He's not so decent as
Sorenson and some of the others, but-"
" Dad hated him. Dick loathes him, though
he never says so. As for me, I hate and



<pb n="26"/>
CHAPTER II
NIGHT AT THE LOG HOUSE
T   HERE was a gurgle of quiet laughter as
Donald thrust an arm through Peter's.
"Did I make you jump ?" he demanded
hopefully.
"Jump !" echoed his sister with serene con-
tempt.
Jim said nothing; the idea was too absurd
to be considered.
Donald changed the subject. " I say, Pete,
the whole place is snowed under by those
brutes Neumann and La Perle. They've got
a load of pelts, sacks of them, and they're
going on to the settlement, and they're in the
worst rage you can imagine with each other
and everybody in the world. Why, Neumann
simply shouted at mother, and Louis chat-
tered-you know how he chatters !"
( I'll teach them to shout at mother," said
Jim with decision.
;  r 



<pb n="28"/>
28 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
No one minded that sort of thing in the back
of beyond. A guest was honoured as a rule,
but in this case the guests were unpopular.
Jenny had been kicked into a corner by Neu-
mann, and sat still, showing her teeth. Raa
was tied up in the girls' bedroom, which, with
the room occupied by their mother and little
Doll, took up one end of the long house. At
the other end were two more rooms-the boys'
bedroom and the bunk-room for a chance
guest. The whole centre was taken up by the
big living-room. It was a very attractive place.
The log building was airtight, with moss and
clay stuffed in the cracks, and stained brown
inside, while the heads and horns of forest
beasts ornamented the walls. Skins covered
the floor, and there were even a few precious
books on shelves. The table, benches, and
stools had been made by Lockhart and old
Hearne in the days before the mining fever
spoiled the master's interest in the Log
House.
Altogether it was a grand home and a glori-
ous life; you had only to look at the young
Lockharts to realize that. There they were,
all five in their leather tunics, leggings, and
moccasins, boys and girls alike. Even the
twins were tall and strong for their years;
indeed, the only smallish member of the



<pb n="30"/>
30  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD TRAIL
see it I His white teeth shone in a face burned
the colour of old leather.
"A-ha, Mees Pete," he cried, "your so
kind mother desire that we rest here. This
is mos' fine for the poor trapper, very well
for us; we have the vile luck, we delay so
many days that the bottom fall out of the
trail I There we are-no river, no'sing to help
the travel, and snow soft as a bog."
" What ?" Jim said, " land travel, and only 
five dogs to the team ? " He would have
thought the ice was safe enough up till the
last few days. Then he asked the route they'd
taken; but La Perle plunged in among the
dogs again with excited expostulations.
"Here you, Kloosh, always you are t'eef
and steal the meat. Gif it to him, you, Bob,
pay heem," and then from the midst of the
scuffling riot he was heard repeating that " the
river trail it is no more safe, the bottom has
fall out of it; the ice is mos' rotten."
Meanwhile Kloosh and Bob leaped upon
one another, and the others joined battle again
out of sympathy; it was the usual procedure
with team dogs, of course, noise and fighting.
Meanwhile Neumann was sitting near the
stove watching the serving of supper: fried
deer meat, bacon and beans, big flat cakes of
home-made bread, pumpkin pie-for they grew



<pb n="32"/>
32 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
when you came to think of it, as Peter pointed
out afterwards: beyond asking if Tom Lock-
hart was back home again, he never referred
to the master of the Log House, or to the
rumours of his illness and death. And yet
he must have heard, and was likely to have
known more than most men, as his grounds
lay around the Great Slave country; besides,
it would have been so natural to ask.
At the same time the whole Lockhart family
was glad he did not. It would have seemed
desecration to discuss " Dad " with this stodgy,
ill-conditioned person.
So the meal came to its close, and then the
men smoked while the work of clearing away
went on. It was then that a funny little inci-
dent occurred which might have had signifi-
cance-Donald and Peter vowed it had, as
shall be told.
After supper the boy strolled off to the end
of the big room to sympathize with Jenny, the
collie dog, who remained in her corner doing
a " hate " of the most concentrated vigour, but
afraid perhaps to risk more kicks.  Having
conferred with her for some minutes in an
undertone, his eyes were attracted to the trap-
pers' guns set up against the wall in the corner
by the door into the bunk-room. Instantly he
went over to investigate, and had been engaged
briL. ..              . 



<pb n="34"/>
34 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
members of the family had disappeared. Mrs.
Lockhart announced that breakfast would be
ready before dawn, which is the usual time for
striking camp on the trail; then she also de-
parted, having done her duty to the utmost.
The first thing Peter did was to administer
comfort to Raa, the wolf-dog, who had spent
the evening in the girls' bedroom.  It might
be as well to explain here the meaning of
"Raa," and his characteristics in general.
There was quite a quarter strain of wolf in
him, and the rest was dog of the Newfound-
land breed more than any other. He was
brindled grey and yellow, with a bushy tail
that drooped wolf fashion. Tom Lockhart
had bought him in his very young days from
a trapper who had come down through the
lakes from the Mackenzie, and had used him
as a team dog. He had been very roughly
treated-" broken in," as they called it-with
a club, which means terribly savage beatings;
but once he learned that his new master was
a friend, and used no club, his affection for
him and the children developed into a wonder
of rooted devotion, unswerving, dominant. It
was Tom Lockhart who called him " Raa,"
giving him a new and happier life, though the
name actually was drawn from the old life.
In this wise.
uI ;-  -. - · - -     * 1                                   i



<pb n="36"/>
36 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
her arms round his shaggy neck. Then she
explained to him that he hadn't missed any
treat, because the men who had come were
"pigs." After that she offered an excellent
supper of thawed deer meat, with a mess of
bran and tallow as an extra. Raa ate it all,
licked her hand for thanks, and stood listening,
while his green eyes looked from Peter to
Peggy and back to Peter. There was a light
behind the green like a wolf's eye; moreover,
Raa had a blood-red spot within the inner
corner of both eyes; only dogs with the real
strain of the Wild in them have that.
The two sisters did not talk much, because
the partition of logs between their room and
their mother's was hardly sound-proof. For
that reason also Peter did not tell Peg about
the watching Indian; it seemed better to leave
the curious episode till they could discuss it
freely in the open. After all, Peter thought,
as she rolled herself up in her blankets, they
hadn't got to the end of it, probably; she, for
one, firmly believing that the Log House was
his object, though whether for good or ill re-
mained to be seen.
Peggy, who had nothing particular on her
mind, went to sleep at once. She had got to
be up before dawn to speed these guests on
their way to the settlement, and, therefore, she
i
(i_.         -                                 A .



<pb n="38"/>
38 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
ings. Close against the glass, she looked out
on to the white world of thawing snow. The
moon had sunk beyond the woods. Had it
not been for the pale light from the snow it
would have been a dark night, for the stars
were not big and clear as they are in frost.
But Peter looked in vain for anything un-
usual. The forest came down fairly close to
the back of the house, giving shelter from the
winter storms; shadows of pine, spruce, and
cedar covered the white ground with black
patterns, and she saw the creatures of the
wood skip across from one shelter to another;
rabbits watchful of foxes; once a fisher-cat,
lithe and swift-the girl made a mental note
of that as a good pelt, though the season was
practically passed for the best fur.
While she was watching the fisher-cat she
was startled into surprise and keen attention.
Crossing the shadows, stealthy and clever as
the hunting fisher, was the figure of a man
going on snowshoes. He was making in the
direction of the forest above the house, and
from his course would seem to have come round
from the front, unless he had climbed the slope
right from the river shores. Peter could not
see him well enough to be sure of details, in
spite of her splendid sight and trained instinct,
but she believed he was an Indian wrapped in
ir. . . · 



<pb n="39"/>
NIGHT AT THE LOG         HOUSE    39
his blanket, and something in his movement
carried her mind back to the Cree without an
ear who had crossed the river.
" So that was why you snarled, old boy,"
she whispered to Raa. " Well, he's gone, and
why on earth he's wandering round this
house    "
Pegtop sat up in her bunk and asked in a
matter-of-fact voice: "What are you talking
about ? Why don't you go to sleep ? "
" Because my natural instincts woke me up;
and while I was wondering what old Raa was
warning about, I happened to see a man going
up towards the forest."
"Old Dick ? " questioned Peggy. They
spoke in whispers.
"Dick I Oh no, an Indian. Jim and I
saw him on the shore this afternoon-even-
ing rather."
" What sort of Indian ?"
" A Cree, I'm pretty sure, and he-"
" There are lots of wood Crees about, espe-
cially now," suggested Peggy; "every trapper
who can collects at the settlement; the Com-
pany people make it lively for them."
Peter waved aside these remarks as entirely
beside the point. She curled herself up cross-
legged on her bunk, and, bending forward,
impressively told her sister of the watch kept



<pb n="40"/>
40 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
by that particular Indian from the opposite
bank of the river; of the concealment of her-
self and Jim by the canoe cache, and the pass-
ing of the man so close that she made special
note of his maimed ear.
Peggy did not scoff. She took in every
word, and considered the matter in silence.
After a minute she said, " What you say about
his wounded ear is the most important part,
Pete, because we all know how persistent the
Indians are. We needn't discuss it; we know
that they never forget an injury, and the decent
ones never forget a kindness. Seems to me
the whole thing points to revenge. He's hunt-
ing some one who shot him."
" Narrow squeak," murmured Peter thought-
fully. " Why, Peg, the bullet must have torn
his ear off and shaved his hair right--"
"Oh no, it doesn't follow," came from
Peggy in her steady, literal way of speaking.
"He may have had his ear destroyed in a
dozen ways, and then cut the hair off to help
the place to mend. Some one wounded him,
poor wretch, of course, by a shot, a cut, or
a blow-and I wouldn't mind betting he's
after the person who did it. He'll never rest
till he pays out the man; but that makes it
so odd his coming here- here, of all places !
What have we done "
*- rs                                                        ?



<pb n="42"/>
CHAPTER III
NOT ON YOUR LIFE, SIR "
OR many minutes the dreadful rending
shrieks continued. When they died down
into moans and silence the whole party was
gathered round the front door, outside and in.
Outside, Jim, old Hearne, and the trappers
were bending over the bodies of two dead husky
dogs, and a third still struggling weakly. Two,
apparently unhurt, yet cowered in terror, and
howled for sympathy.
Neumann was beside himself. He and La
Perle wrangled noisily, while old Hearne gave
a hot gruel of tallow and bran to the sick dog,
who seemed likely to recover. When Mrs.
Lockhart, looking as always quiet and capable,
showed her little figure in the doorway, Neu-
mann was drawing Jim into the altercation by
fairly broad hints that the deer meat given to
his dogs the evening before must have been
poisoned.
42
i                     ,      .              A 



<pb n="44"/>
44 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
but we'll admit he's a good dog, and would
make a power of difference in the team. Hun-
dred and fifty is about what you give for a
sled dog in good condition, so I can't say
better than double it, can I ? Come, is that
a deal ? "
At the sound of his loud voice Peter and
Donald drew within the door, and Pegtop
ceased her labours, opening grey-blue eyes in
startled indignation. There was a breathless
pause in the air. Neumann was too thick-
skinned to feel it, but La Perle looked round
upon the Lockhart family and shrugged ex-
pressive shoulders.
"It is mos' bad luck for us," he said plain-
tively. " Come, then, you will sell your dog
Raa, is it not ? He is one ver' beeg fine husky,
but he is old. He will die soon. You bury
heem, and what of it ? No'sing. If you sell
we gif three hundred, four hundred dollars.
Eh, Neumann? It is great matter to us, and
four hundred dollars to Mis' Lockhart."
"Cheek " ejaculated Peter, drawing a hiss-
ing breath.
Jim answered for the family. "Not on your
life, sir. We're sorry for your misfortune, and
we'd do what we could. But we shouldn't sell
old Raa, not if we hadn't a cent in the world.
Should we, mother ?"
^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 



<pb n="46"/>
46 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
Lockhart's answer to my offer; it's firm at
four hundred dollars."
" What's four hundred dollars ? " said Peter,
loud enough to be heard, her accent scornful.
Mrs. Lockhart turned from the table on
which she had set a great dish of bacon. " A
good deal, my dear." The tone was dry.
" All the same, much or little is nothing to
the point either way. Raa is Dad's dog, and
he's an old friend. I wouldn't sell him for
eight hundred, no, nor eighteen hundred, for
that matter. Money's not everything. There
now, breakfast's all ready. You'll please to
sit down, Mr. Neumann."
Mr. Neumann sat down accordingly, in the
worst of tempers to judge by his looks and
undertone mutters. La Perle glanced at him
in a deprecating fashion; for, though something
of a chipmunk and a good deal of a weasel
too, perhaps, he yet was good-natured in his
own way, and preferred to be friendly.
The meal was almost a silent one, and soon
after dawn the party pulled out; one man
breaking trail ahead, the three weakened dogs
pulling the heavy sled, and the other man at
the gee-pole-that is to say, driving. Had the
dogs been at their best the team would hardly
have been equal to the load.
"Good riddance of bad rubbish," remarked



<pb n="48"/>
48 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
from the trees overhead. She had wanted to
make some discovery leading to better know-
ledge, but the conditions were baffling. Rais-
ing herself from a stooping position over a
snapped twig, Peter found Donald standing by,
watching. The two looked at each other.
" I came after you because I wanted to tell
you something," began the boy. "But what
are you looking for, Pete ? "
"Gold watch I happened to drop a few
days ago," retorted his sister with chill calm.
Donald flushed. "Oh, well, don't tell if
you'd rather not. I wasn't spying-honestly.
Something awfully queer is on my mind, and
I thought I'd tell you first. No one else
knows."
" All right; go ahead," requested Peter.
"It never rains but it pours; seems to me,
there's a regular crush of things happening
-only nothing leads anywhere, so far as I
can discover." She was thinking of the Indian.
"What I'm going to tell you mightn't ex-
actly lead anywhere. I don't know, though-"
Donald checked speech, and stood staring at
the ground with unseeing eyes. Peter was just
about to rouse him by a brisk reminder that
he'd meant to say something, when the boy
said, " I say, Pete, Dad never did have a little
Winchester rifle, one of the new kind, did he ? "



<pb n="50"/>
J
50 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
dragged it out of my hand. The thing is, why
was he in such a temper ? "
"Oh, well, he was in a temper all along,"
said Peter contemptuously. " He's got a brute
of a temper-that's one reason why I hate
him. He'd have snatched anything out of
your hand-anything that was his, I mean.
All the same it was queer."  She paused,
thinking over the matter, then added, " Of
course, he may have bought the little rifle
from Dad, some time, or perhaps another man
bought it and passed it on."
But Donald had thought out these explana-
tions. He had been thinking ever since, and
sifting out probabilities.
"If that was so he would have shown us the
gun and said so, when we were talking about
Dad, too-or he was. You couldn't possibly
have missed seeing the letters, Pete; they
absolutely hit you in the eye."
Peter shook her head thoughtfully. " I don't
know, but I do allow it's queer." She spoke
low as Jim came up to them.
He looked preoccupied, and seemed in a
hurry. " Where's Raa? "   he asked.  "I
thought you'd got him, Pete."
"I haven't seen him."
"Not seen him since when ?"
Peter considered. " He was in our room
iL_--          - I



<pb n="52"/>
52 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
"Of course, he poisoned old Neumann's
dogs," decided Donald in a manner that allowed
of no other opinion. " Of course he did. It
stares you in the face. I expect Neumann
did him down somehow, and the Cree paid
him out in return by killing his huskies."
Donald was well satisfied with his own
assumption, but Jim made no answer. It was
not often that he gave way to gloom, but in
the present instance he felt a strong instinct
that Raa had been stolen by the trappers; and,
sooner than admit this or allow the dog to be
recovered, they would shoot him and bury the
body out of sight.
Neither he nor Peter said much as they
all went back   to dinner.   Raa had not
turned up, and silence oppressed the whole
party.
"I believe these men brought us ill-luck,"
exclaimed Peter worriedly.
"Well, naturally, if they stole Raa," said
Peggy in her rather sedate voice. " But you
can't call that luck; it's just a robbery."
"We must hope," urged Mrs. Lockhart.
"After all, there's no time passed, and one
never knows with dogs. Raa is very clever.
Let's wait a bit. Never, never despair about
things; it doesn't pay, my dears."
Each one of the five gathered courage and
.>



<pb n="54"/>
54  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
"Why not ? "
"Oh well, I'm sure he didn't. He killed
Neumann's dogs because he hated Neumann,
but why should he kill Raa ? "
"You don't know if he's killed Raa. I
thought he might have stolen him, as fine dogs
are so valuable on the trail. Anyway, I can't
see how you can be positive, Pete. You don't
know more than we do." So said Peggy.
Before Peter could enter upon " reasons,"
which usually had small foundations and yet
as often as not proved true, old Dick Hearne
emerged from the wood carrying a sack on his
shoulder. He was making for the Log House.
"You've cleared the traps, Dick ?" said
Peggy, looking at the sack.
The old man nodded. He was always
economical of words.
" Oh then we needn't," added Peter. " Never
mind, Peg; let's go on and hunt for the bear."
" Don't you get messin' around with that
there b'ar," ordered old Dick, turning back
from his journey as he heard her speak.
" Why not ? Bears don't hurt-except griz-
zlies, and we've none of them hereabouts. You
know our brown bears are about as dangerous
as chickens."
"You never know with a b'ar when she's
out of winter sleep with a cub. Don't you



<pb n="56"/>
56 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
"Do you think that Cree did it ?" added
Peter.
Dick made answer in rather a cryptic way.
"Wal, there's times when folkses comes to
their deservin's, though not so often as a body
might wish."
"But dogs, Dick," urged Peggy. "What
had they done, poor creatures ? "
" That's so. Bad luck in them huskies to
get a bad master." And having so spoken,
old Dick went towards the homestead, walking
his own pace in his own way-a way that
caused the young Lockharts to say that he
wouldn't hurry if a bull moose chased him,
and he wouldn't stop if he broke his leg!
There is no doubt that Dick Hearne was a
very dependable person.
"He doesn't like Neumann," announced
Peggy.
Peter answered, " Nobody could," with de-
cision.
After that the two sisters dismissed the
trappers from their minds, and sped away into
the woods in search of Madam Bear. A mile
or two from home, where the slopes began to
roughen into steeps and the woods had taken
on all the grandeur and mystery of the wild
forest, the girls came suddenly upon what
they sought, but in the least expected way.
*^



<pb n="58"/>
CHAPTER IV
GIJIK, THE CEDAR
T   HE futile efforts of the hungry bear, and
the angry face of the chipmunk popping
in and out of his doorways, were both ridicu-
lous; but there was another touch to the picture
that made Peter cry out as she saw it.
"Oh, Pegtop, look ! Did you ever see such
a perfect love ! "
Peggy glanced aside from her observation of
the tree and saw what attracted her sister. An
extremely small baby bear, that looked as
though it were dressed in blackish wool-
rather like a big toy, indeed-was sitting up
on its haunches watching the manoeuvres of
the squirrel while it whimpered with eagerness.
Something in its figure and attitude went
straight to Peter's heart.
" Oh, Peg, we really must have it. Do look
at its face.  We could bring it up, and it
would run about the house quite tame."
68
I'l  .  , 



<pb n="60"/>
60  GIRLS ON THE GOL12        TRAIL
try to dodge. They were both as fleet of foot
as girls of their type could he, and they were
wearing snowshoes, also the route was down-
hill-all to their advantage.
" Look out for snags, Pegtop," called Peter.
"Beware of catching our toes " And off
they went, sweeping over the white ground.
In a minute Peggy answered with, "Let's
keep apart; it will puzzle her."
It was a good idea, the angry bear being
inclined to waver between the two flying
figures that rushed downhill through the woods
ahead of her. She was determined to smash
one of them, but which ?
Then Peter looked back to see if they were
gaining, and in the instant tripped over a
half-buried branch and was flung headlong.
Peggy checked on a sweeping curve and came
back. She was cool as the snow, and for the
matter of that so was Peter, though it's not the
easiest thing to jump up on to your feet when
you are wearing snowshoes.
The bear checked and reared herself up-
right, a horrible sight, with her mouth open.
There was no time to think or realize that
the worst seemed certain, when there came a
shattering report of fire-arms, and the bear, hit
in the face and open mouth, gave a sort of
choking grunt and rolled over headlong.



<pb n="62"/>
62  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD       TRAIL
flight, though, in a way, it had also impeded
them-and the bear. Now it might con-
ceivably hide the rescuer, but then why should
he hide if it was old Hearne ?
Peter suddenly stood upright and stared at
her sister, hazel eyes very wide open. " Peg-
top, do you think it's that Cree ? It can't be
Neumann. Perhaps the Indian is hanging
around still. 'Tisn't often they'll kill Makwa,*
is it? They worship bears, don't they, or
think they are spirits ? "
"Think they are spirits," agreed Peggy.
"I believe they say all sorts of fine things to
them before they shoot them ! Look here, Pete,
didn't you think the noise of that shot sounded
like one of the guns Indians buy at the settle-
ments from the traders ? Not rifles; aren't
they muzzle-loaders-old-fashioned things ? "
" Sure thing, it's the Cree," Peter nodded.
"Well, he can have the old bear for all we care
-not much to eat, and the hide is awful; but
we'd better go back and get that poor baby.
Come on, Pegtop. We can't let it starve."
As a result the two of them arrived at the
Log House some time later, carrying the baby
bear between them. It made no objection,
though it whimpered for its mother at moments
and as soon as it began to feel hungry. There
* The bear.
"V9,,



<pb n="64"/>
64 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
had curled himself into a ball on the big bear-
skin by the stove, sharing very amicably with
Jenny, silence again dropped on the family like
a heavy curtain. Even Donald was speechless.
Dick Hearne was in his own shack. He always
kept that to himself, though sometimes he
brought his work-he was never idle-to the
Log House.
The night had fallen unusually dark, because
mist and clouds obscured the young moon.
There was the muggy damp of thaw in the
air, and even inside the house the dwellers
could hear a soft trickle and patter of water
dropping. No one ever sat up late. You
don't, if you make your own candles, probably.
Besides, the day starts with light and all are
tired, strong as they grow to be.
Just as the general move was made, and a
final stoking of the stove begun, the collie
leaped to her feet with a perfect clatter of
barking. Jenny never did her warnings by
halves; she shouted first, and thought after-
wards. As they all checked, just looking at
one another with questioning eyes, there was
a knock at the door-not a bold knock, but a
tapping that seemed rather furtive to ex-
pectant ears.
Mrs. Lockhart looked at Jim, and he went
forward at once, sliding along the heavy
hi .                                                .~~~~



<pb n="66"/>
66 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
room, and in those seconds his deep-set,
intensely black eyes had taken in every detail.
One could see that in the shifting flash of the
glances. Yet all the while his face remained
inscrutably blank of any expression but dignity.
It was a very fine face as Indians go, now that
the ancient racial features are giving way to
modern conditions and blood mixings. Very
aquiline, splendid nose and strong chin, but a
grim  mouth, eyes set rather close together,
and the forehead receding from   the jutting
brows.
He did not smile, of course, but something
in his intensely controlled manner suggested
a friendly feeling. He repeated " Bo' jou'"
as his quick glance came back to Mrs. Lock-
hart, after taking in the girls, Donald, the big
shadowy room, even the bear cub.
" Bo' jou', my brother is welcome," said Jim
with sedate kindliness. " Is it a message, or
perhaps there is no tea or tobacco in the chief's
lodge ? Our hearts are very good towards our
brothers of the woods and lakes."
"There is plenty of tea and deer-meat,
Chief, if you will rest and eat," said Mrs.
Lockhart, standing upright and somehow con-
triving to look quite tall, though she was not
actually so. It was her manner and presence,
and of course the force of character behind it.
, g~~~j,~



<pb n="68"/>
68 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
indicating space, he went on with a flash in
his black eyes. " The Cedar is great amongst
his people. His district is wide, his traps are
never empty, and his pelts are packed in heaps.
Mitawawa, his squaw, is clever to make them
soft. My white brother has a good heart to
Gijik and Mitawawa; when the child is sick
he finds good medicine for him, so that the
little one plays again and is happy. He can
make well the child of Gijik, but he cannot
make himself well. He stays in the shack that
he may grow strong to take the trail, but he
is more sick. Then he digs in the creek on
Crooked River, where the dead pine tree stands
above the rock that is like a bear in shape,
and there he puts away the gold that he has
found on the Mackenzie many moons before,
because he knows that he cannot take the long
trail yet, and he is afraid of the man with a
bad heart who knows the gold is in the shack.
" Many moons go by, and my white brother
keeps always among the skins and blanket.
Gijik and Mitawawa bring meat for him, and
he is warm. Then he gives his tobacco and
his dogs to the Cedar, because of the meat
and wood. He cannot drive out the Evil
Spirit, but he is content when the true word
is given, the promise of Gijik. When he knows
the time is short, he writes words upon a paper
*i @:.



<pb n="70"/>
70 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
child there was a curious softening of the
hawk-like, fierce face.
Then she turned and went away, giving a
quick injunction to Jim as she passed him.
It was difficult to know what to do in the
way of reward, what to offer or what to say
exactly. When you consider that the man had
come about eight hundred miles-as the crow
flies; much more when you take the river
windings-in fulfilment of a promise to a sick
and dying white man whom he did not know,
because that man had treated him well, it was
not easy to express the immense admiration
they all felt for this serious, dignified giant.
Indians they had seen of many tribes and types,
but not one so far to compare with Gijik, the
Cedar, who appeared to be a survival of what
the best type of Ojibway would have been in
the days when Indians owned the northern
forests and the wide, white plains of the drear
Barrens."
The young Lockharts offered him food. He
declined with a polite gesture. Then Peggy,
seized with an inspiration, went to her special
box, a wooden chest in which her private
treasures were stored, and brought out a long
necklace of pink carnelian beads that had been
sent to her by relatives in Scotland years ago.
It was a greatly valued ornament; but noth-
,:,9.
.,.                        -              A^



<pb n="72"/>
/
72 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
She put out her hand and touched his gun.
"My brother is a fine hunter," she said.
"He killed the bear, eh ? "
Then did a flush of satisfaction darken the
brown   skin. "The young gazelle was in
danger," he said. " Makwa is very fierce
when her cub is young; also she is fleet of foot.
It was well that Gijik was near at hand."
Dolly appeared at this moment, full of en-
thusiasm, and thrust upon the guest a woolly
creature that might have been intended for
a dog, a lamb, or a cat. It had little wheels
in its toes to run on, a tiny bell round its neck,
and a hoarse squeak in its ribs. It was some-
what the worse for wear, but unbroken. To-
gether with this interesting animal she offered
a diminutive tea-set in a little cardboard box-
cups, saucers, teapot-all of some white metal
that shone polished.
"Please give them to your little child,
Chief," urged Dolly, her round face flushed
and her yellow curls in a tumbled mop. She
was certainly ten years old, but, being small
and the youngest of the family, had not yet
attained grown-up manners !
It was plain that these things struck aston-
ishment into the heart of the Cedar.
" How," he said, as he took the animal ging-
erly, and gazed at it. Then he smiled, making
,,1                     1



<pb n="74"/>
~:             M.J
CHAPTER V
PETER'S HEART'S DESIRE
ELARLY twenty-four hours passed before
he young ones saw the letter brought
by Gijik. The following day, after supper,
their mother told them what was in it, and
the elder three read the weak, scrawled lines.
It was written in pencil, and obviously at
different times, because it was disconnected
and often the sickness of the writer made him
imagine he had told things that were left out,
or unexplained. He dwelt on the kindness of
the trapper, Gijik, and his squaw; mentioned
the illness of the child; then he spoke of his
luck in hitting a vein of dust on the Mackenzie
River; said he was so eager to get home that
he sold his claim after getting " enough," but
never told how much the " enough " had been.
He'd got his lungs frosted, he said, in a terrible
cold spell, and felt bad; so he bought a dog
team and hurried, taking the route across the
7'
be       r       t.             <~~~~-



<pb n="76"/>
76  GIRLS ON     THE   GOLD    TRAIL
no doubt-came a warning renewed against
some one whose name was left out. And that
was all. Just odd scraps of paper all shapes
and sizes.
"I think some of it must have been mislaid,"
said Peggy gently. "I'm sure there was more
about this enemy before, then the bit of paper
was lost, because he says ' as I told you,' and
he doesn't tell. Besides, the words don't
seem to continue properly."
Jim took the pieces, and agreed. "Wish
we knew the name," he said.
"Wonder if it was Neumann ?" Peter
fired off one of her guesses.
"That's rubbish. Neumann didn't know
anything about him," retorted Jim with decision.
" How do we know that ? " hotly from Peter.
" Don't argue," urged Peggy quickly. " We
shall know some day, I expect. Anyway, let's
thank God for that Indian."
Suddenly Mrs. Lockhart said, " If I'd known
last night I would have given that man any-
thing I possessed, and obliged him to stay and
tell me everything; but it was so long before
I could read it well enough to understand, and
then he was gone. Jim, we must see him
again somehow, and the wife too. There, I'll
go to bed, children. We will talk more to-
morrow."
-A



<pb n="78"/>
78 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
no grass to sprout under his moccasins. Dunno
when he came in-before dawn, like enough,
and slep' in the day. Well, he was a right
smart buck."
It was not often that Dick would admit
approval of an Indian, so this was praise. At
the same time it was all mysterious. Was he
connected with the Cree ? What did he know
about the poisoning of the dogs ? Indeed, was
he the person who did it ? And what about
Raa ?
Day after day went by, and the dog did not
come back. Miserably the children decided
that he must be dead-poisoned, perhaps, like
Neumann's huskies, by one or other of those
two mysterious Indian visitors.
Meanwhile, though they all talked about
Raa, about the thaw and the breaking up of the
river, with all the many happenings of their
daily life, one idea only held the first place-
with the three elder children certainly, probably
in Mrs. Lockhart's mind too. You could not
get away from the immense importance of the
treasure-that gold dust-and of the journey
to get it. The first and most obvious fact was
this, that it must be fetched, and there was no
one to fetch it but the Lockharts themselves.
For days no one referred to the matter, though
they were all thinking of it. Then Peggy,
k\ ·e 



<pb n="80"/>
80 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
" What about Dick Hearne ? " asked Peter
sharply. 
" He's an old man; he's very slow. Once 
we get up there among the lakes we may be 
months-years-before we can get back with
the gold. What about mother then ?"
Pegtop's grey-blue eyes were intense and
grave in their gaze. Peter made a gesture of
almost passionate annoyance.
"You are always the same-ice, freezing
every little river of adventure. I believe you'd
like to do just chores * every hour of your life,
Peg, round and round and never start out on a
new trail. I'm dying to go, I tell you truly.
You bet Jim is too. Well, three would be
better than two, because one might fall ill or
get an accident. Three it must be-we three.
Honest, we can do it. Say we go by the rivers,
we can fetch Great Slave Lake and this Crooked
River Creek in two months-barring a smash-
and be back before the freeze-up I Come now,
what's the good of hunting trouble ? We shall
have some hold-ups, but I'm allowing a month
or six weeks outside the time for that. Mother
will be busy all summer. She'll have Dick
and the children, and before winter-end of
Many-caribou-in-the-woods month-we shall
be safe home with the stuff. Then, if mother
Household tasks.



<pb n="82"/>
82 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
and, loving her as she did with a most devoted
admiration, softened from urgency to per-
suasion.
" If it were nothing there'd be no fun, you
see, would there, old Pegtop ? Anybody can
stick in the same hole all the year round and
feel safe. I'm just keen as a blizzard to do
the things that are done, and I know we can
do. Please be keen too, Peggy."
" What is to be will be," answered the other
girl. " I've nothing to do with it, Pete. It's
mother."
" But mother will ask you ?"
" She may ask, but her mind will be made
up when she does. Mother's like granite;
you can't make an impression on her fixed
resolve. I'll tell you one thing, though. I
believe we shall have to do it. It mayn't be
this year, perhaps, but we shall come to it."
" Not this year ? How awful !" murmured
Peter despairingly.
" And you mustn't urge it or bother mother,"
went on Peggy with firmness. " We ought to
remember she's had this bad knock, and not
begin to worry her yet about trails and adven-
tures. She comes first, and she's got a lot on
her shoulders."
Gloom fell upon Peter's spirit like a blight.
She went to her work with lagging steps. The
An.                '.      -               X



<pb n="84"/>
84 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
"Dick thinks the rivers will be clear and
all conditions as favourable as we can expect
in a month or so from now," she said. " Jim
and Dick are going to make a new canoe at
once, longer and stronger than the old one, and
while they do that we must get the pack ready."
Slowly Peter turned very white. She opened
her lips to speak, found them too dry, and closed
them again. She felt the shock in every nerve.
Peggy it was who answered. She was a little
pink, but otherwise unshaken.
" You mean, Mum, that you wish-    "
"Yes, Jim and I have talked it out. Then
we consulted Dick, and it's settled as far as plan
goes; but, of course, the rest must be worked.
There's a lot to it, children." For one instant
her voice shook, but she took hold of herself
at once-she had the heart of a pioneer and
mother of heroes-and went on, " We mustn't
forget anything, because you'll likely miss it
badly when you are on the trail and away in
the wild. Peg, you'd better help me make
the list. Dick will tell us; he knows."
Peter's heart suddenly sank like a stone in a
well. After all nothing had been said as to
those picked out for the venture ! Dick appar-
ently, Jim too, Peggy seemed to be included I
She dared not ask the question that would
settle it, and listened with a drumming in her
·'



<pb n="86"/>
86  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD     TRAIL
"You see," she said, "it's quite a usual
thing to go on the trail in the North; everybody
does it sometimes. But it's not usual to have
a bear cub of your own-a live one !"
"You look sharp you don't get bit," warned
old Dick, chuckling. " What you want with an
or'nery little cuss of a bear cub, hey ? Mis-
cheevious they are too. Dunno as yer Mar
will be pleased any, time he's growed a bit."
So the talk went on of one thing and another,
and Peter dared not put her fate to the test.
She sat idly, quite unlike her busy self, watching
for a word that should tell the truth and put
out that tiny spark of hope. Then, just as the
excited party broke up for the night, and the
stove-stoking and bread-setting began, Donald
asked what Peter was aching to know for her-
self.
" Mum, I suppose you wouldn't let me go ?"
Mrs. Lockhart smiled and shook her head.
"Some day you'll go," she said; " they all do.
Wait a few years, Don. You've got to look
after me and Dolly."
" Oh, is Dick going too, then  "
"No, Dick must stay here. There's too
much to do. Jim goes with Peg and Peter."
Peter felt as though the floor rose and hit
her in the face. Her voice when she spoke
was a new voice,-



<pb n="88"/>
CHAPTER VI
A WOLF HOWLS IN THE NIGHT
JUST about a month after that, the Kinoj
-in Indian language, meaning the " Pike "
-was on her way down river heading for the
far north. She was a splendid canoe, and Jim
had carved her head roughly into the likeness of
that savage fish. They took with them as little as
they could do with, packed in rubber bags, and
a tarpaulin sheet extra to use as a shelter and
wind-screen in sleeping out.
You will understand that they would have
often to face a land trail, as well as water; and
when that happened it would be necessary to
carry all they possessed on their backs, the
canoe included ! You don't carry more than
you need in such circumstances.
Summer had come all at once; the woods
were glorious. " Swish click, swish click"
sounded the paddles as the Kinoj flew along
with the stream, sometimes through avenues of
88



<pb n="90"/>
go GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
swered. " I remember that." Then his face
fell, because he remembered Raa also.
What was strange at first became habit in a
few days, each one of the three setting about a
task when they landed to make camp. For the
last half-hour before landing they would look
out for a fairly sheltered site; and one night,
coming to a wooded grove sloping to the water
and closed in at the back by the velvety dark-
ness of woods, they cried out that this was a
perfect camp, and stopped earlier than usual.
On the far side was a sharply rising knoll that
dropped in a bluff to the river, and within its
shelter a grand anchorage for the canoe and
first-rate fishing pool.
Peggy collected dry sticks, Peter took out a
line from the end of the canoe and set about
fishing for pickerel-what the Indians call
6ga, and cook over a clear little fire on a
stick run through their gills. Jim landed the
packs; then he hunted about for a dead birch
sapling, bent it over, split the bend with their
little axe, and brought away enough of the
dry white pith to start Peggy's fire in fine style.
After that he set snares for rabbits and a trap
for hares, because the travellers pursued a
regular plan of catching their food as far as
possible, and thus saving the few stores they
were able to carry for the time when these
-,. S . .. „ D .  ,-. f?                ^ \  7



<pb n="92"/>
92  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD     TRAIL
You others didn't know; something got in the 
way-Raa was lost. I was going to tell you,
Jim, and then, what with Raa, and the bear
and the Cedar-  " 
" Suppose you tell now, then," suggested.
her brother patiently. Peggy went on cleaning
the little pan with sand and leaves. She was
very particular.
Peter told them what Don had seen and
reported, reminding Peggy of Neumann's anger,
which Jim had quite forgotten. In support of
her own belief she concluded with," You know
it was just the little gun that Dad alwayswanted."
Peggy looked from one to the other, and her
eyes darkened.
" Wish I'd known," grunted Jim.
" Don said nothing till they were gone,"
Peggy reminded him.
"You couldn't prove ownership by two
letters only, but they were a give-away all the
same. My wordl what a skunk the fellow
must be if it's true." Jim positively growled
as he gave this opinion.
" I'm not surprised," said Peggy.
" Thought you liked him, Pegtop ? "
"No-never. And La Perle's nearly as
bad. Not quite, of course, but he's got a face
like a mink-horrid little beast ! Always slink-
ing and biting-little bloodsucker I "



<pb n="94"/>
yiJ      J WRD A  J.J1 1a.j, U J L  %a-Jgl
She wondered what was on the other side.
Then she heard, far away, the howl of a wolf,
terribly desolate and unmistakable in the quiet
night. She had heard that sound very often
in winter cold at the Log House. Wolves go
very long distances hunting when they can't
find food-hundreds of miles; but she won-
dered why one wolf alone sent up that terribly
lonely cry in the springtime, when the woods
were full of moving life and every sort of
game.
The wind made a soft murmur in the pine
tops. Busy little creatures, bent on their own
affairs, came out of the dark to peep at this
surprising thing-a fire, and strange beings
they had never seen before.
Peter, like all her family, had wonderful
eyesight, and she noted these movements and
understood them-rabbits followed by minks
and foxes chiefly, but also fisher-cats and little
grey ermines. She shifted softly on to her
elbow and put sticks on the fire, then, clasping
hands round bent knees, she sat up to wait for
sleepy feelings. Again she looked towards the
black barrier, and at that moment the wolf cry
came again from beyond it-anxious, wailing !
Peter's heart gave a little leap of sheer ex-
citement. This wandering wolf had scented
the camp on the west wind, and was coming.



<pb n="96"/>
96 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
a real experience, and waited breathless for
fear of scaring the wild thing.
The shape of it was lost as it reached the base
of the rocks, and then, almost directly, she
saw two green spots, close together as eyes
might be, and they seemed actually to be fixed
on her eyes as though the beast met her gaze-
which she knew was impossible. No doubt,
though, it could see the fire, the camp, and
the human figures. Nearer it came, crawling
and silent.
Peter suddenly remembered with a qualm
that it might be a lynx, one of those terribly
savage and powerful members of the cat tribe
that other animals avoid almost as they do
porcupines. The eyes of a lynx do glare in the
dark like wolves' eyes. She thought of that,
and drew her automatic from its holster at
her belt with as little movement as possible.
Yet she observed that this animal checked
and crouched still lower; it had seen her move
her arm, therefore must be watching very
intently.
Nearer and nearer it came, till she could see
that it had the shape of a wolf-very large, too,
and shaggy; it crawled low on the ground.
Suddenly Peter fancied it was going to spring,
and with a quick move she pulled a stick of
smouldering wood from the fire and waved it
-:I-A



<pb n="98"/>
98  GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL               i
remarked Peggy, rubbing sleep out of her
eyes, and matter-of-fact as usual.
"Put wood on the fire and light up a bit,"
went on Peter. " He's got a leash or something
on him; he's been captive right enough. Oh, 
he is thin "
The camp grew busy, the fire shot up, and
the great dog was drawn into the circle of
light, when the three began to understand how
cruelly he had been used. His shaggy coat
was matted with mud and blood, weals and
welts could be felt under his hide; every rib
was visible, and his spine and flanks had
taken the shape of a starved wolf; his beautiful
bushy tail hung down; one of his eyes was so
swelled by a blow as to be closed, perhaps
blinded; his lip was torn, probably by the
same blow. The dog had been used with the
fiendish cruelty which some drivers will exer-
cise on huskies in their power.
Peter breathed out ejaculations of fury and
pity as one thing after another was discovered. 
Peggy sped off to the river and brought back
a panful of water. Jim said nothing, but his
face grew blacker every minute.
There was a stout thong of babiche, made of
moose-hide, round the dog's neck, and what
looked like the remains of a hastily made
muzzle of the same, plaited; to this collar
* 



<pb n="100"/>
Ioo  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
For three days the little camp rested under
the shade of the rocky bluff and by the swiftly
moving river, because daylight proved to them
how very bad was old Raa's condition. What
you could not see at night became terribly
evident in the morning. He wanted rest, food,
and care; while the constantly interesting ques-
tion was, where had he come from ? From
the north, because he had crossed the barrier
above the camp, and across the river seemingly,
because he was quite wet when he arrived.
It was a mystery, the most wonderful part of
it all being his instinct in finding his own friends.
Of course, he had the super-power of scent,
sight, and hearing that belong to the wolf
tribe in such a marked degree; but as he had ;
crossed the river to find them it was the more
amazing, though he was on the trail for home
in any case-again by instinct.
Another question pressed itself on the party.
What was the incessant hum    of far-away
drumming-low, deep, and ceaseless ? That
first night they had not noticed anything much,
because of the noise of the river and the west
wind in the pine tops-the sound, too, was i
blown away from them; but next day it began 
to impress itself, and presently Jim said he was
sure it meant the falls where the river tumbled 
into the lonely three-cornered lake that fills
_____~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~I



<pb n="102"/>
102  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL 
the canoe. We shall find it a load without 
fish."
Peggy said no more. She saw the difficulty.
Peter brushed it aside cheerfully.
"We'll give him as much as he'll eat for
three days," she suggested, " and then we can
snare rabbits and shoot game while we're on 
the forest trail."
"Not that last-not on your life," contra-
dieted Jim with decision. "We're not going
to shoot game till we are forced. There is 
only a certain amount of ammunition, and
we're bound to keep that for emergency.
Besides--"
" Besides what ? " demanded Peter.
"Oh, well-nothing."
Peter laughed. "I know. I guess you
mean enemies. We've got some about, you
bet, ours and Raa's, and we're not through
with them yet. Never mind; I don't care.
We shall get some exciting times anyway-
better than a smooth trail all the way."
To these optimistic sentiments Jim made no  |
reply. He was very fond of Peter, but regarded
her rather as one might a keg of dynamite-
you never knew what she would be up to or
what explosion she might cause I You had
to be cautious in your dealings with her.
Meanwhile Raa's wounds were being treated
' j.



<pb n="104"/>
CHAPTER VII
THE FOREST TRAIL
" \   OT war, surely?" said Peggy, looking
anxiously at Jim, who got up, went down
to the shore, and stood motionless watching the
three canoes pass up stream. They did not
stop but went on, the gorgeous and bedecked
rowers staring at the young man and the camp
with expressionless faces as they passed. When
they were out of sight, Jim strolled back to
the fire and patted Raa, who was snarling
silently with his hackles up.
" Not war," he said; " the paint is different.
It's ceremonial paint, kind of High Mumbo
Jumbo business. Sort of thing they do when
they visit another tribe in all their best. Dad
told me about it; we saw a lot of them dressed
up when we went down to the settlement. You
bet they've been potting poor old Makwa and
put on these things to pacify his spirit. Beads,
quills, and wool, fringes, and feathers I Rum
104



<pb n="106"/>
io6  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
from a blow-gun she flew, and as noiseless on
her active feet.
The line was all right, thanks to a hitch over
a stump; also there were fish on the hooks,
besides those she had caught before. Peter
returned to camp in what Peggy called " her
state of righteousness," and wanted to renew 
the argument about the bear's soul; but the
others snubbed it.
"There must be an Indian camp or village  1
or some such up river," said Jim as he sat up 
cleaning the fish. " We never heard or saw any- 
thing of it, but I expect they are wise about every
move we've made. Wonder what they think." 
"Wonder they haven't been down to
palaver," said Peggy.
" Head men were away rounding up Makwa.
That was why. Young chiefs and squaws
wouldn't move without leave. Jolly fine dis-
cipline amongst those fellows."
"I say, let's go and call on them," urged
Peter, but her brother laughed dryly.
" Women and girls can't very well go and
call on Indian braves. They don't see it in
the same light as we do. Besides, no good
wearing out our moccasins running after them.
They'll come here fast enough presently; hope
they will, too, for I want to ask them about
the forest trail and the falls."
_________________-«i~~~..,



<pb n="108"/>
io8 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
As they filled their pipes they observed
silently the two girls and the dog in the back-
ground, the girls receiving the most casual
glance, as they proved nothing except that this
expedition could not be warlike-women meant
peaceful intentions. The simple fact was that,
being Indians, and therefore keenly inquisi-
tive, they wanted to find out what it was all
about, and why three young people were on
the long trail northward, not in the direction
of trade settlements. Also, whether they had
tea, tobacco, and ammunition, and whether it
could be obtained by trading, for it was very
seldom that Indians were not what is called
" on the make."
All these things the young Lockharts knew,
and Jim waited without impatience. When the
pipes were filled the Cree volunteered that his
name was Oo-koo-koo, which means "The
Owl," and that his friends were Aivick (" The
Caribou ") and Kee-way-din (" The North
Wind "). The other two men grunted when
their names were mentioned. Oo-koo-koo him-
self was most appropriately named. He had
rather large eyes, with arched brows and a
hooked nose. Aivick was probably called so
for fleetness of foot. And as for the person
in the shadows with the melancholy title, it
was not possible to see how he came by it.
.-s-       A



<pb n="110"/>
I o  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
They expected to be driven to porterage.
By that little diagram in the ashes he grasped ,
the outlook, and the journey. He made sev-
eral suggestions that occurred to him, but the
chief dismissed them at once. It seemed there
was but one way.
After that Aivick took up the talking with
the announcement that he was a great hunter,
and his tepee held many fine skins-mink,
marten, ermine, fox; he would give rare pelts
for tobacco and tea; he was ready to trade.
Jim smiled engagingly, and explained that
he did not want to trade for skins; but be-
cause of the good heart he had towards his
Indian brothers-these great chiefs of the
friendly Crees-he would give so much tea
and tobacco as a present.
The two chiefs nodded. They were ready
to accept what they could get, while at the
same time they shrewdly inferred two things '
-very near the truth !-that Jim was on some 
mission unconnected with furs, and that he
wanted to gain the friendship of the Indians.
Nobody gave valuable goods away for nothing,
in the opinion of the Crees, therefore the in-
experience of this party was patent to them
also.
Having got all they could, the three men
departed, Oo-koo-koo asserting that the hearts



<pb n="112"/>
112 {iRKLb UN  '-1tn,  rUr.L U  KAIL
by the episode of Raa's loss and return, ye
they one and all had faith in the honesty of
the Cedar. 
It was when they were packing up for the
dawn start next morning that Peter, with one
of her sudden flashes, reminded them that Raa!
couldn't have been stolen by the one-eared
Cree, because of his behaviour the night before.
" Why, what about his behaviour ? " asked
Jim, pausing as he tied up a well-packed bundle.,
"He didn't mind the man really. When:
they all three came down he objected. He
always objects to strangers, or Indians; but
when you were talking he just lay quiet and
watched them with his eyebrows twitching,
and when they went he watched them go,
but he did not hate any of them. If that 
Cree had stolen him and clubbed him Raa
would have told us fast enough. No, it wasn't 
that man." Peter laughed cynically.
Peggy was inclined to believe her, and Raa,
yawning prodigiously, stretched his muscles
with healthy indifference. He was much his
old self again, but there would be little 
doubt about his memory supposing they met
his enemy.
Hard work was now the order of the day. 
By canoe the travellers went down as far as
they dared. Probably Indians would have



<pb n="114"/>
II4 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
the sort of conditions they could not often
hope for, as experience of the home forest
had taught them. Seemingly endless miles of
trees and tangled brushwood, rocks, ups and
downs, terribly steep and difficult, were all to
be expected, so that this was all to the good,
like their wonderful run down the river.
"Luck is with us," said Peter, panting a
little as she stopped for a rest, propping her
big pack against a tree to loosen the headband.
" Don't brag," answered Peggy," it's a bad
plan; one never knows," as she did the
same, panting less than her sister, because
she took it all as quietly as might be, while
her sister could not help talking to Raa and
getting fun out of side issues.
They travelled by compass, Jim leading, and
were disappointed when they found that they
had made but eight or nine miles by the even-
ing. The calculation was Jim's, and fairly
correct, no doubt. The Owl had said the
distance across, cutting the lake and the long
round with its falls and rapids, was "two
sleeps." Indians travelled thirty miles a day
and more. The Lockharts felt very envious
of these powers; but of course it might not
be really so much as sixty. Peter felt sure it
was not. When they made camp they were
so tired and stiff with the exercise of un-
i,



<pb n="116"/>
I 6  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD       TRAIL
" Look at Raa," said Peter.
Now the wind had shifted from its normal
westerly position, and was coming in spas-
modic puffs from   the east and north. As
every one knows, this is often the way of it
in thundery weather, as the storms come up
against the prevailing breeze. The great dog
was standing in the trail facing east, his head
raised and his lips curling back from the mur-
derous fangs, the bristles along his back were
raised, and the muscles of his strong body
tense. He was sniffing the wind with a wolf-
like movement of his, and he looked as wicked
as it was in the nature of a wolf-dog to look.
"Scents something he doesn't like ? " Peggy's
eyes questioned Jim.
"Raa! " Peter called him.
The dog made a movement in answer, but
did not turn his head.
"Mush," ordered Jim. "We can't stand
here watching Raa. Let's make camp before
the storm comes."
So they shouldered packs and took up the
march. For nearly another hour they plodded
on, and then the welcome sound of a small
stream stopped them for the night. They had
come on a first-class camping ground, and with
great satisfaction set about their work. Dense
clumps of banksian pine grew high enough to



<pb n="118"/>
II8 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
The supper finished, all three rolled up in
their blankets and went to sleep at once. Then
the thunder began, far away, with booming
echoes. Lightning shivered with a sort of
spasmodic gleam, showing up branches as
though they were painted in Indian ink.
Peter awoke. A full moon in a thunderstorm
always affected her with a sort of electric shock.
First she lay and thought about the dog. Then
she sat up and stared at the forest when those
flashes came. Peter had never seen a cinema,
and knew nothing of sensational effects, but in
all her body she felt the drama of the scene.
When silence fell between the thunder rumbles
she heard intimate noises in the woods-snap-
pings of dead twigs and scurries of wild crea-
tures rather excited. Then came a white flash
that quivered for seconds, and Peter, looking
towards the track passing the dip wherein lay
the camp, saw a giant black shape move along
it. Something immense and awkward, it
seemed. Then the light went out, and the
next flash showed nothing.
Thoroughly awake and disturbed over the
weird vision she had seen, Peter got up and
stepped softly up on to the track. There she
waited, looking and listening. In a minute she
heard an extraordinary noise-a clatter of
thudding feet, heavy stamping, and a strange,
_a 



<pb n="120"/>
120  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL 
and hanging over, knife in hand, cut through
the loop; which was clever, because, had she
simply severed the cord above the loop, the
poor beast would have died before she could
get down to release it; and, moreover, it would
not have been safe to try and handle a dying
moose.
As it was, the animal fell with a crash and
lay still gasping. Peter came down the tree
and, standing near the trunk for safety, waited
for the light to show her what was happening.
When it came, the old moose was on her legs,
nosing the calf. She was very shaky, and her
bloodshot eyes stared strangely around. She
was ready to attack anything in defence of the
calf, but terribly nervous. Then she saw Peggy
coming down the trail, and, turning, made off
the way she had been going, while the calf
shambled at her side.
Peter was excited and hot. "Of all the
brutes! " and she explained eagerly.
"I am glad you set the poor moose free.
Hurry, Pete, now. Here comes the rain.
What thumping drops I "
.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="122"/>
I22  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
ground, when you are on the trail through
forests of the north-west, you will know
that a canoe has been carried through  It is
a fairly arduous task, but the only way to
make it.
Jim had to bend over the saplings and young
branches, and crack the bend with the little
sharp axe. After a bit the job became easier;
the two girls followed on with their packs,
finding this queer tunnel a great easement of
their labour. When they camped for the night
they were more tired than they had been any
day since the land trail started, but very joyous
because of Raa.
" You must expect a dog to go off hunting
on his own-a wild dog in the forests," said
Peggy.
" Looks as if he'd been hunted," suggested
Peter, who was lying quite flat staring up into
the trees, resting her tired muscles. " If I
had any extra energy I'd go river hunting,"
went on Peter. Then she sat up suddenly
and sniffed with her head raised high and
nostrils moving. "I swear I smell river,"
she declared.
Jim grunted. He didn't think they could
have got through yet.
Peggy suggested that the peninsula was not
so wide as Oo-koo-koo thought. "Indians
. --     "



<pb n="123"/>
FORTUNE      OF THE TRAIL        123
measure by' sleeps,'" she reminded them. "I           I 
don't see how it can be accurate." 
"All the same they know," Jim said. " We 
haven't done badly."  He was never lavish in           i
praise of the girls' achievements, taking them 
for granted very much as though his sisters
had been men " pardners." 
Though Peter could not make up her mind 
to go " river hunting" that night, she stole out
of camp before dawn, keen to bring back news
for the breakfast and start. The dog followed
her, and she followed her nose, an instinct of 
scent and feel in the air. As she went she 
blazed her trail in case of accident. Just a 
broken twig, a chip of bark, a leaf displaced-         '
any Indian would have seen in this a highway ! 
A well-trained girl Scout might have followed
it up also, but the average person would have
seen nothing whatever, it was so slight, and
these indications were far apart, as Peter knew
she could find each one again.
She was right, and proved it joyously when the
river noise was added to the river smell, and
the mist that clings to its shores before sunrise
grew thicker. About a mile from the camp
she came out suddenly on the bank, and her
first look was forward-on the coming trail, to
see what it would be and what it promised.
It is more rocky here than back above the
-- C .. j



<pb n="124"/>
124 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
falls. Rapids would be probable, for the
water looked shallow and pebble-bottomed.
That she took in with the first glance. Then,
looking ahead, saw something startling and
very arresting.
On a rock that jutted over the stream stood
a figure. Because of the mist it looked big
and mysterious. Perfectly motionless and gaz-
ing away down the next bend of the river it
waited-watching. Outlined against the open,
and not much more than thirty paces distant
from her, Peter had a clear view.
She melted back into the brushwood and
stayed-quiet as this Indian. Her feet made
no sound with their trained forest tread, and the
water sounds filled the air; but the breeze
blew from her to him, and well she knew
Indian powers I
Like a statue he remained for full two
minutes, listening apparently. Then, with the
sort of muscle-loose movement that recalls the
way a wild animal shifts its position, he dis-
appeared into the brushwood behind.
Peter still crouched in hiding, listening, but
she heard nothing whatever. This odd inci-
dent passed so quickly that she had forgotten
the dog. When she looked round for him he
was not in sight, but joined her on the way
back to camp, slipping silently through the
_^    -            "      \j    



<pb n="125"/>
FORTUNE OF THE TRAIL             125 
undergrowth just like a wolf, every little while
standing with head up and lips curling in a
snarl as he looked back over his shoulder.
Peter carried the good news of the open river
road into camp with triumph. "It's good
enough sure," she declared. " If it should be
very shallow we can wade and haul the canoe 
over the bad places. Anyway, no more forest 
trail at present."  Then she told about the 
Indian on the rock. "It was the Cree," she
said.
"Which Cree ? Do you mean the Owl ?"
asked Jim. 
"N-o-o-o" drawled Peter, prolonging her
negative as she helped herself to rabbit from
the frying-pan; "I mean our Cree-with one 
ear."
"Don't call him  'our' Cree," Peggy re-
marked. " I don't believe in his good inten- 
tions. What's he here for-trailing us? He
must be trailing us-who else is there to
trail ?"
"Besides," asserted Jim firmly, "he shot             ,
Raa. Sure he shot Raa, and I bet he stole
him in the first place. He poisoned old Neu-
mann's huskies, and my opinion is that he
caught Raa to sell him to Neumann. Just what
a low-down neche would do-don't you see ?
Indians are sharp as thorns. They see a
-I j
fi     



<pb n="126"/>
126  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD     TRAIL
notion like that a lot quicker than we should.
Kill the trappers' dogs, and sell him Rai at a
top figure. It doesn't matter to the Indian
if Raa gets away after Neumann has handed
over the dollar bills. Why should it ? Raa 
was trailing him right enough when he left
us, and got a gun pulled on him for his pains I
Well, we shall have to keep our eyes skinned,
and that's a sure thing."
It was not often that Jim gave voice to such
a settled opinion. When he did, it was deeply 
rooted ! Peter saw the uselessness of argu- ,
ment. Even Peggy was carried along by this
idea, though she said, as she cleaned the pan
and collected goods neatly,--
" I don't see why he doesn't come and finish
us off. What can he want, just following? "
"Indians want all you've got," said Jim. "
"What about our automatics, for instance?
The tarpaulin, an AI canoe, the rifle and am-
munition-we are worth anything you like to
them. But you can't tell what his plan is.
Probably he's afraid of our guns, and knows
his old trade muzzle-loader is only warranted
to hit at ten yards-not that, perhaps."
"He can hit. He shot Raa, we know,"
said Peggy.
" We don't know," muttered Peter obstin-
ately. " Raa wouldn't let him get that near."



<pb n="127"/>
FORTUNE OF THE TRAIL            127
But neither of the others attended to her
opinion. They had decided how the matter 
stood, and of course it was only one of Peter's
"feelings." Besides, there was a lot too much
to do for discussion. The thought of the river 
again was a grand uplift to their spirits, and
there was not time to worry even about the 
one-eared Cree l 
Soon after sunrise the canoe was in the
water again, and triumph swelled the hearts
of the three on this strange trail, triumph
almost as great as though they had conquered
all risks and got back with the treasure. With
the stream they went, sometimes in water so
shallow that they waded, guiding their boat1
with caution  Then presently, when it was
deeper, they would get in, but with wet feet
hanging over on either side, because of the
drippings ! That meant a change of stockings
when the rest came, and a careful drying of 
moccasins-not too near the fire, because
leather shrinks.
All three were extraordinarily happy; they
were so well, and getting on so fast. Hundreds
of miles had they come already, and though
they knew what the journey back must be-       -
against the stream, up the rapids, every obstacle
enhanced, too, because of the weight they
would have to carry-yet the buoyancy of their



<pb n="128"/>
I28  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
spirits and the splendid healthiness of this
great life made them inclined to laugh at the
prospect. It was sure to be all right! Luck 
was with them-had been from the first, said
they.
The glory of the woods and the colours,
the power of the river and its help, the fact
that every day took them many miles forward
and nearer their aim-all was so splendidly
cheerful.
Walking in water, bruising your feet and
shins on slippery rocks, being held up at times
by waterfalls impossible to negotiate, so that
you had to land and haul canoe and pack for a 
mile or two along most difficult shores-all 
came in the day's work. No one ever grumbled.
In the beginning of June, when the Wild was
in perfection, they came to Deer Lake, lovely
beyond description, perhaps a hundred miles
long and some twenty wide, its shores the
home of many Indian tribes as well as forest
creatures.
Up the western shore they went, camping
for rests, day, and of course night, and making
fine progress. They met with Indians, but it
was a passing acquaintance, concluding amic-
ably with a small present of tea or tobacco.
They met old Salt Brydon, who had been a pal
of Dick Hearne long years since, and his
.Za



<pb n="129"/>
FORTUNE OF THE TRAIL            129
"pardner" Olaf Sorenson, the big Swede; they
were not coming down to the settlements as 
far south as Cumberland House, but held their
pelts for the visit of the trader Mr. McAndrew,
who went right up to the Great Bear Lake,
almost as far again as Great Slave Lake, calling
at the districts and the Forts for the winter's
output.
Men like old Salt Brydon had no use for the          I
gaieties of settlements. The summer up north
with the fishing and hunting was far more              j
worth while to them. 
Of course, they wanted to know what drew
the young Lockharts thus far on the long
trail, and appeared to be satisfied with the
answer that, hearing their father was dead,
they'd come up to learn all details, the truth
of rumour, and to collect his possessions.
"I'm always glad it's true, every word,"
said Peggy, when they decided in conclave
what they should say.
"They must have heard things," Peter
suggested-" must; I wonder what they all
know."
Suddenly Peggy had a disquieting thought.
"Jim, do you think some of the men will have
found out the whole secret, and dug up Dad's
treasure ? He might have been watched."
Jim shook his head, saying he depended on
1               1



<pb n="130"/>
130 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
Gijik. He was sure the Ojibway believed the
secret was still a secret, nor could he be de-
ceived. " He's sure too cute," declared Jim.
So the cloud passed, and so did the days,
bringing the canoe and its strong, brown crew
farther and farther north.
It was on the shore of Lake Wollaston, the 
smaller water north of Deer Lake, that they
had a quaint experience. Not dangerous, as
things were in this glorious summer world, but '
just a vision of what winter dangers might be. 
You must remember they had come into the    i
land of the wolf-folk, rarely seen round the
Log House except when driven so far by des- 
peration. From Deer Lake northwards it is
a very different matter, while farthest north
you can meet the great white Polar bear, the
most horribly dangerous foe of all, except,
perhaps, the giant grizzly.
Where the caribou herds are, there also
are to be found the hunting animals, of course;
and amongst these the wolves are the strongest
and most relentless.
There had been a thunderstorm and the
woods were wet, drenched by the downpour
and a little chilly; the camp fire glowed cheer-
fully, and the supper was warm and welcome.
The three travellers fell asleep at once in the
shelter of the tarpaulin, for the days of wake-



<pb n="131"/>
FORTUNE OF THE TRAIL            I29
" pardner" Olaf Sorenson, the big Swede; they
were not coming down to'the settlements as
far south as Cumberland House, but held their
pelts for the visit of the trader Mr. McAndrew,
who went right up to the Great Bear Lake,
almost as far again as Great Slave Lake, calling
at the districts and the Forts for the winter's
output.
Men like old Salt Brydon had no use for the
gaieties of settlements. The summer up north
with the fishing and hunting was far more
worth while to them.
Of course, they wanted to know what drew
the young Lockharts thus far on the long
trail, and appeared to be satisfied with the
answer that, hearing their father was dead,
they'd come up to learn all details, the truth
of rumour, and to collect his possessions.
" I'm always glad it's true, every word,"
said Peggy, when they decided in conclave
what they should say.
"They must have heard things," Peter
suggested-"must; I wonder what they all
know."
Suddenly Peggy had a disquieting thought.
"Jim, do you think some of the men will have
found out the whole secret, and dug up Dad's
treasure ? He might have been watched."
Jim shook his head, saying he depended on



<pb n="132"/>
132 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
the thermometer fifty below zero, and no food
anywhere except in your own pack !
Without moving much, Peter pinched Peggy,
who was next her, and was answered by a
whispered,-
"I see."
"Aren't they sweet loves ? " murmured Peter
fatuously.
" Well, of all the-" This from Jim, with
amazed contempt in his voice. " Sweet loves I
Wolves ! "
" You know what I mean," protested Peter,
holding her ground. "They're all laughing,
and they're not a bit shy."
" You'd be jolly shy if they were hungry "
retorted her brother. " Look at old Raa-he
doesn't call them ' sweet loves '! Of all the
devils you can meet in the forest a wolf takes
the prize, unless a lynx is worse."
"A lynx is much worse," declared the girl.
"A lynx will tear you summer or winter just
for the sake of wickedness and spite, but look
at these I Quite friendly."
She had raised her voice and moved more
freely as she argued. Now she threw wood
on the fire, which had the effect of making
the wolves shift and draw back. It really was
wonderful to watch them, they were so utterly
noiseless and agile-like shadows almost. They



<pb n="133"/>
FORTUNE OF THE TRAIL 133
weaved one past another, pushing a little and
giving each other nips that made teeth click
like metal; they then sat down again rather
farther off and continued their curious watch.
Partly curiosity and partly the natural plea-
sure of the warmth where all about was wet
had brought them there. They did not lie
down, all the same, but sat all the while, and at
the turn of the night, towards the very early
dawn, they melted away like the shadows they
had seemed.
"One could imagine one had dreamed them,"
said Peter. " I wonder what would have hap-
pened if I could have patted one of them ? "
" You'd have lost your hand," Jim told her.
" Hearne says they can bite a hand off like a
machine cutting-awful strong brutes."
Afterwards, before this astonishing trail was
accomplished, Peter recalled that night and
the smiling jaws of the green-eyed visitors.
She didn't call them  " sweet loves " then;
she experienced to the full what a wolf is, and
why the howl on a winter night can strike such
terror into the bravest heart.
Only one mischance of a really tiresome
nature occurred on the way up north, and
that was oh this same Lake Wollaston. The
weather had been almost perfect from the time
they left Log House till nearly the end of June.
(2,396)                         9
.r""



<pb n="134"/>
134  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL         1
Then one day the wind was stronger than
usual, and the lake hit up into a flurry of waves.
It was a favourable wind, so they held on,
paddling with renewed energy and satisfaction.
If this helped them, they decided, it was better
to go ahead in spite of the risk of swamping.
Water came inboard, they were all drenched
with spray, but they made it. They got out of
Wollaston and into the zigzag river that forms
the link between the lower lake and the long
-very long-and beautiful lake of Athabasca,
with its exquisite shores, wooded and hilly.
In the stream, then, they found shelter from
the wind, but an unfavourable tide. The drift
of the water was against them and out to the
lake, which fed Fish River, running into the
sea of Hudson Bay about three hundred miles
to the eastward.
A long way they made in spite of that, and
camped on these new shores rather later than
usual. They fished, made camp, carrying most
of the pack ashore, and after supper slept
sounder than they had ever done before-
which is saying a good deal; but they were
very tired.
At dawn the canoe was gone !
Gone, drifted back to Wollaston Lake,
probably, and blown anywhere by the stiff
wind I Indeed, more than likely swamped.
___ ..____...---~-__m                                   ....ii



<pb n="135"/>
FORTUNE     OF THE TRAIL        135
It was by far the most serious misfortune
that could have happened, because it meant
taking the trail on foot unless they could make
another canoe with the very limited tools at 
their command-the axe and three knives.
For the first time between the three travellers 
arose a hot disagreement as to the best course         {
of action. Peter reasoned that the canoe could
not have drifted far in spite of the stream. 
Was not the wind against it ? There was more 
than a chance that it was caught up on a bend 
of the winding river. If they followed back
on the trail they might find it on this-the 
western bank. If on the opposite shore, Jim            i
could swim over for it. 
Jim was obstinately against this plan. He
declared that to take the trail back was sheer
loss of precious time. Far better make a camp
where they stood, and set to work at once on
a new canoe. It would of necessity be rough,
and the wood unseasoned. He groaned at the
memory of the lost craft; they had taken such
pains to make it good. But there !-what
must be, must.
You see there was a very dark cloud over
Jim's cheerful outlook. He was the person who
tied up the canoe, and he could not remember
for the life of him exactly how he had done it.
He thought it was a really strong hitch. He
,4



<pb n="136"/>
136 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
was so careful at the time. He felt certain he
had been careful, as he never forgot the im-
portance of the canoe. And yet it was gone,
and he felt uneasily that even Peggy believed
the loss to be his fault. Neither of them said
so, of course, but there was something com-
forting and sympathetic in Pegtop's manner
that made him feel savage.
She was doing her steady best, as always, keep-
ing the peace between eager Peter and irritated
Jim, trying to suggest that after all it didn't
matter so very much; the summer was long,
they'd months before them.
Finally, and owing to Peggy, they compro-
mised, Jim agreeing to go back on the river
trail as far as the lake. Then, if no canoe
was visible, they must return to this camp and
set to work at once.
Travelling " light "-that is to say, with the
least possible pack-just blankets, pemmican,
tea, ammunition, a saucepan and cups-they
started back by the shore. The trail was rough
and rocky, cumbered with growth of briar and
slippery with wet moss on stones. They rested
at midday, silent and depressed, ate pemmican,
drank tea, and went on again till dusk. No
canoe was to be seen.
Rolled in their blankets they slept, started
again before dawn, and went on. During the
~r-    2Zci7. --



<pb n="137"/>
FORTUNE OF THE TRAIL 137
morning Peter roused to cheerfulness again.
She felt so sure it would all turn out well.
Raa, being hungry, chased rabbits, also caught
them. The sun shone; chickadees, excited by
these unusual presences, sang their loudest, and
fish jumped in the sparkling water. All was
gay and beautiful; but when they camped late
where the river burst into Lake Wollaston there
was no sign of the lost canoe, the breeze was
still stiff, and the surface of the lake flecked
with white caps.
I



<pb n="138"/>
CHAPTER IX
A SONG IN THE WILDERNESS
PETER kept to her bond. Much as she
wanted to go on round the lake shore,
reason pointed to the foolishness of it, and she
had promised Jim to go back. No getting out
of it; but it was a terribly depressing journey
back again over the same trail.
At night when they made camp the only one
of the three not despondent was Peggy, who
worked away at cheering the others-she and
Raa, for the old dog was restless and eager
about something, not rabbits apparently. Be-
fore they turned into blankets the girl went
down to the water's edge, and stood there
watching the moon-the big yellow summer
moon-rise behind the forest, so that branches
seemed painted on its surface, and the broken
light began to pick out rocks and moss in the
river bank.
Motionless Peggy stood and heard a sound
188



<pb n="139"/>
A  SONG    IN  THE WILDERNESS         139
on the wind from the lake; there was some-
thing rollicking and joyous in the sound,
though no words were audible. Then the
other two came from the fire and joined her.
They all listened, and in a minute Peter began
humming the wild, strong tune under her
breath.
"Oh, ze cariboo-oo-oo, ze cariboo-oo-oo;
He roas' on high
Jes' under ze sky,
Ze beeg white cariboo-oo-oo "
"You know," she said, "it's the cariboo
song that Dad told us the men sing down
in the settlements when the Company roasts
caribou whole for the gangs of hunters. Wonder
who it is. He seems a very jolly man-fancy
singing like that all alone in the forest "
She began whistling the tune in company,
clear as a wood wren; and presently the singer
heard her response, for the song stopped, and
a voice called, " Hullo ! Hullo-o-o !" soft and
high like an echo; then it ceased, and into
the moon-path swept an Indian canoe, paddled
by one man with the strongest, swiftest strokes,
and towing behind a second canoe empty.
The paddles turned inshore by the side of
a water-swept finger of sand. Jim and Peter
sprang down to help; there was a meeting on
the spit, a busy minute, and the three walked



<pb n="140"/>
140  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD     TRAIL
up together towards Peggy, who was standing
in the moonlight with eyes shining and yellow
curls looking like spun silver.
"La-la-la," murmured this gay traveller,
shrugging aside the profuse thanks of the
others. "Et puis-she is yours. I saw her
las' night on the lake, and make to catch her,
but she refuse. Then it is done, and I bring
her-la voild." He laughed. " It is nothing.
Eh? All in the good turn; you would do
it for me too, is it not ?" He was gazing at
Peggy, who nodded vigorously, her eyes shin-
ing with gratitude. And who would not be
grateful when all trouble was brushed away
like a cobweb I
"Oh," said Peggy, " oh, we have had a
bad time, and you've saved our poor canoe."
" Poor little canoe," echoed the rescuer, and
laughed again.
They were all very friendly at once; there
was no ice to break, as it were, and no suspi-
cions to lull. Pierre Corraine was a hunter
and trapper, a French Canadian, born and
bred in the forests. In person he was not
very tall, but well-built, and just as wiry and
agile as a catamount-the name he gave to the
big wild-cat of the woods. His black eyes
danced with gaiety and shrewd intelligence,
and instantly, though they hardly knew it, he



<pb n="141"/>
A  SONG    IN   THE   WILDERNESS       14I
began to influence the three Lockharts, while
Raa accepted him at once without so much as
a snarl.
" And this canoe ? " he asked as they all sat
round the little fire. "How did she make a
get-away, hey ? You shall tell me, then I shall
tell you one strange thing."
The girls looked at Jim, who admitted with
shame that he must have tied her up with a
fool knot. How he came to do such a thing
was unexplainable; but they'd had a hard day
and were late in making camp. He hated say-
ing this, because it sounded as though he were
a " tender-foot "-chechaquo, as they call it on
the Yukon trail. But he felt bound to admit
now that it must have been his fault.
Corraine watched Jim as he spoke. He con-
sidered silently, smoking the while; then, as
though it helped his thoughts, he sang rather
low and drearily a queer little song:-
"Out of the hills comes a little white deer-
Poor little vaurien, o, ci, ci I
Come to my home, to my home down here,
Sister and brother and child of me,
Poor little, poor little vaurien "
He sang it in such a way that tears came into
Peggy's eyes because of the gentleness of it;
then, breaking off, he said,-
kOt- '-  -



<pb n="142"/>
142 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
" And that is how you feel, Jeem, that your
knot was a fool knot! Come, then, and I will
show you something deeferent."
Jim followed him to the canoe, and the painter
rope was put into his hand-the rope with
which it had been tied up so securely. The end
was cut through, frayed !
Then Peter burst out: "I thought it was
very short when we pulled it inshore just now.
Why, Peggy, some one cut the knot through,
instead of-  Well!"
" It was my fault anyway," Jim declared.
"It was up to us to land her and turn her
over. We do most times, but we were in a
hurry, so we left the best part of the pack
inboard-extra stores, grub-stake to fall back
on, see, and tied her up to the bank."
" I wonder Raa didn't speak," said Peggy.
"You bet Raa was hunting on his own,"
Peter told her. " We'd so little grub ashore,
and we didn't fish; pemmican is poor feed
to Raa when there's a world of rabbits around.
Now we've got to the bottom of it. We all
were dead asleep, and the enemy came along
to the bank but never landed-just hacked
through Jim's knot- "
"Enemy !" echoed Peggy. " What enemy
have we ? "
"I told you, the Cree," said Jim, very posi-



<pb n="143"/>
A SONG IN THE WILDERNESS I43
tive. " For some reason known to himself he's
got a down on us. You bet he stole Raa and
tried to shoot him afterwards. He's keen
tracking us all along."
Corraine listened to this, his alert gaze on
the three faces as they all sat down by the fire
again. He was humming
" Out of the hills comes a little white deer-"
under his breath. Then he broke off and said-
" So he steal Raa, that Cree, hey ? What
for ?-to make of him sled dog ? And pull gun
on him after-some hate, hey ? Qu'il s'amuse
of your dog, this Cree."
" I say it's not the Cree at all "-Peter began;
and then stopped, getting very pink, because
she felt it was foolish to deny when she had no
other suggestion to make, no one else to accuse.
She minded this before Corraine; it was differ-
ent from jumping at a notion with her own family
-they understood her way of seeing things.
Perhaps Pierre did too. He considered her
with his very intelligent eyes, but said no more.
Presently they all rolled up in their blankets
and went to sleep, taking the precaution of
leashing Raa with a string of raw hide; he
was too obedient to bite it through.
But no enemy came, which is usually the
way when you prepare for them I
ii 



<pb n="144"/>
i44  GIRLS ON     THE   GOLD    TRAIL
That meeting with Corraine was the turning
over of a fresh leaf in the story of the trail.
He had been born and bred in the forests,
and knew the rivers like roads. He taught
them things that helped, because all three were
so ready to learn and recognize the benefit of
his long experience. To them Pierre was
rather old; as a matter of fact he was not
yet forty, and for gaiety of nature might have
been fourteen.
They four went on in company, because the
hunter was bound for Fort Chippewyan, at the
junction where the Slave River falls into Atha-
basca Lake. He was a man chosen for special
missions and the portage of dispatches from
settlements in the south. The long trail was
his life and happiness, and the forests were
his home.
The young Lockharts soon found that he
asked no questions of them. If he was sur-
prised he made no sign. Much as they liked
him, they agreed together at first to keep their
own counsel; yet during that journey from end
to end of the long lake, camping on its shores
and stopping to fish-you will understand it
was two hundred miles more or less-there
was time for the barrier to break down, and
in spite of prearranged caution it did to a
certain extent.
~ 7~--~- c



<pb n="145"/>
A SONG IN THE WILDERNESS 145
Pierre Corraine learned whither they were
bound, and that they had undertaken this
terrific journey to fetch home certain things
belonging to their dead father; but what those
things were he was not told. Peter was for
letting him into complete confidence. She was
sure he was a true friend. Peggy agreed with
her in the second feeling, but thought that it
was just as well to keep to their first decision,
that no chance acquaintance on the way was
to be let into the secret. " As we settled that,
let's keep to it," said Peggy.
Jim said he didn't see the use of taking a
tremendous liking for a man you knew nothing
about, and an equally decided dislike for a man
you knew no harm of-" like old Neumann,
for instance," he added. " It seems to me if
you want to be sensible you'd best have a
reason for what you do."
That was so like Jim, and Peggy agreed with
him, of course, much as she liked Pierre and
his songs. But Peter shrugged her lean, square
shoulders almost fiercely.
" What does God give us instincts for if we
mayn't use them ?" she demanded. " Dogs
know whom they may trust. You believe them,
Jim-though all the same I'm not sure whether
you'd believe Raa if he hated Neumann. Why
do you like that man  "
!+



<pb n="146"/>
146  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD       TRAIL
" Well, he was a friend of Dad's. He never
let any one down that I heard of. He didn't
poison his own dogs, sure, and when he got
so hot on old Raa he was pretty well out of
his head with worry to get on."
"He stole Raa and ill-treated him," cried
Peter tempestuously.
" The man who poisoned the dogs stole Raa,
you bet," retorted Jim. "Just what a Cree
would do, knowing the chap would give most
anything for a strong sled dog. Neumann
may have bought Raa. I can't say for that-"
Here Peggy would interfere, and say what
was the use of wasting breath in argument,
and the subject would be changed; but those
two opinions always remained as fixed as the
woods and hills. Pierre knew nothing about
all this, or, if he sensed any disagreement, he
did not betray his knowledge, but just helped
on the work of the trail with his lifelong ex-
perience of the North.
Presently they crossed to the northern shore.
In the best of spirits and in lovely weather,
they landed to make camp. There was great
rejoicing between the sisters, because they felt
so near the end of the journey. Only that
length of Slave River, and across Slave Lake,
and they had done it !
The curious part was that in all their minds



<pb n="147"/>
getting there seemed all. Getting back they
did not discuss or appear to consider much.
It would happen, they felt.
And just at this cheerful climax something
broke the monotonous success of the daily
trail.
Corraine and Peggy went into the woods to
collect dead sticks for the night. They went a
good distance, because Peggy always wanted to
see what was beyond the next rise or ridge,
and whether there was an open valley outside
the densest forest. The wild creatures were
scarey in this part. Pierre said it was owing
to the proximity of the Forts-Chippewyan
was not more than fifty miles to the west of
them. There was more coming and going-
that is to say, comparatively so, when you
think of such amazing distances, and thirty
miles is a day's trail.
"I have the feeling of men-eh, Mees
Peggy?" Pierre said, and he stopped still as
a deer that " suspicions " human presence.
"But there, what would you ? "
"How do you mean 'feeling' men? Raa
is like that, but we have no gift," said Peggy,
watching his brown face, which was like a
hawk's about the brow and eyes. He seemed
to see and hear what she could not.
"You do not-no. That is deeferent. The
JW-"'1-  s  .



<pb n="148"/>
I48  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD       TRAIL 
woods are to me full of news-of message.
Men there, are, I feel, and there is some-
thing-   "
It was in Peggy's mind that Corraine was
not happy about this " something," but he did
not explain. The walk lengthened out, and
soft twilight made shadows. Peggy did not
mind. She was glad to walk after the hours
of paddling, and it seemed as though the man
wanted to find what he felt but could not see.
They were climbing a steep rise, thickly
wooded, and presently came to the top. From
the other side the ground dropped like a cliff,
and in the bottom was a gulch, a cleft valley
between that cliff and one on the opposite side,
which was also steep and rather thickly clothed
with banksian pine. It was a lovely place, and
the more so because the valley lay from west
to east, so that the last light dipped into its
sheltered greenness.
Peggy sat down, just to look and revel in
the beauty. She could see a winding silvery
stream down in the bottom, and presently made
out the shape of a man, then another man.
They were camping down there on the mossy
bank of the stream. Quite a perfect place,
thought the girl, and said so to Corraine as
she pointed out the two figures. He did not
answer, and then she saw that he was watch-
....~- .4r~' ~ '  ~   -                4



<pb n="149"/>
A  SONG    IN  THE WILDERNESS        149
ing these campers with eyes that saw much
more than she saw.     His expression had
changed to something tense and stern. Then
he put out his hand, the strong, nervous brown
hand that was characteristic of him and his
swift way of acting, and drew the girl into
shelter against a mass of undergrowth.
"Bien," he said, speaking low. "It is the
light from that side we shall avoid." Then he
lay down flat on his face and waited.
"What is it ?" Peggy whispered, taking
her tone from his.
"It ees not good," Pierre answered. "The
poor Indian would say these men have bad
heart. Hein-that is true. God made the
north, and it is very beautiful; then come the
bad heart and trouble."
"Not all bad hearts, Pierre," said Peggy in
a grieved voice.
"No, the angel as well-so," and the man
smiled at her. To him she was very like an
angel, with her kind grey-blue eyes and lovely
corn-coloured hair. Besides these things she
was sweet in her steady unselfishness and
wisdom. Full of common sense was Peggy.
She was just going to answer him when some-
thing caught her eyes on the opposite cliff.
Up till now she had been watching the gulch
and the men down below. Then, quite sud-
(2.96)                           IO



<pb n="150"/>
x50 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
denly, she noticed a movement, something
passed from one clump of bush to another-
it might have been a puma, though they were
rare so far from the Rockies; hardly a deer,
because it seemed to crawl. The girl made a
movement to attract Corraine's attention, and
then grasped on the instant that he already
saw. Surely little escaped him.
" Indian," he answered her eyes. "Cree.
He watch that camp. For no good neither.
Allms ! There you have the soul of this
forest people. To forget the kind act-never.
To forget the evil--not while life is in them.
Perhaps you will say that is the pity, but "-
he threw out his hands, palms upwards, and
shrugged-" but it is the Indian."
" Do you think he means to kill these men
in the camp then ? " asked Peggy, looking down
into the gulch with strained eyes. " Sure, we
ought to warn them."
"No; I think, Mees Peggy, it is not the
beesness of les autres. This Cree, then, he
have only the trade gun. If he is fine shot he
may kill at ten paces I Voil--he wait and
wait, but he cannot come near. These men of
bad heart they can care for themself. Bien,
let them care; we shall not make the mix-up.
Come then; let us go."
So they went, and saw no more of the little
- -- --                             A      _



<pb n="151"/>
A SONG IN THE WILDERNESS 151
camp down in the gulch, and the Indian
prowling like a puma. Peggy was disturbed
about it all, and troubled because this kind-
hearted woodsman seemed cynical. When they
got back under the shine of the big stars she
told Peter and Jim.
The latter said, " That's the kind of chap
those Crees are." But Peter stoutly declared
that if those campers had played a low-down
trick on the Indian, he'd a perfect right to
shoot them if he could.
Pierre Corraine smiled at her so that his
white teeth laughed. " Aha, Mees Pete," he
said, "then you mus' give this poor Indian
the better gun."
" So I would if I got the chance," declared
Peter, which made Jim look rather glum. He
had a strong sense of how sisters should be-
have and speak. Peggy came up to the ideal.
Peter was inclined to jump over all bounds.
Much as he admired her, he wished she wouldn't
"show off," as he called it.
The next day Pierre Corraine left them to
turn aside on his mission to the Fort. He'd
been a stand-by in helping them forward;
not that Jim thought so much of it as the others.
After all they'd got on so far by themselves,
he thought, but certainly Pierre had found the
canoe and brought her to them. The girls



<pb n="152"/>
152  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD       TRAIL
thanked him  again and again for that good
turn; Peter's mind pictured the delay and
the distress vividly.
" We can't thank you enough-how could
we ?" she said. " We shall always remember."
"An' will you please always to remember
that your rope is cut, Mees Pete ? " said Pierre,
with something grave in his manner. "This
canoe does not slip; she is cut away. Some
one, then, had made a mischeef, eh ? Then
it is very well to take care."
" It's that Cree, I expect," said Jim, who
was astonishingly persistent when he got an
idea really fixed.
"Aha! This Cree, you think? "       Cor-
raine's eyes narrowed into slits.
"I expect. Same Indian who was trailing
those other fellows, like as not. Regular bad  ;
neche. Perhaps he's got a down on white
folk all round. Old Hearne says they have,
sometimes."
Peggy and Peter looked at each other.
There was truth in this notion of Jim's. An
Indian would follow up a feud like that. If
he'd been injured by whites he might, in
return, try to injure all whites.
Later on Pierre Corraine departed into the
morning mist, and the sisters felt a loss, much
more than Jim did, naturally; for much as
,;



<pb n="153"/>
A  SONG   IN  THE WILDERNESS        153
the youngest member of the party liked and
admired this capable woodsman, he "didn't
see why they three shouldn't get on just as
well without a stranger." In other words,
Jim was the least bit jealous, which was plain
to the observation of the girls.
But one could not feel despondent in these
glorious places with summer smiling on them,
and each hour bringing something new and
interesting. Slave River was wild and grand
beyond anything they had seen yet, and on the
first night they had to land with a view to
porterage by the shore, because they dared
not attempt the rush of rapids through canions
with cliffs like the walls of a well, so smooth
and precipitous were they. It meant stiff
work, but they had done it before they came
to Deer Lake, and could again. As Peter
said, "they'd grown a good deal" since those
early days.
All next day and the next they carried packs
and canoe up and up and over the barriers,
climbing and resting, and putting out more
exertion perhaps than ever before. Nobody
minded-were they not getting on ? But all
were glad when, in the evening, they began to
go down and down through more open woods
into a gulch through which a creek entered the
big river. The rapids had been passed, the



<pb n="154"/>
154  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
shores opened up less forbidding, and here the
three were coming down into the beautifully
sheltered outlet of some smaller stream.
"Everything we want," murmured Peggy,
slipping her pack and sitting down on a fallen  ;
tree-trunk. " Water, wood, moss, pine needles,
and balsam   boughs   Lovely beds, lovely
smells, and the big river waiting to take us on.
How lucky we always are ! " Then she paused,
and from that height considered the trend of
the gulch, the direction of this forest stream,
and the lay of the land generally. As she
looked she frowned the least bit, for was not
this the actual outlet of the valley she and
Pierre had hit on when they went so far look-
ing for wood ? There was a narrow stream,
between high green walls-surely.
"Why do you look bothered all in a moment,
Pegtop ?" asked Peter, whose observing eye
had detected the sudden frown of anxiety.
"You said how lucky we are, and then you
looked as though you'd put your foot through
an ice-hole."
" Oh no-did I ? I suppose I just thought
of something," said Peggy, getting up again
and settling her tump line; and they all went
on down to the creek mouth and the comfort
of this ideal camping-place.



<pb n="155"/>
CHAPTER X
TERRORS OF THE GULCH
" AND even suppose," thought Peggy, "that
If-   this is the same gulch, it doesn't follow
we shall come across those men." But she
felt the least bit cold when she remembered
the panther-like shape of the persistent Cree
crawling nearer to the men he hated-the men
who had " bad hearts," as Pierre had said.
These thoughts would recur, but did not
interfere with work. They made camp, they
fished, they cooked by the little round fire,
with the canoe turned over on the bank close
at hand, and a grand feeling of completeness
in arrangements. Then--
" Look at Raa," Peter called. "He's been
like that ever since we struck this creek-
going round and round hunting up a trail;
and just see his hackles 1 "
"Bear', said Jim briefly. His mouth was
full, and he was enjoying his supper.
166



<pb n="156"/>
156 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
"Yes," agreed Peggy rather eagerly. "Sure
to be lots of bears coming down here." Then
she called the dog and gave him his supper
of fish, which he bolted and then lay down
nose on paws, his lip just lifted over white
fangs and eyebrows twitching over eyes that
seemed shot with red sparks.
They sat on round the fire enjoying their
ease, when suddenly Raa sprang up and ran.
He ran like a wolf, swift and silent, nose to
the ground and tail drooping, and he went up
the gulch.
"That's the worst of wolf-dogs," said Jim.
"I don't see there's any 'worst' about it,"
retorted Peter, defending the beloved one in-
stantly. " You wouldn't like Raa to be a sort
of sheep, would you ? "
They laughed, but the laugh was cut short
by a horrid noise from the twilight shadows
in the peaceful valley at the back. The sort
of noise you hear in big camps and settlements
where many men and dogs come together-
that is, rough cursing, blows, and the furious
snarl of a maddened beast. The three jumped
to their feet, and Peter went off like a streak,
with Jim after, calling her to come back. Peggy
sat down again.
"Oh dear," she said out loud; "what a
horrible bother!" Then she remained mo-



<pb n="157"/>
TERRORS OF THE GULCH             157
tionless, listening and looking after the others
into the shadows of the wood.
Presently appeared figures coming down the
gulch-Peter with her belt passed through
Raa's collar, talking to him  obviously, and
coaxing against his resistance; behind, three
men, one in front with Jim, another behind.
They were carrying guns and lightish packs-
just rolled blankets and necessaries. Peter came
up swiftly to the fire and stood over her sister.
"Pegtop, it's about the worst that could
have come on us. That brute Neumann-
look what they've done to Raa ! Nearly bashed
his eye out with a gun stock! Wonder he
isn't dead ! Wish to goodness old Jim would
see. He can't; there he is as close as wax
with both of them, and believing all their
lies. Why, any one can see through them
both. La Perle is a liar and a cheat, and Neu-
mann's everything bad you can think of."
Peggy put on the pan full of water. " Wait
a moment; I'll bathe his face," she said.
"Poor old Raa ! What a shame I "
"Shame! And please remember this is
only the beginning of trouble." Peter posi-
tively threw this bitter prophecy at her sister.
She thought Peggy could not realize, or she
would not be so quiet, not knowing that haunt-
ing dread in her sister's mind.
s                                       S:              ^^^flR
1_________________-~                      s ,    „ --     ~«



<pb n="158"/>
158  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL 
"I wish we had Pierre here," said Peggy. 
Then the others came up, talking.
Jim was a little excited for him, and there 
was no doubt but that he welcomed the coming
of these trappers, whom he called " old friends."
He offered them  tea, tobacco, bacon. The
three had been so sparing of these articles that
there was even some of the last left.
"Queer stroke of luck, eh ? " he said to 
Peggy, his honest eyes smiling with satisfac- 
tion. " Fancy Neumann and La Perle turning 
up. Last time we met was at home I Seems
awfully rum chance, doesn't it ? They're on
their way to the district on Slave River-and I
say, Peg, they'll trail along with us. It'll be
grand company. Neumann says they've got a
canoe cached hereabouts, and he says there's
a shack way up this river with stores enough
to set us up I I call that a fine notion. If
we hadn't come here and made camp on this
creek we'd have missed our luck."
Peter was so speechless with fury that Peggy
had to come to the rescue, which she did with
her peculiar power of self-possession.
"I don't see how we can take the trail in
company when Raa's turned nasty. What's he
got such a hunch against Mr. Neumann for ?
He's not savage."
Peter whispered under her breath, " Good
^.______________________J.



<pb n="159"/>
TERRORS OF THE GULCH           159
for you, Pegtop," and gently clapped her hands
together.
Peggy took no notice. She was washing
Raa's eye, and there was an icy ring in her
soft voice. "Poor boy I" she said. "Poor
old lad I"
"It was his own fault, Peg," explained Jim.
"They had to defend themselves, or he'd have
torn Neumann's throat out. He went for it."
"Why ?" Peter's demand came short and
sharp.
Instantly Neumann proceeded to explain,
with almost exaggerated good-fellowship and
honesty. "Well, Miss Peter, it amounts to
this-a low-down neche, who was prowling
around and sure poisoned my huskies at the
Log House, stole the dog and brought him
along on our trail. As you know, I was hard
up for a team; our dogs were about tuckered
out-what was left of them. Well, I don't
pretend I didn't give him a round sum for
the brute. I offered Mis' Lockhart four hun-
dred. I was straight enough. When that
Indian came around with the offer I didn't
start back on the trail to give you the dog,
because I was in a hurry with that load of
pelts. I went on and did good business.
Afterwards the dog got free and it seems he
trailed you. Well, let me tell you he was a



<pb n="160"/>
I6o  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
sight of trouble. Dangerous he was; you
couldn't touch him, neither me nor Louis-
could we ? " he appealed to La Perle, who made
an expressive gesture of despair, while his sharp,
squirrel-like eyes watched the faces of the girls.
" Aha, that Raa-he is a wolf, la ! "
"You mean you both beat him ?" Peter
shot the accusation at Neumann. Her eyes
seemed to flash in the firelight.
"Aw-well, you can't let a husky have his
own way. He'd got to pull and we made him
pull." Neumann spoke sulkily.
Then Jim, still brimming with satisfaction,
broke in, " And, Peg, I was right about that
Cree. Queer how one hits the nail slick on the
head sometimes;" he laughed, with a little self-
conscious pride. "Why, I said he'd stolen
old Raa to make a deal, knowing they were
short of dogs. When we met just now I
asked Neumann straight. I said, 'Did you
get Raa, and wasn't he sold to you by a low-
down Cree, who'd been hanging around at
home ? ' and he said right there that's how it
was. Neumann allows he was pressed or he
wouldn't have done it, but still it is a rum
notion how you see a thing sometimes. I
know I do." There was a modest pride in
the boy's assertion. He looked pleased.
"Cree? " said Peggy in her cool way.



<pb n="161"/>
TERRORS OF THE GULCH             I6i
"Ah, I suppose you mean the poor man with-
out an ear. Didn't you pay him all he asked,
Mr. Neumann? Because he seems to stick
to your trail."
" Or ours," put in Jim, who was feeling how
much he knew about everything.
But silence had fallen on Neumann, and his
jaw dropped as he stared across the fire at
Peggy's little upright figure and set face.
La Perle swore audibly. Jim glanced from
one to the other.
"Cree without an ear-" began Neumann,
and seemed to choke on the word.
" He trail us-you, hey ? " put in La Perle,
and made matters more vivid by staring round
over his shoulder into the night that seemed
darker because of the cheerful flames.
Neumann promptly cursed him. Obviously
he was angry, and, what was more remarkable,
afraid. "How could he pick up our trail ?"
he demanded suddenly of his partner. " Why,
last time we saw that neche was on the Slave.
Ain't his district up on Coppermine River?
Eh, Louis ? Why, I'll take my oath--"
"I thought you said he sold Raa to you last
April on the way between Missinnippi River
and Cumberland House Settlement ?" broke
in Peter, sharp as a frost and as hard. "Now
you say you never saw the man."
~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ~~~~~~~L~~      F~



<pb n="162"/>
162 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
"Miss Peter, he was not the same Cree,"
answered Neumann in a dogged manner.
" There was a chap with no ear-or wounded
after that fashion. He was up on the Slave a
while back-never came south. There was
a Cree followed us and offered Raa for sale,
as I told your brother, an' he- "
" He had no left ear," said Peter. " I saw
him twice; Jim saw him; old Hearne saw
him. He came around Log House before you
ran in, and he went when you went. Now
then; there was only one Cree, and he had
no ear! We saw him more than once after-
wards. On your trail, like as not." Peter
said that with immense satisfaction, because
she saw both men were upset in no small
degree by this curious development of the
Cree story.
"Liar !" she whispered hotly to Peggy.
"He stole Raa. Why, it's plain they never
saw the Indian I "
Peggy agreed, nodding.
The two trappers were conferring in low
tones. Suddenly Neumann stood up, then
La Perle, and Jim rose with them. The three
stood together talking.
" Well, we break camp now," said Neumann.
"We've got the canoe cached close here, and
we're off up river for Slave. If we make a



<pb n="163"/>
IrMxuKu u riF THIE GULCH         163
good break we shall put a few miles between
us and this neche. We've got to lose him-
that's about it."
"Kill 'eem," suggested La Perle.
"An' where is he, hey ? Kill him yourself
if you can find him," answered Neumann
savagely. " I'm not partic'ler. Crees ain't so
precious in my sight. Well, we'll get on."
Peter and Peggy looked at each other with
triumphant eyes. Jim was expostulating; he
felt himself defrauded of companionship. He
admired experienced trappers who could tell
yarns of adventure, and these men he knew.
Then, in the moment when all five were
thinking least of such a chance, came a heavy
report, the acrid smell of powder and smoke,
and Jim staggered against La Perle, slipped to
his knees, and then fell prostrate.
Neumann caught up his pack, which he had
not unrolled, and went off striding into the
brushwood along the bank. La Perle bent
over Jim, lifted him a little, and turned him
over.
" Ze arm, see, ze shoulder." He pointed out
blood to stricken Peggy, who had rushed for-
ward. " It will mend; it is no'sing, he is
shock, that is all," and catching up his own
pack he disappeared after his partner.
"Of all the cowards " cried Peter sormily.



<pb n="164"/>
164  GIRLS ON      THE GOLD      TRAIL
" Look here, Peg, let's see if his arm's broken
first. No, look what a horrible hole in his
coat; but it might be worse-the bullet's gone
through something, Peg, because it's bleeding.
Let's pray it is nothing to matter very much."
Keeping herself up in this buoyant fashion,
Peter helped Peggy, who was a first-rate nurse
by nature, as her mother was. She had the
gift which is rare indeed.
As far as the anxious girls could judge Jim
should have been dead; but a bullet from a
trade muzzle-loader fired from, say, twenty
paces is not as effective as it is noisy. The
holster with the automatic on Jim's tough belt
had deflected the shot, which had torn the
flesh round his ribs in a sort of ripping wound
and passed out through the leather shirt in
front. No rib was broken.
Jim opened his eyes and said, "Where's
Neumann ? What's the matter ? " Then he
tried to sit up, but collapsed, and lay still,
looking at his sisters with troubled eyes.
Peter told him that Neumann had run like
a rabbit. " He thought you were killed, likely
as not." She laughed bitterly. "He was
pretty scarey, because he guessed the shot was
meant for him. So it was. Our friend the
Cree, Peg. Don't you see they were all stand-
ing up together in front of the firelight, and



<pb n="165"/>
TERRORS OF THE GULCH            I65
the man aimed at Neumann and hit Jim, who
was close to him. I wonder what that brute
has done to make the Indian hate him so ?
You bet he treated the poor creature as he
did Raa. One good thing, Pegtop, we're rid
of that crowd."
" We'll have to stay here till Jim's sound,"
Peggy told her in rather a sober tone. " There'll
be inflammation, Pete, and a good bit of bother,
but sure it might have been worse."
So the pair of them started off at once to
make a shelter for Jim till he mended. The
starlight made a soft shine that was not dark-
ness, yet made a mystery over the loveliness
of the creek, the valley, the green height that
hemmed them in, and the distant muttering
hum of the far-away rapids.
"I shan't mind stopping here a bit," said
Peter as she hacked away at spruce stems strong
enough to make a good-sized tepee, as the
Indian huts were called. " We'll let those men
get ahead. Anything is better than travelling
with them. My word, I was sick, Pegtop!
Queer how old Jim is carried away by Neu-
mann."
"Oh no, not queer, really." Peggy as usual
took a tolerant view. " Jim's a boy, and those
men can tell him so many things they've done.
All boys like ' toughs' who've had adventures ;
(2,396)
2                              t.-i



<pb n="166"/>
I66  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
it's natural."  Peggy sighed a little, much as
though she were Jim's mother, and thirty-nine
instead of hardly nineteen.
" I can understand Pierre Corraine for a
hero," said Peter; "but those men ! "
Peggy said nothing, but got very busy pull-
ing down pine boughs to thatch the tepee.
By the time grey dawn put the stars out and
soft mist drifted up the gulch from the river
that shelter was finished in fine style. On a
mossy flat just above the stream they had
chosen the place. First, three sapling poles
were tied together like a tripod over a gipsy
fire, and the rest were leaned against them,
leaving a space open towards the water. This
was hastily covered with boughs tied with
fibre from the inside of tough bark. In the
case of real tepees the Indians cover them with
this same bark, but that is for winter wear.
The girls did not expect to remain in the gulch
more than ten days perhaps, so they were con-
tent with temporary comfort. The tarpaulin
shelter they kept for themselves, because they
knew Jim would be restless and unhappy if
they did without.
As the light grew they climbed up the steep
above them and collected moss-the long, grey
"caribou " moss that is so dry and elastic.
This they brought down and made a grand



<pb n="167"/>
TERRORS OF THE GULCH              167
bed for Jim, and another for themselves under
their shelter.
"Let's have a real house for once," said
Peter. "I'm   so sleepy, I shall drop in a
minute."
But she did not drop. Instead they made
tea and ate joyfully, feeling oddly independent
and at home. They attended to Raa's eye and
fed him; then Jim awoke with a flushed face,
very bright eyes, and a tendency to discuss
the whole affair and defend Neumann. So
they partly carried, partly helped him into his
tepee and on to his moss bed, then bandaged
up his torn ribs with the bandages they had
brought, on Mrs. Lockhart's insistence, in the
little parcel of medical necessaries. Tea he
drank, but he would not eat, and the restless-
ness grew with the fever.
After that the two girls settled down to an
orderly life of fishing, cooking, and mending
all their well-worn garments. When the fever
went down Jim was weak, of course, and the
sisters agreed that it was necessary to shoot
one of the small spotted deer that came down
to drink at night. It had got to be done,
because Jim must have strong broth and meat,
but neither of them liked the job. Peggy was
the coolest and most determined.
Then a curious thing happened, that saved
--



<pb n="168"/>
I68  GIRLS ON      THE   GOLD    TRAIL 
them  some pain, though it was horrible to
witness.
Jim was asleep, and the sisters decided to
watch for some member of the smaller deer
tribe; so they loaded Jim's rifle and took up
a place close to one of the little tracks trodden
by the feet of night visitors to the stream.
They did not even whisper, but just watched
the beauty and mystery as the moon began to
rise over the woods on the heights at the head
of the gulch. The two girls were sitting on a
bank under the shelter of a moss-covered
granite boulder, big and overhanging; around
them were clumps of brushwood and banksian
pine; they were shielded except in front, and
remained still as the rock above them.
Presently Peter whispered, with her lips to
Peggy's ear, " I feel there is some animal on
the rock. Pray it isn't a puma ! "
Peggy shook her head, meaning this was
very unlikely, as it was.
Peter lifted her eyebrows with an expression
that said, "Can't be helped, anyway," and
froze in immobility.
In about half an hour a small spotted doe
came stepping delicately down the mossy
track to the water. Every minute or two she
checked and sniffed the air. Peggy felt her
sister quiver. There was something in the



<pb n="169"/>
TERRORS OF THE GULCH              169
dainty beauty of this woodland creature that
went to Peter's heart. From their almost cave-
like shelter they could see the great soft eyes
and wide, sensitive nostrils.
Just as the deer came opposite, and Peggy
sighted the rifle, there came a rush of shadow
from the top of the boulder, and down on the
deer came something big and immensely strong.
In a moment the killing was over, and the great,
wiry, furry shape was crouched on the doe's
body, making a snarling sound that was par-
ticularly venomous.
"Shall I shoot ? " whispered Peggy.
"No; if you miss-goodness I What is
it ? " Peter was shivering with excitement.
Next minute they knew, for the killing
animal raised itself up with a long rigid move-
ment, like a cat gives when she humps her
back and stretches all four feet at once. It
showed plain in the moonlight-the hideous,
wicked face of a big male lynx, the wide mouth
open, and the curious mad eyes glaring green.
For a moment it strained up, gripping the
doe's body with terrible talons, then it gave
a raucous scream, harsh and triumphant, as
though it were boasting to the whole night
what a fine thing it had done.
As a rule, all wild things of the woods keep
clear of the lynx, unless they must fight for
_    _---



<pb n="170"/>
I70 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
their lives; but on this particular night it
seemed that there was a rival, for the screech
was answered by one just as loud and hideously
vicious, and out of the shadows on the other
side of the track stepped one of those huge
wild-cats that woodsmen of the north call a
" catamount," and the French-Canadians usu-
ally a "lucefee."  They are rare, though the
wild-cat is common. They are nearly as
heavy as a lynx, and their claws and teeth are
terrific weapons too. They are also swifter
and more graceful than the lynx, which has
hardly any tail and very high, clumsy-looking
hindquarters. All these things the sisters knew,
because they had heard all sorts of yarns in
winter from old Hearne and other visitors
about forest beasts. They had often seen
lynxes, trapped them, and detested them, but
never before a live catamount.
This one faced the lynx with a succession of
yowling screeches that were enough to strike
terror into the woods for a mile round. Then
it sprang, and the fight that followed was the
most amazing exhibition of strength, swiftness,
and quite devilish enmity that the girls had ever
dreamed of. The screaming of the fighting beasts
was so deafening while it lasted that the girls
could only hold each other's hands and crouch
closer to one another in speechless horror.



<pb n="171"/>
TERRORS OF THE GULCH H            7i
Then, as suddenly as it began, the struggle
ended. The beautiful catamount was dead,
the under part of it torn to ribbons by the
terrible ripping talons of the lynx's hind feet.
The latter walked a few steps, stood still,
stretched up again, arching its back in a stiff
strain, gave one curious yell, and fell over
dead. When the girls looked at him after-
wards they saw that he was blinded and his
throat bitten to pieces. So both were dead.
They had killed each other I
"We'll bury them in the morning," said
Peggy, gazing down at the bodies. "Poor
things-what a noise! And, Pete, we can
have the doe; it is only killed, not hurt. Just
what we want for Jim."
They carried the spoil to the little camp,
and told Jim the story of the fight they'd seen.
He groaned because he had missed it.
"You don't see that more than once in a
lifetime," he said.



<pb n="172"/>
CHAPTER XI
THE BEAR ROCK
IN about ten days Jim was well, and his
strength renewed. The girls were perhaps
none the worse for that curious short holiday.
They declared they would visit their pretty
tepee and the graves of the two huge cats on
the way home.
"How    odd it seems," said Pete. "We
shall be back here in how long ? Six weeks,
Jim, shan't we ? My word! it will be Sep-
tember. We shall have to hurry if we want
to get home before the freeze comes." She
laughed.
Peggy did not laugh. She had a sober look.
They had lost two more weeks through this
accident-certainly no fault of theirs.
But fortune smiled on them once they got
afloat. Everything went well with a kind of
even success that was cheering. They had
three days of porterage through woods when
172
\: ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ^ga n
:'   .  -  * * - ^ ^^^^1_                            ^



<pb n="173"/>
THE   BEAR ROCK              173
rapids drove them ashore, and then they came
out on the shores of the Lake of the Great
Slave. There is a story about how that lovely
lake came by its name, and the story is doubtless
true, but too long to tell here. It is told in
another place, is tragic, and very splendid.
The three on the hidden treasure trail knew
nothing about it, but they gazed at the calm
beauty of this heavenly place, with the sun
going down in amber and mauve, the woods
and hills rising mistily round the golden shine
of it, while the loons and herons called before
they went to roost.
There was only this between them and
Crooked River Creek ! As they camped that
night they stared away and away over the
water into the distance that held what they
had come for. Peggy had tears in her eyes.
All three of them looked older, and different
from the three that had left the Log House
in May.
Next morning, as the sun rose, they pushed
off, doing exactly what Pierre Corraine had
told them to do. Not to navigate the shores,
or go round, which would take them many
weeks, seeing that Great Slave is longer than
Athabasca and very irregular, but to go straight
across, steering by compass and the sun, and
they should arrive hard by the entrance to



<pb n="174"/>
174 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
Crooked River. The width here was perhaps
thirty miles. Rather a big venture in such a
frail craft-well-laden, too. Nor was it like
going down a river; but not one of the three
gave a thought to risk. The whole business
was risk, when it came to that. From start to
finish there was danger.
They rested once or twice and took a little
pemmican. Then the farther shore rose out
of the silver lake, and after that they watched
it grow with eager eyes. In the afternoon
they landed, and the member of the party
best pleased to land was undoubtedly Raa,
who, by the way, was a very sound dog again
and ready for anything.
Where they landed they camped for the
night and, sitting round the fire, made plans
for the real business of the expedition-that
is to say, the moving and conveyance of the
treasure.
"It can't be very much-I mean as to weight,"
said Peggy. " How many pounds, Jim, do you
think ? What's our pack now ?"
Jim said it had been under two hundred
when they started-a very light pack for three;
now it was less, of course. He couldn't give
a guess about the gold dust.
They spoke of it in whispers, because it
seemed rather awe-inspiring ! Gold dust and
I  ,



<pb n="175"/>
THE BEAR ROCK                1 7
nuggets that were to mean so much to their
mother for the rest of her life. Suddenly
Peter said,-
"I remember hearing Dad say that seven
thousand dollars weighs thirty-five pounds in
dust. Well, we can carry thirty-five pounds
besides our pack, can't we?  It'll fill up the
canoe though. Ought we to have another
canoe, Jim ?"
So they talked and ate, came to no conclusion,
and fell asleep in their blankets.
Next morning, at dawn, they started up
into Crooked River Creek, the girls thrilling
in every nerve with excitement, Jim very stolid
to conceal his.
The memory of Gijik's directions, picturesque
as they were, remained in the minds of the
three. Crooked River certainly came up to
its name ! Streams ran down into it from
wooded swamps, from rocky ravines, and they
saw several strange, new things. In one place
a colony of beavers had built a dam right
across the mouth of a tributary water, so com-
pletely stopping it that they had caused a
swampy lake behind, which was spreading far
and wide. The Lockharts stopped the canoe
to watch these strange creatures working, for
they were not the least shy. No doubt they
had begun by felling timber across the stream,



<pb n="176"/>
176 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
gnawing through poplar, willow, alder, and
birch till the trunks began to obstruct the flow
and make a sort of bridge; then they started
on making a cement of mud and little twigs,
which they carried in cakes under their chins,
and filled up the framework till nothing but
dynamite could smash their building. The
Lockharts had seen them at work before on
the Missinnippi, but never such a fine piece
of engineering as this one on Crooked River;
so they rested on their paddles, watching these
curious people climb out, looking so shiny
and smooth, pulling long bits of wood which
were carried to places where the fortress must
be strengthened and heightened.
" Silly fools," said Jim, stroking Raa, who
was snarling viciously at these odd, busy
people, "they'll turn the whole country up
there into a swampy lake. What's the good ? "
" It's wonderful," murmured Peter. " How
can people hurt them ? "
"Jolly good thing they do," retorted her
brother. "You don't want all the rivers
stopped, and the woods turned into marshes
just to amuse a silly idiot like a beaver I If
the trappers didn't keep them under, where
would any one be ? "
As Peggy and Peter had no idea of the answer
to this question they said nothing, while Raa



<pb n="177"/>
THE BEAR ROCK               I77
agreed whole-heartedly with Jim. He knew
by bitter experience that if you jump into a river
and grip a beaver that person simply goes to
the bottom and bites at you with his terrible
cutting teeth-the teeth that saw through
trees. And the one who is forced to give in
will be the attacker, because he can't fight
for long at the bottom of the stream. Then
the beaver wins, which is annoying to a wolf-
dog very much in earnest.
Crooked River Creek was some six miles
above the big beaver dam on the same side-
that was the western shore. It was about the
middle of an afternoon when the canoe opened
up the place, and the travellers knew it at
once. A creek, wooded yet rocky, crowned
by dark pines. On the farther shore of it,
built apparently close to the steep rise, there
stood a log-built shack.
"Oh !" murmured Peggy. "Oh, Peter I
Poor Dad ! "
As they turned into the creek not one of
them said anything more.
They landed. Then Jim, glancing up at
the lonely shack, said in a sober voice,-
" I vote we walk up the creek a little way,
just to be sure; you remember-the pine tree
above a rock shaped like a bear."
"We don't know whether the bear is sitting



<pb n="178"/>
178 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
down or standing, do we ? " asked Peggy, with
a little furrow of anxiety between her eye-
brows.
Then Peter began to laugh, and she laughed
so much that she sat down on a rock and sobbed
a little. Nobody said anything.
Jim went up along the shore with big strides.
He was feeling deeply, and he wanted to get
away from people and do something. The
place was not a quarter of a mile farther on,
and obvious if you knew the secret.
A sort of track went upward from the shore,
not a path, of course, but just a possible ascent
between rocks, brushwood, and trees. High
up, almost at the top of the rise, stood out one
big pine tree, blasted by lightning. It was
riven and jagged, with a branch or two pointing
out on one side. Below was a massive round-
topped boulder, really like nothing in particular,
but imagination might have suggested a bear
standing with drooped head looking down to-
wards the quiet creek.
Jim simply sprinted up the broken ascent.
The strong action worked off some of his
feeling, perhaps, and when he got level with
the rock on the hillside he allowed that it was
like a bear. Many times bigger, but there
was a space through the lower part that sug-
gested the curve of ribs, with rock for back



<pb n="179"/>
THE BEAR ROCK               179
and forelegs, and the smallish head of the
great Polar bear, so snake-like and wicked.
"That's it," he said aloud, and he stared.
The foot of the boulder was set in brush-
wood. Impossible to see if it was rock be-
neath. But there must be cracks, he guessed.
His heart beat faster than usual, but he did not
know that, for the excitement had got hold
of him.
Down on the shore the girls looked at one
another with rather shrinking glances.
" Pegtop, let's open the door and go in
before Jim comes back. Let's light a fire and
do something, now-directly. We can't sit
and think about it all. Please, Peg."
Peggy nodded, and, with Raa between them,
they hurried up towards this queer place,
which was probably a rest-house for hunters
coming down Crooked River to the Great
Lake-that is to say, a bunk-house, in the
language of the North. It was strongly built
of logs, which had warped a little in the summer
heat, <so that they did not quite fit together.
The roof was a thick thatch of coarse grass,
kept down by big flat stones-a protection
against snow, perhaps, and the fearful winter
gales. The small pipe of a stove came through
a hole in the wall, and there was one narrow
window, covered with parchment. The heavy
-___________________   ______ -t 3 S _tM^ ---  - -_- «-



<pb n="180"/>
i80 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
cross-barred door was hung on big leather
hinges-three hinges, made of strong caribou
hide, nailed with great nails.
The whole place gave the impression of
primitive strength, intended to withstand the
fury of incalculable forces. It made the sisters
realize on the instant how far north they were,
and how terrific winter must be ! They had
often thought the Log House was lonely and
beset by bad storms, but what must it be up
here in this wild creek ?
Peggy said suddenly, " We'd better get that
stuff up to-morrow, Pete, and pack it in the
canoe and get on back home as quick as we
possibly can. Don't you think so ? We could
be off in three days at the very latest." She
looked questioningly at her sister.
Peter's face was grave and pale under the
tan. In her deep-set dark eyes was a curious,
distant expression. " Yes," she said, as though
pulling herself back from something she was
watching. " Oh yes, Peg; of course." She
spoke briskly, but like an echo.
"You're not really thinking so," Peggy
persisted.
" Not ? Oh yes, I am-of course we had
better," said Peter, and she opened the door.
The thrill of entering this place changed
Peggy's thoughts. She stood still, looking
^ ,,,, - A D  f            l. IS<. 



<pb n="181"/>
THE BEAR ROCK               I8I
round. Not a large space, but big enough to
hold three bunkers built against the wall, two
on one side, one below the window, an iron
stove, rather large, a rough table, a bench,
and several stools. Behind the stove on the
wall was a good-sized cupboard, evidently for
the keeping of stores. The floor was of coarsely
shaved logs lying side by side, just to make it
drier, and the door could be fastened inside
by a stout beam of wood that might be let
down across it in two strong staples, after the
fashion of shutter bars.
"Not bad," said Peggy, and looked at
Peter. "Let's light the stove. We can get
wood pretty quick. We may as well stay here
while we are here. Three days at the outside.
Come on."
Peter " came on" as she was asked, but in
the same speechless fashion.
They ran about getting wood, ana the roar
of the fire in the stove was so amazingly home-
like and comfortable that in a few minutes
quite a new complexion was put on things.
Peter woke up from her queer trance and
laughed. The bag of flour-the last-was
opened, and Peggy, with a flushed face, started
to make "unleavened cakes," for the yeast
was finished. Peter rushed down to fish,
but also demanded bacon. Peggy had been so
(2396o)                          12



<pb n="182"/>
I82  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
mean with it lately that this must be allowed
also-on such a red-letter day.-
When Jim came back preparations were well
forward, and he struck the last note of triumph.
He'd found the place-yes I He'd been hunt-
ing around the base of the bear-yes! He
believed he knew where the treasure was
buried. That was the culminating "yes" in
answer to very many eager questions.
That was a wonderful festival. The thought
that prevailed was-their mother. They would
be able to tell her about this shack and that
it was by no means wretched. A man living
there would not be subjected to severe priva-
tion if he had faithful friends to look after him
like the Indian pair. Poor Tom Lockhart had
been terribly ill here, but he had not suffered
extreme misery in his illness. There was a
lot of comfort for her in that. And then came
the success of their amazing trail, and the
money Dad had won to educate Don and Dolly,
and make her comfortable for life.
They sat outside on the slope that fell
towards the creek, discussing it all, because the
shack was too hot inside, and they were all
so used to open-air sleeping beneath the great
white stars.
Jim and Peggy talked and talked, settling the
swift discovery of the gold and an immediate
r           * -^---



<pb n="183"/>
THE   BEAR ROCK            183
start back. Peter sat with her long brown
fingers locked round her bent knees, staring-
up the creek to the bend where the pines
shut it off, down to where the opening curved
out into the river, across at the steeps opposite,
back at the high rocks behind I She tried to
think, but could not, because her mind was
obsessed by immense dread. She was dark-
ened in her spirit by a premonition more dis-
tinct and overpowering than any she had had
in her life yet.
Would they ever see home again ? Would
they be able to get away from the horrible force
that was entangling them, hemming them in,
cutting them off from help and hope ?
That was how she felt, and she fought against
the feeling with all her common sense, hiding
her mind from the others because it would
be so mean to try and put fear into them,
where, apparently, no fear was. One thing
she did say: "Why not carry the canoe up
to the shack ?"
"Why ? " asked Jim, who was lying flat,
staring up at the stars coming out. The
moon would not show till after midnight.
"Why not ?" retorted Peter. " Something
happened to it once-just because we were
sure it wouldn't. I think it's nice to have it
close."



<pb n="184"/>
I84   GIRLS ON     THE    GOLD    TRAIL
" Oh yes, why not ? " agreed Peggy. " There
is no one here, but still one may as well be
extra careful. You don't lose by it."
So Jim went down, fetched the canoe up
on his shoulder, and laid her down close by.
" Sleep in her if you like," he said to Peter,
just a little scornfully.
"Better than be left with nothing to get
home in," she retorted.
Soon after that they all three got their
blankets and rolled themselves up in peace
and security to sleep.
Peter slept, because she was tired with hard
work, but only for about two hours. Then
she found herself awake and uneasy; she be-
lieved it was because of this dread in her mind.
There were clouds over the stars, a sort of
misty wrack had come up from the far-away
lake perhaps, and the noise of wind in the
pines mingled with the ceaseless rush of the
river. She rolled over and took a new position,
looking at the canoe with satisfaction. Then
she noticed Raa-not asleep, but still, with
his ears cocked, moving his wrinkled eyebrows
over red speckled eyes. She could just see
the light behind them, inside them, as you
do in wolves' eyes. He was listening, like
herself.
Then a strange thing happened. Peter heard
" _;  " »  i"  R A  . e _L.  E  a  e _. a . 1 "i":5



<pb n="185"/>
rHE BEAR ROCK              185
a soft hiss in the air, and, from over the shack
it seemed, something swished and fell close
to her. It knocked against the canoe with a
little tap as it grounded. Raa lifted his head
and stared, his lip curling up with challenge.
Peter raised herself on her elbow and looked
at the other two. Both slept deeply. Then
she stretched out an arm and took the thing
that had fallen. It appeared to be a stick.
It was an arrow. The point had stuck into
the ground, but instead of remaining so the
arrow fell over, because something was tied to
the feathered end. Immensely interested, the
girl examined this very carefully, and saw it was
a strip of bark, and on the smooth, inner sur-
face marks were made, apparently by a bit of
charred stick, because they were quite black.
That much she could see, holding it close to
her eyes, but it was not writing. Anyway,
she thought, as her mind began to grasp the
significance of this queer happening-anyway,
it must mean something very important. Was
it a warning ? If so, from whom ?
After a few minutes' thought she woke the
other two, in whispers. She would not take
it on herself to wait till daylight. Peggy came
awake like a bird-it was her way.
" What is it ? What's the matter, Pete "
Her voice was anxious.



<pb n="186"/>
I86 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
Jim took more rousing, but he came awake
obediently in answer to Peggy's urgency.
Then Peter showed the arrow. She told
them she was awakened by a feeling of listen-
ing, and saw Raa was listening too. Then this
thing fell, and she said she was almost sure
it came from the rocks behind the shack-that
is, the high, rugged rise above them.
All three looked up as she whispered, and
noticed the way this cliff-like steep shot up
at the back of the bunk-house. Pines grew
at the top, up the side too-clumps of pine
everywhere, that clothed the height in black
shadow. Of course, any one might conceal
himself there; but whoever it was must have a
very intimate knowledge of their position to
have dropped this arrow so accurately.
"We can't see," said Peggy at last, after
fingering the message into every position. " It
is cloudy, the stars are gone, and the moon
doesn't show. Let us go into the shack and
light up some wood."
With one accord the others agreed, and they
all went into the dim hut, furtively, as though
expecting to find something mysterious.
" You bet it's that Cree again," said Jim.
"Jim, you've got that poor Indian on the
brain," Peggy told him.
"Well, he shot me."
" """" " " * ,   * ,A  -  -E>- 4 , *X-X.             ,



<pb n="187"/>
THE BEAR ROCK              187
"He never meant to," Peter said in her
positive way. "He was shooting at Neu-
mann."
" We can't tell for sure."
" Oh yes, we can. The whole story strings
out like links in a chain," answered the girl.
" But Neumann--"
" Jim, don't you see what lies that man told
you ? He said the Cree sold Raa to him, and
then later, when he was afraid, he let out
that he'd not seen the man for months, and
that his hunting district was up on Coppermine.
Neumann's horribly afraid of him, that's one
comfort."
" So am I," said Jim, in such a sober voice
that Peter was seized with one of her giggling
fits.
Peggy " hushed "them in her motherly way.
She was kneeling by the stove, holding the
strip of bark to the light from the crackling
sticks. "Oh, do look," she urged. "What
on earth does it mean ? "



<pb n="188"/>
CHAPTER XII
THE BLASTED PINE
LACK marks, made obviously by charred
wood. And the marks, or figures, were
five in number.
The first was upright, a strong line down,
with one or two strokes sticking out from it
at one side.
The second was lumpish, something of a
blot, but oblong, not round.
Then came two shapes or hieroglyphics side
by side. Each a line down and four points
to it, with one of the upper points crossed by
a bar.                f
The last, separate, drawn low on the piece
of bark, was a thing rather like a toadstool
with a long stalk and top that was not smooth,
but rather like the coat of a porcupine.
Three heads bent over the mystery, and
three people remained speechless. Then Peter
broke silence.
188
.p   .-p         -
. ~ ~  :. .  . ^ ^ ^ , . . . . , . , , .    : 



<pb n="189"/>
THE BLASTED PINE            i89
"If only we knew one of the things, we
should hit on the others. Just one !"
But that was no help, because they could
not hit on one; or on the reason for the
sending, or who the messenger was; or why
he didn't come and speak instead of firing
an arrow !
At the end of an hour they all were tired,
but no nearer the answer. Jim did not last
out nearly that time, but went to sleep again,
growling about people having no sense. Peter
held on; but at last she said her head was
spinning round, and she thought the secret
might be revealed if they stopped looking at
it and did something else for a few hours.
Then she too went to sleep, and only Peggy
kept to it alone. Upside down, sideways,
every way, what was it ? She could not sleep,
because she felt sure that very much hung on
the answer, something immensely vital to their
enterprise.
In the grey of dawn Peggy rose from her
stool by the stove and went out, stepping softly.
Raa got up too and went with her, leaving the
others like two chrysalis in their blankets.
With her hand on the dog's head Peggy went
along the broken ground above the shore,
picking her way between rocks, brushwood,
and stony slopes. White mist filled the course



<pb n="190"/>
igo  GIRLS ON     THE    GOLD    TRAIL
of the creek, through which towering pines
shot up in dark smudges. There was some.
thing in this creek that made for a sort of
awesome loneliness, thought the girl, more so
than the green gulch in Slave River; she
didn't mind that at all.
She went along the trail Jim  had taken,
quite understanding where it should lead to;
it was a very rough track, of course, leading
through undergrowth which her brother had
trodden down and broken in several places.
Peggy looked at this rather frowningly. In
the back of her mind was a sort of uneasiness
about the perfectly open way in which Jim
had trampled a path up to the Bear Rock.
Surely it would have been wiser to conceal
their trail! Then she thought, what did it
matter? They would dig up the gold dust
and bring it down to-day-at the word her
heart leaped. To-day, after all these weeks.
She stood still, looking-looking. The sun had
risen, and the tree tops came out clean above
the white fog. With the light full on it
stood a tall, black fir stem-it had no top, be-
cause it had been seared by lightning, but from
one side stuck out two or three jagged boughs,
leafless like spikes.
In a rush the first picture on the bit of bark
came before the girl's mind.
J                        B-^-:



<pb n="191"/>
THE BLASTED      PINE        I9I
It was the blasted pine over the Bear Rock.
Well, then, might not the next picture, the
oblong blot, be the rock itself ? Of course.
She turned round and hurried back, Raa
trotting at her heels, and found Peter standing
outside the shack waiting for her. Jim had
gone down to bathe.
"I've lighted the stove, the water will boil
directly, and we've got some fish over from
last night. Pegtop, what's the matter ? Any-
thing happened ? "
"I believe I know what the first pictures
mean. Here, let me look at the bark."
Peggy looked only once, and a flush spread
all over her cheeks and neck as she told her
discovery to her sister.
" Then if that's a tree," cried Peter, thump-
ing the table with a brown fist, " I know what
the last thing is. It's a cedar-that means it
is Gijik. My word, how great I"
So Jim found the rest of the party thrilling
with excitement. He agreed with their notions,
but instantly asked what the star-fish were in
the middle.
" Pegtop and I have found out three-that's
more than half," retorted Peter briskly. "Now
it's up to you to find out what the rest means.
It is rather important, because it explains the
message when you come to think of it. I mean
..c_



<pb n="192"/>
192 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
we know the pine and the bear rock, we know
Gijik. Well, we don't know the other things."
" No, dashed if we do," allowed Jim. " Let's
have breakfast. Then we'll get on to this job,
all three of us, and get it over. It won't take
long."
Presently they went, carrying one of the
rubber bags, the axe, and the small shovel
and fork they had brought for this purpose.
Also, they all had knives and the " guns," while
Jim carried his rifle slung over his back. They
went in high hope. They worked all day round
the base of the great boulder, and they found
nothing at all! It was rock, rock everywhere
under the thin earth surface and scrubby
brushwood ! That night they were depressed.
Jim wondered whether any one had found the
stuff and taken it away. Peggy looked horri-
fied at this idea, but said nothing. Peter was
quite decided.
" Oh no," she said, "no, certainly not.  I
shan't believe that. For one thing, the place
isn't broken up as it would have been if men
had been hunting there-"      She paused,
and a new expression came into her eyes;
they narrowed as though seeing something
far off. "And, besides," she went on, " if
they'd found the gold, Neumann and La Perle
wouldn't be hanging about our trail. They



<pb n="193"/>
THE BLASTED      PINE        193
were after us from first to last-I'll vow they
were. And they're somewhere now, and it's
because of that gold."
" Oh, Pete ! " gasped Peggy uneasily.
" You're so set against them that you can't
see fair," said Jim.
" Of course, I'm set against them," went on
the girl hotly. " I'm dead sure those men hung
about Dad to steal his stuff, and that's what Gijik
meant by men with bad hearts. They were
tricked at the time, but they got away with
his Winchester-other things too, I daresay."
Jim grunted, but Peter swept on with little
fierce gestures of her long brown hands.
"I'm dead sure they are somewhere about
now, and that's why-"     She pulled up
with a cry and wrung her hands together in
an ecstasy of triumph. " Oh, Pegtop, don't
you see-the pictures on the bark ! The warn-
ing to us ! Those two figures are men. Look!
see "  She sprang up from the bench, with
one stride was at the bunk, and fished the strip
of bark from under the blankets. "Peggy,
look, they are two men with guns, or sticks,
in one hand; probably meant for guns, to
show they are dangerous. There, you have
the whole story. The place where the trea-
sure is hidden, and the enemy against us, and
Gijik's name. It's clear as the stars."
AMM _  ,



<pb n="194"/>
194 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
" To you," said Jim. " Doesn't strike me
in the same way. How do you feel, Peg ? "
Peggy gazed at the figure on the bark.
"Well, I rather think Peter's right," she
allowed.
Peter gave one skip. " Now we know, we'll
burn the message," she said, and promptly
pushed the bark into the stove.
Jim looked on stolidly. Both girls were
against him, but his opinion still held.
"This doesn't tell us where the gold is,"
said Peggy plaintively, nodding towards the 
flaring bark. 
"Must be at that place," Peter told her.
"We must go on till we find it."
Next morning they were off at dawn again, 
and all day long they worked, finding it as
hard as the trail or paddle. But they left Raa
at the shack, because Peter's certainty impressed
the other two enough to make them give way
to her suggestion. All the stores were put
inside the shack, the canoe against the door,
and Raa hard by on a long leash.
"They won't dare shoot him yet," said
Peter.
But no gold was found, and at twilight they 
went back very silent. 
Raa jumped up to greet them. He looked
pleased and comfortable. On the ground near
i



<pb n="195"/>
IJ1 lw  i AO lJD) rPINIE     195
tim was a gnawed bone with red meat still
tanging to it.
" Hullo, deer meat ! "exclaimed Jim. " Now,
who on earth--"
Peggy had jumped over the canoe and
ntered the shack, and a cry from her inter-
upted the dog questions.
She came to the door holding up a piece of
bark, her blue eyes very wide and startled.
" It was on the table," she said. " At first
thought it was the other, and then remem-
iered we'd burned that. Look ! "
Peter seized the message and stared. "Ah! "
came like a sigh almost. " I told you, Jim."
Only four figures this time. First, the tree
lone, larger, very definite.
Secondly, the two little pictures that might
be intended for two men walking, one behind
he other, holding guns.
Lastly, the cedar sign low at the foot.
" No bear this time," said Peter thought-
ully, "but the enemy-and the pine. The
pine first and largest. Jim, we've got to go
ip the rock; the gold is by the pine tree."
"Looks so," said Jim. He was rather
startled.
" Let's go back to-night," urged Peter.
They all looked at one another with question-
ng eyes.



<pb n="196"/>
196  GIRLS ON     THE   GOLD    TRAIL
"I'm rather used up," said Peggy. "Why not
morning ? Let's have supper and go to bed."
Later on Peter remarked that she would
give much to know whether it was Gijik who
was warning them after this strange fashion.
"Must be the old Cedar," said Jim lazily.
"Who else is there ?"
They went to sleep without answering that
question. Raa could have told them, but he
was asleep, dreaming of fresh deer meat and
an interesting person he'd never seen before.
When they all went out on the third day
they knew what they would do, and lost no
time in doing it; that is, they climbed up and
over the huge boulder that bore resemblance
to a bear, and again up to the foot of the
blasted pine that shot up on the rock above.
It was a strenuous business, that climb, as the
boulder was smoothed by centuries of wind,
snow, and frost, while nothing grew on it but
moss and lichen. They helped each other up,
clung like forest cats to the smallest crevices,
and finally landed up on the top, which was
slippery as the sides.
"Remember it's the tree we've come for,"
Peter reminded them, clambering ahead on
her hands and knees, as the safest means of
progression.
When they came to the tree the size of its
A -   _   _s _   ~~~~



<pb n="197"/>
THE   BLASTED     PINE        I97
spreading roots was an astonishment; they
struck down outside into root cracks, and they 
were deaAn most of them, for the tree had been
killed in some storm, and had rotted by de-
grees inside trunk and roots.
If the minds of the searchers had not been
fixed on the tree they would not have found
what they sought. But they tried nothing else,
only the tree, and by this concentration they
won.
In the hollow   roots buckskin bags were
stuffed-shabby brown buckskin, in colour
much like the perished wood. After the first
half-choked exclamations no one spoke, and
presently it became plain that to reveal all
they must split and cut out the roots.
Hours they worked, silent most of the time,
because something like awe had taken fast hold
of their dazzled minds at the amount of this
treasure. Not that the actual gold dust affected
them as it did and does gold-diggers and ad-
venturers of all ages. They were too simple
and wholesome in their way of looking at life.
They did not want the things gold would buy
-on the contrary, they were rather afraid of
it. But the awe was inspired by the thought
of their father's labours, and the duty they
owed to him that their mother should profit
by it. It was a straight outlook; they all
(2,396)                          13



<pb n="198"/>
198  GIRLS ON     THE    GOLD    TRAIL
thought the same, and they all felt a certain
dread of the fact that they-and they only-
had got to convey this weighty mass of dirty
brown bags all those hundreds of miles back
to Log House ! It would weigh as much again
as their simple pack.
They crouched round and stared at it all.
Jim began to calculate according to rules told
him by those who were wise in such matters.
Seventy pounds of dust would be valued at
fourteen thousand dollars. He guessed they'd
got near two hundred and fifty pounds here
in weight. Well, that meant- Jim became
confused at this point, while Peter stared at
him with dazzled eyes.
" We'd better get it down, and then home,"
said Peggy, sighing.
" Home ! " echoed Peter, startled.
" To the shack, I mean. Oh dear, what a
desperate bother gold is," commented Peggy
in her soft, old-fashioned way. " We're much
happier without it-much."
" Well, if we don't take jolly good care we
shall be without it," retorted Peter. Then she
whistled softly the song her mother sang when
they were small and the snow came:-
"And what would the robins do then, poor things:
They'd creep in a barn to keep themselves warm
And put their heads under their wings, poor things."
_~V P-'S'  : 
W = _4



<pb n="199"/>
THE BLASTED      PINE       I99
"It's mother's, you see, not ours," she ended
valiantly.
They put a lot of small bags into the rubber
bag, and lowered it down over the " Bear."
Then Peter went over, emptied it, and sent it
up for the rest. When they were all landed
once more, without broken bones, at the base
of the Bear Rock they settled to pack the
rubber sack full and drag it. What was over
they could carry by hand and pocket. In-
deed, it is wonderful what you can stow on
your person. Gold dust weighs heavily in
proportion to its size, as any one can under-
stand.
Buoyant with triumph and excitement, the
three started to drag the rubber sack along the
trail, crushing and breaking the brushwood,
and making an astounding amount of noise.
Peter said she felt ready to jump over the
creek, and Peggy's face was dimpled with smil-
ing joys. Her part was to go ahead and make
the trail easier by getting rid of branches and
stones, and so on. As twilight had snuffed
out day in the depths of that rock-bound creek,
the sooner this job was done the better, they
all thought.
This endeavour had proceeded for about
fifty yards or more, when the undergrowth ahead
of Peggy was divided silently, and a startling



<pb n="200"/>
200  GIRLS ON     THE    GOLD   TRAIL
figure stood directly in the path. If an angel
had appeared with a flaming sword the girl
could not have been more surprised.
It was a woman, an Indian, and, according
to white people's calculation of age, a girl little
older than Peggy. She was pretty, too, with
very large, intelligent black eyes, and two tails
of black hair braided with beads and wool that
hung down below her waist over both shoulders.
She was dressed in leather, fringed and em-
broidered, and her little feet were covered by
dainty moccasins with white tops of cured
doeskin. She held out her hand with an im-
perious gesture to stop Peggy's advance. Her
movements were as quick and vehement as
Peter's, but quite noiseless, and it became evi-
dent at once that she was disturbed and angry
even. She slid by Peggy and checked the
advance of the other two. Then she tried by
signs to make them see that all this was en-
tirely wrong. She pointed at the sack, made
indignant gestures towards the broad and
crushed trail from the Bear Rock, and finally,
with a quick hand on Jim's arm, pointed down
hill to the creek and the water.
" She means we've made a trail like a coach
and six horses," said Peter, looking at her
brother. "My word, so we have! I say
-this to the girl-" are you Mitawawa ? You
/:?-      7 .."            ... 



<pb n="201"/>
THE BLASTED      PINE        201
bet she is, Jim. Pegtop, she sent us the bark
pictures. Sure, isn't she a sweet thing !"
"Me Mitawawa." The girl nodded and
tapped the breast of her shirt. " Trail bad-
all bad," she went on, trying to put her ideas
into words, but failing for want of know-
ledge of English words. "Mitawawa see-
bad trail."
She whipped out of her pocket a buckskin
tump line with a slightly-made cradle of strips
attached, and slipped it over the sack. Peter
instantly seizing her idea, helped with very effi-
cient fingers, and in a minute the weight that
seemed so ponderous to the three was up on
her slight, wiry shoulders. Then with a ges-
ture expressive of haste she went off down the
rugged slope, making   for the water-not
straight, but picking a crooked trail where
footmarks would be least visible.
" She wants to hide the trail," said Peggy.
" Look here, let's take our cue from her,
and all go separately. I'll follow Mitawawa.
You bet she's going along in the water. Jim,
you make a new trail between our track and
the creek. Pegtop can go back along the way
we've made."
"Good," Jim   agreed. "I say, Peg, it's
pretty plain she expects some trouble."
"Of course," said Peter, rather pleased at



<pb n="202"/>
202 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL                 ;
the way things were turning out to prove the i
rightness of her instincts. "Don't you see, H
Jim, we've got to get the stuff to the shack '
and leave those beasts uncertain where it i8.i :
I say, what a tip-top spree; they'll see the I
broad trail end-in nothing, all in one moment." ",
"Oh, they'll see we carried it. Any one }
would," said Jim, refusing to be uplifted into 'i
heights of excitement. "They'd know      we
should take it to the shack-I mean if there ,i
is any 'they' in the business. That's got to 
be proved." 
But Peter declined to listen to reasonable .'
arguments opposed to her certain convictions. '!
Off she went after the Indian girl, who had ,
won her ardent admiration in those few min- ,^
utes. " I wish I were as clever," sighed Peter 
as she fled down to the water in flying bounds 
that even Mitawawa could not have traced. ,'
Sure enough, there was the girl just ahead in X
the water, going at a pace that seemed a mir- ,!
acle, considering the weight she carried. Silent 
and swift, taking advantage of every bit of i
cover along the shore.
Peter kept behind in her tracks, but did not
approach. She thought she would be useful 
at the end of the journey in the climb to the
shack-the quieting of Raa, and the bestowal
of the bags in safety. Oh, where, where could
i,



<pb n="203"/>
THE BLASTED      PINE       203
they be put ? thought the girl as she sped
along. Well, it would not be for long; the
canoe should be packed and that haunted creek
left far behind within twenty-four hours. Her
heart bounded at the joy of this-done, done !
Mitawawa went up the shore at the most
pebbly point. She avoided rocks, because of
the print and slipperiness of wet moccasins;
she avoided sand for obvious reasons. Peter
followed her and slurred the shingle, going to
and fro herself and making confusion if there
should be watchful eyes. She did not quite
understand the position, which she was trying
to think out as she ran.
Supposing the warning justified, as she felt
sure it was, and these trappers actually on the
spot, why had they not tracked the three Lock-
harts to the hiding-place of the treasure ? Why
had they not already arrived at the shack with
threats ? She believed the Indian girl could
explain; but then she had no words. It
seemed odd that Neumann should keep hidden
and allow the three to get the gold into their
possession. Altogether the intention was not
clear to Peter.
She was still thinking of this when she
caught up Mitawawa near the door of the
shack. Raa was there, guarding the canoe.
He stood alertly, with a long smile and shin-
L_______f^..                              J^J



<pb n="204"/>
204  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
ing eyes, as the pair arrived. Obviously he
had accepted the Indian girl as a friend; she
spoke to him in her soft, guttural tones as she
came up. Peter opened the door, saw all well,
and stood a moment looking back. She made
out Jim emerging from the brushwood on the
shore, coming fast.
Then with startling suddenness the quiet
was rent by one piercing shriek-one shudder-
ing scream of terror and pain.



<pb n="205"/>
CHAPTER XIII
CAUGHT!
ETER    knew her sister's voice in that
dreadful cry, and just for the moment
she felt as though in a nightmare, limb-tied.
She saw Jim check in his oncoming stride,
turn, and run up the steep towards the old
trail which was in the wood on the slope. She
forgot the Indian girl and the gold. Noth-
ing remained in her knowledge but Peggy's
scream. If she'd gone on screaming, thought
Peter, the effect would have been less shock-
ing; it was the silence after that one shriek
which made the stab.
Jim had disappeared. Peter went with fly-
ing feet, and Raa on her heels. She never
noticed that, or remembered that she'd set
him free till she saw him: then she stopped.
" My word, that sack!" thought the girl, in
an agony of mind. If the enemy was around,
how could Mitawawa defend the gold against
306
E : : 



<pb n="206"/>
206  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
two men-alone, without weapons? Sick at
the delay, she seized Raa's collar and took him
back. The wolf-dog objected strongly; he
flattened his ears and snarled-for he knew
better than any one how near was the enemy
of himself and his friends. Peter coaxed, and
the dog let himself be tied in the doorway
with the long hide leash.
" That won't prevent them shooting you,
beauty," muttered the girl, with a choke in
her throat. " Oh, Mitawawa, what shall we
do? Did you hear my sister scream? And
now we've got all that gold. Can you stay
and guard it ? "
" Men, bad heart," said the girl with a
frown.  Then she added suddenly, "Him
no get gold now.   Oh no," and she shook
her head.    "Wolf-dog, Mitawawa, make
kill -"
"All right, my dear child, so long as you
can kill them, I'm agreeable. The thing is, I
don't quite see what's to prevent them from
killing you first. However, luck to us," and
she went off again at top speed.
But a few minutes had passed since that
cry, though it seemed quite a long time to
Peter. She went straight by the track they
had used each time, and in a dip buried in
brushwood came suddenly on Jim. He was
' ---- ;-\  wy ----?T "^ V" : 



<pb n="207"/>
CAUGHT I               2o7
kneeling on the ground, and close to him,
prone on her face, motionless, lay Peggy.
"Is she dead ? " demanded Peter with husky
abruptness.
" She's caught in a bear trap-her leg,"
answered Jim, then added, panting as he
strained at the spring, " Beastly thing-mind
your hands, Pete."
Peter understood in a flash which held for
her both horror and relief. Peggy was not
shot; it was a question of dreadful pain and, of
course, a broken leg-every kind of bad luck,
but not death. Light burst into Peter's gloom,
and instantly her active mind began to question.
" How-on-earth?     Jim, it wasn't here
when we came along this morning !"
Jim grunted. He was using the whole force
of his strong hands to break open the two lines
of iron teeth which held Peggy's leather leg-
ging and the slender limb inside it.
"I rather hope her leg-isn't-broken."
Jim breathed hard. "Look here, Pete-top
luck ! A stone caught in the hinge at this end.
You see, when they raked the dirt and leaves
over the trap, they forgot to make sure the
hinges were quite clear."
"' They' ? "repeated Peter. "Why should
any one- Jim, I see the whole devil's trick.
I -"



<pb n="208"/>
208  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
"All right-see away when we've got Peg-
top out of this. Here, lift up her shoulders.
I'll shift her legs. Pete, whatever you do,
don't touch that spring again."
Peggy was lifted clear and laid on the moss
a little way off. She lay quite white and still,
unconscious, but her heart was beating. Peter
was just starting down for water from the creek :
when a thought checked her.
"Jim, let's carry her home before we wake
her up. It will hurt her much more if we wake
her first. I say, what are you doing, Jim ? "
" Setting the trap again for the beasts who i
caught Peg," answered her brother in a dry'
voice. " I'll pay them."
Peter stood looking as he pulled the horrible 
invention along to the next drop in the track; :
then he smoothed earth, moss, and leaves over
it carefully, stood up, and looked at his sister.
"No stone in the hinge this time," he 
laughed, and his nice grey-blue eyes were hard
as flint. " I'll teach them."
Peter was disturbed. She did not like the !
idea at all.
"Oh don't," she urged. "Besides, what
if some one got caught who didn't deserve i
it ? Fancy if you smashed up Mitawawa,'fi
or Gijik ? Come on, pitch the horrible thing ;
into the creek; bury it down a rock crag 



<pb n="209"/>
CAUGHT !               209
-anything. It isn't decent war, that kind of
thing; it's simply brutal."
" We've got to get Pegtop back. Here, take
her feet on a bough; we'll make a kind of
stretcher." Jim ignored Peter's protest, and she
said no more-it would be no use at present.
Jim was in one of his real tempers, for he
thought the world of little " Pegtop." She was
his special friend, and the devilish trick had
roused feelings that would not easily be
soothed.
" I don't believe her leg is broken," declared
the girl, as they stepped carefully over the
broken ground. " Sure it isn't. Look, Jim,
her foot is straight."
" We can't be sure," the boy said. "Oh,
what's happened to what's-her-name ? Is she
at the shack ?" He dropped his voice to a
whisper.
" All right! IWhole show all right," whis-
pered back Peter. "Jim, don't you see now
that it's those two men ? They've been on
our trail all through. That Indian girl knew
and warned us. Don't you see they did this ? "
Jim was hard to convince as ever. " I don't
see why they didn't follow us up to the pine
and jolly well pinch the gold then. If they
were hereabouts they must have seen us."
"I see now; I see plain as the shack. Why,
JWa     5·--*~



<pb n="210"/>
21o  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
look here, Jim, they let us get the stuff down
because they didn't know where it was. Then
when they believed we'd got the whole lot
they set that trap in the trail so that some
one would get caught and we should all stop
-then they'd catch us defenceless and get the
gold easily. I   "
" Don't raise your voice, Pete," ordered Jim
briskly.
Pete dropped her tone again to a whisper.
"What royal luck that Mitawawa spoiled their
game ! I say, Jim, it was grand."
"Well, Peggy's caught. She came by the
old trail, poor old Pegtop I We shall get held
up, you know, Pete, for weeks. This is no
play."
Peter suddenly realized what that meant-
guarding the gold in the shack against desperate
and quite unscrupulous men, with autumn and
frost coming on, and the terrific barrier of the
winter trail between them and home. The
vision rose up like a great overwhelming
wave. Peter held her head up and faced it in
silence; then she said,-
" Well, what will be will be, Jim. I don't
believe wicked men prosper really, you know.
We shall win through-somehow. We've got
Mitawawa, and she's cute as a beaver. Per-
haps we'll find out where old Gijik's got to.
---.-p--,--. -



<pb n="211"/>
CAUGHT I               211
He'll help us if we are in a real fix. Hullo!
here we are !"
It seemed that the Indian girl was extremely
far-seeing. Instead of putting the sack in the
cupboard as you might expect, she had taken
out the buckskin bags and lined the rim of a
bunk all round with them, spreading a blanket
over all.
" Oh, moss-moss," said Peter. " It'll make
a soft bed and cover all this." She smiled at
the silent Indian girl, and patted her on the
shoulder in friendly fashion. Mitawawa looked
at them all three with grave dignity; then she
turned her attention to Peggy's leg.
Peter knew something of these things. You
will understand that everybody must who lives
hundreds of miles from a doctor, while the
Indians have their own methods and cures.
It turned out that the small bone of Peggy's
leg was fractured, and for the rest there was
a terrible-looking bruise, and swollen flesh
dinted with black holes where the teeth had
bitten. Mitawawa split from the lining of the
canoe a straight slip of cedar wood. With
this they made a splint padded with the band-
ages they had used for Jim, which were care-
fully preserved. With balsam and gum they
dressed the swellings, and just as it was all
over Peggy opened her eyes, stared at the
,                             E~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~t-li''C~i n'^lrtni ---  -*



<pb n="212"/>
212  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD       TRAIL
ceiling, said, "What's the matter ? Oh, my
leg !" and fainted again.
Mitawawa made strong soup out of pemmi-
can. Jim went out and cut armfuls of caribou
moss from the rocks at the back of the cabin.
And when the girl revived again she was more
comfortable and her voice stronger.
"I remember," she whispered to Peter.
"Am I here for months? Oh, how awful,
Pete ! Where's the gold ? Was it lost ? Who
found me ? "
Peter gave a brief, low-voiced account. They
had not seen any one, no. She told her Jim
had set the trap again. Peggy looked dis-
tressed.
" He mustn't. It is perfectly frightful, Pete,
when the thing goes off. If it had not been
for that stone I should have been simply
smashed into splints."
"I know. Well, they wanted you to be
smashed or killed-all one to them, Peg;
then they'd have rushed on and scooped up
the gold, and probably brained old Jim and
me. They didn't care; they made sure we
should come back along our track with the
dust."  She paused; then added, "So we
should if we hadn't met Mitawawa. How odd
it all is."
"Not odd," whispered Peggy, lying still



<pb n="213"/>
CAUGHT I                213
with closed eyes, " not a bit odd. Don't you
see it is our Guardian Angels, Pete-truly it is.
We shall get through all right; they are
stronger than wicked men."
Peter felt a sort of awe-stricken security at
this idea. Peggy was so good; she must be
right. There was a picture of a Guardian Angel
over Dolly's bed at the Log House. She re-
membered it.
"But," murmured Peggy, " we oughtn't to
set that bear-trap for them. It's horrible."
Then she dozed -   .c
Later on Jim came into the shack. He and
Peter had supper together, and gave a share
to the Indian girl, who had done cooking and
all sorts of useful jobs with the noiseless effi-
ciency of an Indian woman. Peter asked her
where Gijik was. She shook her head and
made a sweep of her arm suggesting distance.
"Him long trail," she explained, and that
was all she had words for. The rest was head-
shakes or nods and signs. When it was quite
dark she melted away into the night like a
shadow. No doubt there was Mitsa to be
looked after, but obviously she felt that these
three travellers were very much her job.
Jim refused to go to bed in another bunk.
He could not get out of his head that this
deadly enemy might come to see how bad
(29,)                             14



<pb n="214"/>
214   GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
Peggy was. Peter felt that too. She dozed '
with her head against Peggy's pillow. Hours
wore on, and the girl became feverish, asking
for water and tea; weak tea she begged for.
Then suddenly she began to talk in a rapid, 
febrile whisper.
" Pete, are you there ?"
" Of course," Peter assured her. 
"Pete, let them  come, those men.    Let
them  see I'm smashed. Let them    think I 
am much, much worse than I really am, and
that I'll have to stop here for months-till ,
winter. Let them think we haven't got the ,
dust yet. Sure they'll see how the trail never 
got here. Then they'll go away on hunts or 
looking for the gold. They don't know about
it-they only guess, they 'suspicion.' Make as .
though you and Jim had just fixed up to set 
down here till I'm well and about. Then we'll
creep away. I shall get well soon; we'll get i
off and be miles on the river trail before they ,
know we've gone. Do you see, Pete? Tell !
old Jim." 
"Jim   heard what you said; he's here. ,,
That's a first-class notion of yours, Pegtop. '
A regular inspiration, isn't it, Jim ?"  She
made a sign to her brother to agree at once.
"Don't you fret, Pegtop, we'll go for your,
notion," agreed the boy warmly. "It's one.i



<pb n="215"/>
CAUGHT !               215
of the best. Now you go to sleep and mend
up sharp."
When the girl was dozing again Peter whis-
pered, "How does it really strike you for an
idea?"
"Not sure. They are bound to try and
find out about Peg and our next move-who-
ever they are."
Peter detected this reservation, and chuckled
softly. " Oh, you'll see who they are. But
the more I think the more it seems to show
us a reasonable plan. If they think Pegtop is
going to lie here till about Christmas, you bet
they won't stand outside our door the whole
while. They are bound to move about-"
Having got so far, Peter gave a little gasp.
"What?"     Jim observed her face in the
glow of the stove.
"Jim-that Creel Don't you see they're
bound to be on the move if they are afraid
of him ? "
Jim considered, looking back to the gulch
on Slave River.
" They were afraid of him," he allowed.
Peter snorted. " Don't you remember how
they ran when you were hit? Why, they
were silly with fright."
The boy sat still, his arms on the table and
his gun loaded, close to his fingers. Peter sat
:- -            -_ 



<pb n="216"/>
216 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
on the bench with her head against Peggy,
waiting and planning out wonders of strategy.
The nights were still short, but getting longer,
and before dawn there was always a faint chill
and a clinging white mist.
Peter opened her eyes after a brief doze,
because Raa in the open doorway had risen
to his feet. His ears were flattened, his lip
raised, and his strong fore-claws seemed to
grip the ground.
Peter looked at him  and sat up with her 
eyes on the parchment window opposite. A 
dark blur almost effaced it, as it was not large 
-the shape of a man's head, the face pressing
in the endeavour to see. Peter glanced at Jim, 
who was sleeping soundly, and for the moment 
a sick fear seized her that the man would shoot
-then came the sudden conviction that he
would not till he was sure about the treasure.
Supposing he'd known that was in the bunk
their lives wouldn't have been worth the 
window pane.
Boldly Peter stood up and went to the door,
her hand on Raa's head. The man saw her
move, and appeared round the corner of the!
shack. It was La Perle, the rat-faced half--
breed. He looked at her, as she leaned against
the doorpost, with shifting, beady eyes.
Intense satisfaction seized on Peter's mind
__.



<pb n="217"/>
CAUGHT                 217
that she had the " palaver " and start of Jim.
He would wake, but she'd got the lead I
" You've nearly killed my sister, Louis La
Perle, with your devilish trap. It will be
months before she can stand," said the girl
hotly, but in a low voice. " It would serve
you right if I set Raa on you."
" Oh no, no, Mees Peter. What a peety to
have shoot your Raa ! Better keep him, hein?
It is mos' strange how your sister is so hurt.
Mos' str-r-range "-the r's rolled as Louis
raised his shoulders plaintively. "How can
we know she come along? No one come-
only your sister, hey ? There is bear in this
creek. We want him for meat. You see,
there. Well, is your sister so bad, then?
Can she walk ? "
" Walk ! "  There was a volume of meaning
in Peter's scorn. " I told you. We've got
to get back to Log House before the trail
freezes. We promised mother we'd get some
things Dad wanted her to have, and get back
smart."
"Tom Lockhart he hide some dust up
them rocks-we heard so." La Perle's face
became greedy and still meaner as he stared
at the girl. "That was talk on the Mackenzie,
hein! He hide it mos' careful. Come; shall
you look for this stuff ?"
IlA_---            __



<pb n="218"/>
2i8  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD     TRAIL 
Peter found Jim at her elbow; his gun was
in the bend of his arm.
"If you think we are going gold-hunting,
Louis La Perle, you've made the mistake of
your life. We've no notion of it. All we
want is to get my sister well and start off
on the home trail. If you want to dig for
dust, go and do it. We shan't hinder
you."
Peter was singing in her mind. "Oh, Jim,
you are splendid "
He seemed to have grown up on the instant.
The realization that these trappers were really
the enemy, and their treatment of little Pegtop,
had awakened a new spirit in him. Of course,
having a just mind, he allowed they didn't
know the victim would be Peggy; but still
Peter would have been as bad, and in the case
of himself worse, so Jim believed, as he was
their natural protector.
La Perle looked distrustful, then puzzled.
You could see the expression pass across his
mean face. He didn't know what to believe,
or what to think of their journey, unless it was
a treasure trail. Affection played a very small
part in the outlook of Louis La Perle. He
stood awhile, looking about in a downward
kind of way, kicking up the little pebbles 
with his toe, then he went, saying, " We shall 
i'b



<pb n="219"/>
CAUGHT !               219
be mos' pleased to help, as you are in trouble,
so long we stop 'ere."
" It was a lie about the bear," said Peter
hotly. "I don't believe that man ever tells
the truth."
"Probably not," allowed Jim gloomily. Then
he added, " They'll stick close, anyway."
"Oh, something will happen," declared
Peter. "It always does. What about Pegtop's
Guardian Angel ? It's grand luck that she
isn't smashed to splinters; but we'll keep it up
that she's bad-and it's true, she is bad. Come
and have breakfast, Jim. By the way, don't
you notice the kind of autumn smell in the air
now, the first thing ?"
Jim agreed, but said he wished he didn't.
It was getting on too fast! Then he went off
to bathe, with Raa in attendance.
Days passed monotonously for a while, and
to Peter, brave as she was, it became a time
of real trial, because poor Peggy could not be
left. She missed the hard exercise of the
previous weeks, the constant change of scene,
and the deep sleep at nights. Instead, there
was the life of the shack, with the everlasting
strain of the hidden gold dust in Peggy's bunk,
and the danger that the enemy might come on
something that would give them a clue.
Neumann turned up soon after La Perle,



<pb n="220"/>
220  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
pretended sympathy, regretted the trap " ac
cident," as he called it, and was inclined t
pick up intimacy with Jim. Peter saw with
thankfulness that Jim  was at last awake to 
danger. The appearance of these trappers
in the creek, for instance, apart from the warh-
ing of Mitawawa and the bear trap, was enough
to arouse question. Why should they come ?
It was not their district, but Gijik's; and in
any case it was not the time of year for trapping.
Pelts were not worth the carrying.
In those days Peter continued her develop-
ment fast on the finest lines. Night and day
she faced the strain with a level head and cheery
patience. In old days it had been rather the
rule for Peter to explode when life was tire-
some, and for the family to lean on Peggy.
Now Peggy, in the terrible pain and imprison-
ment that followed on the smash, leaned on
Peter, and never once found the prop fail.
Jim was splendid too, but a boy of seventeen
can only stand a limited period of sick-nursing 
and confinement, so he began to go farther
afield with the canoe-not for longer than 
hours, of course, but when you consider the
circumstances, even a few hours was rather a
strain !
Mitawawa came and went like a shadow. 
Always at dusk or nightfall. Always she was



<pb n="221"/>
CAUGHT I              221
cautious as a deer coming down to drink.
Peter got very fond of her, but the trouble
was that you cannot express your feelings or
fears when the other person does not under-
stand ! At the same time that constant dread
of danger prevented Peter from ever getting
slack. She wanted to tell the Indian girl
that they were pretending Peggy was worse
than she really was, but it was altogether too
complicated, and had to be left to chance.
Peggy was much better. Mitawawa took
the cedar splint off, and started a massage to
bring back strength to the very thin little limb.
And the first time Peggy stood up, looking
terribly white and pinched, she exclaimed,-
" Oh, Peter, the moose-maple! It is au-
tumn."
Peter had not told her that the cardinal red
was showing in the woods up the creek.
" Oh dear, we must go. We ought to start
now-at once," said Peggy, with the fretful-
ness of convalescence.
The Indian girl grasped her meaning. She
shook her head vigorously, making a panto-
mime of cold and ice, of fur and wrappings.
" Sled," she spoke the one word. "Ninny-
moosh " (dog) " yes."
" She thinks we shan't take the trail till the
ice is firm," said Peter to Peggy, as she lifted
^~~~~r·IPI1C"



<pb n="222"/>
222 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
her back into the bunk on to the fresh moss.
"Hullo I Just in time I Here's that lynx."
Peter always called Neumann the lynx and
La Perle the mink-the two forest beasts she
hated most.
- ^    -   ' - 



<pb n="223"/>
CHAPTER XIV
THE " WHITEFISH " MOON
PETER had not time to notice till after-
wards that Mitawawa had melted into the
opposite bunk under the blankets I It was
cleverly and swiftly done.
"Hullo, Miss Peter! Hope your sister's
mending," said the trapper. He was in the
doorway, because Raa had gone with Jim.
"Jim on the trail, hey ? "
"Jim's fetching rabbits for supper. We
want the skins, seeing what a while we shall
be held up, thanks to you." Peter was stiffly
defiant. "With luck, my sister may walk in
a month or thereabouts. You can't mend a
smashed leg under six or seven weeks-at
any rate in the Wild."
The man stared at her without answering,
and Peter realized that he was not interested
in what she said, or even thinking about it.
He shifted uneasily on his feet, and tried to
82



<pb n="224"/>
224 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
pierce the gloom of the hut with bloodshot
eyes that had a hunted look.
" Mr. Neumann," called Peggy, which made
him start in fright, " look round the door at
me, and you'll see what a poor thing your trap
made of me."
Peter did not like this, but she could not
interfere very well, so she stood aside and
Neumann took a couple of steps within. Being
within, he glanced casually at Peggy's little
pinched face. Whether she was alive or dead
was nothing to him, for his whole being was
centred on the gold dust-the treasure he was
sure Tom Lockhart had hidden before he
got too ill to move.
He gazed at the bunks and the cupboard,
at the floor-everywhere; and he noticed
that the bunk under the window looked lumpy
and full. He took a step towards it, and
Peter's heart gave a sick jump as she thought
of the Indian girl, for she knew this man
would not think twice about shooting her if
he fancied her an enemy.
In that uneasy moment came a swift diver-
sion in the shape of Raa, who ran into the hut
and made for Neumann like a streak. The
trapper tried to " pull his gun," but as the wolf-
dog went for his throat instantly, he had
no tine to fulfil that object, but flung up his



<pb n="225"/>
THE "WHITEFISH" MOON            225
arm, and the dog hung on to it with locked
fangs. He was mad, clawing at the man with
his hind feet and ripping the leather as with
knives.
Peggy said nothing, because she had fainted.
Mitawawa, under the blankets, hoped for the
end of the trapper, no doubt. Peter seized
the dog's collar and pulled with all her force
so as to choke him off. Then behind her came
Jim's voice. He had heard the din of conflict
and sprinted. His strength, added to Peter's,
dragged down the dog.
" I'll make you pay-for this," gasped Neu-
mann.
" What do you expect, man ? It's your own
fault. Once you ill-treat a wolf-dog he's after
you for life."
" Look at my arm," said the trapper.
"Look at my sister," ordered Jim passion-
ately, with an outflung gesture. Peter gazed
at him in a rapture of respect, for this new Jim
was after her own heart. With steely eyes,
wide and fierce, he met the man who had
believed him only a boy. "Now then, walk,
please. If you come here you may expect to
find the dog. I won't have you bullying my
sisters, see I "
Neumann retreated, blood running from his
torn arm down the rags of sleeve. What he
.rv .now,



<pb n="226"/>
226 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
said under his breath was no matter. When
he was outside he checked at a sudden call
from Jim, who, it seemed, had remembered
something forgotten at first in the tempest of
scuffle.
"Oh, I say, Mr. Neumann, isn't there a
Cree on your trail? I seem to remember
something when I was shot, and you and La
Perle made tracks. Well, he's here. I've seen
him this afternoon."
" You're trying to scare me, you-" The
trapper's voice grew thin.
" Oh, well, as you like. He won't mind if
you wait for him. He looks as if he meant
business-nothing sweet about him. He's got
the Cree paint-war-path rig-and he's got
only one ear-lost the left one. Perhaps you
know something about that ? "
Neumann said no more. Of course he knew
this was no scare, and he knew, too, that he was
up against a perfectly remorseless enemy whom
nothing but death could turn aside from re-
venge. It was no pleasant feeling !
Jim turned back into the hut, and as he
did so Mitawawa slipped by him and dis-
appeared.
" That was narrow," said Peter. " He walked
in and started looking at the bunks and cup-
board. He said nothing to Pegtop, but of
Lrr~c*·ll._



<pb n="227"/>
THE "WHITEFISH" MOON            227
course he saw that bunk looked lumpy I Nearly
as possible he found Mitawawa."
"Does it matter?" asked her brother,
taking a long breath and passing his hands
over his forehead. Truth to tell, Jim hated
being at enmity-he liked to be on good terms
all round, and by nature he believed in every-
body.
Peter said the girl did not wish to be seen
helping them. As Gijik was away she might
suffer; that was obvious.
" Did you really see that Cree," she asked,
"or were you bluffing to make them go ? "
Jim sat down by the table, while the girl
revived Peggy with strong tea, and proceeded
to tell them both his adventure.
"Where do you think he was, Pete ?"
Here Jim broke sticks for the stove, and laid
out a fine row of fish in the pan.
"Haven't a notion."
" Well, on the top of the Bear Rock."
" What I Why, though, was he standing up
there ? "
" You bet he wasn't standing-he was lying
flat like those chaps do. Must have seen me,
but he took no notice. You see I'd come up
from the canoe with Raa, just to see what those
fellows were doing with their bear-trap and
such like. I was looking on the ground mostly,
r     "  



<pb n="228"/>
228 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
and then something made me look up-you
know the feeling, Pete ? "
The girl assented. She was eager.
" Well, there at the edge of the rock was a
head, enough to give you dreams. Just that
queer, wicked head the Indians have when
they're feeling bad. Band round the forehead,
and hatchet face set like a carved image I He
was looking down into the creek, over the 
brushwood. As I said, he took no notice of
me. By the way, shows he never did shoot
at me, Pete I " 
"Of course not," agreed his sister. " Go 
on."
"Well, nothing really. He was looking-
looking over the wood down to the water; just
alert-like you'd stalk a caribou. They are
about the most sensitive things for knowledge. 
There was light enough for me to see he had 
no ear. I was on that side, you see, and his
hair fell forward. He moved like a mink or a 
fisher-cat. He seemed to flow when he drew 
back. Wonderful chaps, those Indians. Why,
we tramp like elephants compared to them- 
that is, if elephants do tramp; bison do, any- ;
way I Well, there he is, and I'll be surprised
if he doesn't get those two before long, They
can't find his trail-no one can. Best they
can do is to vamoose and put a few hundred
li



<pb n="229"/>
THE "WHITEFISH" MOON            229
miles between. Not that it matters. He'll
have them in the end."
Peter's mind thrilled to this strange story.
She was not sorry for those trappers, but the
duel between these men of the Wild filled her
imagination. She said nothing, but the awak-
ened Peggy, pulled up on to her moss pillow,
said quite cheerfully,-
" If they go, we can go. I shall be tough in
three weeks. Pete, let me practise every day
round the table, to start, and then outside
with crutches. Let's get off soon. We shall
leave no trail on the water."
A burst of sunshine lightened life. The
Log House seemed close. " What a triumph,"
Peter said; but she had not forgotten Mitawawa,
and the recollection of her decided opposition
was haunting. " She thought Neumann would
be here, and catch us," Peter persuaded her-
self. Then she went to sleep.
Surely new strength was put into Peggy.
She practised vigorously, and swallowed all
the deer-meat broth Peter made for her, while
they both became busy as bees lining their
spare moccasins with rabbit fur, making waist-
coats and caps of hare-skin, pressing pemmican,
drying whitefish-more especially for Raa.
Everything they could think of in a simple way
they made-mittens, as the big gauntlet gloves
(2,8,")                         5
__""""



<pb n="230"/>
230   GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
are called, and sleeping bags lined with hare- 
skins. 
"We shall be as warm as possible," declared
Peter gaily, and the others agreed; the only
bother they could see was the weight of the
porterage when they had to skirt rapids and 
the cafions in Slave River.
"We can carry half, and cache half and go
back for it," suggested Peggy. So all was 
very well.
They were so busy that they did not take
much notice of the weather, except that it was 
very still. Every tree and bush seemed to be 
holding its breath, waiting. The colours of 
the woods were flames of gold and tan, with
scarlet and crimson standing out on the blackish 
green of the pines. 
Peggy was so much better that she helped
pack the canoe. They left the gold till last-
it must go with them. They felt safe, after a
fashion, as the trappers and their pursuer had
gone.
"Fancy October," said Peter, on that last
night by the stove. "When we came we
thought we should start back within the week
at late3t. We shall find it cold before we are
far on, Jim, shan't we ? "
When her brother nodded she went on,-
"Mitawawa seems pretty glum     about it. 
I



<pb n="231"/>
THE "WHITEFISH" MOON            231
She just says 'No, no-freeze,' but what she
wants us to do I can't imagine. We don't see
our way to camping here till next April I My
word! it would drive mother desperate. No
good trying to explain either."
Everything they could spare they gave to
the Indian girl, but all the while she was per-
turbed. She had never been able to explain
about Gijik, so that remained cloudy too.
She stood looking after them when they pushed
off into the creek with a perfectly immobile
face.
"Wonder if we shall ever see her again,
dear little kind Mitawawa. She's like a spotted
doe," said Peggy, rather tearful.
Then they were off-off on the back trail!
Along the border of the creek was a scum of
thin ice, and all the while dry dead leaves
floated down off the overhanging boughs and
lay on the water, drifting slowly.
"Whitefish Moon," murmured Peter in a
low voice. "Well, we've got enough for old
Raa, and we can always catch more."
Jim said nothing; he was noting the ice
and the slow, impeded trickle of little stream-
lets. All the world was going to be locked
up soon, and he was uneasy.
Out in Crooked River there was freedom,
and more force in the current, but thin sheets



<pb n="232"/>
232 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
of ice were carried by it, and presently, when
they came to the beaver colony, they found
the wide, shallow swamp almost coated over,
and most of the beavers out of sight. Every-
where the stillness oppressed them; it was
as though all the world were listening for and
watching their movements. But they got on
pretty well, as the sharp prow of the canoe
pushed aside the ice, or broke it because of the
thinness, and the stream was with them.
They landed for two rests that day, because
of Peggy, and when they got to the opening
into Great Slave Lake they went ashore for
the night. Instantly Jim and Peter started
making a sort of tepee with boughs, poles, and
tarpaulin, for Peggy must be protected. She
was very tired-worn out with the arm and
back work, and the stiff position. In the night
she had cramp and cried with pain, so they
stayed under the little hut for two more days
and nights, catching whitefish and waiting with
all the patience possible. It was a great
strain, that delay. They began to see Mitawa-
wa's point of view now I But they determined
that nothing should stop them from putting
the Great Slave Lake between themselves and
the trappers. The gold in the canoe haunted
them. How could they defend it ?
In the night came frosts that made cracks
_    - -     -   " 



<pb n="233"/>
THE "WHITEFISH" MOON             233
sound like shots, and all the while the dead
leaves fell and the rest was utter stillness.
On the third day they launched the canoe at
dawn with frozen fingers. The nights were
longer now. The one person who minded not
at all was Raa, whose fine rough and bushy
tail was putting on its winter beauty. Frost
he loved.
"It will be much warmer when the sun
shines," said Peter, cheerful as usual.
Jim said nothing.
"We'll get across in the one day," Peggy
told them.   "We did before; why not
now?"       -
So they started, and at first made some way
between the ice islands, but as they drew out
from the shelter of the high land the difficulty
grew and grew. They could not break through;
they had to go round, to find channels, to
make the most of currents from this or that
river. They knew them, because mush ice
floated down on them and stuck to the lake
ice, making it more and more of a barrier.
Then Jim got out the axe. He chopped
and pushed, pushed and chopped. They ate
"jerky," and the cold grew and grew, till
presently Jim gave up chopping and they sat
still in the gathering foggy chill-silent, over-
whelmed with despair.



<pb n="234"/>
234 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
" I might get out and pull-over the ice,"
said Jim.
Then Peggy got desperate. "You'd fall
through. Pete and I should die in the night."
Her voice trembled.
"He shall not do it, dear old Pegtop,"
Pete assured her. "We've got food, and we
must wait here till the ice is firm, and then we'll
lift the canoe on to it and pull across. We
can harness Raa. Now don't be sad."
She spoke so, but guessed they could not
stand the cold; surely not Peggy, who was of
poor vitality since the accident. Already she
was sleepy and half-stupid. Peter unrolled
blankets and the tarpaulin; she forced the
big lined moccasins over Peggy's; but hot
food was impossible. They had no stove-
a common property with travellers-having
cut down the pack as close as possible, because
it was going to be a summer trail !
Peter looked longingly at the shore near
Crooked River. They had come about a mile
that day, she thought, hardly more; and there
they were, stuck out in the ice, helpless for
the enemy to see and capture-with the dust
in the canoe. Never in her life had Peter
felt so depressed, but she did not show it;
she cheered the sleepy Peggy, trying to keep
her awake.
^-            - - "^



<pb n="235"/>
THE "WHITEFISH" MOON                235
Then the moon came up, round and coppery
in tint, the Indians' " Whitefish Moon," and
all over the desolate ice-sealed lake the mys-
terious light swept in a flow. It was very
wonderful.
Then Jim spoke. " Some one coming out
from Crooked River-a canoe."
Peggy's eyes widened with fear. "Neu-
mann ?" she jerked out.
"If it is, I'll shoot him on the spot," said
Jim in a matter-of-fact voice. " Let's watch."
Jim and Peter spoke together presently.
" It's an Indian; he's smashing through-
strong man."
"Is it that Cree ? Does he think we are
the trappers ? " asked Peggy.
Then Peter laughed. "Pegtop, I hate Neu-
mann, but I'll allow he wouldn't be such a
wild goose as to get frozen in the Great Slave
Lake! But it may be the Cree crossing over
after those men. He may have just found out
where they've gone."
The Indian canoe came along forcing a
path, crashing the ice with blows of an axe, or
tomahawk, and then driving ahead.
"Gijik !" said Peter suddenly. And so
immense was the relief, after suppressed suf-
fering, that she wanted to cry.
Peggy did cry.
a:                   i~~~~~~~~~~~~te ! ^S  ^ afiS &».~a- ^_. ^, .,



<pb n="236"/>
236 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
" Hullo, Chief " Jim spoke, but his voice
was quiet.
Gijik looked at them  and said, "Huh "
a sort of grunt. In another minute he burst
through to the bow of their canoe, making a
sweep to do it. Then he attached a moose-
hide rope to it, and glanced at Jim. " My
white brother is not wise," he said in his very
deep voice. "The Whitefish Moon is no
time for the water trail." And in a flash it
was done-the return journey started. It was
plain that he wanted to use the passage he had
made in coming before it froze.
Jim and Peter seized paddles, and the latter
forced one on Peggy.
"Work, Pegtop. It will warm you," she
urged.
In the wake of Gijik's canoe the second one
made good way, and the three became new
creatures.
"It's a pity we have to go back, though,"
said Peggy, behind Peter.
" We'll be all right-he knows," answered
Peter; and admired the moon, the scenery,
and the Cedar's splendid shoulders.
They got back quite quickly, and were
surprised to find that the Ojibway did not
mean them to stay on the shore. He divided
the pack, giving the empty canoe to Jim and
)4                     .1



<pb n="237"/>
THE "WHITEFISH" MOON             237
taking the treasure as his own share, with a
few other trifles I Then he led the way back
into the woods, but parallel with the river,
and presently Peter realized that they were
making for the beavers' swamp. Here was
not open woods, but a mass of close-grown
brushwood and "dead-falls," as trees are
called which collapse from  age, storms, or
rot. The place was like a maze, and Peter
quickly realized that the swamp marsh under-
foot was frozen beneath and round the tough
grass and rushes.
In and in they went, one behind the other,
till they were completely surrounded by " dead-
falls" that had put out shoots and grown
branches, till they became the thickest possible
shelter.
"Huh," said Gijik, and threw down his
load. After that he proceeded to make a hut
within this " Sleeping Beauty Maze," to light
a fire, and to obliterate all traces of their
arrival. He worked like a giant, and then
accepted tea, food, and tobacco-but all the
time they could see he was listening like a
caribou.
It seemed presently that he was reassured,
for he told Jim that he had been away on a
mission up Mackenzie River. He had made
haste, but got back in time only to hear of
r~~~~~g



<pb n="238"/>
238  GIRLS ON     THE   GOLD    TRAIL
their foolish effort from Mitawawa. He khew
about the bear-trap, and was apparently quite
unmoved, as that was what you must expect
from " bad hearts."
He ordered them to stay where they were
till he came, and not betray themselves in
any way. He would come when the ice-trail
was ready and bring a sled, and dcgs-the
only possible way to get back over frozen
lakes and rivers. He explained with flashes
of his deep-set eyes that the trappers might
come back to the shack, but owing to the
mishap of their canoe venture the trail would
be lost. They would think the travellers had
got away before the lake froze, and probably
they would go on to Athabasca and farther
still. The scent would be confused and thrown
out.
This and more Gijik told them in short,
broken sentences, as he found words. The
rest he filled up with Ojibway, of which Jim
had learned a good many idioms from old
Hearne, who liked the tribe. It was easy to
understand Gijik, because he had talked much
with " white brothers," and found them friends
-as a rule ! He was not shy like his squaw,
who hid herself when trappers appeared.
Earnestly he warned them not to leave the
swamp, or let the dog stray; not to fire a shot,



<pb n="239"/>
THE "WHITEFISH       MOON"     239
unless to save their lives; and to bury the
gold dust till he came. Then Jim pressed on
him gold enough to pay for five dogs, at per-
haps eighty dollars apiece, and a sled. Gold
was of no use to Gijik in the Wild, because he
made all he wanted-except fire-arms; but it
was easier to get things quickly if you could
pay. That he knew.
Then he went, lithe and secret, leaving no
footmarks, and the three, swiftly and neatly,
buried the treasure close to their big dead-fall.
They then cached the canoe under another,
filling up with mud and reeds. And, thankful
beyond speech, they slid into their fur-lined
bags-that is to say, bags made with the pelt
inwards and skin out-rolled into blankets, and
slept and slept as they had never done in the
shack.
" No need to get up very early," murmured
Peggy.
Peter answered, "Pegtop, what about that
Angel ! Seems he was awake to-night."
Peggy gurgled. Jim said nothing. He was
thinking about Gijik's pluck and strength.
ANN



<pb n="240"/>
CHAPTER XV
THE FROZEN SWAMP
THE three obeyed Gijik literally. They
did not go outside the confines of the
frozen swamp, and made each move with
caution. It was hard luck, because nearly
three weeks elapsed before they were set free
to go on. They comforted themselves with
the certainty that this was good for Peggy;
that it would allow the enemy to get well
ahead, or to search the Crooked River Creek
in vain, whichever they elected to do; and
finally that, as you could not use the ice trail,
it was good to be in this beaver country.
Peter saw a bright side in every direction.
So did Peggy as she became herself again and
lost the last traces of weakness. Jim, always a
philosopher, spent his time trapping, and in
this connection it occurred to the girls to
line their blankets with rabbit pelts-not very
heavy, and immensely warmer. True, they
140



<pb n="241"/>
THE FROZEN SWAMP               241
were not the best skins, nor cured in the most
perfect fashion, but they would last for the
journey home. This kept all busy.
It has been said they were cautious. So they
were, very, for the first week or ten days; but
they became freer as the days went by in peace,
and the cold made them need to take harder
exercise. They laughed and talked more loudly,
they penetrated to the shore near the beaver
dam, and fished through holes in the ice-
indeed they set a net-trap, which was not very
wise, as it might easily have been seen. In
the wilds every traveller is full of eyes and
ears, and learns to watch and listen as the
creatures do.
Then the most unexpected thing happened,
that awaked in them again all the old alertness
and sense of danger.
Jim had gone down to the shore after white-
fish, and there he was held by the interesting
sight of a cow-moose standing on the bank
calling. Jim had never before seen this big, un-
gainly creature with a head like a huge hammer.
A very ugly head it is, but the eyes are soft and
beautiful. With her great feet she had broken
some rim ice. She drank a little, nibbled
leaves, and then sent out her curious hooting
call to ice and woods. It was not long before
she was answered by the roar of a bull-moose,



<pb n="242"/>
242 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
which is a terrific booming, in blasts like a great
bellows.
Jim was much excited. He simply longed
to shoot the bull and have its antlers, but
knew he must not-besides, how convey the
prize ? He could only picture how they would
look in the big living-room  at Log House.
That was as far as he would allow himself
to go.
At the same time the two girls heard the
roars. They were in the swamp doing their
best to make a really interesting supper-not
an easy thing to do in these days of very small
supplies. Nothing but tea remained of the
original pack, and you could not buy more, of
course. They stood up, stared at one another
with shining eyes, and, leaving the fire, crept 
through the dense maze towards the sound.
They knew it was a bull-moose, but they had
never seen one close as yet, for this magnificent
species of deer does not come within reach 
of settlements or homesteads unless it is
driven by wolves in mid-winter.
Evidently he was not trying to hide his
presence, for he crashed and trampled close
to the two girls, cracking the surface ice on
the marsh. Then came the excitement.
There was a thrashing sound in the bushes, 
and a moment after appeared another bull,



<pb n="243"/>
THE FROZEN SWAMP               243
bigger, and so, of course, older, with great
antlers like huge spreading fans, most splendid
to see; but he was rather too old, which the
girls did not know, his height making them
think he was quite all-powerful. In a moment
he rushed at the younger bull, and the fight
that followed was a sight to remember always.
The stamping, grunting, and crashing, the
rattling of horns and hard breathing seemed
to the sisters to fill the whole earth.
They got behind a dead-fall, crouched in the
ambuscade of its mass of twisted boughs, and
looked on, shivering. The two bulls had met
head to head, locked antlers, and there they
were !-pushing and straining each to over-
throw the other or to get free. The old one
was heavier, and drove the other back and
back, but the younger one had more power
really, and presently that began to tell, because
there was a note of effort and exhaustion in
the big bull's gruntings, and his head was
forced sideways. The girls realized that his
neck would perhaps be broken, or he would
fall over.
Peter cried excitedly in Peggy's ear, "How
will he get free ? He can't-any way !"
Peggy gasped in return, " Oh, poor things,
why do they do it ? "
Then there was a sound like the crack of a
f . 



<pb n="244"/>
;          z244  GIRLS ON    THE GOLD      TRAIL
; ;rgun, and one of the big bull's antlers fell off.
The young one was free, and he made use of
his freedom by rushing at the other, who was
dazed, hitting him in the flank and knocking
him over; then he jumped on him, with fearful,
smashing blows of his great splay fore-feet,
and then he lifted his head and roared again.
"You horrid, boastful brute !" said Peggy
hotly. " It wasn't his fault his horn came off.
I say, Pete, do you remember the fight we
saw in the gulch-catamount and lynx fight?
Those two killed each other clean away. My
word! what awful fights these forest creatures
have ! "
She had not finished whispering these rapid
words, when close to them sounded the loud
explosion of a gun.
Not Jim! Oh dear no! It was a trade
gun, and fired only a yard or two from the
triumphant moose. The bull staggered, swung
round, and swept his great horns sideways to
meet this new enemy. A trickle of blood ran
down his shoulders.
There was an interval long enough for re-
loading and then another explosion. He was
hit in the chest, fell to his knees, struggled
up, stumbled a few steps, and fell again. Both
of them lay still.
From a dense, low-growing spruce copse
a               -  ·



<pb n="245"/>
THE FROZEN      SWAMP        245
close to the sisters stepped an Indian. He
went over to the two huge animals and killed
the one he had shot. The other had had its
life stamped out of it. Then he proceeded to
skin one and cut it up.
The sisters were simply paralyzed with
horror. It was the Cree !
They crouched down behind the tree trunk,
not daring to go away, and in both their minds
the first thought was, "If the Indian is here,
then what about the trappers ? " But the Cree
had not the appearance of a watcher.
" He would not fire if they were near," Peter
whispered reassuringly, and had hardly done
speaking when a further complication arose
which froze the answer on Peggy's tongue.
Jim  appeared. He crept from   a dense
thicket-plainly returning to see what the
noise was about-and stepped out into the
space trampled down by the fighting moose.
Intent on the idea in his mind, he had not
realized the Cree till too late. Then he stood
gazing at the man who was kneeling by the
moose, very busy. It was no use trying to
hide after showing himself, so Jim bluffed it
out after turning very red. In truth, he was
actually angry at having done such an incau-
tious thing. He knew that an experienced
hunter would have laughed at him.
(,96)           °61.
_



<pb n="246"/>
I!   ~     246  GIRLS ON     THE   GOLD    TRAIL
"Bo' jou'," he said amiably. "I see my
brother is a very great hunter. He has killed
two bull-moose. He is a fine shot. All the
Crees on the Missinnippi River will hear of
this, and tell the story in the wigwams."
This was a good beginning, because Indians
are so vain, even the best, that they are de-
lighted with flattery. In this case the Cree
did not say he'd only shot one moose; two
sounded better than one.   He grunted in
answer, but did not seem at all quarrelsome.
Jim went up close, talked to him a little,
and admired the size of the big bull. Then
he went away to the camp, and, returning in
ten or fifteen minutes, offered the Cree some
tobacco-almost the last they had, by the way.
It was obvious then that he was pleased.
In this wilderness he would have nothing of the
kind. The settlement was months behind now.
His beady, deep-set black eyes glanced from
Jim to the dead-fall behind which the girls
were hiding. He knew they were there, just
as an Indian knows everything in the woods,
and he wasn't sure whether Jim knew also,
or whether it was in some way a plot to deceive
him into some acknowledgment of his aim.
However, he said nothing either way, but
presently went off with a load of moose meat,
which he carried on his back with ease.
.                    -



<pb n="247"/>
THE FROZEN SWAMP              2
Then the girls came out, and the three looked
at one another in rather a subdued manner.
" Last thing one expected," said Peter.
" But he won't matter, in a way," argued
Peggy. " Don't you think he is waiting, like
we are, for the ice trail ? Much easier to
follow with snowshoes on the rivers-a quarter
the work. He didn't look quite so venomous,
Jim, did he?"
Jim agreed. "All the same he sure lives up
to his name. Don't you remember that old
chap the Owl called him 'Kee-way-din '-the
North Wind. He's just about as frosty com-
pany. Sorry he killed both those moose.
What's the good ? Too much meat, except
for a tribe."
" He didn't," said Peter. " The young one
killed the big one-broke his antler off and
then rushed him  down and trampled him.
Then the Cree crawled out of that spruce
copse and shot the young one. Jim, he really
couldn't have missed; his muzzle was about
a yard from the poor brute's flank."
" I don't wonder he hasn't killed Neumann
yet," remarked Peggy in her placid voice.
" Do you know, Pete, I think those men are
fairly safe."
"Afraid they are," allowed Peter murder-
ously.
~  ..___     -          -     ~  .  :~  ~    .
L    S            :_~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="248"/>
.             248  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD     TRAIL
i
E          " ~~"No, they're not," Jim said. " They would
be, perhaps, if this chap wasn't an Indian. I
mean, he'd get tired and get off on some new
notion. But these men never let up till they've
done what they set out to do. I know I
wouldn't be in Neumann's shoes; he knows
what he's in for, and that's why he's so fright-
ened. Why, he's just blind with fright."
"Well, he shouldn't have done it-what-
ever it was," said Peggy in her severest tone.
" Treat them decently, and they'll do the same
to you. Dad always said so."
"I rather wonder how long that Cree has
been haunting our swamp, all the same," Peter
said as they went back through the dusk to
the camp and Raa, who was leashed up near
the buried gold as a precaution; " and I wonder
how much Gijik knows about him ?"
They wondered lots of things; but there
was no one to give an answer, though one
satisfaction was rather self-evident. Neumann
could not be in the swamp if the Cree was,
and if he came he would die like the bull
moose I
For the rest, the three stayed very near
camp after that. They had had a warning
as to possibilities, and did not want Gijik to
come suddenly and find them acting in " ten-
derfoot" fashion after their amazing experi-
5                . 



<pb n="249"/>
THE FROZEN      SWAMP        249
ences. In those waiting days they did all they
could think of to help on the journey that
was coming, but in the main it was an exercise
of patience. Every now and then Peter would
say in a burst of anxiety, " Sure I hope the
Cedar won't so-and-so," and then they'd all
discuss it and wish they'd told him.
"After all, he's only an Indian," Peggy
lamented.
"Well, an Indian knows more about the
needs of the winter trail than you do," Jim
told her; which was so true that they were
comforted.
As for the Cree, he must have fetched away
the whole of his moose meat, but when or how
they did not see. In the night, perhaps. Peter
was on thorns to know how he would eat it all.
"Eat it! "  Jim's echo was scornful, " Isn't
winter ahead? He'll make a cache with the
most part. Safe enough, they know; cover
it up from coyotes or foxes, and it will freeze
directly through and through hard as ice.
Then he'll fetch it when he's on this trail.
Why, an Indian wouldn't think much of com-
ing thirty or forty miles in a day for it; he
may be hard up for meat in winter. They
starve in their lodges sometimes."
"Hark! " Peter whispered, with eager ex-
citement.
_~~~~~~~~~~m~' - -~-~              ~'~~



<pb n="250"/>
250  GIRLS ON     'ITHi   UL    T'KAIL
Then all three jumped up. Through the
mist and cold of the frozen swamp came a
sound. At last, a new sound-from far off,
and from the north, they fancied, listening
with strained hearing.
But nothing happened, and all their faces fell.
Another night, and no news !
" I could have sworn it was dogs," said Jim.
The girls answered nothing, because they
were disappointed, and did not want to show it.
" Let's have extra supper and cheer up,"
urged Peggy. " See, the hare Jim trapped.
Let's do it to-night. How much would you
give for potatoes, Peter-one of all the bags
of dust, eh ? "
So they forgot the disappointment, and
thought about the hare and beans, and in
t ';     that moment Gijik appeared out of the shadows
and stood in the circle of firelight.
"Bo' jou'," he said, in his very deep voice,
even and quiet.
Peter said later she longed to slap him on
the back.
"He'd be horribly offended," Peggy told her.
"Jim might, perhaps-I'm not sure. But a
woman ! Just fancy a squaw smacking a Brave
on the back ! It's not done, my dear, that's
sure."
Anyhow, there he was, and the rest was
\ ._



<pb n="251"/>
THE FROZEN      SWAMP        251
very exciting, very exciting indeed, for he
wanted them to cross the lake that night and
camp on the other side.
He had brought a sled-a toboggan sled of
the sort run on Mackenzie River-and five
dogs. He had muzzled the dogs to stop them
from barking when they scented Raa. At
this point Peggy and Peter looked at one an-
other with meaning. This was why they'd
heard a sound so suddenly stifled.
The Ojibway proposed that he should break
camp, dig up and take away the treasure, while
they ate and got ready for the flight. From
what he said they gathered that he wanted
them to cross the lake under cover of dark.
On the river beyond they would be less ex-
posed, and could take shelter on shore if neces-
sary.
It is probable that the hare mattered less
than they had expected; but it was an excel-
lent meal to start on, and they rather liked the
idea of this night rush after the life of com-
parative inaction. Gijik's way of breaking
camp was amazingly swift and complete; he
carried so much at a time. When he returned
from his first journey he brought three pair
of snowshoes. He said he and Mitawawa
made them in the summer, and dried them
in the sun, so that the wood didn't warp.
...- 27...~_  .~ _



<pb n="252"/>
252  GIRLS ON      THE   GOLD    TRAIL
They were the same shape that the Lockharts
were used to, pointed at both ends. There
was snow enough on the ice to make fair
travelling. It had seemed very little to the
watchers in the frozen swamp, falling in a
quiet way and then ceasing; but the growing
cold and the iron frosts at night prevented any
thaw-no more thaws now till spring, only
the cold, bitter grip of intensifying winter till
all the world seemed dead that was ahead
of them now.
It was dark, but light enough for them to
see, because of the stars. Peggy's teeth chat-
tered as she slipped her feet into the loops
of the snowshoes.  Both girls whispered be-
cause of the stillness, and the two men spoke
very little as they lashed the cover down over
the neatly packed sled. When Raa appeared
there had, of course, been a pitched battle.
The others fought him and one another in a
tangle of flying snow and harness; but it did
not last long under the skilful use of Gijik's
whip, and left no marks, as they had muzzles on.
In ten minutes there were four little black
mI jdots moving swiftly with bent heads-the
black smudge of the load and the string of
six trotting dogs, their breath smoking on the
air. That was all the sign of human life in
the white, frozen world.
^~~



<pb n="253"/>
THE FROZEN SWAMP               253
Gijik led and packed the trail-that is, he
trod strongly down the soft snow ahead of the
dogs, and made it easier for them. Jim drove,
going level with the teams, and driving by
voice and whip. Raa knew all the calls, and
the work of the team was joy to him. As
leader it was his business to make the other
dogs obey too.
Mush meant " go ahead "; Hu, "bend to
the right "; Chac, "turn to the left," and so
on, according as there might be humps on the
ice or obstacles in the direct line.
Team dogs are wonderful creatures. After
some years of it they will die of grief when
not allowed to do their part on the trail. But
to the end they are wild and savage.
In the terrible black, still cold that comes
before dawn the little party came in sight of
the south shores of the Great Slave. All the
last ice was rough and hummocky; it had
been blown so in the gales from the north-
thin ice piled up on other ice, making lumps
and ridges. The last straw of effort for
wearied bodies ! Only Gijik took no account
of these things, and Jim copied him in every-
thing, refusing to betray his exhaustion. An
end comes to every strain, fortunately, and
presently the three found themselves making
camp in a thick copse of spruce fir.



<pb n="254"/>
254   GIRLS UIN l- tinc,   uLu JL  KAIL
That was the plan. To rest all day and the
following night, and leave early for the river
run on the morning after. Jim and Peter
settled this, because Peggy was suffering from
cramp in the leg muscles, and the effort of
using snowshoes was a great strain on her.
To the Cedar such a delay was foolishness;
but he said nothing, of course. Besides, it
concerned him not at all, as he was going
back.
This discovery was in the way of a shock
to the girls. They had hoped he would come
as far as Deer Lake at least. Jim asked him,
offered to pay him, but it was no use. He'd
got his winter business waiting, his wife and
child alone up in his district beyond Crooked
River Creek, and from his point of view they
had discharged their debt of honour to Tom
Lockhart for the kindness to themselves and
little Mitsa. It is quite possible that Gijik
believed the Cree would account for the
trappers, the undying spirit of revenge in that
very embittered person being a shield of
value. However that may be, the parting of
the ways was come, and the three said fare-
well with grief, begging the tall chief to come
to the Log House when business should bring
him so far south.
Then Jim gave him gold dust enough to



<pb n="255"/>
THE FROZEN      SWAMP        255
buy a Winchester rifle. At first he refused,
but the temptation was too great. Upon the
Mackenzie River in the ensuing winter many
a rifle would change hands among men who
had gambled away their diggings. The Ojib-
way knew all this as well as Jim.
"Don't go to the traders, Chief," said the
boy, smiling; " they'll sell you rotten fire-
arms. You go for the best and you'll get it.
Can't you lay hold of a good gun at Fort
Resolution ?  Try  the   Mounted   Police,
hey ?"
"Huh! " ejaculated the tall man, and the
gleam in his deep-set eyes showed that the
suggestion was good to him.
" And, Chief," said Peter," if you see Pierre
Corraine, tell him we are on the trail home.
Tell him what you like; he's sure a safe friend."
Gijik nodded. " Corraine good heart-very
good," he said.
Five minutes after that the tall, splendid
man of the woods was disappearing over the
ice to the westward.
Jim laughed. " Good old Cedar," he said.
"Look, he's jolly well going to make a try
for his gun at Fort Resolution before he goes
home. He'll be as proud as a puppy with
two tails for the rest of his life. Expect he'll
be able to trade one; he's a fine chap."
~ 1,"., ~       _



<pb n="256"/>
256   UlKL;S UiN   i nr  ujvLU     i LKAILL
*)/I        Pee"I hope he meets Pierre Corraine," said
Peter.
Peggy said nothing; perhaps she thought the
Xj |        more. Then they got busy. They scraped the
snow outside with their snowshoes till a cleared
space was made for the fire; they turned the
sledge on its side; then, anchoring the dogs,
they fed them with two whitefish each because
they had had to pull all night instead of sleeping;
and they cooked for themselves frozen deer meat
which the Indian had brought on the sledge.
Then they changed into different stockings and
moccasins, hung the damp ones on sticks near
the fire, and, rolled in their bags covered with
blankets, they all three fell asleep.
Apart from   their curious sojourn in the
beavers' swamp, it was the first time they had
made camp in the snow. But because it was
day they woke early in the afternoon, made
another meal, and sat round the fire talking
over plans and making friends with the dogs.
"I feel topsy-turvy somehow," said Peggy,
sighing as she rubbed the muscles of her shins.
"Wonder what we shall feel in a week-in
a month ? " said Peter. " I've a feeling-"
" What ? "
But Peter refused to say.
I



<pb n="257"/>
CHAPTER XVI
WHY THE MOOSE WAS NOT SHOT
W     ! ITHIN a week the three were broken
to harness as it were, and the daily
grind had become a thing understood.
There had been daily grind on the summer
trail, especially when it included land porterage,
but this was a very different matter. There was
no fun at all in it. Every bit of strength in
mind and body was wanted to support the
winter trail work, so that it should be faced
with patience, good temper, and courage.
From that start in the bleak, black dawn,
with stars fading and every twig seeming to
hold its breath in cold, with frozen, clumsy
fingers and still weary limbs, to have to break 
camp and pack up, starting off on another day
of driving dogs and overcoming obstacles, and
to go on till the freezing dusk forced them into
some likely-looking shelter on the river bank,
and there-tired to death-search their strength
267



<pb n="258"/>
258  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
for a last effort to make yet another camp, a
fire, a supper-always the same supper now- 
and at last sleep. That was winter trail. There 
was nearly always wind, too, though fortunately i
it came from the north, and so was behind
them; but it cut through the leafless woods,
and obliged them   to  pick camping-places
shielded from its knife-like cut, otherwise they 
ran a danger of frost-bitten faces as well as
hands.
In those waiting days at the swamp they had 
made hoods out of rabbit skins and sewn them 
to the collars of their blanket coats.  These
they wore drawn close round their faces, and 
the damp of their breathing froze to the fur 
in ice. 
Truly it was winter. They had no mores'
dreamed than their mother had when she let i
them  go that the treasure trail would lead4
them  into this. But as they were in it all ,
three braced themselves to bear it and the
very awful strain of the incessant little suffer- i
ings that never ceased. They thought, by the 4,
way, that it could not possibly be worse. So i
they had a great deal to learn yet. 
Now they had kept all the way on the east i
side of the river, and because of this came top:
the creek of the old gulch where Jim had been 
laid up. There it was, just as it had been, '
,,.



<pb n="259"/>
WHY MOOSE WAS NOT SHOT 259
only in winter dress, and they got there about
the time of the midday rest, having had a hard
spell of work since dawn.
Peter, who was always irrepressible, sud-
denly announced that she should just run up
the creek and see if the darling balsam hut
was still there. She said she wanted to look
at the graves of the lynx and the catamount.
Peggy shook her head when she was asked.
She said rest was valuable. Jim also shook
his head.
"And don't be long," he urged. "We
ought to get up to the lake to-night. I'm
keen on it. Start across and do it in one day
to the south side, and then along the shore."
Peter nodded and went, and she was about
half an hour gone. When she appeared she
was running, and in her hand she carried a
small rifle, which she waved in an excited
manner.
The other two were ready to start, and Jim
was impatient. When he saw the rifle he
stared, frowned, and looked questioningly at
Peggy. She divined on the instant.
" Oh, mad " gasped Peggy. "Don't you
see-"
Then Peter was with them, explaining her-
self.
"I got to our hut and it was empty, but



<pb n="260"/>
260 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
some one was using it for camping. Jolly nice,
much too nice for them. I just looked in, and
I saw this on one bed. Beasts! How dare
they I So I took it and came away. If there'd
been any more guns I'd have thrown them in
the snow and trodden them in. Well, anyway
we've got this."
It was the Winchester with the deep-cut
initials " T. L."
Jim looked from his sister to the rifle, and
his face seemed to freeze into utter dismay.
" Well," he said, " you've done us in earnest
this time, Pete."
" It's ours. It was Dad's; we know it was,
don't we, Pegtop ?"
"They might have bought it of Dad, you
know," murmured Peggy uneasily, " but apart
from that it is-a fearfully dangerous thing to
do. Why, don't you see it tells them we are
here to-day. Oh, Pete! "
Peter flushed uneasily. She had seized the
gun on the spur of impulse, and now saw there
were two sides to the matter.
" It needn't be us, Pegtop. Any one would
steal a gun; certainly the Cree would. Why,
they'll think it was the Cree, and be scared
stiff. Anyway, we've got Dad's little rifle
Come on, I'll stick it into the pack straps."
She did, and the party started off, a little



<pb n="261"/>
WHY MOOSE WAS NOT SHOT 26I
reassured, perhaps, by this point of view, but
horribly uneasy, for even Peter now    had
qualms, though she would not have allowed that.
It was fair going, and the rest of that day
they drove like the wind behind them, camp-
ing at the point in a sheltered cove on the lake 
shore. Peggy, tired as she was, wanted to go
on straight, as they'd done across Great Slave.
She had a feverish desire to put the lake be-
tween them and the camp on the gulch, but
Jim would not. He said it was no use wear-
ing themselves out at the start, and Peter
suggested that more than likely the men had
gone to the Fort for supplies and tobacco, and
left the rifle in a dry, isolated place because
they were afraid to meet men who knew it.
This was so probable that Jim and Peggy were
eased. Both of them knew that weapons got
to be known, like horses, among hunters and
trappers in a land where they were more valu-
able than anything except, perhaps, dogs, which
could not pass from hand to hand without its 
being known-if they were of the best. 
So they made camp in the cove, and went
off again in the grey, biting dawn out and away
on to the white lake, without a sound in the
freezing world. Later, when the sun came
up over the heights, and the snow was a fore-
ground of crystals backed by pink, amber, and



<pb n="262"/>
262  GIRLS ON     THE   GOLb TRAIL
mauve, they felt happy and high-spirited;
they even began counting the lakes and points
of the trail ahead.
It was good going. Probably this lovely lake
was more sheltered than Great Slave. The
freezing wind was behind them, and they
rushed along, the dogs' bushy tails blowing
over their own backs, and their pretty ruffs
standing up round their strong necks.
In a week the practice of snowshoe trail
had come back to them. Jim broke trail,
going steadily ahead towards the far south
line of heights and pine tops. The girls took
turns-while one was at the gee-pole at the
back which steers the toboggan, her sister ran
alongside with the dog whip to prevent the
team from quarrelling. And they got across in
the day, landing tired but triumphant.
There was no sign of pursuit. To all appear-
ance the lake was their own, for neither sight
nor sound of human life broke the frozen
stillness.
Hide it as they tried from one another,
there was during those next days a feeling of
keen anxiety about pursuit. Each one looked
back when the others were busy, watched for
far-away black spots on the great field of snow
in fear and trembling; then, as nothing hap-
pened to increase this dread, they all began
_-- _, _  7



<pb n="263"/>
WHY MOOSE WAS NOT SHOT 263
to breathe more easily, and to lose the scared
feeling.
One thing is sure. Perhaps for the first
time in her life Peter wished her impulsive
act undone. That was something gained when
you come to think, for, though rapid action
may be extremely important on occasion, a
cool judgment in the first place is still more
so. You ought to be very sure your rapid
action is wise.
When the party reached the river that
joined up Athabasca with Wollaston they had
regained their normal state of mind, and were
able to give themselves up to the battle against
a storm that now swept upon them in full force;
snow and wind of the fiercest-a regular bliz-
zard. They could not go on; they drew in
to the bank on the western side and fought
their way through it, looking for a sheltered
opening to camp in.
They were on the opposite side to the shorei
they had travelled when hunting for the canoe. 
It was strange to see it in such different con-
ditions-there across the hummocky ice of rocks           i
and rapids, banks and streams, that made up
this bit of river. 
Every way came the awful tearing wind, 
whirling snow round in spirals and screeching
in the bare tree tops.



<pb n="264"/>
264  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD       TRAIL
"This'll do here. Hu, Raa," and the big
dog swerved to the right, leading the team,
and struggled up the snow-bank at Jim's call.
Bumping and rocking, the sledge was hauled
up over the uneven ground and the tangle of
scrub Jim was smashing down. Peggy at the
gee-pole was helping behind, and Peter, with
the team, running alongside. Suddenly she
gave a cry of dismay, and Peggy saw her sink
and plunge to one side as her leg went through
the top snow and thin ice over some bubbling-
up spring, right into the water.
In a second she dragged her foot out and
tried to slap off the wet mud, but the mischief
was done. Peggy dropped the gee-pole and
rushed to her.
"Jim, quick !-get wood this instant. Never
mind the dogs; turn the sledge on its
side!"
Jim said nothing. He knew the only hope
was action.
There, just round the corer from the wind,
as you might say, but still gasping from the
force of its buffets, they made a tiny fire under
the lee of big boulders, and Peggy pulled off
her sister's moccasin, legging, and stocking.
They were all frozen hard right through, and
in another minute or two nothing could have
saved the foot that looked so oddly white and
.c - 



<pb n="265"/>
WHY MOOSE WAS NOT SHOT 265
dead already. Peter bore the rubbing like a
Trojan, for it was no small pain. Peggy chafed
and talked in the glow of the red-hot fire,
while Jim set about scraping away snow and
making a camp.
Bushes and boulders here formed a barrier,
and behind them a dense wood of spruce ran
along the side of a tiny creek. It looked prom-
ising, and the least bit of shelter was thankfully
welcomed. Just at the entrance of the creek
the snow was piling up into great drifts. As
it blew down from the lake and into the river,
the blizzard caught it and forced great masses 
up and over the opening into the cove.
Peter, with dry stockings and leg-gear on,
looked at it all approvingly.
"Peg, do you see," she said, "by dark we 
shall be sheltered by a great screen. By morn-
ing we shall be snowed in. What a pity we
can't stop here till spring."                         ,
Peggy laughed. "We can till the snow 
stops," she said. " Pete, has it occurred to 
you that this snow will cover up all our trail ? 
If anybody happens to be tracking us they'll          1
lose us now, anyway."
"Sure, they'll lose us now," agreed Peter, 
drawing a long breath. " If only we could go 
on leaving no trail; but sledge and dogs can't
be hidden." 
fr       _    - ,. l-*
Lt'                                      e    - 



<pb n="266"/>
266 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
They built themselves in among the boulders
with snow and waited.
Three days the blizzard screeched across the
forests, and blinding snow rushed in mad
eddies over the lakes and down the broad
river openings. Certain wind draughts piled
it up in ramparts, and the mouth of this little
stream where they sheltered was stopped.
From side to side they were cut off from the
river.
Their greatest necessity was, of course, food.
Water they got by shaving a bit of ice into
a spike and letting it drip into the pan near
the fire. But food was an ever-present anxiety,
because these delays were a tax on the supply,
and it was not easy to replenish. Gijik had
brought a solid mass of dried fish, which
weighed rather light, of course; but when
you calculate two fish a day each to six dogs
you get through it fairly fast. Deer meat they
had still, and a great deal of pemmican and
" jerky," which they had made while they were
waiting and in the shack. And there was still
tea. The monotony was wearisome, but, as
Peggy said, it would be worse without.
So, as soon as they saw it was a question of
waiting for the blizzard to go, Jim went off,
crawling through the brushwood to the fir
copse, and set wires for rabbits again, while
-low 1



<pb n="267"/>
WHY MOOSE WAS NOT SHOT 267
Peter-with much caution about rotten ice-
cut a water-hole; there was always hope of
fish.
Jim, very eager and absorbed in his snares,
made no sound, though if there was anything
a wild thing would have heard or scented, the
wind was his protection in a great measure.
In the fir wood he crouched behind a wide
bole and looked about, hoping for the sight
of a hare; he would not have despised a
porcupine to bake in hot ashes if one would
have walked into his snare, but Mr. Prickles
is extremely shrewd. Suddenly he saw    a
shape moving between the trees and lifting a
long, hammer-shaped head to bite off what
little remained on a young larch.                     i
It was a moose, he thought at first a cow, 
but soon saw it was much too small. It was           I
a yearling with no horns. Adventurous, it had         I
strayed away from the others, which were no          ': l
doubt sheltering somewhere from the blizzard, 
and here it was wandering alone, bleating every       t
now and then in a queer call, and shaking its        .
long, silly-looking head. 
Jim's heart leaped. If he could shoot this
it would be a crowning piece of luck.  He
shifted swiftly from tree to tree, trusting to
the protection of the wind that blew from the
wandering moose to himself. The beast had
f     ·-     ---- -.-.---



<pb n="268"/>
268  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
not heard; it was still tearing at anything
edible, and pushing the snow about. Jim
advanced forward and sideways, intent on his
prey. Just as he was beginning to think it
safe to fire he became aware that the fir wood
ceased to the right of him. Because the brush-
wood was thick below, he had not realized he
was nearing the end-surely here was a border-
line.
He shifted his attention from the moose and
looked. Then, going forward as lightly as he
could step, he found there was a steep fall
beyond the undergrowth-a steep that was
fringed along the top with fir trees.
The river ! He was, perhaps, a couple of
miles to the north of the snowed-up entrance
to the creek, and the wind was whistling along
the funnel of the river channel like a draught
in a chimney.
On the wind came a call-a voice ! Some
one was moving below. In an instant Jim
went down flat on his stomach, and, crawling
well under the snow-laden bushes, he made a
space to see through.
Coming along from Athabasca Lake, and
making for Wollaston, no doubt, were two
men, one short and thick-set, the other lean
and stooping. They were dressed in woolly
coats and parkas (hoods), the full winter
__ _~r  t  _



<pb n="269"/>
WHY MOOSE WAS NOT SHOT 269
kit of hunters, and the heat of their bodies
had come through the wool like steam  and
frozen on the surface outside, so that they
looked rather like two fluffy white bears
travelling on snowshoes. They carried mod-
erate packs and guns.
Jim stared with a horrible fascination as
they came along at a steady rate-crunch-
crunch, crunch-crunch-on the powdered sur-
face, and passed right under the hiding-place
he crouched in. He heard them speak to each
other, and it seemed that Neumann, as usual,
was in a state of smouldering fury. He said
something about the "blamed    trail being
snowed under."
They went on, and the watcher followed
them with eyes stiff in his head. He was
overwhelmed with the disaster of it, and for
the minute saw nothing else. Then the curve 
of the river took the two speeding shapes, and
for a while he lay still, trying to face the diffi-
culty, but feeling more despondent than any 
time since they had started. 
Presently he crawled out softly, got to his 
feet, and looked for the moose. It was still
feeding. And he dared not fire ! The north
wind would carry the sound of a shot for a
long way. Poor Jim   groaned, then caught
himself up as he remembered that there was



<pb n="270"/>
270  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
no saying whether these men might not know
the mouth of the cove, and decide to camp
there for to-night.  That would be the
climax.
He started back, going gently because of the
moose, found one rabbit just caught, and then
made for the cove with strides that hurried
more and more. Jim was not imaginative,
but without that the possibilities were suffi-
ciently terrifying.
However, Peggy's Guardian Angel had been
in charge. All was quiet, and Peter cleaning
a little string of fish. Jim told them about
the moose. Both girls looked at him, and
Peggy asked why he hadn't killed it.
" We could have fed the dogs for three days
and dried pounds," she said.  " Besides, it
would have been awfully nice in this cold."
Jim was intent on his moccasin, setting it up
on a stick to dry.
" Were you afraid of any one hearing if you
fired ? " asked Peter. " Was there any one ? "
Her eyes looked keen as a hawk's in her
thin brown face, now so strong and clear in
its outline.
Then Jim told them exactly what he'd seen
and heard. " It's the worst bit of luck we've
had," he sighed.
"Oh no," cried Peggy, a flush suddenly
\. .c*` ._~llI~



<pb n="271"/>
WHY MOOSE WAS NOT SHOT 271
making her pink and young-" Oh no, Jim
dear. It was a pity to lose the moose, but
fancy if you'd fired, and they'd heard ! The
snow came and walled up the cove mouth, too !
Wait, we shall win, I'm sure we shall win 
It seems bad, but-" and she tried to laugh.



<pb n="272"/>
CHAPTER XVII
THE FIGHT IN THE DARK
IT  HAT    night the wind went down, and
there was a great stillness over the sheeted
world. Then Jim went back again to the fir
wood and shot the young moose, which was
still there, and would, no doubt, have fallen
a prey very soon to stray wolves, hungry foxes,
or a pair of lynx. It was a wonderfully de-
fenceless creature alone, with no antlers.
Though this was good weather for travel,
the three stayed snug in the snow-walled camp
waiting for the trappers to get on ahead, the
while this precious moose meat was dried in
strips over the fire.
On the third day they hacked through the
snowdrifts at the mouth of the little inlet and
drew out on to the white river; then suddenly
realized that they would have the trappers
snowshoe trail ahead of them as a guide and a
warning.
273



<pb n="273"/>
THE FIGHT     IN  THE DARK      273
Oddly enough, not one of the three had
realized that the snowfall stopped at the time
the men were passing, and the wind dropped
in the evening. Owing to these circumstances
the trail could be seen unmistakably, and this
was a startling relief.
"But it really is funny," said Peggy, looking
at the track with shrinking eyes. " I wish
they didn't haunt us in this horrible way."
"We haunt them," corrected Peter. " Come
on; it's like a picture-all so beautiful. And,
Pegtop, we needn't worry now; we shall know
where they are, and be able to sleep in peace."
So the party raced ahead with vigour born
anew of moose meat, rest, and relief of mind.
Instead of listening back, and watching over
the shoulder, as it were, they gazed ahead and 
followed in the trail of the enemy-who was'
hunting them.                                         i
The blizzard had turned the tables !                 !
It was a grand day's work, and when the             i
dark fell they drew in to the shore just whereI
the river poured itself into Wollaston Lake,          !
almost the spot at which Pierre Corraine had 
captured the lost canoe. Peggy was rather
sentimental about the canoe, cached away up
there in the beaver swamp under a dead-fall.
It was such a beauty I She said they'd want
it in the summer.
^r- i                                      j---
i~ ~   ~   _.      ,   _w



<pb n="274"/>
274 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
"Make another," suggested Jim. "Once
we get home I'd make anything. I say,
Pegtop, won't life seem like all play after
this?"
" I'm awfully glad we've done it, all the
same," said Peter, putting dry wood on the
fire.
"We haven't," said Jim.
"How do you mean ?" questioned Peggy
anxiously.
"We haven't done it yet."
"Oh well, we're at Wollaston I We've got
through all the worst, and we know the winter
trail now, and can live it. There's nothing
more to be afraid of," said Peggy.
" Oh, don't boast," Peter begged with sudden
dread in her voice.
Peggy looked at her reproachfully. "But
you said we'd done it, Pete."
"I know; I said so without thinking.
Jim's right. We have not done it-yet."
They were off before dawn next morning,
and saw the sun rise over the shining floor of
Wollaston. After consultation they settled to
hug the east shore for shelter and direction,
and because they knew they would gain very
little indeed by a direct line across, seeing the
angle at which the river left the lake. The
snowshoe trail went over in a bee-line; the



<pb n="275"/>
THE FIGHT      IN  THE DARK         275
sledge bent away to the left, and in the shade
of the forest trees sped away over the snow, 
dogs and humans working in happy concert.
"One sleep," as the Indians called a night,
another day of the glittering, cutting cold, and 
they reached the river. Then the party waited            j
in the shelter of the woods, while Jim scouted
cautiously for the snowshoe trail. There it
was; no doubt the trappers crossed in a day,
as they were travelling light; besides, they
would never think of camping on the ice of
the lake. Jim followed up the track to a little
round fire on the western shore of the entrance.
So the sledge party held to the other shore, and
went on next day with renewed spirits.
This, though, was not all smooth going.                f
A considerable force of water ran betweeni
these lakes, especially at the junction of Fish          t
River away to the east. Waterfalls and rapids            i
forced the party to land travel, and that meant          "
cutting a way for sledge and dogs, hauling up,
dropping down, and other difficulties. When 
they camped they were tired, but happy, for
was not Deer Lake close by, and after that 
their own land, as it were ? The very name;
of Missinnippi was home and success. They
were not afraid of Deer Lake either; it was
so indescribably beautiful, and conveyed to 
them a feeling of safety, because there were so 
,           .                                _.  '



<pb n="276"/>
276 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
many Indian villages about its shores. It was 
not so lonely as the far north. The weather
held for several glittering days, and then, as
they began the long journey down Deer Lake, I
all the beauty went out and the thermometer 
dropped to fifty below zero.
There was no sun, and the icy chill of the :a
air froze everything exposed to it at once. ;
Fu; " mitts" could not be taken off without 'i
infinite care. Hoods must be drawn close
round faces, so that the fur tails that fringed i
them kept off the wind. Meat and fish were 
frozen like brick; and camp-making was sheer ',
agony, just as was camp-breaking in those   a
awful mornings of black, iron cold. 
The faces of the three were cracked and .(
blistered; they looked old and worn with *.'
the pain and ceaseless struggle against force; 3
but their eyes " were satisfactory," as Kipling :
says in his great story of the Polo Game. ;
Sunk under frosted eyebrows, black-ringed by' i
strain, yet they were full of fearless light and '
splendid intention.                         i
Bad it was-very bad. But they had got      i
the treasure they came for; they had passed
through amazing dangers safely.  They had    Hi
got as far as Deer Lake on the way home.
Were they going to give in now to lamentation
and repining ?
'>
,  :~



<pb n="277"/>
THE FIGHT IN THE DARK 277
As Peggy said, chafing her thin cheeks with
snow because she had got a touch of " bite,"
"After all, what else could you expect ? "
There it was! The cold seemed to get
worse, not better, which, after all, was natural,
as the days shortened fast and the sun had less
and less power. You must remember they
were coming into the very depths of it all.
They made short spells, too, which fretted
them; but the difficulties to overcome were
many, and Peggy suffered pain in her leg.
They were a fortnight getting down Deer
Lake, and then came the most unexpected
and shattering disaster-something impossible
to foresee or avert; something that tried to
the utmost every bit of pluck in all three.
They had come to the last camp on Deer
Lake. To-morrow they planned to take the
Missinnippi trail-the last stretch before home.
It was a great occasion; a night of triumph
in spite of the fearful cold, and they cooked
quite a big porion of dried moose meat, with
beans, in water over the fire, for the feeling
prevailed that they were getting on so fast
that they need not be extra careful. A bigger
fire than usual; a bigger supper too, and the
dogs sitting round in a smiling semi-circle,
waiting for the thawing fish that swung on a
stick above the blaze.
(C3u)                             x8
(         -·" -- ----------.



<pb n="278"/>
278  GIRLS ON      THE GOLD      TRAIL 
"How long shall we be now ? " cried Peggy,
as she shook the pan over the fire and turned
over the meat.
Jim  said a month at the rate they were
going now. " It's not canoeing," he said,
"and we've got to take the land trail for a big
piece-you remember, there's the falls. Why,
it'll all be frozen up, right away round the
bend. Big falls and the rocks, there's a cafion
where the little lake joins."
They remembered well and discussed it,
even to the big boulder on which Peter saw 
the Cree watching the river at dawn in the
mist I How long, long ago it seemed now-
an age. They had all grown so much older,
that they looked at many things in a different
light. The point of view was shifted by these 
experiences.
They were eating, when they noticed a change
in the dogs. Instead of burrowing their holes 
in the snow, as huskies do after finishing all 
the supper they can get, the dogs crowded      t
in to the humans, and they were shivering- 
but not with cold. Raa, in particular, raised  '
his sharp nose and curled his lips back from
his fangs with a look of deadly menace. They
were all listening, too, and their wonderful
power of scent seemed to bring them some-
thing they were afraid of.
_..



<pb n="279"/>
THE FIGHT     IN  THE DARK      279
As the three discussed this matter Peter said
"Hark I " Then they all ceased to speak and,
crouching by the fire, listened to a new sound
that the wind had before prevented from
reaching them. When they first heard it, it
was confused. In a minute after they knew
it for the howling and yelling of dogs, as distinct
from the rather peculiar long-drawn cry of a
hunting wolf.
The three stood up and looked anxiously
at one another, while even the huskies came
crowding in over their feet, whimpering in
terror obviously.
"Let's build up the fire-quick," cried
Peter.
" Load our guns," urged Peggy, looking to
her automatic with a practised eye.
For two or three minutes they were as busy
as possible, and it took only that time to fill
the air with the deafening noise of scores of
wild dogs mad with hunger, and coming through
the woods straight for the scent of the meat
which the wind had carried.
As every one knows, an Indian encampment
owns at least fifty dogs-often many more.
In summer they fare well; in winter, when
food is short, they are always on the verge of
starvation, and often over it-never by any
chance appeased, unless they happen to pull
f      -m         ---,---r            ...



<pb n="280"/>
280 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
down a deer for themselves, in which case it
is a very moderate meal for such a pack. They
eat one another, of course, if one is wounded; it
is a continual struggle for existence.
Jim was telling his sisters to get behind trees
and fire low. Peggy cried out to beat them
with flaming brands; and then the words
were lost and whelmed in confusion and mad
horror that was like a nightmare.
Dogs! dogs-bounding in and out of the
dark; slinking through the scrub; leaping
over dead-falls. Howling, slavering, snapping
dogs-which would have been cowards singly,
but en masse were reckless and carried away by
the energy of the mob.
The three Lockharts kept their heads with
amazing coolness. The girls, setting their
backs against trees, fired at the dogs that
crowded on them, and Jim fought with the
axe, Raa between his knees and a tree behind
him.
The five huskies fought for their lives, of
course, and, as dogs went down, bitten or
maimed, the others rushed on them and tore
them to pieces. It was a most horrible sight;
but of course there was no time to be sick over
details, or even to distinguish them, for the
fire was kicked and trampled out of existence
amid the yelps and yells of burned dogs, and



<pb n="281"/>
THE FIGHT IN THE DARK 28I
after that it was only the bloodstained snow
that showed up the battle.
Of course the sledge was knocked over and
torn, bitten, ripped to get at the food, the dried
meat eaten instantly, frozen as it was, and the
beans left over-nay, even the harness was
chewed and gnawed.
Then, just as the flood had come, it went.
Jim split the head of a big leader with his axe;
panic seized some and they fled, the others
following, and the howls died away in the
distance.
Peggy sat down at the root of her tree and
sobbed. Peter leaned against her, panting.
Both of them gripped guns that were hot with
loading.
Jim patted Raa's head and looked round,
his mouth grim and set. Nothing much worse
could have happened to them, just at that crisis
especially.
Billy, one of their own huskies, crawled out
from under the dead-fall with a bitten paw. 
Raa had his ear torn and his face ripped, but 
Jim  had protected him. The others were              :
either all dead and eaten, or gone with the
raving pack! Dead dogs lay about horribly               i
torn. Jim took them up, one after the other, 
and threw them back of the rocks and scrub. 
Then he began to look at the sled and the
F d -__



<pb n="282"/>
282 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
wreck of their packs. The loss of the dried
meat was the worst. The bags of pemmican
were safe in one of the rubber bags-that was
a mercy indeed-and the package of tea. The
dogs' fish was all gone, frozen though it was.
"Considering the dogs are eaten, it doesn't
matter so much," Peter said with a sort of
brisk despair; then she suddenly began to
laugh, and sat down giggling helplessly. Then
Peggy began to laugh as well as cry, and poor
old Raa stole up to her and licked the tears
that rolled down her cold cheeks.
Jim gazed at them all in silence. "I vote
we have another fire at once," he said.
"Oh, not here," cried Peggy; "it's too
horrible. Let's go a little farther on-to a
clean place. We shall feel better."
So they did, dragging the sledge themselves,
and picking out a likely camping-place. Then
they made a new fire, heated water, washed the
slashed wounds of the two dogs left to them,
and drank some tea themselves.
They slept afterwards from weariness, but
the waking was harder than any yet. So
much to face, and under more and more cruel
conditions. One thing was settled for them:
it was not possible to go on that day. Billy
was very lame, and Raa nearly blind of one
eye. Jim's hand was torn by savage fangs



<pb n="283"/>
THE FIGHT      IN  THE DARK      283
and all sorts of things; besides, eyes, paws,
and hands wanted mending. Even the harness.
" Two dogs better than no dogs," said Peter,
raising her head to meet the blast of ill-luck.
( e'll do it all right, Pegtop. We can pull
in turns, and Jim be leader. The load is too
heavy for two dogs anyway."
The cold continued at the same high pitch,
but no more snow fell, and when the little
cavalcade started the trail of the trappers was
visible on the frozen, powdery surface of the
Nlissinnippi.
It is odd how one can get used to any pain,
or any disappointment, and amazing how even
three days will put a new aspect on what
seemed a crushing defeat. One thing only
was not easy to get over. They had not enough
to eat, and that, with hard work and freezing
cold, is a great strain on pluck and vitality.
Pemmican is very nourishing, but there is so
little bulk in it that it does not seem to satisfy,
and even this had to be rationed. They did
not know when they would get anything else
either. The future showed blank.
But they were on the Missinnippi I Miles
lay between, and hardships indescribable, but
it was their own river, and nothing could
quench the eternal uprising of the " home"
feeling. Unluckily the ground, or rather ice,



<pb n="284"/>
284 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
covered in one day was of necessity shorter.
Two dogs partially fed cannot do the work of
six, but they kept on steadily, day after day,
eating up the frozen miles between the unbroken
ranks of snow-laden forest trees; till at last
they began to look out for the big boulders at
the place where they had taken to the canoe
after their first porterage.
It was going to be harder for a spell, across
the peninsula, but it would be a landmark-an
immense, definite gain once they were through.
And you can bear so much when you see the
prize I
In the early dusk they drew up to the rocks
and stopped to gaze. There was the huge,
round-topped boulder on which the Cree had
stood, watching the forward trail through the
mist of the summer dawn. Then the roar
of the falls filled the air in a deep, ceaseless
hum;    now  there was a frozen     stillness.
No water, no bird; every now and then the
sharp report of wood as some branch split
in the frost with a pistol-like crack; then
deathly silence again, and only the sound of
breathing, and the creaks of the laden sledge.
" Better make camp here to-night," said
Jim. " Come on. One big pull up the bank."
It was a good bank for landing, flattish and
mossy, then up a slope and into the shelter



<pb n="285"/>
THE FIGHT IN THE DARK 285
of a sort of rocky cliff caved out underneath
and sheltered on two sides with more rocks.
The track into the forest was rock-bound too,
for everywhere within a mile or two the land
was rocky, as the big falls at the bend and the
rapids showed. Higher up, the river ran
between walls of rock.
There was a feeling of security in having
rock at your back and sides, apart from the
shelter afforded; so with a sigh of relief the
three started to make camp, scraping away
the snow and collecting dry wood.
" Did you notice that they landed here too ?"
said Peggy. " Same place exactly. I suppose
we shall lose them now; not so easy to see
their trail in the forest. Aren't you sorry,
Jim ? I like seeing them safe ahead."
Jim thought the trail would be visible on
the snow just the same; then he gave a short
laugh. " We shan't bother about their tracks
soon, my word! That will be fine."
And Peter said nothing. She was looking
worn, and her dark hawk-face had the old
listening look that came when she " sus-
picioned " trouble. As always, she did not
know why or wherefrom this new anxiety
came-she was simply oppressed by it. She
said nothing, had not suggested a thought of
it to the others since it took possession of her,
*i  --      ----. a ^_-r'--- . . . .__.  T



<pb n="286"/>
286  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
because the way was so hard, and the real
trials of the day so cruel that it seemed selfish
to add to that which Peggy and Jim were
bearing.
In all this you will see how Peter had devel-
oped. When she left the Log House she would
not have hesitated to blurt out any dread she
felt. On the contrary, she might have been
a little proud of feeling what the others did
not   But now all that was past; the girl
thought many times before adding one straw 
to Peggy's heavy load. If there was anything
nice to see, she saw it; if there was the smallest
happy thought she made the most of it. But
for the past two days or more she had been
struggling against one of her old warning
dreads. She fought it, but it held her, and
it grew stronger.
After the meagre supper they all rolled up
and went to sleep-except Peter. If she slept 
at all it was for a short doze, then she was wide
awake thinking-thinking. Then she sat up
and looked round.
The moon had risen, and white light made
the strange, wild scene quite clear-the fire
burned red, and close to it were two bundles,
Jim and Peggy, sleeping the sleep of exhaustion.
Round them all the overhanging rocks piled
into a sheltering barrier, and the upturned



<pb n="287"/>
THE FIGHT     IN  THE DARK       287
sledge lay across the opening, with the dogs
loosely leashed to it in case they should wander
after food.
Peter got up and stepped into the open with
noiseless feet. Raa raised his head and looked
at her. She patted him to quiet, as she was
afraid of taking him. He might be too definite !
She went down to the river and back along the
trail-the shining trail so clear under the moon
that she feared would tell her the worst news.
About a mile back she found what she ex-
pected-the fresh track of men's snowshoes,
deep and distinct, following on the sledge and
its crew. She stood still awhile making sure,
and presently understood exactly what had
happened. The trappers had made a plain,
obvious trail right down Deer Lake and all
the way to the landing at the boulder rock,
where the party would of necessity be forced
ashore. Having made this trail on the river
snow, they had gone back through the forest
to get behind the sledge again, and followed
it all the way.
It was impossible to guess when and where
Neumann had discovered the Lockharts were
behind him, because he had made no break,
but gone straight ahead and then doubled on
his own trail to keep close behind, landing in
the woods not a mile short of the camp.



<pb n="288"/>
288 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
Peter turned again and went back.
It might be said she had no feeling-noth.
ing but a sense of crushing dismay. For the
first time on this terrible Gold Trail she shiv-
ered in utter misery.
x~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="289"/>
CHAPTER XVIII
DESPERATION
IOW long had they, how long? Perhaps
when she got back she would find the
little camp in Neumann's hands I She gath-
ered her reserve of strength, and forced her
weary feet to full speed. All was still at the
rock camp, only old Raa sat up and looked at
her with eager question in his shining green
eyes.
She had made up her mind what to do
while she ran, and now shook Jim gently by
the shoulder till he woke. Then she told him,
and, whispering, rapidly suggested her plan.
The great round-topped boulder on the bank
was set in brushwood, scrub, and broken rocks.
As it did not fit into the ground there were
hollows beneath it, covered and disguised by
:he bushes and piled-up snow. This was
i'eter's notion as a hiding-place, because it was
I landmark neither of them would ever forget,
-~..~r-



<pb n="290"/>
290  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD     TRAIL 
and one they could describe to a friend if the 
necessity arose to fetch the treasure by other
hands. Jim agreed at once. He saw the ad-
vantage of concealment in a place so near and
simple that the trappers would not think of it. 
In a moment the two were working, and of 
course the steps to and fro were the natural 
traffic of the landing. It all fitted in. Nearly 
three hundred pounds' weight of buckskin   i
bags did they carry and press into the cracks 
under the stone and into the scrub, keeping 
count of number and more or less of position, 
and in the end there was nothing to show they 
had done it. 
When they got back both lay down in their i';
furred blankets-still, listening; and then sud- 
denly Peter gave an exclamation. 
"What ? " asked the boy, raising his head.  '
She held up her arm and hand, then she 
said very low,-                           (
"I say, Jim, look I Pegtop's Angel hasn't 
quit guarding us, eh ? " 
It was snowing. Clouds over the moon had
brought up snow from the north-fine, pow- 
dery snow, on a bitter wind that stirred the
woods and blew the snow round in eddies.
Whether it came from the darkening sky or
the hundreds of miles of snow-laden forest
mattered not at all, for it answered the pur-
. .o
.



<pb n="291"/>
DESPERATION              291
pose either way. Spinning in eddies up the
river bed, sweeping round corners into drifts,
showering from the bending boughs, it laid
a cover over all prints, and a glistening robe
on the big boulder rock and the mass of bushes
at the foot.
When the three woke at dawn they were
half buried.
"Oh, how    warm!"    murmured   Peggy.
"W hy can't we stop like the bears all winter?
So sensible ! " And she sighed.
It went to Peter's heart to tell her the new
fear, but they had to. It was best she should not
be startled by the shock of Neumann's coming.
" And we've put Dad's dust in a safe place,
Pegtop. Don't ask, we shan't tell you."
" Why not ? " demanded Peggy, flushing.
" Because they'll ask you, and you can say
sure you don't know, see ? It's better like that.
\\hy, your eyes are a regular looking-glass for
answering truth back. Jim and I will puzzle
them somehow. You wait."
" But do you think they'll go without it "
asked Peggy in a faltering whisper.
No, we shall," said Jim grimly.
What, and leave it-somewhere ? "
"We shall have to. Just go, and come back
in the spring with some one to help. They'll
force our hand, you'll see." So said Jim.
f



<pb n="292"/>
292 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
"Personally," added Peter, "I'm  sort of
planking on Pegtop's Guardian Angel. I don't
say it's a bright look-out, but I do say it's a
grand chance for an angel to show what it's
made of."
" Oh, hush," murmured Peggy, turning pink.
Then all three laughed, which was very good
for them, seeing how desperately tight was
the corner they were in, and how desperately
hungry and thin they all felt.
They boiled water, drank very weak, hot tea,
and divided a share of pemmican between the
three, and gave some to the dogs; they had
nothing else.
"I must get something to-day," said Jim
uneasily. " There'll be a better chance in the
forest than on the river, perhaps. If we can
get a moose now; Peter, do you remember the
cow-moose that near hanged herself, close here,
too ? "
They were talking about it, and trying to
pack up briskly, when Neumann walked up
the bank from the river trail and stood looking
in at them over their snow barrier. Peter
thought of the wind-swept track, and looked
back at him without dismay.
" Hullo! " said Jim.
They all three went on stowing packs in an
indifferent manner.



<pb n="293"/>
DESPERATION              293
"Can't say you've a strong team," sneered
the trapper, looking at Raa under his narrowed
cvelids.
4( Wild pack came down on us and fought
ours. Starved, I suppose. Held us up a lot,"
said Jim in the same indifferent tone.
" Hard luck on you when you'd a load to
pull-heavy load," suggested the other.
" It isn't heavy now, worse luck still," re-
torted Jim. " They ate up our fish, a whole
heap of it, and our dried meat, frozen and
jerky. We've nothing but a little pemmican
till I bring something down."
"Oh, that's the notion, is it ?" Neumann
paused; then he heard something, for he turned
and looked over his left shoulder towards the
river. "Hullo, pardner!" he called, and
\vhistled.
La Perle came in sight, carrying a pack
which he shifted from his back to the ground.
Then he leaned against a tree, stuffing his pipe
and staring into the little camp with a smile
that exposed his yellow teeth. He was amused,
but plainly not surprised.
Neumann went on talking.
" One way and another we've spent some
time lookin' after you three," he said-" not
for nothing. My time's valuable. You got
awuay from the creek up Crooked River "-
19
be



<pb n="294"/>
294 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
here his face darkened into sullen rage; he
was thinking of the Cree, perhaps-" but we
picked you up again, and you thought you'd
done us. I'm not that kind. No chechaquo ever
done F. Neumann yet, you freeze on to that,
young chap. Well, we thought you might just
as well do the porterage as not-saved us a lot
of trouble. So we let you carry on till it suited
us to take over the stuff. That's how we
stand.  I don't ask for no hole-and-corner
business; I'm fair and square. I've been
after the dust Tom Lockhart hid over a year,
and I won't be put off no longer-see ! You
hand over and we don't harm you. You
monkey with us, and you'll be sorry. There
it is in black and white."
"In black, you mean," said Peter sud-
denly.
She was sitting with her back against the
cliff and an arm round Raa, her gaze fixed on
the trees and the little whirls of snow.
Neumann took no notice except to scowl.
" Well," he said, "I've no time to waste.
This is where our trails part. You can go off
west soon as you like to break camp if you
hand over the gold, the sledge, and the dogs.
We want them for the load. Guess it's heavy."
He grinned.
" There is no gold here," said Jim. He



<pb n="295"/>
DESPERATION              295
just glanced up to say it, and went on with
his careful rolling of a blanket.
" What do you mean, no gold? "  Neumann
flamed with a sudden red rage.
" Just that. There is no gold here. Look
if you like."
The sledge was close to the trapper, and in
a moment he was throwing the bags and the
few utensils right and left. It was true-there
was no gold ! He hesitated, brooding sullenly.
Then he asked,-
"What did you want a sledge and six
huskies for, eh ? "
" Easiest way to take the trail," answered
Jim shortly. " Must have warm things. We
were hung up at the shack so long-well you
know; that threw us back."
All this was true on the face of it.
Neumann drew away slowly and joined La
Perle. They went and sat down together on
a dead-fall by the side of the track, in full
view of the camp. There they smoked and
talked.
Both the girls thought the worst was over.
Peter's buoyancy carried her to the top of the
wave of woe. Her dark eyes twinkled affec-
tionatcly at Peggy.
" Cheer up, old Pegtop. We shall be out of
it soon. How sick they are "   She patted
r            -    --     -
f  ., ~  ~    ~   "-~



<pb n="296"/>
296 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
Raa's nose gently with the palm of her hand.
" Buck up, Raa. I wish I could give you old
Neumann to eat, but you wouldn't like it,"
so she whispered, making Peggy smile, but not
Jim. He looked at her, and his thin brown
face was graver than she had ever seen it.
" 'Fraid there's more to come, Pete."
" But-when they can't-" Peter urged.
" I know. But Neumann's not easy beat.
He's on this notion, and he won't let go in a
hurry."
" I think gold is a most awful thing," mur-
mured Peggy sorrowfully. " Better far live
without it. In old days he wasn't so bad-
at least he didn't seem so. Now, he's wicked,
and all because he thinks there's some gold to
be got."
Neumann and La Perle got up together and
came forward to the entrance of the little camp.
Then the former spoke. " We've a notion
that like as not you buried the loot near the
end of Deer Lake when your dogs got chawed
up. We're going back to fetch it, and Jim's
going along with us to show up the place,
see ? We won't have no more hokey-pokey
over this dust. The girls can stay here and
live on pemmican," he laughed roughly.
" When Jim's shown us the stuff he can come
back. That's our last word."



<pb n="297"/>
jb)   rtiKA i IUIMN       297
"But it's not there !" Peter flung at him
with hot emphasis. " It's no more there than
it's here. Now, then ! "
There was a moment of tense silence. Jim
looked on the ground. The two girls hurled
hack a challenge of denial at the trappers.
"She speak de trut'," remarked La Perle
with conviction.
Neumann's red face turned crimson.
" So that's it," he said. " Well, it's some-
where, and we mean to have it. If one way
fails another way won't. You'll stay here till
you tell me what I mean to know-and you'll
starve. We make camp here. We've food
enough and to spare, but you'll only get the
smell of it. Jim Lockhart, if you'd rather sit
still and see your sisters die, do it. I guess
some one will speak before the end."
Peter realized then the devilish nature of
this pressure. Jim would starve himself, but
to see his sisters die was another thing; and
the case was much the same with her. She
was so hungry, and felt so weak and cold from
the long under-feeding, that she could face
dying with actual comfort, she believed, but
Peggy would be different! Neumann had
been quite clever enough to see this, though
he was incapable of feeling for other people
himself.
(      -     . . -.._



<pb n="298"/>
298 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
On the second day of this imprisonment he
came into their camp and took away all that
remained of the pemmican and Jim's fire-
arms. Apparently he did not see any import-
ance in the little automatics carried by the
girls. Of course, he found the Winchester
with the initials.
" See this, Louis," he said, holding it up,
and laughed-that was all.
It was all Peter could do to hold Raa while
this was going on. Crouching to the ground
with every fang bared, the wolf-dog snarled
at the man who had ill-treated him; but the
girl prevented any attack, because she believed
it would mean the old dog's death instantly.
Neumann stood looking at him for a few
moments, then he went back to the outer camp
and began talking to his partner. This ended
in his return.
" I'm going to have these dogs," he said.
" No," Peter told him fiercely.
" What for ? " Jim asked. He was standing
up leaning against the rock-wall, his blue eyes
sunk and sombre in his thin face.
" Because it won't suit my book to starve
them, see ? I shall want the sledge, and I've
a notion to feed the dogs so's they can pull.
It won't pay me to let 'em die with you all."
Peter let Raa go, with a last little kiss on the



<pb n="299"/>
DESPERATION               299
top of his rough head. She said nothing at all,
but this was like a stab into her heart.
She got up weakly, and began breaking sticks
to put on the fire; there was plenty of dry
wood within reach.
" We may as well be warm," she said, for
the sake of speaking, but a curious feeling came
over her that Pegtop's Angel had gone away
and left them.
Peggy, sitting close to the fire, motionless,
divined the feeling in some curious way, and
raised her eyes, wonderfully large and bright.
" You're thinking our Angel has quit looking
after us, Pete," she said. "You wait. I'm be-
lieving all the time. Don't know exactly what's
up, but I've such a feeling we're not left."
"Good for you, Pegtop."     Peter smiled
with difficulty. " Anyway, Raa will get some-
thing to eat. Look, they're feeding the dogs
with deer meat and cooking their own. Wish
they wouldn't do it so close to us."
"That's just why they do," said Jim grimly.
Peggy went to sleep while Peter kept the fire
going. They drank a little water from the drip
of the ice facets; that was all they had. Jim
and Peter talked in low voices, going over every
detail of chance for and against escape, but
never once did they refer even to the gold
which was in their charge.
. _



<pb n="300"/>
300  GIRLS ON     THE GOLD      TRAIL
Peter wanted Jim to climb up over the rocks
and see if he could get out and kill a rabbit or
some small creature with her little gun, but
Jim refused. First, he would not leave his
sisters. Second, he explained if they saw him
make the attempt they would shoot him or
tie him up-indeed, he believed they were only
waiting an excuse for some action of that kind.
" They want me out of the way really," he
said, and Peter shivered. "Better keep your
guns in case you need them more."
At dusk the guards cooked another feast, and
the smell of the deer meat was pain such as only
those who are starving can understand. They
saw that Raa and Billy were very well fed, and
afterwards a muzzle of moose-hide was put on
Raa-one man holding a club over his cower-
ing head while the other fastened the muzzle;
then he was tied up.
Peter was glad he was fed. If only it could
be Peggy, she thought, having left herself out
of the calculation altogether.
Rolled in their fur blankets, they sat very
still, only moving to keep the fire up, when
suddenly from the dark of the wood came the
long wailing howl of a wolf, perhaps the most
desolate sound on earth. It was answered by
another and then another. Obviously they
were not the only hungry people in the forest.



<pb n="301"/>
DESPERATION              301
Jim sat up, and Peter, who had been court-
ing sleep, rather welcomed this diversion.
i" If only they'll come and eat Neumann,"
she said, and then began to laugh weakly.
" Look," said Jim, " beyond their fire, look
into the wood."
Peter looked, and saw green sparks moving,
moving-light green spots of flame that made
one shudder, because they were so mad and so
merciless.
" They are as hungry as we are," murmured
Peter. " Hark to old Raa growling."
Billy began to howl; they could see him
crawling close to the men.
La Perle rolled over, sat up, and piled wood
on the fire. Then he cursed roundly, and
apparently looked to his rifle. Neumann only
grunted when he was spoken to. He slept
heavily; he was that kind of man, with a very
short, thick neck.
But the wolves were beyond minding the
fire. They came closer and closer in, till Jim
and Peter could see the dark shapes weaving
to and fro in one ceaseless movement-never
still an instant, and always the green eyes and
white fangs turned towards the trappers' fire.
Suddenly they bounded in, and a brief but
fierce battle began between them and La Perle,
who was yelling abuse at Neumann for his
r            -       ._



<pb n="302"/>
302 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
slackness between shots. The latter scrambled
on to his feet, clubbed his rifle, and laid about
him with great, slogging blows.
" Sweet loves! " said Peter, close to Jim's
ear, repeating her own phrase of the summer
trail. "Wonder if they are the same pack?
Go it, wolves, kill them I " Starved or no,
Peter was quite irrepressible, and her dark eyes
flashed in their hollows.
The noise was very horrible and murderous,
the desperate wolves attacking the men. They
were very big, gaunt, grey wolves of the sort
known as timber wolves, but there were only
some seven or eight altogether, and when the
biggest leader was shot the others retreated
into the forest, where they howled with the
terrible lifting cry which is enough to strike
terror into any one, especially a man on a lone
trail.
The brother and sister watched eagerly to see
what might happen, and presently realized that
Billy the husky was dead, torn to pieces. Raa
had been cut free of his muzzle at the offset,
when Neumann woke; that they gathered
from what he said to La Perle. It was a
sensible thing to do, and no doubt the trapper
realized what a help the big wolf-dog would be.
He was bitten and ripped in the struggle, and
lay on the snow growling at Neumann; but he



<pb n="303"/>
DESPERATION               303
had accounted for more than one wolf, as the
bodies proved.
Presently all was quiet again, a new fire made,
and the carcases of the wolves thrown out into
the forest. All was the same as before, except
that Raa was unmuzzled, though still on a long
leash. It appeared that the men wanted him
as a protection; but they threw the meat to him,
they did not take it, and Raa watched them
with his nose on his paws, silent, red-eyed,
revengeful.
By the end of another day Neumann had
exhausted all his powers of threats-such as
they were-but could get no answer from the
two who still sat up with their backs to the rock,
or moved about getting sticks. They had had
nothing now for three days, and that after more
than three weeks of rationed pemmican and
hard labour! You must take the cold into
consideration, too. Only the little fire stood
between them and a quick death, as they were
not strong enough for vigorous exercise.
Peggy slept most of the time. She was warm
enough to keep alive. When she woke she drank
a little tea, so weak that it was but bewitched
water; that would not last two days more.
" It won't matter," said Peter to Jim; " let's
keep it for Pegtop. I don't care now." Her
voice was a whisper.
f



<pb n="304"/>
304 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
That night, when the dusk wrapped the
camp, Neumann was more angry than he had
ever been before. He told La Perle that he
should take measures to force Peter to speak
by tying Jim to a tree outside the warmth of
the camp.
" She won't let him freeze," said Neumann.
" She is mos' determin'," groaned the half-
breed. "The little one she die, now. You
freeze Jim-hein-he die. You tink you make
Pete speak "-he snapped his fingers derisively
-" she die. Where then dis gold?     I do
not belief your starve plan. You are mistak'.
You lose all-ze time, ze gold. We lose all
now, that is ver' sure."
So Neumann was still more angry because
of the obvious truth in the other man's reason-
ing. He was always making miscalculations
in his greed. La Perle did not let him forget
this, especially the trouble he had brought upon
them by the theft of those valuable silver fox
pelts that belonged to the Cree, Kee-way-din.
Neumann had seen them in the man's tepee,
and stolen them when he was out on his rounds.
They were almost priceless, and at the time La
Perle had told him it was never good policy
to steal from an Indian; but Neumann would
not hear reason, and when the Cree tracked
them he made matters worse by shooting the



<pb n="305"/>
DESPERATION              305
man's ear off instead of killing him, as he
meant to do.
La Perle reminded him of this folly again
that night as they quarrelled.
"Brute way no good," he said, and ex-
plained that he would have got the gold by
making friends with the three and then watch-
ing. " Now they all die," he repeated, " where
)our gold ? It is fool treek, your brute way."
Whereupon Neumann reminded him of the
thousands of dollars they'd got for the silver
fox pelts at the settlement.
"And what's the Cree done to us? Let
him follow; he can't hit a house ! Same with
these youngsters. I'll get the gold; the girl
\vill speak when she sees the boy roped to a
tree."
t            _.. .^



<pb n="306"/>
CHAPTER XIX
THE SONG OF THE SCARLET HUNTER
QO   F all this the sister and brother knew
nothing, except that the trappers were
quarrelling, and that Neumann was desperate.
Some of his threats had been especially vile,
but the two were so far gone in weakness that
his words missed fire and conveyed very little
to minds that were really but half conscious.
Jim took Peggy's automatic, as she could
not use it. That was the only preparation
possible for anything they might have to face
on the morrow.
" But I expect we shall be dead," whispered
Peter, smiling with her bright hollow eyes.
" I'm only sorry we couldn't carry out Dad's
job. Never mind; we can tell him we did
the best we knew."
Then she rolled herself in her blanket furs
and lay down against Peggy, who was still and
waxen, but breathing.
Joe



<pb n="307"/>
SONG OF SCARLET HUNTER 307
Peter dozed fitfully, and her mind was full
of strange imaginings. She kept on waking
and finding these thoughts-or dreams-were
not real; but at the same time a feeling of ex-
citement made her heart beat a little faster,
and she wondered if Jim felt it, or if he slept.
tie was very quiet, crouched close to the fire,
his shoulders hunched, and the blanket round
him.
In this queer mood she looked at every yard
of their little rock-framed camp, and then
straight up at the broken outline of the rocks
above her. There was snow everywhere, and
from it jutted bunches of scrubby bush and
queer bits of boulder. One of these fixed
her attention, because it was like a head. She
lay watching it as one might shapes in a red-
hot fire, but it did not dissolve into twigs as
a fire dissolves into ashes. Moving with in-
finite caution it still remained-a head.
Presently it was withdrawn, and Peter,
in her trance-like state of weakness, thought
" that's all right," and she closed her eyes
only to open them again with a sudden memory
of that head.
Jim was still motionless, his crossed arms
on his humped-up knees, his head resting on
them. Peter's gaze left him and examined
tie rock frame of the little camp again. Al-
$ .         . _-



<pb n="308"/>
308 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
most opposite her, and at Jim's back, a dim
shape was coming down the broken cliff face.
It came like a lizard-slow, silent, and sure.
"Ah," thought Peter, interested in this
queer dream, " so that is the body that belongs
to the head ?" and she observed its progress
down the rocks. " It won't hurt us," she
thought. "There is nothing to steal; be-
sides, dreams don't really matter."
On its feet in the angle of the wall she saw
a tall thin shape. The head, turned towards
Neumann's camp, reminded her of something.
Of course-Indians. The smooth, black out-
line, with receding forehead and hook-like nose.
Peter, gazing dreamily, thought how ruthless
is the shape of a Red Indian's head and face.
" Even Gijik," she recalled; then she won-
dered where he was, and wished he would
come.
The lean shape moved like a shadow round
the inner side of the rocks, and looked out
on the trappers' camp. Peter followed its
progress, turning her eyes but not her head-
she was too tired to move that. It occurred to
her that it was a pity there was so much snow,
"things show up against snow." She could
see the man quite clearly now. He was going
out past the upturned sledge into Neumann's
camp.



<pb n="309"/>
SONG OF SCARLET HUNTER 309
Then she heard Raa growl, and a sudden
awakening knowledge in her dazed mind made
her drag herself up on to her knees, and stay so,
rigid with excitement. She heard another long
snarl from the wolf-dog, who was crouching
on the snow on the farther side of the heap
which was Neumann. The snarl woke him,
for he cursed the dog and rolled over. An
instant after he was on his feet, but in the
confusion of waking he had seized the club
with which he beat the dog, instead of his gun,
for both lay by him near the fire. At the
same time he stepped back away from the
swift-moving shape, and shouted confusedly
to La Perle.
The crouching dog saw him grip the club,
and, with every muscle in his powerful body,
sprang at Neumann's back and bore him down,
holding him with fangs like a steel vice through
the upper arm.
The Indian bent over the fallen man and
struck twice into his throat with a knife that
shone; then he turned like a beast of prey on
La Perle, who was struggling out of his furs
in a frenzied manner, and making a noise like
a cat in a trap. Lonis La Perle was not a
brave man when he was getting the worst of
it, hut he was very active. On his feet he
dodged the leaping figure that came at him,
_=Z,=:) 20
L, ..r



<pb n="310"/>
310  UiAIL     V0 JLN  InL  are Lu   1 KAIL
picked up his gun, and raced for the wood.
The Indian went after him in leaps; for
minutes they shifted to and fro among the
trees, getting farther off, then La Perle must
have tripped over a fallen bough, for Peter
heard his shriek of despair as the Indian sprang
on him. Then there was silence.
Peter sat down on her heels and thought it
all over. It was quite horrible. She reviewed
every bit of the vision, from the moment she
saw that quiet head to the last raucous screech
as the Indian caught the half-breed. She
shivered and looked down at Peggy, asleep,
very waxen and still. Then she realized that
Jim was on his feet, looking over into Neu-
mann's camp. " They're dead, you know,"
said Peter, in a matter-of-fact voice that was
husky with weakness.
" So the Cree got them in the end," Jim
answered. " Well, they always do. I'm glad."
And slowly he went past the upturned sledge
into the open. Then Peter heard him talking
to Raa, and she got up and put sticks on the
fire, an amazing sense of security creeping
through her veins and waking her starved body
into life again.
Presently Jim came back, carrying some
brown chips in his hand. " I'll take the axe
and cut some more," he said, putting a little



<pb n="311"/>
SONG OF SCARLET HUNTER 311
hard bit into her mouth. "Here, suck it,
Pete, while you melt the others into soup.
Whatever you do, don't take too much at first;
but it's grand feeding."
Peter did not ask what it was; she recognized
at once that these were broken bits of frozen
deer meat. Presently she heard Jim cutting
more off the haunch, and she found herself
almost hurrying across to warn him not to hit
too hard, as the axe might fly in splinters,
seeing the frost was about forty degrees below
zero, when steel is almost as brittle as glass.
They fed Peggy with hot soup, and she sat
up, leaning against Peter. The younger girl
could hardly control her voice. She wanted
to laugh and also to cry, but there was some-
thing so odd and brief about the whole thing
that her mind thought-quite independently,
as it seemed-" We shall all wake up and find
Neumann snoring in the camp over there,
and nothing to eat. People do dream food
dreams when they are dying."
Then Raa came over and sat down with them.
He slapped his tail on the snow, and looked at
Peter in a corner-wise fashion, because he felt
guilty about Neumann. He would have done
it again, of course, but he was quite civilized
enough to know that dogs ought not to kill
humans. He thought he had killed Neumann,



<pb n="312"/>
312 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
you see, which was not the case, but he had
made it possible for the one-eared man to kill
his enemy at last. There was no doubt in the
world that the trapper was destroyed by his
own sins, for, apart from his evil doings to the
Cree-who trusted in him in the first place-
the dog would have saved him had he been
even a decent master. As it was, seeing the
club in his hand, Raa bore him down.
"Are they gone ?" asked Peggy presently,
sipping more hot soup in a tin cup.
"Dead," answered Jim.
"Why ?"
"Cree came down and knifed Neumann,
and chased La Perle off into the wood. Killed
him too."
"Oh," murmured Peggy. Then, after a
pause, " We can go now."
"When we've found our legs again," said
Peter.
"How extra-or-dinary," breathed Peggy,
with a drawn-out emphasis.
There was a longer pause.
"What about your Angel, Pegtop," Peter
reminded. "I thought he'd quit worrying
about us, but he hadn't."
" Oh no, they never do that," said Peggy,
in her own sober voice; " but of course some-
times it isn't the plan for us to get all we think



<pb n="313"/>
SONG OF SCARLET HUNTER 313
wec want. Mum says so. Oh, Pete, we shall
be able to get her gold home now. I am so
glad."
With that Peggy went to sleep again, looking
less waxen and less pinched, but very small
and thin.
Slowly the other two imbibed soup and talked
their plans out. First and foremost they must
bury Neumann somehow, though to dig in
the iron ground was impossible. With rocks
a sort of cairn could be made; the same for
I.a Perle. Jim  was not strong enough at
present. He knew it, and said so, but hoped
he would be to-morrow.
" I'll help you," Peter told him. A little
creep of horror ran up her spine as she offered,
but if Jim could do a horrible work, surely
she could ! She was older. Why should Jim
bear it alone ?
The food was theirs, and the Winchester
with the initials-come back to them  safely
this time. The ammunition was very valu-
able, and the tobacco would do for presents.
The tea was a special treat, and there were
beans and some rusty bacon, but not much.
All they wanted they moved to the little rock 
camp for fear of wolves. That was the present 
danger; but the bursting of the cloud that 
had hung over the trail all these months had
Pt-- --                                         ,



<pb n="314"/>
314 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
cleared the outlook for them so completely
that wolves seemed a slight inconvenience-
nothing worse.
Within four days Jim and Peter had per-
formed the funeral rites of the trappers with
the utmost care and reverence. La Perle had
been stabbed and his rifle was gone, and no
doubt the Cree had departed, satisfied, to his
own district. The Lockharts never saw him
again-strange, sinister figure.
" I wonder what he was like before he met
Neumann," said Peggy, as she fried bacon
quite like old times. "I wonder what Neu-
mann did to him, poor Kee-way-din ? " You
see, they knew nothing about the silver-fox furs
then; later, they understood.
After a week of resting and food they began
to get the buckskin bags from under the big
boulder again. No light task, considering the
snow that had drifted up round the base. But
the joy of strength again made work light,
and one by one the bags were got at till they
all were there and put back again into the rub-
ber pack bag. Nearly three hundred pounds'
weight-so Jim calculated; between sixty and
seventy thousand dollars in gold dust.
"I'm glad we held on and saved it," said
Peter, sitting on the stuff in a possessive way.
So said they all, laughing over supper at the



<pb n="315"/>
SONG OF SCARLET HUNTER 315
end of the hard day. And now the next thingl
was to get it home. If very much had been
done, very much remained to do. About
sixty miles of trail through the forest before
they could take up the river travel again-and 
one dog ! Billy had been killed by the wolves.
Jim said these things, but the girls would
not listen. As long as food could be got they 
would pull, make a short day's work of it, and
take it in turns to help Raa. Were they not
strong now ? It all came back to the question
of food, which was, of course, running short
again.
Peter was for starting at once, now they were
able, taking what little meat they had and 
trusting to luck to shoot more. She won her
point by the very energy of her arguments,
and at dawn on a certain day they took up
the trail again for the cut across the peninsula
through the forest. During the day Jim shot a
snowshoe rabbit that flitted past while they
were resting silently at midday. It made a
fresh kind of supper. The next day he left
them and ranged round some distance while
the girls went slowly on with the sledge and
Raa. He brought back a small deer, and Peter
shot a partridge running along the ground
like a little ball of feathers; there were plenty
of them somewhere, but hidden in the snow 



<pb n="316"/>
316 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
like the rabbits, the mink, ermine, and other
furred creatures, for the temperature had fallen
again and the cold was bitter.
However, the deer was all they wanted, and
the trail continued for three more days, with
camps at night in the most sheltered places
they could find. Yet there was no sign of the
river, and, of course, no falls to guide them by
their noises. Indeed, the stillness of the frozen
forest was sometimes overpowering, because
the tension seemed to hold the brain as well
as the body.
It was about the end of the sixth day from
the rock camp that they began to get a little
uneasy as to the time and place. Why had
they not reached the upper river-the road
home that they had dreamed of all these
months ? On the seventh day they came on
the trail of a sledge, with the prints of dogs'
feet and snowshoes. Silently they gathered
round, gazing, while Raa sniffed at this strange
happening.
They had come round in a circle. Con-
fused by the everlasting vistas of frozen woods
and the monotony of silence and snow, they
had come round and back to the starting-
place, or near it.
For a while no one spoke. Then Peter,
drawing back her slim, straight shoulders, said,-



<pb n="317"/>
SONG OF SCARLET HUNTER 317
"Why not stay at the old rock camp to-
night ? It always seemed warmer under that
shelter. The forest is draughty."
" All right," agreed Jim. He could not trust
himself to say more, because the blow was so
crushing. They had believed all trouble ex-
cept discomfort over for good with the death
of their persecutors and their release from
actual starvation, and now for this to happen I
To lose themselves, and a whole week of hard
labour, and be back again at the rock camp I
Peggy said nothing at all, but two tears
glistened on her lashes and then froze. You
cannot cry when the temperature is thirty or
forty below zero.
" We've got the deer meat, Pegtop; it will
all come right," said Peter, as she caught up
a handful of snow and rubbed her sister's
cheeks vigorously. " Why, even if we have
to camp till spring and build another canoe
with knives and a hatchet, we'll do it. What
does it matter, now Neumann's quit this life ? 
We've nothing to be afraid of."
So said all three, cheering each other as
they went back on their own trail to the little
camp under the overhanging rocks near the
river bank. They declared it owas warmer, and 
Jim put up the tarpaulin on poles of spruce,
built a good fire, and set about an early camp,



<pb n="318"/>
318 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
that they might have a good rest for the new
start.
The night was bright in that clearness of
atmosphere; the stars seemed to hang low in
the amazing vault, large, shining, and wink-
ing. It was all astonishing in its beauty and
merciless strength.
" Let's go down to the big boulder and look
at the river before we go to bed," said Peggy.
" We've had so much forest, I want to see the
great broad trail again."
So they went, all three and Raa, and gazed
at the wonderful frozen road with its fringe
of black forest and the white stars glittering
down at the stainless snow. Then suddenly
Raa lifted his head, sniffing the air, and Peter
said,-
"Hush! Oh, hark!"
They fell silent, listening fascinated to the
lilt of a song that came up the broad road
from the east, clear as a bell on the frozen
night,-
"Have you heard the cry of the Long Lachine,
When happy is the sun in the morning ?
The rapids long and the banks of green,
As we ride away in the morning,
On the froth of the Long Lachine ?"
"Dad used to whistle that," murmured
Peter. " It's one of the songs of the timber



<pb n="319"/>
SONG OF SCARLET HUNTER 319
men when the logs come down the big rivers.
Oh, how sweet I "
" Corraine," said Jim shortly. "Our luck
holds, Pegtop, eh ?"
Peggy said nothing. She was listening with
all her heart as well as her ears to the song of
the river men as they guide the huge rafts
down river with deft handling of the " peavie,"
the long, spiked pole.
Jim went out on the river to look, waved
his hand towards his sisters, and ran at his
best speed, considering the powdery snow.
The girls looked at one another and waited.
" Dogs-listen to them," said Peter. " And
look at Raa I He's getting ready to fight the
team on sight I "
The song stopped, and they heard Cor-
raine's gay cry, " Oh, mon brave !" as he
recognized Jim; then for a minute or two
there was silence.
" If we hadn't got lost we should not have
come back," said Peggy. " If we hadn't come
back we might have missed Pierre-we didn't
know what trail he usually takes. That's what
mother says-when things look black it's oftenest
for a good purpose."
" That's so," agreed Peter. Then she added,
with her deep-set eyes dancing a little, " Be-
sides, as you can't help yourself, best thing is



<pb n="320"/>
320 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
to face the knocks upright. But sure, Pegtop,
this is rather wonderful. I've hardly started
on being thankful yet, I'm so surprised; but
the thankfulness is going to last, it's come to
stay-taken root."
Pierre Corraine was not alone this time. He
had got a lanky, silent man, Tybalt Coxe, with
him, a hunter of fame. They were friends,
the one so gay, the other glum and observant,
with huge hands and a jaw like a bear trap.
Also, there were six dogs-a grand team of
huskies belonging to the North - Western
Mounted Police, on whose business Corraine
was coming south at top speed.
When the tales were told round the fire it
seemed plain that had the Lockharts achieved
their aim and cut through the peninsula to
the river they would have missed this team,
as Pierre and his partner were taking a much
more direct way south, straight down to Cum-
berland House Settlement on the Saskatchewan
River, not following the Missinnippi. He and
Tybalt conferred briefly, and then decided to
join party with the others and see them well
on their way to the Log House.
It does not take long to tell a story that is
very long in the doing, and Peter made short
work of theirs, but the hunters understood.
From first to last they read between the lines



<pb n="321"/>
SONG   OF SCARLET      HUNTER      32I
what these two girls and the boy had gone
through.
" Zat Neumann he wass a hound I " Pierre's
eyes shot sparks.
" Low-down cur-aw," put in Tybalt, taking
his pipe from his lips for the first time. " Cree
got him-always do. Low-down trick he
played on that Cree, too."
And it was then the Lockharts heard
for the first time the true story of Kee-
way-din's wrongs; his vengeance they had
seen.
Tybalt said it wasn't the first time those
partners had stolen valuable pelts from the
winter shacks of hunters, or even from the
actual traps. The Cree was a clever hunter,
and had a district north of Great Slave.
Neumann had stolen his silver fox pelts when
he was away hunting and fled south to sell
them. The Cree got on his trail and caught
him up. Neumann shot him and destroyed
his ear, incidentally almost his life. The Cree
followed on in spite of all, and it was there
the Lockharts could fill in the story. He'd
poisoned the dogs as chance offered, but with
no weapon but his trade gun he was handi-
capped against two men with rifles. Afraid to
attack at the settlement, he'd bided his time and
followed the trail again north-slow, but sure as
r     --           -B--y            -!



<pb n="322"/>
322 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL
fate, paying his debt in the end at the rock
camp.
" If he don' pay back ze tribe tink him
poor fool," explained Pierre. " Injun he can't
afford be treat contempt-it burn his heart till
he pay." He shrugged expressively. "Now
this Cree he shall be proud to have no ear,
because he knife one, two enemy; also-he
get Engleesh rifle-very great brave in his
tribe now-voild, c'est tout ! "
Afterwards Jim told Corraine about the gold,
and explained rather bashfully that they hadn't
mentioned the object of their long trail because
he was a stranger. Again Pierre shrugged and
twinkled; he knew a good deal-all the north
knew a good deal-about poor Tom Lock-
hart's pile; but no one knew where he'd hidden
it-except, roughly, Gijik the Cedar and his
gentle little squaw Mitawawa.
"Old Gijik's a white man," said Tybalt.
"He wouldn't touch a pinch of dust that
wasn't his. Did you give him an English rifle,
Lockhart ?"
Jim explained that he'd given the money to
buy one as a small return for services.
"Well, he got one at the Fort. Mortal
struck on it he was, too! We knew he'd
got it honest or he wouldn't have had it.
He went up north as proud as a peacock



<pb n="323"/>
SONG OF SCARLET HUNTER 323
with  two  tails."  Tybalt chuckled good-
naturedly.
The next day the combined parties started
on the trail for home, Raa making a seventh
in the dog team, and the small toboggan lashed
upside-down on the top of the load, which
included that three hundred pounds of gold
dust, and the rest of the pack.
The swiftness and ease of it all compared to
the previous weeks of strain was glorious to
the girls. Peter had never enjoyed herself so
much, she said. Peggy did not speak. Jim
seemed to grow every twenty-four hours. In
the evenings round the camp fire they told
the full story of the Gold Trail bit by bit, and
heard amazing stories from the hunters that
" put them wise " about life on the trail through
forest and along rivers. These men knew the
north as the Lockharts knew their Missinnippi
and woods. They learned a great deal those
nights, with the snow piled up in a white wall
round the camp, and the glow of the fire
dancing red upon it.
Sometimes Peter's "sweet loves" howled a
chorus out of the frozen forest, but the party
was too strong to mind.
Best of all the girls loved it when Pierre
could be induced to sing the Song of the
Scarlet Hunter. He would sing the Caribou



<pb n="324"/>
324 GIRLS ON THE GOLD TRAIL 
Song, or the Chant of the River Men, but
seldom the most beautiful song of all, and
only when he was in the mood:-
" O son of man, behold I
If thou shouldst stumble on the nameless trail,
The trail that no man rides,
Lift up thy heart; 
Behold, O son of man, thou hast a Helper near I
0 son of man, take heed I
If thou shouldst fall upon the vacant plain,
The plain that no man loves, 
Reach out thy hand.
Take heed, 0 son of man; strength shall be given 
thee.
0 son of man, rejoice I 
If thou art blinded even at the door, 
The door of the Safe Tent, 
Sing in thy heart.
Rejoice, 0 son of man; thy Pilot leads thee Home." "
#       *      *       *       *        '-X
It was the end of January when the three, 
with Raa, climbed the snow slope to the door
of the Log House, and saw the glow of theo;
stove and lamps through the windows.
Old Hearne and Donald saw them first, and 'i
the ancient hunter looked long, then he said, '
"The Lord save us " with something like, 
awe.
Donald came racing, and checked to gaze
" Hul-o I " he exclaimed-and was silent.
ii



<pb n="325"/>
SONG OF SCARLET HUNTER 325
Could this tall man with the strong, burned
face be Jim-Jim, the silent and rather stodgy
brother, who was slow in the uptake ?
And this long-limbed, boy-like woman, with
serious, hawk-like eyes, set deep in a brown,
clean-cut face-could that be his special " pard"
Peter ?
Peggy was the least changed. She looked
small beside the others. The roundness of
her face was gone, and her blue-grey eyes,
very large and sweet, had an expression as
though they had seen over the edge of
things, and looked sorrow in the face with
courage.
" I say, you've got old Raa ! " cried Donald,
edging away from something that made him
shy, and taking refuge in the everyday.
Dolly came out, a little ball of furry gar-
ments, and called in a high voice,-
" Boxer's grown into a bear-you never saw
anything so big."
And then Mrs. Lockhart came out, and stood
still on the doorstep looking, looking at her
children-her three who had faced summer,
autumn, and winter on the long trail that
all men fear.
"My darlings," she said, and never added,
"I thought I'd lost you all," till much later
when they were all rejoicing, and the two
(2,39)                           2I
r .,. He _,, ^ - S~2



<pb n="326"/>
326  GIRLS ON      THE   GOLD     TRAIL
hunters had come up to see and make friends
with the mother of a remarkable trio.
As every one knows, when people feel deepest
they say least, and the talk there is seems to
skim over the surface of things and dwell on
trivial matters. It was like that on this joyful
evening at the Log House, with Pierre Cor-
raine showing his white teeth and kind eyes
in a smile that won the rest of the family, and
Tybalt Coxe approving heartily of the home
and its mistress, while Donald and Dolly frankly
worshipped all these heroes and heroines. It
took weeks and many quiet, unexpected moments
to teach Mrs. Lockhart all that had happened
in detail, that she might understand the change
in her three children.
And when she had heard it all and realized
the experiences she said, " And would you go
through it again, Peter ? "
The only one of the three who would not
if she could was Peggy. "I'm glad I did it,
Mum," she said, " but don't ask me to do it
again-some of the times were just black
horror."
" But that was the enemy," reasoned Peter,
"not the North. Winter and summer, river
and forest, the North is a glorious life, and the
more you see the more you want to see."
«              S *    «      * 



<pb n="327"/>
SONG OF SCARLET HUNTER 327
In the spring, when the ice went out, Mrs.
Lockhart moved to Edmonton with Donald
and Dolly, the only grief to the young ones
being that Boxer had to stay at the Log House.
Peggy, too, went to Edmonton, but not for
long, because she married Pierre Corraine,
which made two "Peters" in the family.
Then she went to the Cumberland House
Settlement, with long spells of visiting her
mother while Donald was training to be an
engineer.
Peter and Jim ran the Log House with old
Dick. Members of the family came back there
when the fancy drew them, and then the pair,
sister and brother, went off again on the long
'trail; and another book might be filled with
their adventures, which were many and strange,
for the call of the North was in their blood,
and those whose hearts answer to that call
cannot rest in streets of bricks and mortar--
they must make the pack and be off on the
Trail of the Sun Dogs into the trackless glory
of the Wilderness.
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN AT
THI PRESS OF THB PUBLISHERS
p1 . 



