<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
The OCR confidence numbers on these were borderline all the way through -- however, the text files seem to have come through with minimal garbeling, even when the confidence levels were below 800. 

There are no particularly bad sections, and I believe the cause of the garble is spotting on the pages, as the contrast seems adequate and the text straight on the page.<pb n="1"/>
PHASE I.
E GLORY AND THE DREAM
I,:



<pb n="3"/>
CHAPTER I.
" Thou art the sky, and thou art the nest as welL"
BY the shimmer of blue under the beeches Boy knew
that summer-" really truly summer! "-had     come
back at last. And summer meant picnics and straw-
berries and out-of-door lessons, and the lovely hot
smell of pine-needles in the pine-wood, and the lovelier
cool smell of moss cushions in the beech-wood-home of
squirrels and birds and bluebells; unfailing wonderland
of discovery and adventure.
Boy was an imaginative creature, isolated a little by
the fact of being three and a half yeara older than
Christine, and "miles older" than Jerry and George,
mere babies, for whom the magic word adventure hold
no meaning at all. 
Luckily, there was Tara, from the black-and-white 
house: Tara, who shared his lessons and, in spite ia
the drawback of being a girl, had long ago won her. w. .-
into his private world of knight-errantry and roan
Taa was eight years and five weeks old; quite a reason '
able age in the eyes of Boy, whose full name was evt 'I':
Le Boy Sinclair, and who would be nine in June. With -
the exception of grown-ups, who didn't count, there wasi  '
no one older than nine in his immediate neighbourhood. ' ':
Tara came neares: but she wouldn't be nine tll next
year; and by that time, he would be ten. The point
was, she couldn't oat him up if she tried ever so. 
It was Tara's mother, Lady Despard, who had the
happy idea of shaing lessons, that would otherwise be  ','i
rather a lonely affaip for both. But it was Boy's mother
who had the still happier idea of teaching themrherself,
tara's mother joined in now and then; but Boy'. ..i
o0ther-who loved it beyond eveything-eored 
Ai*.mother                                        *** who



<pb n="4"/>
4               rFAn  TO   BBK dK      ; 
lion's share. And Boy was old enough by now to 
proudly aware of his own good fortune. Most o
children of his aequaintance were afflicted with ti
governesses, who wore ugly jackets and hats, who 
' Don't drink with your mouth full," and "Don't a
the point! "-Boy's favourite sin-and always told y
to " Look in the dictionary " when you fond a srum
tious new word and wanted to hear all about-it. Th
dictionary, indeed! Boy privately regarded it as oa
,   of the many mean evasions to which grown-ups w
;  addicted.
His ripe experience on the subject was gleaned partl
from  neighbouring families, partly from :freque
visits to "Aunt Jane "-whom   he hated with a d
unreasoned hate-and "Uncle George," who had
kitA, stupid face, but anyhow tried to be funny
made futile bids for favour with pen-knives and ha
erowns. Possibly it was these uncongenial its t
quickened in him very early the consciousnem that
own beautiful home was, in some special w   , ifee
from n other boys' homes, and his mother-in a. tm
.. ' pecal wy-different from other boys' mothe;  . r .
. that proud conviction was no mere myth i
*, _     g   adoation.  In all the County, peidps 
" N om:, there could be found no moei b    in
l^im,        ani 8ifnetair, descendant of hBatut hi
a      English Baronet, who, in: th  face 
,sb  ,t had Ndared to accept .l riks 
rttwPl        ot his heart. One o; these
irdw,        1 dan on Boy the klowledge tl he wi
e    o * unique romance, of a mut d'I ve die
g    ihat had run the gauntlet .of        a
o fightings without and fear  ; 
i.    e d, had trimphed a       e  terih*      o 
f- *kt$      defeat.  AH this d*eiaia         ;
saidpn,~ of spiritual striving a          tad  g
,,to the making of Boy, who in thel         ^o
F'aIe-perhaps- with pride,perhapa  ith
Q ad   m-egiving-the high and complex            t
^ was hfi                            ,    . -    - * n
1r  Meanwhile he oaly knew that he wS 
pealy ina sunzewrtn e; thitb _«        a1



<pb n="5"/>
4H.GLORY AND "TME         DREAM          & Xq
smiling eyes and loved messing with paints 'lih1  boy
-was ainder than anyone else's, so long as y4A didn't
tell bad- fibs Or meddle with his brushes; that his
idolised mother in her soft coloured silks and Saris,
her bangles and silver shoes, was the " very most
beautiful" being in the whole world.   And Boy's
response to the appeal of beauty was abnormally quick
and keen. It could hardly be otherwise with the son
of these two. He loved, with a fervour beyond his
years, the clear pale oval of his mother's face; the
coils of her dark hair, seen always through a film of 
softest muslin-moon-yellow or apple-blossom p.ik* or
deep dark blue like the sky out of his window at iught
spangled with stars. He loved the glimmer of her jeta,
the sheen and feel of her wonderful Indian silks,  I-
seemed to smell like the big sandalwood box it he 
drawing-room. And beyond everything he loved'ter ..
smile and the touch of her hand, and her voice 'thj4 ..
could charm away all nightmare terrors, all quaeltfii; 
and rebellions, of his excitable brain.       '    . ; i
Yet, in outward bearing, he was not a sentMeti i
boy. The Sinclairs did not ran to sentiment, a.i'i:
blood of two virile races-English and' Bai 
mingled in his veins. Already his budti g  ia 
bade him  keep the feelings of 'that   o     :    i
locked in the most secret corner of his heart..,;
mother, and sometimes Tara, caught a gtlp . c      ,,N
now and then. Lady Sinclair, herself, ;eie  ! t
that, in the vivid imaginations of both' W 
herself was the ever-varying incanation." 't·i
princesses and Bajpuni heroines ao. be    q
Their appetite formtese was insatiable:; la. t 
of them seemed : Bt  ending: folt tales of 
-West; true taleflCrusaders, of AAwid i     lg
of Rajput KingA  ad ;Queens, in the tah-of 'hdt   wha
Bajasthian-a wor,:like a ,trumpet call--EdW:
'her desert cities apnst hordes of invaders, and berd
orned to die in their beds. Much of it all was Afrtdly
yond them; but the colour and the movement, the
noaphere of heroism and high endea'vor qtldcki" d
atifn and fellow-feeling, and left a  in mprflpa, "'
M     that would not pass with thi 'y tfi P  
~o        g.olo od fortune, these taj  and talks W e 



<pb n="6"/>
a PFAB TO. SEEK 
:'a part of her simple, individual plan of eduation. ..'A
:vena greater good fortune-in their. eyes-.was her
instinctive response to the seasons. Shb saared to the
fill their lear oonviction that schoolroom lemons and'
a radiant day of summer were a glaring misft; and shb
trimmed her sails, or rather her time-tabl, aocordingly.
"Sentimental folly and thoroughly denoralising,"
was the verdict of Aunt Jane, overheard by Boy, who
was not supposed to understand. " They will grow up 
without an inch of moral backbone. And you can't
say I didn't warn you. Lady Despard's a crank, of course;
but Nevil is a fool to allow it. Goodness knows he was
bad enough, though he was rered on the good old lines.
And you are not giving his son a ehance. The sooner the'
boy's packed off to school the better. I shall tell him so."'
And his mother had answered with her dignified:
:  ruffied  sweetness-that made her so beautifully
different from  ordinary people, who got red and
i:eited and made foolish faces: "He will not agree.
i; ie shares my believing that children are in love with
if. . It,s their first love. Pity to crush it too soon;
I . 'llp g their minds in tight boxes with no chink for
$ae to ereep in. If they first find knowledgeby their
i f-love  aftewards, they wil perhaps give up
veo gain it." 
·-.ol not Wpllow all that; but the mai  of the
:  e  with the music of his mothe's voioei
him tbhat her victory over horS it
was complete. -And it was omortng t
.t hi father agreed about not putig the
tght boxes. For Aunt Jane's draaprecrip .
him. Of course secool wo: have to;
ome day; but his was not .t   potempmw t that
*  for it at an early age.  a|4bo a moal back"
boae-whbatever sort of an haai             tbe-i
''f it meant growing up ugly and' 
.  unt Jane or the Aunt Jane t oumneib erftity hopedj
ie Puld never have one-or Taa either.. ,:;. .
:  t oni this partiiculp morning he feared o  ann
i- r ler-not even school or a moral ba
tbe hbebells were alight under his b
ndl huadred oat them-and 'really try'
::qomn.ebaok at lastl Ir                       j.l
ri'i~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~..:?~?., :, ~,.~



<pb n="7"/>
THE GLORY AND THE DREA                  7
Boy knew it the moment he sprang out of bed and
stood barefoot on the warm patch of carpet near the
window, stretching his slim shapely body, instinctively
responsive to the sun's caress. No less instinctive was
his profound conviction that nothing possibly could go
wrong on a day like this.
In the first place it meant lessons under their favourite
tree. In the second, it was history and poetry day;
and Roy's delight in both made them hardly seem'
lessons at all. He thought it very clever of his mother,
having them together. The depth of her wisdom he
did not yet discern. She allowed them within reason,
to choose their own poems: and Roy, exploring :ls
bookcase, had lighted on Shelley's 'Cloud'-the mtisiu  ,
flow of words, the more entrancing because only ha
understood. He had straightway learnt the first thee
verses for a surprise. He crooned them now, his head
flung back a little, his gaze intent on a gossamer fili
that floated just above the pine tops=-'still as a
brooding dove.' .
Standing there, in full sunlight-the mdelling of his
young limbs veiled, yet not hidden, by his silk night-suit 
the carriage of head and shoulders betraying innate
pride of race-he looked, on every count, no unworthy  .
heir to the House of Sinclair and its simple honourdlt 
traditions: one that might conceivably live to chall
family prejudices and qualms. The thick dark hair,
ruffled from sleep, was his mother's; and hers the semi- m :
opaque ivory tint of his skin. The clean-cut forehaAd
and nose, the blue-grey eyes, with the lurklng smfil 'i.
in them, were Nevil Sinclair's own. In him, at leat, ' '
it would seem that love was justified of her children. - 
But of family features, as of family qualms, he was, s
yet, radiantly uware.  natching his towel, he scam 
pered barefoot down the passage to the nursery bath-
room, where the tap was already running.
Fifteen minutes hter, dressed, but hatless and 1stll
jefoot, he was racing over the vast dew-drenched law&,
7ving a trail of grey-green smudges on its slvered sur-
f  hanting the opening lines of Shelley's 'Cloud.' 
. breakfast-hunting birds. 



<pb n="8"/>
-^*';'''~~~ ,»                       *~~~~  . !>J: ^~ ~~ ,
* .                                 .           .
^
CHAPTER II.
"Those first affections,  ' 
Those shadowy recollections, . ..
Are yet the fountain-light of all our day;
Are yet the master-light of-all our seeing."
-WORnwoaTH.
TRE blue rug under Boy's beech-tree was splashed
with freekles of sunshine; freckles that were never
. sit  beoause a fussy little wind kept swaying the top'
e ,, most branches, where the youngest beech-leaes fliered,
like golden-green butterflies bewitched by sone mliciousi
:.ry, so that they could never fly into the' sky till
'msam er. was over, and all the leaf butterfliesin the world
*tfd be free to seamper with the wind.
lt was Boy's foolish fancy as he lay, eenfr  terr -
6 *   obvious detriment of his moral babone-hi
i..pped in the hollow of his hands. Close'e hit m 1sY
.* Prie, his golden retriever  so close that Ir. lonld feei
' t-ieW dog'e warm body thrugh his thin  ^     : At th
.fooeof the tre, in a nest of pale cushions, st s mother,
'iit her apple-blossom sari and a silk dress 'tket&e lini
?'t oa, sheil. No jewels in the morning, ex  'te s
that fastened her sari on one shoulder aa i    endm
lgold bangle-never removed-the wte        '   of 
^ o*n land.  The boy, mutely adorin            so
, dim way, feel the harmony of those pae'    'ith t
oeive skin, faintly aglow, and the dof 
' eyebrows poised like outspread wings ab    bro
.. limpid depths of her eyes. He could   't tfl at t
was still little more than a girl; barely eig d4Wen*
For him   she was ageless:-protectw  and 
essence of all that was most real, yet most 
the home that was his world. Unknown tiab 



<pb n="9"/>
THE GLORY AND THE DREAM 
Eastern mother in her was evoking, already, the Easter  .
spirit of worship in her son.
Very elose to her nestled Tara, a vivid, eager slip of a
girl, with wild-rose petals in her cheeks and blue hya-
cinths in her eyes and sunbeams tangled in her hair,
that rippled to her waist in a mass almost too abundant
for the small head and elfin face it framed. In tempera
ment, she suggested a flame rather than a flower, this
singularly vital child.  She loved and she hated, she
played and she quarrelled with an intensity, a singleness
of aim, surprising and a little disquieting in a creature
not yet nine. She was the despair of nurses and had
never crossed swords with a governess, which was a
merciful escape-for the governess. Juvenile fiction ;
and fairy tales she frankly scorned. Legends of Agrd
and Arthur, the virile tales of Rajputana and her warrior
chiefs, she drank in as the earth drinks dew. Boy had a .
secret weakness for a happy ending-in his own phrase,
"a beautiful marry." . Tara's rebel spirit rose to tra
as a flame leaps to the stars; and there was no elak !
of high tragedy in the records of Ohitor -Qduet -ati'.
cities-thrice sacked by Moslem invaders; delv;4r t  i
last, and left in ruins-a saored relic of great .t j
gone by.                                 . .' '  f.i
This morning Bajputana held the field. i,   ^  X 
a thrill in her low voice, was half readin  half i, i  :
the adventures of Prithvi Raj (King of the Earth)
his Amazon Princess, Tara-the Star of Bednore:  4
a star among women for beauty, wisdom, and ou
Many princes were rivals for her hand; but none  :i A
she call "lord" save the man-who restored to  !    ,ih
father the Kingdom snatehed fromh him by an Afgha
marauder. "On the faith of a Bajput, I wffl resore
it," said Prithvi Baj. So, in the faith of a Bajputni,
she married him :-and together, by a daring device,
. they fulfilled her vow. 
Here, indeed, was Boy's 'beautiful manry,* fit :t .
hide for the tale of that heroie pair. For in life--L&m. 
'l01d them-marriage is the beginning, not the end.  t 'at
. only for fairy tales.                          '
And close against her shoulder, listening entraneed,
it?'the child Tata, with her wild-flower face and the
_    ering star in her heart-a creature born out of: tim



<pb n="10"/>
; ^' PFA TO SEEK
.i.   ajn unromantic world; hands lasped round heor
raised knees, her wide eyes gazing past the bluebells
*   the beech-leaves at some fanciful inner vision of it\
; lost in it, as Boy was lost in conte laion of his
othfer's face....
And this unorthodox fashion of imbibing knowledge
in the very lap of the Earth Mother, was Tdiamani
Sinclair's impracticable idea of  giving  lessons' I
Shades of Aunt Jane!   Of governess and copy-books
and rulers! 
Happily for all three, Lady Boscoe never desecrated
their paradise in the flesh. She was aware that her very
regrettable sister-in-law had 'queer notions' and had
flatly refused to engage a governess of high qualifications
ehosen by herself; but the half was not told her. It
never is told to those who condemn on principle what
they eannot understand. At their eoming all the little
private gateways into the delectable Garde of Intimaey
shut with a gentle, decisive click. So it was with Jane
Boeae, as worthy and unlikeable a woman as ever
. '"i     a%- household to perfection and alienated ever
*i ':-/ " bie was that she could not rest aisfied with
:   h  i ement. She was afficted with a vehemen
j" dd    u-he called it a sense of duty-to orgnie th
' Bm . of her less capable relations. If they resented
'tey were written down ungrateful. And Nbvil's in
ttUde had become a byword. For Noevil Sinlair w
i Lht mnaeountable, uniom   prtabte thing-m  artist
W iph is to say he was no true Sinclair, bet the son
his mothe, whose name h bore. No one, not even Jan
'had eucceeded in orgasing him-nor ever would.
So Ltflnani  earried on, unmolested, her  n
attempt at the forest school of an.'.lie day. ,H
simple programme included a good deal more t
tales of heroism and adventure. This mni tig th
4ad beei rhythmical exercises, a lively interlude
s'  m  without lates and their poemw-a get mome
for Boy. Only by a superhuman elert he had k
his treasure locked inside him for two whole da
And his mother's surprise was genuine: not the 
surprise of grown-ups, that was so patant .
ritating and made them look so silly.. The



<pb n="11"/>
THE GLORt  Y AnD TUE     DEeM    l    ie 
her eyes as she listened had sent a warm tingly feeling
all throughlhim, as if the spring sunshine itself ran in
his veins. Naurally he could not express it so; but he
felt it so. And now, as he lay looking and listening,
he felt it still. The wonder of her face and her voice,
and all the many wonders that made her so beautiful,
had hitherto been as much a part of him as the air he
breathed. But this morning, in some dim way, things .
were different-and he could not tell why ...
His own puzzled thoughts and her face and her voice
became entangled with the chivalrous story of Prithvi
Raj holding court in his hill fortress with Tara-fit
wife for a hero, since she could ride and fling a lance
and bend a bow with the best of them. When Boy
caught him up, he was in the midst of a great battle
with his uncle, who had broken out in rebellion against
the old Bana of Chitor.
"All day long they were fighting, and all night long
they were lying awake beside great watch-fires, waiting
till there came dawn to fight again...."
His mother was telling, not reading now. He knew
it at once from the change in her tone.
"And when evening came, 'awhat did Prithvi' Baj t
He was carelessly strolling oywr to the enemy's campp,
carelessly walking into his Uncle's tent to ask if he is
well, in spite of many wounds, And his uncle, full of
surprise, made answer: ' uite well, my child, since I
have the pleasure to see you.' And when he heard
that Prithvi had come even before eating any  inner,
he gave orders for food: and they two,' who were al
day seeking each other's life; sat there together eatig
from one plate.                      . ,
"'In the morning we will end our b      ,ttle  e
said Prithvi Baj, when time came to go. '. '.;
"' Very well, child, come early,' said S
"So Prithvi Raj came early and put his nele's whoe
army to flight. But that was not enough. He must be
driven from the kingdom. So when Prithvi heard
that broken army was hiding in the depths of a mighty
forest, there he went with his bravest horsemen,. and
[ Suddenly, on a dark night, sprang into their midst.
:.'hen there was great shouting and fighting; and soon
|they came together, uncle and nephew, striking at each



<pb n="12"/>
4s At  ,         FAR TO S'EEK       -
other, yet never hating, though they muta make battl
becapSe of Ohitor and the Kingdom of Moewar.
"To none would SurLj yield, but only to Prithvi,
bravest of the brave. So suddenly in a loud voiee he
cried-' Stay the fight, nephew. If I am killed, no great
matter. But if you are killed, what will become of
Chitor t I would bear shame for ever.'
" By those generous words he made submission greater
than victory. Uncle and nephew embraced, heart to,
heEa, and all those who had been fighting each other
sai down together in peace, because Surajmul, true
itput, could not bring harm, even in anger, upon the
uilud city of Chitor."
;a~e paused-her eyes on Roy, who had lost his own
K"iin'g sensations in the clash of the fight and its
* livalrous climax.
Oh, I love it," he said. " Is that all t"
"No, there is more."
" la it sad "
She shook her head at him-smiling.
"Yes, Boy. It is sad."
Wf Twrinkled his forehead.,
' f4'^Ydear I I like ithend the nice way."
i.3;3B.t I am not maj   tales, Sonling. I am telling
>b   .s head nudged her shoulder. " Go on-;please,'
britamtnmured, resenting interruptions.
-'. .,S  Lilnmani-still looking at Roy-told how Prithvi
R;j went on his law quest to Mount Abu, to punish
$ta ehief, whohad married his sister and was ill-treating
. " In answer to her cry he went; and climbing her
palae walls in the night, he gave sharp punishment'to
-that undeserving prince. But when penance was over,
his npble nature was ready, like before, to. embrace
and besfriends. Only that mean one, not abl to kill
him in battle, put poison in the sweets he gave at parting
and Prithvi ate them, thinking no harm. So when he
came on the hill near his palace the evil work was done
Helpless he, the all-conqueror, sent word to TaI thatr
bee. 4*d she, loyal wife, had only one thought in
be; 44!ti Caa the blossom live when the tree is e



<pb n="13"/>
THE GLORY AND THE DREAM               13
down ' Calm, without tears, she bade his weeping
warriors build up the funeral pyre, putting the torch
with her own hand. Then, before them all, she climbed
on that couch of fire and went through the leaping
scorching flames to meet her lord-"
The low clear voice fell silent-and the silence stayed.
The vague thrill of a tragedy they could hardly grasp
laid a spell upon the children. It made Roy feel as he
did in Church, when the deepest notes of the organ
quivered through him; and it brought a lump in his
throat, which must be manfully swallowed down on
account of being a boy...
And suddenly the spell was broken by the voice of
Roger the footman, who had approached noiselessly
along the mossy track.
"If you please, m'lady, Sir Nevil sent word as Lord
and Lady Roscoe 'ave arrived unexpected; and if
convenient, can you come in t "
They all started visibly and their dream-world of desert
and rose-red mountains and battle-fields and leaping
flames shivered like a soap-bubble at the touch of a
careless hand.
Lilamani rose, gentle and dignified.  "Thank you,
Roger. Tell Sir Nevil I am copg."
Roy suppressed a groan. The :~re mention of Aunt '
Jane made one feel vaguely guilty. To his nimble *ay .i
it was almost as if her very person had invaded theitr
sanctuary, in her neat hard coat and skirt and her neat
hard summer hat with its one fierce wing, that, disdain.'
ing the tenderness of curves, seemed to stab the air,'
as her eyes so often seemed to stab Roy's hyper-sensitive
brain.
"Oh dear! " he sighed. " Will they stop for lnmch t "
"I expect so."
He wrinkled his nose in a wicked grimace.  i.
"Bad boy I" said Lilamanni's lips, but her eye said
other things. He knew, and she knew that he knew
how, in her heart, she shared his innate antagonism:
Was it not of her own bestowing-a heritage of aertain
memories-ineffaceable, unforgiveable-during her eae:. ,'
'. days of marriage  But in spite of that mutual klaow, ;
ledge, Roy was never allowed to speak disrespebfulty^'
Iof his formidable aunt.



<pb n="14"/>
14              FAR TO SEEK
"You can 'Ay out andjlay till half-paetwlve, n
one minute later," she said-and left them to their owi
delectable devices.
Boy had been promoted to a silver watch on his eight
birthday, so he could be relied on; and he still enjoye
a private sense of importance when the fact w
recognised.
Left alone they had only to pick up the threads of th
game; a sort of interminable serial story, in which the
lived and moved and had their being. But first Ta
in her own person-had a piece of news to impa
Hunching up her knees, she tilted back her head til i
touched the satin-grey bole of the tree and all her ha
lay shimmering against it like a stream of pale sunshin
"What do you think t " she nodded at Boy with h
elfin smile.  "We've got a Boy-on-a-visit and 
mother, from India. They came last night. He's rath
a large boy."
UIs he nine? " Boy asked, standing up very straigh
and slim, a defensive gleam in his eye.
"He's ten and a half. And he looks bgger'n th
He goes to school. And he's been quite a lot in India.'
"Not my India."
"I don't know. He called it 'Mballa. Tt lett
I brought from Mummy was asking if she could br
them for tea." 
"Well, I don't want him for tea. I don't like y
Boy-on-a-visit. I'll tell Mummy." 
"Oh,  oy--you mustn't."  She made repoac
eyes at him. " oz then I couldn't come. And h
quite ne--only rather lumpy. And you can't not
someb'dy you've never seen."
"I can, I often do." The possibility had only 
occurred to him. He saw it as a distinction and
the most of it. "Course if you're going to malke
fuss-                                         '
Tara's eyes opened wider still. "Oh, Boy, yo
wr--!    'Tisn't me that's making fusses." ..
Though Boy knew nothing as yet about womaa' nd t
last word, he instinctively took refue in tht . s
dignity that spurns descent to the  y are   n h
feels defeat in the air.        j 
"Girls don't never fuss-do they Ti9    qeh



<pb n="15"/>
THE GLORY AND THE DREAM               15
suavely. " Let's get on with the Gaze and not bother
about your Boy-of-ten."
"And a half," Tara insisted tatlessly, with her
sweetest smile. But when Roy chose to be impassive
pin-pricks were thrown away on him.
"Where'd we stop t " he mused, ignoring her remark.
"Oh-I know. The Knight was going forth to quest
the Elephant with golden tusks for the High Tower
Princess who wanted them in her crown. Why do
Princesses always want what the knights can't find t "
Tara's feminine intuition leaped at a solution.
"I 'spec it's just to show off they are Princesses and
to keep the Knights from bothering round.--So away
he went and the Princess climbed up to her highest
tower and raved her lily hand-"
In the same breath she, Tara, sprang to her feet and
swung herself astride a downward sweeping branch
just above Roy's head. There she perched like a slim
blue flower, dangling her tan-stockinged legs and shaking
her hair at him like golden rain. She was in one of her
impish moods; reaction, perhaps,-though she knew it
not-from the high tragedy of that other Tara, her
namesake, and the great greatest-possible grandmother
of her adored 'Aunt Lila.' Suddenly a fresh impulse
seized her. Clutching her bough, she leaned down and
lightly ruffled his hair.
He started and looked reproachful. "Don't rumple
me. I'm going."
"You needn't, if you don't want to," she cooed
caressingly. " I'm going to the tipmost top to .o out
over the world. And the Princess doesn't careol.ean
about the Golden Tusks-truly." 
"She's jolly pleased with the knight that finds them," 
said Roy with a deeper wisdom than he knew. " And '
you can't be stopped off quests that way. Come on, '.
Prince."
At a bend in the mossy path, he looked back and she
waved her lily hand.
SIJo be alone in the deep of the wood in bluebell time
5, for Roy, a sensation by itself. In a moment, you
ipoped through some unseen door straight into fairy-
WP--or was it a looking-glass world f For here the



<pb n="16"/>
1: !              FAR TO SEEK-          .
sky lay all around your feet in a shimmet of bluebells
and high overhead 'Were domes of cool green light,
where the sun came flickering and filtering through
millions of leaves. Always, as far as he could remember,
the magical feeling had been there. But this morning
it came over him in a queer way. This morning-
though he could not quite make it out-there was the
Boy that felt and the Boy that knew he felt, just as there
had suddenly been when he was watching his mother's
face. And this magical world was his kingdom. In
some far-off time, it would all be his very own. That
upliftng thought eclipsed every other. ...
Lost in one of his dreaming moods, he wandered on
and on, with Prince at his heels. He forgot all about
Tara and his knighthood and his quest; till suddenly-
where the trees fell apart-his eye was arrested by
twin shafts of sunlight that struck downward through
the green gloom. 
He caught his breath and stood stilL  "I've found
them I The Golden Tusks !" he murmured ecstatically.
The pity was he couldn't carry them back with him
as trophies. He could only watch them fascinated,
weodering how you could explain what you didn't
unirstand yourself. All he knew was that they made
him feel 'dazzled inside,' and he wanted to watch thean
more.
It was beautiful out in the open with the sunshine
pouring down and a big lazy white cloud tangled it
tree-tops. So he flung himself on the moss, hands und
his head, and lay there, Prince beside him, looking npJ
up into the far blue, listening to the swish and rustl
of the wind talking secrets to the leaves, and all t
tiny mysterious noises that make up the silence of
wood in summer. 
And again he forgot about Tara and the Game 
the silver watec that made him reliable. He simply la
there in a trance-like stillness, that was not of the W
absorbing it all, with his eyes and his dazzled b
and with every sentient nerve in his body. And a
-as when his mother smiled her prai8s-the 
sunshine itself seemed to flow through hi  ens . . vn.
Suddenly he came alive and st upright  Some



<pb n="17"/>
THE IBY AMID THE DBBAM                 17 1
was happening. 'The Golden Tusks had disappeared,
and the domes of eoel green light and the far blue sky
and the lazy white cloud. Under the beeches it was
almost twilight-a creepy twilight, as if a giant had
blown out the sun. Was it really evening t Had he
been asleep  Only his watch could answer that, and
never had he loved it more dearly. No-it was daytime.
Twenty past twelve-and he would be lat--
A long rumbling growl, that seemed to shudder through
the wood, so startled him that it set little hammers
beating all over his body. Then the wind grew angrier
-not whispering secrets now, but tearing at the tree-
tops and lashing the branches this way and that. And
every minute the wood grew darker, and the sky over-
head was darkest of all-the colour of spilled ink. And
there was Tara-his forgotten Prineess-waiting for
him in her high tower; or perhaps she had given up
waiting and gone home.
" Come on, Prince," he said, " we mustrun! "
The sound of his own voice was vaguely comforting:
but the moment he began to run, he felt as if some one
-or Something-was running after him. He knew
there was nothing. He knew it was babyish. But what
could you do if your legs were in a fearful hurry of their
own accord    Besides, Tara was waiting. Somehow
Tara seemed the point of safety. He didn't believe she
was ever afraid-
All in a moment the eerie darkness quivered and broke
into startling light. Twigs and leaves and bluebell
spears and tiny patterns of moss seemed to leap at
him and vanish as he ran: and two minutes after, high
above the agitated tree-tops, the thunder spoke. No
mere growl now; but crash on crash that seemed to be  '
tearing the sky in two and set the little hammers inside
him beating faster than ever.
He had often watched storms from a window: but
to be out in the very middle of one all alone was an  ;
adventure of the first magnitude. The grandeur and
terror of it clutched at his heart and thrilled along
his nerves as the thunder went rumbling and grumbling
off to the other end of the world, leaving the wood so
quiet and still that the little hammers inside seemed
-j ost as loud as the plop-plop of the first big rain-



<pb n="18"/>
18               FA   TO SEEKR
drops on the leaves. :But, in spite of secret trem
he wanted tremendously to hear the thunder sp
again. The childish feeling of pursuit was gone. 
legs that had been in such a fearful hurry, came to
sudden standstill; and he discovered, to his imme
surprise, that he was back again-
There lay the rug and the cushions under the dow
ward sweeping branches with their cascades of brig
new leaves. No sign of Tara-and the heavy dro
came faster, though they hardly amounted to a shower.
Flinging down bow and arrows, he ran under the t
and peered up into a maze of- silver grey and yo
green. Still no sign.
" Tara! " he called. " Are you there "
" 'Course I am." Her disembodied voice 'had a
of triumph. "I'm   at the tipmost top. It's rat
shaky, but serumshous. Come up-quick! "
Craning his neck he could just see one leg and 
edge of her frock. Temptation tugged at him; but
could not bear to disobey his mother-not because
wa naughty, but it was her.
"I can't-now," he called back. " It's late and it
raining. You mst come down."
"I will-if you come up."
"I tell you, I can't "
"Only one little minute, Roy. The storm's ro
away. I can see miles and miles-to Farthest End.
Temptation tugged harder. You couldn't earry on
argiment with one tan shoe and stocking and a flu
of blue frock, and he wanted badly to teUl about
Golden Tusks. Should he go on alone, or should
climb up and fetch her-- 
The answer to that came from the top of the
A crack, a rustle and a shriek from Tara, who seem
to be coming down faster than she cared about.
Another shriek. "Oh, Boy  I'm dstuk! Do come 
Stuck! She was dangling from the end of aj
bough that had caught in her skirt as she fel. There
hung ignominiously-his High Tower Princess-her 
floating like seaweed, her hands clutching at the ne
branches that were too pliable for support. If
skirt should tear, or the bough should break-
Kee stuck e " he commanded suerfluouslv:



<pb n="19"/>
THE GLORY AND THE DREAM               19
like a squirrel he sped up the great beech, its every foot-
hold as familiar to him as the ground he walked on.
But to release her skirt and give her a hand he must
trust himself on the jagged bough, hoping it would bear
the double weight. It looked rather a dead one, and its
sharp end was sticking through a hole in Tara's frock.
He set foot on it cautiously and proffered a hand.
" Now-catch hold I " he said.
Agile as he, she swung herself up somehow and clutched
at him with both hands. The half-dead bough, resenting
these gymnastics, cracked ominously. There was a
gasp, a scuffle. Boy hung on valiantly, dragging her
nearer for a firmer foothold.
And suddenly down below Prince began to bark-a
deep, booming note of welcome.
"Hullo, Roy!"   It was his father's voice. "Are
you murdering Tara up there t Come out of it !"
Roy, having lost his footing, was in no position to look
down-or to disobey: and they proceeded to come out
of it, with rather more haste than dignity.
Roy, 'swinging from a high branch for his final jump
-a bit of pure bravado because he felt nervous inside
-discovered, with mingled terror and joy, that his
vagrant foot had narrowly shaved Aunt Jane's neat
hard summer hat: Aunt Jane-of all people-at such a
moment, when you couldn't properly explain. He half
wished he had kicked the fierce little feather and broken
its back-
He was on the ground now, shaking hands with her,
his sensitive clean-out face a mask of mere politeness:
and Tara was standing by him-a jagged hole in her blue
frock, a scratch across her cheek, and her hair ribbon
gone-looking suspiciously as if he had been trying to
murder her instead of doing her  knightly service.
She couldn't help it, of course. But still-it was a
distinct score for Aunt Jane, who, as usual, went straight
to the point.
"You nearly kicked my head just now. A little
gentleman would apologise."
He did apologise-not with the best grace.
" My turn next," his father struck in. "What the
dickens were you up to-tearing slices out of my finest
tree t" His twinkly eyes were almost grave and his



<pb n="20"/>
b            inAB TOM SEEK n
voie was almost astp. (" Just because of Aunt Jane
thought Boy.)
Aloud he said: "I'm awfully sorry, Daddy. It 
only , . . Tara got in a muddle. I had to help her."
The twinkle came back to his father's eyes.
" The woman tempted me! " was all he said; 
Boy, hopelessly mystified, wondered how  he co
possibly know. It was very clever of him. But A
Jane seemed shocked.
"Nevil, be quiet! " she commanded in a crisp und
tone; and Boy, simply hating her, pulled out his wat
"We've got to hurry, Daddy. Mother said ' not la
than half-past.' And it is later."
"Scoot, then.  She'll be anxious because of t
storm."
But though Boy, grasping Tara's hand, faith
hurried ahead because of mother, he managed to ke
just within earshot; and he listened shamelesS
beeause of Aunt Jane. You couldn't trust her.  S
didn't play fair. She would bite you behind your b
That's the kind of woman she was.
And this is what he heard.
" Nevil, it's perfectly disgraceful. Letting them 
wild, like that; damaging the trees and scaring 
, Se.meant the pheasants of course. No other 
aupI_     werelstaored in her eyes.
ory, old girl. But they appear to survive i
(The cool good-humour of his father's tone was b
to Boy's heart.) "And frankly, with us, if it's a 
of the children or the birds, the children win, han
down."
Amnt Jane snorted. You could   all it nothing 
It was a sound peculiarly her own, and.it implied
utterable things.  Boy would have gloried had
known what a score for his father was that delicat
implied identity with his wife.
But the snort was no admission of defeat.
"In my opinion-if it counts for anythin," 
persisted, "this harum-searum state of things i 
as badl for the children as for the birds. I suppose 
Am. a glimmering concern for the boy's future, as
to the old place "



<pb n="21"/>
Tal UfL: GX t.I     . ,atL  K 'B  JlI   a  ^AM 
Nevil Sinclair chuckled.           '
"By Jove! That's quite a bright idea. Beally, Jas,
you've a positive flair for the obvious."
(Roy hugely wanted to know what a "flair for the
obvious" might be. His eager brain pounced on new
words as a dog pounces on a bone.)
" I wish I could say the same for you," Lady Roscoe
retorted unabashed. " The obvious, in this case-though
you can't or won't see it-is that the boy is thoroughly
spoilt, and in September he ought to go to school. You
couldn't do better than Coombe Friars."
His father said something quickly in a low tone and
he couldn't catch Aunt Jane's next remark. Evidently
he was to hear no more. What he had heard was bad
enough.
"I don't care. I jolly well won't," he said between
his teeth-which looked as if Aunt Jane was not quite
wrong about the spoiling.
"No, don't," said Tara, who had also listened without
shame. And they hurried on in earnest.
" Tara," Roy whispered, suddenly recalling his quest.
"I found the Golden Tusks. I'll tell it you after."
"Oh, Roy, you are a wonder! " She gave his hand
a convulsive squeeze and they broke into a run.
The "bits of blue" had spread half over the sky.
The thunder still grumbled to itself at intervals and a
sharp little shower whipped out of a passing cloud.
Then the sun flashed through it and the shadows crept
round the great twin beeches on the lawn-and the
day was as lovely as ever again. 
And yet-for Roy, it was not the same loveliness.
Aunt Jane's repeated threat of school brooded over
hiT sensitive spirit, like the thundercloud in the wood
that was the colour of spilled ink. And the Boy-of-ten
-a potential enemy-was coming to tea. . :. 
Yet this morning he had felt so beautifully sure that
nothing could go wrong on a day like this! It was his
first lesson, and not by any means his last, that Fate--
unmoved by 'light of smiles or tears '-is no respecter
of profound convictions or of beautiful days.
.. * ;.  .                .



<pb n="22"/>
CHAPTER mI.
"Man am I grown; a man's work I must do."
TAtA was right. The Boy-of-ten (Boy peris
ignored the half) was rather a large boy: also 
lumpy. He had little eyes and freckles and w
Christine called a " turnip nose." He wore a very
school blazer and real cricket trousers, with a 
shirt and school tie that gave Boy's tussore shirt
soft brown bow almost a girlish air. Something
bhi manner and the way he aired his school slang, 
Boy-who never shone with strangers-feel "
youiger," which did not help to put him at ease.
His name was Joe Bradley. He had been in 
til he was nearly eight; and he talked about
as he talked about school, in a rather important v
as befitted the only person present who knew ayt
of tther.                                    i
Boy Was quite convinced he knew nothing at all sb
jpnutana or Cior or Prithvi Baj or the sacred
w o   of Jaipur. But somehow he could not make
'elt talk about these things simply for "show o
beeause a strange boy, with bad manners, was pu
on airs.
Besides, he never mueh wanted to talk when he
eating, though he could not have explained why. 8o-]
devoted his attention chiefly to a plate of eo
ckese, leaving the Boy-of-ten conversationally in 
mand of the field.
He was full of a recent cricket mateh, and h1 
bristled with such unknown phrases as "square 1
"cover point" and "caught out."    But for 
reason-pure perversity perhaps-they stirred in



<pb n="23"/>
THE GLORY A"l THE DREAM                 23
no flicker of curiosity, like his father's "flair for the.
obvious." He didn't know what they meant-and he
didn't care, which was not the least like Roy. Tara,
who owned big brothers, seemed-to know all about it,
or looked as if she did; and to show yon didn't under-
stand what a girl understood, would-be the last indignity.
When the cricket show-off was finished, Joe talked
[ndia and ragged Tara, in a big-brotherly way, ignored
0hristine, as if five and a half simply didn't count.
That roused Roy; and by way of tacit rebuke, he ;be-
stowed such marked attention on his small sister, that
Christine (who adored him, and was feeling, miserably
shy) sparkled like a dewdrop when the sun flashes out.
She was a tiny creature, exquisitely proportioned;
tair, like her father, yet in essence a replica of her mother,
with the same wing-like brows and dark limpid eyes
Dimly jealous of Tar, she was the only one of the
bhree who relished the presence of the intruder and
wished strange boys oftener came to tea.
Millieent, the nursery-maid, presided. She was tall
and smiling and obviously a lady. She watched and
listened and said little during the meal.
Once, in the course of it, Lilamani came in and hovered
round them, filling Roy's tea-cup, spreading Christime's
honey-extra thick. Her Eastern birthright of service,
her joy in waiting on those she loved, had survived tens; i!
years of English marriage, and would survive tenI mor&' '
It was as much an essential part of her as the rhythm
of her pulses and the blood in her veins.
She was no longer the apple-blossom vision of the 
morning. She wore her mother-o'-pearl sari with its  '.
narrow gold border. Her dresi, that was the col6ur .
of a dove's wing, shimmered changefully as she moved,
and her aquamarine pendant gleamed like drops of sea
water on its silver chain.
Roy loved her in the mother-o'-pearl mood best of
all; and he saw, with a throb of pride, how the important
Boy-from-India seemed too absorbed in watching her 
even to show off. She did not stay many minutes and
ah*taid very little. She was still, by preference, quiet
d.iutg'a meal; and it gave her a secret thrill of pleasure
1ee the habit of her own race reappearings an instict
t.fOy. So, with merely a word or two,  e just smiled



<pb n="24"/>
24               FAB TO T SEEK 
at them and gave them things and patted their heads 
And when she was gone, Boy felt better. The scales
bad swung even again. What was a school blazer and
twenty runs at cricket, compared with the glory of
having a mother like that 
But if tea was not much fun, after tea was worse.
They were told to run and play in the garden; and
obediently they ran out, dog and all. But what oould
you play at with a superior being who had made twenty
runs not out, in a House Match-whatever that might 
be    They showed him their ring-doves and their
rabbits; but he didn't even pretend to be interested, 
though Tara did her best, because it was she who had
brought this infliction on Boy.
"How about the summer-houset" she suggested,,
hopefully. For the summer-house locker contained an 
assortment of old tennis-bats, mallets and balls, that
might prove more stimulating than rabbits and doves.
Boy offered no objection; so they straggled across a .
orner of the lawn to a narrower strip behind the tall 
yew hedge.
The grown-ups were gathered under the twin beeches; 4
Oad away at the far end of the lawn Boy's mother and
li's mother were strolling up and down in the sun.
.Again Boy noticed how Joe Bradley stared: and as
they. ounded the corner of the hedge he remarked sud-
daly: "I say! There's that swagger ayah of yours
waikng *ith Lady Despard. She's jolly smart, for an
ayah. Did you bring her from India  YTn never said
you'd been there." 
Boy started and went hot all over. "'Well, I Aem
-just on a visit.  And she's not an ayah. She's,
my Mummy!"
Joe Bradley opened his mouth as wel as his eyes,
which made him look plainer than ever.
"Golly ! what a tale   White people don't have
ayahs for Mothers-not in my India. I s'pose you
Pater married her out there "
" He didn't. And I tell you she's ot au ayah."
:Boy's low voice quivered with anger. It was as.i
tn thousand little flames had come alight inside 
$ut you had to try and be polite to vistora; so hea:



<pb n="25"/>
THE GLORY AND THE DREAM                2
with a virtuous effort: "She's a really and truly
Princess-so there!"
But that unspeakable boy, instead of being impressed,
laughed in the rudest way.
" Don't excite, you silly kid. I'm not as green as you
are. Besides-who eares--    "
It flashed on Boy, through the blur of his bewildered
rage, that perhaps the Boy-from-India was jealous.
He tried to speak. Something clutched at his throat;
but instinct told him he had a pair of hands....
To the utter amazement of Tara, and of the enemy,
he silently sprang at the bigger boy; grabbed him
unscientifically by the knot of his superior neck-tie
and hit out, with more fury than precision, at cheeks
and eyes and nose
For a few exciting seconds he had it all his own way.
Then the enemy-recovered from the first shook of
surprise-spluttered wrathfully and hit out in return.
He had weight in his favour. He tried to bend Boy
backwards; and failing began to kick viciously wherever
he could get at him. It hurt rather badly and made
Roy angrier than ever. In a white heat of rage, he
shook and pummelled, regardless of choking sounds and
fingers clutching at his hair. ...
Tara, half excited and half frightened, could only.
grab Prince's collar, to keep him from rushing into the
fray; and when Joe started kicking, it was all she
could do not to let him go. But she knew Athol--her
dearest brother-would say it wasn't fair play. So she
tugged, and Prince tugged; while the boys, fiercely
silent, rocked to and fro; and Christine sobbed piteously
-" He's hurting Roy-he's killing Boy! "
Tara, fully occupied with Prince, could only jerk out:
Don't be a baby, Chris. Roy's all right. He loves it."
Which Christine simply didn't believe. There was blood
on his tussore shirt. It mightn't be his, but still--
It made even Tara feel rathersick; and when a young
gardener appeared on the soesie she called out: "Oh,
Mudford, do stop them-or somethingll happen."
But Mudford-British to the bone-would do nothing
of the kind. He saw at once that Roy was getftI ng e
better of an opponent nearly twice his weight; Ed



<pb n="26"/>
26               PA.  TO SEEK
setting down his barrow he shamelessly applauded his
young master.
By now, the enemy's nose was bleeding freely and
spoiling the brand-new blazer. He gasped and spluttered:
"Drop it, you little beast I " But Boy, fired by Mud-
ford's applause, only hit out harder.
" 'Pologise-'pologise! Say she isn't! "
His forward jerk on the words took Joe unawares.
The edge of the lawn tripped him up and they rolled on
the grass, Joe undermost in a close embrace--
And at that critical moment there came strolling 
round the corner of the hedge a group of grown-ups-
Sir Nevil Sinclair with Mrs Bradley, Lady Roscoe,
Lady Despard and Roy's godfather, the distinguished
novelist, Cuthbert Broome.
Mudford and his barrow departed; and Taa looked
appealingly at her mother.
.Boy-intent on the prostrate foe-suddenly felt a
hand on his shoulder and heard his father's voice say
sharply: " Get up, Boy, and explain yourself "
They got up, both of them-and stood there, looking
shy and stupefied and very much the worse for wear:-
hair rffed, faces discoloured, shirts torn open. One
of oy's stockings was slipping down; and, in the midst
of hCia:onfsed sensations, he heard the excited voice
of MB Bradley urgently demanding to know what her
"poo. dear boy" could have done to be treated like
1w. oe one eemed to answer her; and the poor dear boy
A     /.  too bsy. comforting his nose to take much interest
j the proceedings.
.*J' Lady Despard (you could tell at a glance she was
!aEn's mother) was on her knees comfrting Christine;
-Ad as Boy's senses cleared, he saw with a throb of
i2e: that his mother was not them  But Aunt Jane.
'wjf i nd Uncle Outhbert--
%fe seemed to stand there panting and aching in an
$41esB:eamoe, full of eyes. He did not know that his
fataw .i  giving him a few seconds to reeover hime& 
Wbin: "What do you mean by it, Boy "he i 
btime his voice was really tern. It hurt-
e bruises.  "Gentlemen don't hammer
;.I ietf." This was an unexpected blow, And it



<pb n="27"/>
THE GLORY IAD THE DBRAM                    '
fair. How eould he explain before " all those " t  is
cheeks were burning, his head was aching; and tear,
that must not be allowed to fall, were pricking like
needles under his lids.      4
It was Tan who spoke-still clutching Prince, lest
he overwhelm Roy and upset his hardly maintained
dignity.
"Joe made him angry-he did," she thrust in with
feminine officiousness; and was checked by her mother's
warning finger.
Mrs Bradley-long and thin and beaky-bore down
upon her battered son, who edged away sullenly from
proffered caresses.
Sir Nevil, not daring to meet the humorous eye of
Cuthbert Broome-still contemplated the dishevelled
dignity of his own small son-half puzzled, half vexed.
" You've done it now, Boy. Say you're sorry," he
prompted; his voice a shade less stern than he intended.
Boy shook his head.
" It's him to say-not me."
"Did he begin it "
" No."
"Of course he didn't," snapped the injured mother.
"He's been properly brought up," which was not
exactly polite, but she was beside herself-simply an
irate mother-creature, all beak and ruffled fesahea.
"You deserve to be whipped.     You've hurt. 1 i
badly."                         . 
"Oh, dry up, mother," Joe murmured behind his' A
sanguinary handkerchief, edging still further away frol  :
maternal fussings and possible catechism.       -
Nevil Sinclair saw clearly that his son would neithfr
apologise nor explain. At heart he suspected young
Bradley, if only on aceount of his insufferable mother
but the laws of hospitality must be upheld.
" Go to your own room, Boy," he said with creditable
severity, " and stay there till I come."
Roy gave him one look-mutely reproachful. Then
-to every one's surprise and Tara's delight-he walked
straight up to the Enemy.
"rdid hammer hardest. 'Pologise!"
The older boy mumbled something suspiciousl 'lie
;,:te' fatal word: a suspicion confirmed by Boyis next



<pb n="28"/>
'^              PFABR TO SEEK 
remark: "I'm   sorry your blazer's spoilt. But you 
made me."
And the elders, watching with amused approbation, 
had no inkling that the words were spoken not by Ioy 
Sinclair but by Prithvi Baj.
The Enemy, twice humbled, answered nothing; and.
Boy,-his dignity unimpaired by such trifles as a lump
on his cheek, a dishevelled tie and one stocking curled
lovingly round his ankle-walked leisurely away, with
never a glance in the direction of the "grown-ups,"
who had no concern whatever with this-the most
important event of his life-
Tar-torn between wrath and sdmiration-watched
him go. In her eyes he was a hero, a victim of injustice
and the density of grown-ups.
She promptly released Prince, who bounded after his
master. She wanted to go too. It was all her fault,
bringing that horrid boy to tea. She did hope Roy
would explain things properly. But boys were stupid
sometimes and she wanted to make sure. While her
mother was tactfully suggesting a homeward move, she
Slipped up to Sir Nevil and insinuated a small hand into
hise. 
" Uncle Nevil, do believe," she whispered urgently.
'truly it isn't fair--"
His quick frown warned her to say no more; but the
pressure of his hand comforted her a little.
A   the same she hated going home. She hated
ithat putrid boy '-a forbidden adjective; but what
'i eo ovd you call him I She was glad he would be gone
i Hee day after to-morrow. She was evea more, glad
ska nose was bleeding and his eye bunge up and his
''portant blazer all bloodied. Girl though she was, 
there ran a fiercer strain in her than in Boy. 
As they moved off, she had an nsraton. She was
given that way.                          r
"Mummy darling," she said in her small ctear voice,
"  yn't I stay back a little and play with Chris. She's '
oe unhappy.  Alice could fetch me-couldn't she t
the innocent request was underlined by an unmistak-
able glance through her lashes at Joe. She wanted hbn
to he,. and she didn't care if he understood-him  ^



<pb n="29"/>
THE GLOBY AND THE DREAM              29
his beaky mother! Clearly her own Mummy under-
stood. She was nibbling her lips, trying not to smile.
"Very well, dear," she said. " I'll send Alice at half-
past six. Run along."
Tara gave her hand a grateful little squeeze-and ran.
She would have hated the "beaky mother" worse
than ever could she have heard her remark to Lady
Despard, when they were alone.
"Really, a most obstinate, ungoverned child. His
mother, of course-a very pretty creature-but what
can you expect t Natives always ruin boys."
Lady Despard-Lilamani Sinclair's earliest champion
and friend-could be trusted to deal effectually with a
remark of that quality.
As for Tara-once " the creatures " were out of sight
they were extinct. All the embryo mother in her was
centred on Boy. It was a shame sending him to his
room, like a naughty boy, when he was really a champion,
a King-Arthur's-Knight. But if only he properly ex-
plained, Uncle Nevil would surely understand-
And suddenly there sprang a dilemma. How could
Roy make himself repeat to Uncle Nevil the rude remarks
of that abominable boy T And if not-how was he going
to properly explain- 
,
., 4-
.~~~~~~~~~ ' ·                



<pb n="30"/>
30
CHAPTER IV.
" What a great day came and pased;
Unknown then, but known at last.
-ALIWa MTNLL
THAT very problem was puzzling Roy as he lay on his 
bed, with Prince's head against his shoulder, aching a
a good deal, exulting at thought of his new-born knight-
hood, wondering how long he was to be treated like a
siner,-and, through it all, simply longing for his
other. ....
; It was the conscious craving for her sympathy, her
atplause, that awakened him to his dilemma.
*'ie had championed her with all his might against.
that lumpy Boy-of-ten,-who kicked in the meanest
way.;  ad he couldn't explain why, so she couldn't
knot ever. The memory of those insulting words hurt
hipm so that he shrank from repeating them to anyone
-leat of all to her. Yet how could he see her and feel
her and not tell her everything ? She would surely ask
- he would want to know-and then-when he tried to
think beyond that point he felt simply lost.
It was an impasse none the less tragic beanse he was 
only nine. To tell her every little thing was as simple
a necessity of life as eating or sleeping; and-til this
bewildering moment-as much a matter of course. For
T.ilmani Sinclair, with her Eastern mother-genius, had
forged between herself and her first-born a link woven
of.the tenderest, most subtle fibres of heart and spirit;
a link so vital, yet so unassertive, that it bid fair to
.stted the strain of absence, the test of time. So close
a.* .with any human heart, while it makes for beauty 
:aq;*  also for pain and perplexity,-as Boy was j"1
reaisnag to his dismay.                        ,



<pb n="31"/>
THE GLORY AND THE DREAM                81
At the sound of footsteps he sat up, suddenly very
much aware of his unheroic dishevelment. He tugged
at the fallen stocking and made hasty dabs at his hair.
But it was only Esther the housemaid with an envelope
on a tray. Envelopes, however, were always mysterious
and exciting.
His name was scribbled on this one in Tara's hand;
and as Esther retreated he opened it, wondering...
It contained a half-sheet of note-paper, and between
the folds lay a circle of narrow blue ribbon plaited in
three strands. But only two of the strands were ribbon;
the third was a tress of her gleaming hair. Roy gazed
at it a moment, lost in admiration, still wondering; then
he glanced at Tara's letter-not scrawled, but written
with laboured neatness and precision.
" DEA RoBY,-It was splendid. You are Prithvi Baj.
I am sending you the bangel like Aunt Lila told us.
It can't be gold or jewels. But I pulled the ribbon out
of my petticote and put in sum of my hair to make it
spangly. So now you are Braselet Bound Brother.
Don't forget.                      From TArA."      ,
"I hope you aren't hurting much. Do splain to
Uncle Nevil properly and come down soon. I am hear
playing with Chris.                     TAA."
Roy sat looking from the letter to the bangle with a
distinctly pleasant kind of mixed-up feeling inside. He
was so surprised, so comforted, so elated by this tribute
from his High Tower Princess, who was an exacting
person in the matter of heroes. Now-besides being a
Knight and a champion he was Bracelet-Bound Brother
as well.
Only the other day his mother had told them a tale
about this old custom of bracelet-sending in Rajputana:
-how, on a certain holy day, any woman-married 'or
not married-may send her bracelet token to any manL
If he accepts it, and sends in return an embroidered
bodice, he becomes from that hour her bracelet brother,
vowed to her service, like a Christian Knight in the
days of chivalry. The bracelet may be of gold or jewels -
or even of silk interwoven with spangles-like Tar's
rttomptu tokqn. The two who are bracelet-bound



<pb n="32"/>
3might p. FA              t SEshe,
might possibly never meet face to face. Yet she, wh
sends, may ask of him who accepts, any service a
pleases; and he may not deny it-even though 
involve the risk of his life. 
The ancient custom, she told them, still holds
though it has declined in use, like all things varo
in an age deafened by the clamour of industrial strife
an age grown blind to the beauty of service, that, i
defianoe of "progress," still remains the keynote of an
Indian woman's life.
So these privileged children had heard much of it,
through the medium of Lilamani's Indian tales; and
this particular one had made a deeper impression on
Tara than on Boy; perhaps beeause the budding
woman in her relished the power of choice and eommand
it conferred on her own sex. Certainly no thought of
possible future commands dawned on Boy. It was.
her pride in his aohievement, so characteristically ex-
pressed that flattered his incipient maseuline vanity
and added a cubit to his stature. He knew now what
*e meant to be when he grew up. Not a painter, or 
miier or a gardener-but a Braeelet-Bound Brother.....
'Gingerly, almost shyly, he slipped over his hand the
daly woven trifle of ribbon and gleaming hair. As the
ifr;t glow of pleasure subsided, there sprang the in-
stinetive thought-" Won't Mummy be pleased !" And:
strightway he was caught afresh in the toils of his
dtlemma-How could he possibly explain----
What was she doing t Why didn't she come--   t
There---    His ear caught far-off footsteps-too
heavy for hers. He slipped off the Braeelet, folded it
in Tara's letter and tucked it away inside his shirt.
Hurriedly-a little nervously-he tied his brown bow'
and got upon his feet, just as the door opened and his
father came in. 
"Well, Boy!" he said, and for a few seconds he,
steadily regarded his small son with eyes that tried
ery hard to be grave and judicial. 8eoldings and asset'
tions of authority were not in his line: and the tug at>
fiI heart-strings was peculiarly strog 'n the  ase ofl
oty. Fair himself, as the boy was darkl their in' i
lilknes of form and feature was yet sostrikg 
there'were moments-na now-when, it ae NA
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~'.*...8         M



<pb n="33"/>
THE GLORY AND THEB DREAM 
Sinclair an eerie sense of looking into his own eyes,-
which was awkward, as he had come steeled for chastlse-
ment, if needs must, though his every instinot revolted
from the mutual indignity. He had only once inflicted
it on Roy for open defiance in one of his stormy ebulli-
tions of temper; and, at this moment, he did not seem
to see a humble penitent before him.
" What have you got to say for yourself t " he went
on, hoping the pause had been impressive; strongly
suspecting it had been nothing of the kind. " Gentlemen,
as I told you, don't hammer their guests. It was rather ;
a bad hammering, to judge from his handkerchief. An4'.t
you don't look particularly sorry about it either."
"I'm not-not one littlest bit."
This was disconcerting; but Nevil held his ground.
"Then I suppose I've got to whack you. If boys
aren't sorry for their sins, it's the only way."
Roy's eyelids flickered a little.
" You better not," he said with the same impersonal
air of conviction. " You see, it wouldn't make me sorry.
And you don't hurt badly. Not half as much as Joe
did. He was mean. He kicked. I wouldn't have
stopped, all the same-if you hadn't come."
The note of reproach was more disconcerting than ever.
"Well, if whacking's no use, what am I to do with
you t Shut you up here till bedtime-eh t "
Roy considered that dismal proposition, with his eyes
on the summer world outside.
' Well-you can if you like. But it wouldn't be fair."
A pause. "You don't know what a horrid boy he was,
Daddy. You'd have hit him 'harder-even if he was a
guest."
"I wonder I" Nevil fatally admitted. "Of course it
would all depend on the provocation."
" What's ' provication' "
'The instant alertness, over a new word, brought back
the smile to Nevil's eyes.
"It means-saying or doing something bad enough
to make it right for you to be angry."
"Well, it was bad enough. It was "-a portentous
pause-" about Mnmmy." 
About Mummy t " The sharp change in his father' 
toue was at once tartling and comforting. " Look here,



<pb n="34"/>
:4               FAR TO SEEK
Boy. No -more mysteries. This is my affair s mu
as yours. Oome here."
Pulling a bedside chair near the window, he at dow
and drew Boy close to him, taking his shouldersbetwe
his hands.
"Now then, old boy, tell me just exactly wiat ha
pened-as man to man."
The appeal was iresistible. But-how could he-- 
The very change in his father's manner made tie telling
at once more difficult and more urgent.
"Daddy-it hurts too much. I don't know how to
say it--" he faltered, and the blood tinglel in his
cheeks.
If Nevil Sinclair was not a stern father, nether was
he a very demonstrative one. Even his closest relations
were tinged with something of the artist's detUhment,
and innate respect for the individual even in embryo.
But at sight of Roy's distress and delicacy ct feeling,
his heart melted in him. Without a word, ha slippe
an arm round the boy's shoulder and drew bmn closer
still.
·" That better, eh I You've got to pull it through
somehow," he said gently, so holding him that R
could, if he chose, nestle against him. He dii choos
It' ight be babyish; but he hated telling: ad it w
a wee bit easier with his face hidden. So,  brok
phrases and in-a small voice that quivered with  g
revived-he told.
While he was telling, his father said nothing; and wh
itwas over, he still said nothing. He seemed to e look
out of the window, and Roy felt him draw one big
"Have you got to whack me-now, DadAyt" I
asked, still in his small voice.
' His father's hand closed on his arm. "o. Yo
were right, Roy," he said. " I would have hit ha
11rmannered little beast! All the same--"
A pause. He, no less than Roy, found speec di
He had fancied himself, by now, inured to this kind
:i*F-so frequent in the early years of his daringly un
; ^Sa  l marriage. It seemed he was mistaken.'
',. belen vaguely on edge all the afternoon. What
WoW~iii  rudely blurted out, Mrs Badley's manf
totCdy expressed. He had succeeded infamo



<pb n="35"/>
THE GLORY AND THE DREAM               8
own sensaonE, only to be confronted with the effect
of it all on Roy-who must somehow be made to under-
stand.
" The fact is, old man," he went on, trying to speak in
his normal voice, " young Bradley and a good many of
his betters spend years in India without coming to know
very much about the real people over there. You'll
understand why when you're older. They all have In-
dians for servants, and they see Indians working in shops
and villages, just like plenty of our people do here.
But they don't often meet many of the other sort-
like Mummy and Grandfather and Uncle Ramas-
except sometimes in England. And then-they make
stupid mistakes-just because they don't know better.
But they needn't be rude about it, like Joe; and I'm
glad you punched him-hard."
" So'm I. Fearfully glad." He stood upright now,
his head erect:-proud of his father's approval, and
being treated as "man to man." "But, Daddy-what
are we going to do ... about Mummy     I do want
her to know ... it was for her. But I couldn't tell
-what Joe said. Could you  "
Nevil shook his head.
"Then-what "
"You leave it to me, Roy. I'll make things clear
without repeating Joe's rude remarks. She'd have been
up before this; but I had to see you first-because of
the whacking! " His eye twinkled. "She's longing to
get at your bruises-- "
"Oh nev' mind my bruises. They're all right
now."
"And beautiful to behold! " He lightly touched the
lump on Roy's cheek. "I'd let her dab them, though.
Women love fussing over us when we're hurt-especially
if we've been fighting for them !"
"Yes-they do," Roy agreed gravely; and to his
surprise, his father drew him close and kissed his fore-
head.
His mother did not keep him waiting long. First the
quick flutter of her footsteps; then the door gently
iopened-and she flew to him, heS sari blowing out in
belautiful curves. Then he was in her sams, gatbrled



<pb n="36"/>
'36              FA     TO SEEK
into her silken softness and the faint scent of sandalwood;
while her lips, light as butterfly wings, caressed the'
bruise on his cheek.
"Oh, what a bad, wicked Sonling! " she murmured,
gathering him close.
He loved her upside-down fashion of praise and endear-
ment; never guessing its Eastern significance-to avert
the watchfulness of jealous gods swift to spy out our
dearest treasures, that hinder detachment, and snatch
them from us. "Such a big rude boy-and you tried 
to kill him only because he did not understand your 
queer kind of mother! That you will find often, Boy;
because it is not custom. Everywhere it is the same.
For some kind of people not to be like custom is much
worse than not to be good. And that boy has a mother
too much like custom. Not surprising if he dina't
understand."
"I made him though-I did," Roy exulted shame- 
tessly, marvelling at his father's cleverness, wondering
how much he had told. "I hammered hard. And I'nm
not sorry a bit. Nor Daddy isn't either."
For answer she gave him a convulsive little squeeze- 
and felt the crackle of paper under his shirt. "Some- '
thin hidden there! What is it, Sonling " she asked j
with laughing eyes: and suddenly shyness overwhelmed
him. For the moment he had forgotten his treasure;
and now he was wondering if he could show it-even 
to her.
"It is Tara-I think it's rather a secret-" he
beian.
"But I may see "    Then as he still hesitated, she 
added with grave tenderness: "Only if you are wihihg
it, son-of my heart. To-day-you are a man." 
From his father that recognition had been sufficiently 
uplifting.  And now-from    her. . .   The subtle
flattery of it and the deeper prompting of his own
heart demolished his budding attempt at reserve.
"I am-truly," he said: and she, sitting where his
fther had sat, unfolded Tara's letter-and the bangle
l   revealed. 
, ;oy had not guessed how surprised she would be-aqd: 
how pleased I She gave a little quick gasp and murmu4ie 
somulbing he could not eatoh. Then she looked at  ,,;#



<pb n="37"/>
THE GLORY AND THE DREAM              37
with shining eyes, and her voice had its low serious note
that stirred him like music.
" Now-you are Bracelet-Bound, my son. So young!"
Boy felt a throb of pride. It was clearly a fine thing
to be.
" Must I give a' broidered bodice ' "
"I will broider a bodice-the most beautiful; and
you shall give it. Remember, Roy, it is not a little
matter. It is for always."
" Even when I'm a grown-up man "
"Yes, even then. If she shall ask from you any
service, you must not refuse-ever."
Roy wrinkled his forehead. He had forgotten that
part of it. Tara might ask anything. You couldn't
tell with girls. He had a moment of apprehension.
"But, Mummy, I don't think-Tara didn't mean all
that. It's only-our sort of game of play-"
Unerringly she read his thoughts, and shook her head
at him with smiling eyes, as when he made naughty
faces about Aunt Jane.
"Too sacred thing for only game of play, Roy. By
keeping the bracelet, you are bound." Her smile deep-
ened. " You were not afraid of the big rude boy. Yet
you are just 8o much afraid-for Tara." She indicated
the amount with the rose-pink tip of her smallest finger.
" Tara-almost like sister-would never ask anything
that could be wrong to do."
At this gentle rebuke he flushed and held his head a
shade higher.
" I'm not afraid, Mummy. And I will keep the bracelet
-and I am bound."
"That is my brave son."
" She said-I am Prithvi Raj."
"She said true."  Her hand caressed his hair.
"Now you can run down and tell you are for-
given."
" You too, Mummy t"
"In a little time. N6t just now. But see-" Her
brows flew up. "I was coming to mend your poor
'bruises!"
"I haven't got any bruises."
The engaging touch of swagger delighted her. A man
to-day-in very deed. Her gaze dwelt upon him. It



<pb n="38"/>
38               FAB TO SEEK
was as if she looked through the eyes of her husband
into the heart of her son.
Gravely she entered into his mood.
" That is good. Then we will just make you tidy--;
and'one littlest dab for this not-bruise on your cheek."
So much he graciously permitted: then he ran off
to receive the ovation awaiting him from Tara and
Chris.
tf t'-, :'*  *
"'t'^4.  ,':
", 
?,                                                  ' 



<pb n="39"/>
39
CHAPTER V.
"Thy bosom is endeardd with all hearts,
For there reigns love, and all love's loving parts."
-SnKsrPBE.
"Women are not only deities of the household fire, but the flame of
the soul itself"-RABINDRAAT  TAGoRB.
LEFT to herself, Lilamani moved back to the window
with her innate, deliberate grace. There she sat down
again, very still, resting her cheek on her hand; drinking
in the serenity, the translucent stillness of clear green
spaces robed in early evening light, like a bride arrayed
for the coming of her lord. The higher tree-tops were
haloed with glory. Young leaves of beeches and poplars
gleamed like minted gold; and on the lawn, the great
twin beeches east a stealthily encroaching continent of
shadow. Among the shrubs, under her window, birds
were trilling out their ecstasy of welcome to the sun,
in his Hour of Union with Earth-the Divine Mother,
of whom every human mother is, in Eastern eyes, a
part, a symbol, however imperfect.
Yet, beneath her carven tranquillity, heart and spirit
were deeply stirred. For all Nevil's skill in editing the
tale of Roy's championship, she had read his hidden
thoughts as unerringly as she had divined Mrs Bradley's
curiosity and faint hostility beneath the veneer of good
manners, not yet imparted to her son.
Helen Despard-wife of a retired Lieut.-Goveror--
had scores of Anglo-Indian friends; but not all of them -?
shared  her enthusiasm   for- India,-her sympathetic 'i
understanding of its peoples. Lilimani had too soon     '
discovered that the ardent declaration, " I'love India,"
as apt to mean merely that the speaker loved riding
*, td dancing and sunshine and vast spaces, with ',the



<pb n="40"/>
40               FAB TO SEEK                     X
real India' for a dim effective background.  And bytd
now, she could almost tell at a glance which were the
right and which the wrong kind of Anglo-Indian, so far
as she and Nevil were concerned. It was not like Helen
to inflict the wrong kind on her; but it had all been 
Mrs Bradley's doing. She had been tactlessly insistent
in her demand to see the beautiful old garden and the
famous artist-Baronet, who had so boldly flouted tradi-
tion. Helen's lame excuses had been airily dismissed,
and the discourtesy of a point-blank refusal was beyond
her.
She had frankly explained matters to her beloved
Lilimani as they strolled together on the lawn, while
Boy was enlightening Joe on the farther side of the yew
hedge.
His championship had moved her more profoundly
than she dared let him see without revealing all she
knew. For the same reason, she could not show Nevil
her full appreciation of his tact and delicacy. How
useless-trying to hida his thoughts-he ought to know
by -now: but how beautiful-how endearing!
That she, who had boldly defied all gods and godlings, 
all claims of caste and family, should have reaped so 
rich a harvest-  ! For her-high priestess of the inner
ifi--that was the miracle of miracles: scarcely less so
to-dy than in that crowning hour when she had
placed her first man-child in the arms of her husband-
still, l   heart, lord of her being. For the tale of her 
inner life might almost be told in two words-she loved.',
Even now-so many years after-she thrilled to 
remember how, in that one magical moment, without i
nearness or speech or touch, the floating strands of their '
destinies had become so nmraculously entangled, that'i
neither gods nor godlings, nor household despots of .
Bast or West, had power to sever them. From one swift r
pencil sketch, stolen without leave-he sitting on the 
path below, she dreaming on the Hotel balcony above-r, 
had blossomed the twin flower of their love: the deeper: 
tevealug of marriage-its living texture woven of joyr
andiain; and the wonder of their after-life together
a woider that, to her ardent, sensitive spirit, still seem
new every morning, like the coming of thunn. A
in essence, she shared with all true p0oeTd that



<pb n="41"/>
TIE GLORY AND THE DSBAM                41
of eternal freshness in familiar things that, perhaps,
more than any other gift of God, keeps the bloom on 
every phase and every relation of life. By her tempera- ,<
ment of genius, she had quickened in her husband the 
flickering spark that might else have been smothered
under opposing influences. Each, in a quite unusual
degree, had fulfilled the life of the other, and so wrought
harmony from conflicting elements of race and religion
that seemed fated to wreck their brave adventure.
To gain all, they had risked all: and events had
amazingly justified them.
Within a year of his ill-considered marriage Sir Nevil
had astonished all who knew him with the unique
Exhibition of the now famous Ramayana pictures,
inspired by his wife: a series of arresting canvases,
setting forth the story of India's great epic, her con-
fession of faith in the two supreme loyalties-of the
Queen to her husband, of the King to his people. His
daring venture had proved successful beyond hope.
Artistic and critical London had hailed him as a new-
comer of promise, amounting to genius: and Lilbmani
Sinclair, daughter of Rajputs, had only escaped becoming
the craze of the moment by her precipitate withdrawal
to Antibes, where she had come within an ace of losing
all, largely through the malign influence of Jane-her
evil genius during those wonderful, difficult, early months
of marriage.
Nevil had returned to find himself. a man of note; a
prophet, even in his own county, where feathers ha
been ruffled a little by his erratic proceedings. Hence
a discreetly changed attitude in the neighbourhood,
when Lilamani, barely nineteen, had presented her hus-
band with a son. 
But-for all the gracious condescension of the elderly,
and the frank curiosity of the young-only a discerning
few had made any real headway with this attractive,
oddly disconcerting child of another continent; this
creature of queer reserves and aloofness and passionate
pride of race. The friendliest were baffled by her incom-
. lehensible lack of social instinct, the fruit of Iidia's
prdah system. Loyal wives and mothers who' adored'
Vlgr children-yet spent most of their day in pursuit  4
:other interests-were nonplussed by her complete



<pb n="42"/>
3  *  FAB TO SEEK
absorption in the joys and sanctities of home. Yet,
course of time, her patent simplicity and sincerity
disarmed prejudice. The least perceptive could 
choose but see that she was genuinely, intrinsi
different, not merely in the matter of iridescent
and saris, but in the very colour of her soul.
Not that they would have expressed it so. To 
about the soul and its colour savoured of being psy
or morbid-which Heaven forbid! The soul of the rig
minded Bramleigh matron was a neutral-tinted, decen
veiled phantom, officially recognised morning and eve
also on  ndays, but by no means permitted to inter
with tfH   hlities of life.
The sod of Lilamaani Sinclair-tremulous, pasio
and aspiring-was a living flame, that lighted
thoughts, her prayers, her desires; and burned 
clearer intensity because her religion had been strip
of all feastings and forms and ceremonies by a ma
that set her for ever outside caste. The inner R
-free of erth-born mists and clouds-none could t
from her.
God manifest through Nature, the Divine Moth
must surely accept her incense and sacrifice of the spi
- since no other was permitted. Her father had given
that assurance; and to it she clung, as a child in a ro
ing confidingly to the one familiar hand.
She was none the less eager to glean all she co
asumlfite of the religion to which her husband
1bfed, but in which, it seemed, he did not arden
e. 'Her secret pangs on this score had been e
a litle by later knowledge that it was he who Bhiel
her from tacit pressure to make the chaagof fai
LPeipqted of her by certaip members .t i
XJaeaeout of regard for. his wishes-h"t raied
frontal attacks; but more than on  flank move
ad. been executed byimeast of the Viear (a
cousin) and of Aunt Julia-a mild elder Sinlair, add
to foreign missions.
She had not told Nevil of these tentative fishings
her soul, lest they annoy him and he put anial veto
them. Being well versed in their Holy Book, she w
to try and fathom their strange llogial way of
The Christianity of Christ she coulI, accept. It s



<pb n="43"/>
THE GLORY AND THE D5B         A         43
faith of the heart and the life. But its crystaised
forms and dogmas proved a stumbling-block to this
embarrassing slip of a Hindu girl, who calmly, reminded 
the Reverend Jeffrey Sale that the creed of his Church 
had not really been inspired by Christ, but dictated by
Constantine and the Council of Nicea; who wanted
to know why, in so great a religion, was there no true .
worship of woman-no recognising, in the creative
principle, the Divine Motherhood of God    Finally,
she had scandalised them both by quarrelling with their
exclusive belief in one single instance, through endless
ages, of the All-embracing, and All-creating revealed
in terms of human life. Was not that samer kt part
of her own religion - a world-wide doctrifW    do-
Aryan origin T Was every other revealing fase, exept
that one made to an unbelieving race only two thound
years ago t To her-unregenerate but not unbelifng
-the message of Krishna seemed .to strike a deeper
note of promise. " Wherever irreligion prevails and true
religion declines, there I manifest myself'in a human
form to establish righteousness and to destrd# evil."
So she questioned and argued, in no spirit of irrever-
ence, but simply with the logic of her race, and the sweet
reasonableness that is a vital element of the Hindu
faith at its best. But, after that final confession, Aut
Julia, pained and bewildered, had retired from  the
field. And Tilmgmaai, flung back on the God within,
had evolved a private creed of her own;-shedding
the husks of Christian dogmas and the grosser super-
stitions of her own faith, and weaving together the
mystical elements that are the life-blood of all religious
beliefs. 
For the lamps are many, but the flame is one. ...
Not till the consnmmation of motherhood had lifted
her status-in her own eyes at least-did she venture
to speak intimately with Nevil on this vital matter. 
Though debarred from sharing of sacred ceremonies,
she could still aspire to be true Sahardamini-' spiritual
helpmate.' But to that end he also must co-operate;
i, A  must feel the deeper need. ...
For many weeks after the coming of Roy she had 
hesitated, before she found courage to adventure farthe 



<pb n="44"/>
t44              FAR TO SEEK
into the misty region of his faith or nnfaith, in t
not see:'?                                     .
" If nm bothering you with troublesome questi
-fo rg   i But, in our Indian way of mariage, it
taught it without sharing spiritual life therean
arrive tl  union," she had explained, not without sec
tremor tt she fail to evoke full response. And wh
such falre would mean, for her, she could hardly expe
him to nderstand.  ^
But-by the blessf Sarasvati, Giver of Wisdom
she had suceeded, beyond hope, in dispelling the sh
reluctance of his race to talk of the 'big little things.
Even to-day she could recall the thrill of that moment :
he, kneeling beside the great chair in his studio-th
sanctury,; she holding the warm bundle of new
against hr breast.
In one long look his eyes had answered her. " Not
short of ' true union' will satisfy me," he had said wi
a quiet seriousness more impressive than any love
ervour. " God knows if I'm worthy to enter your in
shrine. Bit unwilling-never. In the '14 little thing
you are pre-eminent. I am simply yoWextra hild-
mother of my son."
That tribute was her charter f iIood. It link
love with life; it set her, once for ah, beyond the l1
lag fear of Jane; and gave her courage to face th
promised visit to India, when Boy was six months o
to present him to his grandfather, Sir Lakshman Sing
They had stayed nearly a year; a wonderful year 
indceasing knowledge, of fuller awakening .  and yet
The ache of anticipation had been too poignant. Ti
foolish half-hope that Mataji might relent and sanet
this first grandehild with her blessing, was-in 
nature of things Oriental-foredoomed to failure. An
not till she found herself back among sights and son
hauntingly familiar, did she fully awake to the chang
wrought in her by marriage with one of another r
For, if she had profoundly affected Nevil's personali
he had no less profoundly influenced her sense of val
both in art and life.
She had also to reckon with the insidious process
idealising the absoti. Indian to the core, she
teeply imbued with the higher tenets of Hindu p1
ftely  mbed  it ih



<pb n="45"/>
THE GLORY ANlTD     THE DBEA3^F        45
sophy-that lofty spiritual fabric woven of moonlight
and mysticism, of logic and dreams. But the new
Lilamani, of Nevil's making, could not shut her eyes
to debasing forms of worship, to subterranean caverns
of gross superstition, and lurking demons of cruelty
and despair. While Nevil was imbibing impressions of J
Indian Art, Lilamani was secretly. weighing and probing 
the Indian spirit that inspired it; sifting the grain from
the chaff-a process closely lijd with her personal
life; because, for India, religio and life are one.
But no shadow had clouded the joy of reunion with
her father; for both were adepts in the fine art of loving,
the touchstone of every human relation. And in talk
with him she could straighten out her tangle of impres-
sions, her secret doubts and fears.
Also there had been Rama, elder brother, studying at
college and loving as ever to the sister transformed into
English-wife-yet sister still. And there had been fuller
revelation of the wonders of India, in their travels
northward, even to the Himalayas, abode of St, ,
where Nevil must go to escape the heat and paint Mtie '
pictures-always more pictures. Travelling did not
suit her. She was too innately a creature of shrines and
sanctities. And in India-home of her spirit-there
seemed no true home for her any more. ...
Five yeafS later, when Roy was six and Christine two
and a half, they had been tempted to repeat their vist,
even in the teeth of stern protests from Jane, who
regarded the least contact with India as fatal to the
children they had been misguided enough to bring into
the world. That second time, things had been'easier;
and there had been the added delight of Roy's eager
interest; his increasing devotion to the grandfather,
whose pride and joy in him rivalled her own.
" In this little man we have the hope of England and
India! " he would say, only half in joke. "With East
and West in his soul-the best of each--4.fh* cast out
the devils of conflict and suspicion ant draw the two
to closer understanding of one another."
WWAnd, in secret, Lilamani dreamed and prayed that
, .I, e , day .  possibly . . . who |am  tell--  
Zet, still there had persisted the sense of a wideni4n



<pb n="46"/>
tW        '. -tAB TO SEEK;
guf between her and her own people, leaving her dou
ful if she ever wanted to see India again. The spirit
link would be there always; for the rest-was she n
wife of Nevil, mother of Roy  Ungrateful to grie
if a price must be paid for such supreme good fortune. :
For herself she paid it willingly. But-must Bo
pay also  And in what fashion ? How could she fail
imbue him with the finest ideals of her race ? But how
if the magnet of India proved too strong-  To hold
the scales even was a hard task for human frailty.
the time of her absolute dominion was so swiftly slipping
away from her. Always, in the back of her mind, loomed 
the dread shadow of school; and her Eastern soul could
not accept it without a struggle. Only yesterday, Nevil
had spoken of it again-no doubt because Jane made
trouble-saying too long delay would be unfair for.
Boy. So it must be not later than September next year.
Just only fifteen months ! Nevil had tld her, laughing,
it would not banish him to another planet. But it would
plunge him into a world apart-utterly foreign to hir.;
Of'Its dangers, its ideals, its mysterious influences, she;
knew herself abysmally ignorant. She must read. She
must try and understand. She must believe Nevil
knew best-she, who had not enough knowledge and too
much love. But she was upheld by no sustaining faith\
in this English fashion of school, with its decree of too
early separation from the supreme influences of mothr
ad father-and home. ...                    , 
:U.t... er on, that evening, when she knelt by Roy's bed 
,, *good-night talk and prayer, his arms round her neck,
'bl eool cheek against hers, the rebellion she could not
altogether stifle surged up in her afresh. But she said 
not a word. 
It was Boy who spoke, as if he had read her heart.
"Mummy, Aunt Jane's been talking to Daddy again 
about school. Oh, I do hate her! "  (This in fervent
parenthesis.)
She only tightened her hold and felt a small quiver:
run through him.
" Will it be fearfully soon t Has Daddy told you t
" Yes, my darling. But not too fearfully soon, e
lie knows I don't wish that."              4;
4i,.



<pb n="47"/>
TIH    GLORY AND    THE D)EAM           47
" When t"
"Not till next year, in the autumn. September."
" Oh, you good-goodest Mummy ! "
He clutched her in an ecstasy of relief. For him a
year's respite was a lifetime. For her it would pass
like a watch in the night.
I-i  ;                                    .  .
'  .                                        . '  '  -  .



<pb n="48"/>
pale sunlight, pale sky, long films of laminated clou4
From the base of orange-tawny cliffs, the sands swept
out with the tide, shining like rippled silk, where t
*^Jp had nmcovered them; and sunlight was spilled
ioh cand tinzy furrows: the sea itself grey-green
eryg still, with streaks and blotches of purple shado
flng by no visibllod. The beauty and the ms
of them fascinatemd Roy, who was irresistibly a
by the thing he could not undetand.
all. ...
Hpa   fifteen months of reprieve had flown fasterd l
anyonute could have believed. It was ov  ere tv
was over. No more lessons with Tars under
beech-tree. No more happy hours in the studio,y-g n 
ing the mysteries of 'maths' and Homer, of form a
colour, with his father, who seemed to know the 'W
of everything. Worse than all-no more Mummy, 
make the whole world beautiful with theolors of
saris and the loveliness and the dearess of her 
and her culgh and her voice. 
It was all over. He lsss at school: not Co
Friars, decreed by Aunt Jane; but St Bupert's, be
the Head was an artist friend of his father and w
tale a personal interest in eoy.' 
But the Head, however kind, was a distant being 
the boys, who could not exactly be called kind,
him in on every side. His shy sensitive  t i
him in on every side. Eid shy sensi~tive spirili'l



<pb n="49"/>
(C  t ray  -  ; ' '  " .-   ..- .';,*-, *' ;-  -  '*:  -  ,, ;;-?- .  . *;
THE GLORY ASo) THE D1BBAM              S
stbidiously from the strange faces and bodies that
herded round him, at meals, at bedtime, in the schoel-
room, on the playground; some curious and friendly;
thers curious and hostile:-a very nightmare of boys,
who would not let him be. And the more they hemmed
him in, the more he felt utterly, miserably .lone.
As the endless weeks dragged on, there were interesting,
9ven exciting moments-when you hardly felt the ache.
But other times-evenings and Sundays-it came back
harper than ever. And in the course of those weeks
ie had learnt a number of things not included in the
ichool curriculum. He had learnt that it was better to
dleneh your teeth and not cry out when your ears were
tweaked or your arm twisted, or an unexpected pin
ituck into the soft part of your leg. But, inside him,
there burned a fire of rage and hate     d by his
tormentors. It was not so much the pai   as the faet
,hat they seemed to enjoy hurting him, that he eould
weither understand nor forgive.
And by now he felt nmore than half ashamed of those
early letters to his mother, pouring out his misery of
oneliness and longing; of frantic threats to run away
or jump off the cliff, that had so strangely failed to aote  :-.
lis father's heart. It seemed, he knew all about it.
He had been through it himself. But Mummy did not
mow; so she got upset. And Mummy must not be
ipset, whatever happened to Boy, who was advised to
shut his teeth and play the man' and he would feel
the happier for it. That hard counsel. hd done more
*an hurt add shame him. It had steadied him at the
noment when he needed it most. He. Ad somehow
anagued to shut his teeth and play th t'bm; and he
,, thq happier for it already.
-o hi- faith in the fther who wouldn't have Mummy
pset, had inereased ten-fold: and the letter be had
early torn into little bits was treasured, like a talisman,
ti.d letter-case-Tan's parting gift.
. was on the Sanday of the frantic threats that he
Ce[tadered off alone and discovered the little wood
[.ain all'ts antumn glory. It was a very ordinary
pees .-.wett a geup of tall pines at one end.
y^ e.n-ad wo   ag Saa  ice of enehantment . and



<pb n="50"/>
60               PAR TO SEEK
this one had trees all leaning one way, with an aiEr
crouching and hurrying that made them seem
alive; and the moment they closed on him he
back in his old familiar world of fancy, where not
that happened in houses mattered at all....   -
Strolling on, careless and content, he had reached,
gap where the trees fell apart, framing blue deeps
distances of sea and sky. For some reason they loo
more blue, more beautiful so framed than seen from
open shore; and there-sitting alone at the edge of
things, he had felt strangely comforted; had resolved
keep his discovery a profound secret; and to come 
every Sunday for 'sanctuary'; to think stories, or 
poetry-a very private joy.
And this afternoon was the loveliest of all. If o
the sheltering leaves would not fall so fast I
He had been sitting a long time, pencil in h
waiting for words to come; when suddenly there 
instead the very sounds he had fled from-the talk
laughter of boys.
I They seemed horribly close, right under the jut
liff; and their laughter and volleys of chaff had l
jeering note he knew too well. Presently his ear ca
a high-pitched voice of defiance, that broke off and
to whimpering-a sound that made Boy's heart
quick jerks. He could not catch what they were ua
nor see what they were doing. He did not want to
He hated them all.
Listening-yet dreading to hear-he recognised.
voice of Bennet Ma., known-strittly out'of earsh
as Scab Major. Is any school, at any period, quit
of the type I It sounded more like a rough than
natured rag; but the whimpering unseen victim  e
to have no kick in him: and Roy could only sit 
wondering helplessly what people were made ofi
found it amusing to hurt and frighten other
who had done them no harm....          -
And now the voice of Scab Major rang out dist
"After that exhibition, he'll jolly- .i   'salaam t
lot of us, turn about. If he's neve learnt, we's
him how." 
The word salaam enlightened Boy. Yesterday 
had been a btus of curiosity over the beltd.



<pb n="51"/>
THE GLORY AND THE DBEAM                .-?
if a new boy-an Indian-weedy-looking and n    se * .%-
bly dark, with a sullen mouth and shifty eyes. B
hough keenly interested, had not felt drawn to hiB
ad a new self-protective shrining had withheld h .-'
rom proferring advances that might only embroil them
both. He had never imagined the boy's eolour would
ell against him. Was that what it meant-making him
salaan t
,At the bare suspicion, shrinking gave place to rage.
Beasts, they were! If only he eould take a, flying leap
mn to them, or roll a few stones down and scare them
ut of their wits. But he could not stir without giving
way his seeret. And while he hesitated, his eye absently
ollowed a moving speck far off on the shining sand.
It was a boy on a bicycle-hatless, head in air, sitting
rery erect. There was only one boy at St Rupert's
rho carried his head that way and sat his bicycle just
o. From the first Boy had watehed him covertly,
with devout admiration; longing to know him, too
hy to ask his name. But so far the godlike one, sur-
ounded by friends, had hardly seemed aware of his
sistenee.
Swiftly he came nearer; and with a sudden leap of
ds pulses, Boy knew he had seen-
Springing off his bicycle, he flung himself into the
tte group of tormentors, hitting out vigorously right
ad left. Sheer surprise and the fury of his onslaught
;ave him the advantage; and the guilty eonscienees of
heleas aggressive were his allies....
·This was not cruelty, but championship: and Boy
letrmined to see all, lay flat on his front-danger of 
iseovery forgotten-grabbing the edge of the cliff,
hat; curved inward, exulting in til, triumph of the d?
tterer and the scattering of the foe.
uLtAsMet Major, one of the first to break away, saw and
Sied the prostrate bieycle. At that Boy lost his head;
perilously over and shouted a warning, "Hi!
ftab was off like the wind: and the rest,
by a voee from nowhere, hurriedly followed suit.
-hijmul on his hands, gave a convulsive
- - ^^ <angrd #midway, into a badkward



<pb n="52"/>
52              FAB TOSEEK 
The crmblng edge was giving way under his 
under his body. No time for terror. His jerk gave
i; . hing touch....
Down he went-over and over; his Sunday
bouncing gaily on before; nothing to clutch anywh
but by good luck, no stones--
The thought flashed through him, "I'm  killed l
And five seconds later he rolled-breathless and spu
ing-to the feet of the two remaining boys, who
sprung baci just in time to escape the dusty avalane
There he lay-shaken and stupefied-his eyes
mouth full of sand; and his pockets and boots and
inside of his shirt. Nothing seemed to be broken. 
he wasn't killed I
Some one was flicking the sand from his face; and
opened his eyes to find the deliverer kneeling be
him, amazed and concerned.
"I my, that was a pretty average tumble I
sort of a lark were you up to ? Are you hurt " I
- "Only bumped a bit," Boy panted, still out of
"I spec' it startled you. I'm sorry."
The bareheaded one laughed. "You startled
Scab's minions a jolly sight more. Cleared the o
And a rare good riddance-eh, Chandranath  " 
To that friendly appeal the Indian boy vo
a muttered assent. He stood a little apart, looking
irresolute, and thoroughly uncomfortable, the 
tears still on his face. 
" Thanks veree much. I am going now," he 
out abruptly; and Boy felt quite cross with him. 
had evaporated.  But the other boy's good-hum
seemed unassailable.
"If you're not in a frantic hurry, we can go
together."
Chandranath shook his head. " I don't wish
back. I would rather-be by myself."
" As you please. Those cads won't bother you
" If they do-I will kill them."         .
He made that surprising amnnouneement in. a:
whsper. It was the voice of another rae. o
And the English boy's answer was equally
type. " ight you are. Give me fair warning
lend a hand."                           ,



<pb n="53"/>
THE GLOBY AD) THE DREAM 
Ohandranath stared blankly.  "But-they are of -'
Vtou country," he said; and turning, walked off in. t  '
opposite direction.           '
"A queer fish," Roy's new friend remarked. "Quite 
out of water here. Awfully stupid sending him to.,aa
English school."
"Why " asked Boy. He was sitting up and dusting
himself generally.
" Oh, because  " the boy frowned pensively at the
horizon. "That takes some explaining, i[ you don't
know India."
"D'you know India "    Boy could not keep the
eagerness out of his tone.
"Bather. I was born there. North-West Frontier.
My name's Desmond. We all belong there. I was out
till seven and a half, and I'll go back like a bird the
minute my schofling's over."               ., ,
He spoke very quietly; but under the quietness r. 
guessed there was purpose-there was fire. This ;
knew exactly what he meant to do in his grown-up
-that large, vague word crowded with exciting p-
btilties. He stood there, straight as an arrw, loiking
out to sea; and straight as an arrow he would make
for his target when school and college let go their hold.
Something of this Boy dimly apprehended: and his
biterest was tinged with envy. If they all 'belonged,'
were they Indians, he wondered; and decided not,
beanuse of Desmond's coppery brown hair. He wanted
to nderstand-to hear more. He almost forgot he was
st'sehooL
"We belong too-     " he ventured shyly; and
Desmond turned with a kindling eye.
·"Good egg I What Province "
"Rajputana."
- Oh--miles away. Which service "
toy looked puzzled. "I-don't know    You see-
^my mother-that belongs. My grandfather's &
intr tin a big Native State out there."
?  6was_ a shadow of change in his tone His direct
ti .'le      b    brraEssing. He seemed to be consider-
.lu.'kWQm      '~Brs ethought it," he said; and 



<pb n="54"/>
FAR TO SEEK 
llddid a shade too quickly: " We don't belong-
,tifAy.  We're all Anglo-Indians -Frontier
-.arly a ine thing to be, thought Roy, mystified,
I:mpSLed.) " Is your father in the Political "
-re conundrums I But, warmed by Demo
friendliness, Boy grew bolder.
"No. He hates politics. He's just-just a
man."
Desmond burst out laughing.
"Top hole! He couldn't do better than that.
-if your mother-he must have been in India t "
" Afterwards-they went. I've been too. He fo
Mother in France. He painted her. He's a rather fa
painter."
"What name "
"Sinclair."
"Oh, I've heard of him.-And your *lople are
at home   Lnuck   gar " He was silent a mo
watching Boy unlace his boot. Then he asked sudd
.  a voice that tried to sound casual: "I say
yo.old any of the other boys-about India-and
Mother? "
"No-why      Is there any harm  "  REoy was
the defensive at once.
"Well-no. With the right sort, it wouldn't
a sarap of difference. But you can see what some of
4re like-Bennet Ma. and his crew. Making a
'e: at that poor blighter, just because he isn'ti
olor----"              :.
Boy started. "Was it only because of tlAs-'
aaked with emphasis.
" 'ourse it was. Plain as a pike-staff. I su
-they'% bullied him into cheeking them. And.
hrrig him on to his knees-forcing him to
, Twin sparks sprang alight in his eyes.: "That
thing-makes me feel like a kettle on the boil.
I'd Uad a boiling ketle to empty over Bennet."
"So do I--the  ean Scab 1 Aid be's pinched
bicydle."                           '
" No fear ! -You bet we'll find it round the
He wouldn't have the spunk to go right off i
Bat look here-what I mean is "-hesitant, yet
. he arked back to the main point-" if any  ts



<pb n="55"/>
THE GLOBY MID THE DBEAM
asme to know-about India and-your mother, i     .:?"'.:°
ey're proper skunks, some of them. They might aw
1bigs that would make you feel like a kettle on the boil.a -
"If they did-I would kill them."
Boy stated the fact with quiet deliberation, and witha 
mt noticing that he had repeated the very words of the  d
ranished victim.
This time Desmond did not treat it as a joke.
" 'Course you would,' he agreed gravely. "And that
lort of shindy's no good for the school. So I thought--
better give you the tip-"
"I--see," Boy said in a low voice, without looking
ip. He did not see; but he began dimly to guess at a
so far unknown and unsuspected state of mind.
Desmond sat silent while he shook the sand out of his
oots. Then heaemrked in an easier tone: "Quite 
ure there's no dodge "
Boy, now on his feet, found his left g uncomfortably
tiff-and said so. 
"Bad luck   We must walk it off. I'll knead it:flr 
f you like. I've seen them do it on the Border."  ' '-
His unskilled manipulation hurt a good deal; but
Soy, overcome with gratitude, gave no sign
When it was over they set out for their homeward
ramp, and found the bicyele, as Desmond had prophe-
ied. He refused to ride on; and Boy limped beside
Lim, feeling absurdly elated. The godlike one had come-
o earth indeed I Only the remark about his mother-  -
till ra nked; but he felt shy of returning to the subject .
!he change in Desmond's manner had puzled him.
boy glanced admiringly at his profile-the straight- ^
lose, the long mouth that smiled so readily, the reso lte
hin, a little in the air. A clear ease of love at sigt, -
ohoolboy love; a passing phaae of huma effloresoeai ; .
et, in passing it will sometimes leave a mark for ife. 
Soy, instinctively a hero-worshipper, registered a new
mbition-to become Desmond's frend. 
Presently, as if aware of his thought, Desmond spoke.
" I sy, Sinlair, how old are you t You seem leasTof
kd than most of the new lot."
!m te anud a half," said  oy, wishing it was eleven.
? Bit late for startin. I'm twelve. Going on to 
;zse~~~~~·- 



<pb n="56"/>
-^V0      ~   FAB fTO SEEK
-  -Boy felt crushed. In a year he would be gone! i
-there were three more terms: and he would go on
Marlborough too. He would insist.
" Does Scab Ma. bother you much t " Desmond 
with a friendly twinkle.
" Now and then-nothing to fuss about."
Boy's nonchalance, though plucky, was not q
convincing.
"Bighto I I'll head him off. He isn't keen to kn
up against me." A pause. "How about sitting do
my way at meals I You don't look awfully gay 
your end."
"I'm not. It would be ripping."
"Good. We'll hang together, eh t Because of In
beeause we both belong-in a different way. And w
stick up for that miserable little devilphandranath."
"Yes-we will." (The glory of thar'we.') "All
same,-I don't moh like the look of him "
"No more don't I. He's the wrong ' jat.' He w
stay long-you'll see. But still-he shan't be b
by Scabs, because he's not the same colour ou
You see that sort of thing in India too. My fa
fearfully down on it, because it makes more bad
ihan anything; I've heard him say that it's just
blighters who buck about the superior race who 
the dsama  with their inferior manners. Bather
-h    lowed. "or f          m    be a
Boy glowed. "Your father must be a splendicL
I he a soldier t "             '
" ather 1 He's a V.. He got it sving a em
a Native Officer."
Boy caught his breath.
,    " I would awfully like to hear how---"
Desmond told him how....
It was a wonderful walk. By the end of it Boy
longer felt a lonely atom in a strange world. He
found something better than his Sanotuay-he 
found a friend.  .
Looking back, long afterwards, he  ognised
Sunday as the turning-point...
Later in the evening he poured it all ou to his
in four losely-written sheets.
But not a word about herself. or Desmond's



<pb n="57"/>
THE GLORY AND THE DREAM 
warning, which still puzzled him. He worried over it a
little before he fell asleep. It was the very first hint-
given, in all friendliness-that the mere fact of having
an Indian mother might go against you, in some people's
eyes. Not the right ones, of course; but still-in the
nature of things,-he couldn't make it out. That
would come later
At the time its only effect was to deepen his private
satisfaction at having hammered Joe Bradley; to
quicken his attitude of championship towards his
mother and towards India, till ultimately the glow
of his fervent devotion fused them both into one domi-
nant idea.
.        .,
z  ;-'-.,.    . _



<pb n="58"/>
58
CHAPTER VII.
"He it is-the innermost one who awakens my being with his
hidden touches."-TAoE. 
LnlTA.Xwn read and re-read that letter curled among
cushions in the deep window-seat of the studio, a to
room with tall windows looking north, over jagged 
tops, to the open moor
And while she read, Nevil stood at his easel, 
and recording, the unconscious grace of her pose, 
rapt stillness of her face. He was never weary of 
,he-never quite satisfied with the result; always
an ace of achieving the one perfect picture that 
imnortalise a gleam from her inner uncaptured 
ness-the essence of personality that eternally foils
sense, while it sways the spirit. Impossible of coe
One might as well try and catch the fragrne of a 
the bloom of an April dawn, or any other fragmentof
world's unseizable beauty. But there remained the
pursuing-and pursuing, not achieving, is the sat- 
Something in her pose, her absorption-lips
parted, shadow of lashes on her cheek,
sari against the green velvet curtain-had fired 
a spark of inspiratio. . . .
If he made a decent thing of it, Boy should ha
for a companion to the Antibes pastel: her two 
-wife of Nevil; mother of Boy. Later on, the;
would understand. His star stood higher than
just then. For Nevil had detested wriig that 
of rebuke; had not dared show it tohi wife;.
Boy had taken it like a man. No more lamen
so far. Certainly not on this occasion, judging
.bpt look, her complete absorption that gave
-~~-LY   la +  htn ho k n - D .             .



<pb n="59"/>
THE GLORY A.D       THE DREAM              , 'a
For, in truth, she was unaware; lost to everyting  ;-
but the joy of contact with her son. The pang of pat'- ..
ing had been dulled to a hidden ache; but alway     :< 
the blank was there, however richly illeM  with othe':  -::
claims on heart and spirit. A larger schoolroomn'nd: -:
and Nevil, with his new Eastern picture on hand, mB
constant demands on her-as usual-in the imf
stages; till the subject of the moment eclipsed every-
thing, every one-sometimes even herself. Her early
twinges of jealousy, during that phase, rarely troubled
her now. As wife and mother, she better understood
the dual allegiance-the twofold strain of the creatve
process, whether in spirit or flesh. Now she knew ta-
when art seemed most exclusively to claim him, his need
was greater, not less, for her woman's gift of self-effacig
tenderness, of personal physical service. And through
deeper love, came clearer insight..  he saw Nevfl-the 
artist-as a veritable Yogi, impelled to ceaseless stiving
for mastery of himself, his atmosphere, his medium:
saw her wifely love and service as the life-giving impetus
without which he might flag and never reach the
heights.
Women of wide social and intellectual activities might
raise perplexd eyebrows over her secluded life, still
instinct with the 'spirit of purdah.' She fond the
daily pattern of it woven with threads so richly varied
that to cherish a hidden grief seemed base ingratitud
Yet always-at the back of things-lurked her foolish
moter - anxieties, her deep unuttered .lnging.  t-
letters were cold comfort. In the first few weekls as
had come to dread opening them. Always the bitter
ery of loneliness and longing for home. What was it
F'evil had said to make so surprising a change' Craving
to know, she feared to ask; and more than suspected
hmat he blessed her for refrainig.
-And now came this long, exultant letter, written in
the first flush of his great discovery--         -
:And as she read on, she became aware of a new senst
This was another kind of Roy. On the first pag  .. 
pouring out his heart in careless unfoned phri*:& .,i,*
end of the second, his tale had hold of him; ap-. il
:,,^joyin~g-perhaps unaware-the exereise ef      '--'
k-iM  And lonkinrne a. at las. to ahabs



<pb n="60"/>
60 .!        FAR TO SEEK
it with Nevil she caught him in the act of tacn 
curve of her sari in mid-air. 
With a playful movement-pure Eastern-she dre
·it half over her face.         :
"Oh, Nevil-you wicked! I never guessed--"
"That was the beauty of it. I make my salaams to
Boy I What's he been up to that it takes four sheets to'
confess " I "
"Not confessing. Telling a tale. It will surpri
you."                                            !
"Let's have a look."
She gave him the letter; and while he read it, shef
intently watched his face. "The boy'll write-I shouldn't.
wonder," was his verdict, handing back her treasure, with
an odd half-smile in his eyes. 
" And you were hoping-he would paint I " she sad,'
answering his thought.
"Yes, but-sarcely expecting. Sons are a pervert
generation. I'm glad he's tumbled on his feet and foud
a pa"'?
"Yes. It is good." 
"We'll invite young Desmond here and inspect
eh  "
"Yes-we will."
He was silent a moment, considering her profil
humaly, not artitically.  "Jealous, is she  t
hundredth part of a fraction  " 
"Just so much 1" she admitted in her small 
"But underneath-I am glad. A fine fellow. W  t
as him--later."             '                 -
The projected invitation proved superfluous. 
next letter informed them that after Christmas
was coming for teA whole days. He had promised.  t
He kept his promise. After Christmas he came 
saw-and conquered. At first they were all ink
to be secretly oiWcal of the new element that 
as if it had come to stay.   For Soy'sdi
reressed admiration was clear as print to those
oouM read him like an open page. And, on the.
it was not surprising, as they were gtadually
A  to admit. There was more in Lanoe Deapbndc 
;:. mere grae. and good looks, manlness and a 



<pb n="61"/>
THE GLOBY AND TH DBAM : '4
humour. In him two remarkable personalities were
blended with a peculiarly happy result. 
They discovered, incidentally, his wonderful gift of
musio. "Got it off my mother," was his modest dis-
claimer.  She and. my sister are simply top-hole. We
do lots of it together."
His intelligent delight in pictures and books com-
mended him to Nevil; but, at twelve and a half, skating,
tramping, and hockey matches held the field. Some-
times-when it was skating-Tara and Chris went with
them. But they made it clear, quite   aggeively,
that the real point was to go alone.
Day after day, from her window, Lilamani watched
them go, across the radiant sweep of snow-covered lawn;
and, for the first time, where Boy was concerned, she
knew the prick of jealousy,--  foretaste of the day
when her love would no longer fill his life. Ashamed
of her own weakness, she kept it hid-or fancied she
did so; but the little stabbing ache persisted, in spite
of shame and stoic resolves.
Tara and Christine also knew the horrid pang; but
they knew neither shame not stoic resolves.  Boy
mustn't suspect, of course; but they told each other,
in strictest confidence, that they hated Desmond;
firmly believing. they spoke the truth. So it was par-
tinularly vexatious to find that the moment he favoured
them with the most casual attention, they were at bis
feet.
But that was their own private affair. Wbether they
resented, or whether they adored, the boys;remaied
entirely unconcerned, entirely absorbed in each 'ther.
It was Desmond's opinion of them that mattered
supremely to Boy; in pixticular-Desmond's opoUfi
of his mother. After those first puzzling remarks and
silences, Boy had held his peace; had not even shown
Desmond her picture. His invitation accepted, he had
simply waited, in transcendent faith, for the moment
of revelation. And now he had his reward. After a
prelude of mutual embarrassment, Lance had snceumbed
friakly to Lady Sinclair's unexpected charp  aMd bh
.*Irrwisitble overtures to friendship:-so frankly, iA
was ahble now, to hint at his earlier perpleaity. ^-ef7



<pb n="62"/>
. 9s                FAR TO SEEK           -.-  ;
had seen no Indian women, he explained,
in      or in evice; so he couldn't quiteunde
until his own mother made things clearer to him 
recommended him to go and see for himself. Now
had seen-and succumbed: and Boy's very piva
triumph was unalloyed. Second only to that tnum
the really important outcome of their glorious Ten D
was that, with Desmond's help, Boy fought the ba
of going on to Marlborough when he was twelve
won. ...
It was horrid leaving them all again; but it 
make a wonderful difference knowing there was Demo
at the other end; and together they would champi
that doubtfully grateful victim-Ohanath.
zeal proved superfluous. Ohandranath never reapp
at 8t Bupert's. Perhaps his people had  rrived
r iDesmond's conclusion, that he was not the right "
for an English school. In any case, his disappe
was a relief-and Boy promptly forgot all about
ears later-many years later-he was to reme
After St Bupert's-Marlborough :-and just at
he hated it, as he had hated St Bupert's, though i
diffeent fashion. Here it was not so much the lon
for home, as a vague yet deepening sense that, in
vital way-not yet fully understood-he was diffe
frim his fellows. But once he reached the haves
Desmond's study, the good days began in earnest..
-eoUd read and dream along his own lines. He 
wibble verse or prose, when he ought to have 
pirihg quite other things; and the results, 
or bad, went straight to his mother.
..Needless to say, she found them an radiant
promise; here and there a flicker of the divine
and, throughout the years of transition, the locked
reasured book that held them was the sheet-ane
which she clung, till the new Boy should be forged
of the backslidings and renewals incUtlA al to that
'of stress and becoming. What latteri their 
impefections, when-for her-it was as it Boy's
reached out across the dividing distance and 
: her-own. It the days when he seemed most
that dear illusion was her secret bread.
..~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~             :;



<pb n="63"/>
THE GLORY AND THE DBI AM               S 
And all the while, subconsciously, she was drawi ng
nearer to the given moment of religious surrender that
would complete the spiritual link with husband sa-   -
children. As the babies grew older, she saw, with
increasing clearness, the increasing difficulty of her
position. Frankly, she had tried not to see it. Ho.
free spirit, having reached the Reality that transo ,d
all forms, shrank from returning to the dogmas, t1
limitations of a definite creed. In her eyes, it seemed a
step backward. Belief in a personal God, above and
beyond the Universe, was reckoned by her own faith a
primitive conception; a stage on the way to that
ultima Thule where the soul of man perceives its own
inherent divinity, and the knower becomes the Known,
as notes become music, as the river becomes the sea.
It was this that troubled her logical mind and delayed.
decision. 
But the final deciding factor-though he knew it not
-was Boy. By reason of her own share in him, religion
would probably mean more to him than to Nevil. For
his sake-for the sake of Christine and Tara and the
babies, fast sprouting into boys-she felt at last irre-
sistibly  onstrained to accept, with certain mental
reservations, the tenets of her husband's creed; and so
qualify herself to share with them all its outward and
visible forms, as already she shared its inward and
spiritual grace.
The eonviction sprang from  no mere sentimental
impulse. It was the unhurried work of years  . 0-o-
when thre arose the question of Boy's oonrmation
and Tar's, at the same Easter-tide, eonvietion Mor.
somed into decision, as simply and naturally as the bud
of a flower opens to the sun. That is the supreme virtue
of ohanges not imposed from without. When the given
moment eane-the inner resolve was there.
Quite simply she spoke of it to Nevil, one evening
over the studio fire. And behold a surprise awaited
her. She had rarely seen him more deeply moved.
PiFra   the time of Boy's coming, he told her, he had
-iehed the hidden hope.
"TfYt too seldom you have spoken of such things-.: :
*t-'   she asked, moved in her turn and amazed.  , i't;-*
baas  re from the first I made up my mind I wo"; 



<pb n="64"/>
64         aFAB TO OESB
not have it, except in your own way and in your o
time. I knew the essence of it was in you. For 
rest-I preferred to wait till you were ready
Devi." 
"Nevil-lord of me I"   She slipped to her
beside him. "I am ready. But oh, you wicked, h
oould I know that all the time you were caring 
much in your secret heart."
He gathered her close and said not a word. 
So the great matter was settled, with no 
fuss or formalities. She would be baptized before B
came home for the Easter holidays and his confrmati
" But not here-not Mr Sale," she pleaded. " 
us go away quietly to London-we two. Let it be
that great Church, where first the thought was
in my heart that some day . . . this might be."
He could refuse her nothing. Jeffrey might 
aggrieved when he knew. But after all-this was 
own affair. Time enough afterwards to let in the wo
and its thronging notes of exclamation.
Boy was told when he eame home. For im
such intimate news, she craved the response of his Ii
self. And if Nevil's satisfactio struck a deeper n
it was simply that Boy was very young and had at
included her Hindu-ness in the natural order of t
Wonderful days    Preparing the children,
Helens help; preparing herself, in the quiet of
" House of Gods "-a tiny room above the studio
much the same spirit as she had prepared for the
onsecration of marriage, with vigil and meditation.
unobtrusive fasting-noted by Nevil, though he said4;
word.
Crowning wonder of all, that golden Easter m
of her first Communion with Boy and Tara, with
and Helen:-unfolding of heart and spirit, of leaf 
bloom; dual miracle of a world new made. ...
END OF PPB L A 
* /



<pb n="65"/>
PHASE II.
THE VISIONARY GLEAM



<pb n="67"/>
CHAPTER I.
"Youth is lifted on Wings of his strong hope and soaring valour; for
his thoughts are above riches."-PINDAR.
OXFORD on a clear, still evening of June: silver reaches
of Isis and Cher; meadows pied with moon daisies and
clover, and the rose madder bloom of ripe grasses; the
trill of unseen birds tuning up for evensong; the passing
and repassing of boats and canoes and punts, gay with
cushions and summer frocks i all kljhed in the level
radiance that steals over earth liketa presence in the
last hours .f a summer day ...
Oxford-shrine of the oldest creeds and the newest
fads-given over, for one hilarious week, to the yearly
invasion of mothers and sisters and cousins, and girls
that were neither; especially girls that were neither....
Two of the punts, clearly containing one party, kept
close enough together for the occupants to exchange
sallies of wit, or any blissful foolishness in keeping with
the blissfully foolish mood of a moonlight picnic up the
river in ' Commem.'
Roy Sinclair's party boasted the distinction of inud-
ig one mother, Lady Deswird; and one gmeraff   her, fjc
Cuthbert Broome; and Roy himself-a slindernirile
figure in flannels, and New College tie-was Log the
first punt. 
As in boyhood, so now, his bearing and features were
Nevil isarnate. But to the shrewd eye of BIroome the
last seeined subtly ovedaid with the spirit of thie3ast-a
bLf  g . stillness iw ght from the clash of t|psing
'wthin. ,When he laughed and talked it vani ed.
fell silent, and drifted away from his surrounid-
~ I@J/"u'~'~/'~~- 'Tl4 'f,1i.'t[n n+r f'a flnnir h'ilal]ninjA  '



<pb n="68"/>
"8               F    T&t  SEEK             i
. .-  : , --,-3
that intrigued the brain of the novelist, as distinct '
the heart of the godfather. Which was the real 
Which would prove the decisive factor at the
corners of his destiny ? To what heights would it 
him-into what abyss might it plunge him-that
from the ancient soul of things ? Would India
his young glorification of India-be, for him, a spa
inspiratin or a stone of stumbling ?
Broome had not seen much of the boy, intim
since the New Year; and he did not need spec
to discern some inner ferment at work. Roy was 
talkative and less communicative than usual;
Broome let him talk, reading between the lines. 
knew to a nicety the moment when a chance qua
will kill confidence-or evoke it. He suspected
those critical corners. He also suspected one of
Indian cousins of his: delightful, both of them ;
atll ... 
The question remained, which was it-the girl
boy ?                                       ,
The girl, Aruna-student at Somerville College
reclining among vast blue and pink cushions in the i
peasrvely twirling a Japanese parasol, one arm J
round the shoulders of her companion-a fellow-st
fair. and stolid and good-humoured. Broome su
her up mentally: "Tactless but trustworthy.: g
Saxon to the last button on her ready-made 81
coat and the blunted toe of her white suede shoe." ~ 
Ardna-in plain English, Dawn-was quite a
-otherwise. Not beautiful, like Lilamaui, nor qut
fair of skin; but what the face lacked in sm
was redeemed by lively gay of expression, iq
tlt of.nose and chin, large eyes, velvet-dark like 
pansies. The modelling of the face-its brea4tlU
.roundness and upturned aspect--gave it a pas
: a'r. Over her simple summer frock of darnatio: t'i
:  she wore a paler, sari flecked with gold; and two,
t '-ooral beads enhanced the deeper coral of bo .
lo*er lip.  Not yet eighteen, she was si
"'.pe aogy " for the benefit of her less adveu
si: te :" airpl . rrk i'
Clearly a Xctor to be reckoned with, this re
''  fAi. I  14..nI J-i.n .A lnnli hrn -.nna . a. nrrmonn i.



<pb n="69"/>
oE he VISIOns ABY GLEA              ::
of her polished finger nails. Yet Broome had by no
means decided that it was the girl-
After Desmond-Dyan Singh: each, in his turn ani ,
type, own brother to Roy's complex soul. Broome-
in no insular spirit-preferred the earlier influence.
But Desmond had sped like an arrow to the Border,
where his eldest brother commanded their father's old
regiment; and Dyin Singh-handsome and fiery, young
India at its best-reigned in his stead. The4two were
of the same college. Dyan, twelve months younger,
looked the older by a year or more. Face and form
bore the Bajput stamp of virility, of a racial pride,
verging on arrogance; and the Rajput insignia of
breeding-nobieably small hands and feet.
He was polin- the second punt with less skill and
assurance than Roy.: His attention was palpably dis-
tracted by a vision of Tara among the cushions in the
bows; an arm linked through her mother's, as though
defending her against the implication of being older
than any one 'else, or in the least degree out of- it
because of that trifling detail-tacitly admitted, while
hotly denied; which was Tara all over.
Certainly Lady Despard still looked amazingly young;
still emanated the vital charm she had transmitted to
her child. And Tara at twenty, in soft butter-coloured
frock and roses in her hat, was a vision alluring -enough
to distract any young man from oonentration on, a
punt pole. Vivid, eager and venturesome, i   laly
free from  the bane of self-consciousness; n:iteast
among her graces-and rare enough to be'     E   le
-was the grace of. her chivalrous affection fl  te '
older generation. In Tara's -eyes, girls who paaonise
their mothers and tolerated their fathers were -anathea.
It was a tratt certain to impress Roy's Rajput couxt;
and ]Broome wondered whether Helen was alive itdtin
disturbing possibility; whether, for all her genuine love
of the East, she would acquiesce...
'Ony the other day, it seemed, he and she had sgat
together among the rocks of the dear oli. Cap, listei- .
to' Nevil's amazing news. She it was who had cobmi-
. ".a.L  his choice .of a bride: and LilAmani -bad jdti-ed'
tA. ehawiaa onsbip to the fult But then--t'lan i :wt.
!-^if:  m       - tt esa :: aEnd this aftairwea  tei:lie



<pb n="70"/>
*       --  FAR TO SMEEK                 ^
ither way about :-Tara, the apple of,their eye;
with her wild-flower face and her temperament of 
flame--- 
How sharply they tugged at his middle-aged h
these casual and opinionated young things, with t
follies and fanaticisms, their Jacob's ladders hit
perilously to the stars; with their triumphs and fail
and disillusions all ahead of them; airily imper
to proffered help and advice from those who w
agonise to serve them if they could. ...
A jarring bump in the small of his back cut short'
flagrantly Victorian musings. Dyin's punt was
offender; and Dyan himself, clutching the pole that 
betrayed him, was almost pitched into the-river.
His achievement was greeted by a shout of laugh
and an ironic " Played indeed! " from Cuthbert Gor
-Broome's grandson. Roy, tumbled from some st
dream of his own, flashed out imperiously: " Look ali
you blithering idiot., 'Who are you a-shoving ' "
The Rajput's face darkened; but before he co
retort, Tara had risen and stepped swiftly to his s
Her fingers closed on the pole; and she smiled stra
into his clouded eyes.
"Let me, please. I'm sick of lazing and fearfully ke
*A     I can't allow my Mother to be drownded by any
-; by me. I'd be obliged to murder the other body, w
winild be awkward-for us both ! "
X AMiss Despard-there is no danger-" he mutter
o.-impervious to humour; and-as if by chane-
of his ands half covered hers. 
" Let go," she commanded, so low that no one
aknew she had spoken; so sternly that Dyan's fin
unleosed as if-they had touched fire.
'"Now, don't fuss. Go and sit down," she added,
'be lighter vein. "You've done your share. And yo
jolly grateful to me, really. But too proud to own it-
" Not too proud to obey you," he muttered. 
SWe saw the words rather than heard them; and
C*=  sa away without daring to meet her eyes.
It al passed in a few seconds, but it left him tin
*ith repressed rage. He had made a fool of hm
--:-iahe.-Lt eyes ' had probablyven away his secret thy
':k:t yA - Bl:y. After all, what matter ? He. corTI
.- . .. .                    , -SX~~~~~~~~~~i~



<pb n="71"/>
THE VISIONARY GLEAM                  t  > 
much longer have kept it hidden. By the touch of liads
and his daring words he had practically told her.  .
As he settled himself, her clear voice rang out: "Wake
up, Roy ! I'll race you to the backwater."
They raced to the backwater; and Tara won by half
a length, amid cheers from the men.
" Well, you see, I had to let you," Roy explained, as
she confronted him, flushed with triumph. "Seemed a
shame to cut you out. Not as if you were a giddy
suffragette!"
" Qui s'escuse-s'accuse! " she retorted. " Anyway
-I'm the winner."
"Right you are. The way of girls was ever so. No.
matter what line you take, it's safe to be the wrong
one."
"Hark at the Cynic!" jeered young Cuthbert.
"Were you forty on the 'th, or was it forty-five ? "
Roy grinned. "Good old Cuthers ! Don't exhaust
yourself trying to be funny! Fish out the drinks.
We've earned them, haven't we-High Tower Prin-
cess "   The last, confidentially, for Tara's ear alone.
And Dyan, seeing the smile in her eyes, felt jealousy
pierce him like a red-hot wire.
The supper, provided by Roy and Dyan, was no
scratch wayside meal, but an ambrosial affair:-salmon
mayonnaise, ready-mixed; glazed joints of chicken;
strawberries and cream; lordly chocolate boxes; spark-
ling moselle--and syphons for the abstemious.
It was a lively meal: Roy, dropped from the clouds,
the film of the East gone from his face, was simply
Nevil again; even as young Cuthbert, with his large
build and thatch of tawny hair, was a juvenile edition
of Broome. And the older man, watching them, bandying
chaff with them, renewed his youth for one careless
golden hour.
The punts were ranged alongside; and they all eat
together, English and Indian. No irksome caste rules
on this side of the water; no hint of condescension in
the friendly attitude of young Oxford. Nothing to jar
the over-sensibility of young India-prone to suspect '
slig;ht where no thought of i exists; too often, alsoi
~s['~i. to exhibitions of ill-bred arrogance that undo ias
Ihisa«hO-^ft.4trlA Ij.n-.rg«n..  r^r-Aa. , C re.A ,r nn



<pb n="72"/>
FAR .TO S5IEE
Dyan sat by Tara, anticipating her lightest ne
courage rising by. leaps and bounds. ArHna, from
Bnest of cushions, exchanged lively sallies with B1
-Petted by a college full of friendly English girls, she h
very soon lost what little shyness she ever posses
Now and again, when his eyes challenged hers, she wou
veil them and watch him surreptitiously; one mome
approving his masculine grace; the next, boldly ask
herself: "Does he see how I am wearing the favouri
sari-and how my coral beads make my lips look redt t
And again: "Why do they make foolish talk of a g
between East and West ? "
To that profound question came no answer in words
only in hidden stirrings, that she preferred to ignor
Both brother and sister had persuaded themselves th
tak of a gulf was exaggerated by unfriendly spiri
They, at all events, having built their bridge, took iI
stabilty for granted. Children of an emotional race,-
sufficed to discover that they loved the cool green fre
ness of England, the careless kindly freedom of her
and ways; the hum of her restless, smoky, all-embraci
London; her miles and miles of books and pictur
Above everything they loved Oxford, where all we
brother in spirit-with a proper sense of differen
between the brothers of one's own college and the m
outsider:-Oxford, at this particular hour of this 
.;e.a   June evening. And at this actual moment,
oved salmon mayonnaise and crushed strawb
-fully as much as any other manifestation of the dleo
able land,
:;A -  down in subconscious depths-untroubled by
*y of -surfaoe emotions-burned their passionate,
reasoned love of India that any chance breath 
rekindle to a flame. 
Presently, as the sun drew down to earth, trees 
meadows swam   in a golden haze. Arrows of -    '
stealing through alders and willows, conjured 
eiaves into discs of pure green light. Clouds of pa
brigteed to dust of gold. In the near haze m
ciekeied; and, black against the brightness, swa.
wheeled and dipped, uttring thin cries in the e
of their evening fight.
A 8 1, A          _ 4-U-  - -4  ... -1»1  A 4Ar-   A- 1 -A -  - 4 



<pb n="73"/>
THE VISIONARY GLEAM 
descended after the hilarity of their feast. Clouds of
cigarette smoke kept midges at bay. In the deepening
stillness small sounds asserted themselves-piping of
gnats, the trill of happy birds, snatches of disembodied
laughter and talk from other parties in other punts,
somewhere out of sight. ...
Only Aruna did not smoke; and Emily Barnard, 
her fanatic devotee, retired with her to the bank,
where they made a lazy pretence of "washing up."
But Ardna's eyes would stray toward the recumbent
figure of Roy, when she fancied Emmie was not looking.
And Emmie-who could see very well without looking
-wished him at the bottom of the river.
Propped on an elbow, he lay among Aruna's cushions,
his senses stirred by the faint carnation scent she used,
enlarging on his latest enthusiasm-Rabindranath Tagore,
the first of India's poet-saints to challenge the ethics of
the withdrawn life. When the mood was on, the veil
of reserve swept aside, he could pour out his ardours,
his protests, his theories, in an eloquent rush of words.
And Armna-absently wiping spoons and forks-listened
entranced. He seemed to be addressing no one in
particular; but as often as not his gaze rested on
Broome, as though he were indirectly conveying to him
thoughts he felt shy of airing when they were alone. 
A pause in the flow of his talk left a space of silence
into which the encompassing peace and radiance stole
like an inflowing tide. None loved better than Roy
the ghostly music of silence; but to-night hii brain
was filled with the music of words-not his own.
"Just listen to this," he said, without preamble. His
eyes took on their far-away look; his voice dropped a
tone.
"The night is night of mid-May; the breeze is the
breeze of the South.
"From my heart comes out and dances the image of
my Desire.
"The gleaming vision flits on.
" I. try to clasp it firmly, it eludes me and leads me
what astr; I gt what I do ay.
1.I seek what I cannot get; I get what I do not
.       '                    A·"  ...



<pb n="74"/>
74, -           FAR TO,-SEK
:audience paid- the fitting tribute of silence; and
gaze-returning to earth-caught, in Tara's eyes, a
flection of his exalted mood. Dyan saw it also;
once more that red-hot wire pierced his heart.
It passed in a second; and Roy was speaking ag
-not to Tara, but to her mother. 
"Is there any poet, East or West, who can quite
exquisitely capture the essence of a mood, hold it ligh
like a fluttering bird, and as lightly let it go ? "
Lady Despard smiled approval at the simile. "
that one," she said, "he has captured more than
mood-the very essence of life.-Have you met him ? 
"Yes, once-after a lecture. We had a talk-32
never forget. There's wonderful stuff in the new volum
I know most of it by heart."
"Spare us, good Lord," muttered Cuthbert-neit
prejudiced nor perverse, but British to the core. "
you. start again, I'll retaliate with Job and the Psalms ! 
Roy retorted with the stump of an extinct cigaret
It smote the offender between the eyebrows, leaving
caste-mark of warm ash to attest the accuracy of
aim.-
" Bull's eye ! " Tara scored softly; and Roy,
op his elbow, appealed to Broome.. "Jeffers, pl
extinguish him!" (" Jeffers" being a corruption 
;.1*, alias Godfather).
Broome laughed. " I had a hazy notion he was yo
show candidate for the Indian divil! "
"He's supposed to be. That's the scandal of it.
mighty lot of interest he's cultivating in the people a
the country he aspires to administer." 
" High art and sloppy sentiment are not in the bon
Cuthbert retorted, with a wink at Dyan Singh.
That roused Lady Despard. "Insight and sympat
must be in the bond, unless England and India arev
drift apart altogether. The Indian Civilian shoukld
caught early, like the sailor, and trained on the ..
Exams nhake character a side issue. And one m
almost say there's no other issue in the Indian servke
-. : Cuthbert nodded. "Glorious farce, isn't it 
si'aply cram us like Christmas turkeys&  Effiieiei
the war-cry, these enlightened days."       .
<to< is^.^  , ma*^  »> Act Ax-^.,»l, : St·.Asli ,;l



<pb n="75"/>
F:;  tte VISICIAEY GLEAN        -    5
eye. "Already turning our ancient cities into.ni-gc._ .
mares like Manchester and Birmingham, kidf* t6.
true sense of beauty, giving us instead the poWiso  of
money and luxury worship. And what result ?  Just;:
now, when the West at last begins to notice our genim
of colour and design-even to learn from it-we find it
slipping out of our own fingers. Nearly all the homes
of the English educated are like caricatures of your
villas-the worst kind. Yet there are still many on both'
sides who wish to make life-not so ugly, to escape a
little from gross superstition of facts- "
"Hear, hear!" Broome applauded him. "But I'm
afraid, my dear boy, the Time Spirit is oift'to- make
tradesmen and politicians of us all. Thank God, the
soul of a race lives in its books, its philosphy and art."
"Very well then"-Roy was the speaker,-"the
obvious remedy lies in getting the souls of both races
into closer touch-philosophy, art, and all that-eh,
Jeffers ? That's whai we're after-Dyan and I-on the
lines of that society Dad belongs to."
Broome looked thoughtfully from one to the other.
"A tall order," said he.
" A vision splendid ! " said Lady Despard.
Roy leaned eagerly towards her. " You don't sneera;
at dreams, Aunt Helen." 
"Nor do I, my son. Dreamers are our strictly unpai
torch-bearers. They light the path for us; and we
murmur 'Poor fools!' with a kind of sneaking self-
satisfaction, when they come a cropper."
"' Which I 'ope it won't 'appen to me! '" quoted
Roy, cheered by Lady Despard's approval. "Anyway;
we're keen to speed up the better understanding move
-on the principle that Art unites and politics divide."
"Very pithy-and approximately true! May I be
allowed to proffer a sound working maxim for youth on
the war-path ?  'Freedom  and courage in thought-
obedience in act.' When I say obedience, I don't mean
slavish Conformity. When I say freedom, I don't mean
liceree. Only the bond are free."
"Jeffers, you're a Daniel! I'll pinch that pearl of
wisdom! But what about democracy-Cuthers' pet
panacea?  Isn't it making for disobedience in act-
b      ,;Ellon; and enslavement in thought-every man



<pb n="76"/>
:       h   se      h-w    , m   d wh te 
'ott the me eatch-words, minted with the s
iatmartk   " 
' Th  roused the much-enduring British Lion-in t
person of Outhbert Gordon.
"Confound you, Roy   This is. a picnic, not a ba
Union debate. You can't argue for nuts; and when y
start spouting you're the limit. But two can play 
ihat game!"   He flourished a half-empty syphon
lemonade, threatening the handle with a very sq
thumb. 
"Fire away, old bean." Roy opened his mouth by
of invitation. Cuthbert promptly pressed the trigg
and missed his mark. 
There was a small shriek from Tara and from the 'i
on the bank: then the opponents proceeded to
with one another in earnest....
Dyan soon lost interest when Indiawas not the the
aad, as the elders fell into an undercurrent of talk, 
t'fs sought Tara's face. Her answering smile spur
1dm to a bold move; and he leaned towards her, ov
the edge of the boat. "Miss Despard," he said under h
breath, "won't you come for a stroll in the field 1-Daou
She shook her head. "I'm too lazy! We've ha&
enough exercise. And there's the walk home."
ser refusal jarred him; but desire overruled priA
"You couldn't call it exercise. Do come."       '
' Truly-I'm tired," she insisted gently, looking wa
from him towards her mother.             ' 
It was Lady Despard's boast that she could hsten 
t hree eonversations at once; but even Tara was stuir
rised when she casually put out a hand and patted 
:aee. "'Wise child. Better keep quiet till we st
home.." 
-The hand was not removed. Tara covered it wh hme
awn,- and further maddened the discomfited .Dyan 
saying, with her very kindest smile: "I'm so
Don't be vexed."
.eed.! The bloodless word was insult piled on 
Al the pride and passion of his race flamed inm
Without aswering her smile or her plea, he -
abruptly away from her; stepped out of the pui n ^
-wett:o# his stoll alone. 
0  :';  f  '   . ·_       '  . ':-:t



<pb n="77"/>
r      -     *    77-                      .S77
CHAPTER      II.
"Who knows what days I answer for to-day .. .
Thoughts yet unripe in me, I bqnd one way...."
-AuOE MsYNBI=.
WLanE Broome and Lady Despard were concerned over
indications of a critical corner for Roy, there was none
-save perhaps Ardna--to be concerned for the dilemma
of Dyan Singh, Rajput-half savage, half chivalrous
gentleman; idealist in the grain; lover of England and
India; and now-fiercely, consumedly-lover of Tara
Despard, with her Indian name and her pearl-white
English skin and the benign sunshine of England in'
her hair.
It is the danger-point for the young Indian overseas,
unused to free intercourse with women other than his
own; saddled, very often, with a girl-wife in the back.
ground-the last by no means a matter of eo'rse in
these enlightened days. In Dyan Singh's case the safe-
guard was lacking. His mother being dead, he had held 
his own against a rigidly conventional grandmother,
ant insisted on delaying the inevitable till his education
ws- eomplte. Waxing bolder still, he had demanded
the same respite for Ardna; a far more serious affair;
For months they had waged a battle of tongues and
temper- and tears, with Mataji-high-priestess -of the
Iavie-with the family matchmaker and the family
gyr, thoit to offend was the unforgiveable sin. Had
he n   powerer to call down upon an entire household;
the "uBif of the gods I
M-:::e ithan, once Anina had been goaded to the brin
-.; ;. (~ der; tillier brother grewimpatient and purned
::-i w ealing. Yet her ordeal had been s     }harr 
I~;~'k ,n., r .r 3 hiira   m ere mnoral nsasion and-thret- 



<pb n="78"/>
+ ,-8        -'    FAUb TO SEEK 
of ostracism. For her, the immemorial methods of,
inside; forbidden by Sir Lakshman, but secretly app,
when flagrant obstinacy demanded drastic measu
So neither Dyan nor his grandfather had suspe
that Arina, for days together, had suffered the tor
ot Tantalus-food set before her so mercilessly pepp
that a morsel would raise blisters on her lips and ton
water steeped in salt; the touch of the 'fire-st
applied where her skin was tenderest; not to men
the more subtle torment of jibes and threats and
insinuations that suffused her with shame and ra
A word to the menfolk, threatened Mataji, and w
would befall. If men cared nothing for family hon
the women must vindicate it in their own fash
For the two were doing their duty, up to their lig
Only the knowledge that Dyan was fighting her ba
as well as his own, had kept the girl unbroken 
spirit, even when her body cried out for respite at 
price. ....
. ;All this she had confided to him when, at last, 
were safe on the great ship, with miles of turbulent w
between them and the ruthless dominion of dast4r. 
eaoession-with its unconscious revealing of the Raj
swRnt hidden in her laughter-loving heart-had dr
them into closest union and filled Dyan with self-repoa
Small wonder if Oxford seemed to both a paradisei
knowledge and of friendly freedom. Small won4
they believed that, in one bold leap, they had bri
the gulf between East and West.
At Bramleigh Beeches, Lilamani-who knew all wit
telling-had welcomed them with open arms: and
Despard no less. It was here that Dyan mft Tara,
had 'no use' for colleges-and, in the course of a
vacation visits, the damage had been done.
At first he had felt startled, even a little dism
English education and delayed marriage had in
;' no dream of a possible English wife. With the 
Civil in view, he had hoped to meet some gil 
of his own race, sufficiently advanced to remina 
purdah and to realise that a modern Indian hi
might crave companionship from his wife no eI nL, 1
:  motherhood, worship, and service.     - 
e- . .Aed now . . . this--  !            .   .t.



<pb n="79"/>
THE VISIONARBY GLEAM 
Striding across the field, in the glimmer of a moon
just beginning to take colour, he alternately raged  f -i
her light rebuff, and applauded her maidenly hesitaftrn.
As a Hindu and a man -of breeding, his natural instinc
had been to approach her parents; but he knew enough
of modern youth, by now, to realise that English parents
were a side issue in these little affairs. For himself, the
primitive lover flamed in him. He wanted to kneel and
worship her. In the same breath, he wanted simply to
possess her, would she or no.
And in saner moods, uncertainty racked him. What
did they amount to, her smiles and flashes of sympathy,
her kind, cousinly ways? What did Roy's cousinly
kindness amount to, with Arfna ?  If in India they
suffered from too much restriction, it dawned on him
that in England trouble might arise from too much
freedom.  Always, by some cause, there would be
suffering. The gods would see to it. But not through
loss of her-he mutely implored them. Any way but
that !
Everything hung on the walk home. Those two must
have finished their sparring match by now ...
They had. Roy was on the bank, helping Arina pack
the basket; and Outhbert in possession of Taran-ot
for long.
He was called upon to punt back; and at the boat-
house, where a taxi removed the elders and the picnic
impedimenta, he essayed a futile manceuvre to recapture
Tara and saddle Dyan with the solid Emily. Failing,
he consoled himself by keeping in touch with Arfna
and Roy.
Dyan patently delayed starting, patently lagged
behind. Unskilled and.desperately in earnest, he could
not lead up to his moment. He was laboriously framing
'the essential words when Tara scattered them with a
light remark, rallying him on his snail's pace.
Y.-Tou would go for that stroll; and you strolled so
vi~ tly-- "
*,' Beesaise my heart in me was raging-aching, vio-
(-'f'.   he blurted -out with such unexpected vehe-
jl, ~- :that she started and stepped back a pace.
~,ki.    I knew-there must be difficulties-so I
'mAii   -and hoping ..." An idiotic catch



<pb n="80"/>
SO               FAR TO SBEK
his thrTot brought a sudden hot wave of self-con 
ness. He flung out both hands. "Tara-    !" 
. Instinctively, she drew her own out of
/ghost of a shiver ran through her. "No-no. I 
.. I never have ... If I've misled you, I'm
SO sorry."
"If you are sorry-give me hope," his voice, his
implored her. "You come so near-then you draw 
like offering a thirsty man a cup of water he 
not drink.  Give me only a little time-a 
chanee--"
She shook her head. "Please believe me. I'm
the wavering kind. I'm keen to go on being frien
because of Roy. But, truthfully, it's no use hoping
anything more-ever."
Her patent sincerity, the sweet seriousness of her
carried conviction. And conviction turned his
to bitterness. 
"Why no use-ever " he flung out, madden
her emphasis on the word.
" I suppose-because I know my own mind."' 
" No.  Because-I am   Indian."  His voice'
changed and harsh. "We are all British subje
oh yesa--when  convenient! But the door is o'
only-so far. If we make bold to ask for the 
is slammed in our faces." 
"Dyin Singh, if I have hurt you, it was quite-!
tentional. You know that. But now, with in 
Cyou are hurting me." Her dignity and gentlen
justice of her reproof, smote him silent; and she l
on: "You forget, it is the same among your'
ile. Aunt Lila was cast out-for always. oWI
inglish girl that could never be." 
Too distraught for argument, he harked back X
pesonal issue. "With you there would be no
would live altogether like an Englishman----"
"Oh, stop!' she broke out desperately.  A'
star all over again--"                   .
"l. ook alive, you two slackers," shouted
the far corner of the road. " I'm responsible for 
the team tgether."                     .:
' Coming t" called Tra, and turned otn D
#lmnrfs nf n-ni'naal  "T'm Sane, frnm thAc bhn.'



<pb n="81"/>
THE VISIONARY GLEAM 
heart. I can't say more."-And setting the pace, Ishe
hurried forward.
For the fraction of a second, he hesitated. An over-
mastering impulse seized him to walk off in the opposite
direction. His eager love for them all had suddenly
turned to gall. But pride forbade. He would not for
the world have them guess at his rebuff-not even
Arina ...
He slept little that night; and it was not Dyan Singh
of New College who awoke next morning. It was DyAi
Singh, Rajput, Descendant of the Sun. Yet the foolish
round of life must go on as if no vital change had come
to pass.
That afternoon, he was going with Roy to a select
drawing-room meeting. A certain Mr Ramji Lal had
been asked to read a paper on the revival of Indian arts
and crafts. DyIn had been looking forward to it keenly ;, .
but now, sore and miserable as he was-al sense of pur-.
pose and direction gone-he felt out of tune with the
whole thing.
He would have been thankful to ery ff. Roy, how-
ever, must not suspect the truth--oy, who himnelf
might be the stumbling-block. The suspicion stung lhke
a scorpion; though it soothed a little his hurt pride of
race.
Embittered and antagonistic, he listened only with
half his mind to his own countryman's impassioned
appeal for renewal of the true Swadeshi spirit in India;
renewal of her own innate artistic culture, her faith in
the creative power of thought and ideas. That spirit-
said the speaker-has no war-cries, no shoutings in the
market-place. It is a way of looking at life. , Its true
genesis and inspiration is in the home. Like flame,
ne*ly-lit, it needs cherishing. Instead, it is in danger
of being stomped out by false Swadeshi-an imitation
poauct of the West; noisy and political, crying out for
w:~ -tet0ries, more councils; caring nothing for true
tiraditions of art and life. It will not buy goods
kh~     t  igham and Manchester; but it will create
~'~   ' a1;nd Manchester in India. In effect, it is
: '  6, .. . '~.~ . -I  Owtn  a..tvv. .



<pb n="82"/>
~82?'            F A -   AR TO- SE-EK 
the age-old argument whether the greatness of a n
comes from the dominion of men or machinery. ..
For all this,. Dyan had cared intensely twenty
hours ago. Now it seemed little better than a rh
of flue phrases-' sounding brass and tinkling cymba
Could the mere word of a woman so swiftly and viol
transform the mind of a man ?  His innate mase
resented the idea. It succumbed, nevertheless.
was too deeply hurt in his pride and his passio
heart to think or feel sanely while the wound was
so fresh. He was scarcely stirred even by the allu
to Rajputana in Mr Ramji Lal's peroration.
"I ask you to consider, in conclusion-my dear
honoured English friends-the words of a veteran 
of India, who is also a son of England. It was his
vittion-it is also mine-that 'the still living art
ia, the still living chivalry of Rajputana, the
-  ng. areligion of the Hindus, are the only three po
-s whieh there is any possibility of regenerating:
ational life of India-the India of the Hindus .. .'
Very fine; doubtless very true; but what use-
all-their eternal talk ? By blowing volumes of air
their lungs, did they shift the mountains of diffi
one single inch ?
More talk followed; tea and attentions that w
have flattered him yesterday. To-day it all passed 
over his head. They were ready enough to pamper.
like a lap-dog, these good ladies; forgetting he w
man, with a man's Hgart and brain, making demand
something more than carefully chosen sugar-plumS. i
-He had never been so thankful to get away from
hospitable house, where he had imagined himt
happy.....               :
They were out in the street again, striding 
New College: roy-not yet alive to the change in-
-full of it all; talking nineteen to the dozen.
Dyan's urgent heart spoke louder than his cousin's 
And all the while he kept wondering consum
Was it Boy ? 
He could not bring himself to ask outright 
answer would madden him either way. And 
ness-or Badness-knew    he was miserable 
hrf+: onWrr  it i+l. tran r+ifh  nntrlon  a-nvan -- -n-i



<pb n="83"/>
THE VITIONARY GLEAM 
lovely and unattainable! She had spoilt everything;
his relation with her, with her people, with Roy. She
had quenched his zeal for their joint crusade. All the
same, he would hold Roy to the India plan; since there
was just a chance-and it would take him away from her.
He hated himself for the thought; but jealousy, in the
East, is a consuming fire....
Roy's monologue ceased abruptly. "Your innings,
old chap, I think.!" he said. "You're mum as a fish
this afternoon. I noticed it in there-I thought you'd
have lots to say to Ramji Lal."
Dyan frowned. He could not for long play at pretences
with Roy.
"Those ladies did all the saying. They would not
have liked it at all if I had spoken my true thought,"-
he paused and added deliberately-" that we are all
cracking our skulls against stone walls."
"My dear chap  -!" Roy stared in frank bewilder-
ment. "What's gone wrong ? Your liver touched up ?
Too much salmon mayonnaise and cream ? "
His light tone goaded Dyan to exasperation. " Quite
likely," he retorted, a sneer lurking in his tone. "Plenty
of mayonnaise and cream, for all parties. But when we
make bold to ask for more satisfying things, we find
'No Indians need apply.'"
" But-my good Dyn-     ! "
"Well-it's true. Suppose I wish to promote that
closer union we all chatter about by marrying an English
girl-what then i "
Up went Roy's eyebrows. " Are you after an English
wife? "
"I am submitting a case-that might easily occur."
He spoke with a touch of irritation; and fearing self-
betrayal, swerved from the main issue. "Wo  Syou
marry an Indian girl ?" '
"I believe so. If I was keen. I'm not at all sure,
though, if it's sound-in principle -mixing such
tpoAsite strains. And in your case-hypothetical, I
!-.  srg'sgrunt confessed nothing and denied nothing.
^,'^  -ferom what one hears, an English wife, out
|^^;.^ht make a bit of complication, if you get thfe



<pb n="84"/>
14           *   ^PAR TO SlEK
Dyin started. " I shan't go up for it. I've oh
my min"d.
"Good Lord! And you've been sweating allI
time."
Dyan's smile was tinged with bitterness.
"Well-one lives and learns. I can make good
of my knowledge without turning myself into an 
ion Englishman. An Indian wife might make 
diffielty. So-with all my zeal-I am between
grindstones. My father joined the Civil. He was 
He did well. But-no promotion; and little friee
ness, except from very few. I believe he was nx
happy. I believe-it killed him. I was cheris
hope that, now, things might be better. But I
beginning to see-I may be wrong. Safer to see i
time--"
Roy looked genuinely distressed. "Poor old D
Perhaps you're right. I don't know much about 
India. But it does seem hard lines-and bad porti
to choke off men like you." 
"Yes. They might consider that more, if they h
some of our fire-eaters. One was at me last week.
gave the British ten years to survive. Said their,
could raise a revolution to-morrow if they had m
-a trifle of five millions ! He was swearing the In
princes are not loyal, in spite of talk and subscrip
that the Army will join whichever side gives  i p
We who are loyal need some encouragement:-
recognition. We are only human-   !" i'
"Rather. But you won't go back on our little
old chap. Just when I'm dead keen-laying my 
for India--" 
H, e took hold of Dydn's upper arm and gave it a frien
shake.          ,                           -
"No, I'll stick to that. But are you sure you,
.work it-with your people? If you back out, I' s
by the sin of the sack of Chitor, I'll join the b
crowd who are learning to make bombs in Berlin."
At that-the most solemn oath that can, pass t
of a Rajput-Roy looked startled. Then he laugh
' Oommem ' seems to have disagreed with
round! But I won't be intimidated. Likewise-
s   s   a   T  * __ S _ _ 1 ___..  _  _  a t c _  *__l·  _  : t-, ..  .s



<pb n="85"/>
THE VISIONARY GLEAM                8s
vth Jeffers to-night. Recherch6 dinner for two in my
oom. All his little weaknesses ! He'd be a strong ally.
Vish me luck."
DyAn wished him luck in a rather perfunctory tone, ;
onsidering his vehemence of a moment earlier. All 
he fire seemed suddenly to have gone out of him.
They had just entered the college gate; and a few
'ards ahead, they caught sight of Lady Despard and
Eara-the girl's hand linked through her mother's arm.
"Oh, I clean forgot," remarked Roy. "I said they
Gould look in."
:.                                                 .



<pb n="86"/>
CHAPTER III. 
"It is the spirit of the quest which helps. I am the slave-
spirit of the quest."-KABIR.
RoY's recherche little dinner proved an unq
success. With sole and chicken saut6, with tr
Savoury, he mutely pleaded his cause; feeling v
guilty, the while, of belittling his childhood's idol,
he increasingly admired and loved. But this '
business was tremendously important, and the de
boy would never'suspect--                   . 
Roy watched him savouring the chicken and
discussing the decay of falling in love, its reason
,  remedies; and thought, for the hundredth time,
a splendid old boy he was; so big and breezy, n
bookish or newspapery about him. Quite a mas
of modelling, on Nature's part; the breadth and.
of him; the massive head, with its thatch of tawnyi
hair that retreated up the sides of his forehead,
corners; the nose, rugged and full of character :
beard and the sea-blue eyes that gave him the
aspect Roy had so loved in nursery days       No
appraised it consciously, with the artist's ey
vigorous bust of his godfather was his aeciow
masterpiece, so far, in the modelling line, whs
preferred to brush or pencil. But first and for
literature claimed him: poetry, essays, and the &le
novel-truest and most plastic medium for inte
man Ito man and race to race: the most entirely
medium, thought Roy, for promoting the cause
: at heart.
T.    h i.  lwough his brain was overflowing with the
ject, he was reserving it diplomatically for
i:-  ntnmate atmosphere of nort wine. coffee ,



<pb n="87"/>
Vt.- '0   X THERT :VMIOIARY GLEAM              87- ^
biM:time they always had plenty to talk about, these
bim. Broome held the unorthodox view that he probably
lWd quite as much to learn from the young as they from 
him; and at the moment, the question whether Boy
should take up literature in earnest was very much to
the fore.
'Once or twice during a pause, he caught the shrewd
blue eye watching him from under shaggy brows; but
each kept his own counsel till the scout had removed all
superfluities. Then Broome chose a cigar, sniffed it,
and beheaded it.
"My particular weakness! " he remarked pensively,
while Roy filled his glass. "What an attentive godson
it is! And after this intriguing prelude-what of the
main plot  India "
Under a glance as direct as the question Roy reddened,
furiously. The 'dear old boy' had done more than
suspect; he had seen through the whole show-the
indignity of all others that youth can least abide.
At sight of his crestfallen countenance, Broome laughed
outright. "Bear up, old man! Don't grudge me a
fraction of. the wits I live by. Weren't you trying to
give me an inkling yesterday  "
Roy nodded, mollified a little. But his self-confidence  ':
wilted under the false start. " How about arm-chairs '"  t
he remarked tentatively, very much engaged with a 
cigarette. 
They removed their coffee-cups, and sipped once, 
or twice in silence. "I'm  waiting," said Broome,
encouragement in his tone.
But Roy still hesitated. " tou see-" he temporised,
'"I'm so fearfully keen, I feel shy of gassing about. it.
Might seem to you mere soppy sentiment."  t
;Broome's sailor. eyes twinkled. " You pay me the com-r 
plrment, my son, of treating :Te as if I were a fellow-
unnergrad! It's only the 'teens and the twenties of
ths very new century that are so mortally afraid of
:'feimnt-the main factor in human happiness. Tf
i-had hot a strong sentiment for India, you wold-
, worthy of your mother. You want to go out there
.   at Wthe rub ? '
With                              . -      .-.
)a4te^wpacty ?" 



<pb n="88"/>
"A lover and a learner. Also-by way of-a b 
author. I was hoping you might back me up with a
commissions for my preliminary stuff."
"You selected your godfather with unerring f
sight I  And preliminaries over-a book, or bo
woud be the end in view ? "
)'Yes-and other things. Whatever one can do
a small way-to inspire a friendlier feeling all rou
a clearer conviction that the destinies of Eng
and India are humanly bound up together. I'm s
those cursed politics are responsible for most' of
friction.  It's art and literature, the emotional 
spiritual forces that draw men together, isn't it, Jeffe
You know that--"
He leaned forward, warming to his subject; the
start forgotten; shyness dispelled... 
And, once started, none was more skilful than Br
in luring him on to fuller, unconscious self-reve
He knew very well that, on this topic, and on m
others, Roy could enlarge more freely to him than-
his father. Youth is made that way. In his opi
it -was all to the good that Roy should aspire to
his double heritage, for the legitimate and noble pur
-x -  iaterpreting-as far as might be-East to West, 
:-  West to East: not least, because he would prob
' learn a good deal more than he was qualified to 
It was in the process of qualifying himself, by
a.quaietance with India, that the lurking danger 
iit head. But some outlet there must be for the
it in him; and his early efforts pointed ei
literary expression, if Broome knew anything,
, -  eatjve gift. Himself a devotee, he agreed with L
¥flearne tlst 'a man may'do quite as great a se
!-;  s country by writing a book as by winning a battle t
-.just so much of these thoughts as seemed fit he imp
to Roy, who-in response to the last-glowed visib
' Priceless old Jeffers! I knew I could rek
you to back me up-and buck me up! Of coe
wil be hugely encouraged by the bleating of the 
crowd-Aunt Jane and Co.     'Why waste yourI
writing silly novels 1 ' And if you try to epl
novels have a real function, they merely think;.
-   got a swelled head."                      ,



<pb n="89"/>
TE VIB IORNARY GLEAM               s8-;i
BIy:  o oeit ' mind, Boy. 'The quest is a noble one and
i'tl:hope great.' And we scribblers have our glorious
'ntpensations. As for Aunt Jane--" He looked very
Straght at her nephew-and winked deliberately.
:- 1h, of course-she's the unlimited limit," Boy agreed
without shame. "I suppose if Dad plays up, she'll give
him hell ? "
::Good measure, pressed down.-By the way-have
you spoken to him yet of all this--  "
"No. Mother probably guesses. But you're the
first. I made sure you'd understand-"
Y You feel doubtful-about Father "
"M-yes. I don't quite know why."
-Broome was silent a moment. " After all-it's natural.
hut yourself in his place, Roy.--He sees India taking a
stronger hold of you each year. He knows you've a
eal of your mother and grandfather in your make-up.
3- may very well be afraid of the magnet proving tob
trong at close quarters. And I suspect he's jealous-
or' England. He'd like to see. your soul centred on
lrameigh Beeches: and I more than suspect they'd
bith prefer to keep you nearer home."
BRoy looked distressed. "Hard lines. I hadn't got
to that yet. But it wouldn't be for always. And-     :
there's George and Jerry sprouting up."
^ I gather that George and Jerry are not precisely--
" Jeffers-you old sinner I I can't flatter myself--   "
"Don't be blatantly British, Roy! You can flatter
yourself-you know as well as I do "
- ": know it's undiplomatic to contradict my elders !"
Mitered Roy, lunging after pipe and pouch
'-^spe ially convenient godfathers, with $ress con-
netionsa . ''
; Wo. finte ed him squarely, laughter lurking in his
yes-: :A JyoL u going to be convenient-that's the rub ! : .
'I:jYi'giv :-bad a notion I may turn out something
6e(:t when I've scraped up some crumbs of know-
oE. lned' forward and laid a large reassuring
I    ,   *- hiknee. " Trust me to pull it off, old man--
^^^^y:Ce^ "   approvnes. We couldn't press it against
aB  _ .^ ^ 4-»a  ~i s7;,.^*.aC  .'   s -*



<pb n="90"/>
;90 1):--       FAR TO SEEK
-" "o-we couldn't."  There was a new gravity-
Roy's tone. "As 'I said, she probably knows all
it. That's her way. She understandeth one's thom
long before." The last in a lower tone-his eyes dwel
on her portrait above the mantelpiece: the one in 
studio window-seat.
And Broome thought: "With all his brains,
man's hardly astir in him yet; and the boy's still'
love with her. This notion may be an unconsc
outlet. A healthy one-if Nevil can be got to see'
that way."
After a perceptible pause, he said quietly: " em
ber, Roy, just because she's unique, she can't be ta
as representative. She naturally stands for India-
your eyes. But no country can produce beings of
quality by the score--"
"I suppose not." Roy reluctantly shifted his g
"But she does represent what's best in the Indian sp'
the spirit that people over here might take more 
to understand."
"And you are peculiarly well fitted to assist then
admit-if Father's willing to bear the cost of your 
It's a compact between us. The snare of your
dinner shall not have been laid in vain!" 
They sat on together for more than an hour. 
Broome departed, leaving Roy to dream-in a 
mist of tobacco smoke-the opal-tinted ego - ce
dreams of one-and-twenty. 
And to-night one dream eclipsed them all. 
For years the germ of it had lived in him like- a 
in darkness-growing with him as he grew. All U  o
and impressions that struck deep had served to 
it: that early championship of his mother; her 
of Rajputana; his friendship with Desmond afnd
and, not least, his father's RamayAna pictures- in
long gallery at home, that had seized his imaS
in very early days, when -their appeal was simplEl
his innatea sense of colour, and the reiterate w
and beauty of his mother's face in those 
scenes from the story of Sita-India's crown of woi
hood... ..
Then there was the vivid memory of a. room b



<pb n="91"/>
THE VISIONARY GLEAM                9t
grandfather's house; the stately old man, with his
deep voice, speaking words that he only came to undet-
stand years after; and the look in his mother's eyes,
as she clapped her hands without sound, in the young
fashion he loved ...
And Chandranath-another glimpse of India; the
ugly side . . . And stories from Tod's ' ajasthan '-
that grim and stirring panorama of romance and chivalry,
of cruelty and cunning; orgies of slaughter and miracles
of high-hearted devotion. ...
Barbaric; utterly foreign to life, as he had lived it,
those tales of ancient India most strangely awakened
in him a vague, thrilling sense of familiarity . . . He
knew . . . ! Most clearly he knew the spirit that fired
them all, when Akbar's legions broke, wave on wave,
against the mighty rock-fortress of Chitor-far-famed
capital of Mewar, thrice sacked by Islam and deserted
by her royal house; so that only the ghost of her glory
remains-a protest, a challenge, an inspiration ...
Sometimes he dreamed it all, with amazing vividness.
And in the dreams there was always the feeling that he
knew . . . It was a very queer, very exciting sensation.
He had spoken of it to no one but his mother and Tara ;
except once at Marlborough, when he had been moved
to try whether Lance would understand.
Priceless old Desmond ! It had been killing to watch
his face-interested, sceptical4 faintly alarmed, when aI
discovered that it was not an elaborate attempt to ptdl
his leg. By way of reassuring him, Roy had confessed
it was a family faling. Whe things went wrong his
< amother nearly always knew: a4  sometimes she came
i him, in dreams that were not exactly dreams. What
-h-arm.?              .     -
-: .:esimond, puzzled and sceptical, was not prepared
:   lasard an opinion. If Roy was made that way, of
-qw A   -t couldn't help it. And Roy, half indignant,
. A~;~-  d he wouldn't for worlds be made any other
i ~ /."  t, by some freak of memry, it all came back
+i&.: _  thrlough the dream-ind  .'haze of tobacco
"X.-1     -It:And there, on .his wrii le, stood a full-
i,'~   ..f'otogaph of Lance in Pf   cavary uniform.
_ 8ii* the *~Js-To Bdord er            himself iw '



<pb n="92"/>
D^ .    l/ AFAIS- SOE' BEK
hw-own splendid fashion, ha was clearly in his ele
lahed to his father's old regiment, with Paul:-l
/  second-in-command; proud of his strapping Sikhs S
Pathans; watched over, revered and implicitly oe
by the sons of men who had served with his fath
men for whom the mere name Desmond was a talis
For that is India's way.
And here was he, Roy, still at his old trick of s
bling poems and dreaming dreams.   For a flee
moment, Desmond was out of the picture; but w
time was ripe he would be in it again. The link bet
them was indestructible-elemental. Poet and Warr
the eternal complements. In the Rig Veda both 
one; both Agni Kula-'born of fire'; no fulness
life for the one without the other.
The -years dominated by Desmond had been supr
They had left school together, when Roy was sevent
and, at the time, their parting had seemed like the en
everything. Yet, very soon after, he had found hi'
in the thick of fresh delights-a wander-year in I
Greece, the Mediterranean, with the parents 
ristine-- 
And now, here he was, nearing the end of the Oxs
interlude-dominated by Dyan and India; and,.
least, by Oxford herself, who counts her lovers by;
million; holds them for the space of three or
years and sets her impress for life on their minds 
hearts. For all his dreamings and scribblings, her.
played hard and worked hard. In the course of re
for Greafs, he had imbibed large draughts of
classics; had browsed widely on later literature, 
'   and West; won the Newcastle, and filled a ve
bound volume-his mother's gift-with verse-s
sketches in prose, some of which had appear
the more exclutve weeklies, He had also piekc
Hindustani from Dyan, and looked forward to t
Sanskrit. In the Schools, he had taken a 
Mods; and, with reasonable luck, hoped for s-:
in the Finals. Once again, parting would be  w
but India glowed like a planet on the horizon;
fully intended to make that interlude the 1
them all. .     
1 Ancient Hindu ScriDtures.  e . . B.



<pb n="93"/>
THE VISIONARY GLEAM                9 *
What novels he would write! Not modern imprs-
sionist stuff; not mean streets and the photographic
touch. No-his adventuring soul, with its tinge of
Eastern mysticism, craved colour and warmth and
light;-not the mere trappings of romance, but the
essence of it that imparts a deeper sense of the signifi-
cance and mystery of life; that probes to the main-
springs of personality, the veiled yet vital world of
spiritual adventure . o . Pain and conflict; powers of
evil, of doubt and indecision :-no evading these. But in
any imaginative work he essayed, beauty must be the
prevailing element-if only as a star in darkness. And
nowadays Beauty had become almost suspect. Clever-
ness, cynicism, sex and sensation-all had their votaries
and their vogue. Mere Beauty, like Cinderella, was left
sitting among the ashes of the past; and Roy-prince.
or no-was her devout lover.
To the son of Nevil and Lilamani, her clear call could
never seem either a puritanical snare of the flesh or a
delusion of the senses; but rather, a grace of the spirit,
the joy of things seen detached from self-interest: the
visible proof that love, not power, is the last word of i
Creation.  Happily for him, its outward form  and  *
inward essence had been his daily bread ever since he
had first consciously looked upon his mother's face,'
consciously delighted in his father's pictures. They
lived' it, those two: and the life lived transcends
argument.
At this uplifted moment-whatever might qome later
-he blessed them for his double heritage  for the
perfect accord between them that inspired his hope of
ultinate harmony between England and India, in spite
of baiers and complexities and fomenters of discord;
a hlamony that could never arrive by veiled condescen-
-on out of servile imitation.  Intimacy with Dyan
:| his mother had made that quite clear. Each must
oistly will to understand the other; each holding
fi-t:the essence of individuality, while respecting in the
-:eiie precisely those baffling qualities that strengthen
;-.'n:nion and make it vital to the welfare of both.
dyivLy he pictured them as man and woman;         s
^^.'    ^al lines the analogy seemed to hold good,
Hi~S(k~il    'ai  n flhian'Br thatl anlnOi.ria A.ra nft,n.n lI..f.n.ntivp.



<pb n="94"/>
94                FAR   TO SEEK
things; peculiarly so, in this case, since India is ma
not one. Yet there lurked a germ of truth in his see
idea: and he was at the age when ideas and tremen
impulses stir in the blood like sap in spring-time;
age to be a reformer, a fanatic or a sensualist.
Too often, alas, before the years bring power of adj
ment, the live spark of enthusiasm is extinct. ...
To-night it burned in Roy with a steady flame.
only he could enthuse his father-!
He supposed he would go in any case: but he la
the rebel instinct of moder   youth. He wanted 
share, to impart his hidden treasure; not to argue
bloom off it. And his father seemed tacitly to discour
rhapsodies over Indian literature and art. You could
say he was not keen; only the least little bit unrespon
to outbursts of keenness in his son; so that Roy n
felt quite at ease on the subject. If only he could w
into the room now, while Roy's brain was -seething  -
it all, high on the upward curve of a wave. . . .
_'.'!f



<pb n="95"/>
'* 95                                        ; ,::'95
CHAPTER IV.
"You could humble at your feet the proudest heads in the world.
But it is your loved ones . . . whom you choose to worship.
Therefore I worship you."
-RABINDRANATH TAGORE.
ROY, after due consideration, decided that he would
speak first to his father-the one doubtful element in
the home circle. But habit and.the obsession of the
moment proved too strong, when his mother came to
'tuck him up,' as she had never failed to do since
nursery days.
Seated on the edge of his bed, in the shaded light, she
looked like some rare, pale moth in her moon-coloured
sari flecked and bordered with gold; amber earrings
and a rope of amber beads-his own gift; first fruits
of poetic earnings. The years between had ripened and
embellished her; rounded a little the oval of her cheek;
lent an added dignity to her grace of bearing and
enriched her wisdom of the heart.
It was as he supposed. She had understood his
thoughts long before. He flung out his hand-a fine,
nervous hand-and laid it on her knee.
"You're a miracle. I believe you know all about it."
"I believe-I do," she answered, letting her own
hand rest on his; moving her fingers, now and then,
in the ghost of a caress:-an endearing way she had.
"You are wishing-to go out there  "
"Yes. I simply must. You understand t "
She inclined her head and, for a moment, veiled her
3yes.  "I am   proud.   But you cannot understand
bow  difficult . . . for us ... letting you go.  And
Dad .. ."
P h*aused.
- :jYc. think he'll hate it-want to keep me here i "



<pb n="96"/>
96               FA     TI'O SEEK 5-'
"My darling-'hate' is too strong. He cares
much for all that makes friendship between Engl
and India. But-is it wonder if he cares more for
own son t You will speak to him soon I "
"To-morrow. Unless-a word or two, first, frog
you --
"No, not that! " She smiled at his old boyish faith in
her. " Better to keep me outside. You see-I am Indiag
So I'am already too much in it that way." 
"You are in it up to the hilt! " he declared witbi
sudden fervour: and-his tongue unloosed-he poured!
out to 'er a measure of his pent-up feeling; how they i
had inspife  m-she and his father; how he naturallyi
hoped they wotd back him up; and a good deal more
that was for herfrivate ear alone ...
Her immense' caacity for listening, her eloquent:"
silence and gentle 'ashes of raillery, her occasional
caress-all were balm to hire in his electrical mod.i
Were ever two beings quite so perfectly in tune--- 
*Could he possibly leave her? Could he face the final:-
wrench ? 
When at last she stooped to kiss him, the faint clear:
whiff of sandalwood waked a hundred memories; and::
he held her dose a long 4tne, her cheek against his hair.
"Bad boy! Let mego," she pleaded; and, with-,
phenomenal obedience, he unclasped his hands. 
"See if you can go now ! "
It was his old childish game. The moment she stirred,
his hands were locked again.
"Son of my heart-I must! "
"One more kiss then-for luck !"
So she kissed him, for luck, and left him to his
midnight browsings. ...
Next morning she sat among her - cushions in the
studio, ostensibly reading a long letter from her father.
Actually, her mind was intent on Nevil, who stood at
his easel absorbed in fragmentary studies for a new
picture-flying draperies; a man's face cleverly foref
shortened.
Though nearing fifty, he looked more like fivea.
thirty; his face singularly free of lines; his fair  |
anrrnal- rhainhr4r thn i fnth l n+itiain of na- r'c   har lit Sthioafl2 



<pb n="97"/>
:^ . - -THE VI IONARY GLEAM                 97    .
F
-BeJr nially young; and dearer than ever-if that could
Inas the years mellowed and deepened the love on
tbch they had boldly staked everything that counted
west for them both. Yet, for all her skill in divination,
Sae could not tell precisely how  he would take the
things Roy had to say; nor whether Roy himself would
say them in just the right way. With Nevil, so much
sepended on that.
Till this morning, she had scarcely realised how un-
obtrusively she had been, as it were, their connecting
ink in all difficult or delicate matters, where their natures
were not quite in tune. But now, Roy being a man,
they must come to terms in their own fashion. ...
At the first far-off sound of his step on the stairs, she
rose and came over to the easel, and stood there a
few moments-fascinated always by the swift sure
strokes.
" Good-eh ? " he askei, smiling into her serious eyes.
She nodded. " Quite evident-you are in the mood ! "
Her fingers lightly caressed the back of his hand. "If 
will come back later. Such a tray of vases waiting for
me in the drawing-room !"
As Boy entered, she passed him and they exchanged
a smile. Her eyes, mutely b!ging him, besought .him
not to let his eager tongue run away with itself. Then
she went out, leaving them together-the two who were
her world.
Down in the drawing-room, roses and sweet-peas, cut
by Christine-her fairy daughter-lay ready to hand.
Between them they filled the lofty room with fragrance
and harmonies of delicate colour. Then Christine flew
to her beloved piano; and Lilamani wandered away to
her no less beloved rose-garden. Body and mind were
restless. She could settle to nothing till she knew what
had passed between Nevil and Roy. His boyish confi-
dences and adorations of the night before had filled
her cup to overflowing. She felt glad and proud that-
her first-born should have set his heart on the high
project of trying to promote deeper sympathy between
his father's great country and her own people, in this
time of'dangerous antagonism and unrest..
,. B-   beneath her pride and gladness, stirred a fear lest
.h'- nolaha ahl-o.r l .A +.iA in nla Arvln ahormlA ha {i4intrIl



<pb n="98"/>
98      -        FAB TO SiEAK 
to tilt the wrong way. For duty to his father's  B
was paramount. Too strong a leaning towa
--no matter for what high purpose-would s0l;
tilt the wrong way. She had seen the same fe_
in Nevil's heart also; and now, unerringly, shbd
the cause of that hidden trouble which baffled 
Nevil feared that-if Roy went to India-history
repeat itself. She admitted the danger was real;
she knew his fear implied no reflection on herself or
country. Best of all, she knew that-because of
chivalrous loyalty that had never failed her-he
not speak of it, even to his son.
Clearly then, if Roy insisted on going to India,
if a word of warning must be spoken to ease Ne
mind, only one person in the world could speak
herself. For all her sensitive shrinkingjhe could
at this critical turning-point, stand ouile. She
"in it"-as Roy dramatically assured her-up tot
hilt.. ..
Time passed-and he did not come. Troubed
wandered back towards the. house; caught sighft iof
lonely and abstracted, pacing the lawn: saw h.im
near the great twin beeches-that embowered i:.
mock, chairs and rugs-and disappear inside.
knew her moment had come...                 '
She found him prone in the hammock: n      i
*- smoking: staring up into the cool green dome, 
with graceful convolutions of trunk and brifehes;.;i
lightly-clenched hand hung over the ed5[ A;t~
and abstraction alike suggested a listless de  ti
sharply caught at her heart.
He started at sight of her. "Blessed little i
no hiding from you ! "                    ' 
He flung out his left hand. She took it and-
- against her cheek: a form of caress all her own.  /i
"Were you wishing to hide ? I was waiting am.
roses, to show you the new sweet-peas." 
".nd I never came. Proper beast I am ! And,
ing here-" He swung hig long legs over the 
stood up, tall and straight-taller than Nevi
down at her. "I wasn't exactly hiding. I was
-a little bit. But now you've found me, yot
/ macaT)e! "                                A :



<pb n="99"/>
THE VSIONABRY GLEAM                 99
Pressing down the edge of the hammock, he half lifted
her into it and settled her among the cushions, deftly 
tucking in her silks and muslins.
"Comfy.? " he asked, surveying her, with Nevil's
own smile in his eyes.
"Comfy," she sighed, wishing discreet warnings at
the bottom of the sea. Just to be foolish with him-the
bliss of it! To chime in with his moods, his enthusiasms,
his nonsense-she asked nothing better of life, when he
came home. "Very clever, Sonling. But no,"-she
lifted a finger-" that won't do. You are twenty-one.
Too big for the small name now. So far away up there! "
"If I shot up as high as a lamp-post, my heart would
still be down there-at your feet."
He said it lightly-that was the Englishman. B
said it-that was the Rajput. And she knew not
she loved the best. Strange to love two such opposites
with equal fervour.
She blew him a kiss from her finger-tips. " Very well.
We will not be unkind to the small name and throw
him on the rubbish-heap. But now Lit, please-Sonling.
You have been talking-you and Dad ? Not any deci-
sion ? Is he not wishing you should-work for India " 
" Mummy, I don't know." He secured a chair and. sA
down facing her. " He insists that I'm officially free tb 0
kick over the traces, that he's not the kind of father who
'thunders veto from the family hearthrug !'"
Lilhmani smiled very tenderly at that so characteristic A"'
touch; but she said nothing. And Roy went on: "All
the same, I gathered that he's distinctly not keen on
my going out there. So-what the devil am I to do ?
He rubbed it in that I'm full young, and no hurry-but
I feel there's something else at the back of his mind."
He paused-and she could hesitate no longer.
"Yes, Roy-there is something else--"
"Then why can't he speak out ? "
"Not to be so impatient," she rebuked him gently.
It is because he so beautifully remains--lover, he
eaaot put in words-any thought that mijgt give- "
flung out an appealing hand. " Oh, RBoy-can you
_Jl~guess the trouble?    He is afraid-for your' :
:tt_.:y marriage !  It was clear he did not yet grsp



<pb n="100"/>
10               FE A  TO SEEK
the truth. " eally, :Mummy, that's a trifle pre
I'm not even thinking of marriage."
"No, Stupid One ! But out there you might co
think of it! No man can tell when Kama, godling of 
arrows, will throw magic dust in his eyes. You 
meet other cousins-like Artna, and there would o
trouble, because "-she faced him steadily and he 
the veiled blush creep into her cheeks-" that kindB
marriage-for you-must not be."
Now he understood; and, for all her high resol.
she thrilled at the swift flash of anger in his eyes. :'
" Who says-it must not be ? " he demanded witU
touch of heat. "Aunt Jane-confound her! Whew
do marry, it will be to please myself-not her ! "
Oh, hush, Roy-and listen ! You run away too
It is not Aunt Jane-it is I who am saying must n
because I know-the difficult thought in Dad's he
And I know it is right- "
"Why is it right? "  He was up in arms ag
-Obstinate-but how lovable !-" Why mayn't I have 
same luck as he had-if it comes my way t I've ne
met a girl or woman that could hold a candle to you:
all-round loveliness. And it's the East that gives ya
inside and out-a quality, a bloom-unseizable
moonlight-" '
'But, my darling! You make me blush!" 
drew her sari across her face, hiding, under a veil of 
ness, her joy at his outspoken praise.        ;
"Well, you made me say it. And I'm not sentim
ising. I'm telling a home truth !"
*His vehemence was guarantee of that. Very ge
he drew back the sari and looked deep into her eyes. :-
"Why should we only tell the ugly ones, like 
Jane ? Anyway, I've told you my truest one now
I'm not ashamed of it."
"No need. It is a jewel I will treasure in my he
She dropped the veil of lightness, giving him sinc 
for sincerity as he deserved. "But-Ancient one, tb
you seen so many girls and women in your long lif
"I've seen a pretty good mixture of all sorts-O
;- Lion, and round here," he insisted unabashed. "c X
've had my wits about me. Of course they're 
them jolly and straight. Good fellows in fact; 



<pb n="101"/>
I-      1THE VISIONARY GLEAM               WI
Lfil slang; playing our games. No harm, of course.
$ut it kills the charm of contrast-the supreme charm.
.They understand that in India better than we do
here."
The truth of that last Lilamani could not deny. Too
elearly she saw in the violent upheaval of Western
womanhood the hidden germs of tragedy, for women
themselves, for the race.
"You are right, Roy," sh' said, smiling into his
serious face. "From our-from Hindu point of view,
:greatest richness of life come from greatest possible
difference between men and women. And most of all it
is so in Rajputana. But over here .. ." She sighed, a
small shivering sigh. The puzzle and pain of it went
too deep with her. "All this screaming and snatching
and-scratching for wrong kind of things hurts my heart;
because-I am woman and they are women-desecrating
that in us which is a symbol of God. Nature made women
for ministering to Life and Love. Are they not believing,
or not caring, that by struggling to imitate man (while
saying with their lips how they despise him !) they are
losing their own secret, beautiful differences, so import-
ant for happiness-fob the race. But marriage in the
West seems more for convenience of lovers than for
the race--
"Yet your son, though he is of the West-must not
consider his own inclination or convenience  "
"My son," she interposed, gently inflexible, " because 
he is also of the East, must consider this matter of the
tace; must try and think it with his father's min4,"
"All the same-making such a point of it seems like
an insult-to you-"
"No, Rty. Not to say that--" The flash in her eyes,
thaE was almost anger, startled and impressed him more
than any spoken word. "No thought that ever came
in your father's mind could be-like insult to me. Oh,
my dear, have you not sense to know that for an old
Englsh family like his, with roots down deep in English
soil and historyit is not good that mixture of race should
-te twice oveit in two generations. To you-our kind
[*v:~i / appears a simple affair. You see only how
!   we ar?-e now, in love and understanding. You
i"l    AM i^tbn e all the difficulties that went befoee.



<pb n="102"/>
102              FAR TO SEEK               ?:
We know them-and we are proud, because they
like dust under our feet. Only to you-Dil
could tell . . . a little, if you wish-for helping 
understand."
"Please tell," he said, and his hand closed on h
So, leaning back among her cushions-speakingS
simply in the low voice that was music to his ear
told ..
The telling-fragmentary, yet vivid-lasted lessi
half an hour. But in that half-hour Roy gleaned an
of memory that the years would not dim. The;
words would remain . .
For Lilamani-wandering backward in fancy t
the Garden of Remembrance-revealed more tha
realised of the man she loved and of her own pass
spirit, compact of fire and dew, the sublimated e
of the Eastern woman at her best.
Yet in spite of that revealing-or rather be
it-rebellion stirred afresh. And, as if divinin
thoughts, she impulsively raised her hand. "Now,,
you must promise. Only so, I can speak to Dad,
rest his mind." 
Seizing her hand, he kissed it fervently.  :
"Darling-after all that, a mere promise wouldi
fatuous superfluity. If you say 'No Indian wife,' ;
enough for me. I suppose  must rest content w
high privilege of possessing'an Indian mother."
Her radiant surprise was a beautiful thig tW
Leaning forward, she took his head in her handsi
*kissed him between his eyebrows where the caste
should be.
"Must it be October-so soon t " she asked. 
He told her of Dyan, and she sighed. " Poor
T ronder ? It is so difficult-even with the best 
tlaf  nixing of English education and Indian lii
o.pe it will make no harm for those two--"  ,|
Then they started, almost like lovers; for the
: ag branches rustled and Tara stood before t
very vision of June; in her straight frock of De
blue; one shell-pink rose in her hat and its conE
in her waist-belt. Canvas shoes and tennis-
betraye4 her fell design on Roy. 



<pb n="103"/>
THE VISIONARY GLEAM               103
-  m  I despritly superfluous ? " she queried, smiling
o  one to the other.
"-Quite too despritly," Roy assured her with emphasis.
, She wrinkled her nose at him, so far as its delicate
t aquiline would permit.  "Speak for yourself, spoilt
<boy!"
- But she favoured him with her left hand, which he
retained, while she stooped over the hammock and
kissed Lilamani on both cheeks. Then she stood up
and gently disengaged her hand.
"Christine's to blame. She guessed you were here.
I came over in hopes of tennis. It's just perfect. Not
too hot."
"Still more perfect in here, lazing with Mummy,"
said graceless Roy.
"I disown you, I am ashamed! " Lilamani rebuked
him only half in jest. "No more lazing now. I have
done with you. Only you have to get me out of this."
They got her out, between them; fussed over her and
laughed at her; and then went off together for Roy's
racquet.
She stood in the silvery sunlight watching them till
they disappeared round the corner of the house, Not
surprising that Nevil said-" No hurry ! " If he would
only wait . .! He was still too young, too much in
love with India-with herself. Yet, had he already
begun inditing sonnets, eyen to the most acceptable
eyebrow, her perverse heart would doubtless have -
known the prick of jealousy-as in Desmond's day.
Instead she suddenly knew the first insidious prick
of middle age; felt dazed, for a mere moment, by the
careless radiance of their youth; to them an uncon-
sidered thing: but to those who feel it relentlessly
slipping through their fingers ...
Her small fine hands clenched in unconscious response
to her thought. She was nearing forty. In her own'land
she would be reckoned almost an old woman. But some
magic in the air and way of life in this cool green. England
seemed to keep age at bay: and there remained within 
a flame-like youth of the spirit-not so easy, even for
.te Arch-Thief to steal away....
*w: 



<pb n="104"/>
"   104              "^4
CHAPTER V.
"The bow saith to the arrow, ' Thy freedom is mine.' -
-RABINDRANATH TAGO
AND while lilamani reasoned with the son-whose 
fold nature they had themselves bestowed and ins
-Nevil was pacing his shrine of all the harmo
heart and brain disturbed, as they had not been
-years.                                         l
Out of the troubled waters of family friction A
delicate adjustments, this adventurous pair had 
into a haven of peace and mutual understanding.
now behold, fresh portent of trouble arising from 
dual strain in Roy-the focal point of their life 
love.
Turning in his stride, his eye encountered a 
and shoulders portrait of his father, Sir George Sina
an honesty bluff, unimaginative face: yet sudd
arrestingly, it commanded his attention. Checking
walk, he stood regarding it: and his heart went o
the kindly old man in a quite unusual wave of 
pathetic understanding. He saw himself-the " d
unsatisfactory son," Bohemian and dilettante,
at odds with the Sinclair tradition-now standing, 3
or less, in that father's shoes; his heart centred on
old place and on the boy for whom he held it in t
and the irony of it twisted his lips into a rueful 
By his own over-concentration on Roy, and his 
dread of the Indian obsession, he could gauge wha
own father must have suffered in an aggravated-'.
blind as he-was to any point of view save ht"
And there was Roy-like himself in the- twen
how much more purposeful !-drawn irresistibly
:--lure of the horizon; a lure bristling with dan



<pb n="105"/>
THE VISIONARY GLEAM               105
Anore insidious because they sprang from the blood in
Js veins.
V  Yet a word of warning, spoken at the wrong moment,
-Ea the wrong tone, might be disastrously misunderstood;
I-. the distracting sense of being purely responsible for
his own trouble, stung him to renewed irritation. All
eapacity for work had been dispelled by that vexatiously
engaging son of his, with his heart in India and his
head among the stars ...
Weary of pacing, he took out his pipe and sat down
in the window-seat to fill it. He was interrupted by the
sound of an unmistakable footstep; and the response
of his whole being justified to admiration Lilamani's
assurance that his hidden trouble implied no lightest
reflection on herself. Lilamani and irritation simply
could not co-exist within him; and he was on his feet
when she opened the door.
She did not come forward at once. Pushing it shut
with both hands, she stood so--a hovering question in
her eyes. It recalled, with a tender pang9 the earlier
days of worshipful aloofness, when only by special
invitation would she intimately approach her lord.
That she might guess his thought he held out his arms.
"Come along-English wife ! "
It had been their private password. But her small
teeth imprisoned her lip.
"No-King of me-Indian wife: making' too much
trouble again! "
" Lilamani! How dare you ! Come here."
His attempt at sternness took effect.. In one swift
rush-sari blown backward-she came: and he, smitten
with self-reproach, folded her close; while she clung,
to him in mute passionate response.           A 
"Beloved," she whispered. " Not to worry any more
in your secret heart. I told-he understands."
"Roy---     My darling ! But what--   I " His in-
coherence was a shameless admission of relief. "You
couldnt--you haven't told him-   "
" Nevil, I have told him all. I saw lately this trouble
in your thoughts: and to-day it came in my mind that
o-^ : I .eould speak-could give command that-one
:''.'evaeeafE Ai mustd. Loe;. be."
.$*i<' AatvIike- tvaa  ta~nd -n abnnroA 9a". amanll a4-lh -



<pb n="106"/>
106              FAR TO SEEK                !:
" Wasn't the boy angry ? "
"Only at first-on account of me. He is-so
darling, so worshipping-his foolish little Mother."
"A weakness he shares with his father," Nevil as
her: and in that whispered confession she had.'
reward. For after twenty-three years of marriagey
note of loverly extravagance is as rare as the not
the cuckoo in July.
"Sit, little woman."  He drew her down to
window-seat, keeping an arm round her. "The
it is to feel I can talk it all over with you freely. W
the dickens would we be, Roy and I, without our i
preter ]  And she does it all unbeknownst; l
Brownie. I have been worrying lately. The boy's 
gone on his-blessed idea. No reasoning with him;
the moder father doesn't venture to command !
as much as his place is worth ! Yet we see the h
dangers clearer than he can. Wouldn't it be wis
apply the curb discreetly before he slips off in
atmosphere where all the influences will tug one wa-
It was the sane masculine wisdom   of the
But hers-that was feminine and of the East-
deeper.
"Perhaps it is mother-weakness," she said, l
against him and looking away at a purple cloud that 
low over the moor. "But it seems to me, by putt
the curb, you keep only his body from those inf
They would tug all the stronger in his soul. Not h
and alive with joy of action, but cramped up and 
like your legs when there is no room to stretch
Then there would come impatience, turning his 
t'-ore to India, more away from you. Father had
'tid of thwarting when young-so I know. Dear
ai* too foolish" "
"You are my Wisest of Wise.-Is there more ? ":
"Yes. It is this. Perhaps, through being yo
'eager, he will make mistakes; wander too far-.
even if he should wander to farthest end, all 
will not tug one way. He will carry in his heart. 
of you and the star of me. These will shine
f he knows how we longed-for ourselves-to kP
here; yet, for himself, we let him go. I have rem
-..-.* ' *n-taS. n a .r ni n 1-   n+! r -n-P oTr   aln n-lrrAn  -n4 A  d



<pb n="107"/>
THE VISIONARY GLEAM               107
tike by leaving, To hold by letting go.' That is true
uth for many things. But for parents truest of all."
Eigh counsel indeed! Good to hear; hard to act
Nevil Sinclair-knowing they would act upon
out an involuntary sigh and tightened his hold
of   gentle, adoring woman, whose spirit towered so
far above his own.
" Lilmani-you've won," he said, after a perceptible
pause. " You deserve to win-and Roy will bless you.
It's the high privilege of Mothers, I suppose, to conjure
the moon out of heaven for their sons."
"Sometimes, by doing so, they nearly break their
hearts," she answered very low.
He stooped and kissed her. " Keep yours intact-
for me. I shall need it." Her fingers closed convulsively
on his-" England will seem sort of empty-without
Roy. Is he dead keen on going this autumn ? "
"Yes-I am afraid. A little because of young im-
patience. A little because he is troubled over Dyan;
and he has much influence. There are so many now in
India dragged two ways."
Nevil sighed again.. "Bless the boy ! It's an undeni- 
able risk. And what the family will say to our Mid-
summer madness, God knows! Jane can be trusted to
make the deuce of a row. And we can't even smooth  "
matters by telling her of our private precaution -"
"No-not one little word."
Lilfmani sat upright, a gleam of primitive hate in her
eyes.
Nevil smiled, in spite of secret dismay. "You im-
placable little sinner ! Can't you ever forgive her like a
Christian ? "
"No-not ever." The tense quiet of her t6ne carrd
conviction. " Not only far-off things, J can never forget
-nearly killing me and-and Roy. But because she is
always stabbing at me with sharp words and ugly
thoughts. She cannot ever forgive that I am here-that
I make you happy, which she could not believe. She
is angry to be put in the wrong by mere Hindu wife-"
She paused in her vehement rush of speech: saw the
look in Nevil's face that recalled an, earlier day; and
; ager vanished like a light blown out. " King of me-
;- ita-csoy. Only-it is true. And she is Christian born.



<pb n="108"/>
108              FARi TO SEEK             ?-
But I-down in my deepest places I am still-Rajp
Just the same as after twenty-three years of E
wife, I am still in my heart-like the ' Queen who l
erect!'" "
On the word she rose and confronted him, s
into his troubled eyes; grace of girlhood and 
of womanhood adorably mingled in her pose.
"Who was she " Nevil asked, willingly lured
thoughts of Jane.
"Careless one! Have you forgotten the story
my Wonder-Woman-how a King, loving his
with all his soul, bowed himself in ecstasy, and 'took
dust off her feet' in presence of other wives who,
jealousy, cried: 'Shameless one, lift up the hand
the King to your head.' But the Queen stood e
fi~g gladly. 'Not so: for both feet and head'
mtl:zrd's. Can I have aught that is mine ? ' "
Tbt swiftness of transition, the laughing ten
of her eyes so moved him-and so potent in her w&
magical essence of womanhood-that he, Sir X
Sinclair, Baronet, of Bramleigh Beeches, came nea
taking the dust off her feet in very deed.
'      , ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~"i:
;,w



<pb n="109"/>
109
CHAPTER VI.
"Qui n'accepte pas le regret, n'accepte pas la vie."
NErVIr' fears were justified to the full. Lady Roseoe
was one of those exasperating people of whom one can
predict, almost to a word, a look, what their attitude
will be on any given occasion. So N.evil, who shirked a
"scene "-above all when conducted by Jane-put off
telling her the unwelcome news as long as he dared,
without running the dire risk of its reaching her "round
the corner." 
Meantime he was fortified and cheered by a letter
from Cuthbert Broome-a shrewd, practical letter
amounting to a sober confession of faith in Roy the
embryo writer, as in Roy the budding man.
"I don't minimise the risk," he concluded, with his
accustomed frankness (no relation to the engaging
candour that dances a war-dance on other peoplie
toes), "but, on broad lines, I hereby record my con-
viction that the son of you two and the grandson of fir
Lakshman Singh can be trusted to go far-to kee  ls
head as well as his feet, even in slippery places.   -is
eager for knowledge, for work along his own lines. If
you dam up this strong current, it may find other out-
lets, possibly less desirable. I came on a jewel the other
day. As it's distinctly applicable, I pass it on.
"'The sole wisdom for man or boy who is haunted
with the hovering of unseen wings, with the scent of
unseen roses, and the subtle enticement of melodies
unheard, is work. If he follow any of these, they vanish.
If he work, they will come unsought . . .'
"'Well, when Roy goes out, I undertake to provide
him with work that will keep his brain alert and his pen
busy. That's my proposed contribution to his start



<pb n="110"/>
110         ; -FAR TO SEEK            -
in life; and-though I say it !-not to be des
Tell him I'll bear down upon the Beeches the 
available week-end, and talk both your heads off.i
Yours ever, C. B."
"After that," was Nevil's heroic conclusion, "J
can say what she damn well pleases."
He broke the news to her forthwith-by post;
usual expedient of those who shirk "scenes."
furthermore took the precaution to add that the mat
was finally settled.
She replied next morning-by wire. "Cannot und
stand. Coming down at once."
And, in record time, on the wings of her new trave
ear-she came.
-As head of the Sinclair clan-in years and worl
wisdom at least-she could do no less. From her p
of view, it was Nevil's clear duty to discourage
Indian strain in the boy, as far as that sentimen
headstrong wife of his would permit. But Nevil's
of duty needed constant galvanising, lest it die of in
ition. It was her sacred mission in life to galvanise
especially in the matter of Roy; and no one should e
say she shirked a disagreeable obligation. It may safe
be added that no one ever did !
Nevil-who would have given a good deal to be e
where-awaited her in the library: and at the
shook of their encountering glances, he stiffened
through. He was apt to be restive under advice, a
rebellious under dictation; facts none knew better t
Jaa-e, who throve on advice and dictation-given, 
received! She still affected the neat hard coat 
skirt and the neat hard summer hat that had so
tressed the awakening beauty-sense of nine-year
Ray: only, in place of the fierce wing there uprose 
majesty a severely wired bow. Jane was so unvar
outside and in; a worse failing, almost, in the eyes:.
this hopelessly artistic household, than her talent 
pouncing, or advising or making up other peo
minds.
But to-day, as she glanced round the familiar ro
her sigh-half anger, half bitterness of heart.:r
genuine. She did care intensely, in her own wa
Fte brother whom she hectored without mercy.



<pb n="111"/>
THE VISIONARY GLEAM               111
too cared-in his own way-more than he chose to
reveal. But their love was a dumb thing, rooted in
ancestral mysteries. Their surface clash of temperament
was more loquacious.
"I suppose we're fairly safe from interruption?"
she asked, with ominous emphasis; and Nevil gravely
indicated the largest leather chair.
"I believe the others are out," he said, half sitting
on the edge of the writing-table and proceeding to light
a cigarette. "But, upon my soul, I don't know why
you put yourself out to come down all this way when I
told you plainly everything was fixed up."
"You thought I'd swallow that-and keep my mouth
shut? " she retorted, bristling visibly. "I'm no fool,
Nevil, if you are. I told you how it would be, when you
went out in '99. You wouldn't listen then. Perhaps
you'll at least have the sense to listen now ? "
Nevil shrugged. "As you've come all this way for
the satisfaction of airing your views-I've not much
choice in the matter."
And the latitude, thus casually given, she took in full
measure. For twenty minutes, by the clock, she aired her
views in a stream of vigorous colloquial English, lapsing
into ready-made phrases of melodrama, common to the
normally inexpressive, in moments of excitement. ...
To the familiar tuning-up process, Nevil listened
unmoved. But his anger rose with her rising eloquence:
-the unwilling anger of a cool man, more formidable
than mere temper.
Such fiAe distinctions, however, were unknown to
Jane. If tou were' in a temper, you were in a temper.
That was flat. And she rather wanted to rouse Nevil's.
Heated opposition would stiffen her own. ...
"India of all countries in the world ! " she culminated
-a desperate note invading her wrath. "The one
place, where he should not be allowed to sow his wild
oats-if the moder a     .pemic young man has enough
red bliod in his veins*for that sort of thing. And it's
your obvious duty tobe quite frank with him on the
ebject. If you had an ounce of common-sense in your
ale-iup,: you'd see it for yourself. But I always say
de ilever people are the biggest fools. And Roy's in
pije boat-being your son. No ballast. All in the



<pb n="112"/>
112            : -FAR TO SEEK 
clouds.  That's the fruits of Lil's fancy edu
And you can't say I didn't warn you. What he
is discipline-a tight hand. Why not one of the 
vices ?  If he gets bitten with India-at his age,.-.
quite on the cards that he may go turning Hindu
even repeat your folly -"
She paused, simply for lack of breath-and b
suddenly alive to the set stillness of her brother's 
"My folly-as you are pleased to call it," he
with concentrated scorn, "has incidentally made
name famous, and cleared the old place of mor
For that reason alone, you might have the grace to re
from insulting my wife."
She flung up her head, like a horse at a touch of-:
curb.
"Oh, if it's an insult to speak the simple truthsi
quite out of it. I never could call spades agricul
instruments: and I can't start new habits at my 
of life. I don't deny you've made a good thing o
your pictures. But no one in their senses ooulzda
your marriage an act of wisdom."
Nevil winced visibly. "I married for the only::
fensible reason," he said, in a low controlled v
"And events have more than justified me."
"Possibly-so far as you're concerned. But you
get over the fact that-even if Roy marries the?
blood of England-his son may revert to type,.
Simons tells me-"
"Will you hold your tongue! " Nevil blazed o
a white fury. " I'll thank you not to discuss my
-or Roy's-with your damned Doctor. And the,
ject's barred between us-as you're very well awa
She blenched at the force and fire of his unex
onslaught, never dreaming how deeply her thrust
gone home.
"Goodness knows it's as painful for me as it ia
you-" 
"I didn't say it was painful. I said it was ba
"Well, you goad me into it, with your unspe
folly; too much under Lil's thumb to check Rloy,|t
for his own good. For heaven's sake, Nevil, pu
foot down firmly, for once, and reverse youri
decision."
S,~,



<pb n="113"/>
THE VISIONARY GLEAM               113
He gave her a long, direct look. " Sorry to disappoint,
fter all the trouble you've taken," he said in a level
one, "but I've already told you the matter's settled.
ly foot is down on that as firmly as even you could
rish."
" You mean it I" she gasped, too incredulous for
wrath.
"I mean it."
"Yet you see the danger ? "
"I see the danger."
The fact that he would not condescend to lie to her
ased a little her bitter sense of defeat.
She rose awkwardly-all of a piece.
"Then I have no more to say. I wash my hands
f you all. Until you come to your senses, I don't cross
his threshold again."
In spite of the threadbare phrases, genuine pain
ibrated in her tone.
"Don't rant, old thing. You know you'll never keep
b up," Nevil urged more gently than he had spoken yet.
But anger still dominated pain.
"When I say a thing, I mean it," she retorted stiffly,
'as you will find to your cost." Without troubling to
nswer, he lunged for the door handle; but she waved
dim aside. " All humbug-playing at politeness-when
rou've spurned my advice."
"As you please." He stood back for her to pass.
'Sorry it's upset you so. But we'll see you here again
-when you've got over it."
"The boy would have got over it in no time," she
lung back at him from the threshold. " Mark my words,
Lisaster will come of it. Then perhaps you'll admit I
pas right."
He felt no call to argue that point. She was gone . .
Lud she had carefully refrained from slamming the door.
;omehow that trifling act of restraint impressed him
it a sense of finality oddly lacking in her dramatic
sseteration.
H:-e stood a few moments staring at the polished
e witels.   Then he turned back and sat down
A:/eAhamir she had occupied; and all the inner
'csl^the last hour went suddenly, completely to



<pb n="114"/>
11 l             FAR TO SEEK               -
It was the penalty Of his artist nature, th
nervous reaction from strain; and with it camea:
ing back all the insidious doubts and anxieties thf
Lilamani's wisdom  had not entirely charmed-
He felt torn at the moment between anger wi
for causing all this pother; and anger with Jane
for all her lack of tenderness and tact, was 4d;
to a point. It was just Family Herald herotesi
"not crossing the threshold." At least-rather 
surprise-he found himself half hoping it was.-
and Lilamani could frankly detest her-and ite
end.  Nevil-in spite of unforgiveable interl
was liable to be tripped up by the fact that, aft
she was his sister; and her aggression was '
that, in her own queer fashion, she loved him.
the trouble was that the love of each for the
took precisely the form that other could least a
ciate or understand: no uncommon dilemma in
life. At all events, he had achieved his deela
of independence. And he had not failed to evo
"deuce of a row."
With a sigh of smothered exasperation, he I
forward and hid his face in his hands....
The door opened softly. He started and looke
It was Roy-in flannels and blazer, his dark hair 
ruffled: considered dispassionately (and Nevil 1
he so considered him) a singularly individual and
tive figure of youth.
:At the look in his father's face, he hesitated,
his brows in a way that recalled his mother.
"Anything wrong, Daddums ? I'm fearfully so
came for a book. Is'it "-still further hesitation--c
Jane "                                      ;
"Why ? Have you seen her t " Nevil asked sh
" Yes. Was it a meteoric visitation I As I ca
the path, she was getting into her car.-And she c
dead ! "  He seemed more amused than imp
Then the truth dawned on him. "Dad-have y
telling her ? Is she 'as frantic as a skit' "  -
Their favourite Hardy quotation moved :Net
smile.  "She's angry-naturally-because shBy 
consulted," he said (a happy idea). "Ad
dosn't understand."                '    .



<pb n="115"/>
THE VISIONARY GLEAM                @
'Course- she doesn't. Can she ever?" retorted
hpertinent youth. "She lacks the supreme faculty.
nmagination." Which was disrespectful, but un.
nswerable.
.Nevil had long ago recognised the futility of rebuke
i the matter of "Aunt Jane"; and it was a relief
) find the boy took it that way. So he smiled, merely
-or fancied he did. But Roy was quick-sighted; and
is first impression had dismayed him.
No hesitation now. He came forward and laid a hand
a his father's shoulder. "Dads, don't get worrying
rer me-out there," he said with shy tenderness that
as balm after the lacerating scene Nevil had just
assed through. "That'll be all right. Mother ex-
lained-beautifully."
But louder than Roy's comfortable assurance sounded
ithin him the parting threat of Jane: "Disaster will
)me of it. Then perhaps you'll admit I was right."
; shook the foundations of courage. He simply could
ot stand up to the conjunction of disaster-and Roy,
Tith an effort he freed himself of the insidious thing,
-and just then, to his immense surprise, Roy stooped
nd kissed the top of his head.
-" Confound Aunt Jane! She's been bludgeoning you.
nd you are worrying. You mustn't-I tell you. Bad
ir your work. Look here "-   a portentous pause.
Shall I chuck it-for the present, anyhow . "
The parental attitude of the modern child has its
nuching aspect. Nevil looked up to see if Boy were
laffng; and there smote him- the queer illusion (rarer
aw, but not.extinct) of looking into his own eyes.
Roy had spoken on impulse-a noble impulse. But
a patently meant what he said, this boy stigma-
sed by Jane as "all in the clouds," and needing a
tight hand." Here was one of those "whimsical and
erilous moments of daily life " that pass in a breath;
ght as thistledown, heavy with complex issues. To
'evil it seemed as if the gods, with ironical gesture,
anded him the wish of his heart, saying: "It is yours
ifyou are fool enough to take it." -Stress of thought
.varredii n him that he came to himself with a fear of
(i ng Irt the boy by ungracious silence.
1ltw e, in fact, had been so brief that Roy had



<pb n="116"/>
116             PAR TO SEEK                 '
only just become aware that his cherished dreamr'
actually trembling in the balance-when Nevil 
up anld faced him, flatly defying Jane and 01
irony.
"My dear old boy, you shall not chuck it," he@
with smiling decision. " I've never believed in the-
generation being a drag on the wheel. And now it'
turn, I must play up. What's life worth witho
spice of risk ? I took my own-a big one-fam
no-" 
He broke off-and Roy filled the gap. " You me
marrying Mother ? "
"Yes-just that," he admitted frankly. 
greatest bit of luck in my life. She shared the 
a bigger one for her. And I'm damned if we'll
you of yours. There's a hidden key somewhere:'
most of us have to find. Yours may be in India
knows?"
He spoke rapidly, as if anxious to convince
no less than the boy. And he had his reward. 
" Dad-you're simply stunning-you two," Roy.:
quietly, but with clear conviction. 
At that moment the purring of the gong vib
through the house, and he slipped a hand throu
father's arm. " That reminds me-I'm starving h
If they're still out, let's be bold, and propit
teapot on our own ! "
-Lady Roscoe was, after all, a benefactor in heI
depite. Her meteoric visitation had drawn the
eloser together than they had been since seho.
days. 



<pb n="117"/>
r-   :- '  '*       1U7
CHAPTER VII.
"Ce que nous quittons c'est une partie de nous mgme. II faut mourir
i une vie, pour entrer dans une autre."-ANATOLB FRaNCE.
AFTER all, human perversity decreed it should be Roy
imself who shrank most acutely from the wrench of
parting, when it loomed near enough to bring him down
from Pisgah heights to the dust of the actual.
Dy6n was overjoyed, of course, and untroubled by
lualms. Towards the end of July, he and Arina came
:or a brief-visit. His excuses for its brevity struck
Roy as a trifle 'thin'; but Dyan kept his secret and
paid Tara Despard the compliment of taking her answer
is final.
It was during his visit that Roy suffered the first
ncipient qualms; the first sharp contact with practical
letails :-date of sailing, details of outfit, the need for
,ngaging a passage betimes. As regards his destination,
natters were simplified by the fact that the new Resident
)f Jaipur, Colonel Vincent Leigh, C.S.I., D.S.O., very
fonsiderately happened to be the husband of Desmond's
lelightful sister Thea. The schoolboy link between
lance and   Roy   had   created  a  lasting  friendship
retween their respective families; and it was General
Sir Theo Desmond-now retired-who had invited Roy,
a the name of his 'Twin,' to       start with an un-
imited visit to the Leighs; the sort of casual elastic
risit that no one would dream of proposing outside
endia,-unless it were Ireland, of an earlier, happier
lay.  The prospect was a secret consolation to Roy.
It was also a secret jar to find he needed every ounce
of consolation available.
Very carefully he hid His ignominious frame of mind
-even fomt his mother; though she probably suspected



<pb n="118"/>
11482           -PFAR TO SEEK 
At and would not fail to understand. What, preei
would life be worth without that dear, daily inti
-life uncoloured by the rainbow-tinted charm of.
gentle, passionate, humorous, delicately-poised pe
ality ? Relations of such rare quality exact their
pitiless price; and the woman influence would al
be, for Roy-as for most men of genuine gifts and
purpose-his danger point or salvation. The dim 
distant prospect of parting was thinkable-tho
perturbing. But all this talk of steamers and ou
startlingly illumined the fact that in October he
actually going-to the other end of the earth.
With Dyan's departure, realisation pounced upon
heart and brain. Vaguely, and quite unjustly, he
as if his cousin were in some way to blame; and for
moment, he was not sorry to' be rid of him. Part
over, he went off for a lone prowl-hatless, as us
to quiet his jangling sensations and tell that 
irresolute Roy not to be a treble-distilled fool....
Nothing like the open moor to clear-away cobw
The sweeps of heady colour and blue distances c
be trusted to revive the winged impulse that 1
him irresistibly away from the tangible and ass
Is --there no hidden link-he wondered-between
wander-instinct of the home-loving Scot and!
vast spaces of moor and sky that lie about him
his infancy ... .
But first he must traverse the enchanted green gg
of his beech-wood, memory-haunted at every
Under his favourite tree, a wooden cross, carved&
Tara and himself, marked the grave of Prince, dead t
three years of sheer old age. And at sight of it t
sprang to memory that unforgotten day of May,
fight with- Joe; Tara's bracelet, still treasured in:
letter-case, even as Tara treasured the "broid
b9diee," in a lavender-scented sachet, set apart
mere blouses and scarves. ...
And again that troublesome voice within
-" What an utter fool you are-running away. 3
them all." 
To- him had fallen the privilege of knowin:g^
life -at its best-the finest ahd happiest on ti.



<pb n="119"/>
r          Th  i., IBSIONARY 'MLEAM      ;    L
*d not escape the price exacted, when the eall
.to act and decide and suffer alone. Associations
grow up with us atoeanore or less taken for granted
ie their roots lie deep in the heart. Only when the
bfeat of parting disturbs the delicate fibres, their depth
ld tenacity are revealed. And so it was with Roy.
lurrying through his wood of knightly adventures he
lt besieged, in spirit, by the many loves that had
itherto simply been a part of his life; yet to-day
ressed urgently, individually, upon his consciousness,
is heart ... 
Aid over against them    was the counter-pull of '
,eep ancestral stirrings; large vague forces of the outer
rorld; the sense of ferment everywhere; of storm-
louds on the greater horizon, big with dramas that
light rock the spheres ...
All these challenging forces seemed to dwarf his
avenile agitations; even to arraign his own beautiful
arroundings as almost too peaceful, too perfect. Life
ould not be altogether made up of goodness and
weetness and poetry :and philosophy.   Somewhere
-remote, unseen, implaoable-there must lurk strong
hings, big things, perhaps inimical things, waitg
o pounce on him, to be tackled and overcome. Any-
ow there could be no question, after all his vapour-
igs, of playing the fool and backing out-              .
He was on the ridge now; clear space all about him,
eather underfoot; his stride keeping pace with the
larch of his thoughts. Risks . . . t Of course there 
rere risks. He recognised that more frankly now; .and
lhe talk with his mother had revealed a big one that
ad not so much as occurred to him. For Broome was
Lght. Concentration on her had, in a sense, delayed
is emotional development; had kept him-for all his
rtistry and his First in Greats-very much a boy at
eart. Certainly, Ardna's grace and gaiety had sfruck
im more consciously during this last visit. No denying,
ie Eastern element had its perilous fasoination. A.nd
he Eastern element was barred. As for Tasa-sister
id friend and High Tower Princess in one-she was as
Ka   u Amrt of home as his mother and Christine. ,He
ia4i      xinot seen her yet as a budding woman. -
t ^:^      been too deeply absorbed in Oxford a-



<pb n="120"/>
4                F 31ARB TO SBEK 
writing and his dream, and the general delio
life, to challenge the future definitely, except
matter of going to India, somewhen, somehow . !
Lost in the swirl of his thoughts and the 
tion  of light and colour, he forgot all abo:
time ....
It was after five when, at last, he swung ro
yew hedge on to the long lawn; and there, at 
end, was Tara, evidently sent out to find him.  l
wearing her delphinium frock and the big bl
with its single La France rose. She walked pen
her head bowed; and, in that moment, by some
of sense or spirit, he saw her vividly, as she:
He saw   the grace of her young slenderness
wild-flower colouring, the delicate aquiline of he
that revealed breeding and character; the
that even in repose seemed to quiver with
bility. And he thought: "Good Lord! How]
she is !"
Of course he had known it always-at the 
his mind. The odd thing was, he had never th
in so many words, before. And from the thought 
an inspiration. I only she could come out with
--or a time, at least. So imbued was he with a
of their brother and sister relation, that the idea 
as natural as if it had concerned Christinet.b
hada cerainly been aware, the last year or so'
gossamer veil dropped between them. He at
this to mere grown-up-ness; but it made 
apreiably shy at thought of broaching his 
idea.
She raised her head at that point; saw
waved a ommanding hand. Impelled by e
condescended to hurry.
"(Casual demon-what hame you been up to i
greeted him with mock severity.
"Prowling on the ridge. It was gorgeous up
he answered, noticing in detail the curve of h
and thick dark lashes. 
" Well, tea's half cold and most of it eaten;
Ldla seemed wondering a little. So I offeredl
uearth you."      .    - 
How could you tell t"               Ia



<pb n="121"/>
'THE VISIONARY GLEAM              121
; A dimple dipped in one cheek. "I couldn't! I was
oi3ng to the wood, on chance. Come along."
· " No hurry. If tea's half cold, it can wait a bit longer."
le drew a breath, nerving himself; then: "Tara-
Eve got a proposal to make."
"loy! "   Her lips quivered, just perceptibly, and
were still.
"Well, it's this. Wouldn't it be splendid if you came
along out-with us three "
I "Roy ! " It was a changed intonation. "That's not
a subject for a practical joke."
"But I'm in earnest. High Tower Princess, wouldn't
you love to come "
"Of course I would." Was it his fancy, or did the
blood stir ever so little in her cheeks ? " But it's utterly,
erazily impossible. The sort of thing only you would
suggest. So please let be-and come along in."
"Not till you promise. I'm dead set on this. And
['m going to have it out with you."
"Well, you won't have me out with you-if you talk
ill midnight."
"Why not "
Her smile had its delicious tremulous quality. " Were
you twenty-one last birthday-or twelve ? If you think
you'll be lonely, ask for Christine. She's your sister-
C'm not !"
The emphasis and faint inflection of the last words
had their intended effect. Roy's face fell. "O-oh, I
see. But you've always been my sort of sister. Thea
would understand. And nowadays girls do all sorts of
bthings."
"Yes-they do!" Tara agreed demurely.. "They
scratch faces and burn down beautiful harmless houses.
But they don't happen to belong to mother. Roy-its
what I said-crazily-utterly--  If it wasn't, tyou
suppose I'd say No  "
Then Roy knew he was beaten. Also he knew she
was right and that he had been an impulsive fool-
lepressing convictions both. For a moment he stood
aonplaused while Tara fingered a long chain he had given
an a/bssently studied a daisy-plant that had dared
ha'ep    the oldest, loveliest lawn in that part of the
-Bo~ Ii



<pb n="122"/>
122         -    FA     TO SEEK      
But Roy was little used to being thwarted-
elements, at least: and when an idea seized:  H
could be pertinacious, even to the point of foll
was determined Tara should dome with him.
wanted to come. Add her permanent dearness
newly-found loveliness, and there sprang from 
junction a second inspiration, even bolder t
first.
"Tara-dear," he ventured, in a changed to
halted between tenderness and appeal. "I'm
say-something tremendous."
She deserted the daisy and faced him, blue eyes
her tell-tale lower lip drawn in.
"Would it be-quite so 'crazily-utterly '
well, if we were engaged  "
The tremendous word was out; and the effect
was unmistakable. Colour stirred visibly in hi
She straightened herself with an air that seemed
cally to increase the distance between them. 
-'-i'; Really, Roy-have you quite lost your.
We looked-and felt-crestfallen. "But, T
urged, " it's such a supreme idea. Wouldn't ou-
of it, ever ?  We'd fit like a pair of gloves. M
would love it-extravagantly. And we've been 
-caring all these years. At least "-suddenj
assailed him-" I suppose you do care still
bit" ?
"Silly boy ! Of course I-care . . . a lot."
That was more like the Tara he knew. " Ve
Why accuse me of incipient lunacy ? I care, too.
have done. Think how topping it would be, yoe
together, exploring all the wonderland of our G
Mummy's tales-Udaipur, Amber, Chitor, perh
shrine of the real Tara--" 
Still demurely distant, she thought " how tV
would be "; and the thought kept her silet 
that he grew impatient.. 
"High Tower Princess-do give over. Your:
airs are awfully sweet-but not to the point. 
.coming t It'll spoil everything now, ifyou do
She shook her head with a small wise,
seemed to unsh him awav from her. gently vefte



<pb n="123"/>
THE VISIONARY GLEAM              123
make him feel little more than a schoolboy confronted
y a woman; very young in her new syness and dignity, .
it still-a woman.
"No, Roy-I'm not coming. It's-dear of you to    e
ant me. But I can't-for lots of reasons. So please
iderstand, once for all. And don't fuss."
"But you said-you cared," Roy murmured blankly.
"Of course I do. Only-there's caring-and caring
. since you make me say it. You must know that
y now. Anyway, I know we simply can't get married
it because we're very fond of each other and it would
ease 'Mummy' and be convenient for India."
Roy sighed portentously. He found himself feeling
nunger and younger with every smiling, reasonable
ord she uttered. It was all so unlike his eager, fiery
ara that perplexity tempered a little his genuine
smay.
"I s'pose you're right," he grudgingly admitted.
But I'm fearfully disappointed."
" You are now. You won't be afterwards. It's not
arrying time for you-yet. You've lots of big things
do first. Go out to India and do them. Then-when  ,
te time really comes, you'll understand-and you'll .
~ grateful to me-for understanding now. There, what
lecture! But the point is-we can't: and I won't 
3 badgered about it. I'm goipg back to tea; and if 
nl don't come, I'll have to tell Aunt Lila-why?" I: 
He sighed. "I'll probably tell her myself to-night. 4 
rould you mind" "
"-';-no, she'll understand."
,tBet she won't."
" She will. You're not the only person the darling
d~erstands, though you are her spoilt boy."
She swung round on that impetuous little speech,
oreajike her normal self; and her going was so swift
Lt Soy had some ado to keep pace with her. He had
1l more ado to unravel his own tangle of thought and
Dnotism  A few clear points emerged from a chaos of
.ns, like mountain peaks out of a mist. He 
was all of a sudden distractingly lovely; that
1 I and obstinacy combined had thoro ug.hy
I    up; that all the same, she was right about.
"4      " 4s 4.no were r,   .     -,4 ho, -hnTrA si



<pb n="124"/>
124              FAuRt TO SEhEK'
_dOn't utterly despise him; that he hated the;
- lerving her more than ever...
Her pace, perhaps intentionally, made talk 
and he still had a lot to say.
" Tara-why are you sprinting like this ? " he
out, reproachfully. " Are you angry with me ?"
She vouchsafed him a small smile.
"Not yet. But I soon will be, if you don't take
And I'm dangerous in a temper ! "
"Don't I know that ? I once had a scratch that
heal for a month. But do walk slower. YoU'r
chucking me-for good-eh   " 
She slowed down a little, perforce; needing her b
for this new and hopelessly intractable Roy.
"Really, I've never known you ask so many f
questions in one hour before. You must have 
some potion up on the moor! Have you for
you're my Bracelet-bound Brother ? "
"But that doesn't bar-the other thing. It's no
of the Prayer-book affinities ! I say, Tara-you
promise to think it over. If you can't do that
I won't believe you care a bean about me, for all
say--"                                      :
Her blue eyes flashed at that-genuine fire; and,
stood still again, confronting him.
"Roy--be quiet ! You make me furious. I wa
slap you. First you suggest a perfectly crazy 
then you worry me into a temper by behaving
.sfpilt boy who won't take 'No ' for an answer. '
Roy straightened himself sharply. "I'm not sp
and I'm not a boy. I'm a man." 
" Well then, try and behave like one."
The moment her impulsive retort was spoken, s
how sharply she had hurt him, and, with a swift s
of her expressive face, she flung out a hand. He h-
hard. And suddenly she leaned nearer; her lips t
lous; her eyes melting into a half smile.
"Roy-darling," she murmured, barely abo
breath. " You are really-a little bit of all three.
part of your deliciousness and troublesomeness. 
it's not your fault-the spoiling. We've all helped.: 
been as bad as the others. But this time-please  B
-_T aimnrTl-- nftArlv- Fal.n'Et-AAn fatr vntm" -:



<pb n="125"/>
THE VISIONARY GLEAMI              12
Words went from him. He could only cling to 'wr
hand.
But with a deft movement she freed herself-and
fled round the comer of the house; leaving him in a
state of confusion worse confounded, to seek his mother
and the outraged teapot-alone.
He found her, companioned by the ruins of tea,
in the depths of her great arm-chair; eyes and fingers
intent on a square of elaborate embroidery; thoughts
astray with her unpunctual son.
Bramleigh Beeches drawing-room-as recreated by
Sir Nevil Sinclair for his Indian bride-was a setting
worthy of its mistress: lofty and spacious, light filled
by three tall French windows, long gold curtains shot
through with bronze; gold and cream colour the pre-
vailing tone; ivory, brass, and bronze the prevailing
incidentals, mainly Indian; and flowers in profusion
-roses, lilies, sweet-peas. Yet, in the midst of it all,
the spirit of Lilamani Sinclair was restless, lacking
the son, of whom, too soon, both she and her home
would be bereft-
At the sound of his step she looked up.
"Wicked one ! What came to you  "
Impossible to hide from her the disarray of hi
*motions. So he spoke the simple truth.
"Tara came to me-  1I I'd been prowling on the moor,
and forgetting the time. I met her on the lawn-.-"
"Yes-where is she I-And you-- I 
He caught the note of apprehension. Next momeut
he was kneeling by her chair, confessing all.
" Mummy, I've just asked her-to marry me. And
she simply . . . won't hear of it. I thought it woud
be so lovely, going out together-that it would please
-you so--".
The smile in her eyes recalled Tara's own. " Did you
say it that way-to. her, my darling  "
«"No--not exactly.  Naturally I did mention you
.-d India. She admits she's fond of me. Yet she
.pt qite angry. I can't make her out."
g:,'  faintly aggrieved note in his voice, implied
'  3 tion of sympathy. To his inexpressible sur-
t A"    saiid pensively, as if to herself: "Such a
X 'of .



<pb n="126"/>
126            FAR TO SEEK 
"Well, I don't see where the wisdom comes 
muttered a trifle disconcerted.
"Not yet, son of my heart. Some day pe
when your eyes are not too dazzled from the 
coloured sparkle of youth-of yourself-you will
many surprises. You are not yet ready for a wife,
Your heart is reaching out to far-away things.
-she has been woman enough to guess." 
"Perhaps, I'm not so sure. She seemed-not a
like herself, part of the time." He looked pensively
slim vase overflowing with sprays of blush rambler, 
for some reason, evoked a tantalising vision of the
who had so suddenly blossomed into a woman;
his shy, lurking thought found utterance: "I've
wondering, Mummy, is it ... can she be-in love
somebody else ? Do you think she is "
Lilfmani shook her head at him. "That is a m'
question! Hard to tell. At this kind of age, when
have so much character-like my Tara-they hav
natural instinct for hiding the thoughts of their hea
She dropped her needlework now and lightly tooka'
head between her hands, looking deep into his e
"Do you think you are yet-in love with her, R
ionest answer."
The touch of her hands stirred him all through.
nestion in her eyes probed deep.
Honest answer, Mummy-I'm blest if I know,'"
said slowly. "I don't think I've ever been so
I t before; beyond thrills at dances . . . and all
,-: She somehow churned me up just now and madef
want her tremendously. But I truly hadn't thougi
it--that way, before. And-I did feel it might 
you and Dad about..     the other thing, if I 
out fixed up."
She drew his head to her and kissed him, then let
hands fall in her lap. "Wonderful Sonling ! Indee
Uowild ease me and please me-if coming from
true motive. Only remember, so long as you are t
ing first of me, you. can be sure That Other has not
arrived."
"But I shall always think first of you," he 
catching at !her hands. "There's no one like
There never will be." 



<pb n="127"/>
r
F          THE VISIONARY GLEAM                127
"No-not like, but different-in dearness and near-
less. Love is one big impulse, but many forms. Like
ihite light made from many colours. No rival for me,
that Other; but daughter-in-law-best gift a son
in bring to his father's house. Just now there is
room inside you only for one big thing-India."
"And you-    "
"But I am India."
"Sublimated essence of it, according to Jeffers."
"Jeffers says many foolish things !" But she did not
lisguise her pleasure.
" I've noticed occasional flashes of wisdom !-But, I
ay, Motherling, what price tea s "
"Tea ?"   She feigned exaggerated surprise.  "I
tought you were much too far in the clouds !"
"On the contrary. I'm simply famished !"
SAnd forthwith he fell upon a plate of sugar cakes;
Wnle she rang for the fresh teapot, so often in requisi-
tin for ' Mr Roy.'
:       .. 
wi,.^; , . 



<pb n="128"/>
;* 128                    4
CHAPTER VIII.
" Comfort, content, delight, the ages' slow-bought gain,  -;
They shrivelled in a night. Only ourselves remain
To face the naked days in silent fortitude.
Through perils and dismays renewed and re-renewed."  ' 
NEvuL was up in town on business; not retur
next day. The papers were seething with rumourd
the majority of everyday people, immersed in th
important affairs, continued cheerfully to hope
hqpe. Sir Nevil Sinclair was not of these; but hl
his worst qualms to himself. Neither his wife
son were keen newspaper readers ; which, in his o
was just as well.
Certainly it did not occur to Lildmani that stay
in Europe could invade the sanctities of her ho
affect the shining destiny of Roy. That he was de
to shine, her mother's heart knew beyond all doubt. '*I~
round that knowledge, like an aura, glimmered a d
like hope that perhaps his shining might some
some way, strengthen the bond between Nevil's peep
her own. For the problem of India's changing r
,J .inBgland lay intimately near her heart. Her 
Wrain   saw England always as "husband of
while misguided or malicious meddlers-who       -
'make the Mother a widow "--were fancifully
porated in the person of Jane. And, in this m
India, Roy -had triumphed over Jane :-~.,rely .
omens, for bigger things :-f4or at heart .sh was sftiU
eeptible to omens; more so than she cared to
Orzy mother-arrogance, Nevil'would say.      But
.  emed to feel the spirit df his grandfather at.t.
Beoy; and well she knew that the old man's n



<pb n="129"/>
I:^   g    uiTHE VISIONARY GLEAM                t .-
Wtiould guide and temper his young zeal. Beyond that1 ,-
|So human eyes could see; only the too-human heartf of %t.
tther could dream and hope. ... 
.; Long ago her father had told that nations had always '
bien renewed by individuals; that India-aristocratic
to the deeps of her Brahmin-ridden soul-would never
:elaknowledge the crowd's unstable sway. For her it
imust always be the ian--ruler, soldier, or saint.
. Naot that she had breathed a word of her 'arrogance'
.to Nevil, or even to Roy. Nor had she shown to either
a certain letter from a distinguished Indian woman;
rare Indian by birth; also by birth a Christian; her
sympathy with East and West as evenly poised as Lila-
mlani's own. The letter lived in a slim blue bag, lovingly
embroidered. Lilamani-foolish and fanciful-wore it
like a talisman, next her heart; and at night slipped
It- under her pillow with her gold watch and wisp of
scented lawn.
- =To-night, being alone, and her mind very full of Roy,
khe drew it out and re-read it for the hundredth time;
higering, as always, on its arresting finale.
"I have seen much and grieved more over the problem
: the Eurasian, as multiplied in our beloved country-
ite fuit, most often, of promiscuous unions between
how-easte types on both sides, -with sense of stigma
iided to drag them lower still. But where the crossing
i of highest caste-as wish you and your 'Nevil'
:4 ean see no stigma; perhaps even spiritual gain to
children. :For I love both counties with my whole
And to my love God has given the vision tNht :
11- may some day be saved by the son of just such a
"'as your own. He will have the strength of hs
i~eap; the soul of the East; the forceful mind ant
tpineter of the West. He will bring to the task of
f.'i-g them such twofold love and understanding that
W.;,world must needs take infection. What if the
|"te--meanig of British occupation of India be ju. 
,that the successor of Buddha should be a man bor
l:-~   the, Nghb-minded British and Indian parents .
. the finest that East and West can give. That
': c:ins.pire you in your first flush of happy
M '   .- *So I feel impelled to pass it on . . 
s: vsiom--whether fantasy or prophecy-could



<pb n="130"/>
f', 'B                   OSETA .       ....B
ofail6" stir Lilmani Sinclair's Eastern heart
4ehs. But she shrank from    sceptical com'
,aaid sceptical Nevil would surely be. As for 
' intuition warned her it was too heady an idea to imp
in his ardent brain. So she treasured it secretlyi
read it at intervals, and prayed that, some day, it m
be fulfilled-if not through her, then through some
Lilnani, who should find courage to link her life
England. Above all, she prayed he who should ai
India's renewal might spring from Rajasthan. . .. 
In the midst of her thinking and praying, shei
sound asleep-to dream of Roy tossed out of reach
the waves of some large vague upheaval. The 'h
and 'why' of it all eluded her. Only the vivid im
sion remained....
And before the week was out, an upheaval, actual
terrible, burst upon a startled, unheeding world:
world lulled into a false sense of security; and too sir
ously engaged in rushing headlong round a centr
point called 'progress,' to concern itself with a m
peril across the North Sea.
But at the first clear note of danger, devot
pleasure and progress and the franchise were t
formed, as by magic, into a crowd of bewildered, c
and resentful human beings, who had suddenly lost
bearings; who snatched at newspapers; confdei
pedreet strangers; protested that a European Wa 
un-peakable, unthinkable, and all the while could 
and think of nothing else ...
It was the nightmare terror of earthquake, whew
solid ground underfoot turns traitor. And it
even the stoutest nerves in the opening weeks o
Great War, destined to shatter their dear and f
world for months, years, decades perhaps... '.
But underlying all the froth and fume of the 
restlessness, of the later fear and futility, the 
kindly, imperturbable heart of the land stilX
sanely-if inconspicuously-in the home life
cottages and her great country houses.  Tw
century England could not be called degene
she counted among her hidden treasures homes,
charm and;.culture and mutual confidence as t



<pb n="131"/>
T: EE VIIONAY GLEAM                      - 
produced the Grenfells, the Charltons, a Lord Eleho, an
Edward Tennant and a Charles Sorley-to pick a few'.
names at random from that galaxy of 'golden boys'
who ungrudgingly gave their lives-for what ?
The answer to that staggering question is not yet.
But the splendour of their gift remains: a splendour no
after-failure can tarnish or dim....
To the inmates of Bramleigh Beeches-Nevil excepted
-the crash came with startling abruptness; dwarfing
all personal problems, heart-searchings and high decisions.
Even'Lady Roscoe forgot Family Herald heroics, and
'crossed the threshold' without comment from Nevil
or herself. 'The weightiest matters became suddenly
trivial beside the tremendous questions that hovered
in every mind and on every tongue: 'Can We hold
Them   ' ' Can They invade Us ' 'Can it be true
-this whispered horror, that rumoured disaster ? ' And
the test question-most tremendous of all, for the mere
unit-' Where do I come in ? '
Nevil came in automatically through years of casual
connection with the Artists' Rifles. He was a Colonel
by now; and would join up as a matter of course-to
his wife's secret amazement and far from secret pride.
Without an ounce of the soldier in him, he acted on
'instinct like most Englishmen; not troubling to analyse
motives; simply in the spirit of Noblesse oblige; or,
in the more casual moder equivalent-' one just does.'
Roy-poet and dreamer-became electrically alive to
his double heritage of the soldier spirit. From age to
age the primeval link between poet and warrior is re-
-Lirmed in time of war: and the Rajput in him recog-
nised only one way of fighting worthy the name-the
triune conjunction of man and horse and sword. Dis-
lhusion, strange and terrible, awaited him on that score:
and as for India-what need of his young activities, when
the whole Empire was being welded into one resistant
-tasts'by thp triple hammer-strokes of a common danger,
'a emmon enemy, a common aim ?
'i 14iwas perhaps this sense of a clear call in an ageof
betual ferment, of sex problems and political
,that sent so many unlikely types of manhood
as arrows to that universal target-the Front.
nfJa ra . 4. hit '.iand nmra.pntirai .l itflt far thfir'r



<pb n="132"/>
132               AR TO SEEK 
dumb idealism; to their realism, it offered the '
verities of fatigue, suffering, bodily danger-belove
and stagging death.'
For Roy, Cavalry was a matter of course. Inl
saddle, even Jane could find no fault with him;
guessing that, in his genius for horsemanship, he
Rajput to the marrow. His compact, nervous 
strong thigh and light hand, marked him as the inevi
centaur; and he had already gained a meas
distinction in the cavalry arm of the Officers' Tr
Corps. But a great wish to keep in touch with:
father led him to fall in with Sir Nevil's suggestion 
he should start in the Artists' Rifles and apply
transfer later on-when one could see more clearly
this terrific business was likely to develop. George
Jerry-aged fifteen and sixteen and a half-rag
their own futile juvenility-which, in happier c'
stances, nothing would have induced them to a
Jerry-a gay and reckless being-had fell designs ona
Flying Corps, the very first moment he could 'w
it' George-the truest Sinclair of them all-
voted for the Navy, because it took you young. 
one heeded them very much. They were all too a
in mewspapers and their own'immediate plans.
iAd .Lilamani, also, found her niche, when the 
stirrng proclamation announced the coming of I
troop   There was to be a camp on the estate. .
on, there would be convaleseents. Meantime, the0
wholesale need of 'comforts ' to occupy her and 
and Christine.
Tar's soaring ambition would carry her farthers
Her spirit of flame-that rose instinctively to 
issues and heroic demands-could be at peace n
but in the splendid, terrible, unorganised thick ofi
Without making any ado, she proposed to get t
tie shortest possible time; and, in the shortest
time, by sheer concentration and hard work, she a
her desire. Before Roy left England, before
loed brother-a man of brilliant promise-4a, d .
E,1rxnlg to fly, she was driving her car in 
lseged in Antwerp, doing and enduring .
Ater Tara. Nevil-for the Artists' i



<pb n="133"/>
r|         THE VISIONARY GLEAM               1i
Mthe field. After Nevil, Roy-his exchange effectedr-
·sy slim and soldierly in cavalry uniform; his grey-
ei eyes, with the lurking gleam in them, more than
er noticeable in his sunburnt face.
The last day, the last hour were at once sai and
$ad beyond belief; so that Lilamani's coward heart
was thankful for urgent trifles that helped to divert
attention from the waiting shadow. Even to-day, as
always, dress and sari were instinctively chosen to express
er mood:-the mother-of-pearl mood; iridescence of
$ad and sad: glad to give; yet aching to keep. Daughter
Af Rajputs though she was, she had her moment of very
Vuman shrinking when the sharp actuality of parting
as upon them; when he held her so close and long
ftt she felt as if the tightened cord round her heart
ifst snap-and there an end. ...
SBut, by some miracle, some power not her own,
tcmage held; though, when he released her, she was
MU1 blinded with tears.
; Ser last words-entirely like herself though they
ere-surprised him.
h' Son of my heart-live for ever," she whispered,
ying light hands on his breast. "And when you go
Iito the battle, always keep strongly in your mind that
by must ot win, because no sacred or beautiful thing
bi left clean from their touch. And when you go
i*i~eA battle always remember-Chitor."
ai'   s you I shall always remember-looking like this,"
aasweered under his breath. But he never forgot her
n    tios; and through years of fighting, he obeyed
to the letter....
~,:That was in April, after Neuve Chapelle, when even
timists admitted that the War might last a year.
X At: COhristmas time he came home on short leave-a
e      Roy; his skin browner; his sensitive lips more
g i set under the shadow line of his moustache; the
i~ f body and spirit hardened; without loss of
M-t   or flexibility. Livelier on the surface, he was
, more reticent, underneath-even with her. By
in m his eyes she knew he had seen things that
_.:etr be put into words. Some of them- she too
·  .~thg  his mind; so close was the spiritual



<pb n="134"/>
134              FAR TO SEEK                  -
link between them. In that respect at least, he .
beautifully, unaffectedly the same....
Nevil was home too, for that wonderful Christm
and Tara, changed also, in her own vivid way; fra
and friendly with Roy; though the grown-up 
between them was seldom lifted now. For the Wi
held them both in its unrelaxing grip; satisfied,
terrible and tremendous fashion, the hiAden desire
not uncommon in young things, though concealed 
a vice-to suffer for others. Everything else, for
time being, seemed a side issue. Personal affairs co
wait. ..
When it came to letting Nevil and Roy go ag
after their brief, beautiful interlude together, LI
mani discovered how those fifteen months of cease
anxiety and ceaseless service had shaken her ner
Gladness of giving could now scarce hold its own aga
dread of losing; till she felt as if her heart must bre
under the strain. It did not break, however. It end
-as the hearts of a million mothers and wives h
endured in all ages-to breaking-point . . . and beya
The immensity'of the whole world's anguish at o
crushed and upheld her, making her individual 
seem almost a little thing----
They left her. And the War went on-disastrou
gloriously, stubbornly, inconclusively; would go o
seemed, to the end of Time. One came to feel as if.
free from the shadow of War had never been. As i,
would never be again-
5,        -         END OF PHASE II.
.~~~~~~~~~~~~~ i/
~i.



<pb n="135"/>
PHASE III.
PISGAH HEIGHTS
.. .. .



<pb n="137"/>
.... ' ...  ?
CHAPTER I.
"No receipt openeth the heart but a true fried."-aFbAmc BAoWN.
As early as 1819 there had been a Desmond in India; a
soldier-adminstrator of mark, in his day. During the
Sikh Wars there had been a Desmond in the Punjab ;
and at the time of the Great Mutiny there was a Punjab
Cavalry Desmond at Kohat; a notable fighter, with a
flowing beard and an easy-going uniform that.would net
commend itself to the modem military eye. I the year
of the second Afghan War, there was yet another :
Desmond at Kohat; one that earned the crofs '*Fo
Valour,' married the daughter of Sir John Meredith-
and rose to high dstintion. Later still, in the year o
graoe 1918, his two sons were stationed there, in the  :
self-same Punjab Cavalry Regment   There w   also :a
by now, a certain bungalow in Kohat known as 'Des   '
mond'f bungalow,' occupied at present by Colione Pad -i
Desmoad, now in Command. 
That i no unommon story in India. She has laid her
pell on certain families; and they have followed oee
atar throgh the geeations, as homing birds follow
' ls acrosshe    nset sky.  nd their name becomes a
egend that pases from father to son; because Indi
oes not foret. There is perhaps nothing quite like it
' the tale of any other land. It makes for continuity;
.w    f netradition of service and devotion; a trado
,safe  l anot be broken till agitators and theorists mate
O:f ,:-rtita in -India. But that day is not yet; 
i:f tjbe. bet elementa of both raes still believe it will
Bli. '   n.aaha  Pal nor    ance Desmond, rif    ,
_iif;:B t T i eoff, on a monmig of
_ ~a~a     &l:._^__ ina Am t 4i -M aI



<pb n="138"/>
i8               FFAB TO SEEK
break with the family tradition. Lance, at seven-
twenty-spare and soldierly, alive to the finger-ti
was his father in replica, even to the V.C. afte 
name, which he had snaffed out of the War, to
with a Croix de Guerre and a breveftMajority. Th
Cavalry had been at a discount in France, Mesopot
and Palestine had given the Regiment its chance-
fever and dysentery and all the plagues of Egypt th
in to keep things going.
It was in the process of filling up his woeful
that Colonel Desmond had applied for Boy
and so fulfilled the desire of his brother's heart: 
incidentally, Boy's craving to serve with Indian Cavb
To that end, his knowledge of the language, his h
manship, his darin  and resource in scout work,
stood him in good stead. Paul-who scarcely knew'
at the time-very soon discovered that he had 
a asset for the Regiment-the great Fetish, that a
his paramount allegiance, and began to look like
it for life. 
"He's just John over again," Lady Desmond
my, referring to a brother who had served the 
het-sh from subaltern to Colonel and left his name
moss in Kohat cemetery.           i
. ertainly, in form and feature, Paul was very
*l Meredith:-the coppery tone of his hair, the
k e and steadfast grey-blue eyes, the height and 
id asggestion of power in reserve. It was oae
,most Aerious problems of his life to keep hbig. 1-
'-  der weight for polo, without impairing his
apacit for work. Apart from this important
he was sigularly unaware of his striki 
appearane, except when others haffed hi  a
l ook of Lord Kitchener, and were usually snub
.. their pans.; though, at heart, he was inordinatel
k -of the fact. He had only one quarrel with the e
:ik boyhood;-the decree that officially
r fthe Frontier Force; though the spirit .of it
aM wmin survive, for deeades to Ime. Like hi s
h e had ' snaffed' a few decoratens out of th%
but to be. in Command of the B: ent, wiLh
harge of his pet squadron, was   thai. im
:  . ..The strong bond of afif be. t:Bf9Mi|I _



<pb n="139"/>
'PISGAH fIGHTS                MS -.-
and last of a family of six-was enhanced by their
very nnlikeness. Lance had the elan of a torrent; Pil
the stillness and depth of a mountain lake. Lance was
a rapier; Paul a olaymore-slow to smite, formidable
when roused. Both were natural leaders of men; both,
it need hardly be added, ' Piffers ' in the grain. They
had only returned in March from active service, with
the Regiment very much the worse for wear; heartily
sorry to be out of the biggest show on record; yet
heartily glad to be back in Inda, a sadly changing India
though it was.
Two urgent questions were troubling the mind of
Lance as they rode at a foot's pace up the slope leading
to the Blue Bungalow. Would the board of doctors,
at that moment 'sitting' on Roy, give him another
chance t Would the impending reliefs condemn them
to a ' down-country ' station t For they had only been
posted to Kohat till these eame out.
To one of those questions Colonel Desmond already
knew the answer.
"I ha   a line from the General this morning," he -::
remarked, after studying his brother's profile. ad . ,
shrewdly gauging his thoughts.                   "-
Trae enough-his start betrayed.him. "The Geural -
-Beliefs t"                                     ; -
"Yes."   A pause.   "We're for-Lahore O(antuf-a;
ments."                                        ,
"Damn I"
"I've made that inspired remark already.  You '
needn't flatter yourself it's original!"
"I'm not in the mood to flatter myself or any'!o e
else. I'm in a towering rage. And if dear old Boy Ist . 
be turned down into the bargain---   " Words faled
him. He had his father's genius for makin friends; 
and among them all Boy Sinclair reigned supreme.
· "I'm afraid he will be if I know anything of medical  -
boards."                                        '
"Why the dev    -t " Lance flashed out. "It's not
a if Al offloers were tumbling over each other in the -
.vles. 'If Boy was a Tommy they'd jolly soon think
t betIngbetter than leave and futile tonic" 
Bair ^        Psaob       F nul ,Mt  P.-



<pb n="140"/>
Colonel 'Dmha d omiled at. the  T
b n  t..                               .    . * ...
"etaily their tinkering sn't up 'to mueh.. 
m afid there's more wrong wth .Boy than -
doctoring can toch. Still-he doesn't seem 
'ing Home."
inee shook his head. "Natually-poor old 
Fels he can't face things, yet. It's not only the
pt Mespot that have knocked him off his centre.
oing--that jewel of a mother." His eyes darkened
feeling.  "You can't wonder.   I  anything w
tpen   --" He broke oft abruptly.             *s
itaul Deoahid s  teeth   and was silent. In:
deep of his heart, the Regiment had one rival-and
Demond knew it. ....
They found the bungalow empty. No sign of Bo
4Gettg round 'em " su       d Paul opmis
and pased on into his  .
Lance lit a cigar, flung himelf into a verandah
aad piked up the 'Civil and Military.' He had
meaned the war telegrams when Boy came     p U
round trot.
Lance sat forward and dicarded the pape r.
nAhng.e of glances sufficed. Boy's detei
baff. the board ' had failed.
;    H6e looked sallow in spite of sunburn; tired and
wltened; no lurking mile in his eyes. He'
.:    ve vet nose of his beloved SirAJ--a grael  i
. '    Aab, bhalt Wale; and abent    acowled
frantoi jubilations of his fIris terri e puppy,  
by, Le - the Holy Terorm-erry frat sht -      Ij
.  ram ted the steps, rbaeided- i t  theU   br i
ipead ht ap and whip on.the groun: -:..
.D I.am  the dootors," said' Lance question
- lat so characteristic form of sympathy  ov
toa netlamile. "Obstiae devils. I bled'
1 knae. Ovredid it, perhps. -Anway tie
-I-.a   mset   They've dispensed with my va
:-'..-  i, Anar , mild newrastheni a, fearic, w
*: -.:and  a brw other pu laXtoi lm    . Wtnllm
i-dn't throw in houemaid's kne    OhkelO
S"  1 "  He convert  a -isilhiii-



<pb n="141"/>
ItiG f^H~~~~~~aR  HEIGHTS  . ' ,'  -
"Let's make merry over a peg, Lanee. Dotors are
exhausting to argue with. And Outhers always said I
couldn't argue for nuts I Now then-how about pegs-t "
."A bit demoralsing-t midday," Lance murmured
without monvictitn.
"Well, I a  demoralised; dead-daned--done fo. -
I'm about to be honoured with a blooming medial
ertfioate to that effect. As a soldier, I'm extinct-
rom this time forth for evermore. You see before ye
the wraith of a Might-Have-Been. After tAt gold-medtl
exhibition of inanity, kindly produce said pegs "
Lanoe Desmond listened with a grave smile, and a
sharp contraction of heart, to the absurditie  of this
irat-best friend, who for three years had sharei 
him the high and horrible and ludicrous vio -tos  o
war. He knew only too well that trik of talg
random to drown some inner stress. With ever*y w
of nonsense he uttered, Boy was implicitly c  i f ng
how acutely he felt the blow; and to para: his own'  -
bitter disppointment seemed an egotisticalm uperlt - ut :'. :
o8 he merely remarked with due gravity: "1I adit
you've made out an overwhelming case for' said peglsa  -
And he shouted his orders accordingly.              - .
They illed their tumbler s in silence, avoiding rb  ;;'
other's eyes. Every moment emphasised   iei        ;-y
all that the detested verdict implied.  o moNl. I:
teesther. No more sharing of books and joke'l 
enthusiams and violent atipathies, to which-- t      ,,
were pron    No more O.*ee' ' in the Hills beyi l ,
Kashmir.
Pr..  om  the first of thethfly had lateIy  ied    -
dsk leave, hi Boy's oas; and the p          was to
be repeated next April, if they oo- d 'wagle'-lr    . -
leave. Bah knew the other was thinking of thee thng 
Biu they seemed entirely occapled in quenohig:their
,'zst. and their dispoinet, i doee     d   gss  of  ':
*ei*ig fceeool whisky- dso  ,. Moreove        e-    -;'
i    m: t trna-when the tumblers were 'emp ied, thip .
:,  uinh)l to look s-.ade less blue. It became -.    ::
' ft to djc               An  Dem       was feil: 
'4j<il b,          "  he remarked; -b s  '
_  *'.......................Mu.........s'-".2



<pb n="142"/>
" Nex moh     I  ppose. We mst make thl
of these few-eeks, old man."
" And tb-what     . .. Home" t 
Boy did not answer at once. He was lying
agan, staring out at the respectable imitat 
ISn, at rose beds, carpeted with over-blown
and a lone untidy tamarisk that flung a spiky
.the gras. And the eye of his mind was piotung
loveliest lawn of his aequaintance, with its noble 
beeches and a hammock lung between-an em
casket; the jewel gone. It was picturing the dra
room; the restful simplicity of its cream and gold:
no dear and lovely figure, in gold-flecked sari, lost
the great arm-chair. Her window-seat in the studi
empty. No one in a 'mother-o'-pearl mood' to 
and tuck him up and exchange confidenees, the.
thing. His ather, also invalided out; his left
sleeve half empty, where the forearm had been remo
"N-no," he said at last, still staring at the'
blinking sunshine. "Not Home. Not yet-anyway.
Then, having confessed, he turned and looked s
into the eyes of his friend-the hasel-grey eyes he
so admired, as a small boy, beeause of the way 
da kemed with anger or strong feeling. And he  m
I thm still. "A coward-am 11 -It's not a
Ouuion. But I suppose it's the cold truth."
.t hasn't struck me that way." Desmond
.t-,rned his look.
:  "That's a mercy. But-if one's name hp
-be Lace Desmond, one would go-anyhow." .
' i '  doubt it. The plaee must be simply 
amorles. We Anglo-Indian, jogged fra o 
peot, know precious little about homes like you
manean't judge--   "
" fl.ea a generous soul, Lance I "Boy broke outl.
adds t irarmth. " Anyway--eowal or no--I. 
aa'i faoehe ordeal, yet awhile. I believe my t
.will undertad.   After all-here I   ;am Ia m
:ptaned, befo  the Great Interruptio.
.amee, I might.as well take it. The dea  obic
m rsly empty, these day--with Tny marr
At .Vorce job pinning him to Ton.
*,' 'b  --,.         ,         ." .' . -.-"



<pb n="143"/>
x- .PIEGAH       HEIGEHTS             -1i
"You'll hang on out here for the present  Thank 
God for that much."
Desmond's pious gratitude was so fervent that they
both burst out laughing; and their laughter eleared the
air of ghosts.
"Jaipur it is, I suppose, as planned. Thea will be
overjoyed.  Whether Jaipur's precisely  a ihea
rsort--    ".
" I'm not after health resorts. I'm after knowledge--
and a few other things. Not Jaipur first, anyway. The .
moment I get the official order of the boot-I'm fbr
Olitor."
"Chitor "   Faint incredulity lurked in Desmond's
tone.
"Yes-the casket that enshrines the soul of a race;
buried in the wilds of Bajasthan. Ever heard tell of it,
you arrant Punjabi   Or does nothing exist for 'yo
soutb of Delhi" 
* Just a thing or two-not to mention Thea I ' 
"Of course-I beg her pardon I She would appr .. ,i
Sate Ohitor."                                  -   '
"Bather. They went there-and Udaipur, last year. : .
She's death on getting Vincent transferred. And the 
Bmra Sahibs are as wax in her hands. If they happen  ,
to be musica) and she applies the fiddle, they haven't 
an earthly-  1" 
Boy-  s eyes took on their far-away look.
Ril be truly uplifting to see her-and hear hu.? :'
Middle COs more, if she's game for an M- * taei  db - e.
T soA  ty.  Anyway, there's my granit-.-> -         :
Quite superfluous," Desmond inte       ad a shade
b e'.amptly.n "If I know Thea, she'll hg on to :yo
Mf** he old weather; and ensure you a pied a ter
if- i want to prowl round Bajputana and give the bee
i yo0 en    et an airing! Youll be in elover. The
B      yereieac~  s sort of palace. Not precisely Thea's
ls fof bHs. She's a Piffer at heart; and her social
n't get mueh scope down there. Only half a 
;e; and oi Vinx buried fathoms deep n    -
ka book. But, being Thea, she has
head foremost, into it all  Got very
I *ome. She's mixed up in some st 
**ri   . -Abar who's been educated at hoian .



<pb n="144"/>
144              FABR aTO  'EBK           FK
It seems an nfilin presiption for trouble.  . 1I
facy she's a cousin of yours."
Boy tarted. "Whatr-Arina "t
" She didn't mention the name. Only
Thea to the rescue I "   
"Poor Ardna -She stayed in England 
time, because of the War-and DyIn. I've not-
of Dyan for an age; and I don't believe they
either. He was knocked out in 1§16. Lost his left
Said he was going to study art in Oalcutta.
wonder--    " Desmond-who had chiefly been
ing to divert the current of his thoughts-noted,
iBataction, how his simple tactics had taken efet. 
"Wel'- write to-morrow-eh t" said he. "B
s 11-happy thought I-Ill bear down on Jaipur 
f   Ohri tmas leave. Baze fine pig-iking in
the happy thought proved a masterstroke, I
disosso   of plans and projects Boy beame 
his radit self again: forgot, for one merfal:
that he was dead, damned, and done for-the
. 'Might-Have-Been.' 
- o. . 
.  .



<pb n="145"/>
.- .               '.   1 
.      t.at adore  t                  -.em'
;,.,         ,                    ..            .
C, ..
CHAPTER IT.
" Oh, not more subtly ilenoe strays
Amtongt the wind, between the loghs..
Than thou art preent i my days.  .' :.
Mys ileene, life return to thee    e 
In a the lpus of her breath.   *     . 
And thou, wae ever, wke for me I 
S0E five weeks later, Boy sat alohae-very oomplete 
sad desolately alone-in a whitewadhed, unhomelr ro
tat everywhere bore the stamp of dk bungalow ^from 
the wobbly teapoy1 t his elbow to th board of pnto
rulea that adorned the empty mantelpiece  The ona l
oheeing ting in the room was the log fie that  ad
ompanionable noises and danced shadow-danes o
the ding  white walls. But the optmism om f th be: 
was diseounted by the pesmism    of the amp tht-     '
leemed specially constructed to produce a mintim of
light with a maximum of mnel-and rank keroeIme at
l;haft. ·.              ·                 -- :':....
>ak bungalows had seemed good fun in the days of  ' 
bi. leave, wh  he and Lanee made merry over their
well-won  failings. But it was quite another affair to
smoke the pipe of eompulsory solitude, on the onutkirts
f Ohitor, hundreds e miles away from Kohat and the.
Begiment; to feel oneself the only living bein  i aa
rcoession of empty rooms-ffor the servnts were
holeoa in their own little colony apart. Solitude, in
ri      mood a       t    place, was bread ad t
I.-- .foul. ; bnt (raemffoneliness of the dyeas bhe bi
:l!lr. .w,.ot, t.se b,3ad. -ot four yeaa he ha. -':i:;
J,,-^ . ;-* -     .* ,hfeed4«Hk  ' -   *         ;. -



<pb n="146"/>
Y- 146                AR TO -SIPK TO
himsepwart of a huge incarnate purpose;
part d  his regiment-a closely-knit broth
action. [N".w, the mere fact of being an
human f          t oddly intensified his feeling of
With all l  individuality he was no egoist;
. muhi a lovr orthis kind. Imbued with the
the quest, yet avre by temperament to plo
lonely furrow.
It had been his own choice-if you could
-starting this way, instead of in the friendly
phere of the Jaipur Residency. But was the
such a thin    ehoice     The fact was, he had.t
obeyed aoa -  ible impulse,-and to-morrow 
be glad oR   To-night, ater that interminable 
his head ached atrociously. -He felt limp as
dish-clout; his nerves all out of gear . . .
those confounded doctors were not such fools
· eeemed. He cursed himself for a spineless inef
' ieeaig  about with nerves when he had
come through four years of war with
ment of limbs and fAulties unimp        i
s rwounds, a passing collapse, from utte
.- misery, soon after his mother's death; 
Ai- bronio dysentery, durintehih  he had
masaged to keep more or less fit for duty
bi .  lsed of physical dumage, in a War that hat
S       t      o..-  il  sand* ft e.
. --   ther are rwoundslitbe mind; and te
.': ·     . tl  is a slow, complex air. Boy, with hfi
sem' of beauty, his almost morbid     in
Inflfited pain, had suffered acutely, where nm" a
ntures searcely suffered at all. Yet it ws
that wet to pieces-which was one of the.
pses of a War that shatteed     on vitiou
md .hallenged modern man to the feroea trial
at a moment when Science had almost stripped,
of belief in anything outside himself. 
Boy, happily for him, had not been stripped o
ad his receptive mind had bene         a e
uite2stewng impressions, too.     t, latoi
-oi .veee, sat -. t                       ~o l   b
sitm  volume-pub                     tl :.1~..
ttracted no ama all 



<pb n="147"/>
-  PMAH HEIGHTSi ,'-
the time, he had deprecated premature rusbing into e¢,
print; but afterwards it was a blessed thing to remneat-  .
ber the joy he had given her that last Oristmas-t:h  P.''
very last.... 
On the battlefield, if there had been nerve-shattering 
moments, these had their counterpart in moments when
the spirit of his Bajput ancestors lived again in him,
when he knew neither shrkingi nor horror nor pity:
and in moments of pure pleasure, during some  uiet
interlude, when larks rained music out of the blue;
when he found himself alone with the eerie woeder of
dawn over the scarred and riven fieldl  deat; or
when he discovered his Oriental ge iu-outk
that had rapidly earned him distinetio.
love of adventure to the full; 
And always, unfailingly he had obeyedtiS mother's
parting injunction. As a British offlcer, had fought
for the Empire. As Roy Sinlair
he had fought for the senctities of Hoind Baty     :
-,intrinsi beauty of mind and body and so i_ A' .
ideousness and licence and the uncleanr              '.
ould defile the altar santuaries of God.
And always, when he went into battle, he remnbered
Ohitor. Mentally, he pulon the saffon robe, iia
of 'no surrender.' To be taken prisoner was the o 
fe he could not bring himself to contemplate   et 
that very fate had befallen him and Lance, in mpo- 
tlmia-the sequel of a darngEd sucesful raid; .:  .
. etumng, in the teeth of uiinpected dimoulti"e 
h.d found themselves ambushed, with their haadfto  -
..p-outnumbered, no loophole for escape.       ..
2For three months, that seemed more like .yetnr th  "
Bad losall sense of personal liberty-the oxygen of t
Hl-k They had endured misery, emi-starvation,  d
i    y ,other things, u. as a man cannot bi :    |
to speak about or consiously recall: not leas,
.w#f6 sense of being powerless-and hated. Fro
ting, they had kept their mipds oocupied
iu plan for eseape, that, at times, seemed
.of thdr men, whom they ooulMeitbe.
lis. S*wh,.-#ta miraloe-the Oovet
Do     oould haveatav y 
_?*Jt'  r,          '4 s  



<pb n="148"/>
Wr   *2'?      J -m   3B  uNKi    .      .
'-=  ·It had been  biath es affair- deand.
poammed of bodily fleetness and Bupplenem, of 
zeekleumnrag. And it had been crowned with 
the go4 news wired home to mothers who w
praye d  -BUt Boy's nerves had suffered more
than Desm  d's. A sharp attack of fever had
hi prostraSon. And it was then, in the
his paitnfeakness, that Fate turned and smote
with he ta pst weapon in her armoury ..
H   alsd jot  even heard his mother was ill. He
j psteiv  f her eostatio response to his    '
ir   sight  ecame to him, vividly, as^
t^  ~   stood by hi bed, in her mother-o'
g^   B~i; clear in  *ry detail; lips jut 
la hii--nile m in  _e»s. And round about
moonbeams, height
lvltenees,    med to     her apart; so that he
·  d tmW.     her nor utter a word of welcome.
.; -.b md g-afel     gaMe, while his heart beat ton.
;t o:~kmmear-8tm ||c w h a double throb between.::
wah a gesture   mute yeamag her hands
ito tim,  .She stooped low and koer. A faint
-_msed to flit aossi his forehead as if her lips,
brahing it, had breathed a blessing. 
Then, darkness felab pt-nd a deep s,l
..;'. -, H  *o al. aw ne^   -    nin  woke; to a
' thlbee odtalnty that hi u~a had been w4'eaaaw
:  -tor  .elf had oome to him-that he w
-hen the bitter tnrth reahed hm,: he
waxfto,  that on the tight of his vdonzL.
.-;.-...-                     ,   .      .
* '.                         ' ..  ' , *'/
It was a shap attack of pneumonit that 
_         :o . ode gr4e. But, in efect, the War 
. ;- t· Idlled- tary another hypeneait _
;  at    not become inured t horor on hoor,  i
tapdy, whome heart abd for the oieo 
:  if th  were herown. Ad hera pBoa
'   i" ' ' _ l* taxed ha en&MWunae
* t» et,   n   naad aM       - "'J    h
ad-    en. pdown I   Qthe  aum
:..  t out to Frace, hI eil



<pb n="149"/>
?P9AE HEIGHTS                 i     T1
lies  and after months of uncertanty they had he ud 
be was alive, woanded-in German hands. Taraw, fSla
Eul to the Women's Hospital in  erbia, had ben ioar
tautly in danger, living and moving among unimagi-
able horrors. Nevll, theatened with septic poisoning,
lad only bees saved at the cost of his left foream.
lot till he -W   invalided out, near the iose of 1916, 
bad he realied-too late-that she was illing hend
by inches, with work that alone could le ave a iety-
up to a point. 
But it was the shock of Boy's imprisonment 
agony fl    ee   that finally stretched her 
ealeoi n t; so that the sudden
monia had slain her in the space of a w
knowing her too well, had guessed the tru
his father's gallant attempt to shield him i t.
His first letter from tthat be   fther ee little
short of a revelation to the son, who lI nied to
nppose he knew him: a rash suppo      wher -a    '
human being -i conoerned. There had bee more than
ne suoh revelation in thf. *ors of lett   that at onoe
plfted. and overwhele   ' him, and increased tenfold
hMi prlde in being b*-n.   But outshinin  al, and
tiPtarly     ted-     a letter from here, wrtt
k los^   dap' when the others ill hoped agabst
with t  his fther's, ,- a s ,    .
and    lor and e;
t  of her: and with it camewt lb»a   .- 
he was born. Beamhind  hii.S.f':  · :'
y t leeed Tunder the beideri
soothed his agony of pain and r4
of her fingers on his forehead; hadta  '.t-
M -dath and robbed the gpv<f -v'ory'. J' '.:.''" '
In ht,  I            draw the slm bsg s.- . 
'er poket,     d rere    ith his eyes the wmd- --1.
ao m ted on Mhis memory.             ' 
flj w  ow  i nrAB,-This is good-bye-bu
Ejeeh    o moptD          een     a H   ;nd  u-v:s



<pb n="150"/>
n                lnr-A.6 MMflq2
us, too deep for word-not to bot ha        a
que. broken because of this big rq  .   You l
brave In battle, my Prithvi Eaj. Be still more
far ame  Bemember I am Lilmmni-Jewel of
2I~v/m ave tried to be in my life, for every one eof
' That'[awih to be always. So I ask you, my 
notatqlpke me a Jewel of Sorrow because I have 
intQ  Next Door House too soon. Though not
I will never for long be far from you. That is m
and yo must share it; helping your dear father,be
f r Whin the way of belief is hard.
"Never forget those beautiful words of Fouquet
o made dication of your poems to me: '
1iIH    eson to whom it is allowed to gladden
with the blossom and fruit of his
And yo       l still gladden it, Dilkusha.  I will
sha   yo      , though in different fashion tha' -
hoped. O       p your manhood pure and the
of your       clear, so the Light can shine t
Then ywou    know if I speak truth, and you will
feel altogether alone.  .
"Oh, Boy, I could write       till the
My heart s too full, but my han too feeble f
Onl   ^'-, when your time comes for marriage,
yo  wih-Se to :your wife al. that your splendid 
s      beea for me-king and lover and companion o.b
a&.zpleMl  Draw nearw tban ever,r you two, -c
&       sfe    to. «|iy«4 ; tieQt  love- for me-unseen now-, but
,s  nys.6 God bless you. I can write no more. 
"Your devoted 
..The last lines wavered and ran together. la
of hr injunction, tears would come. Qhill and
:.    uSlipped down his ohIs, while he folded bi tr
d -   'aput t iaway with thl other, that went to hb 
a litle, as she had foreseen; thoughb i.the e
bad been overshadowed by her            whi
;    ld have let him'ho deare    _
angl of God. In death,                h
.':-. '. : .. '.- I     -~ ~ i  '''''s f  ~ ' '-^" ^ - 1:'·' > "..



<pb n="151"/>
PmGdm RETIOTS                *'S!s
_nfsrt and healing. She had bidden him    e h'.e -b  '
disf; and he never hod felt altogether ai.   u-
mined Sy that inner conviction, he had somehf  adptie
dmaelf to the strangenessof life empty of t physical
wesenoe. The human being, in a world of pin, like the
mset in a world of danger, lives mainly by  a e  . 
esaeless, unconscious miracle of adaptati.  y 
hough he craved a sight of his father and GU
Le had not asked for leave home. There w
noments when he wondered if he could ever 
rimself to face the ordeal. He sincerely hdped they  :
mderstood. Their letters left an impression that it
ras so. Jeffers obviously did.
And Tar--       Her belated letter, from the wids
i Serbia, had revealed, in every line, thea dhe under-
tood only too welL  For Tars, not long before, had
eased through her own ordeal-the deat, i. a briliant
ir fight, of her second brother Atholl ho4evotee and
o from nursery days. So when aoy's;tn eame,
ter funess of sympathy and undetdi'were oat-
Iretohed like wings to shield him, if miht b,- f
he word, as she had k iown it. 
Fortit once, she-lung aside the veil of grown-up
seerves and wrote stright from he egr  passiobate
teart to the Bracelet-bond Brother, unseen fer yeas,
ret linked with her by an imperishabl meiay; and    S-
row linked closer stil by a mutual grie. 
The comfort to Boy of that Bpontaneewius-T $Ia    -,
,utpouing had been greater than se knew-.t.   . 'g  :
oild ever let her know. For the old intimao;.'l  .:-
ever been quite re-established between them -iane' 
he Lay of his tacess juvenile proposal-for so he aw
.aow. -They had only met that onee, when he was
tome for Christma. On the second occasion, they  d ad
disd. Throughout the War they had oore     nded    : 
tally; but her letters, thouif eotionate and saiterly,
bsCd an unaeisable someth   tht affected the tone
respons. He had been rash enough, once,         -
e on their special relation. But he was,  '-"
|a by-; -.ad. bead hkis prii. * . 
H dred     kns  how it would be if they wat
_0^WolovtEel~ n love with hert Shewas supnga
-fi||l lifc J|| t, be.-new, nor-- * Ba had  - h   ;



<pb n="152"/>
·sinetvely know  aten-that his cnvicton 
sore did not amount to being in love.  o o
be. lt and wa-med with the ire of paio   Ana d
couldn't very well fll in love across six thousandi
of ea. Oertainly none of the girls he had daed
and ridden with since his arrival in India had
him that way. And for him marriage was an imp
consideation. Some day he supposed it would
him.-as an urgent  ersonal issue. But there
remendous lot to be done first; and girls were
cattle.
Unsuspeted by him, the intimate relation .i
mother-while it quickened his need for woman's
vdoping tendernes    and sympathy-held his h
leash by etting up a standad, to which the
gil rarely aspired, much lees attained.
And now she was gone, in some strange, en
way, she held him still. At rare intervals, she
again to him in dreams; or when he hovered 
verge of sleep. Dreams, or visions-they
learly in memory as any waking aet; and
left a vvid after-sense of having been in touch w
.'e:y self. More and more oonvicio do - 
t she still had joy in 'the blosom ad fi
"Us'; that even in death she was neaer to -
many living mothers to their sons.  -.;   '
A  trange experience: strangest of l,
uidpiilty with which he came to accep it as 
the natural order of thing. The intuitivei
raey analytical. Moreover, he hd seen; heh
he knew. It is the invincible arment of t1he 
Against belie born of vivid, re te 
loquacity of logio, the formulae of pure intele
like waves upon a rock-and with as little
intensity and persistence of Boy's exprience :
left no room for insidioP w r of doubt; 
he have tolerated such septiism in other,
though it might be, if one had not sen, nor
known.
So he neither wrote nor spoke of it to % 'i
could scarce have kept it fm Tara, te
who had shared all his thoughts and  im
,   pgownup Tan hbd become 4o      ' 



<pb n="153"/>
Dr a' on   cso           *so sacrd. To 
wo au cofidence  o intimate, 8so acred. To ei: ehieP
e would fain have oonflded everythbing, rememberg
er last command; but Sir Nevil' later letters-
lough unfaiingly sympatheti---were not ealculated to'
yoke filial outporngs. For the time being, he seemed
D have shut himself in with his gief. Perhaps he, of
1l others, had been least able to  nderstand Boy's   *
ilure to press for short leave home. He had said very 
ttle on the subject. And Boy--with the instinct of
ansitive nature to take their tone from others-had
Iso said little: too little, perhaps. Least said may be
Donest mended; but theare re times when it may-
riden a rift to a gulf.
In the end, he had felt impelled at least to me
is dream experiences, and let it rest with his faher
rhether he said any more.
And by return mail came a brief but poignant answer:
Thank you, my dearesBoloy, for telling Se what you
id. It is a relie to knoon have some sort of eomfort 
-if only in dreams. You ae fortunate to be so made.
fer a, for purpose of comfort and guidance, one's
paeity to believe in.esuh communion is the measur
£ its reality. As for me, I  na still utterly, desolately
lone. Perhaps some day she will reach me in spite of
iy little faith. People who resort to mediums and the
utomatio writing craze are beyond me: though the
amptation I understand. You may remember a ea-
awe of Maeterlitck-' We have to grope timidly and
tke sure of every footstep, as we cross th, thushol]
as even when the threshold is oessedw--Vt sbaF l
wdtainty be found-t One cannot speak of them
'g    e osolitude is too great.' That is my oV..   '
about it-at present." 
B last had given Boy an impression that his solitude,  ;
*riever desolating, was a sortof santuary, not to be
1eed as yet, even with his son. And, in the fce of
hA lonmeiness, it seemed almost cruel to enlarge on his
a        sense of intimate oommunion with her who had
u.nfalingly their Jewel of Delight. 
degrees-in the long months of eaa
all-hil ethereal link with her had come to 
ad. more real than his link with those others,
rfr'yestrangy r-mote from his nnr     e



<pb n="154"/>
Tonight-after reading both letters-that 
niomesse seemed stronger than ever. Could it be?
t Ae mgnetism   of India was in the nature
intimation from her that for the present his w
here   By the hidden forces that mould men's
he had been drawn to the land of heart's desire; r
at home, neither his family nor his country e
have any particular need of him. Whether or no
had need of him, he assuredly had need of her.
was the very strength of that feeling which had
him pause.
But now, at last, he knew beyond cavil that, f
his mind-or was it his conscience 1-might haver
split straws, he had been drawn to Bajputana, as
sistibly as if that vast desert region were the moon
he a wavelet on the tidal shore.
With a great sigh he rose, yawned cavernonuslB
shivered. Better get to bed and to sleep:-a be
didn't dank and jolt and batter your brains to a
Things would look amaingly differat in the m
.~ , .~~~~~~ .W                 'I
*,.  ' ' '        .        '      '           .:-  :i r



<pb n="155"/>
16 -                 .     - I
155-~~~~~~~~~ . .
CHAPTER m.
" Darkness and solitude shine for me:
For life's fair outward part, are rife
The silver noises: let them be.
It is the very soul of life
Listens for thee, listens for thee."
-Anon M   fnml.
E depressingly bare, whitewashed bedroom owned a.
reach bedstead, with brass rails ;-a welcome 'fidd
a dak bungalow, especially after three very brokw
ghts in an Indian train. Tired to the point of atupefac-
on, Boy promised himself he would sleep the eock
mand; eat a three-decker Anglo-India breaklaet, and
lereafter be his own man again. In that faith he laid
is head on the least lumpy portion of the pillow--d
L less than five minutes found himself quite intolerably 
ide awake.                                   :
Though the bedstead neither repudiated him.-or
ook liberties 'with his person, ghostly laft arga "a
Ibrations still jarred his nerves and played deds
ea in his brain. Though he kept his eyeids severely
d, sleep-the coveted anodyne-seemed to hover
1 the misty edge of things, always just out of reaeh.
he body was over-tired, his brain abnormally alert.
e _change of position, that was to be positively the
, lost its virtue in the space of three minutes, till
aheet-that was too narrow for the mattress-
Onme ruckled into hills and valleys and made things
se than ever. Having started like this, he knew .
dle   capable of keeping it up gaily till the smai:i.t
a; nd to-night, of all nights- !     . 
through his closed eyelids, he was still awa, l
A   verandah doorway framed a wide paeel otS r
EA   Al.r. .   , a t Ala .'n nraUiwl. .4- »J Toin:



<pb n="156"/>
|: lo6          FPAR T0 SEE 
He had flung 1open as usual and rolled up the 
A bedroom he4btically sealed made him feel sufo
imprisoned; i 0 he must, perforce, put up with 
moon; and when the world was drowned in her
anoe, deep seemed almost a sin. But to-night, m
F    no, he craved Bleep as an opium-eater craves his
peiets,-because he wanted to dream. It was
weeks sine he last had sight of his mother. But
she must be near him in his loneliness; aware, in
mysterious fashion, of the deep longing with *h
longed for sight or sense of her, to assure him 
in spite of qualms and indecisions-he had 
aright. Conviction grew that directly the veil of
fell he would see her. It magnified his insomnia
mere discomfort to a bafling inimical presence
holding him from her:-till utter weariness blotted
everythng; and even as he hovered on the v
deep, she was there. ..
he was lying in her hammock under the
her apple-blossom sari, sunlight flickerin  throwugh
leaves. And he saw his own figure moving towa
without the least surprise, that he could see and,
himselfas another being, while stil remaining
himsel. 
He heard his own voice say, low and few
"Beloved little Mother-I am here. Always- I,'
bat6 I  remel bered Chitor. Now-turned out i
b t'le-I have come to Ohitor." 
. . Then he was on his knees beside her; and her
-  ht an thistledown, strayed over his hair, in tfh
f a caress that so unfailingly stilled his
*   .qat. VWithout actual words, by some
-bterpentratlon, she seemed to know all that 
his heart-the perplexities and indecislons; th
nsmn   of Home and the dread of it; the
'makn  things clear to his father: And  e the
her touch charmed away all inner confsions, all 
z heartache. But when he rose impdlve
E   v*hve vtaken her in his arms-ehe was go
agone; .. . the hammok,tee
_PHewas standing alone on a moonlit plan,
aiA *mnalroa   h w h ahoAr nw      A       Hf Albni a



<pb n="157"/>
.. .         : - ,  · - -.- ... *· r- wm...,
PISGAH HEIGHTS                mt 
Amh; and rising out of it abruptly-as he had seen it
ast night-loomed the black bulk of Chitor; the sacred,
diltary ghost of a city, linked with his happiest days
if childhood and his mother's heroic tales. The great
ook was searped and bastioned, every line of it. The
raIs, ruined in parts, showed ghostly shades of rain
ieyond; and soaring high above all, Khumba Bina's
die-storied Tower of Victory lifted a giant finger to
he unhe   g heavens. Watching it, fascinated, trying
a vain to make out. details, he was startlingly beset
y the strangest among many strange sensations that
bad visited his imaginative brain: nothing less than a
evival of the long-ago dream-feeling, the strange sense
Of familiarity-he knew  Beyond all cavil, he knew
wery line of that looming shadow, every curve of the
bill. He knew the exact position of the old bridge
rver the Gamberi river. From the spot where he stood,
te could find his way unerringly to the Padal Pol-
he fortified entrance to the road of Seven Gates ;--
he road that had witnessed, three times in three hundred
rears, that heroic alternative to surrender, the trile l
ite of Johur :-the final down-rush of every mal, de-
ender, wearing the saffron robe and coronet of him
rho embraces death as a bride; the awful slauhter
A the lowest gate, where they fell, every man of them,
efore the victors entered in....
The horror and savage exaltation of it-all stfzisd, n
ensibly, in his veins that he caught himsef- dimy
wondering-was it he, Boy Sinclair, who stood tmeb
'membering these thngs-or another . . . 
And before that erazy question could resolve itself-
ehlnd he was lying wide awake again in his rukled bed,
lumpy pillow, staring at the wide patch of moon-
Ight framed by his open door.
Not morning ye, confound it allI But the tiredness
d loneliness were lean gone. It was always so when
Ibeoas to him thus. Tacitly, he knew it, and she knew
it,  - visitation. There was no delusion of having
ht rback again; only the comforting assuranoe
MVe wa near him still. There was also, on this
adar   aa cu riosity and impatene not to be
:        lf on his electric torch, he consulted
:ra. Heai h.1ast four-why not ... .  A&d-



<pb n="158"/>
NW ABRTO   SEK r       'II  ''-
n distance to the lower gate, and only a mile of
road up to the city.
Thought and         were almost simultaneous.
was out of bed, standing in the. doorway. The m
Tmuloudad brilliance seemed to flood his brain; to
it of aobwebs and dispel all desire of sleep. For
loved the veiled spirit of night as most men love
unveiled face of morning; and in no way, perhaps,
he more clealy of the East. In a land where the
slays his thousands, the moon comes triumphantly,
her own: and Boy deeide4, there and. then, that
the glamour of her light he would take his first lo
Ohitor. Whether or no it rally was his first look,
might possibly find out when he got there.
His train-basket provided him with a hurried cUpF
te%  bisuits and a providential hard-boiled egg.
had no qualms about rousing Bishun Singh to
Surj, or disturbing the soldiery quartered at the
His grandfther had written of him to the 
Udaipur-a cousin in the third degree: and he
lev6 tO go in and out, during his stay, at what
he :pleasd. He would remain on the rook till d
·and rom the ninth storey of Khumba Bana's Tow
would see the sun rise over Ohitor....
.alf an hour later, he was in the saddle
theIempty road; Terry, a scurrying shad
;i j*   Bishun Singh left to finish his night's 
_ate him loomed the magnet that had d
a ' ]S :Aid bed at this unearthly hou-the great 
-,'.  rt  thres miles long, less than a mile broai
edto a battleship ploughing through the
sea of bush-grown hills at its base. 
iding quickly through new Ohitor-a di
town, fast asleep-he reached the fortified..p
Ws echallenged by sleepy soldiery; gave his msae
paued on-into another world; a world :thati
. intesingly familir with every hundred yarlsof
* * At one point he halted abreast of two rough 
gaves of the valiant pair who had
]ike Bajputs, in that last terrible  g
of Akbar entered in, over the bodiefts 
'  i.dle   saffron-robed warriors, -and made  ^
oe  deolation for ever. One-- mere boyt 



<pb n="159"/>
PE3GA    HEBHTS 
teen-was the only son of his house. Beside him, lanoe
in hand, fought his widowed mother and gi wife; 
and in death they were not divided. The other, Jaimul
of Bednore, was a far-away ancestor of his own mother.
How often she had told him the tale-adding proudly
that, while Bajasthan endured, the names of those two
would shine clear in the firmament of time, as stars in
the firmament of space.
Through gateway after gateway--under the lee -o a
twenty-foot wall, pierced for musketry,-he passed,.a
silent shadow. And gradually there stole over him
afresh the confused wonder of his dream,-was it he him-
self who rode-or was it-that other, returning to the
sared city after long absence t For the moment he
oould hardly tell. But-what matter ? The astonis-
ing thrill of recognition was all ...
Bound about the seventh gateway clustered the sem-
blance of a village; shrouded, slumbering forms strewn
around in the open ;-ghosts all. The only inant
realities were himself and Suraj and Chitor, aLd t   ,e
ilence of the sleeping earth, watched over by,. -   ::
sleeping stars. Within, and about him, hovered aatr- 
ring consciousness of ancient, unehanging India; u tly
impervious to mere birds of passage -   the West;
veiled, elusive, yet almost hideously reaL  So real,
just then, to Boy, that-for a ew   ing   pnea
he was unaware that he rode through a id-  b
by man. Ghosts of houses and temples sid 
either side of him, as he spurred Surj -to a o.iAetl
made unerringly for the main palace. There was a
for the Bana-news of Akbr's amy-that did not
brook delay....
Not till uraj stopped dead-there where the Plaee
had once stood in its. glory-did he come to himhlf_,
as abruptly as when he waked in the French bedstead 
an. hour ago.                . 
G.one was the populous city through which he hed,-
Iddxn in anoy; gone the confusion of himself with tbhAFt
etrub  self-how many centuries old ? But the Iamipa -·r
bok of the palace was no dream; nor the fait thMt*J  -
toj1*inc. -and sharply domed, it stood before him  I '.
I   ~001.e but within sides it was hollow as a sdAf,



<pb n="160"/>
AOU                ML L          -'L1V: 
a plaee of ghosts. Suddenly there came over
old childish dread of dark, that he had never q
grown. But dread or no, explore it he must. . .
As his foot touched earth, a low his warned
was trespassing, and clutching Terry's collar, he
rigid, while the whip-like shadow of death
across a strip of moonlight-and disappeared.
was life,-of a sort, in Ohitor. So Boy trod warily 
paused from room to room; dread of dark f
in the weird faination of foreknowledge verified
Through riven walls and roofs, moonlight
its spetral brightness  tensifying every pa
streak of shadow., And there, where Kings and
had held audienoe-watched by their womenfolk 
fretted sereens-was -neither roof nor walls;
group of marble pillars, as it were assembled in
conferene. The stark silence and emptiness-
yesterday, but of centurie-smote him with a
pang. From end to end of the rock it 
ating presencee,-tutelary goddess of Chitor.
is an emptiness of the open desert, of an un
sowfleld that lifts the soul and sets it face to fa
God; but the emptiness of a city forsaken is
body.with the spark of life extinct:--'the s
loosedthe golden bowl broken, and the pitcher
a  hefo  tain  . ..'
:- teTy's sharp bark, a squawk and a suffle of
·made him start violently and jarred him all
It eems d almost profane-as if one were in a
Oaing the marauder to heel, he mounted da 
to the Tower of Victory. For the moon was
westward; and he must see that vast view
moonlight. Then the dawn.... 
Onoe more deserting 8urij he cnonted    hi
Tower; scatheless as the builder's hand left
centuries ago. Massive and arrogant, t loom
him; scarcely a foot of stone unarven, so far a
see-exploring the four-square base of it with
of the moon and his torch. Figures, in
everywhere-animal, human and divine;    '
impossible forms, impossibly intertwined 
any aspet, and n moonlight hideously so



<pb n="161"/>
rellent f          y obsene. Bt even      hile hi
repellent, frankly obscene. But even while his
uitured eye rejected it all, some nfiniteiml fragment
of himself knew there was symbolic meaning in that
agy of sculpture, could one but find the key.
Up and up, round and round the inner spiral stair-
ose he climbed, in a creepsome darkness, invaded by
moonbeams, hardly less creepsome, admitted through
window-like openings set in every faee of every storey.
With each inrush of light, each flash of his torch, in
leepest darkness, those thronging figures, weirdly dis-
borted, sprang at him afresh, sending ignominious trickles
down his spine. Walls, window slabs, door beams-
the vast building was encrusted with them from base
to summit; a nightmare of prancing, writhing, gesticu-
lating unrest; only one still face repeated at intervals-
the Great God holding the wheel of Law....
Never had Boy more keenly appreciated the company
of Terry, who, in spite of a Oeltio pedigree, was not
enjoying this prolonged practical joke.
It was relief unspeakable to emerge at last, into full
lght and elean sweet morning air. For the ninth steny
ander the dome, was arcaded on all four sides and
efreshingly innocent of decoration. Not a postuing
Igure to be seen. Nothing but restful slab of plhed
stone. There was meaning in this also-oould one
Batch the trend of the builder's thought.
On a slab near an arcaded opening Boy sa grate
lown; while Terry, bored to extinction with the wols:
iffar, curled himsf up in a shadowed corner and Wa
ast asleep. " Unfriendly little beast," thought Boy;
nd promptly forgot his existence.
For below him, in the silvery moonlight of morning,
lay Ohitor; her shattered arches and battlements, her
temples and palaces dwarfed to mere footstools for the
gods. And beyond, and again beyond, lay the naed
strength and desolation of northern tajputana-white
with poppy-fields, velvet-dark with sab, jagged with
outcrops of volcanic rook; the gaunt warrior eoumlntry,
battered by eenturies of struggle and slaughter; making
ialamity a whetstone for courae; sying,in effect, to
kied and enemy, ' Take me or leave me. You oaonet
abfl   mea      fa
,i..e ,S Beadr }a Eiad    BA.    e Hilayaa hod



<pb n="162"/>
W -O                                      '.SEE-K  '
-         * !o tEt 7EE
subjugated him. But this stro    unlovely
rock and. md, of horses and swords, of  i
cruelty and daring, irresistibly laid siege to his 
gave him the authentic sense of being one with it 
On a day, in that summer of blessed memory
mother had almost promised him that, once
would revisit India if only for the joy of m
pilgrimage with him to Ohitor. And here he sat o
summit of Khumba BUna's Tower-alone. That
the way of life...
Gradually there stole over him a great wea
body and spirit; pure reaction from the uplift 
strange adventure. His lids drooped heavily. In a
moment he would have fallen sound asleep; b
saved himself, just in time. When he craved the 
it eluded him; now, undesired, it assailed him. B
would never do. He might sleep for hours. 
the back of his mind lurked a clear conviction tot
was waiting for more than the dawn....
: '3go shake off drowsiness he rose, stretched
posed to and fro several times-and did not sit
again. Folding his arms, he leaned his shoulders 
the stone embrasure; and stood so, a long while,
ing-with every faculty of flesh and spirit-the st
the mystery, the pearl-grey light and bottomless
of shadow; his mind emptied of articulate thought
his soul poised motionless, as it were a bird on o
ins. ...
Was it fantasy, this gradual intensifying of his
mood, this breathless stir in the region of his h
some vital part of him seemed gradually  th
into the vastness and the silence .. .   -
. And suddenly, in every nerve, he knew-^-"t
alone. In the seeming emptiness of the place,
ting, some one hovered near him.
exultant, he held his breath; and an answe
of the heart set him tingling from head to foot.
It was more than a vague 'sense of presence.' :'.
in the central happiness that flooded him-as the
light flooded the desert-was an almost startlingl
ness; not the mere emotional effect of musi or ;
but sure knowledge that she was there with:
that upper room; her disembodied tenderness



<pb n="163"/>
PISGAB   HEIGHTS               168
owards him across a barier of empty space that neither
6e nor he could traverse, for all their nearness, for
dl their longing. .
If Lance himself had come audibly up those endless
ai and stood beside him, he could not have felt more
rtfain of his presence than he felt, at this moment,
of her companionship, her unspoken assurance that he
iad chosen aright. He felt himself, if possible, the less
real of the two.
For that brief space, his world seemed empty of every-
thing, every one, but they two-so irrevocably sundered,
o1 mysteriously united.
Could he only have sight of her to complete the marvel
f it I But although he kept his eyes on the spot whence
he 'feel of her' seemed to come, not the shadow of a
hade could he see; only-was it fancy t-a hint of
bighter radiance than mere moonbeams-there, near
he opposite archway t
He dared not move a finger lest he break the spell
ret he could not restrain altogether the emotion that
urged in him, that filled his ears with a soft roar as of
eaking waves.
." God bless you, little Mother " he murmured, barely
bve his breath-and waited; expecting he knew not
ihat.
A ghost of a breeze passed close to him;-truly a
ost, for the night was dead still. Almost he eould
we sworn that if he put out a hand he would have
ehuhed her. But reverence withheld him, rather than
A;!d the next moment, the place was empty. He was
-e felt the emptiness as unmistakably as he had felt
presenee. But the pang of her going was shot
with elation that at last his waking brain had
of her-a knowledge that no man could wrest
hin, even if she never so came again. He had
bidding. He had kept his manhood pure and
sof is soul clear-and, behold, the Light
to tell how long he stood there. In those
-- .nteuIti   life, time was not. The



<pb n="164"/>
1W4              FAB TO MMEE
o ordinary sense of his surroundings faded. The
sense of reaity quickened in like measure; the
of her presence, all the more felt, because it 
unseen. ...
When he came learly to himself again, the
had vanised. Eastward, the sky was full of pri
light. It(deepened  d bed; ill, all in amo
the sun l!ped from the scabbard of the hills, keen
radiant as a drawn sword.
A full /inute Boy stood there, eyes and brain 
with biliasne. Then he knelt down and cove
face, and so remained, a long while, his whole
uplifted n a wordless estsy of thanksgiving.
4.
.,·
-                               /~~~~~~~~~~~~~~,?
*                         X z~~~~~~!



<pb n="165"/>
CHAPTER IV.
"The now upon my life-bloom sits
And sheds a dreary blight-
Thy prit o'er my spirit fit,
And rimmon oome for white."
ON an unclouded afternoon of October, Boy sat alone
with Thea Leigh in a shady corner of the Besidency
garden, smoking and talking, feeling blissfully at ease
body and very mueh at home in spirit. After the
wrench of parting with Desmond, it was balm to be
releomed by the sister who shared his high courage
d enthsiasm for life, and who was smiling at Boy
iow with the same hael-grey eyes that both had gotten
berm  their father.  But Thea's hair-her crown of
glor-belonged exclusively to herself. The colour of
it reminded him, with a pang, of autmn beech leIaves
In his own woods. It enhanced the vivid quality of
her beauty, and added appreciably to his pleasure in
wathoing her while she talked.
Boy had arrived that morning, in the mist-laden dhm
of dawn' had enjoyed a long talk with Colone Leigh;
had made the acquaintance of Vernon and Phyli
aed dsix and four; also of Flossle Eden, a id- o
d     daughter, aged twenty; and, tifin being over,
had announced his intention of riding out to re-diseover
roe-red wonderland of his childish dreams-the
po     and elephants and crocodiles and temple
.k  Thes, however, had counselled patience, threat-
r.m8g hm- with dire disillusion, if he went seeking
,ib.l .woderla at that glaringly unpoeti time of day.
"sd         cap of tea, and a ride atewi. ds"a   she"  y
_--lSLZ.i. » hag beisll ftna;ofttil m .mi ~f a Ol



<pb n="166"/>
166         '    FAR TQ SEEK
sunset, or the first glimmer of dawn, can throw a
over the municipal virtues and artistio b
Jaipur 1 I peak with feeling; because I rushed 
untimely; and, in the full glare of afternoon sns
your rose-red city looked like nothing on earth 
fearful and wonderful collection of pink and 
birthday cakes, set out for a giants' tea-party !
seemed almost a pity the giants had never oomen
eaten them up. Vinx said I was ribald. As a
of fact, he was simply jealous of my brilliant metap
Look at him now-bored to death with me, 
I'm telling the truth I"
Colonel Leigh-a tall pensive-looking man, who 
little and listened assiduously-met her challenge
the indulgent smile of a husband who can be at 
,  amused and critical and devoted: an excellent conj
tion in marriage.
" "If you can stay Boy's impatienne with your 
piors, I'll begin to have some respect for them ! "sid
And she was staying Boy's impatince now,
igarettes :and coffee and the tale of Ar6na-' B
returned.' She had revealed little by letterj-
unharacteristio touch of eaution derived from-
h:sband, who questioned the wisdom of her boll
euraon into the complexities and jarring el
, pmemai-modern Hindu household   But The
-    .4hkter of Honor Desmond, was dmogly ied
a -responsibility of the ruling rae. She stoutly 
. o preserve, in Jaipur, the ecorreot offial de
of Anglo-India. More: she possesed a railw
.  4 the heart, not to be gainsad.; as who shoaldm
t'  better than her husband, since it. hd .saed him 
hmnelf. And now, having secured Boy fore halt a 
she oomfded to him, unreservedly, ahl sbe old ' |
of.-te traio ane he was unravell in i
eactive fashion. 
"Ardna's the dearest thing," she told
he knew. "And I'm trly.fond of he. Bit so
I feel helpless. They're so haod to come
gentle, nirsmatabe Hindu woan.      Talk :oof:
eserve IE However, I'm getting quite nimble bt
and  fring; ad I gater that your-
adtather. is rather patheicall heea ...



<pb n="167"/>
PISGA    HEIGHTS 
hibe of hidden womenfolk and gurus.  Also that tihe
CM lady--Mtaji-is a bit of a tartar. Of course, having
cat eate, makes the poor child's home position ah;b
impossible. Yet she flatly reuses to go through thdb
horrid rites of restitution. And Miss Hammond-our
lady doctor at the hospital-backs her up."
"Well played, Mis Hammond I" quoth -Boy; and
remembering Afrna's cheerful letters (no word of com-
plications), all his sympathy went out to her. Might
not he-related, yet free of grandmotherly tyranny-.
somehow be able to help I Too cruel that from her
happy time in England there should spring such tra
issues. And she was not a creature made for troge
but for laughter and love and 'man's delight.' Ytj
in the Hindu natur6 of things, this very matter f
marriage was the crux of her troubles.
To the Power behind the curtain it spelt digrace,
that the eldest grand-daughter-at the ripe age of.
twenty-two-should be neither wife nor-mother... It
would need a very advanced suitor to overlook that
damning item. Doubtless a large dowry would be de-
manded By way of compenation; and, befre al, caste
must be restored. While Arua remained obduirte,
nothing could be definitely aranged; and her grand-:
father had not the heart to enforce his wife's ir'a  '. :
demands.   But if the Indian woman's ho4i ::
limited, her shrewdness and intuitive knowWledge asiV f 5
amazing; and this formidable old lady-skilled in ti;'
art of imposinghe oher wers-knew herself a mat     .
for her husband's evions aad. Arna's flat rebellion. 
She reckoed, however, without the daughter of Sir  *
Theo Desmond, who, at this point, took action-sudden 
and diseonertg                               .
"'You see the child came regulary to my purdah
pties," she explained to Boy, who was impatint no,
-luger, only absorbed. "Sometimes I had her alone
for reading and musie; and it was heart-breaktg to 
»er wilting away before my eyes     So, at last, in
I broke loose-as Vin        politely puts it-
·'wttjf sn sear  qquestions, regardless of etiquebte
it1iL th poorhl bas no mother. And I Myvec-
_i tt^lr ~thle eft.-. I beieve I at oly"
_ KiM,.,k .*«"-"*- _** art,,heM    *asi as it .



<pb n="168"/>
1 *;AB                  - TO B-B          ' 
widowed sister-in-law were in touch with a
husband.   o they had given the crew a fresh
asited by the family guru. He had just honoured
Vih a speoial visit, expecting to find the lost
erate and eager for his blessing. Shocked at:
a  of her obstinacy, he announed that, unle
heard otherwise within a week, he would put n
curae upon her; in which case her honourable
mother would not allow the poor child to eat or
under her honourable roof."
Boy's hand closed sharply on the arm of his
"Confound the fellow I It's chiefly the mental
they rely on. They're no fools; and even me n
Grandfather-who can't possibly believe such
seem .powerless to stand up against them. Does
know all this "
"It's hard to tell. They're so guarded-even.
most enlightened-in alluding to domestic 
Without a shade of diseourtesy, they simply kee
outside. Poor Arlna was terrifed at havig td
Broke down utterly. But no idea of giving ,in.
astonishing the grit one comes upon under their
gentleness. She said she would starve or drown
Z aid she should do nothing of the kind; that I
:eak to Sir Lakshman myself-oh, very
flS$  of courwse-I Afterwards, all in a rush,
tSig  tionen.  Some sort of secretarial work forme
fairly plausible. (Did you know-I'm 
aname, in a small way, over myzeal for Indian w
Oi te strength of that, one could sggest a 
: rooms in the Besidenoy; and she eould stil
on at the hospital with Mis Hammond, g
certain afternoons. It struck me as awle
imparted it to Vinx and saw him tweak his let ey
-Of course he was convinced it ' wouldn't do '; Sir
man ... myposition ... and so on. I aid -I 
make it do-and the eyebrow twitched worse 
o I mildly reminded him that he lad not held
obbing in his arms, and he didn't bappen
-maothrl Which was unanswerable.-And,
Boy, I had a hectic week of it, mailt n
aWbraud ,Aru4. ad the        .omra bl.e



<pb n="169"/>
PISGAHR HIGHTS                169
at a- the other high-buns; but I can't get at her
However-with a boldtfront and a tactful tongue, I
caried the day. So I hope the holy man will transfer
his potent curse to me. Naturally, the moment I'd.
fixed things up, came Lance's letter about you. But I
couldn't back out. And I suppose it's all right "
"Well, of oourse." Boy was troubled with no doubts
on that score. " What a family you are I I was hoping
to pick up threads with Ardna."
" You shall. But you must be discreet. Jaipur isn't
exactly Oxford. Brother and cousin are almost the
same word with them; but still--"
"Is she at the hospital now t " Boy cut in irrelevantly.
Her insistence on discretion-with Ar6na, of all peope
-struck him as needless fuing and unlike Thea. And
by now he was feeling more impatient to see Ardna than
to see Jaipur.
"No. But she seemed shy of appearing at tiffin. So
I said if she came out here afterwards, she would find
you and me alone. She's looked happier and leo
frgile lately. Even Vinx admits the event has justified
me. But of course it's simply an emergency plau-_s
transition--" 
"To what?" Boy challenged her with burpriin.-
emphasis.
"That's my puzie of puzzles Perhaps you can hep: 
me solve it. Sometimes I wonder if she knows hemil-
what she wants out of life  ... But perhaps I havt 
the key to her waverings .."                - 
At that moment a slight unmistaable figure stepped 
from the shadow of the verandah down the shallow itep  .
flanked with pots of begonia; moving with the eo: t
le  grace that Boy's heart knew too well. Dres and
sri were carnation pink. Her golden shoes hUMierd
at every step: and she pensively twired a iqa4e i   :
Jipanee parasol-elmond blossoms and buttefles
sattead abroad on silk of the frailest ble.
-;-t their instinct for that sort of thing unoonsciou,
,       T _ I" murmured Thea  " You shall have half an
ll  l  her, to pick up threads. Help me if you on,.
layhth-e godiesuretl  "
oercely heard her. He hba gone suddenly very
-        rn-Vw+A   -i Ana % ato Tn. dAIaef



<pb n="170"/>
no               FAR TO SEBRK
the carriage of her veiled head, the leis
sharply smote him that tears pricked his
fr one iNtocang   moment he was wafted 
acoss. te ham o the War to that der 
of youth, when all distances were blue aP& ail
prospeet bright with the dew of the morning
ander a mask-like stillness could he hide th$l
uprush of emotion; and had Broomn  been
him, he would have seen the sabtlhn fAM  4
steal over his face.
Thea qj.only his sudden abstraction anld the 
knukles of his left hand. She s)so realised, wtl
prie of anxiety, that he had simply not heard her
Was.it possible-could Boy be at the back of
waverings   Would his eoming mean fresh  o
tions t Too distracting to be responsible for an
of that kind. ...
.:Without a word, he had risen-and went
forward to meet her. Thea saw how, on his a
al. her studied composure fell away; and both,
they joined her, looked so happy, yet so 
composed, that Thea felt ridiculously it so.
the right word with which to effect a casua
Besponsibility for Sir Lakshman's grand-daugh
no light matter: at least she had done well in
oy.. These emerging Indian girls ... I. 
Jt was a positive relief to see the proaic
flos mden, in brief tennis skirts and shady hat, 
aross the lawn, with her boyish stride; racquet 
ink her round fae flushed with exercise.
· I smy, Aunt The--you're wanted j't u,
snnounced briskly. "Verney's- n one of his
and Mr Neil il soon be in one ot his
isnt forcibly removed. Instead of 'helping
'bals, he's been parading up and down the.
two tin pails, tied on to him with string, 
--making a beast of a row. Shouting wasn't ea
Sp I rushed in and grabbed him. 'Vemey
What re you doing ' I said sternly; and 
up at me like a sainted cherub. 'Flop, don't
I'm walkin' froo the valley of the shahow, nilJ
~.          1,~I T.e n.1n t    . lw_.I



<pb n="171"/>
r. ,wvv- .,  -r      ae    i     ';        'af  '
·an' mero   are foiowings '-.fo  the days      ty
life.'  That's the fruits/ o  teaching the Bie to
iTtflt lauq*gh ended in a sigh. " I wrned Niss Mills.
ixftfll er0eatan   4 getting out of hand. I suppose it
mewa  be ought to go home. Mr Neill," 'she explained
;:':,"'*"is VinX' shorthand secretary: volcanic, but
iadotab l htle 9 to   e Great Work! So I must fly ff
and oate     my superfluous son."     '. 
Her eyes tried to impart the warning he had not
heard. Useless. His attention was centred on Arna.
"Wonderful-isn't she t " the girl murmured, looking
after her. Then swiftly, half-shyly, she glanced up at
him. "Still more wonderful that, at last, you have 
come-that I am here too-only through her. She-to 
you  "
"Yes. A little. I want to hear-more."
"Presently. I would rather push away sad things- 
now you are here. If there was only Dyin too- ke
Oxford days. And-oh, Boy, I was bad never   riting
...  bout her. I did try. But so diffcult ... . Aa'--
you knew---   "
"Yes-I knew," he said.in a repressed voie. Oa tat
subject he could not trust himslf just yet. Every
curve and fold of her sari, and the half-sen Qoils of e 
dark hair, every movement, every quaint turn of phras 
set his nerves vibrating with an ecstasy that was p*. ;
For the moment, he wanted simply to be aware e If ; !
to hug the dear lluion that the years between we :e""
dream. And illusion was heightened by the -trvial btt
that her appearance was identical in every detail. Wa 
it chance  Or had she treasured them all this  !t -t
Only she herself looked older. Though her face Ikt 
its pansy aspect, her cheek-bones- were a shade- to
prominent; no veiled glow of health under her dusky
an. a4ut her smile could still atone for all short-
oooomuB*· '                                 ' .'
"Let's sit down," he added after a strained ilence.
" Awd tell me-what's come to Dyn t " I: -"
>hl:e  shook her head. "Oh-if we could heow, W     --t
·ia    se,a     afbe  all, trying to psh away 8sadnesw   .
fW^i mik* into her chair and looked up at him.  " 
you push it away, the more it eomes fl  l 
y^S~t.f u*"   '                       '-'"'./."*"*'.. " '  .  '^



<pb n="172"/>
'172          .'-      TO              " -f. U
from everyhere. JLvything so broken aiD*
from thi terrbli  War. At the beginning
mid all would be made new; East and We
United. But here, at home, while the best were;i
the wors were too busy with ugly whispers and
talL. , v  holy men, behind the purdah . ." 
"As bad as that, is it " asked Boy,
*om his own sensations by the subject that lay
his heart.  "And you think DyIn's in witih
crew" t"
" Yes, we are afraid ... A pity he came back/
France too soon, because half his left arm must
off. Then-you heard-he went to Calcutta " '
"Yes, I wrote at the time. He didn't a
haven't heard since."
She nodded. Sudden tears filled her eyes. "
now ... no answer. Like trying to speak with 
one dead. So Grandfather fears he was not only
art. You know how he is too quick to catch fire. 
too easily, he might believe those men who spini
like spider's webs. Also he was very sore l
arm, by some small stupid chance; and thie
btterness for that trouble ... of Tara .." 
Boy started.   "Lord-was it Tara "
ther flashed a vision of the walled ane le
New College; Dyan's embittered mood and
-ug                            bae of front  . . Looking back now, the
emed      ringly obvious; but, throgh the o
mist of his own dreams, he had seen Dyn in one
odly. Just as well perhaps. Even t this d
dea amazed aand aered him. Tar! The 
of it... I
"You   didn't know -never thought     . 
Dyan "    One finger-tip furtively intercepted
that was tealing down the side of her nose. 
"I am too illy just now," she apologised
'To me, he only spoke of it long after, whe
wounded from France. Then I saw how the b
was still there, changing the noble thoughts 
heart. That is the trouble with Dyin.
good enough for England. But too fierce vi
bMing too fierce hate-if they poison his
cmming words dressed up in high talk of



<pb n="173"/>
"How long since you heard    Have you any ad-
dress t " Boy dared not encourage her melting mood.
"Six months now." She stoically blinked back her
ears. "Not any word. Not any address, sinee he lqft
Calcutta. Last week, I wrote, addressing to the offie
of a paper there, because onee he said that editor gave
hm work. I told him all the pain in my heart. If
that letter finds him-some answer must come."
"Well, if it does, I promise you this much;-I-Il
unearth him-somehow, wherever he is- "
"Oh, Boy I I hoped-I knew-       I " She clasped
her hands to hide their tremor, and the look in her eyes
came perilously near adoration.
Boy had spoken with the obol assurance of his father's
race, and without a glimmering idea how his rash promise
was going to be fulfilled. "I'll do my level utmost,
anyhow," he added more soberly. "But there's you-
your home complications- "
She turned her hands outward with the expreasve
gesture of her race. " That foolish sadness we cno push
away. What matter for anything-now      I rest-I
breathe-I am   here-- "    Her smile shone out,
sudden and brilliant. " Almost like England-this big
green garden and children and sound of playing tennis.
Let s be young again. Let us, for a small time, not
remember that all outside is Jaipur and the desert-
4nsty and hot and cruel; and dark places full of secret
ad terrible things. Here we are safe. Here it Is almost
Her gallant appeal so moved him, and the lighter vein
* charmingly became her, that Boy humoured her mood
Witngly enough ...
When his tea arrived, she played hostess with an
allfing mixture of shyness and happy importance,
appfig his lively sallies with the quick wit of old days.
Ad when Surij was announced-" Oh, please-may I
sieeb m I " she begged eagerly as a child.
:. oAi grciously permitted his velvet nose to be
by alien fingers, light as rose petals. Then Boy
-nto the saddle; and Arhna stood watching
bhe went--ab and dog trotting to heel-a grace-
r~ rfigure, shadowed by her semi-transg  arent.



<pb n="174"/>
n 17- FXL -T X                 8B0 -
At a bend in the drive, where a seaty 
attention, he turned for a parting salute.  r 
gesture might or might not have been iten fi
he at leat knew all about the need fi being
Fo, o  leaving the tea-table, they had passedi
the drem of almost ngland into the dusty
of Jaipur.
i.
X,.                             via~~~~~~~~~;



<pb n="175"/>
* " .  * * "  *            *' ^ S S f.
CHAPTER V.
"Broadly speaing, there are two blocks of people--Eat and West;
eople who interfere and people who don't interfere;  . .  Et Is a
taFist, West is an idealist, of a olumsy sort."--STAcY Avoma.
i    n.I, or less, of tree-bordered road sloped gently
rom the Residency gate-posts to the walled City of
ioctory, backed by craggy, red-grey spurs of the AraLiM
akge, hidden almost in feathery heads of banyan,
cac, and neem-a dusty, well-ordered oasis, holing
ts own against the stealthy oncoming of the desert.
North and east ran the screen of low hills with their
reeping lines of masonry; but from south and welt
be softly encroaching thing crept up to the city WaHi,,
i through the gates, powdering every twig and leaf 'aid
tiee with the fine white dust of death. Shadeles aad
blnrlees, to the limit of vision, it rose and ell :in long
llowing waves; as if some wizard, in the.morning of
e. world, had smitten a living ocean to ifeless sand,
hire nothing flourished but the camel thorn and the
plait and gaunt cactus bushe-their limbs petrifted
a wird gesticlation.
But on the rad itself was a sufficiency of life and
clour-parrokeets flashing from  tree to tree, like
mealds made visible and vocable; village women
.wtd. i n red and yellow veils; prancing Bajput
..SiS   straight from the Middle Ages; ox-carts and
"' 'ieii ciirtl edcamels, with fiapping lip and scornful
;^ a tggish stream of life, rising out of the landscape
ing, from   dawn to dusk, through the seven
And there, on the low spur, beyond
" i'b~tbtd the famous Tiger Fort, and the
tJaI Sing-he that built the rose-red
d~~Lib    fl..&. 4IIILA   ..· -A ~·I



<pb n="176"/>
176              FAR TO -SE=EK 5
in terms of stone and mortar, 'Here shall thy
waves be stayed 1' Nearing the fortified gateways
not4a every inch of flat surface was silkily p
'ev  diin, -silted with sand. Would it rest
-desert- oty5he wondered, the ultimate victory 
lat word ... I
Close against the ramparts, sand and dust were
into a deep drift; or was it a deserted pile of 
Suddenly, with a sick sensation, he saw the rags
and stir. Arms emerged-if yon could eall them
-belonging to pinched, shadowy faces. And fr
human dust-heap came a quavering wail, "
-Ih"aj I"
"What is it, Bishun Singh I " he asked sharply
eme, trotting at his stirrup. 
"Only the famine, Haszr. Not a big tro
year, they say. But from the villages these oome
a to the city, believing the Mahar  has ple
wil give."
"Does he give t"
Bishun Singh's gesture seemed to depreatea
eurioity. "The Mahaaj is great, but the 
like fies. If their Karma is good, they find a fe
. fls; if evil--they die."
Boy said no more. That simple statement 
lusive as a dropped stone. But, on reaching
wy, he scattered a handful of loose coins. 
: nstatly a cry went up: "He gives money 
Ji dd Maharbjl"1      Not merely arms, but
skeletons .emerged, seething, srambling,  i
wasted to mere laws. A few of the boldes
at Boy's stirrup; whereat Bishun Singh b
off, as if they were flies indeed. .
Unresisting, they tottered and fell one againt X
like ninepins : and Boy, hating the tan, tuinS,
away. But rebuke was futile. One oould do
It was that which galled him. One could only
mentally brushing them aside-like Bishun
Spetres vanished, however, once he and .i
absorbed into the human kaleidoscope of tlhs
.'a-s



<pb n="177"/>
PISGAH HEIGHTS                 177
reet, paved with wide strips of hewn stone; one half
d it sun-flooded; one half in shadow. The olour
ad movement; the vista of pink-washed houses speckeia
ith white florets; the gay muslins, the small turban
ad inimitable swagger of the Rajput-Sun-descended,
-awakened in him those gleams of ancestral memory
hat had so vvidly beset him at Chitor. Sights and
ounds and smells-the pungent minglin of spies and
Lust and animals-asailed his senses with a vague yet
ioignant familiarity: fruit and corn-shops with their
ramids of yellow and red and ochre, and the fat
tIown bunnia in the midst; shops bright with bras-
rork and Jaipur enamel; lattice windows, low-browed
rohes, glimpses into shadowed courts; flitting  gures
if veiled women; humbler women, unveiled, winnowing
rain, or crowned with baskets of sacred cow-dung,
topping like queens....
And the animal --   I Extinct, almost, in modern
achine-ridden cities, here they visibly and audibly
revailed.  For Asia lives intimately-if not always
mercifully-with her animals;  and Boy's catholic
deotion embraced them all. Horses first-a long way
Iist. But bullocks had their charm: the gracful
totting zebus, horns painted red and green. nd the
Maderous swaying of elephants-sensitive eares,
rvous of their own bulk, resplendently eaparisonem
kadthe--a flh of the jungle, among asual goats,
wris, and pariahs-went the royal cheetahs, led on
Bps; walking delicatey, between scarlet peons, look-
ig or all the world like amiable maiden ladie with
ito-hooded caps tied under their chins. In the wake
ftheir magnificence two distended donkeys, on parodies
if legs, stageed under loads more distended still,
omap dhobies perched callously on the cruppers.
.KA[~ , Boy's eye delighted in the jewelled sheen of
ri   , rivalling in sanctity the real lords of Jalpur
.Bfin'*s sacred bulls. Some milk-white and onyx-eyed,.
iM l black and insolent, they sauntered among the
hop fronts, levying toll and obstructing trffi
arrogant, immune. ..            .
i '^tstated intervals, like wrong notes in istaeoe-
i ithere sprang wrought-iron gas-lamps
ataa' LMlkt s I            -      



<pb n="178"/>
178t           .FPAB  TO SEEK 
So riding, he came to the heart of the ity--
open spaae, whare the shops seemed brighter, the -
gayer; ta by contrast, the human rag and
heaps, ear and cripples, more terribe to
B    H e  first ray of actual reeognition
thbugh. the haze of famil   sensations. For3
rhiteotural exuberance culminated in the vast
eing fagade of the Hall of the Winds and the I
fanting its royal standard-five colours blasied
cloth of 'gold. But it was not these that held
gbze. It was the group of Brahmin temples,
carven, rose-red from plinth to summit, rising
fights of erowes and iridescent pigeons; their 
lithe forms clean eat against the dusty haze;
shallow steps fanked with marble elephants, s
with orange-yellow robes of holy men and gro
brightly-veiled women.
At sight of them Boy instinctively drew rein ;
thee' in the midst of the shifting, drifting crowd, he
mobtless, letting the vision sink deep into his 
wbw Terry investigated a promising smell, and B
begh, wholly incurious, gossiped with a potter,
mhose wheel emerged an endless succession of hs
y.       t ativ e  ay lamps, with a lip for the cotton 
._.'l i  r, with equal zest, was creating v
animals, birds and fishes.
-   .ok, HLaszdr-for the Dewai," Bishmu S .in&
-  n^ Boy's attention the one matter of real -
jst -hen, to all right-minded Hindus.  Only two
weeks.. So they are making lamps, without n
for houses and shops and the palace! of the
Vey big tamasha Hazir." 
.e mlarged volubly on the coming festival, to
Sahib, who took such unusual interest in the 
Indi; While Boy sat silent, watching, remembeO
Nearly nineteen years ago he. had eem the :
-Pst of Lights; had, been drien, sitting
mother's knee, through a fairy city  lined in tr
pott of flame, down to the shore of the Ma
where the lights qnavered and ran
the dead ruins came alive with them. All
had seemed to flicker in his fancful brna i;
*_ *  *  ^   st-  --  _it  S.9



<pb n="179"/>
iad been moved to dictate his very first attaept M-A s
poem. ...
Suddenly, sharply, there rose above the chattr df the
rowd and the tireless clamour of crows, a scream of
ningled rage and anguish that tore at his nerves and 
sent a chill down his spine.
Swinging round in the saddle, he saw a spectral
Igure of a woman-detached from a group of spetres,
huddled ironically against bulging sacks of grain. One
hrivelled arm was lifted in denunciation; the other
ressed a shapeless bundle to her empty' breatts.
Obviously little more than a girl-yet with no trace 
)f youth in her ravaged facee-she stood erect, every
bone visible, before the stall of a bangle , fat and  ,
well liking, exuding rolls of flesh above his dA.,51l and
njoying his savoury chupattis hot and hot; entirely
mpervious to unseemly ravings; entirely o.cupie in
pursuing trickles of ghi 2 with his agile tongue that lone 
night be lost.
"That shameless one was begging a morsel of food,'"
the toymaker explained conversatioally. "Doubtles
her stomach is empty. Wahl  Wahl But she hat no
Aioe. And a man's food is his own ..." 
As he spoke a milk-white bull ambled by, plundrln
at will; his privileged nose adventuring near and near 
to the savoury smell. Promptly, with reverentdeagl- .
Less, the man proffered half a freh chupatti -te  ,
acred intruder. 
At that the starving girl-mother lunged forward with
he yell of a hunted beast; lunged right alor  the  - 
)ath of a dapper young man In an TAgsh suit, gee.
turban, and patent-leather shoes.-  .         *.i-  ',
"Peace, she-devil t Make way," he cried; and aei- -I
ng her wrist-that looked as if it would sap at  i touch 
-he f-lng her aside so roughly that she stggere  and
elI the child beneath her emitting a feeble waiL . ..
Sinoe the days of his imprisonment, cruelty witmeed
iad a startling effect on Roy. Between the moment
sSen he sprang from the saddle, in a blase of tury, to
khe moment when he stood confrnting the sw,'
ald Indian-riding-crop in one hnd, the oter 
^   .*-;·fwi~"h                       ****6~ .  . .   '-.b
iw -l- mousbth.    .',ts butu. H.
Itf".A



<pb n="180"/>
1D              FAB TO SUEK               ''nrA
supporting the girl and her babe-his mind was a
The thing was done almost before the impulea
hi brain. He wondered if he had struck the 
whom he ws now arraiing furiously in fluent
stani and whose sullen, shifty face was remindg
of some one-somewhere.... 
."Have you no respect for suffering-or for 
other than your own t " he demanded, scorn un
in his look and tone.
The man's answering shrug was frankly contemp
"All you English are mad," he said in the ve
"If she die not to-day, she will die to-morrow.
already there are too many to feed--" 
She will not die to-day or to-morrow," Boy
with. Olympian assuranoe. "Courage, little
-he addressed the girl-" you shall have food, you 
the sonling."
As she raised herself, clutching at his arm, he 
uncomfortably aware that her rags of clothing.
probably verminous; that his chivalrous pity.
tinged with repulsion. But pity prevailed. Su
her to a neighbouring stall, he bought fruit, w
devoured like a wild thing. He begged a little
in a lotah and gave her money for more. Half
she dropped the money, emptied the smal jar 
at a gulp, and flung herself at his feet, pressing
head on his dusty boot; covering him with
Imperatively he bade her get up. No result 
stooped to enforce his command....
She had fainted.
"Help, mother-quick l" he appealed to an.
woman who hovered near the stall and     p
Instinctively, to the note of command. 
As she stooped over the girl he sam in low- .
tones: "Listen   It is an order. --Give w
to her and the child. Take her to the Bulrra-
compound. There she will be cared for. I 
He slipped two ruped into her hand, adding a:.'
more-when all is done acc    to ordier."d  . '
" Hail Hai    The Shib is a Son of Pri
mured the favoured one, reflecting. shewdly
anans would sumce to feed those poor empty 



<pb n="181"/>
PI8TGAH EBfIfOflS             181.
d gahering up her light burden she bore it away
to Boy's unfeigned relief.
Would Thea scold him-or uphold him, he wondered,
having committed himself. The whole thing had been
swift, so unreal, that he seemed half a world away
om the green Residency garden, with its atmosphere
twentieth-century England, scrpulously, yet uncon-
iously, preserved in a setting of sixteenth-century
dia. And Boy had a strain of both in his com-
eition.
Across the road Bishun Singh-tolerant of his Sahib's
gasies-was still chatting with the potter; a blare
discord in a minor key announced an approaching
ocession; and there, in talk with the bangle-seller,
ood the cause of these strange doings; keeping a
rious eye on the mad Englishman, but otherwise
akly unconcerned. Again there dawned on Boy
e conviction that he had seen that face before. It
u not in India. It was linked with the same sensa-
as, in a milder form. It would come in a moment....
It ame.
Behind the slight, foppish figure, the eye of his mind
w suddenly-not the sunlight and colour of Jaipur,
it a stretch of grey-green sea, tawny cliffs, and sandy
ore ... St Bupert's I Of coure, mnmisble: the
den mouth, the shifty eyes. ...
instantly he went forward and said in Englih: "I
'y-exuse me-but is your name Ohandrnath   "
The man started and stiffened. "Tht is no matter
*-Perhaps not.  Only . .  ou're very like a boy
trw --one term at St Bupert's School with me."
:WWe, I wM at St Bupert's. A beastl hole--
a, too, spoke English, and scanned Boy's face with
mrwed eyes. "Sinclair-Is it  You tumbled down
bil: onc to me-aid that Desmond fellow--  "
:T-  ,'I did. Lucky for you," Boy answered, stifen-
his-: tum-. But because of old days-because thi
im  *mkg specimen of manhood had incidentall
9l||;t   luid Desmond together, he held out hi
'"      t~'/. I lost my temper," he said casamy,
Jb ;- " But you put my blood up."
-h 8mi lip    id bl8  a    . 



<pb n="182"/>
"till so senstve--      Then better to
India. I only pushed that crazy girl asde.
knock and kick our people without slightesom
Perhapso     are a tourist-or new to this countly
.Wol. and manmer set Boy's nerves on edge 
.h^ b ea imprudent enough for one day. " I'
n_    months on the Frontier in a cavalry Be
he said; " but I only came to Jaipur yesterday."'
"Well, take my advice, Mr Sinclair, and leavel
people alone. They don't want Englishmen
pretence of sentimental fuss over them. They like
better to be pushed-or even starved-by t
j4t. You may not believe it. But I belong to4
So I know."
Boy, who also 'belonged' in a measure, very
aid so-but again prudence prevailed.   "I
enough to disagree with you," he said paably.
question of non-interference, of letting ill a
one's afraid or can't be bothered-isn't  eA
question; it's a root question of human _
Some men can't pass by on the other side. 
wong, it simply isn't arguabl. It's a matter
individual eonscienee-the heart"
" 0onesience and heart-if not drastally 
by the logically reasoning brin, propagate the 
of troubles that afflict. makind, quoth.
in the manner of one fmhapi  with platorm-i
"  e you stopping in Jai P "             . 
'" Yes. At the Besiden:   Ms Leigh is     1 -
sister. Did you know t"
"That is curious. I did not know. Too 
and eomniene there also. Mrs Leigh is
fingers into omplicated ises of whi shJads
ignorant."                  - 
Boy, taken aback, nearly ga* himself
quite.. "I gather she acted with Sir
approval," was all he aid.
(Jhaudranath shrugged. " ir Laishma   iis.
but deluded man. His dreams of eoial 
obsolete. We of the new scool adhee pa
oal c  and religious ordinances of the Mltr
agitate for is political indeped ee."  He:al
polysyllabe, like a flag;  lmly  _nd «



<pb n="183"/>
PBGAK HEIGHTS                  18    .
iAL a eotditin in terms. " But your Sir LIhh-
an is of the old-fashioned school-English-mad."
" And your particular friends-are sane, eh t"
The apostle of Hindu revival pensively twirled aa
nglish button of his creditably-cut English coat.
"Yes.   We are sane-thanks to more libealising
fluenoes. Coloured dust cannot be thrown in our eyes
r bureaucratic eonjuring tricks, or imperialistic talk
mout prestige. To-day it is India's turn for prestige.
rya for the Aryans ' is the slogan of the rising genera-
on."  He paused, blinked, and added with an in-
ititing chuckle: "You will go running away with
i impression that I am metamorphosed into red-hot
volutionary. No, thank you I I am intrinsically a
an of peace " With a fourish he jerked out a showy
old watch. "Ah-getting late I Very agreeable-ex-
anging amenities with old schoolfellows. But I have
i appointment in the Palace Gardens, at the time they
ed the muggers. That is a sight you should see, Mr
nolair-when the beasts are hungry and have not
tely napped up a washerwoman or an erring wife "
"I'd rather be excused this evening, thanks," Boy-
nswered, with a touch of brusqueness. "I confess it
ouldn't appeal to my sense of humour-seeing crooo-
les gorge, while women and children starve."
"That is what they call in a book I once read 'little
mnies of life.' Good fortune, at least, for the muggers !
etter start to sharpen your sense of humour, my frend.
is incomparable asset against the slings and arrows of
trageous ontingencies." This time his chuckle had
i undernote of malice; and Boy, considering him
oughtfully-from green turban to patent-leather shoes
-felt an aout-ire to take him by the scruff of his
nglish coat and dlst the Jalpur market-place with the
imnant of him.
.Aloud he said coolly: "Thanks for the prescription.
re you stopping here long  "
" Oh, I am meteoric visitant. Never very long any-
rere. I oome and go."
" Bines:t-eh   "
"Yse--many kinds of business-for the Mother."
b     tfiBdb a direct look at Boy; the first since their
-         httered a foppish hand-the litte finger



<pb n="184"/>
184           - 1*3   S) :'BU
lifted to display a square uncut erald-and 
way... .                   r ...        .....
Boy, left stand   alone in the leirely crowd 
and&-almls-- t onee so alien and so
to Bishun Singh and Suraj in a vagdely -roubled
atrind.
"Which way to the house of Sir Lahskman
he asked the maker of ohirgha, his foot in the ti
Enlightened, he set of at a trot, down anothe
street, all hay in the level light that eonjured the
air to gold. But contact with human anguish,
and unashamed-as he had not seen it since the'
and that sudden queer encounter with Chandr
had rubbed the bloom off delicate films of memory
artistic impressions. These were the drop-seene, 
negigible, when Life took the stage. He had an e
- sen  of having stepped straight into a crisis.
were going to happen in Jaipur.



<pb n="185"/>
CHAPTER VI.
"       God ha s few of u, whom He whispe in te ar;
The rest may reaon and welcome...
-Bsowmra.
iving still, and the more beautiful for our logngg"
TEB house of Sir Lakshman Singh, .S.I.-like maUn
others in advancing India-was a howe divided
against itself. And the cleavage cut deep. The furnish-
ing of the two rooms, in which he mainly lived, was not
more sharply sundered from that of the Inside, than was
the atmosphere of his large and vigorous mind from
the twilight of ignorance and superstition that shrouded
the mind and soul of his wife. More than fifty years. go
-when young India ardentl admired the West ad aIl
its works-he had dreaed of educating hi    piied
gIlbride, so that the way of compaionship might
gadden the way of mariage.
But too soon the spirited girl had hardened into the
narow, tyrannieal woman; her conception of the wiel
Steo limited to the traditional duties of herhd
i&d household hseri. Happily for Sir Lakahmn, hi
taral gift had gined him wide recognition and hih
iatee in the State. He had schooled himself, log
adu, to forget his early dreams: and if mrr   had
fltD, fatherhood had made royal amends. Above. a,
b: I  pla , daughter of flesh aid spirit, he had ound
i.had in a measure created--te- intimate oompanioo
I:.t    fleaved; a woman skilled in the fine art of lbv
_.t      nd least stulied of in the art that emia
Amain if          B.t.the  ods, it seemed' 
_ il     .w a      oo nealy polrfeet for mortal m D
~|B_:w:-        . a, 8 m a ,  d  libeoveL d dbelov-e



<pb n="186"/>
186           P-fBa TO~ IBA TO,
had been taken, while the estranged wife twr
Bemaned the grandchilren, in whom centred
hope and pride. So far-as the dividing miles and
-would permit, he had managed to keep in close
with BOy. But the fact remained that England
first daim  n Tilamani's children; and Bama's 
tosed on the troubled waters of transition.
.. A  for India herself--sared Mother-land-her 
t rugt soul seemed moreand more at the mery of
lble, the half-baked, the disruptive, at home
abroad.
Himself, steeped in the threefold culture of his eo
-Vedantic, Islamic, and European-he -came very
the prevailing ideal of composite Indianation
Yet was he not deceived. In seventy years of lfe,'i
. had seen intellectual India pam through many p
i temn ardent admiration of the West and all its t
to no less ardent denuniation. And in these d
saw too dlearly how those same i     le
emthwords, meaningless to nine-tenths of her
were beig down, stone by stone, their mighty
guard of iBrtish administration. Useless to
Having ears, they heard not. Having eyes, the
* not.-'-he spirit of destruction seemed abroad S
the earth.  After Germany--ussia.    Would in
India next T He knew her peoples well enough to1
Be also knew them well enough to hope. But :do
increasingly, fear had prevailed. His shre*d eyE
oemed, in every direction, fresh portents of
* eakned exeeutive, divided   ounsels, and
tht is the offspring of both. His w  Maha
thanked Gd, was of the old school, loyal 'and 
tie; his face set like a flint against th  edin-R
in print or person. And as ooneesions miil
extemnst8s waxed bolder, so the need for viglao
in proportion. ...'
But to-day hid ioom for one
-the advent of Boy; legacy of her, hs 
of Deight. 
. A message from the Beidehy bad told of
rival, of his hope to antfi    malf in
eiing; and now, on a              aws-dIvan, :ta - ;
awaiting It   with a more pround             l



<pb n="187"/>
PIBG     HE IGHTS
art than the mere impatience of youth. Bt the
npassive face under the flesh-pink turban betraye ino
pgn of disturbance within.. The strongly-marked nos
ad eyebones might have been carved in oma    y-
.he snowy beard, parted in the middle, was s up
wer his ears; and the eyes were veiled. An  v
ook lay on his knee. But he was not reading. HeC
nitening for the sound of hoofs, the sound of a voie/ f. .
The two had not met for five years: and in thee 
ars the boy had proved the warrior blood in his veis;
ad passed through the searching test of a bitt.r lot.
!tgether, they could speak of her-gone from them;
ret alive in their hearts for evermore. Been or unseen
le was the link that kept them all united, the pivot
A which their lives still turned. There had been none
with whom he could talk of her since she went....
Over his writing-table hung the original Antibes
prtrait-life-sise; Nevil's payment for the high pivil
ie of painting her; a privilege how reluctantly accorded
tie but himself had ever known. And behold' bis
Mwlrd: her ever-visible presenee-the girl-chb  who
fid been altogether his own. 
fs at last-and the remembered voice; deeper
e commanding; .the embroidered curtain pushe
e.  Then-Boy himself, broader, browner; hi
s smile in- his eyes; and, permeating all, te
S  of his mther, clearly disc.rnible to the man who
ell given it life.
was on his feet now, an imposing figure, in loose
haiment and purple choga. In India, he wisely
English dress, deeming it as unsuitable to .t
yas   li    political machinery. Silet, he h 
hi a3nlund bded Boy in a close embrace: thn
sienttood away and    onsidered him asL
mutual emotion affected them sensibly, like the'
a third.peson, making them shy ofeih
of theselves.
i Lakhmaun  ho spoe first. "Boy, son tf
' Dlight, I have waited many years for t*i
s   the hidd   wish of her heart.    hW
ftlhdrswn, 4r1 wors in our Etlveas.
_    !  !tse who love greatly, WthoU&I



<pb n="188"/>
^*. .sne          FAB V                      i   l
remain; untouched by death, H te lotus, tha
in the water, but opens beyond its reach." 
Words and tone so stirred Boy that sden
flled hi eyes. And through the mist of his
a_ "a vision of his mother's face. Blunr
trnolouts, it hovered before him with a startling  l
oife:. then-he knew....
WVithout a word, he went over to the picture and
bcdore it, drowned fathoms deep.... 
A slight movement behind roused him; and with
effort he turned away. " I've not seen a big one 
dince my last time at home," he said simply. " I'e
two mall ones out here."
The oarven face was not impassive now. " Aftb:
Dilkubsh,' what matter pictures when you hn
herself t "
Boy started.  "It's true. I hae--herself.
could you know ? "
Five minutes later, he was sitting beside his
father on the deep divan, telling him all.
Before setting out, he would not have
possible. But instinctively he knew himself i:
with a quality of love that matched his own;  i
aeie telling revived the marvel, the thrill of that
and beautiful experience at Ohitor. .
Sir TLakhmaun had neither moved nor spoken
out. Now their eyes met in a look of deep> i
standing.                                 -
I am very proud you told me, Boy. It is no
"No. I've not told any one else. I coulda
just now-something seemed to draw it aB oUt>i
I  ppose-something in you--               ' 
"Or perhap-herelf     It almost seeed
here with us, while you talked." 
"Perhaps-she is here still."
Their voies were lowered, as in the preence 
things. Never, till now, had Boy so keen
individual link with this wonderful old olm#!
blood ran in his.veins.                   >
. " Grandfather," he asked after a pass, " 
it doeo't often happen-that sort of  It.g  ,
' ,,  .-'        .« -^_  _* _ «.^.^* .  :'  .  , ' .



<pb n="189"/>
PISGAH      IGHTS               1*
il-d eommon-sense people would dismis it all as-sheer
uision n  "
--he young simplicity of the question lit a smile in Sir
'khman's eyes.
:"Quit possible. All that is most beautiful in life,
most real to saints and lovers, must seem delusion to
those whose hearts and spirits are merely vassals to the
ody and the brain. But those who say of the soul, 'It
l not,' have still to prove it is not to those who have
hlt and known. Also I grant-the other way about.
But they speak in different languas. Kabir says, 'I
disclose my soul in what is hidden' And again, 'The
bird is beyond seeking, yet it is most clearly visible.'
oor us, that is living truth. For those others, a mere
mngle of words."
"I see."  Roy's game was riveted on the picture
Ibove the writing-table. "You can't explain colours
to the colour-blind. And I suppose experiences like
mine only come to those for whom words like that are-
vfng truth' "
"Yes-like yours. But there are other kinds; not
always true. Because, in this so sared matter, clever
p0le, without scruple, have made capital out of the
ert' nnatural longin; and the dividing lne is dim
where falsehood ends and truth begins. So it has at
mome into suspicion and contempt. Accept what Is
reely given, Boy. Do not be tempted to try and snatch
nore."
aan.:
"No-no. I wouldn't if I could." A pause. "YoY
uieve it is trne . .. what I feel  That she is bftea
-.aery near me t "
Sir Lakshman gravely inclined his head.   "As I
balie in Brahma, Lord of all."
And for both the silence that fell seemed pulsting
ilb her unseen presence....
Whe   they spoke again it was of mundane thiibs.
Sqy fividly described his senfatioa, riding tro
ibe Cty; the culmnating incident, aad his reognn 
tith offl~ader.
¶"BTh  qaeerest thing rpnning into the beggar agaia  ;"
st M   loks as sblky and shifty as ever. Tha's
bi~t~~rC~Qja4na te Un4A- nhlnJt 4.'



<pb n="190"/>
tro              FAB, TO    EmBK- 
Sir Lakha L n'sB brows contcted sharply..
name did.yon say " 
" Ohadranath, we called him."
"And you don't kno* his whereabouts ? "
"No, I'm sorry. I didn't suppose his whe
matered a damn to any one."
The stem old Bajput smiled. It did his hearti
to hear the familiar slang phrases again. "
matters a damn-as you say-depends on whe
is the undesirable I have in mind. Quite young!
much influence, and a bad record. Mixed ups1
German agents, before the War, and the Ghadr
in Oalifornia; arrested for seditious activity
ported: but of course, on appeal, allowed to
Always the same tale. Always the same result.
mhBief done. And India-the true India
pgteful for these mercies I Sometimes I
irony i too sharp between the true gits give
noticed, by Englishmen working sincerely for th
of our people, and the false gifts proclaimd fr
house-tops, filling loyal Indians with bewilderm
fear. I have had letters from scores of these, 
I am known to believe that loyal allegiance to
government gives India the best chance for 
pogress she is likely to have for many
And from every one comes the same cry, be
be saved from this crazy nightmare of Home 
understood and not desired except by those who in
it But what appeal is possible to those who 
ears  : And all the time, by stealthy and open
the poison of race-hatred is being poured into 
veins--"                ....
"But, Grandfather-what about the War-and
together-and all that "
Sir Lakshman's smile struck  oy as one of the 
he. had ever seen. " Four yeas ago; my dear 
al had many radiant illusions. But this
dragged on too long. It is too far away. 
Prines and warlike races it has had some-1
For the rest it means mostiy news in the pa
rumours. in bazaa, high pices, atd trou
food. No better soi for sowing evil seed.  
of Germany are still orking' in



<pb n="191"/>
s  t  GAH fh EIG,  S  Mw
While the loyal were fighting, these were talking, plot-
ting, hindering: and now they are waving, like a fig,
the services of others, to gain their own ends, from
which the loyal pray to be delivered I Could irony be
more complete   Indian Princes can keep some check
on these gentlemen. But it is not always easy. If this
Ohandranath should be the same man-he is here, no
doubt, for Dewili. At sacred feasts they do most of
their devil's work. Did you speak of connection with
met"
"No. But he seemed to know about Ardna: sid
you were English mad."
Sir Lakshman frowned.- "English mad I That is
their jargon. Too narrow to understand how I can
deeply love both countries, while remaining as jealous
for all true rights of my Motherland as any hot-head who
swallows their fairy-tale of a Golden Age, and lngland
as Baksha-destroying demon !' By help of sudokinven
tions, they have deluded many fine young men, like
my poor Dydn, who should be already married and
working to fill my place. Such was my hope in sandiag
him to Oxford. And now-see the result . . ."
On that topic he could not yet trust himself; and Boy,
leaning forward impulsively, laid a hand on his kneeo
" Grandfather, I have promised Arda-and I promise
you-that somehow, I wiU get hold of him; and bring.
him back to his senses."
Sir Lakshman covered the hand with his own. ".True
son of LilAmani I But I fear he may have joined some
secret society; and India is a large haystack in which
to seek one human needle I"
"But Arfna has written again. She is convinced he
will answer."
Sir Lakshman sighed. "Poor Ardna I I am not sure
if I was altogether wise letting her go to the Besidency.
But I am deeply grateful to Mrs Leigh. Indi needs
many. more saoh English women. By making fiends
with high-born Indian women, it is hardly too .muc
it say they might, together, mend more than half the
x     .idors made by men on both sides."
Thus, sklflly, he steered clear.of Araa's problem
t   wnRs .linked with matters too intimately painful for
gqwai-*with a grandson, however dears, .



<pb n="192"/>
19n               nAR T-cO c
So absorbed was Boy in the delight of re
not till he rose to go did he take in the details
lofty room. Everywhere Indian workmanship
evidaene. The pictures were old Bajput painting
eamples of Vaishnava art-pure Hindu, in its
of restraint and exuberance, of tenderness and
hallowing of all life and idealising of all love. 
writing-table and swivel-chair were frankly of th
and certain shelves full of English books andrev
"I like your room," Boy announced after
inspection. "But I don't seem to remember---"'
"You would be a miracle if you did  The 
saw had plush curtains, gilt mirrors and gilt
in fact, the correct 'English-fashion ' guest-room.
educated Indian gentleman. But of late yeas 
-em  how greatly we were mistaken, making 
England to honour our English friends. Some
teid me how they were disappointed to find 
hbses only caricatures of middle-las E
Prance. Such rooms are silent barriers to
paii  mnig that East may go to the West bu
cannot oome to the East."
"In a way that's true, isn't it "
"Yes-in a way. This room, of course, is
my inner apartments.   It is like myself,
oeutivted--but still Indian. It is my way of
true Swadeshi :-Be your own self, even wit
gaits. But so far I have few follower.  o
looishly  ond of their mirrors and
gramophones. Some will. not believe sueh 
affect friendliness. Yet-trange, bat
Angiclslng of India instead of drawing us 
rather to widen the gulf."
Boy nodded. "rve heard that. Yet most 
so keen to be friends. Qeer, perverse
bengs, aren't they t"                      .
" And for that reason, 'more intresting
wonders of Earth I"   Setting both hand 
shoulders he looked deeply into his eyes. 
see me often, Dilkusha. It lits my tired
this very human being so near me again., 
Ten minutes lter. Bov was ridi h



<pb n="193"/>
PISGAH fEIGHTS                 106
.changed city; streets and hills and sky wrapped in the
nystery of enroaching dusk.
South and west the sky flamed, like the heart of a
ie opal, through a veil fine as gauze-dust no longe
out the aura of Jaipur. Seen afar, through the coloed
loom, familiar shapes took on strange outlines; moved
ad swayed, mysteriously detached, in a sea of shadows,
oattered, here and there, by flames of little dinner fires
long the pavements. The brilliant shifting crowd of
wo hours ago seemed to have sunk into the earth. For
here is no night life in the streets of Jaipur. Travellers
ad passed on and out. Merehants had stowed away
heir mnslins and embroideries, their vessels of bras
ad copper and priceless enamels. Only the starvng
by in huddled heaps as before-ominously still; while
bove them vultures and eagles circled, expectant,
ak-black against the immense radiance beyond. Grey,
kpening to black, were flat roofs, cornices, minarets
ad massed foliage, and the flitting shadows, with lifted
tils, that careered along the house-tops; or perched
n some jutting angle, skinny elbows crooked, abased
a the pursuit of fleas. For sunset is the- monkey'
tour, and the eerie jibbering of these imps of darknes
truck a bizarre note in the hush that shrouded the
"Boy knew, now, why The had stayed his impaene;
ad he blessed her sympathetic understnding.  But
ast then-steeped in India at her most magical hour-
b was hard to believe in the Residency household; in
nnerh dinner-tables and English detachmnt from the
edteval medley of splendour and squalor, of courage
ad cruelty and dumb endurance, of arts and crafts
and all 'the paraphernalia of enightened knowledge that
as Jaipur. It seemed more like a week than a few
wars since he had turned in the saddle to salute ArfUs
ad ridden out into another world:-her world, which
nW also in a measure his own...
On and on he rode, at a foot's pace, followed by his
Mf shadows; past the temples of Maha Deo, Btff
qY where they faced the west, still rumbling sad
· i# ng~  with muffled music; past wayside shrines,
ii,:.10oves for grotesque images-Shiva, Lord of
t- OBeaanh the Blevhba t God-each with bi'



<pb n="194"/>
14               FAB TO ASABK     :
seented garlands and his flickering chiragh;i
shadowy groups round the dinner fire, cookingt
evening meal: on and out through the double
gateways into the deserted road, his whole being
in the silene and the deepening dusk.
Here, outside the eity, emptiness loomed alm
a presence. Only the trees were alive; eaeh
its colony of peacocks and parrots and birds of
noisily settling to rest. The peacocks' unea
and the far, ghostly laugh of jackals-authentic
of India at sundown-sent a chill down Boy's
For he, who had scarcely known fear on the 
was ignominiously at the mercy of imagination 
eerie spirit of the hour.
At a flick of the reins, Suraj broke into a
anter, willingly enough. What were sunsets or
devils to him compared with stables and gram t
And as they sped on, as trees on either side 
like stealthy ghosts, the sunset splendour died,,
to rise again in a volcanic afterglow, on which
and twigs and battlemented hills were printed in 
reotype; and desert voices were drowned in thel
of c.cdas, grinding their knives in foolish eostasy;
at last, he swerved between the friendly ga
the Reeideney-the richer for a spiritual 
that could neither be imparted, nor repeated,
gotten whi e he lived.



<pb n="195"/>
CHAPTER VII.
"The deepesteb thing in our nature is this dumb region of the heart,
where we dwell alone with our willingneres and unwiliingnee our
hith and our feear"-WmLun Janm.
NoT least among the joys of ArUna's return to the freer
ife of the Residency was her very own verandah balcony.
Bere, secure from intrusion, she could devote the first
nd last hours of her day to meditation or prayer.
)xford studies had confused a little, but not killed, the
With of her fathers. The real trouble was that too
Aten, nowadays, that exigent heart of hers wokul
ntrude upon her sacred devotions, transforming them
nto day-dreams, haloed with a hope the more frankly
brmulated because she was of the East.
For Thea had guessed aright. Boy was the key to her
waverings, her refusals, her eager acceptance of the
mnegeney plan :-welcome in itself; still more welcome
emuse it permitted her simply to await his coming.
They had been very wonderful, those five years in
Bgland; in spite of anxieties and disappointed hopes.
Bt when Dyan departed and Mesopotamia engulfed
Soy, India had won the day.
How unforgettable that exalted moment of decision,
me drenehed and dimal winter evening; the sudden
aving for sights and sounds and smells of her own
ad. How slow the swiftest steamer to the speed o
eor aoing thoughts   How bitter, beyond belief, the
blt fant chil of disappointment; the pang of realising
:*h0: macteluantly-that, within herself, she belonged
Mbl'i4M  emdly to neither world.
!   oinhat1etimred qualified for medical work, by experi-
a Colege hospital at Oxford; yet hampered by
blarr fnm thA lA ad maimad. who had



<pb n="196"/>
been too murh with her in those years of war. 3
innate was the urge of her whole being to
wtmanbood through marriage rather than throgh
And i.t-he light of that discovery, she saw her d
plain. Either she must hope to marry anEng
and break with India, like Aunt Lilamani; or
*a the hands of the matchmaker, an enlightened
groom, nnseen, unknown, whose family would 
--at a price-her advanced age and English adve
Against the last, all that England and Oxford
given her'rose up in revolt . . . But the
subconscious Aruna was centuries older than the
fledged being who hovered on the rim of the nest,
.trustfu of her untried wings and the pathless
That Arfna had, for ally, the spirit of the ages;
formidable, if less assertive, than the transient
of the age. And the fledgling Arfna knew
well that the Englishman qf her alternative was,
fesedly-XBoy. His mother being Indian, she inn
supposed there would be no trouble of prejudiee
stupid talk of the gulf that she and Dyan had set 
rige. -The fact that Dyin had failed only ma
tSi more anxious to succeed. ... 
Soon after arriving, she had taken up hospitalt
in the women's ward, because Miss Hammond wea
and her edueated self had need of occupatiom
other self--deeply loving her grandfather-had 
her to try and live at ome,-so far as her
state would permit.         . 
As out-of-caste, she had been exempt from '
work; debarred from touching any   A   ceep1i
portion set aside for her meals, that were a
in Sir Lakshman's room-her haven of refuge.
I-ide, she was at the mercy of women's tongue'
the petty tyranny of MAtaji; antgonisi   a
sharpened and narrowed with age, even as her
father had mellowed and grown* beautiful,
unearthly beauty of the old, whose- spirit shinw
through the attenuated veil of flesh. ArBna, 
him, with clearer nde   d   , marvelled hvo
presered .his serenity of soul through.a t
atafs1 domint   . -    . 
' And'the other wlome-relations in Pt   x^



<pb n="197"/>
*     o 1"-7"  - v      -'.if
-took their tone from her, if only for the sake of peace:
-the widowed sister-in-law, suavely satirical;  greats
aunt, whose tongue clacked like a ricehusker; two
cousins, correctly betrothed to unseen b  g     ,
entitled to look askance at the abandoned one, who
was neither wife nor mother; and two children of a
poor relation-embryo women, who echoed the jeers
of their elders at her English friends, her obstinacy.in
the matter of caste and the inevitable husband. Ha'l
ai ! At her age, what did she fear t Had the English
bewitched her with lies t Thus Peru, aged ne, jooosel
proceeding to enlighten her; egged on by gigles and
high-pitched laughter from the prospective brides  For
in the zenana reticence is not, even before children.
Arfua herself had heard such talk; but for years her
early knowledge had lain dormant; while fatidiouaness
had been engendered by English studies and contat
with English youth. Useless to answer. It siply
meant tears or losing her temper; in which ease, MLtai
would retaliate by doetoring her food with red.peper
to sweeten her tongue. ,
Meanwhile, sharpened pressure in the matter of caste
rites and rumours of an actually maturing hsiand,
had brought her very near the end of her tether. :a
Thea was right. Her brave impulse of the hearts ad
only been just in time. And hard upon that unbelevable
good fortune followed the news that Boy was oming '-
Tremulously at first, then with quicken  nfide
her happy nature rose like a sea-bird Out of itrou 
Iwaers, on the wins of a secret hope. ...
And now he was here, under this friendly roof that
sheltered her from the tender mercies of her own kind
There were almost daily meetings, however brief, asn
the after-glow of them when past; all the well-mem-
bad tricks of speech and manner; and the twine
of fto in his eyes  jappld in an ecstasy of countp
hp   sciearcely stirs a wing. Enough that he was
Az4*tt .was her joy when Mrs Leigh--after scodig
4. ekind t. way over the girl mother and two
children, pickedip afterwards-ha      given
toae sapecial cha ae thim andldgedtie



<pb n="198"/>
IN               FAR TO OBEK 
with the dhobi'u wife. This also brought her 
Boy. And what could she ask more s
But with the approach of the Dewli, thoughts
future came flocking like birds at sundown. B
on Dewll night, all tried their luck in some 
and Mai Lakshmi's answer failed not. The men
eoin or dice. The maidens, at sunset, when the
wind of evening stirred the waters, carried eao
hiragh-lamp of her life-and set it afloat on.
or stream, praying Mai Lakshmi to guide it safe
It the prayer was heard, omens were favourable. 
lamp should sink, or .be shattered, omens were
And the oenturies-old Arna-still at the mercy of
-had secretly bought her little chiragh; secretly 
to try her fate on the night of nights. If the
were unfavourable-and courage failed her-thee
always one way of escape. The water that put
lamp woul as carelessly put out the flame of her
in a little moment-without pain.  .
A small shiver convulsed her-kneeling there
balcony; her bare arms resting on the ba
The new Ar6na shrank from thought of de
eraved the fulness of life and love-kisses and 
and the clinging arms of little hildren. ....
For, as she knelt in the moonlight, nominally.
Boy; chiding herself for the foolishnes that 
er.from appearing at dinner; hoping he might
ipd perhaps think of her a little-wishing ho
And all the while, perhaps he was simply uot j
-not oaring one little bit--! 
Stung by the thought, she clenched her
lifted her bowed head. Then she st  ed
ht breath-- 
Could it be he, down there among the
wandering, daming, thinking of her, or making
... he knew most of his slim volume i&heart . 
t* , More likely, he was framing boldplans to  d
-now the answer to her letter had come. 
stage unsatisfying answer; full of affection,
fl of windy phraes. that she was hrewd 
reognise as mere echoes from those otherlsi
ar ed b      tin a web of words      . .  -



<pb n="199"/>
PISGAH HIGHTS                 1' 
"Fear not for me, aister of my heart," he wrote.
"Rejoice because I am dedicated to service of the
Mother, that she may be released from political bondage
and shine aain in her ancient glory-no longer ex-
ploited by foreigners, who imagine that with bricks and
stones they can lock up Veda-eternal truth I The
gods have spoken. It is time. Kali rises in the East,
with her necklet of skulls-Giants of evil she has 
It is she who speaks through the voice of the patriot.
'Do not wall up your vision, like frogs in a well . ..
Bise above the Penal Code to the rarefied atmosphere
of the Gita and consider the actions of heroic men.
"You ask if I still love Boy  Why not t He is e
our own blood'and a very fine fellow. But I don't w
now because he would not understand my fervour of
soul. So don't you take all his opinions forgoapel;
like my grandfather's, they are well meant, bat obsolete
If only you had courage, Ardna-ji, to accept the en
lightened husband, who might not keep you in stric
purdah, then we could work together for liberatiot of
the Mother. Sing Bande Mdtaram,l forty tte    td.
brothes I That is our battle-acy. And one of to.e is
your own fond brother-Dyin Singh."
Ardna had read and re-read that bewildering effusion
till tears fell and blotted the words. Could this be the
same Dyen who had known and loved England even as
she did I His eloquence somehow failed to carry con-
vietion. To her, the soul of new India seemed like a
book, full of contradictions, written in many strange
nguages, hard to read. But behind that tngle
words beat the heart of Dyen-the brother who wom
ber .lL
Still no address was given. But Roy had declared
the Delhi postmark sfficient clue. Directly Dewbi
was over, he would go. And, by every right ipulse,
she ought to be more glad than sad. But the heart,
like the tongue, caaIo man tame. And sometimes his
eagerness to go hurt her a little. Was he thinking of
Delhi down thee-or of her-  t   . 
The shadow had turned and was moving towards her.
Th eewas a white splash of shirt-front, the glo  of a
,^^W9.;e  .           .  oh                     ,
^~~~~ Ba& -.    Hi   obher.          " :i . I \:'



<pb n="200"/>
dden  y     paFAB TO A         d sn 
Suddenly his pace quickened. He had seen her.
mdment he was standing under her balcony. UiWM
pitched vice came distinctly to her ears .
"Good evening-Juliet I Quit your dreaming.
and be sociable down here."
Delicious tremors ran through her. Much too 
g~xg down in the dark. But how to resist t
" I think-better not," she faltered, incipient s
miher tone. "You see-not coming down to
.. .Mrs Leigh ..."
"Bother Mrs Leigh. I've got a ripping 
about Delhi-     Hurry up. Ill be by the step
Then he ad been thinking of Delhi. But he
her low; and the note of command ex
hesitton. Slipping on a cloak, she reached the v
withoutmeeting a soul. He put out a hand.
impulse sm gave him her left one; and he co
her down the steps with mock ceremony, as if
her out to tread a measure to unheard strains
viola and spinet.
.Happiness ran like wine in her -ins: and ca
mood she swept him a curtsey, English fashion,
"Fit for the Queen's Drawin4m I " he app
-ad she amiledadp at him under her straight
"Wh.y didn't you appear at diu er   Is it a
-hiding your light under a bushel  Or do 
he   e and heartaches working in  the ward
out of tue with our frivol " I 
:The solicitudeln his tone was worth many h
and heartaches to hear again. But with him.
mot pretend.
"No-not that!" she said, teading te gr
him, as if it were a moonlit cloud  "Only  ^
... I am foolish-not inclined for so  m
and all the lights and the talk."        ; .
He nodded. " I know the feeling. The
in us, I suppose. But, look hqp  about D
suddenly struck me I'd have ten times be-
if I went a an Indian. I an talk the 
admiration. What d'you think  " 
She caught her breath. A vision of him so
seemed to bring him surprisingly nearer. "
inn I ftnwhll" 



<pb n="201"/>
PISGAB HEIGHTS B 
"Yes-but not impossible. And no end of a lnk.
If I could lodge with some one who knew, I believe I
eould pull it through. Grndfather might arrange that.
It would give me a ehance to get in among Dyan's set
and hear things. Don't breathe a word to any oat
I must talk it all over with Grandfather."
" Oh ! I would love to see you turned into a Bajpat,'
she breathed. 
" You 8ha see me. I'll come and make my salaam
and ask your blessing on my venture."
"And I will make prasad for your journey! " Her
unveiled eyes met his frankly now. "A portion for Dya
too. It may speak to his heart clearer than words."
"Preadt What's thatt "
"Food prepared and eonsecrated by touch of mothb
or sister or-or nearest woman relation. And byabsence
of those others ... it is ... my privilege"--"
" "My privilege. I would not forgo it for a kingdom,"
Boy interposed, such patent sincerity in the revered
quiet of his tone that she was speechless.. ...
For less than half 'Hhour they strolled on that moon-
enohanted lawn. Nothing was said by either that the
rest might not have bierd. Yet it wa a traaired
Aruna who approached the verand, where The
stood awaiting themn   having come out to look for
Boy and found the clue to his proloaged mditations.
" What have you been plotting, you two t "s he. aked
ightly when they reached her. To Boy her eyes sai. 
"'yon call this being discreet t " T1  Arina her lips
maid: "Graceless one   I thought you were purva
wukin this evening! "
" So she was," Boy aswered for her. " I'm the cul-
prit. I insisted. Some details about my Delhi trip, I
wanted to talk over."
Thea wrinkled her forehead  "Boy-you mustn't. 
It's a emry plan--"
"Pardon mean4nspired plan " He drew himself
ap half an inch the better to look down on her. "Nothing
u earth can put me off it-except Grandfather. And
know hell back me up."
?t'fthsat case, I won't waste valuable verbal ammuni-
Hln1ou l Come along in-       We're going to have



<pb n="202"/>
:  '         ~FAB TO 1BBK ·-
But as Boy moved forward, Ara drew b*ok. 
-I would rather go to bed now. And-pleae 
little Mother," she murmured caressingly. 
great-hearted English woman seemed mother 
her now.                         -
For answer, Thea took her by the shoulders and
her on both cheeks. "Not guilty this time,
But don't do it again! "
Boy's hand dosed hard on hers, but he said
word. And she was glad.
Alone again on her balcony, gladness rioted
all her being.  Yet-nothing had really hap
Nothing had been said. Only-everything felt di
inside. Of such are life's supreme moments. They-
without flourish of trumpets; touch the'heart o<:
lips with fire, and pass on....
While ndreing, an impulse seized her to br
ohirgh and treasure the pieces-in memory ofi
night. Why trouble Mai Lakshmi with a q
already half answered  But, lost in happy tho
knwoven with delicate threads of sound from
violin-she forgot all about it, till the warmth .
cheek nestled against the cool pillow. 'Too lasy'
eomfortable to stir, she told her foolish heart t
merrow morning would do quite as well.
But the light of morning dimmed, a tte, her
jI.palted assurance. Habit and superstition 
'ove that so arrogant impulse, and the mystic
testtiy was saved-for another fate.
Darling.
,;~~r'": · 4



<pb n="203"/>
Are the winds ire-laden, the sky, the rin 
They wae god no more, but thei" selli reminan."
-C-nAPTER V  L.  -
DWLTm night at last; and all Jaipur astir in the streets
at sundown awaiting the given moment that never quite
loses its quality of miracle. ...
For weeks every potter's wheel had been whirling
double tides, turning out lay cbirSgl  by the thou-
.and, that none might fail of honouring Mi Lakshmi-
a compound of Minerva and Ceres,-worehipped .i the
living gold of fire and the dead gold of minted ooin .
And all day long there ebbed and flowed through the 
temple doors a rainbow-ooloured stream of worshippers: '-
while the dust-laden air vibrated with jangle of metal 
bells, wan of conches and raaous clamour ot ertow. 
Within doors, the rattle of dice rivalled the jangle of
bell.  Young or old, none failed to   onsult thio
myterious arbiters on this aspicious day. Housea,
shops, and balconies had been swept and plstered with
frsh cow dung, in honour of Vishnu's brld.; and gayest
among festal shop-front was the dazzling rray of toys
For the Feast of Lights is also a feast of toys in
bewildering variety; in sugar, in paper, in burnt lay;
tinselled, or gorgeously painted with colours such as
never were on ox or elephant, fish or bird.
What matter t To the uncritical Eastern eye, colour
*o aH
And, as the day wore on, colour, and yet more colour,
f .  spilled abroad in the wide main streets that are an
'i     f..g featue of Jaipur. Men, women, and children·
Jfcl.~tflbas and gala draperies, laughing and talking



<pb n="204"/>
04               PAFB 1TO SEEK
at full pitch of their lungs; gala elephants 
cloth of gold, their trunks and foreheads pat
divers colours; searlet outriders clearing a
through the maze of turbans that bobbed to 
like a bed of parrot-tulips in a wind. Crimson,
and apricot, copper and flame colour, greens and ye
every conceivable harmony and discord; no
rival it anywhere, Sir Lakshman told Boy; save
in Gwalior or Mandalay.
Boy had spent most of the morning in the city, 
ing with his grandfather and imbibing large dra
colour from an airy minaret on the roof top.
home to the Residency for tea, only to insist on
them all back in the car-Thea, Arlna, Flossie,
the children, who must have their share of
sweets and toys, if only 'for luck,' the watchw
DewAl 
As for Arina-to-day everything in thir. nl
to hbang on the frail thread of those two words. 
what of to-night . .. .
All had been arranged in conjunction with Boy.
insfitenoe on the cousinly privilege of protecting h
arisen from a private confession that she shrank
jofng  the orthodox group of maidens who wo
orth at sundown, to try their fate. She was oh
they were; out of purdah; out of caste; a beij
And for most of them it was little more than w
of play.' For her-but that she kept to.
syabolical act of faih this childish appeal fi j
was a matter of life and death. Soto her coh
t the tank, she would go alone and therm-
save by DewAli lights of earth and hear
mfide her lamp to the waters -and the 
rippled them in the first hour of darknme.  4
But Boy would not hear of her Wandeing
Dewbti crowd. In Dyhn's absencee he claimed
to accompany her, to be somewhere within hal, 
shed the Eastern protection of purdah, se m
the Western protection of escort. Ad
ther sprang an inspiration: he wouldwrear:
dres, ready and waiting in every detail, at Sir
AI.IU . From there, he could set out
adventure--which his grandfath



<pb n="205"/>
PImGAH fE IGHTS         .     w
proved, with what profound heart-searhings and beart-
stirrings Boy did not even dimly guess.
At sundown the Residency party would drive throuwh
the city and finish up at the gardens, before going on to
dine at the Palace. That would be Arfna's moment
for slipping away.  Boy-having slipped away in
advance-would rejoin her at a given spot.   And
then-     t
The rest was a tremulous blur of hopes and fears and
the thrill of his presence, conjured into one of her own
people....
Sundown at last; and the drive, in her exalted
mood, was an ecstasy no possible after-pain or disappoint-
ment could dim. As the flaming tint of sunset faded and
shafts of amethyst struck upward into the blue, buildings
grew shadowy; immense vistas seemed to melt into the
landscape, shrouded in a veil of desert dust.
Then-the first flickering points of fire-primrose
pale, in the half light; deepening to orange, as night
rolled up out of the East, and the little blown flames
seemed to flit along of their own volition, so skilled and
swift were the invisible hands at work.
Prom roof to roof, from balcony to balcony they ran:
till vanished Jaipur emerged from her shroud, a cty
transfigured: cpola, arches, balconies, and temples,
palaee of the XaharLja and lofty Hall of the Wind.-
every detail faultlesy traced an darkness, in deliate,
tremulous lines of fe. Only here and there ilusion wea
shatered by garish globes of electric light, dimming
the mellow radiance of thousands on thousands- f
modest ehitghs.
Aruna had seen many Dewli.nights in her time; but
never at a moment so charged with conflicting emotion.
Silent, absorbed, she sat by Thea in the brouhe;
Boy and Vernon opposite; Phyllis on her mother's
knee; the others in the car on ahead-ineluding a tourist
of note outriders beore a  bee an hind, learing a path-
way through the pesa. Vernon, jiging on his feeO.
wa lost in wonder. Boy, like Arna, said little. Only
Tbe lpt.up s low ripple of talk with her babe. . . .
<By now, not only the aty was alight, but the endimng
l,. tAe.   bonfires laughed inflame. Jeweled caCo 



<pb n="206"/>
3006 ·          FARB TO 5EKP    . 
nets twinkled on bastions of the Tiger Fort. 
fit traced every curve and line of Jai Sin*g
And on either side of the carriage, the crowdI
and hummed; laughing, jesting, boasting;
withthe spirit of festival, that found an echo in
heart and rioted in her veins. To-night she felt:
i t India, Eastern to the core; capable, 
wondering-could she put it away from her, eve
bidding of Boy-- I
On they drove, away from crowded pavem
wards the Man SBgar Lake, where ruined tem l
palaces dreamed and gleamed, knee deep in the
water; where jackals prowled and cranes n
muggers dozed unheeding. At a point of vantag
the Lake, they halted and sat there awhile in
a group of silent shadows. Words did not meet
tven Vernon ceased his jigging and baby Phyllim
no sound: for she had fallen asleep.
Arna, resting an elbow on the side of the 
at lost in a dream....
Suddenly, eleetrically, she was aware of con
Boy's coat-sleeve. He had leaned forward to
partiular effect, and was probably not aware 
trespasing arm; for he did not shift it till
gamed. his fill. Then with a long sigh, he l
again. But Arfna's dream was shattered by
too startingly real to be ignored....
'Once, driving back, as they passed under :aI
globe, she caught his eyes on her face, and they
a smile. Did he know---     Did he, eve f
thatt 
Near Sir Lakshman's house they stopped
Boy leaned towards her. 
" Ill be quick as lightning--don't stir till I
said-and vanished.
Some fifteen minutes later, she stood alonr
jeelled darkness, awaiting him; her own 
jewel held between her hands. She had bro
her, complete; matches and a tiny bottle of 
in a.ardboar d box. Mrs Leigh-angel of
had lit the wick with her own hand-' for. l
Boy had made her so completely their ally,: d



<pb n="207"/>
PIBAH HEIGHTS                 20
dea. But who could resist him,-after all  Waitig
ione, her courage ebbed a little; but he came quic
i lightning, arrayed in a chog of some dark material
ad the larger turban of the North ;-so changed, she
careely knew him till he saluted and, with a gesture,
ade her go forward.
Through the dark archway, under a block of zenana
mildings they passed: and there lay before them the
pret tank patterned with -quivering threads of light
Eer chosen corner was an 'ifrequented spot. A little
arther on, shadowy figures moved and talked.
"You see," she explained under her breath, as though
hey were conspirators, "if the wind is kind, it will
rat across there making the mystical triangle; symbol
if perfect knowledge-new birth. I an only afraid
t is getting a little too strong. And if anything should
uinder it from crossing, then-there is no answer.
luspense-all the time. But-we will hope Now,
elaee, I must be alone. In the shadow of this building,
ew will notice me. Afterwards, I will call softly. But
lou't-go too far."
"Trust me. And-see here, Ardna, don't make too
oueh of it-either way. MaT Lakshmi's not Queen of
l the Immortals-"
'' O, hush I She is bride of Vishnu "
EBoy's smile was half amused, half tender. "Well I
hope she plays up-royally."
And with a formal salute, he left her.
,Cpn, crouching near the water's edge, she held out
it eookle-shell with its blown wisp of light.
:MOh Lamp of my life, flame of my heart," she ad-
_ d it, just above her breath, "sail safely through
wavelets and answer truly what fate awaits me now t
Md Ladlshnmi grant the blessing I crave o. .
a gentle push, she set it afloat; ta    ilg
'/nst the building, deep in shadow, -i B red
saafd prayed, childish incoherent prayers, for
nof her difficult problem that would be
for her and Boy.
was edamant. She must see...  She
q   she stood near the coping,'one hand on-
_ ( sn.he .aj ous being centred on the



<pb n="208"/>
20               PAB TO SBa 
adventuring flam  that swayed and eurtsied_
caprice of the wind. The effect of her concent
almost,hypnotio: as if her soul, deserting her
.flickeed away there on the water; s if every!
of wind or wavelet struck at her very life....
Footsteps passed, and voices; but the sounds 
reahed her brain. The wind fresned shaspl
the impact of two ripples almost capsised her 
It dipped-it vanished .. .
With a low sound of dismay she craned forwa&
her balance, and would have fallen headlong .
that masculine fingers closed on her arm and
baekward-just in time.
" Boy! " she breatbed, without turning her o
the water-for the precious flame had re
" Look, there it Is-safe . . .! "
"But what of you, little sister, had not I
wateh the fate of your Dewili lamp t"
The words were spoken in the vn     lar
in the voice of Boy. Startled, she drew back a
a man of less than middle height, bare-headed,
tho eange-pink draperies of an aseetic. In
dark she could just discern the oolour ant the n
of carved beads that hung almost to his ast.
"I am most grateful, gur-j,"1 she m
murely, also in the vernacular; and stood 
litle by her fright: unreasonably diappot
was not Boy; relieved, that the providetal 
chanced to be a holy man. "Wil yow not 
brave little lamp with your blessing t "
His smile arrested and pussed her; and
more dearly seen, lacked the unmistakble
the ascetic. 
"You are not less brave yourself, iter,"'
"venturing thus boldly and alone .. ,    .,
The implication annoyed her; but anxious 
misjudged, she answered truthfully: " I am not 
others, gu-ji. I am   England-returned; d
prdh ... out of caste."               ...
He levelled his eyes at her with awaken
then: " Frankness for frannes is fai ex
*, -;               '        1        -



<pb n="209"/>
PISGAH HEIGHTS                 20
am no gurm; but like yourself, England-returned;
ate restored, however. Dedicated to service of the
other  -"
It was her turns to start and serutinise him-dis-
eetly. "Yet you make pretence of holiness--    "
"In the interests of the Mother," he interposed,
awering the note of reproach, "I need to mix freely
mong her sons-and daughters.   These   lothes are
isports to all, and, wearing them in her service is no
ahonour. But for my harmless disguise, I might not
tye ventured near enough to save you from makin a
sut for the muggers-just for this superstition of
ewli-not cured by all the wisdom of Oxford.-Was
Oxford  "
"Yes."
"Is it possible--  "  He drew nearer.    is. eyes
relt on her frankly, almost boldly. "Am I ad-
essing the accomplished daughter of Barn Sinbg
'haduur    "
At that she pulled her sari forward, turning away
mn him. His look and tone repelled her, frightene
sr; yet she could not call for Boy, who was playing
s part too scrupulously well.
" Go-      Leave me I" she commanded desperately,
ader than she had spoken yet. " I am not ungrateful.
t-making pjh4 '--I wish to be alone-"
His chuikhing laugh sent a shiver through her.
"Why these airs of the enana with one enlightened
tike yorsef ... .   "
He broke off and retreated abruptly. For a shadowy
Pre had sauntered into view.
Afta   sprang towards it-enana airs forgotten6
Oh, Boy --   "
sOid you oalAr6aI " he asked. " Thought I heard
m.   This fellow  bothering you-      11l  ettle
in-"     Turning, he said politely: "My cousin is
unSdmr my escort, to make pujah, guwrmji. She
f te be aoe."
or eouain, except for my timely intrusion, would
timbnee   permanently secure from interrptio-
pl'br ot a  r  retorted the supposed ascetic
-,e IX       _ n...     B n. .'!_.' f-_ sn



<pb n="210"/>
If             FPAR TO SEEK
By tarted and stared. The voice was
" Ohanduanth I Masquerading as a saint t
no g  ." u
"And you are no Bajput. You also ap
masquerading-as a lover, perhapst  Quite
trying to fool me, Sinclair, with play-
cousins. In my eapacity of guru I feel ompe
this accomplished young lady that her fine
only a sham Bajput of British extraction .. ."
' Sham-curse you! I'm   a genuine
one side--" The instant he had spoken, he;
folly.
Oho-haaf-caste only "
An oath and a threatening forward move,
the speaker to an undignified step bkw
cooled a little at that. The fellow was beneath
"I am of highest caste, English and Indian. 
no slur in the conjunction; and I take no 
any man . . ." He made another forward mo
for the pleasure of seeing Chandranath jerk
"If my cousin was in danger, we are grate
But I told you, she wishes to be alone. So I
you to move on elsewhere."
"Oh, as to that . .. I have no violent
for your society."
And, as he sauntered off, with an e
pleasing no one but himself, Boy kept a  as
"For all the world," he thought, "ike 
off an intruder. Too polite to go for hi;
prepared if need be ! "
When they had turned the corner of t
handranath fired a parting shot.   .. infer
here fancying you can marry her, becuse  
of Beesodis runs in your veins. But he 
will find forces too powerful militating a
But Boy was not to be goaded again into
his self-controL  "The men of my stock,
Bajput, are not in the habit of discussig
folk with stranges," said he-and flattedi
had very neatly secured the last word.  *
As for Arna-left alone-she leaned 
low abutment. but the hvDnotio. sail-.at



<pb n="211"/>
PIGAH BEIGIHTS                    -
ate anxiety remained. For the lamp of her life had
ode scant progress; and now she was aware of a
isturbance in the water, little ominous whirlpools not
insed by wind. Presently there emerged a long shadow,
ke a black expanse of rock :-unmistakably a mugger.
nd in that moment she felt exquisitely grateful
the hand that had seized her in the nick of time.
be next-she wrung her own together with a low,
aivering cry.
For as the brute rose into fuller view, her chirgh
me with it-and so remained; stranded high and dry
omewhere near the horny shoulder; tilted sideways,
ie judged from the slope of the flame; the oil, its life-
Lood, trickling away. And as the mugger moved lei-
rely on, in the wrong direction, breaking up the gold
3twork of reflections, she had her answer-or no
iswer. The lamp was neither wrecked nor shattered;
at it would never, now, reach the farther shore. Mat
mkshmi's face was turned away in simple indif-
renee, from  the plea of a mere waverer between
ro worlds, who ventured to set her lamp on the
tem, not so much in faith as in a mute gesturm of
"sair. ...
She came very near despair, as she crouched sobbing
hme in the shadow-not entirely for the fate of her
mp, but in simple reaction from the mingled excite-
eats and emotions of the evening...
It was only a few minutee-though it seemed an age
-before she felt Boy's hand on her shoulder and heard 
s voice, troubled and tender beneath its surface note
c command.
"Arna-wha the-get up. Don't cry like that-
la mustn't    ."
he obeyed instinctively; and stood there, like a
iddef child, battling with her sobs.
" Where' the thing  What's happened " he asked,
ning.to disregard her effort at control.
Thee-tover there. Look . . . the mugger "
Muquger ." He sighted it "Well, I'm-the thievng
.l' I" Humour lAked in his voice-more tnie than
ipathy;- yet in a sense, more upsetting. Her tragedy
r[. w ve/in of the ladierous; and at his hint of it,
*xb^Iaitt. laughter; laugter Ito tears. The



<pb n="212"/>
212                 tj3X e 
impact msd     her afsh; and she **ed her fao
again shaken with obs.                         '
A',Arna-nmy dew-you mustn't, I tell yon . . .
More tendernes now than command
She held her breath-pain shot throgh with suddea
ecae  . For in speaking he had laid aa arm:round he
houlder; just supporting her with a firm gentle graq
hat sent tingling shocks along all her sensitised nervef'
"Listen, Ar6na-and don't cry," he said, low and
urgently. " No answer always leaves room for hope
And you shall have your Dyin, I promise you. I wo'1
come back without him. I can't say fairer than that
So now-   " his hand closed on her shoulder. " Oiv
ovebreaking your poor heart "
Comforted a little, she uncovered her faoe. "I wil
try. Only to-night-I would rather-not the Pala
dinner, the firewors. I would rather go home witl
Miss Mills and the bhildren ..."
" And cry your eyes out all alone. And spoil the whob
evenin-for us both. No, you don't.  emember-yo:
are Bajputni: not to be hag-ridden by a mere chirigi
and a thieving mugger. No more teas and terron
Look me in the face-and promise."
As usual, he was irresistible.  What matter Ma
kabhmi's indiierene -inee he eared so much.1
althtndully-I promise, Boy," she said; and, for prod
of courage, looked straight into his eyes-that Meme
mysteriously to hold and draw her into depths beyonc
deih                      .                 *.
For one incredible moment, his foe moved a littl
nearer to hers-paused, a i irresolute, and witrew.
So brief was the instant, so sight the muvement
that she almost doubted her sense. But her ine
beWa  knew-and ached, without shyness or ahme, fo
the kiss withheld....                     -
"-You've the grit-I knew it," Boy sid at lat, i
the level voice that had puded her arlie in the eve"
ing: and his hand slid from her amddler. "O0mo nos
-weve been too long. Thea wi be.derbi     ..:,; 
. He tuamed; and she moved- bs ef him, w-.i g
-,dream.                  .. ..           ..
"Did you say much, before I tlm t" he  ' b d
a pause, "to that fellow-TOhandisMbtWf .* 0'



<pb n="213"/>
PBBAH    EEIGHS         w     s ii 
*."X spoke a little-thinking him a gur-  "  She
amed. The name woke a chord of memory. "Chan-
Iranath," she repeated, " that is the name they said- " 
" Who ? " Boy asked sharply, coming out of his own
Irean.
"M ataji and the widowed Aunt--"
" What do they know of him  "
"How can I tell t I think it wa-through our gwnrv
ie made offer of marriage-for me; .wishing for an
lducated wife. I was wondering-could it be the
me---- 
" Well, look here," he rounded on her, suddenly im-
erious. "If it iyou can tell them I won't have it.
randfather would be furious. He ought to know--
aad Dyhu. Your menfolk don't seem to get a look
n."
"1Not much-with marrying arrangements. That is
tor women and priests. But-for now, I am safe, with
I[ Leigh-   "
"And you'll stay safe-as far as he's concerned.
rou see, I know the fellow. He's the man I slanged in
he City that day. Besides-at school-"
He unfolded the tale of St Bupert's; and she listened,
emazed.
" So don't worry over that," he commanded, in his kind
ader-brotherly tone. " As for your poor little ohiagh,
r good&ness' sake don't let it get on your nerves."
She sighed-knowing it would; yet longing to be
rortby of him. It seemed he understood, for his hand
.oed lightly on her arm.
"That won't do at all I If you feel quavery inside,
y holding your head an inch higher Gesture's ha tbe
btthe of life."
"Is it  I never thought- " she murmured, paed
bt impressed. And after that, things somehow .ee
.de than she had thought possible over there, by the
fleer, under TWa's wing, she drove to the Palace,
ethey were rally entertained by an unseen host,
!1tK _ad   not join them at table without ipperng
aiL Later on, he appeared-grey-bearded, oo  ty
l'    rvely 'jewelled-supported by Sir LakT m,
ad a few privileged notabea; whe; te   - ,e



<pb n="214"/>
214              FAB TO SMt I
they all migrated to the Palace roof for the g
of fiework-fitting climx to the Feast of LJgh
Throughout the evening Boy was seldom 
Adna's' side. They said little, but his presene 
her round with a sense of companionship more 
than she had yet felt even in their happiest
gether. While rocket after rocket soared and
nd blossomed in mid-heaven, her gaze rev
sttently to the outline of a man's head and 
silhouetted against the sky....
Still later on, when he bade her good-night i
Besidency drawing-room, she moved away carrying
head like a crowned queen. It eertainly made her
a few degrees braver than when she had croue
the shadows praying vain prayers--hedding
tears. ...
If only one could keep it up--  I
..



<pb n="215"/>
CHAPTER IX.
"Thou dost bereb the path to every shrine 
And if I turn from butone sin, I turn
Unto a mnil of thine."
-Auom  MBM 't.
'oB Boy himself, no less than Ardna, the passing of
hose golden October weeks had been an experience as
eautiful as it was unique. The very beauty and be-
rilderment of it had blinded him, at first, to the under-
ring danger for himself and her. Bewilderment spran
rom an eerie sense-vivid to the verge of illusion-
hat his mother was with him again in the person of
L4rna:-a, fancy enhanced by the fact that his entire
nowledge of Indian womanhood-the turns of thought
ad phrase, the oharm, at onee sensuous and spiritual
v-wa linled indissolubly with her. And the perilous
barm bad penetrated insdiously deeper than he knew.
ly the time he realied what was happening, the spell
ra upon him; his will held captive in selke  meshes
e Iad not the heart to snap.
As often as not, in that early stage, he craved sight
ad sound of her simply beeause she wore a sari and
aded her head and moved her hands just so; because
*r mere presence stirred him with a thrill that blended
xquiite pleasure, xquisite pain. There were times
. would contrive to be alone in the room with her;
e talking; not evoe looking at her-because her fae
,    :b.'t.e illusion;  simply letting the feel of her
ease that inner ache-ubdued, not stilled-
mother who had remained more vitally one with
.. :    o gn-othrs in ten are Ah      or w lttnegto
;'with tli ,  own-un san&-            .  .. 



<pb n="216"/>
216.             FA     TO 8 n BK
The   Leigh, watching unobtrusively, had caught i
glumpe  of the strange dual infuence at work in
had oasionally seen him with his mother; 
had gleaned some idea of their unique relation; 
from  Lance, partly from her intimate link
own Theo, half a world away; nearly eighteen no
and eager to join up before all was over. So her troub
scrutiny was tempered with a measure of understan
Boy had always attracted her. And now, unmothe
-the wound not yet healed-she metaphorically gath-i
ered him to her heart; would have done so physia
without hesitation; but that Vincent had his
and foolish qualms about her promiscuous capacity fo
afection. But Ardna was her ewe lamb of the moment
sad not even Boy must be allowed to make things had
for her than they were already ....
So, after scouting the Delhi idea as preposterous,
mddenly perceived there might be virtue in i
Arna. Possibly it would glorify him in her eyes: 
it would remove the fatal chad   of his presence;
he a chance to pull up before things had gone 
far. Whereat, being Thea, she spun round unaham
to Boy's secret amsement and relief. A11 the Desm
in her rose to the adventure of it. A risk, of
but thgre must be no question of failure: and 
would ustify all. 8he was entirely at his
discused details by the hour; put him 'on to Vir
for coaching' in the general stuatioundegi
sedition; reformers, true and false; teling
for the relaiming of Dyln Singh. 
To   rown all-between genuine relief and
afction-she impulsively kissed him   on   e
under Vincent's very eyes.
"ust only to give you my blessing " she
laughing and blushing like a girl at her own
. Word are the stupidest damqy.- gng  .I'm m Ire  I
would be happier and less eomfi«t- d if we only.
ie sense to kiss more and talk  '   "-" 
'This-In the presence of Ardun  alrher husband 
irulx-year-old son I
- .;'fl,  deeply moved a   a little ovnume, '
-s :,|b»while ltVeent    her by t-he a W



<pb n="217"/>
- --          PISGAH   HEIGHTS            "
'Where you'dbe, aam,if tallingwas rationed-.-af'   ^;
r   -take *it otW   kissing-Sir '-t she ret or B 
eababied |felina, glanoed a I#b, wtlr    fully at
ye^WdlingWI          Terry and talking noosee   to
S      .'-S For the boy adored him and was on the brink
ut if he seemed unheedng, he was by no means
maware.  He was fighting his own battle in his
wn way; incidentally, he hoped, helping the girl to
ht hers. For he had shaken himself almost free of
I delicious yet disturbing illusion, only to be coao
onted by a more profoundly disturbing reality. Loyal
his promise, tacitly given, he had simply not eonnected
ar with the idea of marriage. The queer thrll of her
reence was for him quite another afair. Not lntl:
iat nght of wandering in the moonlight had it struck
nm, with a faint shock, that she might be mistaking
s friendliness for-something more. That contact
fth her had come at a eritical moment for himsrf,
as a detail he failed to realise. Beyond the sudde
wilderng  sensations that prompted his headlong
roposal to Tara, he had not felt seriously pert rb  y
A or woman; and, in the past four years, life had bee
ld to overfowing with other things-
That he should love Arns, deeply and dearly, iemea:
si mple and natural, as loving Tara. But to allI 
ve was a risk he had no right to run, either for himself
her. Yet the risk had been run before he awoke
v-the fact. And the events and emotions of Dewi'
Ight had drawn them irresstibly,  an        dose
gether. For the racial ferment had ben strg in
hn, a in her. And the darkness, the subtle infiuted
! his Indian dress-her tears-her danger! 'HoW
mld any man, frankly loving her, not be carried a
tte out of himself  That overmastering hmpnA   to
s her had taringly revealed the true fOres at wcrk;
'After all that, wh  could he do, but sharply ap .q
ie arb and renve imself-for a time-in the devo:t   ':
thatthi ''ng   had not gone too fart He bad bt      '
asurace to-- suppose she was already it lve .Wi
4i: t paMtently the possibility was thef. 
*ife~ltke Te-e  had eome to ee-the e     Be1i- lisp



<pb n="218"/>
218              FAR TO SEK
search of Dy4 he was, in effect, running away
himselt-  d Ardna, no less. If not actually inlo
very oon would be-did he dare to let himself go. 
And why not-why not?     The old unron
bellion stirred in him afresh. His mother being
temptation tugged the harder. Home, without 
Indian element, was almost unthinkable. If only
could take back'ArunaI But for him there could
no 'if.' He had tacitly given his word-to her.
any case there was his father-the Sinclair herita
So all his fine dreams of helping Arna amountedto
-that it was he who might be driven, in the en,
'  hurt her morethan anyof them. Life thatlooked
a straight-ahead business for most people, seemed
bristle with pitfalls and obstacles for him; all ona
of the double heritage that was at once his pride,
inspiration, and his stone of stumbling.
Endless wakeful hours of the night journey were
with thoughts and visions of Ar4a-her pansy faes
velvet-soft eyes, now flashing delicate raillery,
ite in troubled appeal. A rainbow creature-tha
te charm of her. Not beautiful-he thanked his
since his weakness for beauty amounted to a
but attrative-perilously so. For, in her case the
elemeat that drew him was the barrier that held 
apart. The irony of it I
Was she lying awake too, poor ehild-mising 
lttle t. Would she marry an Indian--evert 
she turn her back on India-even for him t UI
able questions hemmed her in. Could she even
them herself ?  Too well he understood how the 
of her nature hung balanced between conflicting
enaes. As he was, racially, so was she, spirit
divided being; yet, in spite of waverings,
at the core, with all that word implies to the,
know. If she lacked his mother's high sustained
he flashes of spirit shone out the brightefor her r
into womanly weakness-as in that poignpant,
by the tank, which had so nearly upset his own 
brium. Vividly recalling that moment, lt  ^
o realise that weeks might pas before he
again. No denying he wanted her z flt lk



<pb n="219"/>
PI8GAH   HEIGHTS               *A lp
her. The coveted Delhi adventure seemed suddenly
a very lonely affair; not even a clear inner sense of his
mother's presence to bear him company. No dreams
lately; no faint mystical intimation of her nearness,
since the wonderful hour with his grandfather. Only
in the form of that strange and lovely illusion had she
seemed vitally near him since he left Ohitor.
Graceless ingratitude-that ' only.' -For now, looking
back, he clearly saw how the beauty and bewilderment
of that early phase-so mysteriously blending Arena
with herself-had held his emotions in chek, lifted
them, purified them; had saved him, for all he knew,
from  surrender to  an  overwhelming passion that 
might conceivably have swept everything before it.
Pure fantasy-perhaps.   But he felt no inclination
to argue out the unarguable. He preferred simply
unquestioningly to believe that, under God, he owed
his salvation to her. And after all-take it spiritually
or psychologically-that was in effect the truth...
Towards morning, utter weariness lulled him into a
troubled sleep-not for long. He awoke, chilled and
heavy-eyed, to find the unheeded loveliness of a lemon-
yellow dawn stealing over the blank immensity of earth
and sky.
In a moment he was up, stretching cramped limbs,
thanking goodness for a carriage to himself, leaning out
and drlndng huge draughts of crisp lean air, fragnt
with the ghost of a whiff of wood smoke-the inlmfathle
ir of a Punjab autumn morning.
..
*~                                           ·lSA   ' ' '  



<pb n="220"/>
CHAPTER X.
'Tho tongue I a little member, and bouteth great thinga . .,
The tongue cn no man tame; it s an unruly evil, full o
poaLon."--   JAm  Ui. 65..
RBo spent ten days in Delhi-lodging with one 
Lal, a jewel merchant of high standing, well
to Sir Lakhman-and never a word or a sight o
Singh. The need for constant precautions ha
him not a little; but if the needle he sought wa
particular haystack, he would find it yet.
Meanwhile, at every turn he was imbibing 
pressions, a sufficiently enthralling occupation-i
of all places on earth: Delhi, mistress of many  '
Very woman, in that she yields to conquer; 
eaotries of romance and tragedy, remains, in
imeenqpered stilL   The old saying, 'Who holdsi'
Bhos India,' has its dark counterpart in the 
ldef that no alien ruler, enthroned at Delhi, sahal
Hence the dismay of many loyal Indians when thl
Government deserted Calcutta for the Queena
North. And here, already, were her endless,
byways rivalling Calcutta suburbs as homet-n
sedition and intrigue.
Boy was to grow painfully familiar with these
hi search ended. But the city's pandemonium i
posite noises and composite smells was offet
splendid remnants of Imperial Delhi -the Pearl 
a dream in marble, dazzling agait the blue:
oolumns of the Dewan-i-Khas-every lea
jade or malachite, every petal o   s stone; '
domes and rose-pink minmr      f ibe Juo
rsing superbly from a network of narrow 
shabby toppling houses. For, in India, th 



<pb n="221"/>
stately rub shoulders with sublime disegard for effeot.
In the cool aloofness of tombs and temples, or among
erumbling fragments of them on the plain, or away
beyond the battered Kashmir Gate-ground sacred to
heroic memorie--he could wander at will for hours,
solated inbody and spirit, yet strangely content... 
And there was yet a third Delhi, hard by these two;
yet curiously aloof: official, Anglo-Indian Delhi, of
bungalows and clubs and painfully new Government
buildings. Little scope here for imginative excursions,
but much scope for thought in the queer sensation,
that beset him, of seeing his father's people, as it were,
through his mother's eyes.
New as he was to Anglo-Indian life, these glimpses
from the outskirts were sufficiently illminating. Once
he was present in the crowd at a big Gymkhna; and
more than once he strolled through the Club gardens
where social Delhi pursued tennis-balls and shuttle-
cocks-gravely, as if life hung on the issue; or gaily,
with gusts of laughter and chaff, often noisier than need
be. And he saw them all, now, from a new angle of
vision. Discreetly aloof, he observed, in passing, the
complete free-and-easiness of the modem maiden with
her modern cavalier; personalities flying; likewise
legs and arms; a banter-wrange interlude over a
tennis-racquet; flight and pursuit of the offending
maiden, punctuated with shrieks, culminating in oollapse
and undignified surrender: while a pair ofclub peon -
also discreetly aloof-exchanged remarks whose imp   j
would have enraged the unsuspecting pair. Boy kirw - a
very well they never gave the matter a thought.  ber 
were imply ' rotting' in the approved style of to-da, y.
But, seen from  the Eastern standpoint, the trivial
eiddent troubled him. It recalled a chance remark
his grandfather': " With only a little more decorum
nd seriousness in their way of life out here, they could
do far more to promote good understanding socially
between us all, tan by making premature 'reforms'
o  titing at barriers arising from opposite kinds of
,lbsmation."
.:;-mer was matter for the novel-or novels--to b
_*-j  o .his .errantry :-the 'fruit of his life' that se 
longed to hold in her hands. Were she only at  j



<pb n="222"/>
222      '       FAB TO MEK
1Home now, what letters-without-end he would be:
ing out to heri What letters he eould have 
out to Artm-did conscience permit.
He allowed himself two, in the course of ten dayp
the spirit moved him, after long abstention, to  d
a rambling screed to Tan telling of his quest; r
more than he quite realibd of the inner stress
trying to ignore. The quest, he emphasised, 
private affair, onfided to her only, because he l
she would ruderstad. It hurt more than he
admit to feel how Completely his father would not 
stand his present tff oil of heart and brain. ...
Isolated thus; with his hidden thwarted em
there resulted a literary blossoming, the most
taneous and satisfying since his slow struggle up
the depths. Alone at night, and in the elear keen 
he wrote and wrote and wrote, as a thirsty man 
after a desert march:-poems chiefly; sketehes:
impressions; his dearest theme the troubled
Inda,--or was it the spirit of Arna t-poised 
-rescent light and deepening shadow, looking for
clear guidanee-and finding none. A prose sketde
this vein, stood out from the rest; a fragment o
soul, too intimately self-revealing for the general
no uncommon dilemma for an artist, precisely
work is most intrinsically true. Had he followed
natural urge of his heart, he would have sent
Arnn. As it was, he decided to treasure it a^
longer for himself alone. - 
Meantime Dy=n-hslf forgotten-suddenly
It was at a meeting-exelusively religions and
phieal; but the police had wind of it; and a 
imlpector. mentioned it to Krihna Lal.   The
speaker would be a Swami of impeccable
"But if you have a sensitive palate, you will 
deteot a spice of politial powder under the 
religion " quoth Krishna Lal, who was a man of
and no friend of sedition.                -
"Thanks for the hint," said Boy-and        
spirit. Meetings, at best, were the abomination of
ton; and his soul was sick of the Indian var
e e tf   ast' is never happier than he
1             *               ;;^^-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.



<pb n="223"/>
PISGAH HEIGHTS 
-at immense length; denouncing, inaugurating, p      -
moting; and a prolonged dose of it stirred in Boy a
positive  raving for men who shot remarks at each
other in ' straight-flung words and true.' But no stone 
must be left unturned. So he went;-guided by the     2
friendly policeman, who knew hi lfor a Sahib bent on 
some personal quest.
Their search ended in a windowless inner room;
packed to suffocation; heavy with attar of rose, kero-
sene, and human bodies; and Boy as usual elung to a
doorway that offered occasional respite.
The Swami was already in full flow :-   wraith of a
man in a salmon-eoloured garment; his eyes, deep in
their sockets, gleaming like black diamonds. And he
was holding his audience spellbound:-Hindus of every
calling; students in abundance; a sprinkling of Sikhs
and Dogras from the lines. Some form of hypnotism,-
was it t Perhaps. Even Boy could not listen nmoved,
when the spirit shook the frail ereature like a gt o
wind and the hollow chest-notes vibrated with appeal
or command. Such men-and India is full of them-
are spiritual dynamos. Who can calculate their effect
on an emotional race t And they no longer confine their
influence to things spiritual. They, too, have caught
the modern disease of politics for the million. And the
supreme appeal is to youth-plastic and impressionable,
lame with fervours of the blood that can be eonjured
by heady words, into fervours infnitely more dangeros
to themselves and their country.
In an atmosphere dense with spilled kerosene, with
ir-breathed air and over-harged emotion, that appeal
aig out like a trumpet blast.
"It is to youth the divine message has come in all
.ge; the call to martyrdom and dedication. 'Suffer
children to come unto me,' said the inspired Founder
: Chris tianity. So also I say in this time of reviva,
Srsti the young to fling themselves into the arms of
-bMother. My sons, she cries, go back to the Vedas.
.wfl- find all wisdom there. Rejeot this alien gift
ve  finely gilded-of a- ivilisation inferior to
Hindu Bishis were old in wisdom when thee
til  lothed savages coloured with blue paint.
dasm d MotharlfmA ha finnlaflat  with WAmtm



<pb n="224"/>
224              FAB TO      BK    ''R
poison   It is for the young to decide-to aot.
your ams with valour. Bring offerings  oept
the shrine of Kali Mat  Does she demand a
A buffalo  A oocoanut   Ask yourselves. The
is written in your hearts--"
His emaciated arms shot up and outward in a 
the more impressive because it was maintained.
prolonged moment the holy one seemed to hover
his audience--    it were an eagle poised on o
wings.... 
Boy' ome to himself with a start. His friend-
policeman had plucked his sleeve; and they e
a step or two through the open door.
"The Shib heard t " queried Man Smgh in a
undertone
"There's hearing-and hearing," said Boy,
of some cryptic message given and undrstood. :
take it hey all know what he's driving at."
"True talk. They know. But A. has not said.
fore he goes in safety when he should be picking
in the jail khana. They are cunning as serpents
holy one."
"They have the gift of tongues," said Boy.. "
one ask what is Mai Kali's special taste in
'The Sikh gave him an odd look. " The blood o
atsmei        Sahibs, Has nr."-Boy's ' lick'.'
Oriental to a niety.-" 'A white goat for Ka' 
old Bengali eathworh dlrk how their
But there is still another"iucn h esteemed by the 
f i  one who an skilfully flavour a pig l of i
talk, as the Swami can flavour a pitlah o£ 
Where he eomes, there will be trouble aft
arrests. But no  i Oharnath. He is off :
troble elsewhere."                        >:
"Ohantdramuth--re f"   Boy's heart gave 
half excitement, half apprehension.
"Your Honour has heard the man  "
"No. I'm glad of the chane."   -
As they entered, the second speaker. ieppe
tbw p foto.rm  ..
_r® tealk indeedl  There stood the boy.;
1 An T.UmIan          . A.ff



<pb n="225"/>
PISGAH HEIGHTS                826
fi'pered under Scab Major's bullying, in the dark
Ot and turban of the educated Indian; his back
S turned, in confidential talk with a friend, who had
it a arafe and tumbler ready.to hand. The light of a
al lamp shone full on the young man's face-lean-cut,
mndsome, unmistakable....
Dyn I Dyan-and Chandranath I It was the oon-
motion that confounded Boy and tinged elation with
Ilmay. He could hardly contain himself till Dya. 
oined the audience; standing a little apart; not taking
seat. Something in his face reminded Boy 6f the
rained fervour in his letter to Arfna. Carefully care-
a, he edged his way through the outer fringe of the
adienee, and volunteered a remark or two in Hindustani
" A fll meeting, brother. Your friend speaks well "
Dy/n turned with a start. "Where are yo  from,
iat you have not heard him  " He scrutinised Boy's
ppearane. " A hill man-   "
Boy edged nearer and spoke in English under his
eath. "Dyan-look at me. Don't make a scene. I
n Boy-from Jaipur."
In spite of the warning, DyAn drew back sharply.
'WAet are you here for-spying  "
"Ho. Hoping to find you. Because-I eare; and
rmna cars--"
Better to care less and understand more," Dyan
totered brusquely. " No time for talk now. Listet
em may learn a few things OQ d could not teach."
iThe implied sneer enraged Uy  but liste he must,
force: and in the space of half an hour he learnt a
iod deal about Ohandraath and the mentality of his
o the outer ear, he was propounding the popula
edom doctrine of 'Yoga by action.' To the inner ear
was extolling passion and rebellion in terms of a
ted that enjoins detachment from both; inciting to
fti6al murder, under sanction of the divine dictum,
Who kills the body kills naught . . . Thy coacern is
i action saloe, never with results.' And his heady
t of rhetorlo, like those of the Swamt, were frankly
. [ ;a~ the scores of half-fledged youths Who hung
ijil :utterance.
_.tA i   2ha th flrat wera   of thA mnnnno ahild t .Whak  -



<pb n="226"/>
29              FPAR TO SEEK
WOe the first words in your own hearts "
indicating that organ with a dramatic
"I watl It is the passionate cry of youth.
domitably uttering it, he can dislodge mount
the sea. And in India to-day there exist 
necessary to be hurled into the sea " His
ause was not lost on his hearers-or on Boy. 
branched and endless are the thoughts of the i
But to him who eries ardently, 'I wnt,' the
impediment, except paucity of courage to sna
seductive object. Deaf to the anmmic whisper
punotion, remembering that sin taints only the
he will be translated to that dizzy eminence, wh
and wrong, truth and untruth, become as pigmies
discerned by the naked eye. There dwells
ehameless and pitiless; and believing our coun
deity incarnate, her needs must be our gods. 
age make we in temple after temple-Bande 
The invocation was flung back to him in a r
Here and there a student leapt to his feet l
a clenched fist. " Compose your laudable int
brothers. I do not say, 'Be violent.' There is-a
mancy of the spirit more potent than weaponc
flesh:-the delusion of iesistible suggesion
conquer even truth itself ..."
Abstraction piled on abstraction; perversion
version; ad that deluded crowd plainly
it all as gospel truth--  I To Boy the whole 
was purely disgustful; as if the man had t
dust-bin under his aristocratie nose. Once o 
glanced covertly at Dy6n, standing beside him
strained intentness of his face, the nervous !
hand. Was this the same Dyin who had
agued and read 'Greats' with him only 
ago-this hypnotised being who seemed to 
gotten his existence-   t
Thank God I At last it was over  But whie 
hummed and fluttered, there sprang on to the 
unannounced, a wiry keen-faced man, with 
beatd of a Sikh.                         ;
"Brothers-I demand a hearing " he crei
"I who was formerly hater of the British,
mmannr of vinlena--I have ben three vm a 



<pb n="227"/>
PISGAH lEIGHTS 
a Germany; and I come back now, with my eyes
pen, to say all over India-cease your fool's talk about
elf-government and tossing mountains into the sea I
lease making yourselves drunk with words and waving
'our Vedic flags and stand by the British-your true
riends--"
At that, cries and counter-cries drowned his voice.
looks were hurled; no other weapon being handy;
ad Boy noted, with amused contempt, that Chandra-
ath hastily disappeared from view.
The Sikh laughed in the face of their opposition.
)exterously catching a book, he hurled it back; and once
hore made his strong voice heard above the clamour.
'Fools-and sheep ! You may stop your ears now.
n the end I will make you hear-"
Shouted down again, he vanished through a side
sit; and, in the turmoil that followed, Roy's hand
losed securely on Dyan's arm. Throughout the stormy
nterlude, he had stood rigidly still: a pained, puzzled
rown contracting his brows. Yet it was plain he would
ave slipped away without a word, but for Boy's detain-
mg gOm. k'
"Yo , don't go running off-now I've found you,"
aid he good-humouredly. "I've things to say. Come
long to my place and hear them."
Dyin jerked his imprisoned arm. "Very sorry. I
lave-important duties."
To-morrow night then t I'm lodging with Krishna
aIL And-look here don't mention me to your friend
he philosopher l I  now more about him than you
night suppose. If yo still eare a damn for me-and
he others, do what I ask-and keep your mouth
hut-"
Dyin's frown was hostile; but his voice was low and
roubled. "For God's sake leave me alone, Boy. Of
urse--I care. But that kind of caring is carnal weak-
tess. We, who are dedicated, must rise above such
Reakness, above pity and slave-morality, giving all to
lhe Mother-- "
"Dymn-have you forgotten-mij mother T"   Boy
xemsed his advantage in the same low tone.
"No. Impossible. She was Did-Goddess; love-
ert  d kindest--"



<pb n="228"/>
228               FAR TO SEEK
"Well, in her name, I ask you-come to-morrow
evening and have a talk."
DyAn was silent; then, for the first time, he looked
Boy straight in the eyes. "In her name-I will come.
Now let me go."
Boy let him go. He had achieved little enough. But
for a start it was not so bad.
,    .    .~~~~
.               .~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~1



<pb n="229"/>
a2%9 . . '                 ?~'
CHAPTER XL
"When we have fallen through stony after storey of our anity and
aspiration, it i then that we begin to mesure the stature of our
friends."-R. L. S.
NEXT evening Dyan arrived. He stayed for an hour,
and did most of the talking. But his unnatural volu-
bility suggested disturbance deep down.
Only once Boy had a glimpse of the true Dyin, when
he presented Arfna's ' pradd,' eonsecrated by her touch.
In silence Dyan set it on he table; and reverently
touched, with his finger-tips, firs the mal pa thenl 
his own forehead.
"Arfna-siter," he said on an under breat. But
he would not be drawn into talking of her, of his grand-
father, or of home affairs: and his abrupt deprure
left Boy with a maddening sense of frstration
He lay awake half the night; and reached eertain
conclusions that atoned for a violent headahe next
morning. First and best-Dyfa was not a genuine on-
vert. All this ferment and froth did not spell reasoned
conviction. He was simply ensnared; his finer natre
warped by the 'delusion of irresistible suggestin,'
deadlier than any weapon of War. His fanatial loyalty
mavoured of obsession. So much the better. An obaie-
sion could be pricked like an  ir-ball with the right
weapon at the right moment. That, as Boy    aw it,
was his task :-in effect, a ghostly duel hbtween himself
and Chandraath for the soul of Dyan Singh; and the
fate of Arina virtually hung on the issue.
Should he succeed, Ohadrnh would doubtless
gnus at his 'hare in Dyan's defetion; and few men
eae  about courting the enmity of the userplou
SOt is the secret power behind the foraes o anruhy,



<pb n="230"/>
aso               enf sss am --K
-*230            PEA5       SEETO 0 K
above all in India, where social and spiritual boyeot
an virtually slay a man without shedding of blood.:
For himself, Boy decided the game was worth the;
candle. The question remained-how far that natura
shrinking might affect Dyan  And again-how mueh.
did he know of Chandranath's designs on Ardna t
Boy decided to spring the truth on him next time--
and note the effect. Dyan had said he would come
again one evening; and-sooner than Boy expected-
he eame. Again he was abnormally voluble, as if hold-;
ing his cousin at arm's length by italicising his own
fanatical fervour, till Boy's impatience subsided into.i
weariness and he palpably stifled a yawn.
Dyan, detecting him, stopped dead, with a pained,
puzled look that went to Boy's heart. For he loved
the real Dyin, even while he was bored to extinetion
with the semi-religious verbiage that poured from him,
like water from a jug.
" Awfully sorry," he apologised frankly. "But I'v
been over-dosed with that sort of stuff lately; and.rIm
damned if I can swallow it like you do. Yet I'm 4ead
keen for India to have the best, all round, that she's
apable of digesting-yet. So's Grandfather. You can't
deny it."
Dyan frowned irritably. "Grandather's prejudiced
and old-fashioned."
"He's longer-sighted than most of your voluble
krends. He doesn't rhapsodise. He knows.-But I'm
not old-fashioned. Nor is Ardna."
"No, poor child; only England-infatuated  She
mnwiae not taking this chance of an educated h
bad-    "                                     .
" And s.eh a husband I" Boy struck in so shar
that Dyan stared open-mouthed. 
"How the devil ean you know  "
"And how the devil can you not know," cont
Boy, "when it's your precious paragon-Ohd
nath." 
He scored his point dlean and true. "hdranath 1:
Dyin echoed blankly, staring into the fire 
Boy said nothing; simply let the fact sink in.
having dealt the blow, he proffered a crumb of'_
to. -" Perhaps he prees to say nothing til he's p



<pb n="231"/>
PIbGAR HnIGkTS                fSl
it off. But I warn you, if he persists, I shall put evety
feasible spoke in his wheel."
Dyan faced him squarely. "You seem very intimate
with our affairs. Who told you this "
"Arna-herself."
"You are also very intimate-with her."
"As she has lost her brother, her natural protector,
I do what I can-to make up."
Dysn winced and stole a look at him. "Why not
make up for still greater lack-and marry her yourself t "
It was he who hit the mark this time. Boy's blood
tingled; but voice and eyes were under control.
I've only been there a few weeks. The question
has not arisen."
"Your true meaning is-it eould not arise. They
were glad enough for her service in England; but
whatever her service, or her loving, she must not marry
an Englishman, even with the blood of India in his
veins. That is our reward-both--"
It Wa the fierce bitter Dyan of that long ago after-
noon in New College Lane. But Boy was too angry
on his own account to heed. He rose abruptly.
"I'l trouble you not to talk like that."
Dyin rose also, confronting him. "I must say what
l in mind-or go. Better aecept the fact-it is useless
to meet."
"I refuse to accept the fact."
"But-there it is. I only make you angry. And
yo imply evil of the man-I admire."
He so plainly boggled over the words that Boy struck
without hesitation.
': "Dyan, tell me straight-o you admire him ?  Would
ou have Arnna marry him    "
.' SN-no.  Impossible.  There is-another kind of
MWe," he blurted out, averting his eyes; but before
Cy eould speak, he had pulled himself together. " How-
*e-I mustn't stay talking. Good-night."
Boy's anger-fierce but transient, always-had faded.
are some ties you ean't break, Dyan, even with
:/BBalde Mitaram. Come again soon."
68ble -to resist the friendly tone. "But," he
¶how-    lfg are yoi hanging about Delhi liMk



<pb n="232"/>
932          '         TB.O SEEK     
" As long as I choose."
"But-why ?"
"To eW something of you, old chap. It seems
only way-unless I can persuade you to hnuck all
poisonons vapouning, and come back to Jaipur with
ArUna's' waiting-breaking  her eart-longing to
you ...
He knew he was rushing his fences; bt the mood
on; the chance too good to lose
DyAn's eyes lightened a moment. :the he shook
head. "I am too much involved."' 
"You wil come, though, in the end," Boy
quietly. "I can wait. Sunday, is it  And well
politic-a we did in the good days. Don't you
to hear of them all at Home t "
"Sometimes-yes. But perha-better not.
are a fine fellow, Boy-even to quarrel with.
night." They shook hands warmly.
On the threshold, Dyin turned, hesitated; 
a hurried murmur-asked: " Were is she-what's
doing now ... .Tara t "                      '
He was obviously unaware of having used her
and Boy, though startled, gave no sign.
"She's still in Serbia. She's been simply  p
Head over ears in it all from the start."-He pa
" hall I tell her-when I write . . . about you "
Dyan shrugged his shoulders. "Waste of ink=
pp. It would not interest her."
It would. I know Tar. What you o doi
would hurt her-keenly." 
"      Tha I" The sharp sound expressed sheer 
It also expressed pain. "Good-night," he added,
third time; and went out-leaving Boy 
a- ti le with the hope of success at last. 
ara was not forgotten; though Dyan had be
ig to pretend she was-evn to himself. Ten
to one, she was still at the core everyhing;
preat incongruous activities.....
Bot paced the room; his imagination
own reoofi from the conjunction, overborne by 
ooncern for Dyn. Unable to forget her-who 
he had thrust the pain of remembering into. 
background of his mind; and there it



<pb n="233"/>
*  PISGAH OHEIMG TS
hard knot of soreness and bitterness-a  Arlna had
said. And all that bottled-up bitterness had been
tented against England-an unonscious symbol of Tar,
desired yet withheld; while the intensity of his thwarted
pasaion sought and found an outlet in fervent adoratio
ot his country visualised as woman.
Right or wrong-that was how Boy saw it. And the
argument seemed psychologically sound. Cruel to be
ind, he must touch the point of pain; draw the hidd
thin into the open; and so reawaken the old Dyan,
who could arraign the new one far more efetualy thaw
could Boy himself or another. Seized with his ide, h
indulged in a more hopeful letter to Aria; and had
scarcely patience to wait for Sunday.
In leisurely course it arrived-that last Sunday of
the Great War. The Chandni Chowk was a-bubble with
strange and stirring rumours; but the day waned- nd
the evening waned-and no Dyan appeared.
On Monday morning-still no word: but news, s     '
tremendous, flashed half across the world, that Dya 
and his mysterious defection flickered like a  at
at midday.
The War was over-virtually over. From the Vosges
to the sea, not the crack of a rifle nor the moan o a.
shell; only an abrupt, dramatic silence-the ead t
Belief in the utter cessation of all that wondedful -a
terrible activity, penetrated slowly. And as it pea. -.
trated Boy realised, with something like dimq, tha.
the right and natural sense of elation simply Va not'
He actually felt depressed. Shrink as he might from
the jar of confict, the sure instinct of a soldier ro.
warned him that hell holds no fury and earth no dange
like a ruthless enemy not decisively smitten. The psy-
tology of it was beyond him-shroudeo i mystery.   .
;   ot.till long afterwards did he kno: how many,
'. Ingland and France, had shared his beilderd feel-
^r:;~ how British soldiers in Belgium had  ried like
.4~ren, had raged almost to the point of mtiny..
.J e thing he knew-steeped as he was in ,th
of Eastern thought and feeling. In dia w  .
understand. Visible, spectaolar victory, alone
Ipjl~4Ii  press the East: and such an impresion might



<pb n="234"/>
3i64             W AX'O SEEK                ^^1
have  oounteatedM many mistakes that had
beore... 
Tueayd brought no Dyan; only a scrawled
"Scty--too much business. Can't eome just n
fone eold take thatat its face value--  But it
mean anything. Had Ohandranath found out-and
Dyne not the moral courage to go his own way t
e new by now where his cousin lodged; but
never been there. It was in one of the oldest parS 
the city; alive with political intrigue. If Boy's nat
ty were suspected, 'things' might happen, and it
dearly unfair on his father to run needless risks.
this was different. 'Things' might be happening.'
Dyan.
So, after nearly a week of maddening suspense,
resolved-with all due caution-to take his chance
A silvery twilight was ebbing from the sky whean
plunged into a maze of narrow streets and by-
Where the stream of Eastern life flows along immem
ehmenls scarcely stirred by surface eddies of 'adv
.Threading his way through the crowd, he found
street and the landmark he sought: a doorway, ado
with a faded wreath of marigolds, indication of
o  preence within; and just beyond it, a low-
almost a tunnel. It passed under balconied h
tsOlg perilously forward; and as Boy entered- i
f|are darkened the other end. He could only
the lang dark coat and turbaned head: but
ashed ustat conviction-Chandranath I
- Alert, rather than alarmed, he hurried forward,
Ing the opposite will. At the darkest pnt
eosed. Boy felt the other pause,e hi'
and pass on. The relief of it! And the ign
suddenly feeling the old childish terro, when yeo
tamed your back on a dark room. It was all he 
\do not to break into a run. .. .
In the open court, set round with tottering h
acred neem tree made a vast patch of shadow.
it, a riokety staircase led up to Dyin's roof room. 
mounting cautiously, knocked at the highest door.'- .
"Are you theie  It's Boy," he called softly. -
A  ause :-then the door flew open and Dfl-a



<pb n="235"/>
·-                      -                      uPISGAH HEIGHTS 3e
before him, in loose white garments; no turban; a
farouche look in his eyes.
"My God-Boy I Crazy of you I I never thought--"
"Well, I got sick of waiting. I suppose I can come
in I " Roy's impatience was the measure of his relief.
Dyin moved back a pace, and, as Boy stepped on 4
the roof, he carefully closed the door.
" Think-if you had come three minutes earlier  He
only left me just now--handranath"
And passed me in the archway," added Boy with
his touch of bravado. "I've as much right to be in
Delhi-and to vary my costume-as your mysteriously
potent friend. It's a free country."
"It is fast becoming-not so free." Dyin lowered
his voice, as if afraid he might be overheard; "And
you don't consider the trouble it might make-for me."
" How about the trouble you've been making for me t
What's wrong t"
Dyan passed a nervous hand across his eyes and fore-
head. " ome in. It's getting cold out here," he said
in a repressed voice. Boy followed him across the rif
top, with its low parapet and vault of darkening sky,
up three steps, into an arcaded room, where a log fi
burnd in the open hearth. Shabby, unrelated bits of
furniture gave the place a comfortless air. On a co00
table strewn with leaflets and pamphlets ("Polsoed
arrows, up to date I " thought Boy), a typewriter read
its hooded hed. The sight struck a shaft of pain thr h
him. Arlna's Dyn--son of kings and wariors-turnin
his one skilful hand to such base uses 1
"What's wrong   " he repeatqd with emphasis  "I
want a straight answer, Dyan. I've risked something
to get it."
Dyan sat down near a small table, and took his head
between his hands. "There is-so much wrong," he
said, looking steadily up at Boy. "I am feeling-like
a man who wakes too suddenly after much sleep-
.walkig." 
" ince when T " asked Boy, keeping himself in hand.
"What's jerked you awake t D'you know t "
" There have been many jerks. Seeing you; Arna's -
.ffleing; this news of the War; and sometng . .
,r"mentloned last timee.A" 



<pb n="236"/>
3    -           FAB TO SEEK 
What was that ... Tara " Boy lunged
to the middle of the wound.
Dyin tarted. "But-how--t I never said .. 
stammered, visibly shaken.
"It didn't need saying. Ardna told me-the
and my own wits told me the rest. You're not h
keen-are you t-to shorten the arm of the Briti
'* and plunge India into chaos ? "
" No-no." A very different Dyin, this, to th
who had poured out stock phrases like water
week ago.
"Isn't bitterness-about Tars, at the back of
Face that straight.  And-if it's true, say so 
fase shame."
Dyin was silent a long while, staring into th
Very strange. I had no idea," he said at last.,
wotas came slowly, as if he were thinking aloud
angrymiserable; hating you al; eve
b  ie-ker. Then came the War; and I th
anow our countries will become like one. I
her by some brave action-she who is the 
wrmagp. From France, after all that praise of
itnthe papers, I wrote again. No ue. Afteo
hoped by some brave action, I might be killed.
through stupid carelessness, I am only m ed
see. I was foolishly angry when Indian trooi
sent away from Franee: and my heart beamn
like a nut."-He had emerged frm his dream -
was frakly addressing Boy-" I knew-, ifI w
they would insist I should marry. Quite
for me-not thinkable. Yet I mus go bsac
And there, in Bombay, I heard Chandransth
was just back from deportation; and to me  i
ee like leaping flames. All the fire of my. 
choked up in me-could flow freely in
Mother. I became intoxicated with the  rede
new comrades: there is neither truth nor
ight nor wrong; there is only the Mother.
Sied with the joy of deditko    and unq
surrender. It gave me vsioq Epium
kinds of opium I have tae    l ,-while t
my sleep. I was ready for taking lifer any 
deed. Instead-Toha ! I have to take



<pb n="237"/>
PI8GAH HEIGHTS                 -
common daooit, beeause police must be bribed, soldiers
tempted, meetings multiplied . . ."
"It takes more than the blood of white goats to oil
the wheels of your chariot," said-Boy, very quiet, but
rather grim. "And he's not the man to do his own
dirty work-eh t "
"No. He is only very clever to dress it up in fine
arguments. All money is the Mother's. Only they are
thieves who selfishly hide it in banks and safes. Those
who release it for her use are deliverers . . ." he broke
off with a harsh laugh. "In spite of education, we
Indians are too easily played upon, Boy. If you had
not spoken-of her, I might have swallowed-even that.
Thieving-bah I Killing is man's work. There is sanc-
tion in the Gita-"
" anction be damned I" Boy eut in sharply. " Youn
might as well say Shakespeare sanctioned theft becane
he wrote, 'Who steals my purse steals trash I' The
only sanction worth anything is inside you. And you
didn't seem to find it there. But let's get at the point.
Did you refuse "
"No. Only-for the first time, I demurred; and
because the need is urgent, he became very violent-i
lnguage. It was almost a quarrel."                  ;
Olear proof you scored l  Did you mention- '
Aimp "                  -'.
Dyan shook his head. "If I become violent, it is
bot only language--"
-"No. -You're - a man.  And now you're awake
can.I can tell you things-but I can't stay all
gt.ell
"No. He is coming back. Only gone to Canton-
meats-on business."
" What sort of business t " 
Dyan chewed his lip and looked uncomfortable.  ..
"Never mind, old chap. I can see a church by 
light  He's getting at the troops. Sreading lies abut
'theArmistioe. And after that- t           - 
:;  ,e is returning-about midnight, hoping toa   me
Aaras-reasonable mind-" 
*    And by Jove we won't ippoint him 1 "  d Boy,
had seen his God-given chance. Springing up he
_-B '    vn bv the ahoudP. " Yonr reesonable mind



<pb n="238"/>
388             FAB TO SEEK                  1
will take the form of scooting back with me, ju
and we can sip out of Delhi by the night ma.
precious. S8 hurry up."
But Dyin did not stir. He sat there loo
plainly staggered that Boy burst out laughing.
"You're not half awake yet. You've messed
so long with men who merely 'agitate' and 'i
rate,' that you've forgotten the kind who actst 
talk afterwards. I give you ten minutes to 
tender farewell. Then-We make traeks. It's all I
here for-if you want to know. And I take it 
willing t "
Dyan sighed. "I am willing enough. But
are many complications. You do not know.
organiling big trouble over the Rowlatt Bill-and
things. I have not much secret information, or 
would probably not be worth a pin. But it is 
complicated network, and there are too easy w
India for socal and spiritual boycott-"
He enlarged a little; quoted cases that flled-
with surprise and indignation, but no wa.oc
resolve.
"We needn't go straight to Jaipur. Qut b.  t
to knock round a bit. Throw him oft the scent,
got over the shock. We can wire our news; A
be too happy to fret over a little delay. And yM
be ostracised among your own people. They,
They want your help. Grandfather does. The
could do was to run you to earth-open your e
" And by Indra you've done it, Boy."
"You'll come then " 
"Yes, I'll come-and damn the consequenees I t
The Dyin of Oxford days was visibly mer
a veritable awakening; the strained look gone
It was Boy's 'good minute': and in the
rush that followed, he swept Dyan along with 
unresiting, exalted, amaed---
The farewell letter was written; and D  g
belongings stowed into a basket-box. Then they 
down, .through the dark courtyard into t.
-A- :;   X se egos   -.:~



<pb n="239"/>
PISGAH  HEIGHTS '
mnnel; and Boy felt unashamedly glad not to be     X
alone. His feet would hurry, in spite of him; and
that kept him a few paces ahead.
Passing a dark alcove, he swerved instinctively-and
hoped to goodness Dyin had not seen.
Just before reaching the next one he tripped over
something-taut string or wire stretched across the
passage. It should have sent him headlong had he
been less agile. As it was, he stumbled, cursed and
kept his feet. 
"'Ware man-trap I" he called back to DyAn, under
his breath.
Next instant, from the alcove, a shot rang out: and
it was Dyan who cursed; for the bullet had grazed his
am.
They both ran now; and made no bones about it.
Boy's sensations reminded him  vividly of the night
he and Lance fled from the Turks.
"We seem to have butted in and spoilt,somebody's
Wtte game I " he remarked, as they turned into a wider
teet and slckened speed. "How's your arm  "
" Nothinp     mere scratch." Dyin's tone was graver.
"But that' Amost unusual. I can't make it out-"
"You're well quit of it all, anyhow," said Boy, and
ipped a hand through his arm.
Not till they were settling down for a few hours' sleep
i the night mail, did it dawn on Boy' that the little
[mb might possibly have been connected with himself.
Iniasldr th had seen him in that dress before. He
1d just come very near quarrelling with Dyfin. If he
efpected Boy's identity, he would suspect his in*
.e frankly spoke his thought to DyAn; and found
I-bad occurred to him already. "Not himself, of
Ie," he added. "The gentleman is not partial to
I But suspeting-he might have arranged;
to catch you coming back-the swine   Natu-
tiaer this, he will go further than suspecting "  
on   go to the devil-and welcome; now I've
p.!I " aid Boy;-and slept soundly upon that
m_ abevemnt, through all the rattle and elatter
_A-



<pb n="240"/>
:
-tlQ  ·
CHAPTER XIL
"God usea to help eah other so."
-BROWsNm.
IT was distinctly one of Boy's great moments
at last they four stood together in Sir Lakshman's
the old man, outwardly impassive-as became a
-profoundly moved in the deep places of 'hi
ArLna, in Oxford gown and sari, radiant one mo
the next-in spite of stoic resolves-rying
DyAn's arms. And Boy understood only too welL
moment he held her hand and met her eyes- he
It was not only joy at Dyin's return that evol
veiled blush, the laugh that trembled into tears.
oeit or no conceit, his intuition was not to be e
- And the conviction did not pa. It was co
"by every day, every hour he spent in her com
On the rare oceasibns, when they were alone
the very thing that must be religiously stfled ad
. eamanted from her like fragrance from a flower;
reawakening his own temptation to respond
only to ease her pain. And there was more in iB
that-or very soon would be, if he hesltted t
longer to clinch matters by telling her the trth; 
*ery nerve shrank from the ordeal-for himself
unning away from oneself was plainly a futfile
met. To have so faile   with her, dishearte
badly and dwarfed his proud achievment to 
significant thing.
, To the rest, unaware, his triumph seemed o
his risky adventure justified beyond eca'
admitted as mueh ;-even Vincent, who ab
latives and had privately taken falure for 
in a ft of modesty, ascribed it all to 'ie



<pb n="241"/>
PISAH HEIGHTS 
merest chance he had caught Dyan, on his own oon-
fessin, just as the first flickers of doubt were inva4ig
his hypnotised soul; just when it began to dawn bn
him that alien hands were pulling the strings. He  a
alredy begun to feel trapped; unwilling to go forwa  ;
unable to go back; and the fact that no inner secrets
were confided to him, had galled his Bajput vanity and
pride. In the event, he was thankful enough for the
supposed slight; since it made him feel appreciably
safer from the zeal of his discarded friends.
Much of this he had confided to Boy, in framents
and jerks, on the night of their amazng exit from
Delhi; already sufficiently himself again to puzzle
fankly over that perverted Dyan; to marvel-with a
simplicity far removed from mere foolishnes-"how
one man can make a magic in other men's minds so that
he shall appear to them an eagle when he is only a
crow."
" That particular form of magic," Boy told him, " has
made half the history of the world. We all like to
flatter ourselves we're safe from it-till we get bitten.!
You've been no more of a fool than the others, Dyan
-if that's any consolation."
The offending word rankled a little. The truth of it
rankled more. "By Indra, I am no fool now. Perhaps
he has discovered that already. I fancy my letter wl
administer a shock. I wonder what-he will do t "
"He won't 'do.' You can bank on that. He may
flin vitriol over yon on paper. But you won't have the
pleasure of his company at Jaipur. He left his card on
us before the Dewli. And there's been trouble sinee;
eaflets eirculating mysteriously; an exploded attempt
to start a seditious 'rag.' So theyre on the gui .se.
Hell -count that one up against me: but I'll nm age
to survive."
And Dy6u, in the privacy of his heart, had felt dis-
inotly relieved  Not that he lacked the courage, of his
race; but, having seen the man for years, as it were,
_mogh a magnitying lens, he could not, all in a moment,
Bnm for the hing he was .    geros  as a  ak,
vwi"'wrt  a snake to wriggle it of harm's way. 
-lh.d not been backward, however, in awakening
to purdah maneuvres.    Strictly in



<pb n="242"/>
242h             PAXA      SEEKS 
privat--he told hbi cousin-there had been ungovernd
stors of temper, ungoverned abuse of Boy, who wi
suspeotd by ' the Inside' of knowing too much and
bAtng undue influence with the old man. 'The Inide,'
hbtathered, had from early days been jealous of the
avourite daughter and all her belongings. Naturally,
in DyAn's opinion, his sister ought to marry; and the
sooner the better. Perhaps he had been unwise, after
al, insisting on postponement. By now she would have
been settled in her lawful niche instead of making
trouble with this crase for hospital nursing and keeping
outside caste. Not surprisingif she shrank from living
at home, after all she had been through. Better for them
both, perhaps, to break frankly with orthodox Hinduis
and join the Brahma Samaj.
As Roy knew precisely how much-or rather, how
little--Artna liked working in the wards, he suffered
a pang at the pathos of her innocent guile. And if
Dyan had his own suspicions, he kept them to himself.
He also kept to himself the vitrlolie outpouring which
he had duly found awaiting him at Jaipur. It contained
too many lurid allusions to 'that conceited, imperialisti
half-caste cousin of yours'; and Boy might resent the
implied stigma as much as Dyin resented it for him.
Bo he tore up the effusion, intended for the eye of
Roy, merely remarking that it had enraged him. It was
beneath contempt.
Roy would like to have seen it, all the same; for
he knew himself quicker than Dyan at reading between
the lines. The beggar would not hit back straight. But
given the chance, he might try it on some other way-
witness the pistol-shot in the arcade; a sidd light-or
a side flash-on the pleasant sort of devil he was 
Back in the Jaipur Residency, in the garden that was
'almost  ngland,' back in his good familiar tweed coat
and breeches, the whole Delhi interlude seemed stragely
theatrial and unreal; more like a vivid dream than an
rence in the flesh.
Bt there was Dyn to prove it no dream; ad the
pearous charm oft Aina, that must be ressted to the
be  of his power....
All this stir and ferment within; yet .. o ..
A~1 ths stir and ferment within; yet not a _



<pb n="243"/>
PITGAH RHEIGTS                 in 
ipple disturbed the flow of those uneventful -eeks
between the return of Boy and the coming of Lanbe
)esmond for Christmas leave.
It is thus that drama most often happens in life
-a light under a bushel; set in the midst, yet unseen.
Tincent, delving in ethnological depths, saw little or
othing outside his manuseript and maps. Floss Eden
-engrossed in her own drawing-room comedy with Cap- 
aln Matin--aw less than nothing, except that 'Mr
indlair's other native cousin' came too often to the
louse. For she turned up her assertive nose at 'native
gentlemen '; and confided to Martin her private opinion  '
hat Aunt Thea went too far in that line. She bothered 
oo much about other people all round-which was tre.
She had bothered a good deal more about Floss den,
a1 early days, than that young lady at all realised.
Lnd now-in the intervals of organising Christmas
resents and Christmas guests-she was bothering a
pood deal over Boy, whose absence had obviously failue
o clear the air.
Not that he was silent or aloof. But his gift of speech
tverlaid a reticence deeper than that of the merely
dlent man; the kind she had lived with and under-
tood. Once you got past their defences, you were.un-
nistakably inside:-Vinx, for instance. But with Boy
he was aware of reserves within reserves, which made
dim the more interesting, but also the more distrating,
rhen one felt entitled to know the lie of the land. For,
Lruna apart, wasn't he becoming too deeply immersed
a his Indian relations--losing touch, perhaps, with
hose at homet Did it-or did it not matter-that,
lay after day, he was stroling with Artna, riding with
)yfn, pig-sticking and buck-hunting with the royal
heetahs and the royal heir to the throne; or plunging
leek deep in plans and possibilities, always in connection
rith those two  His mail letters were few and not
iulky, as she knew from handling the contents of the
lesidency mail-bag. And he very rarely spoke of them
fl: less than ever of late. To her ardent nature it
eemed inexplicable. Perhaps it was just part of hi
esuliar 'inwardness.' She would have liked to feel
I.e, however....
*.;  .                 _>_ ^ a .  __ A.  .i  -»- m _ . &



<pb n="244"/>
2a              li    TO SEEK
Lanoe would be a help. She was counting on 
readjust the scales. Thank goodness for Lae-
up the Lahore 'week' and the Polo To
spend  hristmas with her and Boy in the 
Rajputana. Just to have him about the place i
his music, his big laugh, his radiant certainty
any and every circumstance, it was a splendid 
be alive-would banish worries and lift her
high. After the still, deep waters of her beloved
whose strain of remoteness had not. been quite 
by marriage-ad the starlit mysteries of Arna 
intriguing complexities of Boy, a breath of Lance
be tonic as a breeze from the Hills. He was o
and sure; not in flashes and spurts, but
like sunshine; because the clearness and  r
his whole personality behind them. And he
counted on to deal faithfully with Boy; p
him back to the Punjab. It would be sad o
but in the distrcting circumstances, a clean ut 
the only solution. She would just put in a word
effect: a weakness she had rarely been known t
however complete her faith in the man of the 
.<^She simply dared not think of Arfna, who
itaenmed like betrayal-no less. And yet .. ; t
. . /
:'-..
. ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~ '.'  1



<pb n="245"/>
:CAPTER      X    ...
CHAPTER XIm.
"One made out of the better part of earth,
A man born u at a nriee."
.was all over-the strenuous joy of planning and
eparing. Ohristmas itself was over. From the adja-
eat borders of British India, five lonely ones had been
thered in. There was Mr Mayne, Commissioner of
sli, Vinoent's old friend of Kohat days, unmarried
id alone in camp with a stay Settlement Officer,
hose wife and children were at Home. There was Mr.
mne--in the Canals-large-boned and cadaverous,
ith a sardonic gleam in his eye. Rumour said there
ad once been a wife and a friend; now there remained
mly work and the whisky bottle; and he was overdoing
eth. To him Thea devoted herself and her fiddle with
urtecular zest. The other two lonelies-a Mr and Mrs
air-were medical missionaries, fighting the influensa
surge in the Delhi area; drastically disinfected-
uetse of the babies; more than    kful for a brief
wpite from their daily diet of tragedy, and from labours
[ereules' self would not have disdained. For all that,
ey had needed a good deal .of pressing. They had
so clothes.' They were very shy. But Thea had
uted; so they came-clothed chiefly in shyness and
rattude, which made them shyer than ever.
aoy, still new to Anglo-India, was amazed at the way
Weme haphazard humans were thawed into a passg
ilimasy by the smunhine of Thea's personality. For
iMf, it was the nearest approach to the real thing
hit hlald known since that dear and dramlike  hrst-
Ri.: 1916. It warmed his heart, and renewed the
_i00   edw of erelesshamineim.that had cone from him



<pb n="246"/>
f 246             FAB TO     EEK 
utterly since the blow fell; gone, so he beleve
ever.
Something of this she divined-and was glad,
her exigent heart was not altogether at ease. His e
to Lance, though unmistakble, fell short of herj
fldent expectation. He was still squandering fat
much time on the other two. Sometimes she felt
angry with him: jealous-for Lance. She knew
deeply he cared underneath; because she too 
Desmond. And Desmonds could not care by halve-
This morning, for instance, the wretch was out
with Dyan; and there was Lance, alone in the dra
room strumming the accompaniments of things
would play to-night: just a wandering successe
chords in a minor key; but he had his f
gift of touch, that no training can impart, and.
same trick of playing pensively to himself, am
if he were thinking aloud. It was five years since.
had seen her father; and those pensive chords bro
sudden tears to her eyed
What did Lance mean by it-mooning about
piano like that t Had he fallen in love That was
of the few questions she did not dare ask him.
here was her chance to ' put in a word' about Bo
So she strolled into the drawing-room and leaned
the grand piano. His smile acknowledged her p
and his pensive chords went wandering softly away
the bass.
"Idiot-what are you doing T" she asked
because the music was creeping down her spine. ". 
ing to yourself "
"More or less."
"Well--give over. I'm here. And it's -a.
habit." 
He shook his head, and went wandering on. ' lIa
form I find it soothing and compaible."   :
"Well, you oughtn't to be needing either at
time under my roof, with Boy here iBa all-if he'd4
behave. Sometimes I want to sbakbia--" -:."
"Why-what's the matter with Doyt 'T
cent query checked her rush of prQtett  lM
Had he not even noticedt Eeawei.ti   h 1r
dearest things I-" He looks awfully ffi



<pb n="247"/>
PISGAH HEIGHTS                ml
rond. He's pulling up. You never saw him-you
lon't realise-n"
" But, my dear boy, do you realise that he's getting
rather badly bitten with all this-Indian problems and
[ndian conuins-"
Lance nodded. " I've been afraid of that. But one
an't say much."
"I can't. I was counting on you as the God-given
antidote. And there he is, still fooling round with
Dyan, when you've come all this way . . . It makes me
wild. It isn't fair-"
Her genuine distress moved Lance to cease strumming
nd bestow a friendly pat on her hand. "Don't be
iving yourself headaches and heartaches over Roy and
ne, darlint. We're going strong, thanks very muchl
It would take an earthquake to throw us out of step.
Ef he chose to chuck his boots at me, I wouldn't trouble
-except to return the trees if they were handy I Strikes 
ne women don't yet begin to understand the noble art
tf friendship-"
" Whic is a libel-buetle that pass I Besides
hasn't it struck you t Arna-- "
-"My God! " His hands drojped with a crash on the
eyboard. Then, in a low swift rush: "Thea, you
lon't tme  it-you're pulling my leg."
"Bible-oath I'm not. It's too safely tucked under the
iano !"
": My God! " he repeated softly, ignoring her incurable
ivolity. "(Has he said anything t"
-"No. But it's plain they're both smitten more or
ae"
"Smitten be damned."
"Lance! I won't have Ardna insulted. Let me
el you she's charming and cultivated; much better
impany than   Floss.  And  I love her like a
laughter--"
"Would you have her marry Boy " he flung out
nathfully.
" Ot ourse not. But still--
^JfN-peperhapst !" he queried with such fine scorn
burst out laughing.
pricels gem I You are t- unadulterated
1"  ,~'



<pb n="248"/>
. "Well-what:-e :would I bet What else ar .youi
by the ame token t"
"Not adulteted," she denied stoutly. "Perhaps a
wee bit lees' prejdiced' The awful result, I suppoqe
of failin to eep myself scrupulously detached from ny
surroundings. Besides, you couldn't be married twenty
years to that Vinx and not widen out a bit. Of ourse
I'm quite aware that widening out has its insidious
dangers and limitation its heroic virtues-Hush I Don't
fly into a rage. You're not limited, old boy. You loved
-Lady Sinclair."
"I adored her," Lance said very low; and his fingers
ptrayed over the keys again. " But-she was an accom-
plished fact. And-she was one in many thousands
She's gone now, though. And there's poor Sir Nevil-"
He rose abruptly and strode over to the fireplaoe
"Tell you what, Thea. If the bee in Boy's bonnet is
buzzing to tt tone, some one's got to stop it-"
"That's my point I " She swung round onfronting
him. "Why not whimshim back to the Punjb t I
does seem the only way --'
Lance nodded again. "Now you talk sense. Mind1
I-don't believe he'll ome. Boy's a tougher customer
than he looks to the naked eye. But I'll have a shot
at it to-night. If needs must, Ill tell him why. I can
swallow half a regiment of his Dyins; but not-the
other thing. I hope you find us intact in the morning ! 
She flew to him and kissed him with fervour; and
she was still in his arms when Boy strolled aeal
into the room.
There were only three outsiders that night: the State
Engineer and two British officers in the Mharajah's
employ. But they st down siteen to dine; and
very shortly after, eame three others in 
of Dyin and Sir -Tlkhm,  n Singh, with hi, ditin
guished friend Mahomed Insat .Khan, from Hydsdmbi
Nothing Thea enjoyed better than getting a mixed bpth
of men together and hearig    m th-m iespeiA p I
for then she knew their hearts were in it  w.h.yfl
happy.
And to-night, her chance assortlmeinatw 
varied, even for India:-Army, '< 9      ;ie



<pb n="249"/>
PISGAB HEIGHTS                 s
MWJD. and Native States; New India, in the-person
I Dyin; and not least, the 'medical mish' pair; as
lement rich in mute inglorious heroism, as the villagers
ad 'depressed classes' of India know. She took keen
dight in the racial interplay of thought and argument,
dth Boy, as it were, for bridge-builder between. How
* would relish the ideal He seemed very much in
he vein this evening, especially since his grandfaher
rrived. He was dearly making an impression on Mr
layne and Inayat Rhan; and a needle-prick of remorse
ouehed her heart. For Ardna, annexed by Captain
artin's subaltern, was watching him too, when she
ineled no one was looking; and Lance, attentively,
ilent, was probably laying deep plans for his capture.
L wicked shame-but still .. .!
As a matter of fact, Lance, too, was troubled with
hint compunction. He had never seen Boy in thi.
lnd of company, nor in this particular Vein. And
elutantly, he admitted that it did seem rather a waste
f his mentally reviving vigour hauling him back to
he common round of tennis and dances and polo--ye
ven sacred polo-when he was so dead keen on ti
ifernal agitation business, and seemed to know:f sch
deuce of a lot about it al.
:Lanoe himself knew far too little; and was anxious to
ear more, for the intimate, practical reason that he
ras not quite happy about his Sikh troop. The Pathon
st were all right. But the Sikhs-his pride and joy
rre being ' got at' by those devils in the City. Andg
I these men could be believed, ' things' ere gog o
bt very much worse; not only 'down eountry' but
de in the Punjab, India's sure shield against the
ivader. To a Desmond, the mere suggestioan i the
uanjab turning traitor was as if one impugned the
Murage'If his father or the honour of his mother; So
.tlotasy personal is. India's hold upon the hearts of
IikahmeW n who eome. uder her spell.
Lai.  ance litened intently, if a little anxiously, to all
tjo  hea  ' mised-biscuits ' had to say on that abaorbl
~je. For to-night shop held the field: if that
J   qbs ealled shop, which vitally concerned the fate
' 1^f   d sad Ind, and of British dominion in the



<pb n="250"/>
250              FAB TO 8BlK 
Agitation aginst the sane measures embodied 
Bwlatt Bills was already astir, like bubbles round
before it boils. And Inayat Khan had come
from Bombay, where the National Congress had r
with ocorn the latest palliative from Home; 
manded the release of all revolutionaries, and w
repeal of laws against sedition. Here was shop
eiently ominous to overshadow all other topics:.
there was no gne, no constraint. The Englishmen
talk freely in the presence of cultured Indians-1
stood for Jaipur and Hyderabad, since both
were loyal to the core.
Dyan, like Lance, spoke little and pondered m
the talk of these men, whose straight speech and
were refeshing as their own sea breezes after the
of rhetoric, the fog of false values that had bem
brain these three years. Strange how all the 
and pain of hate had shrivelled away; how he
even shake hands, untroubled, with that 'impe
bureaucrat' the Commissioner of Delhi, whom he
have been told off, any day, to 'remove from this
coil.' Strange to sit there, over against him, w
puffed his cigar and talked, without fear, of 
antagonism, inreasing danger to himself and hi
" here's no sense in disguising the unpa a
that New India hates us," said he in h gruff,e
voice. "Present eompany excepted, I hope I" :c
He gravely inclined his head towards
responded mutely with a flutter at his heafe
possible I The man could not suspect-- t I
And the man, looking him frankly in the eyes,
"The spirit of the Mutiny's not extinet-and wn
it, those of us that count."
Dya simply sat dumfounded. It was Sir
who aid, in his guarded tone: "Neverthele
bulk of our people are loyal and peaceable. -^
there are some in England who do not count 
to their credit." 
"If they ever become anything'else, it 
our credit," put in Boy. "If we can't sta
bluster and sedition with that moral force at 
we shall deserve to go under." 
"Well spoken, Boy," said his grandfatr 



<pb n="251"/>
"?     PISGA      HEIGHTS             26i
ly. " Let u hope it is not yet too late. Sadi says,
he fountain-head of a spring can be blocked with a
iUek; but in full flood, it cannot be crossed, even on
Wi elephant.'"
They exchanged a glance that stirred Boy's pulses
and gave him confidence to go on: "I don't believe it
b too late. But what bothers me is this-are we treating
)ur moral force as it deserves ? Are we giving them
byalty in return for theirs-the sort they can under-
tand t With a dumb executive and voluble 'patriots,'
persuading or intimidating, the poor beggars haven't a
log's chance, unless we openly stand by them; openly
anite our enemies-and theirs."
He boldly addressed himself to Mayne, the sole symbol
)f authority present; and the Commissioner listened,
rith a gleam of amused approval in his eye.
"You're young, Mr Sinclair-which doesn't mean
ou're wrong I Most of us, in our limited fashion, are
tyin to do what we can on those lines. But, after
endhing half a lifetime in this climate, doing our utmost
to give the peasant-nd the devil-his due,-we're apt
o grow cynical-- "
"Not to mention suicidal " grunted the slave of
work and whisky. "We Canal coolies-hardly visible
to the naked eye-are adding something like an Egypt
kyear to the Empire. But, bless you, England takes
mo notice. Only let some underbred planter or raw
mbaltern bundle an Indian out of his carriage, or a
bimken Tommy kick his servant in the spleen, andt
the whole British Constitution comes down about our
"Very true, sir-very truel"  Inayat Rhan leaned
rd.d His teeth gleamed in the dark of his beard.
large firm-featured face abounded in good sense
id good humour. "How shall a man see justly if he
es thse telescope wrong way round, as too many do
ar there. It also remains true, however that the
manners of certain Anglo-Indians create a lot of bad
ling. Your so-called reforms do not interest the
.iam  or touch their imagination. But the boot of
low-clas European touches their backs and their
e .4 and hardens their hearts. That is only human
T T1e ltA Ua A. Lfr nlrA mainma nf nnnvot w ftana



<pb n="252"/>
Ms~         FPARB O SEEK
the heart more than a kilat 1 of political hotch
I myself-though it is getting dangerous to say 
am frankly opposed to this uncontrolled 
reform. When all have done their duty in tii
strgle, why such undignified clamour for
which are now being flung back in the giver's 
It ha become a vicious circle. It was British- 
in the first place-not so 1-that stirred up this
ficil ferment; and now it grows alarming, it is 
with larger doses of the same medicine. We In
who know how little the bulk of India has really
could laugh at the tamasha of Western fancy-r
small matters; but time for laughing has gone
Time has come for saying firmly-all rights and 
tions will be grated, stopping short of actual
meat-otherwise-- !"
He flung up his hands, looked round at the list
faces, and realised how completely he had leth
go. "Forgive me, Colonel. I fear I am talking
much," he said in a changed tone. 
<' Indeed no," Colonel Leigh assured him
"In these difficult days, loyal and courageous f
like yourself are worth their weight in gold mohurs
Visibly flattered, the Moslem surveyed his own 
person with a twinkle of amusement. " If value 
go by weight, Insyat Khan would be worth a 
ransom! But I assure you, Colonel, your coun
many hundreds of friends like myself all over
if only she would seek them out and gve them e
agement-as Mr Sinclair   id-intead of wasting.
volubles, who will never cease making trouble till
isU  a blaze."            -
As the man's patent sincerity had wamed t be
of his hearers, so the pointed truth of that last
them sharply and probed deep. For. they knew
selves powerless; mere atoms'of the whirling
aised, in passing, by the chariot-wheels of  r
perdition t
The younger men rose briskly, as if to shake off
physical discomfort. Dy/n-very much aware of 
and the subaltern-approached them with a



<pb n="253"/>
PISGAH   flIGHTS                3M
Imrul   Boy and Lance said, "Play up, Thea I Your
biings," almost in a breath-and crooked little fingers.
Thea needed no second bidding. While the men
taked, an insidious depression had stolen over her
spirit-and brooded there, light and formless as a river
mist. Half an hour with her fiddle, and Lance at his
best, completely charmed it away. But the creepiness
of it had been very real: and the memory remained.
When all the others had dispersed, she lingered over
the fire with Roy, while Lance, at the piano, with
diplomatic intent, drifted into his friend's favourite
Nocturne-the Twelfth; that inimitable rendering of a
mood, hushed yet exalted, soaring yet brooding, 'the
iky and the nest as well.' The two near the fire knew
every bar by heart, but as the liquid notes stole out into
bhe room, their fitful talk stopped dead.
Lance was playing superbly, giving every note its true 
value; the cadence rising and faling like waves of a stf
ea; softer and softer; till the last note faded aws%
ghostlike-a sigh rather than a sound.
Boy remained motionless, one elbow on the mantel-
piec. Thea's lashes were wet with the tears of rarefied
emotion-tears that neither prick nor burn. The silence
Itself seemed part of the music; a silence it were dewe-
ration to break. Without a word to Boy, she crossed
bhe room; kissed Lance good-night; clung a moment to
his hands that had woven the spell, smiling her thnlra,
her praise; and slipped away, leaving the two together.
Boy subsided into a chair. Lane came over to the
ire and stood there warming his hands.
It was a minute or two before Boy looked up and
nodded his acknowledgments.
"You're a magician, old chap. You play that tbin
. damn sight too well."
He did not add that his friend's music had called
ip a vision of the Home drawing-room, clear in every
letail; Lance at the piano-his last week-end fom
hndhurst-playing the 'thing' by request; himself
winging on the hearthrug, his head against his mother's
knee; the very feel of her silk skirt against his cheek,
f her fingers on his hair ... Nor did he add that the
Ir;on had spurred his reluctant spirit to a resolve.



<pb n="254"/>
24              FAB TO SlEW
The more prstical soul of Lance Desmond had
dropped back to earth, as a lark drops after po
its heart in the blue. In spite of conern for 
was thinking again of his Sikhs.
"I suppose one can take it," he remarked
flly, " that Vinx and Mayne and that good old
johnny know what they're talking about "
Boy smiled-having jumped at the connection. 
afraid," he said, "one can."
"You think big trouble is coming-organised tron
"I do. That is, unless some ' strong silent man
the pluck to put his foot down in time, and chanoe
consequences to himself. Thank God, we've 
John Lawrence in the Punjab."
"And it's the Punjab that matters-"
"Especially a certain P.C. Regiment-eh "
Lance was in arms at once:-that meant he
touched the spot. "No flies on the Regiment. 
Paul. It's only----  I get bothered about a sikb.
and there."
"Quite so. The blighters have taken
pains with the Sikhs. Realisng that they'll need
fighting stuf. And Lahore's a bad place. I expect 
sneak off to meetings in the City." 
"Devil a doubt of it. Mind you, I trust t
plioitly. But, outside their own line, they're
as children-you know."
Bather. In Delhi, I had a fair sample of i*." ':
Another pause. It suddenly occurred to La
his precious Bikhs were not supposed to be the I
the evening. "You're quite fit again, oy. A
blooming fools chucked you like a ast ho
broke out in a spurt of vexation. "I wish to 
were back with your old Squadron." 
And Boy said from his heart, "I wish to Ged L
"Paul misses you, though he never ays m
new lot from home are good chaps. Full of
theories. But no knowledge. Oan't gi at 
You could still help unofficially in all sorts ot
Why not come along back with me t .Haven't 
pottering round here long enough ?"  - '
Boy shook his head. "Thanks all the 
invite. Of course I'd love it. But-I'e



<pb n="255"/>
PISGAH HEIGHTS                        2
ere's a novel taking shape-and other oddments.
tve done precious little writing here. Too much en-
tangled with human destinies. I mus bury myself some-
where and Set a move on. April it is. I won't fail you."
Lance kicked an unoffending log. "Confound your
old novel "-A portentous silence. " See here, Boy,
I don't want to badger you. But-well-if I'm to go
back in moderate peace of mind, I want-certain guar-
antees."
Boy lifted his eyes. Lance frankly encountered them;
and there ensued one of those intimate pauses in which
the unspeakable tI said.
Boy looked away. " Arna " He let fall the word
barely above his breath.
"Just that."
"You're frightened-both of you     Oh yes-I've
seen-" He fell silent, staring into the fire. When
he spoke again, it was in the same low, detached tone.
"You two needn't worry. The guarantee you're after
was given... in July 1914... under the beeches
. . at Home.   She foresaw-understood.  But she
couldn't foresee ... the harder tug-now she's gone.
he ... association ... and all that."
"Is it-only that "
"It's mostly that."
To Lance Desmond, very much a man, it seemed the
queerest state of things; and he knew only a fragment
of the truth.
"Look here, Boy," he urged again. "Wouldn't the
Punjab really be best t Aren't you plunging a bit too
deep--       Does your father realise  Thea feels-"
"Yes. Thea feebi, bless her  But there's a thing
or two she doesn't know "  He lifted his head and
spoke in an easier voice. "One queer thing-it may
interest you. Those few weeks of living as an Indian
among Indians--amaingly intensified all the other side
of me. I never felt keener on the Sinlair heritage and
ai} it stands for. I never felt keener on you two than
l. this time while I've been concentrating every faulty
tii-the other two. §ounds odd. But it's a fact."
."Good. And does-your cousin know      .  . about
E-a        Tha' 8 stillo to come
Thati's_     W     still to come."



<pb n="256"/>
"Wl h--t"- I
Boy frankly returned his friend's
Damn you ! " he said softly. Then, in a 
You're right. I've been shirking it. Seeoe.
to spoil Christmas. Remains-the New Ya e  .
it up-while you were playig hat thing, to be 
"Did I-contribute t "
" You did-if that gives you any satisfaction 
rose, stretched himself and yawned ostentatiously. 
God, I wish it was over,"
Desmond said nothing. If Boy loved him
one quality than another, it was for his
of silence.
'i
C..
':?
. .,



<pb n="257"/>
;:' -      ·w -                  .               .  "'"'--
CHAPTER XIV.
"Yet hall I bear in my heart this honour of the burden of pain-this
ft f thlne."-RAMBIDRANs TaaoB.
was the last day of the year; the last moon of the
ear, almost at her zenith. Of all the Christmas guests
ance alone remained; and Thea had promised him
eafre leaving, a moonlight vision of Amber, the Sleeping
eauty of Bajasthtn. The event had been delayed till
ow, partly because they waited on the moon; partly
eause they did not want it to be a promiseuous afair.
To Thea's lively imagination-and to Boy's no less
-Amber was more than a mere city of ghosts and
larble halls. It was a symbol of Rajput womanhood
-strong and beautiful, withdrawn from the clamour
I the market-place, given over to her dreams and her
ods. For though kings have deserted Amber, the
ods remain. There is still life in her temples and the  ,-
lood of sacrifice on her altar stones. Therefore she 
at not be approached in the spirit of the tourist.
nd, emphatically, she must not be approached in a.
otor-car; at least so far as Thea's guests were oon-
tied. Of course one knew she was approached by
teverent oars; also by tourists-unspeakable ones,
o0 made contemptible jokes about 'a slump in house
rperty.' But for these vandalisms Thea Leigh was
ot responslble.
I-Her young ones, including Captain Martin, would
de; but, because of Artna, she and Vincent must
ibdt to the barouche. So transparent was the girl's
ulmne  at being included, that Thea's heart failed her
'kowing what she knew.
B   .. and Lance had Adden on ahead; out through
·ilf.Sed gates intq the open desert, strewn with



<pb n="258"/>
258              FAB 0 SEB EK
tumbled framts of the glory that was Baj
There, where          ha  intrigued and fat
rows held confeence   On the ermbling arh of
doorway, that opened into emptiness, a vulture brood
heavy with feeding on those who had died for lack
food. Knee-deep in the MAn Saga Lake, greyra
sought their meat from God; every tint and c
of them repeated in the quiet water. And there, 
a rained shrine, two dead cactus bushes, with th
stiff distorted limbs, made Boy think suddenly of t
dead Germans he had come upon once-killed so
that they still retained, in death, the ghastly sembls
of life. Why the devil couldn't a man be rid of them
Dead Germans were not 'in the bond.' . . 
"Buck up, Lance," he said abruptly; for Demo
who saw no ghosts, was keenly interested. "Let
quit this place of skulls and empty eye-sockets. Amber
dead; but not utterly decayed."
He knew. He had ridden out alone one morning,
the light of paling stars, to watch the dawn steal 
through the valley and greet the sleeping city
would never wake again-half hoping to recapture
miracle of Ohitor. But Amber did not enshrine the 
of his mother's race. And the dawn had proved mr
a dawn. Moonlight, with its eerie enchantment, wo
be even more beautiful and fitting; but the plea
of antieipation was shadowed by his resolve.
He had spoken of it only to Thea; asking her w
tea was over, to give him a chance:-and now ie
heartily wishing he had chosen any other place and t
thanthis....                              ; -
The brisk canter to the foothills Ws&. ireief.
the road climbed, between low, reddiii  spur,.1
the narrow pass, barred by a om        ge 
swung open at commad, with a cre   of i sty 
as if in querulous protesanst aaint ntrusion 
Another gateway,-and yet another: then they 
through the triple wall that guards the dead city from
Invader who will never eome, while both races hoo
pact that alone saved dewp te:, stubborn Baj
from etinction.             . i           ;@:
Up on the heights, it was tl df; but in
it was almost evenin. And       d   e



<pb n="259"/>
PISGAH HEIGHTS                2ae
iadowe and twabled fragments of hills-lay Amber:
her palace and itemples and broken houses crowding
round their sao ake, like Queens and their handmads
round the shiel  e a dead King.
Deseending i a foot's pace, the chill of emptiness
md of oncoming twilight seemed to close like iey fingers
m Boy's heart; though the death of Amber was as
lothing to the death of Chitor-the warrior-queen,
ravished and violently slain by Akbar's legions. Amber
iad, as it were, died peaeefully in her sleep. But there
emained the all-pervading silence and emptiness:-
her sorrowful houses, cleft from roof to roadway; no
onger homes of men, but of the rock-pigeon, the peacock,
nd the wild boar; stones of her crumbling arches
bhrust apart by roots of acaeia and neem; her sreets
choked with caetus and brushwood; her beauty-dis-
igured but not erased-refiected in the unanging
nirror of the Lake.
If Boy and Lance had talked little before, they talked
ms now. From the Lake-side they rode up, by stone
pathways, to the Palace of stone and marble, set upon
a jutting rock and commanding the whole valley. There,
n the quadrangle, they left the horses with their grooms,
who were skilled in cutting corners and had trotted most
d the way.
Close to the gate stood a temple of fretted marble-
either ruined nor deserted; for within were the priests
Rf Kali, and the faint, sickly smell of blood. Daybreak
fter daybreak, for centuries, the severed head of a goat
ad been set before her, the warm blood offered in a
Ise bowl. ...
'3hPah    Beastly " muttered Lance. "I'd sooner
veno religion at alL"
Boy smiled at him, sidelong-and said nothing. It
w beastly: but itmatched the rest. It was in keeping
rith the dusky rooms, all damp-incrusted, the narrow
pssages and screens of marble tracery; the cloistered
irglp garden, beyond the women's rooms, their baths
Aiblled out of naked rock. And the beastlines wa 
t-'et by the beauty of inlay and 'carving    ad
, by the splendour of bonze gates and mabl
i and slabs of carven granite that served as
_I1      . Xto the tarraA   . whAm davlPiht A fl   ""



<pb n="260"/>
2d0             'FAR TO SEEK
lingered and azure-necked peacocks strutted,
immnne.
Sated on a carven slab, they looked downward 
the hear of desolation; upward, at creeping battle
and a little temple of Shivs printed sharply on the 
filled sky.                        I
" Can't you feel the ghosts of them all round you
whispered Boy.
"No, thank God, I can't," said practical Lance,
out a cigarette. But a rustle of falling stones
him  start-the merest fraction. "Perhaps smoke
keep 'em off-like mosquitoes ! " he added hopefully
But Boy paid no heed. He was looking down into
hollow shell of that which had been Amber. Notr
human sound anywhere; nor any stir of life, but
soft ceaseless kura-kooing doves, that nested and 
in those dusky inner rooms, where Queens had 
with Kings.
"'Thou hast made of a city an heap, of a defe
city a ruin ... Their houses shall be full of d
creatures; and owls shall dwell there, and satyrs 
dance there,'" he quoted softly; adding after a pa
"Mother had a great weakness for old Isaiah.
used to say he and the minor prophets knew all a
Bajasthhn. The owls of Amber are blue pigeons.
I hope she's spared the satyrs."
"Globetrotters I " suggested Lance.
"Or 'Piffers ' devoid of reverence !" retorted
"Hullo ! Here come the others."
Footsteps and voices in the quadrangle waked h
echoes as when a stone drops into a welL 
they sounded on the stairs near by: Flossie's 
boisterous laugh; Martin chaffing her in his h
tones.
" Great sport I Let's rent it off H. H and gather
all in from the highways and hedges for a masked
ball I"
Boy stood up and squared his shoulders. 
dancing, with a vengeance I" said he; but the 
Ar6na's sari smote him silent. A band    ese:
tighten round his heart. ...     '         :.
Before tea was over, peacocks and pigeons



<pb n="261"/>
PISGAH HEIGHE                '   L
to roost among the trees that shadowed the Lake; and
the light behind the hills had passed swiftly from gold
to flame-colour, from flame-colour to rose. For the
sun, that had already departed in effect, was now setting
in fact.
"Hush-it's coming," murmured     Thea:-and it
came.
Hollow thuds, quickening to a vibrant roar, swelled
up from the temple in the courtyard below. The Brah-
mins were beating the great tom-tom before Kali's
Shrine.
It was the signal. It startlingly waked the dead
city to discordant life. Groanings and howlings and
clashings, as of Tophet, were echoed and re-echoed from
every temple, every shrine; an orgy of demoniac
sounds; blurred in transit through the empty rooms
beneath; pierced at intervals by the undulating wail
of ram's horns; the two reiterate notes wandering,
like lost souls, through a confused blare of cymbals
and bagpipes and all kinds of music.
Flossie, with a bewitching grimace at Martin, clapped
both hands over her ears. Boy-standing by the balus-
trade with Arena-was aware of an answering echo
somewhere in subconscious depths, as the discords rose
and fell above the throbbing undernote of the drum.
It was as if the claimant voices of the East cried out to
the blood in his veins: 'You are of us-do what you
will; go where you will.' And all the while his eyes
never left Ardna's half-averted face.
Sudden and clear from the heights came a ringing
peal of bells, as it were the voices of angels answering
the wail of devils in torment. It was from the little
Shrine of Shivs close against the ramparts, etched in
outline, above the dark of the hills.
Arna turned and looked up at him. " Too beautiful I"
she whispered.
He nodded, and flung out an arm. " Look there I "
L ow and immense-pale in the pallor of the eastern
sky-the moon hung poised above massed shadows, like
a wrait escaped from the city of death. Moment by
foment, she drew light from the vanished sun. Moment
-        moment, under their watching eyes, she conjured the
dark into a new heaven. a new eari. ...



<pb n="262"/>
26^  ^        'JAB    TO SEEK
"Would you be afraid-to stroll round a little .. .
"with me t " he asked.
" Afraid   I would love it-if Thea will allow." 
This time she did not look up.
Vincent and Thea were sitting a little farther along
the balustrade; Lance beside them, imbibing tales of
BajasthAn.  Flossie and her Captain had already
disappeared.
"I'm going to be frankly a Goth and flash my electric
torch into holes and corners," Lance announced as the
other two came up. "I bar being intimidated by
ghosts."
" We're not going to be intimidated either," said Boy,
addressing himself to Thea. "And I guarantee not to
let Ardna be spirited away."
Vincent shot a look at his wife. "Don't wander too
far," said he.
" And don't hang about too long," she added. "It'll
be cold going home."
Though he was standing close to her, she could say
no more. But, under cover of the dusk, her hand found
his and closed on it hard.
The characteristic impulse heartened him amaingly,
as he followed Arna down the ghostly stairway, through
marble cloisters into the hagng garden, misted with
moonlight, fragrant with orange trees.
And now there was more than Thea's hand-clasp to
uphold him. Gradually there dawned on him a faint yet
sure intimation of his mother's presence, of her tenderly
approving love-dim to his brain, yet as sensible to his
spirit as light and warmth to his body.
It did not last many moments; but-as in all contact
with her-the clear after-certainty remined. ...
Exaetly what he intended to say he did not know
even now. To speak the cruel truth, yet by some means
to soften the edge of it, seemed almost impossible. But
nerved by this vivid, exalted sense of her nearness, the
right moment, the right words could be trusted to come
of themselves  ....
And Aruna, walking beside him in a hushed exa-.
pectanoy, was remembering that other night, so strangel-i
far away, when they had walked alone under the atqm[ 
moon, and assurance of his love had so possessed 'N



<pb n="263"/>
PISGAB   HEIGS'                268
that she had very nearly broken her little chirigh. 
And to-night-how different I Her very love for him,
though the same, was not quite the same. It seemed to
depend not at all on nearness or response. Starved of
both, it had grown not less, but more.
From a primitive passion it had become a rarefied
emotional atmosphere in which she lived and moved.
And this garden of eerie lights and shadows was satu-
rated with it; thronged, to her fancy, with ghosts of
dead passions and intrigues, of dead Queens, in whom
the twin flames of love and courage could be quenched
only by flames of the funeral pyre. Their blood ran in
her veins-and in his too. ThAt closeness of belonging
none could snatch from her. About the other, she was
growing wofully uncertain, as day followed day, and still
no word. Was there trouble after all t Would he speak
o-night... .
They had reached a dark doorway, and he was trying
the handle. It opened inwards.
"I'm keen to go a little way up the hillside," he said,
forcing himself to break a silence that was growing
oppressive. " To get a sight of the Palace with the moon
full on it. We'll be cautious-not go too far."
"I am ready to go anywhere," she answered; and the
fervour of that simple statement told him she was not
thing of hillsides any more than he was-at the
back of his mind.
Silence was unkinder than speech; and as they
passed out into the open, he scanned the near prospect
for a convenient spot. Not far above them a fragment
of ruiped wall, overhung by trees, ended in a broken
arh; its lingering keystone threatened by a bird-
borne aeacia. A  allen slab of stone, half under it,
offered a not too distant seat. Slab and arch were in
full light; the space beyond, engulfed in shadow.
:-:.ar up the hillside a jackal laughed. Across the valley
i'a  er answered it. A monkey swung from a branch
et to the slab, and sat there engaged in his toilet-a
Aj tImp of darkless.
4t'cixot be-czeeped-are you ? " Boy asked.
? at the littlest bit  Nice ind of creeps. I feel
with you."                                     .
was rouah in Darts  Once she stumbled and-



<pb n="264"/>
264   -'AB TO SEEK 
his hand dosed lightly on her arm under the oloa
She felt sae with him-and he must trn and    i
her---! 
At their approach, the monkey fled with a gib
squeak: and Boy loosened his hold. Between
and the lake loomed the noble bulk of the palace; roo
terraes and fagades bathed in silver, splashed
indigo shadow; but for them-mere man and wom
-its imperishable strength and beauty had sudde
become a very little thing. They scarcely noticed 
even.
" There-sit," Boy said softly, and she obeyed.
Her smile mutely invited him; but he could not
trust himself-yet. He might have known the moon
light would g to his head.
"Arnna-my dear-" he plunged without p
amble. " I took you away from them all because
-we can't pretend any more ... you and I. It's 
and there we are. I love you-dearly-truly. But.. .t
How could one go on t
" Oh, oy 
Her lifted gaze, her low impassioned cry told all;
before that too clear revealing his hard-won resol
quailed.
"No-not that. I don't deserve it," he broke
lain   himself and startling her. "I've been a
cow-Ad-letting things drift. But honestly I
the  onceit-we were cousins . . . it seemed  a
And now   .. . .   " 
A stupid catch in his throat arrested him. She
motionless; never a word.
Impulsively he. dropped on one knee, to be n
et not too near. " Arna-I don't know how to 
t. The fact is . . they were afraid at Home,
came out here, I might-it might ... Well, just
come to us," he blurted out in desperation. "AndM
told me frankly-It mustn't be, twie running . ..
that.". Her stillness dismayed him. "DBear," he
tenderly, " you see their difficulty-you 
" I am trying-to understand." Her voice was
and conained. The courage and control of it u
him more than any passionate protest. Yet he 
dm in thea ama Innr rana        - .



<pb n="265"/>
PISGAH HEIGHTS                2 
"Of courO , I ought to have thought. But, as I say,
it seemed natural . . . Only-on DewAli night-"
She caught her breath. "Yes--Dewali night. Mai
Lakshmi knew. Why did you not say it then "
" Well... so soon-I wasn't sure . . . I hoped going
away might give us both a chance. It seemed the best
I could do," he pleaded. " And-there was Dyin. I'm
not vamping up excuses, Arena. If you hate me for
huting you so-"
" Boy-you s8hll not say it 1" she cried, roused at
last. "Could I hate ... the heart in my own body t"
' Better for us both perhaps if you could! " he jerked
out, rising abruptly, not daring to let the full force of
her confession sink in. " But-because of my father, I
promised. No getting over that."
She was silent:-a silence more moving, more com-
pelling than speech. Was she wondering-had he not
promised .. .  Was he certain himself  Near enough
to swear by; and the impulse to comfort her was
overwhelming.
"If-if things had been different, Ardna," he added
with grave tenderness, " of corse I would be asking you
now . .. to be my wife."
At that, the tension of her control seemed to snap;
and hiding her face, she sat there shaken all through
with muffled, broken-hearted sobs.
"Don't-oh, don't I" he cried low, his own nerves
quivering with her pain.
"How can I not " she wailed, battling with feah
bobs. "Because of your ndian mother-I hoped ...
But for me-England-returned-no hope anywhere: no
tre country now; no true belief; no true home;
everything divided in two; only my heart-not divided.
And that you eannot have, even if you would-"
Tears threatened again. It was all he could do not
to take her in his arms.
If-if they would only leave me alone," she went
m, clenching her small hands to steady herelf. " But
kapodible to change all the laws of our religion for one
rethless me. They will Insist I shall marry-even
Sit; and I cannot-I cannot-     I"
9nddely there sprang an inspiration, born of despair,
- tB  ehance and the hour and the grave tenderne



<pb n="266"/>
266              FAR TO SEEK                     -
of his assurance. No time for shrinking or doubt. 
Almost in speaking she was on her feet; her cloak-: 
that had come unlinked-dropped from her shoulders, -
leaving her a slim strip of pallor, like a rayof light 
escaped from clouds.
" oy-Dicusha " Involuntarily her hands went out 
to him. "If it is true . . . you are caring-and if I 
must not belong to you, there is a way you can belong
to me without trouble for any one. If-if we make
pledge of betrothal ... for this one night, if you hold 
me this one hour ... I am safe. For me that pledge 
would be sacred-as marriage, because I am still Hindu.
Perhaps I am punished for far-away sins-not worthy
to be wife and mother; but, by my pledge, I can remain 
always Swami Backht-worshipper of my lord.. a 
widow in my heart."
And Boy stood before her-motionless; stirred all
through by the thrill of her exalted passion, of her
strange appeal. The pathos-the nobility of it-swept:
him a little off his feet. It seemed as if, till to-night, he
had scareely known her. The Eastern in him said'
'Accept.' The Englishman demurred-' Unfair on her.'
"My dear-" he said-" I can refuse you nothing;.
But-is it right t Yon should marry- "
"Don't trouble your mind for me," she murmured v
and her eyes nevef left his face. "If I keep out o*
purdah, becoming Brahmo Samaj .    . perhaps---"
She drew in her full lower lip to steady it. " But th.
marriage of arrangementI cannot. I have read too,'
many English books, thought too many English thoughtui|
And I know in here'-one clenched hand smote hf
breast-" that now I could not give my body and i
to any man, unless heart and mind are given too.
for me ... Must I tell all t It is not only these fw
weeks. It is years and years . . ." Her voe broke.
"Arna I Dearest one--"      <.               ~:
He opened his arms to her-and she wsa on him-
breast. Close and tenderly he held her, putting a 
constraint on himself lest her ecstasy of sure4
should bear down all his defences. To fail her like
was a bitter thing: and as her arms stole up
his neck, he instinctively tightened his hold. So
she was. so unsunbtantia .. . .-



<pb n="267"/>
PISGAH HEIGHTS                W
And suddenly a rush of memory wafted him from the
moonlit hillside to the drawing-room at Home. It was
his mother he held against his breast --the silken drap-
eries, the clinging arms, the yielding softness, the un-
yielding courage at the core....
So vivid, so poignant was the lightning gleam of
illusion, that when it passed he felt dizzy, as if his body
had been swept in the wake of his spirit, a thousand
leagues and back: dizzy, yet, in some mysterious fashion,
reinforced-assured....
He knew now that his defences would hold....
And Ar6na, utterly at rest in his arms, knew it also.
He loved her-oh yes, truly-as much as he said and
more; but instinct told her there lacked... just
something; something that would have set him-and
her-on fire, and perhaps have made renunciation un-
thinkable. Her acute, instinctive sense of it, hurt like
the edge of a knife pressed on her heart; yet just enabled
her to bear the unbearable. Had it been . . . hat way,
to lose him were utter loss. This way-there would be
no losing. What she had now, she would keep-whether
his bodily presence were with her or no-
Next minute, she dropped from the heights. Fire ran
in her veins. His lips were on her forehead.
"The seal of betrothal," he whispered. "My brave
Arfna--"
Without a word she put up her face like a child; but
it was very woman who yielded her lips to his....
For her, in that supreme moment, the years that were
pat and the years that were to come seemed gathered
a burnt-offering-laid on his shrine. For her, that
long kiss held much of passion-confessed yet tran-
soended; more of sacredness, inexpressible, becase- it
would never come again-with him or any other man.
he vowed it silently to her own heart. ...
Again far up the hillside a jackal laughed; another
aid another-as if in derision. She shivered; and he
oosed his hold, still keeping an arm round her. To-night
hey~ were betrothed. He owed her all he had the right
wbgive.
v:* Your cloak. You'll catch your death.. ."  He
~j'e~d   short-and flung up his head. "What was
There-again-in those trees--"-



<pb n="268"/>
268              PAB TO SEEK           '
Some monkey perhaps," she whisperd, startled by
his look and tone.
"Hush-listen !" His grip tightened and they stood
rigidly stll, Boy straining every nerve to locate those
stealthy sounds. They were almost under the arch;
strong mellow light on one side, nethermost darkness on
the other. And from all sides the large unheeded night
seemed to close 1n on them-threatening, fall of hidden
danger.
Presently the sounds came again, nnmistakbly
nearer; faint rustlings and  rekings, then a distinct
crumbling, as of loosened earth and stones. The shadowy
plumes of acacia that crowned the arch stirred per-
eeptibly, though no breeze was abroad:-and not the
acacia only. To Ardna's excited fancy it seemed that
the loose upper stones of the arch itself moved ever so
slightly. But ws it fancy t No-there again-  I
And before the truth dawned on Boy, she had pushed
him with all her force, so violently that he stumbled
backward and let go of her.
' Before he recovered  imself, down rashed two large
stones and a shower of small ones-on Ar6na, not on
him. With a stifled scream she tottered and fell, knock-
ing her head against the slab of rock.
Instantly he was on his knees beside her; stanching
the out on her forehead, binding it with his handkerchief;
consumed with rage and eoncern ;-rage at himself and
the dstardly intruder,-no monkey, that was certain.
.Hs quick ear caught the stealthy rstling again, lower
don; and, yes-nmistakably--     human sound, like a
stfied exclamation of dismay.
"Arna-I mas get at that devil," he whispered.
"Does your head feel bettei    Dare I leave you a
moment "
"Yes-oh yes," she whispered back. "Nothing wil
harm me. Only take care-please take are."
Hastily he made a pillow of his overcoat and covered
her with the cloak; then, stooping down, he kissed her
fervently--ad was gone.



<pb n="269"/>
CHAPTER XV.
"Then was I rapt away by the impulse, one
Immeasurable . . . wave of a need
To abolish that detested life."
-BoWiNm.
LITH   and noiseless as a eat, Boy crept through the
archway into outer darkness. It was hateful leaving
Ardna; but rage at her hurt and the primitive instinct
of pursuit were not to be denied. And she might have
been killed. And she had done it for him :-oals of
fre, indeed ! Also, the others would be getting anxious
Let him only catch that mysterious skulker, and he could
shout across to the Palace roof. They would hear.
* Close under the wall he waited, all the scout in him
alert. The cautious rustlings drew stealthily nearer;
ceased, for a few tantalising seconds; then, out of the
massed shadows, there crept a moving shadow.
Boy's spring was calculated to a nicety; but the
thing swerved sharply and fled up the rough hillside.
There followed a ghostly chase, unreal as a nightmare,
lit up by the noon's deceptive brilliance; the earth,
an unstable welter of light and darkness, shifting under
his feet.
The fleeing shade was agile; and plainly familir
with the ground. Baulked, and lured steadily farther
from Aruna, all the Rajput flamed in Boy. During those
mad moments he was capable of murdering the unknown
with his hands.  . .
Suddenly, blessedly, the thing stumbled and dropped
to its knees. With the spring of a panther, he was on
It, his fingers at its throat, pinning it to earth. The
eholing cry moved him not at all:-and suddenly the
moonlght showed him the face of Chandranath, mingled
ate and terror in the starting eyes. ...



<pb n="270"/>
270             FAB TO SEK
Amazed beyond measure, he unconsciously relaxed
grip. " Yos-4s it ?-you devil "
There was no answer. Chandrnath had had the
to wriggle almost clear of him ;-almost, not qui
Boy's pounce was worthy of his Bajput ancestors; 
next moment they were locked in a silent, purpo
embrace....
But Boy's brain was cooler now. Sanity had
turned. He could still have choked the life out of
man, without compunction. But he did not choose
embroil himself, or his people, on account of any
so contemptible as the creature that was writhing 
scratching in his grasp. He simply wanted to se
him and hand him over to the Jaipur authorities, w
had several scores up against him.
But Chandranath, though not skilled, had the e
cunning of the lesser breeds. With a swift unxpe
move, he tripped Boy up so that he nearly fell 
ward; and, in a supreme effort to keep his
unconsciously loosened his hold. This time, h
nath slipped free of him; and, in the act, 
him so violently that he staggered and came 
among sharp broken stones with one foot twisted .
him. When he would have sprung up, a stab of 
n his ankle told him he was done for.... 
The sheer ignominy of it enraged him; and he
still further enraged by the proceedings of the vi
who sprang nimbly out of reach on to a fragment
buttressed wall, whence he let fly a string of 
epithets nicely calculated to touch up Boy's pride 
temper and goad him to helpless fury. 
But if his ankle was crippled, his brain was 
While Ohandranath indulged his pent-up spite,
was feeling stealthily, purposeflly, in the semi-d
for the sharpest chunk of stone he could lay hands; 
a chunk warranted to hurt badly, if nothing more.
strip of shadow against the sky made an ad
target; and Boy's move, when it came was swift,-
aim unerring.
Somewhere about the head or shoulders it took
a yell of rage and pain assured him of that, as his 
vanished on the far side of the wall. .-
*~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ,. C .



<pb n="271"/>
PISGAH   HEIGHTS               271 
Had he jumped or fallen t And what did the damage
anount to t Boy would have given a good deal to
mow; but he had neither time nor power to investi-
rate. Nothing for it but to crawl back, and shout to
brina, when he got within hai.
It was an undignfied performance. His twisted ankle
tabbed like a knife, and never failed to claim acquaint-
ace with every obstacle in its path. Presently, to his
mmense relief, the darkness ahead was raked by a restless
Ight, zigzagging like a giant glow-worm.
"Lance-ahoy I " he shouted.
"Righto " Lance sang out; and the glow-worm
waggled a welcome.
Another shout from the Palace roof, answered in con-
ert; and the mad, bad dream was over. He was
back in the world of realities; on his feet again-one
oot, to be exact-supported by Desmond's arm; pouring
out his tale.
Lance already knew part of it. He had found Ardna
ad was hurrying on to find Roy. "Your cousin's got
he pluck of a Rajput," he concluded. "But she seems
b bit damaged. The left arm's broken, I'm afraid."
Boy cursed freely. "Wish to God I could make sure
f I've sent that skunk to blazes."
" Just as well you can't, perhaps. If your shot took
flect, he won't be off in a hurry. The police ean nip
mt when we get back."
"Look here-keep it dark till I've seen Dyan. If
Ihandranath's nabbed, he'll want to be in it. Only
ir I "
Lance chuckled. "What an unholy pair you are!-
By the way, I fancy Martin's pulled it off with Miss
?lossie. I tumbled across them in the hanging garden.
rou left that door open. Gave me the tip you might
be out on the loose."
Desmond's surmise proved correct. Ardna's left arm
ms broken above the elbow: a simple fracture, but it
aurt a good deal. Thea, in charge of 'the wounded,'
ned them both as best she could, during the long drive
tome. But Arina, still in her exalted mood, counted
me pain a little thing, when Roy, under cover of the
; '.4



<pb n="272"/>
272             FAB TO SEEK
cloak, found her cold right hand and cherished it in his
warm one nearly all the way.
No one paid much heed to Martin and Flossie, who
felt privately annoyed with 'the native cousin' for
putting her nose out of joint. Defrauded of her due
importance, she told her complacent lover they must
'save up the news till to-morrow.' Meantime, they
rode, very much at leisure, behind the barouche;-and
no one troubled about them at all.
Lance and Vincent, having cantered on ahead, called
in for Miss Hammond and left word at Sir Lakshman's
house that Ardna had met with a alight accident; and
would he and her brother come out to the Residency
after dinner 
Before the meal was over, they arrived. Miss Ham-
mond was upstairs attending to Ardna; and Sir Laksh-
man joined them  without ceremony, leaving Dyan
alone with Boy, who was nursing his anle in an arm-
chair near the drawing-room fire.
In ten minutes of intimate talk he heard the essential
facts, with reservations; and Boy had never felt more
closely akin to him than on that evening. Rajput
chivalry is no mere tradition. It is vital and active as
ever it was. Insult or injury to a woman is sternly
avenged; and the offender is lucky if he escapes the ex-
treme penalty. Boy fankly hoped he had inflicted it
himself. But for Dyan surmise was not enough. He
would not eat nor sleep till he had left his own mark
on the man who had come hear killing his sister-most
sared being to him, who had neither wife nor mother.
"I The delicate attention w" meant for me, you know,"
Boy reminded him; simply from a British impulse to
give the devil his due.
" Tcha I" DyAn's thumb and finger snapped like a
toy pistol. "No law-courts talk for me. You were so
close together. He took the risk. By Indra, he won't
take any more such risks if I get at him I You saidwe
would not see him here. But no doubt he has been
hanging round Amber, making what mischie he can.
He must have heard your party wa coming, and got
sneaking round for a chance to score off yw.. Young
Bamanund, priest of Kal's shrine, is one o' those be
has made his tool, the way he made me., It he is in



<pb n="273"/>
PISGAH HEIGHTS                 27
&mber, I shall find him. You can take your oath on
that." He stood up, straight and virile, instinct with
purpose as a drawn sword. "I am going now, Boy.
But not one word to any soul. Grandfather and Arlna
mly need to know I am tryiig to find who toppled those
itones. I shall not succeed. That is all :-except for
yon and me. Bijli, Son of Lightning, will take me full
pallop to Amber. First thing in the morning, I will
come-and make my report."
"But look here-Lance knows    "
"Well, your Lance can suppose he got away. We
gould trust him, I don't doubt. But what is known to
nore than two, will in time be known to a hundred.
For myself, I don't trouble. Among Rajputs the penalty
would be slight. But this thing must be kept between
yon and me-because of Ar6na."
Boy held out his hand. Dyin's fingers closed on it
ike taut strips of steel. Unmistakably the real Dyin
Mingh had shed the husks of soholarship and politics
ad come into his own again.
" I wouldn't care to have those at my throat I" re-
marked Boy, pensively considering the streaks on his
ywn hand.
" Some Germans didn't care for it-in France," said
Dyan coolly.  "But now-"       He scowled at his
Dnding left arm.: "I hope-very soon      . . . neer
mid. No more taking . . . poison gas I"  And with 
flash of white teeth-he was gone.
Boy, left staring into the fire, followed him in imgina-
Mon, speeding through the silent city out into the region
f skulls and eye-sockets--a flying shadow in the
moonight with murder in its heart....
Within an hour, that flying shadow was outside the
gateway of Amber, startling the doorkeepers from sleep;
murder, not only in its heart, but tucked securely in its
b. No 'law-courts talk' for one of his breed; no
doe adjustment of penalty to offence; no coneern as to
,buible consequenees. The Bajput, with his blood up,
tdming to the point of recklessness; deaf to puerile
'j  1fpt  of prudence or merey; a sword, seeking its
;.ll  imatiate till the thrust has gone home.
i   ' ~in minisM I-n Tnv6n RUnlrh if. hnnld ha rAdAA that



<pb n="274"/>
274             PFAB T0 SEEK 
there was more than Ardna in his mind. There
India-increasn gly at the merey of handranath
his kind. The very blindness of his earlier obses
had intensified the effect of his awakening. Bo
devoted daring, his grandfather's mellow wisdom,
worked in his fiery soul more profoundly than theyf
knew: and his act of revenge was also, in his eyes
an act of expiation. At the bidding of Chandraath
or another, he would unhesitatingly have flung a bom.i
at the Commissioner of Delhi-the sane, strong maeJ
whose words and bearing had so impressed him on t
few occasions they had met at the Residency. By
what law of God or man, then, should he hesitate toi
grind the head of this snake under his heel     .-
One-handed though he was, he would not strikiE
from behind. The son of a jackal should know wh
struck him. He should taste fear, before he ta
death. And then-the Lake, that would never giv'
up its secret or its dead.  iri Ohandranath would di.4
appear from his world, like a stone flung into a river
and India would be a cleaner place without him. 
He knew himself hampered, if it eame to a s
But-tehal the man was a coward. Let the gods
deliver his victim into that one purposeful hand of hit
-and the end was sure.
Near the Palace, he deserted BiJli, Son of Lightung
tethered him securely and spoke a few words in hisb a^
while the devoted ereature nuzzled against him, as wM r
should say, 'What need of speech between me an
.thee'   Then-following Boy's direetions-he mad
his way cautiously up the hillside, where the arch
showed clear in the moon. If Chandranth had been
injured or stupefied, he would  obably not have gone
far.
His surmise proved correct.  is stealthy  pproab .
well-timed. The guardian gods of Amber, it seeed
were on his side. For there, on the fallen slab, croumhed
a shadow, bowed forward; its head in its hands.  -
"Must have been stunned," he thought. Patently 
the gods were with him. Had he been an Englihman 
the man's hurt would probably have baulked him of9  I
purpose. But Dy6n Singh, Bajput, was not    'pi
bv the 'nortman's code of morsl. He was f'ran! ii



<pb n="275"/>
PISGAH HEIGHTS                275
to kill. His brain worked swiftly, instinctively: and
wift action followed....
Out of the sheltering shadow he leapt, as the cheetah
eaps on its prey: the long knife gripped securely in
Ls teeth. Before Chandranath came to his senses, the
teel-spring grasp was on his throat, stifling the yell of
eror at Roy's supposed return. ...
The tussle was short and silent. Within three minutes
)yan had his man down; arms and body pinioned
etween his powerful knees, that his one available hand
night be free to strike. Then, in a low fierce rush, he
poke: " Yes-it is I-DyAn Singh. You told me often
-strike, for the Mother. 'Who kills the body, kills
laught.' I strike for the Mother no."
Once-twiee-the knife struck deep; and the writhing
hing between his knees was still.
He did not altogether relish the weird journey down
o the shore of the Lake; or the too close proximity of
be limp burden slung over his shoulder. But his
magination did not run riot, like Roy's: and no qualms
if conscience perturbed his souL  He had avenged, ten-
old, Ar8na's injury. He had expiated, in drastic fashion,
di own aberration from sanity. It was enough.
The soft 'plop' and splash of the falling body, well
eighted with stones, was music to his ear. Beyond
bat musical murmur, the Lake would utter no sound...
...
K~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="276"/>
sA6e XV
CHAPTER XVL
" So lot him journey through his esrhly day:
'Mid hustling spirit go his self-found way;
Find torture, bliu, in every forward stride-
He, every moment, still unsatisfied."
--FAUST.
NEXT morning, very early, he was closeted with Boy,
sitting on the edge of his bed; cautiously, circumstan-
tially, telling him all. Boy, as he listened, was half
repelled, half impressed by the sheer impetus of the
thing; and again he felt-as once or twice in Delhi-
what centuries apart they were, though related, and
almost of an age.
.-  ? ".ThiR will be only between you and me, Boy-for
sysj'* Dyan concluded gravely. "Not because I
ii  any shame for killing that snake; but-a  I said
. . d because of Ar na--"
"Trust me," said Roy. "Amber Lake and I don't
blab. There'll be a nine days' mystery over his dis-
.  ppearance. Then his lot will set up some other ti
god-and promptly forget all about him."        /
"Let us follow their example, in that at least I"
Grim humour fickered in Dyan's eyes, as he extracted
a cigarette from the proffered case. "You gave me
my chance. I have taken it-like a Bajput. Now we
have other things to do."
Boy smiled. " That's about the size of it-from your
,s, barbaric standpoint    I'm fairly besieged with
i   things to do. As soon as this blooming ankle
allows me to hobble, I'm keen to get at some of the
thoughtful elements in Calcutta and Bombay; educated
Indian men and women, who honestly believe that
India is moving towards a national unity that will
wannad all aantaoniam of race and caeed    I caa't



<pb n="277"/>
PISGAH   HEIGHTS               277
Be it myself; but I've an open mind. Then, I think,
rdaipur-' last, loneliest, loveliest, apart '-to knock
ly novel into shape before I go North. And you-  "
[e pensively took stock of his volcanic cousin. "Sure
ou're safe not to erupt again t "
"Safe as houses-thanks to you.     That doesn't
lean I can be orthodox Hindu and work for the orthodox
aipur Baj. I would like to join ' Servants of India'
ociety; and work for the Mother among those who
ccept British connection as India's God-given destiny.
a no other way will I work again-to 'make her a
idow.' Also, I thought perhaps-" he hesitated,
verting his eyes-" to take vows of celibacy--"
"Dyd I " Roy could not repress his astonishment.
[e had almost forgotten that side of things. Right or
Trong-a tribute to Tar indeed I It jerked him un-
omfortably; almost annoyed him. 
"Unfair on Grandfather," he said with deision.
For every reason, you ought to marry   enlightened
rie. Think-of Ar6na."
" I d think of her. It is she who ought to marry."
The emphasis was not lost on Boy:-and it hurt.
ast night's poignant scene was intimately with him
Mill  "I'm afraid you won't persuade her to," he sad
i a contained voice.
"I am quite aware of fhat. And the reason-even &
ind man could not fail to see."
, They looked straight at one another for a long moment.
ley did not swerve from the implied accusation.
Well, it's no fault of mine, Dyin," he said, recalling
faa's confession that tacitly freed him from blame.
'Sh understands-there's a bigger thing between us
bn our mere selves. Whatever I'm free to do for her,
31 gladly do-always. It was chiefly to ease her poor
oart that I risked the Delhi adventure. I felt I had
lithe link with you."
/3SrNot surprising."  Dyin smoked for a few minutes
i.uilence. He was clearly moved by the fine franneks
r 'x's attitude. "All the same," he said at-last,
P    not quite broken. You have given me new life;
Ssmallpu_ e you did it-for her, I swear to you, as kl
needs me, I will not fail her." He held out 'lb
iJ  i4's olosed on it hard.



<pb n="278"/>
278              FAP TO fIEK 
"Later in the morning I will ome back and see
DyAn added, in a changed voice-and went out.
Later in the morning, Boy himself was allowed to 
her. With the help of his stick he limped to her ve
balcony, where she lay in a long chair, with  hi
and rags, the poor arm in a sling. Thea was wit h
She had heard as much of last night's doings as any 
would ever know. So she felt justified in letting 
poor dears have half an hour together.
Her withdrawal was tactfully achieved; but th
followed an awkward silence. For the space of se
minutes it seemed that neither of the 'poor
knew quite what to make of their privilege, though th
were appreciating it from their hearts.       '
Boy found himself too persistently aware of the 
that had been broken to save him; of the new
between them, signed and sealed by that one 
gettable kiss.                               *'
As for Arna--while pain anchored her body to 
her unstable heart swayed disconcerftngly from heig
of rarefied content, to depths of shyness. Thingsl'
had said and done, on that far-away hillside, e
unbelievable, remembered in her familiar balcony 
a daylight mind: and fear lest he might be '
it that way too' increased shyness tenfold. Yet it'
she who spoke first, after all
"Oh, it makes me angry . . . to see you-like 1ta
she said, indicating his ankle with a faint movement
her hand.
Boy quietly took possession of the hand and
it to his lips. 
"How do you suppose I feel, seeing you like that I'
Words and act dispelled her foolish fears. "Did y
seep t Does it hurt much t "                  "'
"Only if I forget and try to move. But wh.at
Every time it hurts, I feel proud because that feeble
was able to push you out of the way."
"You've every right to feel proud. You
knocked me over I"                        -
mischievous smile crept into her eyes. "I 
af.id . . . I was very rude!" IB--'
"That's one way of putting it I" Hias grae



<pb n="279"/>
PISGAH rHEIGHTS          21
B-warmed her like sunshine. He leaned nearer; his
fti grasped the arm of her long chair. "You were a
jiy wonderful Ar6na last night. And-you are going to
) more wondirful stil  Working with Dyan, you are
dng to help make my dream come true-of India
Lding herself again by her own genius, along her own
ead          theightnote. Herfa     lit     he
He had struck the right note. Her fare lit up as he
4 hoped to see it. "Oh, Roy-can I really--    
l Dyan help t Willhee me-     "
"Of course he will. And I'll be helping too-in my
rn fashion. We'll never lose touch, Arfna; though
dia's your destiny and England's mine. Never say
aln you have no true country. Like me, you have
ro countries-one very dear; one supreme. I'm
raid there are terrible days coming out here. And in
ose days every one of you who honestly loves England
every one of us who honestly loves India-will count
:the scale . . ."
He paused; and she drew a deep breath. "OOh-
rW you see things  It is you who are wonderful,
qy. I can think and feel the big things in my
ar. But for doing them-I am, after all, only a
man . . ."
" An Indian woman," he emphasised, his eyes on henm
I know-and you know-what that means. You
we not yet bartered away your magical influence for
mess of pottage. Because of one Indian woman-
preme for me; and now... because of another,
y all have a special claim on my heart. If India
m not gone too far down the wrong road, it is by the
M Swadeshi spirit of her women'she may yet be saved..
iy, at -ay, rate, don't reckon progress by counting
roy chimneys or seats on councils. And every seed
good or bad-is sown first in the home. Get at the
taen, Ardna-the home ones-and tell them that. It's
* only my dream; it was-my mother's. You don't
rw how she loved and believed in you all. I think
never quite understood the other kind. The lwner
lived among them, the more she craved for all or
i to remain true women-in the full sense, not the
-nver yet spoken so y--        and f      of 
trte·a never yet spoken so frankly and freely of that



<pb n="280"/>
280              RA31-AB TO  BUSIM
tear:ot mother; Ardna knew it for the highest
menr he could pay her. Truly his generous heart -
giving her all that his jealous household gods wo
p-lt.o .*                                      ' 
Thea-stepping softly through the inner room
anught a sentence or two; caught a glimpse of Boy'
finely-cut profile; of Ardna's eyes intent on his faeoe
and she smiled very tenderly to herself. It was so
exactly like Boy; and such constancy of devotion wen
straight to her mother-heart. So too-with a sharp
pang-did the love hunger in Ardna's eyes.
The puzle of these increasing race complications----
The tragedy and the pity of it . . .1          .i
Lance travelled North that night with a mind at eas
Boy had assured him that the moment. his anle 
mitted he would -leave Jaipur and 'give the bee in
bonnet an airing  elsewhere. That assurance prove
easier to give than to act upon, when. the mome*
eame. The Japur Residenoy had come to seem asim.os
like home. And the magnet of home drew all tha
was Eastern in Boy. It was the British blood in i
veins that drove him afield. Though India was hb
objective, England was the impelling force. His 
home seemed hundreds of miles away, in nore senh
than one. His union with Bajputana-set with the s
of that--sacred and beautiful experience at Chito-
seemed, in his present mood, the more vital of the two.
And there was Lance. up in the Punb-  magnet
strong as any, when the masculine element prev
Yet   tain, some inner irresitible impulse obliged 
t break away from them al. It was one of
wvttable moments when the dual forces within p
two ways; when he felt envious exoeedi   of 
Desmond's sana and sine-minded attude. toward
men and things. One couldn't picture laaceea p^
to Ihe -fnoinious sensation that half of him want;
Xo .g oneway and half of him another way. At 
)mcture* half of himself felt a confounded fool for w
going bakte the Punjab and enjoying afriendly .t
old   ·gt~eatt -among his father's .people. -The ot
felt impelled to probe deeper into the  pr
aesin- India.    c to eonfirm. aad impart h ba



<pb n="281"/>
F?              P9ISGAH HEIGHTS 
the destinies of England and India were one  _ t. in-
divisible. After all, India stood where she did to-day
by virtue of what England had made her. He   efused
to believe that even the insidious disintegratingprocess
of democracy could dissolve-in a brief fever of unrest
-links forged and welded in the course of a hundred
years.
In that case, argued his practical half, why this absurd
inner sense of responsibility for great issues over whieh
he could have no shadow of control I What was the
earthly use of it-this large window in his soul, opening
on to world's complexities and conflicts; not allowing
him to say comfortably, 'They are not.' His opal-
tinted dreams of interpreting East to West had suffered
a change of completion since Oxford days. His large
vague aspirations of service had narrowed down, in-
evitably, to a few  definite personal issues. Action
involves limitation-as the pieture involves the frame.
Dreams must descend to earth-or remain unfruitful
Itmigkht be a little, or a great matter, that he had
ged to set two human fragments of changing India
rwhe right path-so far as he could discern it. The
htfis of that modest beginning only the years could
reveaL ...
Then there was this precious novel simmering at the
back of things; his increasing desire to get away alone
with the ghostly company that haunted his brain. As
the mother-to-be feels the new life mysteriously mving
tithin her, so he began to feel within him the first
*rrings of his own creative power. Already his poem
and essays had aisd expectations and secured aen o
farother things he wanted to say. And there seemed no
nd to them. He had hardly yet begun his mental
adventures. Pressing forward, through sense, to the
alutlew regions of mind and spirit, new vistas would
bpes, new paths lure him on....
That first bewildering, intoxicating sense of power is
good-while it lasts; none the less, because, in the
*Mrfm of things, it is foredoomed to disillusion- ater
*fl-h according to the authenticity of tetgod within.
rCh2tever the outcome for Boy, that pasin exalts-
'F eased appreciably the pang of parting from them'
d., And it was responible for a happy inspiration.



<pb n="282"/>
S82              FAB TO SEtEK 
Bummagng among his papers, on the eve of
he came upon the sketch of India that he had wit
in Delhi and refrained from sending to Ardna. 
trinsically it was hers; inspired by her. Alo-i
trinsicaly it was good: and straightway he did
she should have it for a parting gift.
Beautifully copied out, and tied up with
pink ribbons, he reserved it for their last few 
together. She was still such a child in some wa
The small surprise of his gift might ease the pang
parting. It was a woman's thought. But the wom
strain of tenderness was strong in Boy, as in all t
artists.
She was standing near the fire in her own  i
room, wearing the pink dress and sari, her arm stil
a sling. Last words, those desperate inanities-buff
between the heart and its own emotion-are di
things to bring off in any case; peculiarly difficult 
these two, with that unreal, yet intensely aetual, 
between them; and Boy felt more than grateful to 
itspration that gave him something definite to say. 
nstantly her eyes were on it-wondering . 
guessing ... .
"It's a little thing I wrote in Delhi," he said simn
"I couldn't send it to Jeffers. It seemed-to belong
you.  So I thought-'" He proffered it, f
absurdly shy of it-and of her.
"Oh-but it is too much I"   Holding i with
sling hand, she opened it with the other and devo
it eagerly under his watehing eyes. By the chages
flitted across her face, by the tremor of her lips and 
hands, as she pressed it to her heart, he knew he
have given her no dearer treasure than that
of himself. And because he knew it, he felt t
tied; tempted beyond measure to kiss her once
If she divined his thought, she kept her lashes lo
and gave no sign. 
He hoped she knew...
But before either could break the spell of silence 
held them, Thea returned; and their  oment
idyll-was over. ... 
END OF PHASE m.



<pb n="283"/>
PHASE IV.
DUST OF THE ACTUAL
9.; '~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="285"/>
CHAPTER I.
"It's no ur trying to keep out of thingp. The moment they want to
at you in-you're in. The moment you're born, you're done for."-
[uio WALPOL.
HE middle of March found Boy back in the Punjab,
haring a ramshackle bungalow with Lance and two of
is brother officers; good fellows, both, in their dia-
tetrically opposite fashions; but superfluous-from
~oy's point of view. When he wanted a quiet ' onfab '
ith Lance, one or both were sure to come strolling
I and hang round, jerking out aimless remarks, When
o wanted a still quieter ' onfab' with his -matuing
ovel, their voices and footsteps echoed too learly in
ie verandahs and the santily furnished rooms. But
Id he venture to grumble at these minor drabaks,
anoe would declare he was demoralised by floui
ose in an Earthly Paradise and beooming a mre
ppendage to a pencil.
There was a measure of truth in the last. As a mat.er
fact, after two months of nninterrupted wolk at
'daipur, Boy had unwarily hinted at a rish of btomnd g
nbedded in his too congenial surroundings ;-and that
reless admission had sealed his fate.
Lance Desmond, with his pointed phrase, had vi u.
ly dug him out of his chosen retreat; had writts
imptingly of the' last of the polo,' of prime pig-stioka
Kpurthala, of the big Gymkhna that was to    lhd
p the season :-a rare chance for Boy to exhibit   · ·
rsemaanship. And again, in more serious mood, har-
d written of inreasing anxiety over his Sibhs withr  r
at 'infernal agitation business ' on the increse, aSa
,nlbrldled native press shouting sedition from the
e.tops. A nice state of chaoa Inda was comin tot 
Wlj»aaA1 +nAan>.hnaa 4+lt'ita wnrA1t  a awm»AlaA. at aS



<pb n="286"/>
286              PARB TO SEEK                   I
their leave; but Boy had better 'roll up' soon, so as t
be on the spot, in case of ructions; not packed away2
in cotton-wool down there. 
A few letters in this vein had effeetually rent
the veil of illusion that shielded Boy from aggressiv-e
actuaities. In Udaipur there had been no hysterical
press; no sedition flaunting on the house-tops. One
hadn't arrived at the twentieth century, even. Except
for a fourishing hospital, a few hideous modern in-
teriors, and a Resident-who was very good friends with
Vinx-one stepped straight back into the leisurely
colourful, frankly brutal life of the middle ages. And
Boy had fallen a willing victim to the charms of Udai-
pur:-her white palaces, white temples, and white
lnding-stages, flanked with marble elephants, embosomed
in wooded hills, and reflected in the blue untroubled
depths of the Pioh6la Lake. Immersed in his novel, he
had not known a dull or lonely hour in that enchanted
backwater of Bajasthhn.
His large vague plans for getting in touch with the
thoughtful elemnts of Caleutta and Bombay had'yielded
to the stronger manetim of beauty and art. Like his
father, he hated polities; and Westernised India.is
nothing if not political. It was a true instinet that
warned him to keep clear of that muddy stream, and
rmder his mite of service to India in the exercise of his
Individual gift. That would be in accord with one of
his mother's wise and tender sayings: (his memory was
jewelled with them) " Look always first at your own
gifta. They  e sign-posts, pointing the road to your
true line of service."  Could he but Immortalise the
measure of her spirit that was in him, that were true
aserve to India-and more than India. There are
si  sereated for action. There are men created to
aspire action. And the world has equal need of ith.
He had things to say on pape that would take  all
his time; and Udaipur had netmphorically openeaher
arms to him. The Resident and ids wife had been more
tham kind. He had his books; i cool, lofty rooms in
the Guest House; his own private boat on the Lake;
#ad freedom to go is own unfettered way at all ~i,
of the day or night. There the simmering novel }1
begun to move with a life of its own; and while ..



<pb n="287"/>
DUST 0F THE ACTUAL 
state of being endured, nothing else mattered much ta
earth or heaven.
For seven weeks he had worked at it without inter-
ruption; and for seven weeks he had been happy 
companioned by the vivid creatures of his brain; and,
better still, by a quickened undersense of his mother's
vital share in the 'blossom and fruit of his life.' The
danger of becoming embedded had been no myth: and
at the back of his brain there had lurked a superstitious
reluctance to break the spell.
But Lance was Lance: no one like him. Moreover,
he had known well enough that anticipation of breakers
ahead was no fanciful nightmare; but a sane corrective
to the ostrich policy of those who had sown the evil
eed and were trying to say of the fruit-' It s .not.'
Letters from Dyin, and spasmodic devouring of news-
papers, kept him alive to the sinister activities of the
larger world outside. News from Bombay grew steadily
more disquieting :-strikes and riots, fomented by agi-
tators, who lied shamelessly about the nature of the new
Bills; hostile crowds and insults to Englishwome.
Dyan more than hinted that if the threatened outbreak
were not resolutely crushed at the start, it might prove
a far-reaching affair; and Boy had not the lightest
desire to fnd himself 'packed away in cotton -woo~4
miles from the scene of action. Clearly Lanee wanted
him. He might be useful on the spot. And that settled
the matter.
Impossible to leave so much loveliness, Such large
draft of peace and leisure, without a pang; but-the
wrench over-he was well content to find himself estab
lished in this ramshackle bachelor bungalow, back again
with Lance and his musi--very much in evidence Just
tow-and the two superfluous good fellows, whom he
liked well enough in homeopathio doses. Especaly he
liked- Jak Meredith, cousin of the Desmonds;-a large
md simple soul, gravely absorbed in pursuing balls and
ent- pegs and 'pig'; impervious to feminine lures;
squally impervious to the caustic wit of hi diametricd
opposite, Captain James Barnard, who eased his private
av by cbhristening him 'Don Juan.' For MeredtI 
l  ty attraeted women; and Barnard-n ultured, eyi-
i,. C nambride -wm as fatally susceptible to them a a



<pb n="288"/>
288              P FAB TO  BEEK 
trout to % May4fy; but, for some unfathomable reas
they wptld not; and in Anglo-India a man could n
hide  s failures under a bushel. Lance classified him
omprehoively as 'one of the War lot'; liked him,
atd was sorry for him, although-perhaps beause-e
was' no soldier.'
Boy. also liked him; and enjoyed verbal fencing-bouts
with him when the mood was on. Still he would have
preeed, beyond measure, the Kohat arrangement,
with the Colonel for an unobtrusive third.
But the Colonel, these days, had a bungalow to him-
self; a bungalow in process of being furnished by no
means on bachelor lines. For the unbelievable had eome
to pass-     I And the whole affair had been carried
through in his own inimitable fashion, without so much
as a telltale ripple on the surface of things. Quite un-
obtrusively, at Kohat, he had made friends with the
General's daughter-- dark-haired slip of a girl, with
the blood of distinguished Frontier soldiers in her vein.
Quite unobtrusively-during Christm   week-he haL
laid his heart and the Regiment at her feet. Quite
unobtrusively, he proposed to marry her in April, when
the leave season opened, and earry her off to Kashmir. 
" Tht' the way it goes with some people," said Lance,
the irst time he spoke of it; and Boy fanied he d*.
tooted a wistful note in his voice.
"That's the way it'll go with you, old man," he h
retorted. "I'm the one that will have to look out for
Lance had merely smiled and said nothing:-th
eoeption he usually acorded to personal remarks. And,
at the moment, Boy thought no more of the matter.
Their fist good week of polo and riding and generall
fooling round together had quickened his old allegiane
to Lanee, his newr allegiance to the brotherhood of
action. He pomsesed no more enviable talent than is :
many-sided zest for . Ie.
Lance himself seemed in an unusually social mood.
o8 of course Boy must submit to being bowledl
round in the new dog-cart and introdnoed to speeal
fied, Iinn oantonments and Lahore, incuding   *
Deputy Commissioner's wife and good-looking 
diaughter; the best dancer in the station adi . 



<pb n="289"/>
DUST OF TiH      ACTUAL, 
extra specia friend, he gathered from  Lance's best
ofthand manner.
Boy found her more than good-looking; beautul,
almost, with her twofold grace of carriage and feature
and her low-toned harmony of colouring:-ivory-white
skin, ash-blond hair and hazel eyes, clear as a Highland
river; the pupils abnormally large, the short thick lashes
very black, like a smudge round her lids. She was tall,
in fine, and carried her beauty like a brimming oaioce;
very completely mistress of herself; and very completely
detached from her florid, effusive, worldly-wise mother.
Unquestionably, a young woman to be reckoned with.
But Boy did not feel disposed, just then, to reckon
seriously with any young woman, however alluring.
The memory of Ardna-the exquisite remoteness from
everyday life of their whole relation-did not easily
fade. And the creatures of his brain were still clamant,
in spite of broken threads and drastic change of sur-
roundiigs. Lance had presented him with a spacious
writing-table; and most days he would stick to it ior
hours, sooner than drive out in pursuit of tennis or
afternoon dancing in Lahore.
He was sitting at it now; flining down a dramatic
episode, roughly, rapidly, as it eame, The polished
surface was strewn with an untidy array of papers;
the only ornaments a bit of old brass-work and two
ivory elephants; a photograph of his father and a
large one of his mother taken from the portrait at Jaipur.
The table was set almost at right angles to his open
door, and the chick rolled up. He had a weakness for
being able to 'see out,' if it was only the comer If 
barren 'compound' and a few dusty oleanders. -e
had forgotten the others; forgotten the time Al]
-he asked, while the spate lasted, was to be kit
alone... .
He almost jumped when the latch clieked behind hit
and Lance strolled in, faultlessly attired in the latest
suit from home; a golden-brown tie and a silk hand-
kerchief, the same shade, emerging from  his 'breast
pocket. By nature, Lance was no dandy; but Boy
1a not failed to note that he was apt to be scrapulodlly
well turned out on certain oocasions And, at sight of
ibtm  he promptly 'remembered he had forgotten'



<pb n="290"/>
290              f    ia To kfbK   
the very particular nature of to-day's oocasion:
marriage of Miss Gladys Elton-step-sister of Bo
a rising civilian some eighteen years older than
bride. It was an open seeret, in the station, that
wedding was Mrs Elton's private and personal trin
that she, not her unassuming daughter, was the ana
ledged heroine of the day.
"Not ready yet-you unmitigated slacker " L
exclaimed with an impatient frown. " Buck p. Ti
we were moving." 
" Awfully sorry. I clean forgot." Boy's tone was.
oonspicuously penitent. 
" Tell us another I The whole Mess was talkng of
at tiffin."
" I'm afraid I'd forgotten all about tiffin."
It was so patently the truth that Lanee looked mn
f ied. "You and your oonfounded novell Now
--double. I don't want to be glarngly late."
Bo- looked pathetic. "But I'm simply up to
eye. The trath is, I can't be bothered. I'll turn up
tle doning at the Hall." 
"And I'm to make your giddy excuses t "
If any one happens to notice my absence, you
ay something pretty-   " 
1  He was interrupted by the appearance of Barnard
. the verandah door. "Dog-cart's ready and wai
Major. What's the hiteh  "
"Sinclair's discovered he's too busy to come "
"What-the favoured onet The fair Bose
relish tha touching mark of attention. On whom
smiles, from him she expects gold, frankincese, 
myrrh--" 
"Drop it, Barnard," Desmond cut in       tiv
and Boy remarked almost in the same breath, " T.
for the tip. Ill write to Bombay for the best 
of all three against another oecasion."
"But this is the occasion! Copy-my dear 
oopy   Anglo-India in exoelsis and ' Oh 'El' in I
glory I!"
It may be mentioned that Mrs Elton's namne, 
Olive; that she saw soldiers as trees walki g.
subalters retaliated-strictly behind her beak.  - 
; :t



<pb n="291"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL                291
But Boy remained unmoved. "If you two are in
such a fluster over your precious wedding, I vote you
get out-and let me get on."
Barnard asked nothing better. Miss Arden was his
May-fly of the moment. " Come along, Major," he cried,
and vanished forthwith.
As Lance moved away, Boy remarked casually: "Be
a good chap and ask Miss Arden, with my best salaams,
to save me a dance or two, in ease I'm late turning
up !"
Lance gave him a straight look. "Not I. My pockets
will be bulging with your apologies. You can get some
one else to do your commissions in the other line."
Sheer astonishment silenced Boy; and Desmond,
from the threshold, added more seriously, "Don't let
the women here give you a swelled head, Boy. Theyll
do their damnedest between them."
When he had gone, Roy sat staring idly at the patch
of sunlight outside his door. What the devil did Lance
mean by it t Moods were not in his line. To make a
half-joking request, and find Lance taking it seriously,
wasn't in the natural order of things. And the way
he jumped on Barnard, too. Could there possibly have
been a rebuff in that quarter ? He couldn't picture any
girl in her senses refusing Lance. Besides, they seemed 
on quite friendly terms. Nothing beyond that-so far
as Boy could see. He would very much like to feel
sure. But, for all their intimacy, he knew precisely
how far one could go with Lanee: and one couldn't go 
as far as that.
As for the remark about a swelled head, Lance must
have been rotting. He wasn't troubling about women
or girs-except for tennis and dancing; and Miss
Arden was a superlative performer; in fact, rather
superlative all round. As a new experience, she seemed'
distinctly worth cultivating, so long as that process did
not seriously hamper the novel,-that was unashamedly
his first consideration, at the moment.
He loved every phase of the work; from the initial
thrill of inception to the nice balance of a phrase and
the very look of his favourite words. His childish love
of them for their own sake still prevailed. For him,



<pb n="292"/>
292              FAR TO SBEEK
they were still live things, possesing a haracter 
charm all their own.
And now, the house being blessedly empty, his
sped off again on its wild career. The men and 
he had loved into life were thronging his brain. E
thing else was forgotten-Lance and Miss Arden and
wedding and the afternoon dancing at the Hall .. 
.  .
4-
I



<pb n="293"/>
293 
CHAPTER IL
"Which is the more perilous, to meet the tempting of ve, or to pique
her t"-GOOBGR Manrn
OF course he reached the Lawrene Hall egregiously
late, to find the afternoon dancing, that Lahore pre-
scribes three times a week, in full swing.
The lofty pillared HUall-n aristocrat among Station
Clubs-was more crowded than usual. Half the polished
floor was uncovered; the rest carpeted and furnished
for lookers-on. Here Mrs Elton still diffused her ex-
uberant air of patronage; sailing majestically from
group to group of her recent guests, and looking more
than life size in lavender satin besprinkled with old
lace.
Boy hurried past, lest she discover him; and, ftom
the security of an arched alcove, scanned the moem
interesting half of the HalL  There went little Mrs.
Hunter-Banyard, a fluffy pssy-eat person, with  oft
eyes and soft manners-and    laws. She was one of
those disconnected wives whom he was beginning to
recognise as a feature of the country: unobtrusively
owned by a dyspeptic-looking Divisional Judge; hoapi
table and lively, and an Infallible authority on other
people's private amffirs. Like too many modern Anglo-
Indians, she prided: herself on keeping airily apart from
the country of her exile. Natives gave her 'the creepsl
Useless to argue. Her retort was unvarying and tm-
answerable. "East is East-and I'm  ot. It's a ountry
of horrors, under a thin layer of tinseL  Don't talk to
.e-     I"  Lance Desmond had achieved fame among
the subalterns by christening her the Banter-Wtan ; ,
but he liked her well enough, on the whole, to hope ael
would never. find him out.



<pb n="294"/>
24               FAB fTO UABE
She whirled past now, on the arm of Talbot Hayes,
senior Assistant Commissioner; an exceedingly superior
person who *ared her views about 'the country.'
Catching Boy's eye,'she feigned exaggerated surprise
and fluttered a friendly hand.
His response was automatic. He had just discovered
Miss Arden-with Lance, of course-looking supreme
in a moon-coloured gown with a dull gold sash carelessly
knotted on one side. Her graceful hat was of gold
tissue, unadorned. Near the edge of the brim lay one
yellow rose; and a rope of amber beads hung well
below her waist.
Boy-son of TLlmasni-had an artist's eye for details
of dress, for harmony of tone and line, which this girl
probably achieved by mere feminine instinct. The fool
he was, to have come so late. When they stopped, he
would catch her and plead for an extra, at least.
Meantime, a pity to waste this one; and there was
poor little Ms Delawny sitting out, as usual, in her
skimpy pink frock and black hat, trying so hard not
to look forlorn that he felt sorry for her. 8he was
tacitly barred by most of the men because sle was
' eaf an lait' ;-a delicate allusion to the precise amount
of Indian blood in her veins.
He had not, so far, ome across many specimens of
these pathetic half-and-halsh, who seemed to inhabit
a racial No-Man's-Land. But Lahore was full of them;
minor officials in the Railway and the Post Office;
living, more or less, in a substratum of their own kind
He gathered that they were regarded as a 'problem'
by the thoughtful few, and simply turned down by the
est,. He felt an acute sympathy for them: also-in
hidden dpths    vague distaste. Most of those he had
eneountered were so obviously of no particular caste,
in either country's estmate of the word, that he had
never assoeiated them with himself. He saw himself,
rather, as of double caste; a fusion of the best in both:
ere. The writer of that wonderful letter had said he.
was different; and presumably she knew. Whether
the average Anglo-Indian would see any difference he
had not the remotest idea; and, so far, he had scarel-:
given the matter a thought.                    -..
Here, however, it was thrust upon his attention; , /



<pb n="295"/>
:(      DDUST OF THE ACTUAL 
ad he failed to notice that Lance never mentioned the
Jfapur cousins except when they were alone:-whether
by chance or design, he did not choose to ask. And if
either of the other fellows had noticed his mother's
photograph, or felt a glimmer of curiosity, no word had
been said.
After all, what concern was it of these chapce-met
folk t He was nothing to them; and to him they were
mainly a pleasant change from the absorbing business
of his novel and the problems of India in transition.
And the poor little girl in the skimpy frock was an
unconscious fragment of that problem. Too pathetic
to see how she tried not to look round hopefully when-
ever masculine footsteps came her way. Why shouldn't
be give her a pleasant surprise t
She succeeded, this time, in not looking round; so
the,surprise came off to his satisfation. She was nervous
and unpractised, and he constantly found her feet where
they had no business to be. But sooner than hurt her
feelings, he piloted her twice round the room before
stopping; and found himself next to Mrs Hunter-
Banyard, who 'snuggled up' to him (the phrase was
BDmarnd's) and proffered consolation after her kind.
"Bad boy I You missed the cream of the afternoon,
but you're not quite too late. I'm free for the next."
Boy, fairly cornered, could only bow and smile his
aeceptance. And after his arduous prelude, Mrs Ban- 
yard's dancing was an effortless delight-if only she
would not spoil it by her unceasing ripple of talk. Hie
lack of response troubled her no whit. She was bubbling
over with caustio comment on Mrs Elton's latest adven-
ture in matrimony.
" She's a mighty hunter, before the Lord I She marked
down poor Hilton last cold weather," cooed the silken
voice in Boy's inattentive ear. "Of course you know
he's one of our coming men I And I've a shrewd idea
he wa intended for Bose. But in  iss Bose the match-
maker has met her match     She's clever-that gir.;
ad she's reduced the tactics of non-resistance to a fie
!)&  I don't believe she ever stands up to her mother.
Se smiles and smiles-and goes her own way, She
iBfp pying with soldiers; partly because they're good
£ae.ibjf   * nal  T1l nrr T'1 As- 1tnaa r  4A+ 16 -ann&



<pb n="296"/>
296;' PAB                  BBIK 
her mother on tenter-hooks. But when it comes to
business; she'll choose as shrewdly--"
Boy stopped dancing and confronted her, half laugh- 
ing, half irate. '"f you're keen on talking-let's talk.
I can't do both."  He stated the faet politely, but't
with decision. "And-frankly, I hate hearing a girl
pulled to pieces, just because she's charming and good-
looking and-" 
"Oh, my dear boy," she interrupted unfailingly-, 
sweet solicitude in her lifted gaze. " Did I trample on
your chivalrous toes t Or is it--   t "
" No, it isn't." He resented the barefaced impliea-
tion. "Naturally-I admire her -"
"Oh, naturally ! You an't help yourselves, any of
you! She's 'sooner caught than the pestilence, and 
the taker runs presently mad.' No use looking daggers I X
It's a fact. I don't say she flirts outrageously-Ike
I do ! She simply expects homage-and gets it. She 
expects men to fall in love with her-and they topple
over like ninepins. Sometimes-when I'm feeling mag- 
nanimous-I catch a ninepin as it falls ! Look at he 
now, with that B.E. boy-plainly in the toils !" I
Boy declined to look. If she was trying to put himnt-
off Mis Arden, she was on the wrong tack. Besides- 
he wanted to dance.
"One more turn " he suggested, nipping a frh .
outbreak in the bud. "But, please-no talking."
She laughed and shook her fan at him. " Epicure s
But after all, it was an indirect complimentto herdancng r! 
and for the space of two minutes, she held her peace.
Throughout the brief pause she rippled on, wit-h
negligible interludes; but not till they re-entered t
Hall did she revertto the theme that had o exaspeated'
Boy. There she espied Desmond, standing under *
archway, staring straght before him, pparently lost
in thought.
She indicated him, discreetly, with her fan. "The b
Happy Warrior (that's my private name for him) seem 
to have something on his mind. Can he have.proposed
-at last   I confess I'm acrious. But of course 
know all about it, Mr Sinclair. Don't tell e I "  - .4-
"I won't! " said Boy gravely. "You probabwi H
--~. ,L'. ~  T -   ,  . .  ..H



<pb n="297"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL               2f9
"But I thought you were such intimate friends
How superbly masculine! "
"Well-he is."
"Oh, he is I He's so firmly planted on his feet that
he tacitly invites one to tilt at him! I confess I've
already tried my hand-and failed. So it soothes my
vanity to observe that even the Bose of Sharon isn't
visibly upsetting his balance. Frankly, I'm more than
a little intrigued over that affair.  It seems to have
reached a certain point and stuck there. At one time
-I thought-"
Her thought remained unuttered. Boy was patently
not attending. Miss Arden and the' R.E. boy' had just
antered the Hall
"Don't let me keep you," she added sweetly. "It's
evident 8he's the next I "
Boy collected himself with a jerk. "You're wiser
han I am ! I've not asked her yet."
"Then you ean save yourself the trouble and go on
dancing with me I She's always booked up ahead-"
Her blue eyes challenged him laughingly; but he
eaught the undernote of rivalry. For half a second the
cales hung even between courtesy and inclination;
then, from the tail of his eye, he saw Hayes bearing
lown upon the other pair. That decided him. He had
3oneeived an unreasoning dislike of Talbot Hayes.
"I'm awfully sorry," he said politely. "But-I seat
word I was eoming in for the dancing; and  "
" Oh, go along then and get your fingers burnt, as you
leserve. But never say I didn't try and save them I "
Boy laughed. "They aren't in any danger, thanks
very much I "
Just as he reached Miss Arden, the B.E. boy left her,
md Lance, forsaing his pillar, strolled casually to her
ide.
She greeted Boy with a faint lift of her brows.
"Was I unspeakable-      I apologise," he said im-
pulsively; and her smile absolved him.
"You were wiser than you knew. You escaped an
niction. It was insufferbly dull. We all smiled and
miled, till there were 'miles and miles of smiles'; and
we wre allbored to extinction! Ask Major Desmond I "
at...t  a..a t.            -...aa.    w.



<pb n="298"/>
298             :FAB TO ASEdB     -
He returnd it with a quick look that told Boy he had.
been touched on the raw.                        i
" As I spent most of the time talking to youn-nd as
ytu've just recorded your sensations, I'd rather be
excused," he said with a touch of stiffess. "Yowi
nnings, I suppose, old man  " And, with a friendly
nod, he moved away.
Boy, watching him go, felt almost angry with the gir
and impetuously spoke his thought. 
"Poor old Desmondl What did you give him a
knock for t He couldn't be dull, if he tried."
"N-no," she agreed, without removing her eyes from
his retreating figure.  "But sometimes-he can be
aggressive."
"I've never noticed it."
"How long have you known him   "
"A trifle of fifteen years."
"Quite a romanti friendship t "
Boy nodded. He did not choose to discuss his feeling
for Lance with this cool, compelling young woman. Yet
her very coolness goaded him to add: "I suppose men
see more clearly than women that-he's one in a thou-
and."
" I'm-not so sur   " 
"Yet you snub him as if he was a tin-pot ' sub.'" '
His resentment would out; but the smile in her es
disarmed him. 
"Was it as bad as that    What a pair you are 
Don't worry. We know each other's little ways by now."
It was scarcely convincing; but Lance wold not
thank him for interfering; and the band hba  struck
up. No sign of a partner. It seemed the hlek b6B 'n.'
"Did Desmond give you my message    " he
"No-what" "
"Only-that I hoped you'd be mrananimous..
Is there a chane-  t "
Her eyes rested deliberately on his; and the lat
spark of resentment fickered out. "More than yoe 
deserve! But this one does happen to be free- ,. ' *'
" Wll, we won't waste any of it," said he : -adty- '
danced without a break, without a word, till the c j!-
accord of their cirling and swaying  eased fl-s i
lae  n4 nn aas  . 11A .s         - a-;ls



<pb n="299"/>
""USBT OF THE ACTUAL                   3
That wae the eal thing, thought Boy, but felt too
shy for compliments; and they merely exchanged a
mnile. He had felt the pleasure was mutual. Now he
knew it.
Out through the portico they passed into the odk
green gardens, fshly watered, exhaling a smell of moist
earth and the fgragance of nnumbered roses--a very
whiff of Home: bushes, standards, ramblers; and every-
where-flaunting its supremacy-the Marechal Nield
sprawling over hedges, scrambling up evergreens and
Walling again, in cascades of moon-yellow blossoms and
glossy leaves.
Boy, keenly alive to the exquisite mingling of scent
ad colour and evening lights-was still more alive to
the silent girl-at his side, who seemed to radiate both
the lure and the subtle antagonism of sex-in itself an
Inverted form of fascination.
They had strolled half round the empty bandstand
before she remarked, in her cool, low-pitched voice:
" You really are a flagrantly casual person; Mr Sinclair.
I sometimes wonder-is it quit spontaneous ? Or-do
ou find it effective t "
Boy frankly turned and stared at her. " Effective T
What a question t "
Her smile puzzled and disconcerted him.
"Well, you've answered it with your usual pristine
rankness! I see-it was not intentional."
"Why should it be "
"Oh, if you don't know-I don't! I merely won-
ered-      You did say definitely you would come to
the reception. Bo of course-I expected you. Then
you never turned up. And-naturally--     "
A ghost of a shrug completed the sentence.
"I'm  awfully sorry. I didn't flatter myself you'd
notie--" Boy said simply. There were moments when
she made him feel vexatiously young. "You see-it
ws my novel-got me by the hair. And when that
happens, I'm rather apt to let things slide. Anyway,
po got the better man. And if you found hi  dull,
'd have been nowhere."
iSh was silent a moment. Then: "I think-if you
ht mind-we'll leave Major Desmond out of it," she
ait adding, with a distinct change of tone: ': What's



<pb n="300"/>
300             'AB TO     SEEK              . 
the hidden charm in that common little Miss Delawny
I saw you dancing with her again to-day." 
The subtle flattery of the question might have ta
effect, had it not followed on her perplexing re
about Leace. As it was, he resented it.
" Why not ' She's quite a nice little person."
" I daresay. But we've plenty of nice girls in our
set."
"Oh, plenty. But I rather bar set mania. I've
catholic taste in human beings I "
" And I've an ultra fastidious one! " Look and 
gave her statement a delicately personal flavour. " Be
sides, out here . . . there are limits---"
" And I must respect them, on penalty of your
pleasure ? " His tone was airily defiant. "Well-ma
me out a list of irreproachables, and I'll work them
in rotation-between whiles I"                  ;1
The implication. of that last subtly made amends:
and she had a taste for the minor subtleties of
course.
"I shall do nothing of the kind! You're
graceless this evening! I suspect all that scrbbl
goes to your head sometimes. Sitting on Olymp
heights, controlling destinies I I suppose we earthwon
down below all look pretty much alike t To
between mere partners-is human. To embrace th
indiscriminately-divine "
Boy laughed. " Oh, if it came to embrang--"
" Even an Olympian might be a shade less eatholic ?
she queried with one of her looks, that stirred in
sensations far removed from Olympian. Bandom t
did not flourish in  iss Arden's company: delia
insistently she steered it back to the focal point of
terest-herself and the man of the moment.
From the circular drive they wandered on, he
and when they re-entered the Hall a fresh dance
begun. Under the arch they paused. Mi     Ards
glance- scanned the room and reverted to Boy. 
bst ten minutes had appreciably advanced their in
"Shall we " he asked, returning her look witi 
terest. " Is the luckin again  " I             '
Her eyes assented. He slipped an arm rouad
and once more they danced .....             '.



<pb n="301"/>
DUBT OF THE '  ACTUAL 
Boy had been Olympian indeed had he not pereet
the delicate flattery implied in his apparet luck. Lane
had not given his message. Yet two dances were avail-
able. The inference was not without its insidious effect
on a man temperamentally incapable of conceit.
The valse was nearly half over, when the least little
drag on his arm so surprised him that he stopped
almost opposite the main archway ;-and caught sight
of Lance, evidently looking for some one.
"Oh-there he is "    Miss Arden's low tone was
almost flurried-for her.
"D'you want him   "
"Well--I suppose he wants me. This was his
dance."
" Good Lord I What a mean shame," Boy flashed
out. "Why on earth didn't you tell met Wouldn't
for the world . . ."
Her eolour rose under his heated protest. "I never
hang about for unpunctual partners. If they don't turn
up in time-it's their loss."
Boy, intent on Lance, was scarcely listening. "He's
seen us now. Come along. Let's explain."
It was Miss Arden who did the explaining in a manner
all her own.
"Well-what became of yout " she asked, smiling
in response to Desmond's look of interrogation. "As
you didn't appear, I concluded you'd either forgotten
or been caught in a rubber."
"Bad shots,-both," Desmond retorted with a direct
look.
" I'm awfully sorry ... I hadn't a notion-" Boy
began-and checked himself, perceiving that he could
not say much without implicating his partner.
This time Desmond's smile had quite another quality.
"You're very welcome. Carry on. Don't mind me. It's
half over."
" A model of generosity! " Miss Arden applauded him.
"I'm free for the next-if you'd care to have it instead."
"Thanks very much; but I'm not," Desmond an-
swered serenely.
"The great little Banter-Wrangle-is it t You could
'p*d a mid    tandet ing and bribe Mr Sinclair to savo
he situation !"



<pb n="302"/>
0a9            FnA TO SEEK
"Hard luck on Sinlair. But it's not Mrs Banyard.
I'm sorry---"
" Don't apologise. If you're satisfied, I am."
For all her careless tone, Boy had never seen her so
nearly put out of countenance. Desmond said nothing;
and for s moment-the briefest-there fell an awkward
silence. Then with an air of marked graiousness she
turned to Boy.
" We are generously permitted to go on, with a clear
conscience 1"
But for Boy the charm was broken. Her cavalier
treatment of Lance annoyed him; and beneath the
surface play of looks and words he had detected the
flash of steel.  It was some satisfaction that Lance
had given as good as he received But he felt troubled
and curious. And he was likely to remain so. Lance,
he very well knew, would say precisely nothing.
The girl, as if divining his thoughts, combated them
with the delicately pointed weapons of her kind-and
prevailed.
Again they wandered in the darkening garden and
returned to find the Boston in fall swing. Again Mis
Arden's glance travelled casually round the room. And
Boy saw her start; just enough to swear by ...
Desmond was dancing with Miss Delawny-- I
The frivolous comment on Boy's lips was cheeked by
the look in his partner's eyes. Impossible not to wonder
if Lance had actually been engaged; or if-- 
In any case-a knock for Miss Arden's vanity. A
shade too severe, perhaps; yet sympathy for her was
tinged with exultation that Lance had held his own.
Mrs Banyard was right. Here was a man set firmly on
his feet....
Miss Arden's voice drew his wandering attention back
to herself. "We may as well fnish this. Or are you
also-engged t "
Her light stress on the word held a sgnificane he did
not miss.
" To you-if you will I " he answered gallantly, hand
on heart.  More than I deserve-as you said; but
still-"
" It's just possible for a woman to be mannmu  t:
she capped him, smiling. " And it's just posbleB; :a.



<pb n="303"/>
DUST OF THE      AOTUAL         \0SS
man to be-the other thing! Remember that-when
you get back to your, eternal scribbling ! " 
An hour later he rode homeward with a fine confusion
of sensations and impressions, doubts anddesires seeth-
ing in his brain. Miss Arden was delightful, but a trifle
unsettling. She must not be allowed to distract him from
the work he loved.
.:
[[.. .,.. .



<pb n="304"/>
**    *                ,   .   t.U
-,  r
CHAPTER m.
"Shall I oool deire
By lookin at those lovely eyes of hen,
That passonate love prefers
To his own brand, for setting hearts on fire.
-EDMUND GoesL
BET neither the work he loved, nor his budding intimay .
with Miss Arden, deterred him from accepting a week- 
end invitation from the Maharajah of Kapurthala-the
friendly, hospitable ruler of a neighbouring Sikh State.:
The Oolonel was going, and Lance, and half a dozen
other good sportsmen. They set out on Thursday, the 
military holiday, in a state of high good-humour with.
themselves and their host; to return on Sunday evening, 
renewed in body and mind by the pursuit of pig and
the spirit of Shikar, that keeps a man sane and virile
and tempers the insidious effect, on the white races,
life and work in the climate of India. It draws me
awsy from the rather cramping station atmosphere. 
sets their feet in a large room. And in this ease it did.
not fail to dispel the light cloud that had hovered bWe
tween Lace and Boy since the day of the wedding.
In the friendly rivalries of sport, it was possible to for.
get woman eomplications; even to feel it a triflee
gatory that one should be so ignominiously at the merc
of the thing. Thus Roy, indulgingin a spasmodi
tion of independence; glorying in the virile exit
of pig-stiking, and the triumph of getting fit spear.
But returning on Saturday, from a day after 
and teal, he found himself nstinctively allotting
pick of his 'bag' to Miss Arden; just a omplim
attention; the sort of thing she would appr
Having refused a ride with her because of.thisi
it seemed the least he could do. 
Ann r.t+1wr 4tha -caam  a FInirl lvar tiu  ji .: .  t-



<pb n="305"/>
DUST OP THE ACTUAL               306
emured to Lanee; and by the merest fluke they found
ne another out. To Boy's relief, Lance greeted the
nbanrraig discovery with a gust of laughter.
"I say-this won't do. You give over. It's too mueh
a joke. Besides-oheek on your part."
Though he spoke lightly, the hint of command in his
me promptly put Boy on the defensive.
"BRot  Why shouldn't I  But-the two of them... I
bit overwhelming I" And suddenly he remembered
is delaration of independene. " After all-why should
ther of us I Can't we let be, just for four days t Look
are, Lance. You give over too. Don't send yours.
nd I won't send mine."
Lance-having considered that inspired proposal-
.ned a speculative eye on Boy.
"Lord, what a kid you are, still I"
" Well, I mean it. Out here, we're clear of all that.
ver there, the women call the tune-we dance. Sport's
Le God-given antidote I Though it won't be so muh
Iger-the way things are going. We shall soon have
m after pig and on the polo ground--"
" God forbid I " It came out with such fervour that  ;
ey laughed.
"He doesn't-that's the troublel He gives us a. .   ;:
ie rope we want. And the women may be trusted to    '
ike every available inch. I'm not sure there in't f 
rai of wisdom in the Eastern plan; keeping thin, so
D speak, in a separate compartment., Once you ope
chink, they flow in and swamp everything."
;Up went Lance's eyebrows. "That-from    you- 
ai Boy made haste to add: "I wasn't hin    g of
lothers and siters; but the kind you play round
t  ... before you marry. They've a big pull out here.
y        f good fun of course. And f a man's keen on
-"Aren't you keen t " Lance out in with a quick look.
4*N-no. Not just yet, anyway. It's a plunge. And
Ltofo full up with other things.-But what abot the
-lwe'll let be--es you sagely suggest I"
fibl they did. 
f|p pig-stiking next-morning, with two tuskers f 
n aUp ithfn     o  n tha r t  bian.llal-  whnt r tbtl Ab



<pb n="306"/>
06: TOSEEK
to harness, by an afternoon train, feeling-without ex:
oeption-healthir, happier men.
None of them, perhaps, was more conscious of tha,
inner renewal than Lance and Boy. The incident d
the game seemed in some way to have cleared the i
between them; and throughout the return journee
both were in the maddest spirits, keeping the whoe
carriage in an uproar. Afterwards, driving homeward,
Boy registered a resolve to spend more of his time oa
masculine society and the novel; less of it dancing and
fooling about in Lahore....
A vision of his table, with its inviting disarray, an
the picture of his mother for presiding genius, gave hi
heart a lift. He promised himself a week of uniteprra
evenings, alone with Terry and his thronging thoughts
when the whole house was still and the reading-lam
made a magic circle of light in the surrounding gloom.. .
Meantime, there were letters: one from his father, cm
from Jeffers; and beneath them a too familiar envelope
At sight of it, he felt a faint tug inside him; a it
were a whispered reminder that, away at Kapurtl
he had been about as free as a bird with a strng r d
its leg. He resented the aptness of that d   a
imile. It was a new senation; and he did not rei
it. The few women he intimately loved had counted iua
so much in his life that he sccely realied his abysmal
ignorance of the power that is in woman-the mel
... opposite of man; the implicit challge, the
-';i:'*e.m* Partly from temperament, party fom pf i
s   had kept more or less clear of 'all that.'  w
weaponless, he had rashly entered the lits.
He opened Miss Arden's note feeling antagonlst.
But its friendliness disarmed him. She hoped they had
enjoyed themselves immensely and lain enough ereatnr
to satisfy their primitive instincts. And her mothe
hoped Mr Sincalir would dine with them on Wednesda
oiiling: quite a smallalair.
is first impulse was to refuse; but her alludonat
the slain creatures touched up his conscience  To-
the omission by refusing her invitation might i.
her. No sense in that. So he decided to aedlpt ^
--A    A_=-_ A_  rs_ -i _   ILS   _-   __A..   -A.  Aces _ _ .   . t,2  '



<pb n="307"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL               W80      '
Lance, it transpired, had not been asked. He and
Lanard were the favoured ones,-and, on the appointed
vening, they drove in together. Boy had been writing
early all day. He had reached a point in his chapter
t which a break was .distrating. Yet here he was,
riving Barnard to Laore, cursing his luck, and-yes
-tyTing to ignore a flutter of anticipation in the region
If hi heart....
As far as mere lust of the eye went-and it went a
ood way with Boy-he had his reward the moment he
cntered Mrs Elton's overloaded drawing-room.  Bose
rden excelled herself in evening dress. The carriage
I her head, the curve of her throat, and the admirable
ne from ear to shoulder made a picture supremely
itiffying to his artist's eye.
Her negligible bodice was a filmy affairivory white
ith glints of gold. Her gauzy gold wedding-sash,
wathed round her hips, fell in a fringed knot below
er knee. Filmy sleeves floated from her shoulders,
aving the arms bare and unadorned, except for one
ild bangle, high up-the latest note from Home. jtor
ie rest, her rope of amber beads and long earrings only
few tones lighter than her astonishing hazel eyes.
Face to face with her beauty, and her discreetly veiled
leasure at sight of him, he could not be ungracious
iough to cuse his luck. But his satisfaction cooled
sight of Talbot Hayes by the mantelpiece, inclining
Is polished angularity to catch some confidential tit
om little Mrs Hunter-Banyard. Of course that fei..
puld take her in. He, Boy, had no official posa,.i;t:
ow; and without it one was negligible in Anglo-Iik :'z
esides, Mrs Elton openly favoured Talbot Hayes. Fld 
g Bose, there were two more prospective brides at
bome-twins; and Hayes was fatally endowed with all
he surface symptoms of the 'coming man': the supple
Iertness and self-assurane; the instinet for the right
ding; and-supreme asset in these days- studious
taoehment fom the people and the country. In oon-
quenoe, needless to say, he remained obstinately eoep-
em as regards the rising storm.
Very early, Boy had put out feelers to discover how 
eh he understood or cared; and Hayes had blandly



<pb n="308"/>
308             FPAB TO SEEK 
fssared him: "Bengal may bluster and the D.O. may
pessmise, but you can take it from me, there will be ni
serious upheaval in the North. If ever these people an
lools enough to manceuvre us out of India, so much t1
worse for them; so much the better for us. It's a
beastly country."
Nevertheless Boy observed that he appeared to extraet
out of the beastly country every available ounce od
enjoyment. In affable moments, he could even manage to
forget his career-and unbend. He was unbending now.
A few paces off, the dyspeptic Judge was disssing
'the situation' with his host-a large unwieldy man,
so nervous of his own bulk and unready wit that ony
the discerning few discovered the sensitive, friend
spirit very eompletely hidden under a bushel. Boy,
who had liked him at sight, felt vaguely sorry for him
He seemed a fish out of water in his own home; over
wlelmed by the florid, assured personality of his wife.
:They were the last, of eourse; nearly five minutes
late  Trust Roy. Only four other guests; Dr Ethe
Wemyss, M.B., lively and clever and new to the count-ry
Major and Mrs .Garten of the Sikhs, with a stolid good
humoured daughter, who unfailngly wore the same fros
and the same disarming smile.
'The Deputy Commissioner's wife permitted herself fe
military intimates. But she had come in touch w.
Mrs Garten over a diobV '1 chit and a'Tecipe for pum
gin. Both women were onsumedly Anglo-Indian. Al
heir values were social ;-pay, promotion, prestige. Al
their lamentations pitched m the same key:-evey
dearer, servants 'impossible,' hospitality ettinct, wi
every one saving and scraping to get Home. PBi
were deeply versed in bazaar prices and the Din, 4
native servants. Henee, in due course, a frisdah
(according to Mrs  anyard) 'broad based on jhar
ant charcoal and kerosene' I
'h.t.ro were lifting up'their voices in una   oV
the mprterious shdrtage of keroseneitihat arohsiil
Moi Oband said none was coming into the 
hen dinner was announced; and TEalbot
.  . evitably-offered his arm to Mi .;Arien. 
,-        -  1 Wadiermn..       F.j                ...



<pb n="309"/>
'DUST OP THE AOTUATL              m    '
Boy, consigned to Dr Wemyss, eould only pray heaven
Ior the next best thing-Miss Arden on his left. Instead,
nmazedly, he found himself promoted to a seat beside
er mother,' who still further amazed him by treating
him to a much larger share of her attention than the
aw of the dinner-table prescribed.  Her talk, in the
main, was local and personal; and Boy simply let it
low; his eyes flagrantly straying down the table towards
Miss Arden and Hayes, who seemed very intimate this
vening.
Suddenly he fond himself talking about Home. It
began with gardens. Mrs Elton had a passion for them,
i her mdlie1l knew to their cost; and the other day
i friend had told her that somebody said Mr Sinclair
had a lovely place at Home, with a wonderful old
arden-      t
Mr Sinclair admitted as much, with maseuline brevity.
Undeterred, she drew out the sentimental stop:-
the charm of a real old English garden! Out here, one
i     ay used the word by courtesy. Lahorites, of course,
were specially favoured; but do what one would, it
was never quite the same thing-was it ... .
Not quite, Roy agreed amicably-and wondered what
the joke was down there. He supposed Miss Arden
must have had some say in the geography of the
table....
Her mother, meantime, had tacked sail and was pob-
ing him, indirectly, about his reasons for remaimin in
Endia. Was he going in for politics, or the life of aebuntry,
ntatlnan iin his beautiful home.? Her remarks implied
ht she took him for the eldest son. And Boy, who
had not been attending, realised with a jar that,, in
rulgar parlance, he was being discreetly pumped. Where-
4 politely but decisively, he sheered off and steck to
is partner till the meal was over.
The men seemed to linger interminably over their
e and igars. But he. an          to engage the DOC.
Rk the one subject that put shyness to fightr-M
Problems of changing India. With more than twiety
IsIM of work and observation behind him, he saw bthe
Rdeming gulf between rulers and ruled as an almost
6 ..'  .·                                   ...
~I~- ·   ·'aucbpc¾(



<pb n="310"/>
310              PAR TO SBEf
equal disaster for both. He knew, none better, all
that had bein achieved, in his own Province alone,
for the peasant and the loyal landowner. He had
made many friends among the Indian of his district;
and from these he had received repeated warnings of
widtpread, organised rebellion. Yet he was helpless;
tied'hand and foot in yards of red tape .. .
It was not the first time that Boy had enjoyed a talk
with him; a sense of doors opening on to larger spaces.
But this evening restlessness nagged at him; and at
the first hint of a move he was on his feet, determined
to forestall Hayes.
He sueeeeded; and Miss Arden welcomed him with
the lift of her brows that he was growing to watch for
when they met. It seemed to imply a certain intimacy.
" Very brown and vigorous, you're looking. Was it
-great fun, t"
"It was topping', he answered with simple fervour.
"Bare sport. Everything in style."
"And no leisure to miss partners left lamenting t
I hope our stars shone the brighter, glorified by dis
tanoe I"
Her eyes- hallenged him with smiling deliberation.
His own met them fun; and a little tingling shook
ran through him, as at the touch of an electric needle.
". Some stars are dazzling enough at close quarters,"
he said boldly.
"But surely-' distance lends enchantment'- t "
"It depends a good deal on the view! "
At that moment, 'up emne Hayes, with his ineffable
air of giving a cachet to any one he honoured with his
favour. And Miss Arden hailed him, as if they had not
met for a week.
Thus encouraged, of course -he clung like a limpet;
and reverted to some subject they had be ndiscussing,
tadt-y isolating Boy.
For a few exaspeatng moments, he stood his ground,
counting on bridge'to remove the limpet. But when
Hayes refued a pressing invitation to join Mrs Ban-
yard's table, Boy gave it up, and delibeaely waked.
away.
Only Mr Elton remained sitting near the fireplac 
His look of undisguised pleasure, at Bo7y's approajl



<pb n="311"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL                 31
baed for a good deal; and they renewed their talk
iaere it had broken off. Boy almost forgot he was
eaking to a senior official; freely expressed his own
6Bghts ; and even ventured to comment on the strange
staohment of Anglo-Indians, in general, from a land
ll of such vast and varied interests, lying at their
ery doors.
"Perhaps-I misjudge them," he added with the
dalling touch of modesty that was not least among his
harms. " But to me it sometimes seems as if a curtain
mng between their eyes and India. And-it's catching.
a some subtle way this little coneentrated worldj within
world seems to draw one's receptiveness away from
alL is that very sweeping, sir "
A smile dawned in Mr Elton's rather mournful eyes.
In a sense-it's painfully true. But the fact is-
aglo-Indian life can't be fairly judged from the out-
I. It has to be lived before its insidionsness can be
upected." He moistened his lips and caressed his
bn with a large, sensitive hand. " Happily-there are
good many exceptions."
" If I wasn't talking to one of them, sir-I wouldn't
we ventured I" said Boy; and the friendly smile
rpened.
.''All the same," Elton went on, " there are those who
eart that it is half the secret of our success; that
ia conquered the conquerors, who lived wit her and
i lost their virility. Yet in our earlier days, when the
lmonal touch was a realityj we did achieve a better
iton all round. Of course the present state of affdMi
i the inevitable fruit of our whole system. By the
giliing process, we have spread all over India a     '
t layer of minor officials some six million persons deep !
Silder, my dear young man, the significanee of those
e. We rflue the European staff. We increase
d*rudgery of their office work-and we wonder why
e Salhib and the peasant are no longer personal
dais--I"
:r:ed by his subject, and warmed by Boy's intelli-
l -interest, the man's nervous tricks disappeared. He
. terlye , earnestly, as to an equal in expedene;
'ldff mt Boy would have bee   quicker to appre-
not bul his attenlinn be  etnfres an that



<pb n="312"/>
31,              11B TO1 S BEK 
exaspeatapsrj who had tetired to a   auhioaed 
and looked like rmainig there fot good. 
What the OdeV  had the girl invited him for  If 
wished to disllusion him, she was succeedig to dm
tion. If she haaded he was one of her inernal ninepin
she was very much mistaken. And all the wile heo
found himself growing steadily more distracted, mere
isitently cobndous of her....
Voices and laughter heralded an  nflA  of bride
Players ; Mrs Bmyard, with Barnard, Misl Garten, tmd
Dr Wemyss. A table of thIe women and one man dr.
not suit the littl lady's taste.
" We'rea very scratch lot. And we want fresh blood! '
she announced carnivorously, a the pair in the alovo
roe and earme forward.
The two men rose also, but went on with their takt
Tfey knew it was not their blood Mrs Banyard wais
MekIg.   Bey kept his baok turned and s5Wdio     4d
f·lraht 4tm hoping... 
"-   you two have qute finished breaking ltp t
pe . . . T " said Miss Ade's voie at hib elbo
SBe had appioahed to qietly that he urted   Wsi
SWI, her: ae  she had seen. "I was tehifled of
caught,"-she turned affeetionately to her stepath
" so I flng Mr Hayes to the wolves-and fled  You
Her flg      ereeed his seeve. Wors and 
waked a &smile in is moumfl eyes. Tey .eed yi
understad oas    other, thee two. To Boy she
neve  seemed mao charming; sad his on 
valtoe -ta a  nsted1yingj to say the leat of it. 
"Haye   woto   prove a tough mouthf l-ven
wolves,  BIton ·marked- pensivey. .
"HJre otid/ I -'s so e   lmuy -laquered over
we--we won't bem ukL      Be -trotiy betw ee
selves, Pater-woudn't yru love to swop him fhri
Sinclair, these days "                         *
"My dear " Elton reproachedher, nerv
his large hands. "Hys E b   a maodoel-of
But-well, wel-If Mr Sindir wil     giMve 
his eae-I should say he ha mai y fu
dian career, should he be inclined tCat  *
66 V91t     a.    s- -  La*.._. 'a_



<pb n="313"/>
DUST OP THE ACTUAL               3   , .
Wwhehned, as lton-eeing Miss Garten stnded-
oed dutifully to her rescue.
Ms Ards glanced again at Boy. " An you inling
t'way t"
The question took him aback.
"Met    No. Of course I'd love it-for some thinp."
Yot're well out of it, in my opinion. It'll oon be
country for a white man. He's already little mme
an a futile superfluity-- "
"On the contrary," Boy struck in warmly, "the
nIlshmman--of the rightest sort is more than ever
eeied in India to-day."
Her slight shrug conceded the point. " I never arge I
ad if you start on het subject-I'm nowhere I You
a save it all up for the Pater. He's rather a deaw-
n't you think t 
"He's splendid."
Her smile had its aressing quality. " That's the laf
iajtive any one else would apply to him ! But,; is
me. There's a fine streak in him--vey careMfuy hidden
ray. People don't ee it, because he's shy and eliny s
id hasn't an ounce of pusa   But he undesta   the
toves. Loves them. Goodness knows why. And he#
* the right touch. I could tn you a tal--"
"Do" h    rged. " Tae are my pet weakles."
She subsided into the empty chair and loked -u
yittgy. " St," she oemmaandld-ad he obyed.
e was Bnthr slaying nor dtiag the things bhe  a.
ant to say or do. But the mere beauty of hereea
Maed him; the allurg      e ofa her pose leanieg
rard a little, bare arms refing -an her kns. No
,Wt' olour anywhere except her lip   Those ip,
ougt Boy, were      mbe for a good deal.   heir
m    eftse  dis  ted    t more than a little the de-
Iaftion of her eyes; and to-night, her rtaming
itude to  lbtn appretbly quicka ed hb intem t i
r and her tale.
I hap     e out in the ditrit. I heard t from a
Bl/."  he leaned neaer ad spoke in a aonfidatial
terme. -" Hoe    nes that some neihboring tow
fl s *tment Ml*   y a haidul of BEuopea  there 
ii  mea    l u"isI  and no troops  So the ' mih
dtd:- hf-^C       n    4- .iah  1t anlS 4ml ,  fif1



<pb n="314"/>
814              tAB TO SEEK                   I
offial wa     You must be very polite to badmml
these days, if you're a mere Sahib; or you hear of
from some little Tin God sitting safe in his office, hmndred-
of miles away. Well, off he went-a twenty-mile drive;
found the mission in a flutter-I don't blame them--
armed with rifles and revolvers; expeing-every-mo'
ment-to-be-their-next sort of thing; and the town in
an uproar. Some religious tamasha. He talked like a 
father to the headmen; and assured the 'mish' people'
it would be all right.
"They begged him to stay and see them through.
So he said he would sleep at the dak bungalow.
' An   alone t' they asked. ' No one to guard you t'
'Quite unnecessary,' he said:-and they were imply,;
amazed 1
"It was rather hot; so he had his bed put in the
garde   Then.   he sent for the leading men and said:
' I hear there's a disturbanee going on. I don't intimate
you have anything to do with it. But you ae re porn-
sible; and I expect you to keep the people in handl
I'm sleeping here to-night. If there is trouble, you ea:
report to me. But it is for you to keep order in yout
own town.' 
"They salaamed and departed. No one came n
him. And he drove off next morning, leaving t
Americans, with their rifles and revolvers, more 
than ever! I was told it made a great impression 
the natives, his sleeping alone in the garden,
so much as a sentry. And the cream of it is," she aded
-her eyes on Elton's unheroic figure-" the man 
could do that is terrifed of walking across a
or saying polite things to a woman "            *
Distinetly, to-night, she was in a new vein, moa
attractive to Boy than all her feminine crafts and lure
Sitting, friendly and at ease over the fire, they di e
human idiosynerasies-a pet subject with him.
Then, suddenly, she looked him in the eyes;-and
was aware of her again, in the old disturbing way.
Yet she was merely remarklng, with a sm smaligh, "
can't think how refreshing it is to get a little real-
sometimes with a cultivated man who is neithes a
IL  ......0-



<pb n="315"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUATL              31
lor a civilian. Even in a big station, we're so boxed in
rith 'shop' and personalities. The men are luckier.
Chey can escape now and then; shake off the women
a one shakes off burrs- I "
Another glance here; half sceptical, wholly capti-
ating.
"It's easier said than done," admitted Boy, recalling
bis own partial failure.
" Charming of you to confess it I Dare I confess that
've found the Hall and the tennis rather flat these few
,avs-without imperilling your phenomenal modesty "
I think you dare." It was he who looked full at
mr now. "My modesty badly needs bucking up-this
vening."
Her feigned surprise was delicately done. "What a
hame ! Who's been snubbing you t Our clever M.B. "
" Not at all. You've got the initials wrong."
"Did it hurt your feelings-as much as all that t
he dropped the flimsy pretence and her eyes proffierq
ology.
" Well-you invited me."
" And mother invited Mr Hayes ! The fact is-he's
en rather in evidence these few days. And one can't
ok him off like an ordinary mortal. He's a 'coming
I' I" She folded hands and lips and looked deliciously
amure. " All the same-it was unkind. You were so
fblappy at dinner. I could feel it all that way off.
19 magnanimous and come for a ride to-morrow--d;.
::nd Roy-the detached, the disillusioned-aei
h alacrity.
; '. 



<pb n="316"/>
a-m R                .       -
· UCHAPTER IV.
"F orry poawn, a man pays toll n a orrempnding weahik; and
probeMy the artist pays heaviet of alL"-M. P. WIwomO.
IT was the morning of the great Gymkhana, to b'
followed by the Bachelors' Ball. F  or ahre'S unfaiing
ooil energy was not yet spent; though Depot troops
had gone to the Hills, and the leave season was open,
radasing a fortunate few; leaving the rest to fretfu
stoical endurance of the stealthy, stoking-up proeos
t'.    & .- Punjab hot-weather. And the true inwardness ot
::' :those three words mnst be burned into body and brain
Mson after seson, to be even remotely understood.
Already earth and air were full of whispered warniano
R oses and sweet-peas were fading. Social life was virt
aly suspended between twelve and two, the 'cahg
hous' of the eold weather; and at sunset the (e
-ickets shrilled loudSr than ever-areless heras 
doem. Humaa tempewerere shorter; and eve-t
ft   id inot now bring unfailing relief
oy hd been leeping badly again; partly the hat
paty the lash of ensations within him. This morn
ag, after hours of tossing and dozing and dr
not the right kind of dreams at all,-he was up ad li
before sunrise, forsaking the bed that betrayed' im
for the saddle that never failed to bring a measure t
resite from  the fever of body and mind that   ad
mstulfying, insidiously, his reason and his will. -
Stil immersed in his novel, he had come up to Labho
het-free, purpos-free; vaguely aware that virtue l
gone out of him; looking forward to a few
eazress enjoyment, between spells of work; 
al, to the 'high old time' he and Lance 
together beyond Kashmir. Women and m    a.ige
** ....»»



<pb n="317"/>
DUST OF THE 'ACTUAL                 T
limply not in the picture. His attitude to that in-
>vitable event was, on his own confession-'not yet.'
?ossibly, when he got Home, he might discover it was
Cara, after all. It would need some courage to propose
bgain. For the memory of that juvenile fiasco still
)ricked his sensitive pride. A touch of the Rajput
;ame out there. Letters from Serbia seemed to dawdle
mconscionably by the way. But, in leisurely course,
Le had received an answer to his screed about DyAn
and the quest; a letter alive with all he loved best in 
ler-enthusiasm, humour, vivid sympathy, deepened
aid enlarged by experiences that could not yet be told.
But Tara was far and Miss Arden was near; and, in
he mysterious workings of sex magnetism, mere pro-
)inquity too often prevails. 
And all the others seemed farther still. They wroQte
iegularly, affectionately. Yet their letters-especially
is father's-seemed to tell precious little of the things
le really wanted to know. Perhaps his own had been 
nore reserved than he realised. There had been so
nuch at Jaipur and Delhi that he could not very well
nlarge upon. No use worrying the dear old man; and
he, who had linked them, unfailingly, was now seldom- 
nentioned between them.
.So there grew. up in Roy a disconsolate feeling that  '
Lone of them cared very much whether he came Home or
lot. Jerry-after three years in a German prison-was
b nervous wreck; still undergoing treatment; humanly
ost, for the time being. Tiny was absorbed in her
musband and an even Tinier baby, called Nevil Le Roy,
after himself. Tara was not yet home; but coming
b)QrO long, because Aunt Helen had broken down,
ptween war work and the shock of Atholl's death.
A  queer thing-separation, mused Roy, as SurAj
lowed down to a walk and the glare of morning flamed
dlong the sky. There were they-and here was he:
elose relations, in effect; almost strangers in fact. There
vas more between him and them than several hundred
ailes of sea. There was the bottomless gulf of the War;
he gulf of his bitter grief and the slow climb up from
he depths to Pisgah heights of revelation. Impossible
q communicate-even had he willed-those inner, vital
Iperiences at Chitor and Jaipur. And he had certainly



<pb n="318"/>
neither will nor power to enlarge on his present 
of heart and mind. 
Since his ride with Rose Arden, after the dinner-
things seemed to have taken a new turn. Their i
tion was no longer tentative. She seemed taciti 
regard him as her chosen cavalier; and he, as ta
fell in with the arrangement. No denying he felt i
tered a little; subjugated increasingly by a spel'di
could neither analyse nor resist, because he had
nothing quite like it before. He was, in truth, pa'
the penalty for those rare and beautiful years of
manhood inspired by worship of his mother. For e
virtue, every gift, the gods exact a price. And hei
paying it now. Deep down within him, something tig
against that potent spell. Yet increasingly it prev
and lured him from his work. The vivid beings  a
brain were fading into bloodless unrealities; in
state he could do nothing with them. Yet Broo
encouragement, and his father's critical appreciatif
fragments lately sent Home, had fired him to 
more than fulfil-their expectations. And now
he was tripped up again by his all-too-human cap
for emotion-as at Jaipur.
The comparison jerked him. The two experie
like the two women, had almost nothing in co
The charm of Artna-with its Eastern mingling of
sensuous and spiritual-was a charm he intimately 
stood. It combined a touch of the 6arth with 
todi  of the stars. In Rose'Arden, so far, he Badi
covered no touch of the stars. She suggested, i
a day in early summer, when warmth and fragran
colour permeate soul and body; keeping them del
in thrall; wooing the brain from irksome querieS
whence, whither ? IIi'
By now, the sheer fascination of her had e !
and saturated his being to a degree that h
resented. Always one face, one voice, intru  i
unsought. No respite from thought of her,'
of her; the exquisite intolerable ache, at
she-was present with him; the still mori,
ache when she was not.
The fluidity of his own dual nature, anti
the Arina temptation, inclined him 
,.~~~~:::*                 He'~~  ,,,:'^ i-



<pb n="319"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL                 319
idealise the clear-eyed, self-poised Western qualities-so
diversely personified in Lance and this compelling girl.
Yet emphatically he did not love her. He knew the
reat reality too well to delude himself on that score.
Were these the authentic signs of falling ' in love' 
If so-in spite of rapturous moments-it was a con-
foundedly uncomfortable state of being. ...
Where was she leading him-this beautiful, distract-
iag girl, who said so little, yet whose smiles and silences
implied so much ? There was no forwardness or free-
mnd-easiness about her; yet instinctively he recognised
her as the active agent in the whole affair. Twice,
lately, he had resolved not to go near her again; and
both times he had failed ignominiously-he who prided
himself on control of unruly emotions . . . 
Had Lance, he wondered, made the same resolve and
managed to keep it-being Lance ?  Or was the Gym-
Khana momentarily the stronger magnet of the two ?
Ee and Paul, with a Major in the Monmouths, were
3hief organisers; and much practice was afoot at tent-
pegging, bare-back horsemanship, and the like. For 0,
week Lance had scarcely been into Lahore. When
Roy pressed him, he said it was getting too hot for
dternoon dancing. But as he still affected far more
violent forms of exercise, that excuse was not particu-
arly convincing.
By way of retort, he had rallied Roy on overdoing the
bame-cat touch and neglecting the important novel. And
Roy-wincing at the truth of that friendly flick-had
replied no less truthfully: "Well, if it hangs fire, old
5hap, you're the sinner. Yrou dug me out of Paradise
by twitting me with becoming an appendage to a pencil!
Another month at Udaipur would have nearly pulled me
bhrough it-in the rough, at least."
It was lightly spoken; but Lance had set his lips in
I fahion Roy knew well; and said no more.
.ltogether, he seemed to have retired into a shell out
bi le h"e refused to be drawn. They were friendly
,     but distinctly less intimate; and Roy felt
NRguely responsible, yet powerless to put things straight.
> jntimacy-in its essence a mutual impulse- cannot
ianduced to order. If one spoke of Miss 4rden, or
ags in Lahore, Lance would respond without en-
L'  2



<pb n="320"/>
320             PAR TO SEEK}
thusiasm, and unobtrusively change the subject. 
could only infer that his interest in the girl had ne
gone very deep and had now fizzled out altoget
But he would have given a good deal to feel sure 
the fizzling out had no connection with his own
ance on the scene. It bothered him to remember tha
at first, in an odd, repressed fashion Lance had seeS
unmistakably keen. But if he would persist in play
the Trappist monk, what the devil was a fellow to do
Even over the Gymkhana programme, there had b
an undercurrent of friction. Lance-in his new vei
had wanted to keep the women out of it; while 1B
-in his new vein-couldn't keep at least one of th
out, if he tried. In particular, both were keen ab
the Cockade Tournament: a glorified version of fene
on horseback: the wire masks adorned with a s
coloured feather for plume. He was victor whose fen
ing-stick. detached his opponent's feather. The pi
a Bachelor's Purse-had been well subscribed for a
supplemented by Gymkhana funds. So, on all aceo
it was a popular event. There were twenty-two nan
down; and Boy, in a romantic impulse, had prop
making a real joust of it; each knight to wear a lady.
favour; a Queen of Beauty and Love to be chosen 1
the prize-giving, as in the days of chivalry.
Lance had rather hotly objected; and a few invete
bachelrs had backed him up. But the bulk of men
w^m^m i^^^      idff;; none more f mean tAe t Sift
Roy's idea had caught on, and the matter was se
There was little doubt who would be chosen for 
giver; and scarcely less doubt whose favour Roy '
wear. 
Desmond's flash of annoyance had been brief 'j
he had stipulated that favours should not be s
pulsory. If they were, he for one would '
This time he had a larget backing; and, amid a:
deal of chaff and laughter, had carried his point.
That -opn clash between them-slight though it'
-had jarred Roy a good deal. Lance, charact
had ignored the whole thing.
-But not even the inner jar could blunt Boy's 
anticipation of the whole affair. Miss Ard  i



<pb n="321"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL                321
r favour for the Tournament-a Marechal Niel rose;
d, infatuated as he was, he saw it for a guarantee of
tory ...
In view of that intoxicating possibility, nothing else
ttered inordinately, at the moment: though there
,osed in his pocket a letter from Dyan-with a Delhi
it-mark-giving a detailed account of serious trouble
lsed by the recent hartal: 1 all shops closed; tram-
s and gharris held up by threatening crowds; help-
s passengers forced to proceed on foot in the blazing
bt and dust; troops and police violently assaulted;
a few rounds of buckshot cooled the ardour of
orant masses, doubtless worked up to concert pitch
wandering agitators of the Chandranath persuasion.
'There were certain Swamis," he concluded, " trying
keep things peaceful. But they ought to know resist-
ae cannot be passive or peaceful; and excitement
hout understanding is a fire difficult to quench. I
ieve this explosion was premature; but there is lots
re gunpowder lying about, only waiting for the match.
m taking Arina into the Hills for a pilgrimage. It
possible Grandfather may come too; we are hoping
start soon after the fifteenth, if things keep quiet.
ite to me, Roy, telling all you know. Lahore is a
bed for trouble; Amritsar, worse; but I hope your
;horities are keeping well on their guard."
From all Roy heard, there seemed good treaon to
ieve they were;-in so far as a Home policy of
vernment by concession would permit. But well he
ew that-in the East-if the ruling powet discards
ion for argument, and uses the sceptre for a walking-
ik-things happen to men and women and chiliden
the spot. He also knew that, to England's great
id fortune, there were usually men on the spot who
ild be relied on, in an emergency, to think and act
I dare in accordance with the high tradition of their
e.
Ie hoped devoutly it might not come to that; but
the core of hope lurked a flicker of fear ...
1 Abstention &a sign of mourning.



<pb n="322"/>
322
CHAPTER V.
"Her best is bettered with a more delight. "-SHAKPERE.
THE great Gymkhana was almost over. The last event
-bareback feats of horsemanship-had been an exciting
affair; a close contest between Lance and Roy and an
Indian Cavalry officer. But it was Roy who had carried
the day, by his daring and dexterity in the test of
swooping down and snatching a handkerchief from the
ground at full gallop. The ovation he received went to
his head like champagne. But praise from Lance went
to his heart; for Lance, like himself, had been 'dead
keen' on this particular event. He had carried off a
tent-pegging cup, however; and appropriately won the
V.0. race. So Roy considered he had a right to his
triumph; especially as the handkerchief in question
had been proffered by Miss Arden. It was reposing in
his breast pocket now; and he had a good mind not to
part with it. He was feeling in the mood to dare,
simply for the excitement of the thing. He and she
had won the Gretna Green race-hands down. He
further intended-for her honour and his own glory-
to come off victor in the Cockade Tournament, in spite
of the fact that fencing on horseback was one of Lance's
specialities. He had taught Roy in Mesopotamia, durinag
those barren, plague-ridden stretches of time when the
war seemed hung up indefinitely and it took every ounce
of surplus optimism to keep going at all.
Roy's hope was that some other man might knock
Lance out; or-as teams would be decided by lot-.
that luck might east them together. For the ache of
compunction was rather pronounced this afternoon;
Derhans because the aood fellow's aloofness from the



<pb n="323"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL                   323
rand shiamidnah1 was also rather pronounced, con-
idering . . 
He seemed always to be either out in the open, direct-
ig events, or very much engaged in the refreshment
snt-an earthly Paradise, on this blazing day of early
kpril, to scores of dusty, thirsty, indefatigable men.
Between events, as now, the place was thronged.
Ivery moment, fresh arrivals shouting for 'drinks.'
ivery moment the swish of a syphon, the popping of
orks; ginger-beer and lemonade for Indian officers,
3ated just outside, and permitted by caste rules to
3fresh themselves 'English-fashion,' provided   they
rank from the pure source of the bottle. Not a Sikh
r Rajput of them   all would have sullied his caste-
urity by drinking from   the tumbler used by some
dmired Sahib, for whom on service he would cheerfully
by down his life. Within the tent were a few-very
)w-more advanced beings, who had discarded all irk-
ome restrictions and would sooner be shot than address
white man as 'Sahib.' Such is India in transition;
welter of incongruities, of shifting perilous uncertainties,
E subterranean ferment beneath a surface that still
ppears very much as it has always been.
RbyA-observant and interested as usual-saw, in the
rilliant gathering, all the outward and visible signs of
3curity, stability, power. Let those signs be shaken 
ever so little, thought he-and the heavens would fall.
ut, in spite of grave news from   Delhi-that might
rove a prelude to eruption-not a ripple stirred on the'
bce of the waters. The grand shamidnahl was thronged
ith lively groups of women and men in the lightest
f light attire. A British band was enlivening the inter-
Ade with musical comedy airs. Stewards were striding
bout looking important, issuing orders for the next
rent.  And around them    all-as close as boundary
alg and police would allow-thronged the solid mass
t onlookers: soldiers, sepoys, and sowars from every
egiment in cantonments; minor officials with their
amilies; ponies and saises and dogs without number;
1 wedged in by a sea of brown faces and bobbing
irbans, thousands of them twenty or thirty deep.
1 Marquee tent.



<pb n="324"/>
324               H'FAt- TO S;EEK               E
Roy's eyes, travelling from that vast outer ring i
the crowded tent, suddenly saw the whole scene   4
typical of Anglo-Indian life: the little concentrated'
world of British men and women, pursuing their O6wT
ends, magnificently unmindful of alien eyes-watching~
speculating, misunderstanding at every turn; the who
heterogeneous mass drawn and held together by thel
love of hazard and sport, the spirit of competitiog 4
without strife that is the corner-stone of British character
and the British Empire. 
He had just been talking to a C.I.D.1 man, who ha4l
things to say about subterranean rumblings that might: 
have startled those laughing, chaffing groups of men
and women. Too vividly his imagination pictured thl:
scenes at Delhi, while his eyes scanned the formidba.,
depths of alien humanity hemming them in, outnumb@r i
ing them by thousands to one. What if all those frienUd
faces became suddenly hostile-if the laughter and high
pitched talk changed to the roar of an angry crowd...-
He shook off the nightmare feeling, rating himself
for a coward. Yet he knew it was not fantastical, not
even improbable; though most of the people around himl
till they saw with their own eyes, and heard with their
own ears, would not believe. ... 
But thoughts so unsettling were out of place, in thX
midst of a Gymkhana with the grand climax imminent
So-having washed the, dust out of his throat h&A
sauntered across to the' other tent to snatch a few-
'words with Miss Arden and secure his rose. It h4a
been given to one of the ' kits,' who would put it ia&i
water and produce it on demand. For the affair of the.
favours was to be a private affair. Miss Arden, however, 
in choosing a Margehal Niel, tacitly avowed him herx
knight. Lance would know. All their set would know.
He supposed she realised that. She was not an acei 
dental kind of person. And she had a natural gift far
flattery of the delicate, indirect order.
No easy matter to get near her again, onee you left
her side. As usual, she was surrounded by men; easj:
the Queen of Beauty and of Love. In honoAr of: i
high compliment, she wore her loveliest rae   i?
1 Criminal Investigation Department,  : s



<pb n="325"/>
.JUib'1' U L' U ' 'tLJi A'T'UAj 
soft shades of blue and green skilfully blended; and a
close-fitting hat bewitchingly framed her face. Nearing
the tent, Roy felt a sudden twinge of apprehension.
Where were they drifting to-he and she ? Was he
prepared to bid her good-bye in a week or ten days,
and possibly not set eyes on her again ? Would she
let him go without a pang, and start afresh with some
chance-met fellow in Simla t The idea was detestable;
and yet . . .
Half irritably he dismissed the intrusive thought. The
glamour of her so dazzled him that he could see nothing
else clearly.
Perhaps that was why he failed to escape Mrs Hunter-
Ranyard, who skilfully annexed him in passing, and
rained compliments on his embarrassed head. Fine
horsemanship was common enough in India; but any-
thing more superb-! Wide blue eyes and extrava-
gant gesture expressively filled the blank.
" My heart was in my mouth! That handkerchief
trick is so thrilling. You all looked as if you must
have your brains knocked out the next moment-"
" And if we had, I suppose the thrill would have gone
one better! " Roy wickedly suggested. He was annoyed
at being delayed.
" You deserve 'yes' to that! But if I said what
I really thought, your head would be turned. And it's
quite sufficiently turned already!"  She beamed on
him with arch significance, enjoying his impatineee with-
out a tinge of malice. There was little of it in her;
and the little there was, she reserved for her own sex.
"I suppose it's a dead seoret . .. whose favour you
are going to wear ??
"That's the ruling," said Roy; b-t he felt his blod
tingling, and hoped to goodness it didn't show through.
" Well, I've got big bets on about guessing right;
and the biggest bet's on yours I Major De)smord' a
good second."
"Oh, he bars the whole idea."
"I'm relieved to hear it. I was angeil enough to
offer him mine, thinking he might be feeling out in the
cold!" (another arch look) "and--he refused. My
'Happy Warrior' doesn't seem quite so happy as he
used to be-  "                          ,



<pb n="326"/>
326              FAR TO SEEK
The light thrust struck home, but Roy ignored i.
If Lance barred wearing favours, he barred discussing i
Lance with women. Driven into a corner, he managed 
somehow to escape, and hurried away in search of hias:
rose.
Mrs Ranyard, looking after him, with frankly affect
tionate concern, found herself wondering-was he really 
quite so transparent as he seemed ? That queer visionary :
look in his eyes, now and then, suggested spiritual depths,
or heights, that might baffle even the all-appropriating 
Bose ?  Did she seriously intend to appropriate -him-
There were vague rumours of a title. But no one knew
anything about him, really, except the two Desmonds;
and she would be a brave woman who tried to squeeze
family details out of them. The boy was too good for
her; but still . . .
Roy, reappearing, felt idiotically convinced that every |
eye was on the little spot of yellow in his button-hole |
that linked him publicly with the girl who wore a cluster i
of its fellows at her belt. 
-Time was nearly up. She had moved to the front e
now, and was free of men, standing very still, gazing,,
intently. ...
Roy, following her gaze, saw Lance-actually in the.
tent-discussing some detail with the Colonel. 
"What makes her look at him like that ? " he won 
dered; and it was as if the tip of a red-hot needle
touched his heart.
Next moment she saw him, and beckoned him with-
her eyes. -He came, instinctively obedient; and her 
welcoming glance included the rosebud. " You found
it " she said, very low, mindful of feminine ears.
" And-you deserve it, after that marvellous exhibition.
You went such a pace. It-frightened me."
It frightened him, a little, the exceeding softness of
her look and tone; and she added, more softly still
"My handkerchief, please."                       ,
" My handkerchief ! he retorted. "I wOn it fairly.
You've admitted as much." 
"But it wasn't meant-for a prize."
"I risked something to win it anyway," said he,-
"and now-    "                                 ; 
The blare of the megaphone-a poor substit t.



<pb n="327"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL                 M7
heralds' trumpets-called the knights of the wire-mask
and fencing-stick into the lists.
" Go in and win the rosebud too! " said she, when
the shouting ceased. " Keep cool. Don't lose your
head-or your feather ! "
I He had lost his head already. She had seen to that.
And turning to leave her, he found Lance almost at
his elbow.
"Come along, Roy," he said, an imperative note in
his voice; and if his glance included the rosebud, it
gave no sign.
As they neared the gathering group of combatants,
he turned with one of his quick looks.
"You're in luck, old man. Every inducement to
come out top ! " he remarked, only half in joke. "I've
none, except my own credit. But you'll have a tough
job if you knock up against me."
"Right you are," Roy answered, jarred by the look
and tone more than the words. "If you're so dead keen,
I'll take you on."
After that, Roy hoped exceedingly that luck might
cast them in the same team.
But it fell out otherwise.
Lance drew   red; Roy, blue.    Lance and Major
Devines, of the Monmouths, were chosen as leaders.
They were the only two on the ground who wore no 
Favours: and they fronted each other with smiles of ,.
approval, their respective teams-ten a side-drawn up
In two long lines; heads caged in wire-masks, tufted
with curly feathers, red and blue; ponies champing and
pawing the air. Not precisely a picturesque array;
ut if the plumes and trappings of chivalry were lack-
ing, the spirit of it still flickered within; and will
continue to ficker, just so long as modern woman will
permit.
At the crack of a pistol they were off, full tilt; but
there was no shock of lance on shield, no crash and clang
of armour that 'could be heard at a mile's distance,'
as in the days of Ivanhoe. There was only the sharp
rattle of fencing-sticks against each other and the masks,
the clatter of eighty-eight hooves on hard groutnd; a
ively confusion of horses and men, advancing, backing,
:maing on a sixpence' to meet a sudden attack;



<pb n="328"/>
328              FAR   TO SEEK
voices, Indian and English, shouting or cheering; a-u:4
the intermittent call of the umpire declaring a playm  i
knocked out as his feather fluttered into the dust. 
Clouds of dust enveloped them in a shifting haze. They 1
breathed dust. It gritted between their teeth. WLat i:
matter I They were having at each other in furious
yet friendly combat; and, being Englishmen, they were
perfectly happy; keen to win, ready to lose with a
good grace and cheer the better man.
In none of them, perhaps, did the desire to win bWrn
quite so fiercely as in Lance and Roy. But more than
ever, now, Roy shrank from a final tussle between them.
Surely there was one man of them all good enough to i
put Lance out of court.
For a time Major Devines kept him occupied. Whe
Roy accounted for two red feathers, the well-mateaed I
pair were making a fine fight of it up and down the
field, to the tune of cheers and counter-cheers. 
But it was the blue feather that fell; and Laace,
swinging round, charged into the mel6e--seven rpd:
now, to six blue.
Twice, in the scrimmage, Roy came up against him,-
but managed to shift ground, leaving another man to
tackle him. Both times it was the blue feather thatW
fell.. Steadily the numbers thinned. Roy's wrist und:i
arm  were tiring, a trifle; but resolve to win buned,
fiercely as ever. By now it was clear to all who w-if
the two best men in the field, and excitement rose a-
the numbers dwindled... . .:.
Four to three; blues leading. Two all. And at list
*:-an empty dusty arena; and they two alone i the'e,
tidlst, ringed in by thousands of faces, thousands of'
*  eyes. ... .
Till that moment, the spectators had simply not existe4
for Roy. Now, of a sudden, they crowded in on hirm-
a tightly-wedged wall of humanity-expectant, tenrify-
ing....                                        . 
The two had drawn rein, facing each other; and 1
that mere moment Roy felt as if his nerve was goei!8
A glance at the crowded tent, the gleam of a bluere4|
figure leaning forward. ... .                   4i;
Then Lance's voice, low and peremptory, 'Come onif
In the ame breath he himself came on, with i



<pb n="329"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL                 29
able elan. Their sticks rattled sharply. Roy parried
a high slicing stroke-only just in time.
Thank God, he was himself again; so much himself
that he was beset by a sneaking desire to let Lance win.
It was his weakness in games, just when the goal seemed
in sight. Tara used to scold him fiercely ...
But there was Miss Arden, the rosebud. ...
And suddenly, startlingly, Roy became aware that
for Lance this was no game. He was fencing like a man
inspired. There was more than mere skill in his feints
and shrewd blows; more in it than a feather.
Two cuts over the arm and shoulder, a good deal
sharper than need be, fairly roused Roy. Next moment
they were literally fighting, at closest range, for all they
were worth, to the accompaniment of yell on yell, cheer
on cheer....
As the issue hung doubtful and excitement intensified,
it became clear that Lance was losing his temper. Ioy,
hurt and angry, tried to keep cool. Against an an-
tagonist so skilled and relentless, it was his only chance.
Their names were shouted. " Shahbaash 1 Sinkin, Sahib,"
from the men of Roy's old squadron; and from Lance's
men, " Desmin Sahib k i jai! " 2
Twice Roy's slicing stroke almost came off-almost,
not quite. The maddening little feather still held its'
own; and Lance, by way of rejoinder, caught him a blow
on his mask that made his head ache for an hour after.
Up went his arm to return the blow with interest.
Lance, instead of parrying, lunged-and the head of a
yellow bud dropped in the dust.
At that Roy saw red. His lifted hand shook visibly;
and with the moment's loss of control went his last
hope of victory....
Next instant his feather had joined the rosebud  the
crowd were roaring themselves hoarse; and Roy was
riding off the ground-shorn of plume and favour, furi-
ously disappointed, and feeling a good deal more bruised
about the arms and shoulders than anything on earth
would have induced him to admit.
Of course he ought to go up and congratulate Lance;
but just then it seemed a physical impossibility. Merci-
-   Well done.       Victory to Desmond=4 Sb.



<pb n="330"/>
330              FAR TO SEEK                      I
fully he was surrounded and borne off to the refreshmentl' 
tent; sped on his way by a rousing ovation as he passed :
the shamidnah. 
Roy, following after, had his full share of praise, and e
a salvo of applause from the main tent. 
Saluting and looking round, he dared not meet Miss
Arden's eye. Had he won, she might have owned him. 
As it was, he had better keep his distance. But the 2
glimpse he got of her face startled him. It looked a
curiously white and strained. His own imagination,
perhaps. It was only a flash. But it haunted him t
He felt responsible.   She had been so radiantly 
sure. ... .
Arrived in the other tent-feeling stupidly giddy and .
in pain-he sank down on the first available chair. 
Friendly spirits ordered drinks, and soothed him with 
compliments.  A thundering good fight.   To be so t
narrowly beaten by Desmond was an achievement inia
itself; and so forth. 
Lance and Paul, still surrounded, were at the othera
end of the long table; and a very fair wedge of thirsty, :i
perspiring manhood filled the intervening space. ROy j
did not feel like stirring. He felt more like drinki.ng 
half a dozen 'pegs' in succession. But soon he was,
aware of a move going on. The prizes, of course; and' "
he had two to collect. By a special decree, the Tournam-
ment prize would be given first. So he need not hurry -
The tent was emptying swiftly. He must screw himself 
up to congratulations. ... 
The screwing was still in process when Lance crossed 
the tent-nearly empty now-and stopped in front of a
him. 
"See here, Roy-I apologise," he said hurriedly, in a I
low tone. "I lost my temper. Not fair play -"
Instantly Roy was on his feet, shoulders squared, the  !
last spark of antagonism extinct.
"If it comes to that, I lost mine too," he admitted, 
and Lance smiled.
" You did! But-I began it." There was an instant 
of painful hesitation, then, "It-it was .na accident- 
the favour  -" 
"Oh, that's all right," Roy muttered, embarr
and overcome.                                 .i;S!



<pb n="331"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL                331
"It's not all right. It put you off." Another pause.
" Will you take half the Purse "
" Not I." Glory apart, he knew very well how badly
Lance needed the money.    "It's yours. And you
deserve it."
They both spoke low and rapidly, as if on a matter
of business, for there were still some men at the other
end of the tent. But at that, to Roy's amazement,
Lance held out his hand.
"Thanks, old man.     Shake hands-here, where
the women can see us. You bet . .. they twigged....
And they chatter so infernally. . . . Unfair-on Miss
Arden-"
Roy felt himself reddening. It was Lance all over
-that chivalrous impulse. So they shook hands pub-
licly, to the astonishment of interested kitmutgars, who
had been betting freely, and were marvellig afresh at
the strange ways of Sahibs.
"I'll doctor your bruises to-night !' said Lance.
"And I accept, gratefully, yowr share of the purse. She
won't relish-giving it to the wrong 'un." The last,
barely audible, came out in a rush, with a jerk of the
head that Roy knew well. "Come along and see how
prettily she does it."
To Roy's infatuated eyes, she did it inimitably.
Standing there, tall and serene, in her pale-coloured
gown and bewitching hat, instinct with the mysterious
authority of beauty, she handed the prize to Desmond
with a little gracious speech of congratulation, adding,
"It was a close fight; but you won it-fairly."
Roy started. Did Lance notice the lightest imaginable
stress on the word e
"Thanks very much," he said; and saluted, looking
her straight in the eyes.
Roy, watching intently, fancied he saw a ghost of a
blush stir under the even pallor of her skin. She had
told him once, in joke, that she never blushed; it was
not one of her accomplishments. But for half a second
she came perilously near it; and although it enhanced
her beauty tenfold, it troubled Roy.
Then-as the cheering died down-he saw her turn
to the Colonel, who was supporting her, and heard her
clear deliberate tones, that carried with so little effort:



<pb n="332"/>
332              FA  - TO SEEK                  ?
"I think, Colonel Desmond, every one must agree that
the honours are almost equally divided--"     -
More applause; and Roy-scarcely crediting his ears?
or eyes-saw her pick a rose from her cluster. 
The moment speech was possible, she leaned forwat!
smiling frankly at him before them all. 
"Mr Sinclair, will you accept a mere token by way ?
of consolation prize s We are all agreed you put up a
splendid fight; and it was no dishonour to be defeated
by-such an adversary."
Fresh clapping and shouting; while Roy-elated and
overwhelmed-went forward like a man walking in a
dream.
It was a dream-woman who pinned the rosebud in
his empty button-hole, patting it into shape with the
lightest touch of her fiAger-tips, saying, "Well done
indeed," and smiling at him again...
Without a word he saluted and walked away.
She had done it prettily, past question; and in a
fashion all her own.
2'   9
.                 .^ ^ f.'f~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~sk



<pb n="333"/>
333
CHAPTER VI.
"Blood and brain and spirit, three-
Join for true felicity.
Are they parted, then expect
Someone sailing will be wrecked."
-GaORGO MBREDITH.
ON the night after the Gymkhana the great little world
of Lahore was again disporting itself, with unabated
vigour, in the pillared ballroom of the Lawrence Hall.
They could tell tales worth inditing, those pillars and
galleries that have witnessed all the major festivities
of Punjab Anglo-India-its loves and jealousies and
high-hearted courage-from    the day of erinolines and
whiskers, to this day of the tooth-brush moustache, the
retiring skirts and still more retiring bodices of after-war  *
3conomy. And there are those who believe they will wit-
aess the revelry of Anglo-Indian generations yet to be.
Had Lance Desmond shared Roy's gift for visions, he
might have seen, in spirit, the ghosts of his mother and
father, in the pride of their youth, and that first legendary
irl-wife, of whom Thea had once told him all she knew,
and whose grave he had seen in Kohat cemetery with a
lueet mingling of pity and resentment in his heart.
There should have been no one except his own splendid
nother-first, last, and all the time.
But Lance, though no scoffer, had small intimacy
with ghosts; and Roy's frequented other regions;      or
was he in the frame of mind to induce spiritual visita-
tions. Soul and body were enmeshed, as in a network        ;
)f sunbeams, holding him   close to earth.
For weeks part of him had been fighting, subconsciiosly,
against the compelling power that is woman; now, 
consciously, he was alive to it, swept along by it, as by



<pb n="334"/>
334              FAR TO SEEK
a tidal wave. Since that amazing moment at the 
giving, all his repressed ferment had welled up
overflowed; and when an imaginative, emotional n
loses grip on the reins, the pace is apt to be headlo
the course perilous. ...
He had dined at the Eltons'-a lively party; ch
and laughter and champagne; and Miss Arden-a
yesterday's graciousness-in a tantalising, elusive mdI
But he had his dances secure-six out of twenty, not 
mention the cotillon, after supper, which they were 
lead. She was wearing what he called her 'Undine frock'
a clinging affair, fringed profusely with silver and pal
green, that suggested to his fancy Undine emerging fr
the stream in a dripping garment of water-weeds. 
arms and shoulders emerged from it a little too not
ably for his taste; but to-night his critical brain 
in abeyance.                                   :
Look where he would, talk to whom he would, he 
persistently, distractingly aware of her; and she eco
not elude him the whole evening long. ... .
Supper was over. The cotillon itself was almost ov
the maypole figure adding a flutter of bright ribbonsg
the array of flags and bunting, evening dresses, 
uniforms. Twice, in the earlier figures, she had cho
him; but this time, the chance issue of pairing l
colours gave her to Desmond. Roy saw a curious lo
pass between them. Then Lance put his arm ru
her, and they danced without a break.
When it was over, Roy went in search of iced coff
In a few seconds those two appeared on the same e
and merged themselves in a lively group. Roy,
sistibly, followed suit; and when the music struck 1
Lance handed her over with a formal bow. 
"Your partner, I think, old man. Thanks for t
loan," he said; and his smile was for Roy as he turia
and walked leisurely away. 
Roy looked after him, feeling pained and pus
the more so, because Lance clearly had the whip-
It was she who seemed the less assured of the  l
and he caught himself wishing he possessed the po w
to upset her equanimity. Was it even remotely, 
that-she cared seriously, and Lance would not A; ': i



<pb n="335"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL                335
" Brown studies aren't permitted in ballrooms, Mr
Sinclair! " she rallied him in her gentlest voice-and
Lance was forgotten.  "Come and tie an extra big
3hoc. on to my fishing-rod."
Roy disapproved of the chocolate figure, as derogatory
to masculine dignity. Six brief-skirted, briefer-bodiced
irls stood on chairs, each dangling a chocolate cream
Yrom a fishing-rod of bamboo and coloured ribbon. Be-
tore them, on six cushions, knelt six men; heads tilted
back, bobbing this way and that, at the caprice of the
ngler; occasionally losing balance, and half toppling
over amid shouts and cheers.
How did that kind of fooling strike the ' kits' and the
Indian bandsman up aloft, wondered Roy. A pity they
iever give a thought to that side of the picture. He
letermined not to be drawn in. Lance, he noticed,
studiously refrained. Miss Arden-having tantalised
three aspirants-was looking round for a fourth victim.
Cheir eyes met-and he was done for. ...
Directly his knee touched the cushion, the recoil came
sharply-too late. And she-as if aware of his reluc-
;ance-played him mercilessly, smiling down on him with
ier astonishing hazel eyes. .-.
Roy's patience and temper gave out. Tingling with
mortification, he rose and walked away, to be greeted
with a volley of good-natured chaff.
He was followed by Lister, 'the R.E. boy,' who at
nice secured the elusive bait, clearly by favour rather
han skill. The rest had already paired. The band
tl;rrk up; and Roy, partnerless, stood looking on,
he film of the East over his face masking the clash of
forces within. The fool he was to have given way 
nd this--before them all-after yesterday . . .
His essential masculinity stood confounded; blind to
;he instinct of the essential coquette-allvreoent by
light. He resolved to take no part in the final figure
-the mirror and handkerchief; would not even look
t her, lest she catch his eye.
: Her choice fell on Hayes; and Roy-elaborately in-
ilerent-carried Lance off to the buffet for champagne
i. It was a thirsty evening; a relief to be quit of the
Els"oom and get a breath of masculine fresh air. The
&<otg-bout and its aftermath had consciously quiok-



<pb n="336"/>
336              FAR TO SEEK                   :
ened his feeling for Lance. In the fury of that t
they seemed to have worked off the hidden fri
of the past few weeks that had dimmed the st
radiance of their friendship. It was as if a storm-c
had burst and the sun shone out again. 
They said nothing intimate, nothing worthy of no
They were simply content.
Yet, when music struck up, Roy was in a fever to 
with her again. 
Her welcoming smile revived his reckless mood. 
-this time, anyway," he said, in an odd repressed vo'
"Yes-ours." 
Her answering look vanquished him utterly. As 
arm encircled her, he fancied she leaned ever so Uit
towards him, as if admitting that she too felt the t
of coming together again. Fancy or no, it waa like 
lighted match dropped in a powder magazine.... 
For Roy that single valse, out of scores they h
danced together, was an experience by itself. 
While the music plays, a man encircles one womn
and another, from habit, without a flicker of emot
But to-night volcanic forces in Boy were rising
champagne when the cork begins to move. Never 
he been so disturbingly aware that he was hol
her in his arms; that he wanted tremendously to 
on holding her when the music stopped. To this dn
point he had been brought by the unconscious 
of delicate approaches and strategic retreats. And 
man who has most firmly kept the cork on his emot
is often the most unaccountable when it flies off .. :
The music ceased. They were merely partners ;
He led her out into starry darkness, velvet soft; v
quiet and contained to the outer eye; inwardly, 
sudden, afraid of himself, still more afraid of the sereGoy
beautiful girl at his side.      .
He knew perfectly well what he wanted to do; but ti
at all what he wanted to say. For him, as his moth
son, marriage had a sacredness, an apartness from r I
emotions, however overwhelming; and it went a
the grain to approach that supreme subject in his pr
fine confusion of heart and body and brai n.
They wandered on a little. Like himself, she&.'
smitten dumb; and with every moment of all 



<pb n="337"/>
DUST Or THE AOTUAL                007
became more acutely aware of her. He had discovered
that this was one of her most potent spells. Never for
long could a man be unaware of her, of the fact that
she was before everything-a woman.
In a sense-how different !-it had been the same with
Arina. But with Arina it was primitive, instinctive.
This exotic flower of Western girlhood wielded her power
with conscious, consummate skill. ...
Near a seat well away from the Hall she stopped.
"We don't want any more exercise, do we 1 " she said
oftly.
"I've had enough for the present," he answered.
nId they sat down.
Silence again. He didn't know what to say to her.
Ee only craved overwhelmingly to take her in his arms.
Bad she a glimmering idea-sitting there, so close .. 
so alluring . .
And suddenly, to his immense relief, she spoke.
"It was splendid. A pity it's over. That's the litany
of Anglo-India. It's over. Change the scene. Shuffle
tihe puppets-and begin again. I've been doing it for
ix years-"
"And-it doesn't pall I"  His voice sounded quite
aatural, quite composed, which was also a relief.
" Pall ?-You try it !" For the first time he detected
i faint note of bitterness. "But still-a cotillon's a
eotillon! "-She seemed to pull herself together.-
: There's an exciting element in it that keeps its fresh-
ness. And I flatter myself we carried it through bril-
lantly-you and I." The pause before the linked pro-
aouns gave him an odd little thrill  "But-what put
you off . at the end  "
Her amazing directness took him  aback.  "I-oh,
srell-I thought . . . one way and another, you'd been
aaving enough of me."
"That's not true! "  She glanced at him sidelong. 
You were vexed because I chose the Lister bot And
e was all over himself, poor dear ! As a matter of fact,
E'd meant to have you. If you'd only looked at me ... !
But you stared fiercely the other way. However, per-
lwps we've been flagrant enough for to-night-"
< "'Flagrant-have we "
Daring, passionate words thronged his brain; snAd



<pb n="338"/>
338              FAR IA   SEEk: 
through his inner turmoil, he heard her answer li
"Don't ask me ! Ask the Banter-Wrangle. She
to an inch the degrees of flagrance officially perm'
to the attached and the unattached ! You see, in In
we're allowed . . . a certain latitude."
"Yes-I've noticed. It's a pity . . ." Words sim
would not come, on this theme of all others. Was-
indirectly . . . telling him . . . 
" And you disapprove-tooth and nail? " she qu
gently. " I hoped you were different. You don't k
how tired we are of eternal disapproval from people
simply know nothing-nothing    "
" But I don't disapprove," he blurted out vehemen
"It always strikes me as a rather middle-lass, purit
attitude. I only think-it's a thousand pities to t
the bloom off ... the big thing-the real thing,;:!
playing at it (you can see they do) like lawn tennis j
to pass the time-"
" Well, Heaven knows, we've got to pass the time
here-somehow ! " she retorted, with a sudden wam
that startled him: it was so unlike her. "All v
fne for people at home to turn up superior noses at
to say we live in blinkers, that we've no intellec
pursuits, no interest in 'this wonderful country.'
confess, to some of us, India and its people are :
terrors. As for art and music and theatres-where
they, except what we make for ourselves, in our in
fatigable, amateurish way. Can't you see-you, 
your imaginative insight-that we have virtually a
ing but each other ?  If we spent our days bowing
scraping- and dining and dancing with due deco
there'd be a boom in suicides and the people in e
at Home would placidly wonder why--   "
"But do listen. I'm not blaming-any of you,'
exclaimed, distracted by her complete misreading of
mood.
" Wi , you're criticising-in your heart. And 
opinion's worth something-to some of us. Evea
do occasionally-play at being in love, there's all
the offchance it may turn out to be . . . 
thing." She drew an audiblebreath and ade
lighter vein: "You know, yot're a very fi b
it yourself-in your restrain  fakirih faaM:hiq



<pb n="339"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL                 833
"But I don't-I'm   not-   " he stammered desper-
ately. " And why d'you call me a fakir ? It's not the
first time. Ani it's not true. I believe in life-and the
Eulness of life."
"I'm lad- I'm not keen on fakirs. But I only meant
-one can't picture you playing round, the way heaps
)f men do with girls . . . who allow them . .."
" No. That's true. I never-   "
" What-never ? Or is it ' hardly ever' s "
She leaned a shade nearer, her beautiful pale face
3therealised by starshine. And that infinitesimal move-
nent, her low tone, the sheer magnetism of her, swept
iim from his moorings. Words low and passionate came
ill in a rush.
" What are you doing with me ? Why d'you tantalise
ne. Whether you're there or not there, your face
launts me--your voice. It may be play for you-it
sn't for me "
"I've never said-I've never implied-it was play
. for me-    "
This time perceptibly she leaned nearer, mute con-
ession in her look, her tone; and delicate fire ran i'a
is veins. ...
Next moment his arms were round her; trembling,
ret vehement; crushing her agaipst him almost roughly.
To mistaking the response of her lips; yet she never
tirred; only the fingers of her right hand closed sharply
mn his arm. Having hold of her at last, after all that
nner tumult and resistance, he could hardly let her go.
let-strangely-even in the white heat of fervour, some,
letached fragment, at the core of him, seemed to be
iating the whole thing, hating himself-and her-
Instantly he released her . . looked at her...
ealised .... In those few tempestuous moments he
lad burnt his boats indeed ...
She met his eyes now, found them too eloquent, and
eiled her own.                             f
"No. You are not altogether-a fakir," she said
oftly.
' I'd no business. I'm sorry . ." he began, answer-
nrg his own swift compunction, not her remark.
-" m not-unless you really mean-you are " Faint
iafflt  eleamed in her eves. " You did rather over-



<pb n="340"/>
340              FAR TO SBEK 
whelmingly take things for granted. But still ...
that .  ." .f
"Yes-after that . . . if you really mean it" '"
" Well . . . what do you think . "
"I simply can't think," he confessed, with t
parent honesty. "I hardly know if I'm on my 
my heels. I only know you've bewitched me. 
infatuated-intoxicated with you. But . . . if youi
care enough ... to marry me-"
"My dear-Roy-can you doubt it ? "
He had never heard her voice so charged with e
For all answer, he held her close-with less assur
now-and kissed her again. ....
In course of time they remembered that a pause
lasts five minutes; that there were other partners.
"If we're not to be too flagrant, even for Is
she said, rising with unperturbed deliberation, " I 
gest we go in. Goodness knows where they've got'
by now !"
He stood up also. " It matters a good deal more .
where we've got to. I'll come over to-morrow and
. . . your people ..."
" No. You'll come over-and see me! We'll de
from the dream . . .to the business; and have 
thing clear to our own satisfaction before we let in'
the others. I always vowed I wouldn't accept a 
posal after supper  If you're . . . intoxicated,
might wake sober-disillusioned!"
"But I-I've kissed you," he stammered, sudi
overcome with shyness. 
So you have-a few times ! I'm afraid we
keep count! I'm not really doubting either of us
Roy. But still . . . Shall we say tea and a ride I '
He hesitated.  "Sorry-I'm   booked.  I prom
Lance-   " 
" Veiy well-dinner ? Mother has some bridge p
Only one table. We can escape into the garden. ,
-come along." 
He drew a deep breath. More and more the det
part of him was realising. ... 
They walked back rather briskly?, ot Cpeakg -. 
did hA tnnn.h hsr a.in'n.                    -



<pb n="341"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL                341
They found Lahore still dancing, sublimely uncon-
erned. Instinctively, Roy looked round for Lance.
ro sign of him in the ballroom or the card-room. And
he crowded place seemed empty without him. It was
ueer.
Later on, he ran up against Barnard, who told him
hat Lance had gone home.
A. .
K:
i-  ' 
X  -
4·



<pb n="342"/>
* *  . .2 *                   ' * ' 
CHAPTER VII. 
Of the unspoken word thou art master. The spoken word i n
of thee."-A rab Proverb. 
RoY drove home with Barnard in the small hours,..
too overwrought for clear thinking, and too exha'
all through to lie awake for five minutes after his
touched the pillow. For the inner stress and com
had been sharper than he knew.
He woke late to find Terry curled up against his
and the bungalow empty of human sounds. The o
three were up long since, and gone to early pa
His head was throbbing. He felt limp, as if a1if
vigour had been drained out of him. And Sudi
... he remembered ...
Not in a lover's rush of exaltation, but with a 
'reaotion almost amounting to fear, the truth dal
on him that he was no longer his own man. In Xa
sionate impulse, he had virtually surrendered
and his future into the hands of a girl whom he sc
knew. He still saw the whole thing as mainly her 
-and it frightened him. Looking backward ove
past weeks, reviewing the steps by which he had a
at last night's involuntary culmination, he felt
frightened than ever.
And yet-there sprang a vision of her, pai
gracious in the starshine, when she leaned to 
parting... . 
She was wonderful and beautiful-and she w4a
Any man worth. his salt would feel proud. An 
feel proud-in the intervals of feeling hoAb
of himself and her. Especially her. Girls weje,
things. You seized hold of one and spoke 
nd njeafrly crushed the life out of her, aid*



<pb n="343"/>
~(     DDUST 1O    THE ACTUAL             343
st as calmly as if you had asked for an extra dance.
l it a protective layer of insensibility-or super-
|  1 self-control f Would she, Rose, have despised
bi had she guessed that even at the height of his
Niltation he had felt ashamed of having let himself go
|: -eompletely; and that before there had been any
!eO of marriage-any clear desire of it even in the
'ip of his heart ?
.that was really the root of his trouble. The passing
,   from an ardent avowal is no uncommon experi-
with the finer types of men. But, to Roy, it
d peculiarly unfitting that the son of his mother
l, as it were, stumble into marriage in a headlong
e of passion, on a superficial six weeks' acquaint-
; and the shy, spiritual side of him felt alarmed,
ve, even a little repelled.
A   a measure, Rose was right when she dubbed him
atd. Artist though he was, and all too human, there
W4ed in him a nascent streak of the ascetic, accentuated
Eis mother's bidding, and his own strong desire to
in touch with her and with things not seen.
~!d there, on his writing-table, stood her pictre
eCly reproaching him. With a pang he realised how
Fletely she had been crowded out of his thoughts
· e these weeks of ferment. What would she think
I a ?7 The question-what would Rose think of her
did not arise. She was still supreme, shb who
once said, "So long as you are thinking first of me,
|'ay be sure That Other has not yet arrived."
i  oose Arden-for all her beauty and witchery--
ly That Other I
iled by her visible perfections, he had taken her 
yfor granted. And he knew well enough that 
i$t through the senses a man first approaches love
is eapable of that high and complex emotion,
trough imagination and admiration, sym-
umour. As it was, he had not a glimmering
she would consort with his very individual
yet matters were virtually settled.. . .
dby, ike a javelin, one word pierced his
O  - Whatever there was between them, he
'iW.. m.'w/-- t plase Lance, to say the
- i-i thebR-ashmr plin .. . 



<pb n="344"/>
344              FAR TO SBEE
Why the devil was life such a confoundedly  a
plex affair  By rights, he ought to be 'all o
himself,' having won such a wife. Was it somet
wrong with him ? Or did all accepted lovers feel
this-the morning after ?  A greater number, perh.
than poets or novelists or lovers themselves are e
likely to admit.- Very certainly he would not ad
his present sensations to any living soul.  :
Springing out of bed, he shouted for chota hazri 1
shaving water; drank thirstily; ate hungrily; and-
just cleared his face of lather when Lance came
booted and spurred, bringing with him his ma
atmosphere of vitality and vigour.
Standing behind Roy, he ran his left hand lightly,
the back of his hair, gripped the extra thickness ati
top, and gave it a distinct tug; friendly, but sharp eno
to make Roy wince.
"Slacker! Waster! You ought to have been
riding off the effects. You were jolly well going it
night. And you jolly well look it this morning.
thing I'm free on the fifteenth to haul you away fromr
this."
Perhaps because they had first met at an age w
eighteen months seeied an immense gap between th
Lance had never quite dropped the elder-brotherly 
tude of St Rupei days. 
"Yes--a rare gotn thing- " Roy echoed, and sto
with a visible jerk. 
"Well, what's the hitch   Hit out, man.
mind me."
There was a flash of impatience, an undernote ofi
knowledge, in: his tone, that made confession at: 
easier and harder for Roy.
"I suppose it was-pretty glaring," he admi
twitching his head away from those strong 
fingers.  "The fact is-we're . . . as goodi:
gaged--'"                               . - 
Again he broke off, arrested by the mask-like 
of Desmond's face.                         { J'o
" Congrats, old man," he said at last, in a .ve*
"I got the impression . . . a few weeks ago. Y_-
1 Earlvtefa-     . t a'.- f'



<pb n="345"/>
'      DUST OF THE ACTUAL               345 
,fready for the plunge. But you've done it-in record
Wae." A pause, Boy sat there tongue-tied-unreason-
ly-rangry witthimself and Rose. "Why 'as good
it; . . T' Is it , be . . . not official "
"'Only till to- Irrow. You see, it all came ...
.Iher in a rush. 'She thought . . . we thought . ..
itter talk things over first between ourselves.. After
&i Yes-after all," Lance took him up. "You do
pgw a precious lot about each other! How much
I:, does she know ... about you  "
WtiQh, my dancing and riding, my temperament and
F   olour of my eyes-four very important items!"
:I Roy, affecting a lightness he was far from feeling.
Mce ignored his untimely flippancy. "Have you
:i. . . happened to mention . . . your mother ? "
ISot yet. Why--      " The question startled him.
k it occurred to me. I merely wondered--"
A' W^ell, of course, I shall-to-night."
noe nodded, pensively fingered his riding-crop, and
ked, "D'you imagine now she's going to let you
-yourself up Gilgit way-with me    Besides-
hardly care . . . shall we call it 'off'? "
Well you are-! Of course I'll care. I'm damned
-all it' off.'"
tthat the mask vanished from Desmond's ace. His
oelosed vigorously on Roy's shoulder. " Good man,"
ieid in his normal voice. "I'll count on you. That's
gaiun." Their eyes met in the glass, and a look
fderstanding passed between them. "Feeling a 
:Eve yourself, are you  "
drew a' great breath. "It's amazing. I don't
m to take it in."
-you will." The hand closed again on his shoulder.
I':ll clear out. Time you were clothed and in
$gtmind."
they had not so much as mentioned her name!
iven when clothed, Roy did not feel altogether
t mind. He was downright thankful to be
Laonee with some sports for the mew. designed
etrad    fthe infectious state of ferment prevailing
_1, :aeon -id-f 'to-morrow's deferred hartat.



<pb n="346"/>
i-04             FAR TO SEEK 
.For the voice of Mahatma Ghandi-saint, fanatic, .
volutionary, which you will-had gone forth, proclam
ing the sixth of April a day of universal mourning 
non-co-operation, by way of protest against the Rowl~
Act. For that sane measure-framed to safeguard Ind
from W.iwMder elements-had been twisted, by skill
weave r;, words, into a plot against the liberty of t
individual. And Ghandi must be obeyed. 
Flamboyant posters in the city bewailed 'the moun
of calamity about to fall on the Motherland,' and co|
signed their souls to hell who failed, that day, to oloq
their business and keep a fast. To spiritual threat
were added terrorism and coercion, that paralysis of ti
city might be complete.         :
It was understood that, so long there was no disorde
the authorities would make no move. But, by Sa
day, all emergency plans were complete: the F
garrison strengthened; cavalry and armoured cars to,
off to be available.
Roy had no notion of being a mere onlooker, if thi
happened; and he felt sure they would. Directly -
was dressed he waited on the Colonel, and had 
honour to offer his services in case of need; furth
unofficially -to beg that he might be attached, ,
extra officer, to Lance's squadron. The Colonel--
unofficially-expressed his keen appreciation; and i
might rest assured the matter would be arranged. 
So he went off in high feather to report himself
Lance, and discuss the afternoon's programme.
Lance was full of a thorough good fellow he :h
stumbled on, a Sikh-and a sometime revolutionar
whose eyes had been opened by three years' polite d
tion in Germany. The man had been speaking all o
the place, showing up the Home Rule crowd, with
courage none too common in these days of intimidat
After the sports, he would address the men; tal
them, encourage them to ask questions.
It occurred to Roy that he had heard somethingi
the sort in a former life; and-arrived on the .
-he recognised the very same man who hadI
howled down at Delhi.         .t
He greeted him warmly; spoke of the      i
listened with unmoved countenance to lurid 



<pb n="347"/>
~~   ~  DUST OF THE      ACTUAL           s    -'
bout the disappearance of Chandranath; spoke, him-
f, to the men, who gave him an ovation; and, by the
We it was over, had almost forgotten the astounding
itt that he was virtually engaged to be married ...
Driving out five miles to Lahore, he had leisure to 
inember, to realise how innately he shrank from speak- 
xg to Rose of his mother. Though in effect his promised
WOe, she was still almost a stranger; and the sacredness
ithe subject-the uncertainty of her attitude-intensi-
fed his shrinking to a painful degree.
She had asked him to come early, that they might
fve a few minutes to themselves; and for once he was
lot unpunctual. He found her alone; and, at first sight,
W'ul shyness overwhelmed him.
i:iShe was wearing the cream-and-gold frock of the
nting that had turned the scale; and she came for-
Wd almost eagerly, holding out her hands.
"' Wonderful! It's not a dream  "
': took her hands and kissed her, almost awkwardly.
~:ii feels rather like a dream," was all he could
-to say-and fancied he caught a flicker of amuse-
tlih her eyes. Was she thinking him an odd kind
SBr ? Evei last night, he had not achieved a single
of endearment, or spoken her name.
:With a graceful gesture, she indicated the sofa-and
A sat down.
iWell, what have you been doing with yourself-
'. I " she asked, palpably to put him at ease. " It's
flightfl name-Royal ? "
i^.~L--e Roy. Some Norman ancestor."
4'The King ! " She saluted, sitting upright, laughter
k tenderness in her eyes.
-i:'that, he slipped an arm round her, and pressed her
i-,: then he plunged into fluent talk about the after-
AjS events, and his accepted offer of service, till Mrs
i, resplendent in flame-coloured brocade, surged
thle room.
nas;  a purely civil dinner; not IHayes, to Roy's
*:"3irectly it was over the bridge layers dis-
*   d; BtMr Eiton was called away-an Indian gentle-
l        i d  oea,)n urgent business; and they two, left
ff~Ein. 'waindered out into the verandah.



<pb n="348"/>
348              FAR TO SEEK                     -
By now, her beauty and his possessive instinct had!
more or less righted things; and her nearness, in 1the
rose-scented dark, rekindled his fervour of last night, ]
Without a word he turned and took her in his armst:
kissing her again and again.  "'Rose of all roses f
Rose of all the world ! '" he said in her ear.   A
Whereat, she kissed him of her own accord, at the same
time lightly pressing him back.
"Have mercy-a little! If you crush roses too hard :
their petals drop off "
"Darling-I'm sorry!" The great word was out at
last; and he felt quaintly relieved.
"You needn't be ! It's only-you're such a vehement 
lover. And vehemence is said-not to last! "
The words startled him. " You try me." 
"How ? An extra long engagement "
"N-no. I wasn't thinking of that." 
"Well, we've got to think, haven't we ?  To talk
practical politics !"
" Rather not. I bar politics-practical or Utopian."
She laughed. There was happiness in her laugh, and l
tenderness and an undernote of triumph.
"You're delicious! So ardent, yet so absurdly de-'
tached from the dull plodding things that make up comen
mon life. Come-let's stroll. The verandah breathe6i
heat like a benevolent dragon!" 
They strolled in the cool darkness under drooping
boughs, through which a star flickered here and there
He refrained from putting an arm round her, and wU
rewarded by her slipping a hand under i4ds elbow.
"Shall it be-a Simla wedding ?" sM -asked in hel
caressing voice. "About the middle of the seasons1
June? "
" June ? Yes. When I get back from Gilgit '; i"
"But-my dear! You're not going to (diapp     foii
two whole months"                            - 
"I'm afraid so. I'm awfully sorry. But I can't 
back on Lance."
"Oh-Lance!" 
He heard her teeth click on the word. Perhaps 
had merely echoed it.                      -    :i
"Yes; a very old engagement. And-frank
keen."



<pb n="349"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL                    34.
'Oh-very well." Her hand slipped from his arm.
d when you've fulfilled your prior engagement, you
perhaps find time-to marry me ? "
Darling-don't take it that way," he pleaded.
"'Well, I did suppose I was going to be a shade more
portant to you than-your Lance. But we won't
things by squabbling."
Impulsively he drew her forward and kissed her; and 
time he kept an arm round her as they moved on. 
must speak-soon. But he wanted a natiral open-
not to drag it in by the hair.
And after the honeymoon-Home I" she asked,
owing up her all-absorbing train of thought.
' Yes-I think so. It's about time."
0?She let out a small sigh of satisfaction. "I'm glad
I not India. And yet-the life out here gets a hold,
We dram-drinking. One feels as if perpetual, unadul-
fcted England might be just a trifle-dull. But, of
rse, I know nothing about your home, Roy, except
.vague rumour that your father is a Baronet with a
ely place in Sussex."
", No-Surrey," said Roy, and his throat contracted.
early the moment had come. " My father's not only
t.Baronet. He's a rather famous artist-Sir Nevil
.ilair. Perhaps you've heard the .nme "
he wrinkled her brows. "'N-no.- You see, we dob
in blinkers ! What's his line ? "
-' Mostly Indiah subjects-"
SOh, the Ramayana man      I remember-I did see
lovely thing of his before I came out here. But
pEan-Ie " She stood still and drew away from him.
be heard he had married .. ."
i' Yes. He married a beautiful high-caste Indian
1," said Roy, low and steadily. "My mother---'
d*tour--mother--/   "
emould scarcely see her face; but he felt all through
the shock of the disclosure; realised, with a sudden
eos resentment, that she was seeing his adored
er simply as a stumbling-block  ....
-Wts 'as if a chasm had opened between them-a
as wide as the East is from the West.
few seconds of eloquent silence seemed inter-
.- It 'i's eshe who spoke.



<pb n="350"/>
A3t;    ~FAe TO SEEK 
"Didn't it strike you that I had-the right to kn
this . .before .."                             ^
The implied reproach smote him sharply; but h
could he confess to her-standing there in her quee
assurance-the impromptu nature of last night's 
oeedings ?                                      d
" Well I-I'm telling you now," he stammered. " L
night I simply-didn't think. And before . . . the f
is . . . I can't talk of her, except to those who knew 1t
. .who understand .. ." 
"You mean-is she-not alive ?"                 .
"No. The War killed her-instead of killing me."'
Her hand closed on his with a mute assurance d
sympathy. If they could only leave it so! But-he
people . . . 
"You must try and talk of her-to me, Roy," sh,
urged, gently but inexorably. " Was it-out here ? " .;
"No. In France. They came out for a visit, when '
was six. I've known nothing of India till now-excep
through her." 
"But-since you came out . . . hasn't it struck yo
that . . Anglo-Indians feel rather strongly . . . "
"I don't know-and I didn't care a rap what th
felt," he flung out with sudden warmth. "Now, o
course-I do care. But . . . to suppose she could . .
stand in my way, seems an insult to her. If you're
one of the people who feel strongly, of course . . 
there's an end of it. You're free." 
"Free ? Roy-don't you realise . . . I care. You'v&
made me care."
' I-made you?" 
"Yes; simply by being what you are-tso gifted, so,
detached . . . so different from  the others . . . the'
service pattern  . ."
"Oh yes-in a way .. I'm      different."-Strange,
how little it moved him, just then, her frank avowal,;
her praise.-" And now you know-why. I'm sorry id
it upsets you. But I can't have .. . that side of n
accepted . . . on sufferance ---"
To his greater amazement, she leaned forward a
kissed him, deliberately, on the mouth.
"Will that stop you--saying such things?" 'I
was repressed passion in her low tone. " I'm not ac



<pb n="351"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL                351   -
.. . any of you on sufferance. And, really, you're
a bit like . . not the same ..."
-'No !." She smiled at the fierce monosyllable. "A:
t lot-the poor devils you despise-are mostly made
m the wrong sort of both races-in point of breeding,
mean. And that's a supreme point, in spite of the
addle that's talked about equality. Women of good
ily, East or West, don't intermarry much. And
rute right too. I'm proud of my share of India. But
think, on principle, it's a great mistake .. ."
-"Yes-yes. that's how I feel. I'm not rabid. It's
my way. But . . . I suppose you know, Roy, that
.on this subject, many Anglo-Indians are."
You. mean-your people '
I: Well-I don't know about Pater. He's built on
'ge lines, outside and in. But mother's only large to
e naked eye; and she's Anglo-Indian to the bone."
? You think . . . she'll raise objections ? "
'"She won't get the chance. It's my affair-not hers.
re'd be arguments, at the very least. She tramples
tlessly. And it's plain you're abnormally sensitive;
l rather fierce under your gentleness--! "
- But, Rose-I must speak. I refuse to treat-my
huer as if she was-a family skeleton-"
,.No-not that," she soothed him with voice and
e. " Of course they shall know-later on. It's
!  ,. I couldn't bear any jar at the start. You
t, Roy-out of consideration for me. It would be
simple. You need only say, just now, that your
er is a widower. It isn't as if-she was alive--"
S words staggered him like a blow. With an inco-
texclamation, he swung round and walked quickly
from her towards the house, his blood tingling in
er altogether different from last night. Had she
en a woman, he could have knocked her down. --
gayedt and startled, she hurried after him. "Roy,niy
Searest," she called softly. But he did not heed.
0'overtook him, however, and caught his arm with
ads,- forcing him to stop.
"    -fForgive me," she murmured, her face ap-
lose to his. "I didn't mean-I was only
i    eae tings or you, a little-you quiver-full
II f  11s3o,"          ,



<pb n="352"/>
352              FAR TO SEEK
He had been a fakir, past saving, could he have with-
stood her ih that vein. Her nearness, her tenderness,
revived the mood of sheer bewitchment, when he could
think of nothing, desire nothing but her. She had a
genius for inducing that mood in men; and Roy's
virginal passion, once roused, was stronger than he
knew. With his arms round her, his heart against hers,
it was humanly impossible to wish her other than she
was-other than his own.
Words failed. He simply clung to her, in a kind of
dumb desperation to which she had not the key.
"To-morrow," he said at last, "I'll tell you more-
show you her picture."
And, unlike Ardna, she had no inkling of all that those
few words implied.
- A                      - X



<pb n="353"/>
*v a:
CHAPTER VII
"The patienoe of the British iss la  a s aummer's day; but the arm
f the British is se long as a winter's night."-_PaAan Ymg.
HEY parted on the understanding that Boy would
come in to tiffin on Sunday. Instead, to his shameless
relief, he found the squadron detailed to bivouac all
day in the Gol Bagh, and be available at short notice.
It gave him a curious thrill to open his camphor-
Irenched uniform case-left behind with Lance-and
unearth the familiar khaki of Kohat and Mespot days;
to ride out with his men in the cool of early morn-
ing to the gardens at the far end of Lahore. The
amiliar words of commands, the rhythmic clatter of
toofs, were music in his ears. A thousand pities he was
not free to join the Indian Army. But, in any case,
there was Bose. There would always be Bose now. And
he had an inkling that, their angle of vision was by no
means identical....
The voice of Lance, shouting an order, dispelled his
brown study; and Rose-beautiful, desirable, but pro-
foundly disturbing-did not intrude again.
Arrived in the gardens, they picketed the horses, and
disposed themselves under the trees to await events.
The heat increased and the flies, and the eternal clamour
of crows; and it was nearing noon before their ears
eaught a far-off sound-an unmistakable hum rising to
a roar.
"Thought so," said Lance, and flung a word of com-
mand to his men./
A clatter of hoofs heralded arrivals-Elton and the
Superintendent of Police with orders for an immediate
advance. A huge mob, headed by students, was pour-
hIt alone the Circular Boad. The Dolice were Dowerless



<pb n="354"/>
354                 i       f S            'K
to hold them; andi; all costs they must be pre
from debouching on to the Mall. It was brisk
but the squadron reached the critical corner just in
A sight to catch the breath and quicken the, p
-that surging sea of black heads, uncovered in 1*
of mourning; that forest of arms beating the air O
deafening chorus of orthodox lamentation; while ad
trait of Ghandi, on a black banner, swayed une
in the midst.         -?        s
A handful of police, shouting and struggling with :
foremost ranks, were being swept resistlessly ba*'
wards'the Mall-the main artery of Lahore; i
British police officer on horseback was sharing the 
fate.  Clearly nothing would check them  save ;.
formidable barrier of cavalry and armoured ears. ,':
At sight of it they halted; but disperse and r
they would not. They haggled; they imposed i
sible conditions; they drowned official parley'i
shouts and yells.                            i
For close on two hours, in the blazing sun, b
Desmond and his men sat patiently in their sad
machine-guns ready in the cars behind them-wnl
Civil Arm, derided and defied, peacefully pers
those passively resisting thousands that the M
not deemed a suitable promenade for Lahore citizy
a highly processional mood.               .: i;
For two hours the human tide swayed to and fro;
clamour rose and fell; till a local leader, after mucth, b
speaking, begged the loan of a horse, and headed:I
off to a mass meeting at the Bradlaugh Hall. 
The cavalry, dismissed, trotted back to the gard
remain at hand in case of need.              .
What the Indian officers and men thought of iE
who shall guess ?  What Lance. Desmond. 4hozgat'
frankly imparted to Roy. 
"A fine exhibition of the masterly inaetivity to
said he, with a twitch of his humorous lips. ".;
exactly an edifying show for our men. Wondo
my old Dad would think of it all? .You bet thr
a holy rumpus in the city to-night."    -- 
" And then-     " mused Boy, ihis-imagiSOi
ing ahead. " This isn't the last of it." - 
"The last of it-will be bullets, not 



<pb n="355"/>
DUTST OF THE ACTUAL                35
ein his soldierly wisdom. " It's the only argument
crowds. The soft-sawder lot may howl 'militarism,'
They're jolly grateful for a dash of it when their
sare touched. It takes a soldier of the right sort
know just when a dash of cruelty is kindness-and
reverse-in dealing with backward peoples; and
ads, of any colour, are the backwardest peoples
ag ! It would be just as well to get the women safely
the scene."
[He looked very straight at Roy, whose sensitive soul
ed, at the impact of his thought. Since their brief
, the fact of the engagement had been tacitly accepted
tcitly ignored. Lance had a positive genius for that
.  of thing; and in this case it was a godsend to Roy.
'.' Quite so," he agreed, returning the look.
e Well-you're in a position to suggest it."
eiI'm not sure if it would be exactly appreciated. But
l have a shot at it to-morrow."
he city, that night, duly enjoyed its 'holy rumpus.'
' on Monday morning shops were open again ; every-
gas normal as you please; and the cheerful prophets
ratulated themselves that the explosion had proved
p squib after all.
-remost among these was Mr Talbot Hayes, whose
ble air of being in the confidence of the Almighty
to mention the whole Hindu Pantheon-was balm
~  Elton at this terrifying juncture. For her moun-
¶Of flesh hid a mouse of a soul, and her childhood
.pbeen shadowed by tales of Mutiny horrors. With
A4  was almost an obsession. The least unusual
at a railway station, or holiday excitement in
ar, sufficed to convince her that the hour had
i:eor which, subconsciously, she had been waiting
life.
toouLghout Sunday morning, she had been a
jelly of fear; positively annoyed with Rose
kserene assurance that 'the Pater would pull it
tlHiht.' She had' never quite fathomed her daugh-
'in the shy, undistinguished man for whom
mfl a fF .eAn secretly tinged with contempt.
T se it waS j:ti:ed. He had returned to tiffin
;d ?a;^ '-tnahsaied no detaills;. simply



<pb n="356"/>
356              FAR 'TO SEEK 
assured her she need not worry. Thank God, 
a strong L.G. That was all.
But authority, in the person of Talbot Hayes, was,
communicative-in a flatteringly cohfidential unde
A long talk with him had cheered her consideij
and on Monday she was still further cheered by a
of news her daughter casually let fall at brea
between the poached eggs and the marmalade. 
Rose-at last! And even Gladys' achievement th
into te shade ! Here was compensation for all she
suffered from the girl's distracting habit of goin
so far with the wrong man as to give her palpitl
She had felt downright nervous about Major Des'
For Rose never gave one her confidence. And she-
suffered qualms about this new unknown young
But what matter now t To your right-minded me
all's well that ends in the Wedding March-and De
Most satisfactory to find that the father was a Bar
and Mr Sinclair was the eldest son! Could any
be more gratifying to her maternal pride in this
tiful, difficult daughter of hers ?
Consequently, when the eldest son came in to'r
himself, all that inner complacency welled up andi
over him in a volume of maternal effusion, trying g
in any case; and to Roy intolerable, almost, in
that enforced reservation that might altogether e
her tone.
After nearly an hour of it, he felt so batteredi
nally that he reached the haven of his own roob
ing thoroughly out of tune with the whole affairt;!
-there it was. And no man could lightly break
a girl of that quality. Besides, his feeling for
infatuation apart-had received a distinctsti
their talk about his mother and the impressioI
on her by the photograph he had brought with 
promised. And if Mrs Elton was a Brobdingnagia
on the stem of his Rose, the D.C.'s patent plea
affectionate allusions to the girl atoned for a goo4 i
So, instead of executing a ' wobble" of the fir
tude, he proceeded to clinch matters by writimg
his father, then to a Calcutta firm of jew
selection of rings.        ^:
But he wavered badly over facing the ciM



<pb n="357"/>
mi-    DUST OF THE ACTUAL               35T
. congratulations-the chaff of the men, the reiterate
-ties of the women.
^n Tuesday, Rose warned him that her mother wasx
ag to give a dinner, to invite certain rival mothers,
announce her news with due eclat.
" Hand us round, in fact," she added serenely, " with
.ehocs and Elvas plums!-No! Don't flare up!"
* fingers caressed the back of his hand. "In mercy
you, I diplomatically sat down upon the idea, and
Eined seated.till it was extinct. So you're sved-
your affianced wife, whom you don't seem in Wfrantic
to acknowledge . . .! "
le caught her to him, and kissed her passionately.
'ou know it's not that-"
*'Yes, I know . . . you're just terror-struck of all
ose women. But if you will do these things, you must
nd up to the consequences-like a man."
JHe jerked up his head. "No fear. We'll say to-
nrow, or Thursday."
f' I'll be merciful, and say Thursday. It's to be
ounced this afternoon. Have you mentioned it-
any one "
t'.Only to Lance."
, small sound between her teeth made him turn
i'(Anything hurt you ? "
Y-:ou've quick ears ! Only a pin-prick." She ex-
ed her blouse for the offending pin. "Do- you tell
other everything-you two "
:lretty well-as men go."
l¥ot're a wonderful pair."
h  esighed and was silent a moment. Then, " Shall it
4tride on Thursday I " she asked, giving his arm a
lsqueeze.
Wfther. There are Brigade Sports; but I could
?i,   We'll take our tea out to Shadera, have a
time there, and finish up at the Hall."
[/was arranged, and so it befell, though not exactly
dg t design.
iusay they rode leisurely out through the heat
(Iy 'haze, away from bungalows and the watered
E     #. village alive with .shrill women, naked



<pb n="358"/>
358              FAR TO iBJEt 
babies, and officious pariahs, who kept Terry furio 
occupied: on past the city, over the bridge of ho
that spans the Ravi, till they came to the green seciu
garden where the Emperor Jehangir sleeps, heedless d
infidels who, generation after generation, have picnicke
and made love in the sacred precincts of his tomb. 
Arrived at the gardens, they tethered the horsesi
drank thermos tea and ate sugared cakes, sitting on tht
wide wall that looked across the river and the plain tii
the dim  huddled city beyond.  And. Boy talked t
Bramleigh Beeches in April, till he felt home-sick feor
primroses and the cuckoo and the smell of mown grass 
while, before his actual eyes, the terrible sun of Indi
hung suspended in the haze, like a platter of molterr
brass, till the turning earth, settling to sleep, shouldered
it almost out of sight. 
That brought them back to realities. 
"We must scoot," said Roy. "It'll be dark, and
there's only a slip of a moon."
"It's been delicious ! " she sighed; and they kissed
mutually-a lingering kiss. 
Then they were off, racing the swift-footed dusk. . .
Skirting the city, they noticed scurrying groups 
figures, shouting to each other as they ran; and thi
next instant, Roy's ear caught the ominous hum 
Sunday morning. 
"Good God! They're out again. Hi-You! What'S
the tamasiha " he called to the nearest group ;. .
They responded with wild gestures, and fled ;n. Ba
*one lagged a little, being fat and scant of breath; and Ro
shouted again. This time the note of command took effe
"Where are you all running t Is there trouble ? "h'm
asked.                                           '
"Big trouble, Sahib-Amritsar," answered the fles
one, wiping the dusty sweat from his forehead, ana&
shaking it unceremoniously from his finger-tips. " W
comes that our leaders are taken. Mahatma Ghandi, al
The people are burning and looting; Bank-ghar,1 To!*w
Hall-ghar; killing many Sahibs and one Mem- salh
Hai! hai! Now there will be hartal again; Committee
rjy. No food; no work. Hai! h ai!a Ghaudi ki/jail:
House.               2 Alas, alas;! . .  '



<pb n="359"/>
DUJST   1  THE AiCiTUAL
fioonfound the man! " muttered Roy, not referring
the woebegone one. "Look here, Rose, if they're
edged. up near Anarkali, we must change our route. I
ipeet the squadron's out; and I ought to be with it-"
l'Thank God, you're not. It's quite bad enough-"
Ehe set her teeth. " Oh, come on."
J-Baek they sped, at a hand-gallop, past the Fort and
be Badshahi Mosque; then, neck and neck down the
sng straight road, that. vibrant roar growing louder
1th every stride.
Near the Church they slackened speed. The noise
Lad become terrific, like a hundred electric engines; and
here was more than excitement in it-there was fury.
" Sunday was a treat to this," remarked Roy. "We
han't get on to the Mall."
"We can go through Mozung," said Rose coolly.
'But I want to see-as far as one can. The Pater's
ound to be there."
Roy, while admiring her coolness, detected beneath
ka repressed intensity, very unlike her. But his own
rgent sensations left no room for curiosity; and round
he next swerve they drew rein in full view of a sight
hat neither would forget while they lived.
:The wide road, stretching away to the Lahori gate,
ras thronged with a shouting, gesticulating human
rrier; bobbing heads and lifted arms, hurling any
issile that came to hand-stones, bricks, lumps of
fLase-at the courageous few who held them in check.
Cavalry and police, as on Sunday, blocked the turning
ito the Mall; and Roy instantly recognised the sil-
Wuette of Lance, sitting erect and rigid, doubtless
6inking unutterable things.
jLow roofs of buildings, near the road, were, alive
th shadowy figures, running, yelling, hurling bricks
i, mud from a half-demolished shop near by. Two
ounted police officers made abortive attempts to get
earing; and a solitary Indian, perched on an;-etric
ldard, well above the congested mass, vainl har-
ed and fluttered a white scarf as signal of pacific
.otions. Doubtless one of their ' leaders,' ;gain mak-
ifrantic, belated efforts to stem the torrent that he
This kind had let loose.
d the nightmare effect of the scene was intensified



<pb n="360"/>
360              FAR TO SEEK                  ;
by the oncoming dusk, by the flare of a single
hoisted on a pole. It waved purposefully; and i
objectre was clear to Roy-the electric supply wires.d,
"That brute there's trying to cut off the light!" i
exclaimed, turning sharply in the saddle, only to 
that Rose had not even heard him.
She sat stone-still, her face set and strained, as 
had seen it after the tournament. " There he is,"
murmured-the words a mere movement of her lips. ^
He hated to see her look like that; and putting a
a hand, he touched her arm.
"I don't see him," he said, answering her murm
"He'll be coming, though' Not nervous, are you ? "
She started at his touch-shrank from it almost; 
so he fancied. "Nervous ? No-furious !" Her lo
tone was as tense as her whole attitude. "Mud a
stones ! Good heavens ! Why don't they shoot ?"  ,
"They will-at a pinch," Roy assured her, feed
oddly rebuffed, and as if he were addressing a stran
"Stay here. Don't stir. I'll glean a few details fr
one of our outlying sowars."
The nearest man available happened to be a Path
Recognising Roy, he saluted, a fighting gleam in his ey
" Wah, wah! Sahib ! This is not man's work, to 0
staring while these throw wordsto a pack of mad jacka
On the Border we say, pdili lth; pechi bihdt.1 Th
would soon make an end of this devil's noise."
"True talk," said Roy, secretly approving the ma
rough wisdom. "How long has it been going on  " 
"We came late, Sahib, because of the sports; 
these have been nearly one hour. Once the police
gave buckshot to those on the roofs. How much use
the Sahib can see. Now they have sent a sowar for. 
Dep'ty Sahib. But these would not hear the Lat Sal
himself. One match will light such a bonfire; bu
hundred buckets will not put it out."
Roy assented, ruefully enough. " Is it true there--
been big trouble at Amritsar-burning and killing U!
"Wah, wah! Shurrum ki bhdt.2    Because he-.
made all the trouble may not come into the P
Sahibs who have no concern-are killed- "   '
1 First a blow, then a word.  .True talk. Shaei



<pb n="361"/>
r     Y   DDUST OF THE ACTUAL               361;
D intensified uproar drew their eyes back to the mob.
It was swaying ominously forward, with yellings and
incings, with renewed showers of bricks and stones.
!' Thus they welcome the Dep'ty Sahib," retarked
er Khan with grim irony.
e ,iIt was true. No mistaking the bulky figure on horse-
back, alone in the forefront of the throng, trying vainly
X make himself heard. Still he pressed forward, urging,
tommanding; missiles hurtling round him. Luckily the
was poor; and only one took effect.
A voice shouted, " You had better come back, sir."
?h He halted. There was a fierce forward rush. Large
prups of people sat down in flat defiance.
?'again Rose broke out with her repressed intensity,
lit's madness! Why on earth don't they shoot "
^"' The notion is-to give the beggars every chance,"
izged Roy. " After all, they've been artificially worked
I  It's the men behind-pulling the strings-who are
lblame--"
lt I don't care who's to blame. They're as dangerous
wild beasts." She did not even look at him. Her
es, her mind were centred on that weird, unforgettable
lne.   "And our people simply sitting there being
ted with bricks and stones . . . the Pater...
She drew in her lip. Roy gave her a quick look.
:t was the second time; and she did not even seem
Wte of it.
! "Yes. It's a detestable position, but it's not of their
g," he agreed; adding briskly: " Come along, now,
se. It's getting dark; and I ought to be in Canton-
ts, There'll be pickets all over the place-after
. I'll see you safe to the Hall, then gallop on."
er lips twitched in a half-smile. " Shirking congrats
:" Oh, drop it! I'd clean forgotten. I'll conduct you
n--and chance congrats. But they'll be too full of
fthliings to-night. Scared to death, some of them."
Bi.other, for one. I never thought of her. We
lhery."r                              - .
r: new-made lovers, their tone and bearing was
. detached, almost brusque. They had gone some
-M before. Gthey heard shots behind them.



<pb n="362"/>
362              FAR TO SEEK
"Thank goodness ! At last! I hope it hurt some
them badly," Rose broke out with unusual warmni
She was rather unusual altogether this evening. "Re,
it would serve them right-as Mr Hayes says-if we 
clear out, lock, stock, and barrel, and leave their preci0r
country to be scrambled for by others of a very diffe
jdt 1 from the stupid, splendid British. I'm glad I'm golt
anyway. I've never felt in sympathy. And now, a
all this . . . and Amritsar . . . I simply couldn't . . 
She broke off in mid-career, flicked her pony's. flan
and set off at a brisk canter.
Pause and action could have but one meaning. " Sh
realising," thought Roy, cantering after, pain and anl
mingled in his heart. At such a moment, he admitt
her outburst was not unnatural. But to him it
none the less, intolerable. The trouble was, he co
say nothing, lest he say too much. 
At the Lawrence Hall they found half a comp
of British soldiers on guard,-producing, by their 
presence, that sense of security which radiates fromn 
policeman and the soldier when the solid ground 
underfoot. 
Within doors, the atmosphere was electrical w
excitement and uncertainty. Orders had been recee
that, in case of matters taking a serious turn, the
dred or so of English women and children gathered
the Club would be removed under escort to Gov
House. No one was dancing. Every one was 
The wildest rumours were current. 
At a crisis the curtains of convention are rent and
inner self peers through, sometimes revealing the fae
a stranger. While the imposing Mrs Elton quive
inwardly, Mrs Ranyard-for all her 'creeps' and 
fluffiness-knew no flicker of fear. In any case, t
were few who would confess to it, though it gnawedi
their vitals; and Roy's quick eye noted that, among
women, as a whole, the light-hearted courage of A
India prevailed. It gave him a sharp inner tweak'
look at them all and remember that nightmare of ae 
ing, yelling rebels at Anarkalli. He wished to God 
had not seen it too. It was the kind of thing that 
stick in the memory.
1 Caste.



<pb n="363"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL                   3m
.their appearance in the Hall, Mrs Elton deserted
ible group and bore down upon them, flustered
erspiring.
B My darling girl-thank God! I've been in a
r'' she cried, and would have engulfed her stately
ter before them all, but that Rose put out a
g  hand.
[ was afraid you'd be upset-so we hurried," she
setenely; not the Rose of Anarkalli, by any means.
we were all right along the Mozung road."
't 'we,' and a possessive glance-the merest-at
ver, brought down upon the pair a small shower
flgatulations. Every one had foreseen it, of course,
t was so delightful to know....
er the sixth infliction, Roy whispered in her ear,
Miy, I can't stand any more. And it's high time I
Poor dear! 'When duty calls . . . '"  Her cool
as not unsympathetic. " I'll let you off the rest."
came out with him, and they stood together a
t in the darkness under the portico.
- shall dream to-night, Roy," she said gravely.
p we may not even see the Pater. He's taken up
e in the Telegraph Office. Mother will want to
B I can see it in her eye ! "
ei, she's right. You ought all to be cleared out
instanter."
e you-so keen ?"
ICourse not." His tone was more impatient than
I'm only keen to feel-you're safe."
safe ! " she sighed.   "Is one-anywhere-
) he- countered with unexpected vigour, " or life
-t be worth living. There are degrees of un-
that's all. It's natural-isn't it, darling --
*  qanet to feel you're out of reach of that crowd.
- pushed on here, and to Government House,
gs would have been thrown into the shade."
"i .  It's horrible-ineredible ! I suppose
i be a lifelong Anglo-Indian to realise quite
pWi it feels-to us."
t;i arms round her, as if to shield her from the



<pb n="364"/>
364              FAR TO SEEK                   |
"I'll see you to-morrow  " she asked,., 
"Of course. If I can square it. Bat we sha1;f
snowed under with emergency orders. I'll send a 
in any case." 
"Take care of yourself-on my account," she ce
manded softly; and they kissed. 
But-whether fancy or fact-Roy had an un
sense of mutual constraint. It was not the same t
at all as that last kiss at Shadara.
There they had come closer, in spirit, than ever ye
Now-not two hours later-the thin end of an unsee
wedge seemed to be stealthily pressing them apart. fr
"1-4
. ~    ~ ~~~ . "* 
..i



<pb n="365"/>
365
CHAPTER IX.
'tt has long been a grave question whether any Government not too
ong for the liberties of the people, can be strong enough to maintain its
tence in great emergencies."-ABRAHAM LINCOLN.
OK in Cantonmnets, Roy found strong detachments
g rushed to all vital points, and Brigade Head-
aters moving into Lahore.
It was late before Lance returned, tired and mono-
tl . He admitted they had mopped things up
-bit - outside; and left a detachment, in support
[the police, guarding the Mall. But-the city was in
rebellion. No white man could safely show his
:there. The anti-British poison, instilled without
or hindrance, was taking violent effect. He'd seen
ogh of it for one day. He wanted things to eat
drink-especially drink. 'Things' were produced;
afterwards-alon e with Roy in their bungalow-he
ed more freely, in no optimistic vein, sworn foe of
Wem hthough he was.
Sporadic trouble ?  Not a bit of it! Look at the
'they're going for lines of communication. And
;at these choice fragments from one of their posters
ched off a police inspector. 'The English are the
t lot and are like monkeys, whose deceit and cun-
are obvious to high and low.... Do not lose
but try your utmost to turn these men away
leofur holy country.' Pretty sentiments-eh i  Fact
p'e up against organised rebellion."
Xi  nodded.   "I had that from  Dyan, long ago.
.isr of movement and Government is their game.
,        f      phave a job to regain control of the city."
:ift w     e declare Martial Law," said the son of
ni o   with a kindling eye. "Of course, I'm



<pb n="366"/>
366              FAR TO SEEK 
only a soldier-and proud of it! But I've more th
nodding acquaintance with the Punjabi. He's no 
monger; handier with his Idthi than his tongue. 
you stir him up, he hits out. And I don't blame 
The voluble gentlemen from the South don't realse
inflammable stuff they're playing with- " 
"Perhaps they do," hazarded Roy. 
" M-yes-perhaps. But the one on the electric sta
ard this evening didn't exactly achieve a star turn
You saw him, eh  " He looked very straight at
"I noticed you-hanging round on the edge of th
You ought to have gone straight on."
Roy winced. "We'd heard wild rumours. She* i
anxious about the D.C."
Lance nodded, staring at the bowl of his pipe. " 
does-Mrs Elton make a move ? "
"The first possible instant I should say, from .
look of her."
"Good. She's on the right tack, for once!   '
D.C. deserves a first-class Birthday Honour-and :i
possibly wangle an O.B.E. ! I'm told that he and:
D.I.G., with a handful of police, pretty well save&`
station before we came on the scene. It's been a 
shave than one cares to think about, And itts/
over."
They sat up till after midnight discussing the -
situation, that looked blacker every hour. And.
long after midnight, an uproarious mob raged tlt
the city and Anarkalli, only kept from br
bounds by the tact and good-humour of a han
cavalry and police; men of their own race, n
by open or covert attempts to suborn their loyt
a minor detail worth putting on record.      l
Friday was a day of rumours. While the city
tinued furiously to rage, reports of fresh trouble S
in from all sides: further terrible details from'Am
rumours that the Army and the police were being
pered with and expected to join the mob; serious
at Ahmedabad and Lyallpur, where seventy 
women and children were herded, in one b
they could safely be removed. Everywhere- t
tale: stations burned, railways wrecked., 



<pb n="367"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL                M7
stories constantly to hand; some true, some
.ly exaggerated; anger in the blood of the men;
ror in the hearts of the women, longing to get away,
II. suddenly afraid of trains packed with natives,
psned by natives, who might be perfectly harmless;
6tr, on the other hand, might not ...
it was as Rose had said; to realise the significance
.these things, one needed to have spent half a lifetime
ithat other India, in the good days when peaceful
1 masses had not been galvanised into disaffection;
an Englishwoman, of average nerve, thought noth-
of travelling alone up and down the country, or
ding a week alone in camp-if needs must-secure
eknowledge that-even in a disturbed Frontier
ot-no woman would ever be touched or treated
other than unfailing respect.
|t a good many were preparing to flit: and to
men their departure would spell relief; not least,
oy-the new-made lover. Parting would be a
; but at this critical moment-for England and
the tug two ways was distinctly a strain; and
as she saw of it all, the better for their future
-I of happiness. He. felt by no means sure it had
en imperilled already.
the exigencies of the hour left no room for vague
ftgs. Emergency orders, that morning, detailed
i.with a detachment for the Railway Workshops,
-1passive resisters were actively on the warpath.
iitter early stables, was despatched with another
4.to strengthen a cavalry picket near the Badshahi
e on the outskirts of the city, where things might
y in the course of the day.
ig through Lahore, he sent his sais with a note
e; and, on reaching the Mosque, he found things
saough already. The iron railings, round the
e of the Fort, were besieged by a hooting,
.mob, belabouring the air with Idtkis and axes
oo poles; rending it with shouts of abuse and
Q gry, " Kill the white pigs, brothers.! Kill !
; A    ga;   they stormed the railings,, frantially
them down by sheer weight of numbers-
l  ' * 0le-siy t^w    .      .whi l



<pb n="368"/>
368              FAR TO SEEK 
"How the devil can'they keep it up " thought
and sickened to think how few of his own kind
were to stand between the English women and e
in Lahore and those hostile thousands. Thank 
there remained loyal Indians, hundreds of them-a
Mutiny days; but surely a few rounds from the
just then would have heartened them and been 
tinctly comforting into the bargain.
The walls were manned with rifles and Lewis 
and at times 'things looked distinctly alarming; 
not a shot was fired. The mob was left to exh
itself with its own fury. Part melted away, and 
was drawn away by the attraction of a mass meetine
the Mosque, where thirty-five thousand citizens were
ered to hear Hindu agitators preaching open rebel
from Mahommedan pulpits; and a handful of Br
police officers-present on duty-were being hissed;
hooted, amid shouts of " Hind-Mussalman ki jai! "
From the city all police pickets had been withdra
since their presence would only provoke disturb
and bloodshed. And the bazaar people were par
the streets, headed by an impromptu army of ye
hotheads, carrying ldthis, crying their eternal 'I
and 'Jai!' with extra special 'Jai's' for the 
of Germany' and the Afghan Amir.
Portraits of Their Majesties were battered down 
trampled in the mud; and over the fragments the
swept on, shouting: 'Hai! hai! Jarge Margya !1 '
the air was full of the craziest rumours, passed I
with embellishments, from mouth to mouth. ....
Roy, on reaching Cantonments, was relieved to
that the decision had already been taken to r
control of the city by a military demonstrati
force; eight hundred troops and police, under the 
commanding Lahore civil area. Desmond's squao
was included; and, sitting down straightway,
dashed off a note to Rose. 
"MY DARLING,--
"I'm sorry, but it looks like 'no go' to-mo
You'll hear all from the Pater. I might look 
1 " Hai Hai ! Georze is dead."  . .



<pb n="369"/>
DUST OF THE ACTIUAL 
i, f things go smoothly, and' if you'll put up with
':all dusty and dishevelled irom the fray! From
I saw and heard to-day, we're not likely to be
ed with marigold wreaths and benedictions! Of
se hundreds will be thankful to see us. But I doubt
hey'll dare betray the fact. I needn't tell you to
p cool. You're simply splendid.
.~           " Your loving and admiring,
Boy."
li-was after ten next morning, the heat already in-
ewhen that mixed force, British and Indian, and
tour aeroplanes acting in concert with them, halted
ethe Delhi Gate of Lahore City, while an order
'.read out to the assembled leaders that, if shots were
or bombs flung, those aeroplanes would make things
leasant. Then-at last they were on the move;
r:igh the Gate, inside the City, aeroplanes flying low,
y bringing up the rear.
ee normal life and activity were completely sus-
,led-hence more than half the trouble. Groups of
,, sauntering about, stared, spat, or shook clenched
, shouting, "Give us Ghandi-and we will open ! "
peal Rowlatt Bill and we will open."
d, at every turn, posters exhorted true patriots
.terms often as ludicrous as they were hostile-to 
off all dealings with the 'English monkeys,' to
band be killed.'
as they advanced, leaving pickets at stated points
using that Mr Elton might exhort the people to
e work-mere groups swelled to crowds, increasing
omber and virulence; theli cries and contortions  '-
'gMvage than' anything Roy had yet seen. 
t it was not till they reached the Hira Mundi vege-
nmnarket, fronting the plain and river, that the real
be-began. Here were large excited crowds stream-
and fro between the Mosque and the Mundi-
aI inflammable as gunpowder. Here, too, were
theads armed with leaded sticks, hostile andy-   '
- houting their eternal cries. And to-day, as
y, the Badshah    Mosque was clearly the centre
e. Exhortations to disperse peacefully were
sor unhei-~ Al oVer the noen space thev



<pb n="370"/>
370              FAR TO SEEK 
swarmed like locusts. Their wearisome clamour "
not for a moment. And the mosque acted as a 
hold. Crowds packed away in there could neiH
dealt with nor dispersed. So an order was give
it should be cleared and the doors guarded.
Meantime, to loosen the congested mass, it was e
to the front-thankful for movement at last. 
There was a rush and a scuffle. Scattered groups b
into the city. Others broke away and streamed
from the high ground into the open plain, sow
pursuit; rounding them up, shepherding them 
their by-lanes and rabbit-warrens.
" How does it feel to be a sheep-dog I " Lance:'a
Roy, as he cantered up, dusty and perspiring. "  h
from the aeroplanes would do the trick. Good-i
Look at them-    ! "
Roy looked-and swore under his breath. Fi
half-dispersed thousands were flowing together'-
like quicksilver. The whole Hira Mundi regio
packed with a seething dangerous mob, complet
of hand, amenable to nothing but force.
And now from the doors of the Mosque fresh 
sands, inflamed by fanatical speeches, were sw
across the open plain to join them, flourishing-
Ithis with threatening gestures and cries... .'
It was a sight to shake the stoutest heart. Ai
they were not; but the ldthi is a deadly weapon/
quarters; and their mere numbers were overwhe.
Roy, by this time, was sick of their everlastg
their distorted faces full of hate and fury; their
less abuse of 'tyrants,' who were exercising a
almost superhuman. 
An order was shouted for the troops to turn 
them. Carnegie, of the police, dashed off to tXi
of the column that was-nearing the gate of exit¶
the cavalry lined up in support of Mr Elton, wN
exhorted, still tried to make himself heard by
who were determined not to hear. 
Directly they moved forward,) there was Wt;
concerted rush; idthis in the foref  brics 
hurtling, as at Anarkalli, but wit'  r int$
A large stone whizzed past the;ar of an 
Sikh Ressaldar; half a brick caught Roy on  l th



<pb n="371"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL               371
er struck Suraj on the flank and slightly disturbed
equanimity.
Roy was soothing him, came a renewed rush,
8crowd pushing boldly in on all sides with evident
lnt to cut them off from the rest.
line broke. There was a moment of sickening
Fsion. A howling man, brandishing a ldthi, made a
at Roy, a grab at his charger's rein ....
e instant his heart stood still; the next, Lance
ed in between, riding-crop lifted, unceremoniously
iing Roy, and nearly oversetting his assailant-but
quite
opwn came the leaded stick on the back of his bridle
*, cutting it open, grazing and bruising the flesh.
an oath he dropped the reins and seized them in
ight hand.
Biather neatly done! " he remarked, smiling at the
y in Roy's eyes. " Ought to have floored him,
ah-the murdering brute !"
-Lance, you'd no business-"
,0h, drop it. This isn't polo. It's a game of Aunt
. No charge for a shy-   ! "  As he spoke, a
fragment of brick struck his cheek and drew
. "Damn them. Getting above themselves. If
ted with me I'd charge. We can hold 'em, though.
ghten the line."
ut your hand-"
.y hand can wait. I've got another." And he
½o leaving Roy with a burning inner sense as of
coals of fire heaped on his unworthy self.
t urgent need for action left no leisure for thought.
ow the line was straightened; somehow they
ted themselves from the embarrassing attentions
'mob. Carnegie returned with armed police; and
<Ailes were lined up in front of the troops; the
-: clearly given; the response-fresh uproar, fresh
, of stones. . . .
eight shots rang out-and it sufficed.
vqi e of the rifle, the sting of buckshot, valour
vaapoTated like smoke. And directly the crowd
Iag~. ceased. A few were wounded; one-:was
fd cearri-ed off4 . w ith lo. udl lagentations  - An
B |ice, wiSthg fild bQyo nets, compltete  te



<pb n="372"/>
372     '        FARE TO SEEK
effect that nothing else on earth could have produced-:--
and the Grand Processional was over. 
It emerged from the Bathi Gate a shadow of itselff
having left more than half its numbers on guard at vital 
points along the route.
"Scotched-not killed," was Lance's pithy verdictk
on the proceedings. "As a bit of mere police work--w 
excellent..- As to the result-we shall see. The 0.0.
must have been thankful his force wasn't a shade weaker."
This, unofficially, to Roy, who had secured leave off
for tiffin at the Eltons', and had ridden forward to report 
his departure and inquire after the damaged hand, that
concerned him more than anything else just then-not
even excepting Rose.
It had been roughly wrapped in a silk handkerchief; 
and Lance pooh-poohed concern.
" Hurts a bit, of course. But it's no harm. I'll have
it scientifically cleaned up by Collins. Don't look'
pathetic about nothing, old man. My silly fault for 
failing to ride the beggar down. Just as well it isn't 
your hand, you know. Unpleasant-for the women."
"Oh, it's all very well," Roy muttered awkwardly,
Lance in that vein had him at a disadvantage, always.
"Don't be too late," he added, as Roy turned to go.
"We may be needed. Those operatic performers in the
City aren't going to sit twiddling their thumbs by the
look of them. When's . . . the departure "
" To-morrow or next day, I think."
"Good job." A pause. "Give them my regards.
And don't make a tale over my hand."
"I shall tell the -truth," said Roy with decision.
"And I'll be back about six."
He saluted and rode off; the prospective thrill of
making love to Rose damped by the fact that he had
not been able to look Lance in the eyes.
Things couldn't go on like this. And yet ...  Im-
possible to ask Rose outright whether there had been
anything definite between them. If 'she said "No," he
would not believe her:-detestable, but true. If she-
well . . . if in any way he found she had treated Lance
shabbily, he might find it hard to control himself-or 
forgive her: equally detestable and equally true. But
nno.rtfnaintv. wan mnre intnlnranhln t.ill  .. 



<pb n="373"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL                373
ie found the household ready for immediate flitting,
I Mrs Elton in a fluster of wrath and palpitation over
fiing news from Kasur.
T' The station burnt and looted. The Ferozepur train
s- up! Two of our officers wounded and two warrant
Bas beaten to death with those horrible lathis !" She
Wired it all out in a breathless rush before Roy could
etn get near Rose. "It's official. Mr Haynes has
st been telling us. An English woman and three tiny
Wlren-miraculously saved by two N.C.O.'s and a
bindly native Inspector. Did you ever--- ! And I
:tr they poured kerosene over the buildings they burnt,
l^ the bodies of those poor men at Amritsar. So now
a know why the price ran up and why ' none was coming
fr the country!' Yet they say this isn't another
htiny,-don't tell me ! I was so thankful to be getting
wyy; and now I'm terrified to stir. Fancy if it hap-
ted to us-to-morrow !"
t' My dear Mother, it won't happen to us." Her
ighter's cool tones had a tinge of contempt. " They're
tking the trains. And Fakir Ali wouldn't let any.
lay a finger on us."
rs Elton's sigh had the effect of a small cyclone.
well, I don't believe we shall reach Simla without
l4ng our throats cut-or worse," she declared with
ibed conviction.
? You'll be almost disappointed if we do! " Rose
Oszed her cruelly, but sweetly. "And now perhaps
Iay- get at Roy, who's probably tired and thirsty
e all those hours in the sun."
bte  Jeremiad revived, at intervals, throughout
rn; but directly it was over Rose carried Roy off
tier boudoir-her own; corner; its atmosphere as
'I and restful as the girl herself, after all the strife
| heat and noise of the city.
iey spent a peaceful two hours together. Boy de-     '
no shadow of constraint in her; and hoped the
Thursday had passed off. For himself-au inner
btions were charmed away by her tender concern
ruised shoulder-a big bruise; she could feel it
s eoat--nd the look in her eyes while he told the
Si' Lanbe; not colouiug.it up, because of what he
*1 vr4ei it/t4! ois» w<»LnM««' cirtkCQ(.rn  lvfsxzia1al4 .& ,-



<pb n="374"/>
374              FAR TO SEEK 
"He's quite a splendid sort of person," shbe
with a little tug at the string of her circular fan. ;!
you know all about that."
"Rather."
She drew in her lip and was silent. If he could:
now. In this mood, he might believe her-might'
forgive her ...
But it was she who spoke.
" What about-the Kashmir plan ? "
"God knows. It's all in abeyance. The Co
wedding too."
" Will you be allowed-I wonder-to pay me a.
visit first " Her smile and the manner of her r
were irresistible.                          ;
"It's just possible! " he returned, in the same 
"I fancy Lance would understand."           :Il
"Oh-he would. And to-morrow-the night
Can you be there" e
He looked doubtful. "It -depends-how thing
And-I rather bar station partings."
"So do I. But still . . . Mother's been clamo
for you to come up with us and guard the hairs et
heads ! But I deftly squashed the idea."
"Bless you, darling !  He drew her close, an4d
leaned her cheek against him with a sigh, in l v
present content and prospective sadness were stra
mingled. It was in these gentle, pensive moods'-l
Boy came near to loving her as he had dreamed of I]
the girl he would make his wife.
"I'm still jealous of the Gilgit plan," she mur
"And, of course, I wish you were coming up to-m
-even more than Mother does ! But at least I've.
grace to be glad you're not-which is rather an advi
for me!"                                     f
Their parting, if less passionate, was more tr
than usual; and Roy rode away with a distinct 
in his heart at thought of losing her; a nascent
tance to make mountains out of molehills in respe
her and Lance. ... .                         ^
Riding back along the Mall, he noticed absei't
approaching horsewoman, and recognised-too 1l
escape-Mrs Hunter-Ranyard. By timely fligh
Thursday, he had evaded her congratulations. 



<pb n="375"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL           -   75
.him she would say things that jarred. Now he
ed SurAj with the base intent of merely greeting her
passed.
at she was a woman of experience and resource.
*beckoned him airily with her riding-crop.
IMr Sinclair ? What luck! I'm dying to hear how
'March Past' went off. Did you get thunders of
useg "
Oh, thunders. The Monsoon variety !"
I saw you all in the distance, coming in from my
y ride. You looked very imposing with your atten-
s aeroplanes !--May I "  She turned her pony's
: without awaiting permission, and rode beside him
foot's pace, clamouring for details.
e supplied them fluently, in the hope of heading her
personalities. A vain hope: for personalities were
alily bread.
etook advantage of the first pause to ask, with an
able look: " Are you still feeling very shy of being
Iged B You bolted on Thursday. I hadn't a chance.
3(?m rather specially interested." The look became
st caressing. "Did it ever occur to your exquisite
iusty, I wonder, that I rather wanted you for my
er. You seemed so young-in experience, that I
ht a little innocuous education might be an
tage before you plunged. But she snatched-
W did !-without seeming to lift an eyebrow, in
Btnimitable way. Very clever. In fact, she's, been
tly clever all round. She's eluded her 'coming
on one side; and ructions over her soldier man
e other-  "
iook here-I'm engaged to her," Roy protested,
Inot to be aware of a sick sensation inside. "And
naow I hate that sort of talk-"
?ought to, by this time!"  She made tenderly
eyes at him. "But I'm afraid I'm incurable.
be angry, Sir Galahad ! You've won the Kohinoor;
ough you seem to live in the clouds, you've had
to make things pukka straightaway. ' Under-
H i' and private engagements are the root of all
,4blest if I know what you're driving at " b
tb his temper risg.



<pb n="376"/>
376              FAR TO SEEK 
But she only laughed her tinkling laugh and shoo
riding-whip at him.
"Souvent femme varie ! Have you ever heard
you blessed innocent  And the general impressi
-there's already been one private engagement-if
more. I was trying to tell you that afternoon to
your poor fingers -" 
"It's all rot-spiteful rot! " The pain of inre
conviction made Roy careless of his manners. '
women are jealous of her beauty, so they invent anyi
that's likely to be swallowed-"
" Possibly, my dear boy. But I can't tell my n
bours to their faces that they lie! After all, if
win a beautiful girl of six-and-twenty you've 
swallow the fact, with a good grace, that there must
been others; and thank God you're IT-if not the
IT that ever was on land or sea I-After that mat
homily, allow me to congratulate you. I've 
congratulated her, de mon plein coeur !"
" Thanks very much. More than I deserve! i.'
Boy, only half mollified. "But I'm afraid I musa
on now. Desmond asked me not to be late."
"Confound the women ! " was his ungallant re
as he rode away.
Mrs Ranyard's tongue had virtually undone th1
of his peaceful two hours with Rose. After ta
or no clash-he must have the thing out with Lab
the first available moment.
. ,A
,                               . ,  L~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="377"/>
377
I:.";  _     -J. C. SQUnai.
retturned to an empty bungalow.
'inquiry, he learnt that the Major Sahib had gone
to see the Colonel Sahib; and Wazir Khana--
;: ,nd's bearer-abused, in lurid terms, the bastpiard
If a pig who had dared to assault the first Sahib in
sitting down at his table, pushed aside a half-
page of his novel, and his pen raced over
in a headlong letter to Jefers:-an of utlet,
r his pent-up sensations; and a salve to his
ee. He had neglected Jeffers lately, as well
'novel. He had been demoraised, utterly, these
setw weeks: and to-day by way of crowning de-
tiuion, he felt by no means certain what the end
be-for himself; still less, for India.
damaged Major Sahib-untroubled by animosity
odeareonly just in time to change for Mess; his
3mzbecomingly plastered, his hand in a sling.
stly nuisance; Hukm hai," 1 he explained in
sto Boy's glance of inquiry. "Collins says it's
inflamed. I've been confabbing with Paul over
eedwedding. But, of course, there's no chance
,   settling down, unless we declare martial law.
- pagre   f played out; and as for the impression
er ins amorning-the D..'s just telephoned in
itdorhied h British troops and armoured ca  to
ged Major Sahibsuntroubled by anosityrder.



<pb n="378"/>
378              FAR TO SEEKE
picket and patrol bungalows in Lahore. Seems 
received an authentic report that the city people 
planning to rush civil lines, loot the bungalows, a
assault our women-damn them. So, by way of
caution, he has very wisely asked for troops.-Are th
off-those two " 
"To-morrow night," said Roy, feeling so horri1
constrained that the influx of Barnard and Mered
was, for once, almost a relief.
Then there was Mess; fresh speculations, fresh tal
and a certain amount of chaff over Desmond havi
'stopped a brick '; Barnard, in satirical vein, regretti
to report a bloody encounter: one casualty: ene
sprinkled with buckshot, retired according to plan.
Before the meal was over, Roy fancied he deteN
a change in Lance; his talk and laughter seeme
trifle strained; his lips set, now and then, as if he
in pain.
Later on he came up and remarked casually: "I
not feeling very bright. I think I'll turn in. Perh
the sun touched me up a bit."   Clearly Roy's f
betrayed him; for Lance added in an imperative un
tone: " Don't look at me like that. I'm going to i
off quietly-not to worry Paul."
"Well, I'm going to slip off too," Roy retorted 
decision. "I feel useod up; and my beast of a 
hurts like blazes." 
"Driveme home, then," said Lance; and his ohan
tone, no less than the surprising request, told Boyj
would be glad of his company.
They said little during the drive; Roy, becauf:
felt vaguely anxious, and knew it would annoy 
if he betrayed concern, or inquired after symp
It seemed a shame to worry the poor fellow in
state; but silence had now become impossible.
"Are you for bed, old man  " he asked when i
got in.                                       - rB
"Rather not. I just felt a bit queer. Wanted tq
away from them all and be quiet." 
His normal manner eased Roy's anxiety a ,
Without more ado, they settled into long v
chairs and called for 'pegs.' The night was  ·
still. A red distorted moon hung iust above theu



<pb n="379"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL               379
Yelling and spitting crowds seemed to belong to
ther world.
aance leaned back in the shadow, the tip of his cigar
g like a fierce planet. Roy sat forward, tense and
oseful: hating what he had to say; yet goaded by
knowledge that he could have no peace of mind
it was said.
e was silent a few moments, pulling at his cigar:
a, "Look here, Lance," he said. " I've got a question
Wk. yYou won't like it. I don't either. But the truth
. . I'm bothered to know what is . . . or has been
;. between you and . ..
~*Drop it, Roy." There was pain and impatience in
omnd's tone.' " I'm not going to talk about that."
1 opposition gave Roy precisely the spur he needed.
'tSI afraid I've got to, though."  The statement
placable but decisive. "I can't go on this way.
getting on my nerves- "
t)vil take your nerves," said Lance politely. Then
Fh an obvious effort-" Has she-said anything "
hen why the hell can't you let be "
ishe val let be-altogether, if this goes on ;-this
isl awkwardness between us; and the things she
Y the way she looks; .. almost as if she cares."
Well, I give you my oath-she doesn't. I suppose
itto know   " 
.'det depends how   things were before I came 
sBhe's twice let your name slip out, unawares.    -^
Gn Anarkalli she was extraordinarily upset. And 
about your hand. Then, riding home, I met
Ianyard. And she started talking . . . hinting at  '
tew engagement---"
tRanyard deserves to have her tongue removed.
Xtell any lie about another woman."
,; so. But is it a lie   It fits in too neatly
e other things-"
a     bife'him a sidelong look. Their faces were
in the moonlight.
14is-_--:e you? "-His tone was almost tender.
&ing -ed lucky devil-you've no cause to ob." :
tiral infermnce -startlingly revealed to Roy
K&fif flittec notH-hto ;do with his trotb l  *;



<pb n="380"/>
380              PAB TO; SEEK -RX
and so great was the relief of open speech bet
that instinctively he told truth.
" N-no. I'm bothered about you."
" Good God ! " Desmond's abrupt laugh had :
in it. " Me ?"                     .     -
"Yes-naturally. If it amounted to . .. an 
ment, and I charged in and upset everything.
can't forgive myself . . . or her-"      X
At that Desmond sat forward, obstructive no 
"If you're going so badly off the rails, y"u mu
it straight. And . . . confound you! ... it Bl
"I can see that. And it's more or less my d
"On the contrary ... it was primarily my do&
as you justly pointed out to me a week or two 
Roy groaned. The irony of the situation st
a whip-lash. "Did it amount to an engagement
persisted.                                :
"There or thereabouts." Lance paused and:'
long pull at his cigar. " But-it was quite bet
selves-in fact, conditional on . . . the hea
could manage to make. She-cared, in a way:N
as I do. That was one hitch. The other was
antipathy to soldiers, as husbands for her preciiou
She--  ose-knew there would be ructions; a;
right tussle, in fact. Well-she'll go almost anyQ
to avoid ructions; specially with her mother. ':
blame her. The woman's a caution. So-shee
facing the music ... till she felt quite sure .
self .. ."
" Till she felt sure of herself, there should ha
no engagement," Roy decreed, amazed at his o
anger. "Unfair on you."         ,,
Desmond's smile was the ghost of its no
"You always were a bit of a purist, Roy! By
it was my doing again. I pressed the point.!!
think... she liked me... loving her. S
seemed to be coming my way-till you tur n&
He clenched his hand and leaned back agam, 
deep breath. "I'm forcing myself to tenl youl 
-since you've asked for it-because I won' l
blaming her-" 
Roy said nothing. Remembering how, t
the initiative had been hers. how hard .he.-  



<pb n="381"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL               381
ainst being ensnared, he did blame her, a good deal
pore than he could^ery well admit to this friend, whose
Sigle-hearted devotion made his own mere mingling of
4atuation and passion seem artificial as gaslight in
the blaze of dawn.-But knowing so much, he must
flow all. 
]" How long-was it on  "
"Oh, about three weeks before you came. I was on
: long while. Before Christmas."
IL "Since when has it been-off  "
. Lance. hesitated. " Well-things became shaky after
Kapurthala. That day-the wedding, you remember?
-I spoke rather straight . . . about you. I saw you
were getting keen. And I didn't want you to come a
Wopper--"
h" Why the devil didn't you tell me the truth "
i Laoe set'his lips. "Of course I wanted to. But-
was;   cult. She said-not any one. Made a point
It it.  :t even Paul. And I was keen for her to feel
Kite free; no slur on her-if things fell through. So-
lS.iI couldn't warn you, I spoke to her. Perhaps I was a
hl   Women are queer. You can never be sure . . .
1td it seemed to have quite the wrong effect. Then I
Ew she was really losing her head over you-   Natural
opugh. So I simply stood by. If she really wanted
OJD-not me, that was another affair. And it's plain
-:. she did."
-" But when-did she make it plain I " Roy insisted,
wing more and more as if the ground were giving way
i his feet.
.¶' Just before the Gym. That . . was why...."
b looked full at Roy now. His eyes darkened with
m. - " I felt like murdering you that day, Roy. After-
1s . .. well--one managed to carry on somehow.
P6 always can-at a pinch . . you know."
gto  God ! It's the bitterest, ironical tangle !" Roy
t out with a smothered vehemence that told its own
. "You ought to have insisted about me, Lance.
dn't for fifty worlds ..."
.* eouxee you wouldn't. Don't fret, old man. And
blame hser."
EOir no, I can't pretend it doesn't alter thmifgs
;i .J :s        . .bsAJ' .. i"



<pb n="382"/>
382             FAR TO SEEK: i-
He broke off, startled by the change in De
His face was drawn. He was shivering violently. 
"Lance-what is it  Fever ? Have you been f
bad ," 
Desmond set his lips to steady them. " On and 0
at Mess. Touch of the sun, perhaps. I'll get to bed/
souse myself with quinine."
But he was so obviously ill that Roy paid no h
"Well, I'm going to send for Collins instanter."
"Don't make an ass of yourself, Roy," Lance 
out: but his hands were shaking: his lips were sha
He was no longer in command of affairs....  -
While the message sped on its way, Roy got hiwn
bed somehow; eased things a little with hot bot
and brandy; nameless terrors knocking at his heart.
In less than no time Collins appeared, with the Col
and their faces told Roy that his terror was only,
well founded....
Within an hour he knew the worst-acute bl
poisoning from the ldthi wound.
"Any hope--   ? " he asked the genial doctor, w
Paul Desmond knelt by the bed.speaking to his brot
in low tones.  .1
"'Too early to give an opinion," was the caut
answer. But the caution and the man's whole ma
told Roy the incredible, unbearable truth.
Something inside him seemed to snap. In that mo
of bewildered agony, he felt like a murderer . .  : %
Looking back afterwards, Roy marvelled how he, 
lived through the waking nightmare of those two da
while the doctor, did all that was humanly possible,
.Lance pitted all the clean strength of his manhood ag
the swift deadly progress of the poison in his veins;,
was simply a question of hours; of fighting the dev
the last on principle, rather than from any likeliho
victory. With heart and hope broken, superha
they struggled on. 
For Roy, the world outside that dim whitewashei
room ceased to exist. The loss of his mother had.
anguish unalloyed; but he had not seen her go0. .. ,'
Now, he saw-and heard, which, was worse thaia']-n
For Lance, towards the end, waeoastantly dfi



<pb n="383"/>
DUST OP THE ACTUAL               383
'i delirium, he raved of Rose-always of Rose.
Che soul of reserve, poured out incontinently his
his worship, his fury of jealousy-till Roy grew
bto hate the sound of her name.
brse-he was constrained to tell the Colonel the
ig of it all: to see anger flash through the haunt-
-in his eyes.
y twice, during the final struggle, the real Lance
d; and on the second occasion they happened
alone, Their eyes met in the old intimate under-
Lance flung out his undamaged hand, and
ed Roy's with all the force still left him .
on't- fret your heart out, Roy .. . if I can't pull
h," he said in his normal voice. " Carry on.
don't blame Rose. It'll hurt her-a bit. Don't
er more-because of me. And-look here, stand
aul for a time. He'll need you." 
,s "Trust me, dear old man," applied, mentally,
last. Even at that supreme -moment he was
thandkul it came last.
In the Colonel returned; and they could say no
:;;nor could Roy-find it in his heart to grudge him
eit of that brief blessed interlude of real contact
man they loved...
ltcould be no question of 'going to Lahore station
dy evening. He was ill himself, though he did
it; and his soul was centred on Lance-the
spirrt inwoven with almost every act and thougt
'ration of his life. By comparison, Rose Was
t? g'tbnhim; less than nothing; a mushroom
'gdden and violent-with no deep roots; oAlx
- 0e sent her, by an orderly, a few hurried lines of
n and farewell.
^^^W sqrry, but I can't come to-night. We are
grief, Lance down with acute blood-
CI--/Oollins evidently fears the worst. I can't
*~t~ tI do trust you get up safely. I'l wb
tL' s, .possible.        . .
,  '- :> '      ( 0 Yo;urs,  Ro.",s



<pb n="384"/>
384              FAR TO SEEK
Yes, he was still hers-so Tar. More than thin
could not honestly add. Beyond this awful how
could not look. It was as if one stood on the edge
precipice, and the next step would be a drop into 
darkness. ...                            -
By Monday night it was over. After forty-e
hours of fever and struggle and pain, Lance Des
lay at rest-serene and noble in death, as he had 
in life. And Roy-having achieved one long, slow 
out of the depths-was flung back again, deeper
ever ...
It was near midnight when the end came. Utt
weary and broken, he had sunk into Lance's 
leaning forward, his face hidden, his frame shake'l
through with hard dry sobs that would not-%
stilled.                .
Through the fog of his misery, he felt the Co
hand on his shoulder; heard the familiar voicey
and kindly: "My dear Boy, get to bed. We
have you on the sick-list. There's work to do; a
gap to be filled-somehow. I'll stay-with him."' -?
At that, he pulled himself together and stood-.
"I'll do my best, Colonel," was all he could say.  B
face he had so rarely seen perturbed was haggardh
grief. They looked straight at ne another; 2an
thought flashed on Roy, 'I must tell him.' Not
but it had to be done.
"There's something, sir," he began, "I feel you 
to know. By rights, it-it should have been me. 
brute with the dthi was right on me; and he
-dashed in between . . . rode him off-and got
knock intended for me. It-it haunts me."
Paul Desmond was silent a moment. Pain a
altation contended strangely in his tired eyes.
"I-don't wonder," he said slowly.  " It--war
him. Thank you for telling me. It will be-some
comfort . . . to all of them. Now-  i' ^ :
sleep."                           - *' 
Roy shook his head.   " Impossible. --4
Colonel. It's a relief to feel you know. Fps 'i:
let me do any mortal thing I can for any
There was another moment of sile oi, ci-



<pb n="385"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL               3&5
tion; then once again Paul Desmond put his
on Roy's shoulder.
ok here, Roy," he said.    "Drop calling mu
. You two-were like brothers. And-as Thea'J
tied, why should I be out of it. Let me-be' Paul.'"
swas hard to do. It was inimitably done. It gave
fte very lift he needed in that hour when he felt
.they must almost hate him, and never wish to
es on him again. 
j;- shall be proud," he said; and, turning away to
ami emotion, went back to the bed that drew him
magnet.
e he knelt a long while, in a torment of mute,
nate protest against the power of so trivial an
,o rob the world of so much gallantry and charmn
tion was far from him. With all the vehemence
s in him, he raged against his loss ...
; morning, they awoke, as from a prolonged and
dream, to find Lahore practically isolated; all
~ own, but one; the hartal continuing in defiance
rsand exhortations; more stations demolished;
s derailed and looted; all available British
!ealled from the Hills. But for five sets of wire-
t urgently asked for, isolation would have been
'fourteenth, the position was desperate. Civil
y flatly defied; the police-lacking reserves-
yed out; the temperature chart of rebellion
est point. The inference was plain.
ad revolt is amenable only to the ultimate
,v-of force.  Nothing, now, would serve but
Ation, and the compelling power of Martial
for India, the men who had striven their
* i,-void both did not falter in that critical
.t;rong action had already been taken;
effect of it spread, in widening circles,
; tthousands of both races; not least to
e snd resource had been strained almost
Ei     o   VMartial Law were issued. The



<pb n="386"/>
386              FAR TO SEEK                    '
suspended life of the city tentatively revived. Law
abiding men of all ranks breathed more freely; and ft
the moment it seemed the worst was over. ...
R oy, having slept off a measure of his utter fatigue
took up the dead weight of life again, with the old sicl
sensation, of three years ago, that nothing mattered in
earth or heaven. But then, there had been Lance tI
uphold and cheer him. Now there was only the har
unfailing mercy of work to be pulled through somehow.,
There was also Rose-and the problem of letting het
know that he knew. And-their marriage I All that
seemed to have suffered shipwreck with the rest of him
He was still too dazed and blinded with grief to see an
inch ahead. He only knew he could not bear to sel
her, who had made Lance suffer so, till the first angui^
had been dulled a little-on the surface at least.
-4
.4
. :            *   -1



<pb n="387"/>
387
* CHAPTER XI.
"Why did'st thou promise such a beauteous day,
To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way,
Hiding thy bravery in their rotten smoke ?"
away up in Simla, Rose Arden was. enduring her
minor form    of purgatory. The news of Lance
~pmond's sudden death had startled and saddened
_;. had pierced through her surface serenity to the
_p places of a nature that was not altogether shallow
?   its veneer of egotism and coquetry.
|o  a morning, near the end of April, she sat alone in
: tgarden under deodar boughs tasselled with tips of
pg green. In a border, beyond the lawn, spring
Hwers were awake; the bank was starred with white
eets and wild-strawberry blossoms; and through a
in the lex trees beyond, she had a vision of far
and flashing snow-peaks, blue-white in the sun,
at in shadow. Overhead, among the higher branches,
!urd was trilling out an ecstatic love-song.
~But the year's renewal, the familiar flutter of Simla's
akening, sharpened, rather, that new ache at her heart;
haunting, incredible thought that down there, in
stifling dusty plains, Lance Desmond lay dead in
L sp5ringtime of his splendid manhood; dead of his
g enerous impulse to save Roy from hurt.
ince the news came, she had avoided sociabilities
r unobtrusively, worn no colours. Foolish and fat-
t, was it     Perhaps. She only knew that-Lance
a       rg gone-she could not make no difference in her
jjg round, whatever others might think or say. 
id the mere fact of his being gone seemed strangely
jtvive the memory of his love for her, of her own       C



<pb n="388"/>
388              FAR TO SEEK
genuine, if inadequate, response. For she had b
more nearly in love with him than with any of 
predecessors (and there had been several), who 
been admitted to the privileged intimacies of the 
accepted lover. More: he had commanded her a
tion; and she had not been woman could she have hi
out indefinitely against his passionate, whole-heart
devotion.
After months of patient wooing-and he by nat
impatient-he had insisted that matters be settled, 6
way or the other, before he went on leave; and she
almost reached the pbint of decision, when Roy, with 
careless charm and challenging detachment, appear
on the scene.... 
And now-Lance was gone; Roy was hers; Br
leigh Beeches and a prospective title were hers; 
still .. .
The shock of Roy's revelation had upset her a 
deal more than she dared let him guess. And the 
did not pass-in spite of determined efforts to be 
aware of it. She knew, now, that her vaunted toler
sprang chiefly from having ignored the whole sul
Half-castes she instinctively despised. For India antfld
Indians she had little real sympathy; and the ri
tide of unrest, the increasing antagonism, had sharpe
her negative attitude to a positive dislike and dist
acutely intensified since that evening at Anarkalli, w
the sight of Lance and her stepfather, sitting ther&~
the mercy of any- chance-flung missile, had stirred b
slumbering passion in her to fury. For one bewilde
moment she had scarcely been able to endure
touch or look, because he was even remotely linked 1
those creatures, who mouthed and yelled and w
have murdered them all without compunction. 
The impression of those few nerve-wracking days
struck deep. Yet, in spite of all, Roy's hold on her 
strong; the stronger perhaps because she had bi
aware of his inner resistance, and had never felt
sure of him. She did not feel fundamentally sure';
him, even now. His letters had been few and 
heart-broken, naturally; yet scarcely the letters  |
ardent lover. The longest of the four had given I
poignant picture of Lance's funeral; almost as s,



<pb n="389"/>
>- \    JUOS U1 orI TJf AUTUAIL 
oew, and had written with intent to hurt her. In
dition to half the British officers of the station, the
*etery had been thronged with the men of his squad-
Sikhs and Pathans-a form of homage very rare in
ia. Many of them had cried like children; and for
aself, Roy confessed, it had broken him all to bits.
hardly knew how to write of it; but he felt she would
nre to know.
-;,She cared so intensely that, for the moment, she had
Jilmost hated him for probing so deep, for stamping on
: {memory a picture that would not fade.
; >His next letter had been no more than half a sheet.
Ihat was three days ago. Another was overdue; and
:he post was overdue also.
i;Ah-at last ! A flash of scarlet in the verandah and
Xazl Eli presenting an envelope on a salver, as though
Ie were a goddess and the letter an offering at her
sine.
it was a shade thicker than usual. Well, it ought to
She had been very patient with his brevity. This
eit seemed he had something to say.
ifier heart stirred perceptibly as she opened it and
,^:-
' DEAREST GIRL,-.
in
I'm afraid my letters have been very poor things
frtl of the reason you know and understand--as fi
[I any one can. I'm still dazed. Everything's out of
ctpective. I suppose I shall take it in some day.
'.But there's another reason-connected with fim.
Crhaps you can guess. I've been puzzled all along
Out you two. And now I know. I wonder-does
t hurt you ?   It hurts me horribly. I need hardly
'te didn't give you away. It was things you said-
MIars Ranyard. Anyhow, that last evening, I intlted
lhaving the truth. But I couldn't write about' I
er-for fear of saying things I'd regret afterward's
Bose-what possessed you ? A man worth fifty of
: -Of comrse,, I know loving doesn't go by merit.
l[to keep him on tenterhooks, eating his heart -out
jealousy, while yu frankly encouraged me--you
t rou did. And -never d-eaming; only puzzled
mg;~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="390"/>
at the way he sheered off after the first. Betweew;
we made his last month of life a torment, though he n
let me guess it. I don't know how to forgive my
And, to be honest, it's no easy job forgiving you. If ti
makes you angry, if you think me a prig, I can't he
it. If you'd heard him-all those hours of deliriumn
you might understand.                         .
"When he wasn't raving, he had only one though
I mustn't blame you, or hurt you, on account of h
I'm trying not to. But if I know you at all, that.
hurt more than anything I could say. And it's
right I should tell it you. 
"My dearest Girl, you can't think how diffic
how strange it feels writing to you like this. I me
to wait till I came up. But I couldn't write natura
and I was afraid you mightn't understand.  ' -
"I'm coming, after all, sooner than I thought, for 
fool of a body has given out, and Collins won't let a
hang on, though I feel the work just keeps me go
It must be Kohat first, because of Paul. Now thi
are calming down, he is getting away to be mar
The quietest possible affair, of course; but he's keii
should be best man in place of Lance. And I neqe
say how I value the compliment.  . 
"No more trouble here or Amritsar, thank God
a few courageous men. Martial Law arrangements 
being carried through to admiration. The Lahore C.i
seems to get the right side of every one. He ham
gift for the personal touch that is everything out he
, and in no time the poor deluded beggars in the 
were shouting 'Martial Law ki jai' as fervently as 
they shouted for Ghandi and Co.              :i
"One of my fellows said to me: ' Our people o
understand this new talk of "Committee Ki Raj" 
"Dyarchy Raj."   Too many orders make confus
But they understand "Hulkm Ki raj."   In fact, 
the general opinion that prompt action in the Pmj
has fairly well steadied India-for the present at,
"Well, I won't write more. We'll: inm  soon ;  in
don't doubt you'll explain a good dea ,at still pu.I
and hurts me. If I seem changed,' yu mast    i
1 Government by order. -:  ,; . ;' l. 'i



<pb n="391"/>
DUJT OF THE ACTUAL                391
allowances. I can't yet see my way in a world empty
of Lance. But we must help each other, Rose-not
pull two ways. Don't bother to write long explanations.
things will be easier face to face.
" Yours ever,
RoY."
"Yours ever," . . .Did he mean that? He cer-
tainly meant the rest. Her hands dropped in her lap;
and she sat there, staring before her-startled, angry,
more profoundly disturbed and unsure of herself than
she had felt tn all her days. Though Roy had tried to
write with moderation, there were sentences that struck
at her vanity, her conscience, her heart. Her first over-
whelming impulse was to write back at once telling him
he need not trouble to come up, as the engagement
was off. Accustomed to unquestioning homage, she
book criticism badly; also-undeniably--she was jealous
Df his absorption in Lance. The impulse to dismiss him
was mere hurt vanity.
And the queer thing was, that deep down under the
vanity and the jealousy, her old feeling for Lance seemed
sgain to be stirring in its sleep.
The love of such a man leaves no light impress on
any woman; and Lance. had unwittingly achieved two
master-strokes calculated to deepen that impress on one
6f her nature. In the first place, he had fronted squarely
Fe shock of her defection-patently on account of Roy.
$he could see him now-standing near her mantelpiece,
is eyes sombre with passion and pain; no word of
reproach or pleading, though there smouldered beneath
his silence the fire of his formidable temper. And just
ieause he had neither pleaded nor stormed, she had
isme perilously near to an ignominious volte-face, from
hch she had only been saved by something in him,
tot in herself. If she did not know it then, she kwew
1 now. In the second place, he had died gallantly-
on account of Roy. Snatched utterly out of reach,
of sight, his: value was enhanced tenfold  and now,
:rown all, came Roy's revelation of his amazing
gnanimity. ...
tr:ange, what a complicated affair it was, for some
le, this simple natural business of getting married.
i?



<pb n="392"/>
MS              FAB T'O SEEK E
Was it part of the price one had to pay for being
tiful t Half the girls one knew slipped into it with m
the same sort of thrill as they slipped into a new f
But those were mostly the nice plain little things, w
subided gratefully into the fist pair of arms held o
to them. And probably they had their reward.
ln chastened moods, Bose did not quite care
.~leB ber _ how many times she had succumbed, e
; 'lXilljy , to that supreme temptation. Good heavem
:-¢*.*  Voilhd her precious pair think of her-if t
ti trI At least, she had the grace to feel proud
"t~ tale of her conquests included two sudh men.
But Lance was gone-on account of  oy-where
spell of hers could touch him any more; and Bo
was he going too . .. on account of Lance . . . t
if she could prevent him; and yet . . goodness knew
The sigh that shivered through her sprang from.'
deeper source than mere self-pity.
Battle of rickshaw wheels, puffing and grunting.
" jkAmponu, heralded the return of her mother,
had been out paying a round of preliminary cals.,
took eight stalwart men and a rickshaw of special 
sions to eonvey her formidable bulk up and down
reads; and affectionate friends hinted that the 
demanded extra pay for extra weight I 
A glance at her florid face warned Bows there 
trouble in the air.
! Oh^Rose-tiere you are. I've had the shook of 
life! I" Waving away her jkha panieNe sank into 
adjacent eane chair that creaked and swtd om
under the assault. "It was at Mrs Tas. My: :
-would you beiee it    That fine fanc6 of
after worming himself into our good graes-trii 
to be practically a kdf-aste. A superior one, it
But till--the deceitfulness of the man  Going 
looking like everybody else too  An4 gey'biaec
into the bargain I"
At that Bose fatally smiled-in spite of genuine
"I can't see anything fwseW in it I" sape
mother; "I thought you'd be fptnou. Did yoe i
notice -  t Had you the least suspiion "   - .
No theast," N    ose answered, with unrled 
"I Iknew."                         -  .   v



<pb n="393"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL               '       :
-I- new ? Yet you were fool enough to accept
dwilfully deceive your own mother! I sup-
lle insisted, and you-"
I insisted. I knew my own mind. And I
going to have him upset-"
ut if I'm upset it doesn't matter a brass farthing ? "
bfdoes matter. I'm very sorry you've had such a
RiBose had some ado to maintain her coolness;
Fe knew it for her one unfailing weapon. "Of
B  I meant to tell you later; in fact, as soon as he
tU1 to settle things finally--"
l t considerate of you! And when he does come
P.ropose to settle things finally-- " She choked,
and glared. She was realising . . . " The posi-
u've put me in ! It's detestable !."
sighed. It struck her that her own position was
betly enviable. "I've said I'm sorry. And really
idt seem the least likely. . . . Who was the
ifnstrument of Fate "
ung Joe Bradley, of the Forests. We were 'talk-
he riots and poor Major Desmond, and Mrs Tait '
to mention Roy Sinclair. Mr Bradley asked
tie the artist's son; and told how he once went
* there-when his mother was staying with Lady
d-nd had a stand-up fight with Roy. He said 
i3otcher was rather a swell native woman-a psueo
' and Roy went for him like a wild thing, because
' her an ayah- , -"
Rose smiled in spite of herself. "He would i"
eld he, indeed! That's all you think of-
-you know I've got a weak heart. And I nearly 
f that's any interest to you ! The Bradley boy
'know--about us. But Mrs Tait's a perfect little
'!g:   abe all over Simla to-morrow. And I was so
t.d rprouod--  " Her voice shook. Tears threat-
0"^ And it's so awkward-so undignified ... baek-
fea;r mother, I've no intention whatever of back-
l  re no intention whatever of having a half-
a son-in-law." 
l    i.ed aft that, and drew in a steadying breath.
Sat last, the eards were on the table. She wasv



<pb n="394"/>
394              FAR TO SEEK 
committed to flat opposition or retreat-an impasse
had skilfully avoided hitherto. .But for Roy's sake
stood her ground.              . -
"It was-rather a jar when he told me," she admit
by way of concession. "But truly, he is differen
you'll only listen, without fuming! His mother's:
Rajput of the highest caste. Her father educated
almost like an English girl. She was only sevent
when she married Sir Nevil; and she lived altoge
in England after that. In everything but being 
son, Roy is practically an Englishman. You can't
him with the kind of people we associate with
other word out here-"
Very patiently and tactfully she put forward 
redeeming argument in his favour-without avail
Elton-broadly-had the right on her side; and.
gods had denied her the gift of discrimination. She
India as a vast, confused jumble of Rajahs and n
and servants and coolies-all steeped in varying 
of dirt and dishonesty, greed and shameless ingrati
It did not occur to her that sharp distinctions of.
* acter, tradition, and culture underlay the more o,
uniform tint of skin. And beneath her instinctive
pathy, burned furious anger with Roy for placin
by his deceitfulness (it must have been his) in the.i
position of having to repudiate the engagement s-,
announced with such dclat only three weeks agQ.c
The moment she had recovered her breat
returned unshaken to the charge.
"That's very fine talk, my .dear, for two 
love. But Roy's a half-caste: that's fiat. You
wriggle away from the damning fact by splitti'
& bout education and breeding. Besides-you only
'of the man. But are you prepared for your p
first baby to be as dark as a native   It's moi
likely.. I know it for a fact--"
"Really, Mother! You're a trifle previous." I
was cool no longer; a slow, unwilling :blhuse
her face. Her mother had struck at her more'
than she knew.                 '
" Well, if you will be obstinate, it's muy iy, t
your eyes; or, of course, I wouX't     te-
married girl. There's another t.i4-



<pb n="395"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL                 39'
a lparticular form of consumption carries off
c*4etched children of these mixed marriages. A
rhaps; but think of it- ! Your own! And
perfectly well the moral deterioration- "
e's none of that about Roy." Rose grew warmer
4And you know perfectly well most of it comes
l circumstances, the stigma, the type of parent.
'ean say what you please. I'm of age. I love
9stend to marry him."
^ you won't do it from my house. I wash my
thie whole affair."
Be, upon her ultimatum, a-quiver with righteous
en to the realistic cherries in her hat. The girl
, Oitwardly composed, inwardly dismayed.
you. Now I know where I stand. And you
j a word to Roy. You mustn't-really--"
s pleaded. " He worships his mother in quite
Fashioned way. He simply couldn't see-the
ilt of view. Besides-he's ill . .  unhappy.
"your attitude forces one to say, can only be
m e."
L't take orders from my own daughter," Mrs
btted ungraciously. She was in no humour for
or dictation. "But I'm sure I've no wish
him. I'll give you a week or ten days to make
is. But whenever you have him here, I shall
- And if you come to your senses-you can let 
t she departed, leaving Rose feeling battered
B e, and horribly uncertain what-in the face
*ombshell-she intended to do: she, who had
ee suffer cruelly, and evoked a tragic situation
:im and Roy, largely in order to avoid a clash
i   have been as nothing compared with this...!
sations were in a whirl. But somehow-she
it through. Home life was becoming intoler-
~    i-for several cogent reasons-she wanted
h'eed be, she would tell him, diplomatically;
' herself from her mother's attitude.
-er mother had said things that would
tl things, that might be true....
, she could not write him a long letter:
to bring him back to her in a relenting



<pb n="396"/>
396              FAR TO SEEK
mood. Sitting down again, she unearthed from 
black-and-silver bag a fountain pen and half a s
of paper.
"MY DARLING Ro " (she wrote),-
"Your letter did hurt-badly. Perhaps I dese
it. All I can say till we meet, is-forgive me, if y
can, because of Lance. It's rather odd-though 
are my lover, and I suppose you do care still-I
think of no stronger appeal than that. He cared
for us both, in his big splendid way. Can't we sta
by each other ?
"You ask me to make allowances. Will you
generous, and do the same on a larger scale for y
sincerely loving (and not altogether worthless)
Bosrim
-:
.7
.



<pb n="397"/>
397
CHAPTER XII.
' She had a step that walked unheard,
It made the stones like grass;
Yet that light step had crushed a heart
As light as that step was."
--W. H. DAVIES.
AT last, Roy was actually coming. The critical moment
was upon them; and Rose sat alone in the drawing-
room awaiting him.
;Her mother was out; had arranged to be out for the
evening also. The strain between them still continued;
pad it told most on Rose. The cat-like element in her
Vrved comfort; and an undercurrent of clash was
peculiarly irritating in her present sore, uncertain state
it heart. Weeks of it, she knew, would scarcely leave a
Oknt on her mother's leathern temperament. When it
ane to a tug the tougher nature scored, which was one
ason why she had so skilfully avoided tugs hitherto.
e True, she was of age; and her father's small legacy
?ve her a measure of independence. But how could
te set about getting married in the face of open opposi-
tI I And-how keep the truth from Roy I Or tone
i down, so that he would not go off at a tangent straight-
Mway I
-. Assuredly the Fates had conspired to strip her head-
otng romance of its gilded trappings. But her moment
.r marriage had come. She was sick to death of the
Aio-Indian round-from the unattached standpoint,
i* least. Roy fascinated her as few men had done;
1 she had been deliberately trying to ignore the effect
mother's brutal frankness. Their coming together
i these changed'conditions, would be the ultimate
:uc· h a chasm of distance seemed to yawn between



<pb n="398"/>
398              FAR TO SEEK
that tender parting, in her boudoir and this rit
reunion-in another world.... .
Sounds of arrival brought her to her feet; but ,
checked the natural impulse to welcome him in
verandah. Her innate sense of drama shrank 
possible awkwardness, a false step, at the start.
And now he appeared in the doorway-very strai
and slim in his grey suit, with the sorrowful black b
on his arm. 
"Rose! " he cried-and stood gazing at her, pu
hammering, brain dizzy. The mere sight of her brou
back too vividly the memory of those April days th
he had been resolutely shutting out of his mind.
His pause-the shock of his changed aspect-he
her motionless also. He looked older, more sallo'
his sensitive mouth compressed; no lurking gleam 
his eyes. He seemed actually less good-looking than sE
remembered; for anguish is no beautifier.     wI
So standing, they mutely confronted the change'i
themselves-in each other; then Rose swept fo
both hands held out.
"Roy-my darling-what you must have been throu
Can you-will you-in spite of all--? "
Next moment, in his silent, vehement fashion, h6':i
straining her to him; kissing her eyes, her hair,  !
! lips; not in simple lover's ecstasy, but in a fervousr
repressed passion, touched with tragedy, with pain. .
Then' he held her from him, to refresh his tired 
with the sheer beauty of her; and was struck at 
by the absence of colour; the wide black sash, the 
velvet round her throat and hair. 
He touched the velvet, looking his question. 
nodded, drawing in her lip to steady it.  /  ''-
" I felt-I must. You don't mind  "
"Mind- -   -Sometimes I wonder if I shall
really mind things any more."
His face worked. That queer dizziness took him a
With an incoherent apology, he sat down rather abr
and leaned forward, his head between his hands, hi
the emotion he could not altogether control. 
Rose stood beside him, feeling helpless and v
aggrieved. He had just got back to her, after g4
weeks' parting, and he sat there lost in an aee



<pb n="399"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL
:t left her quite out of account. Inadvertently
shed the thought, " Whatever Lance might have
he would not succumb." It startled her. She
per so compared them before....
,-looking down at his bowed head, compunction
!her, and tenderness, that rarely entered into her
Sor men. She could think of nothing to say that
.not sound idiotically commonplace. So she laid
don his hair, and moved it caressingly now and
t a tremor go through him. He half withdrew
d, checked himself, and capturing her hand,
it to his lips, that were hot and feverish.
.ys-what is it ? What went wrong ? " she asked
Icoked up now with a fair imitation of a smile.
an old memory. It was dear of you. Un-
of me."-Pain and perplexity went from her.
pped to her knees beside him, and his arm en-
bter. "Sorry to behave like this. But I'm not
. And-seeing you, brought it all back so sharply!
bit of a strain, this last week. A letter from
brave, of course; but broken utterly. The
"too: and that beast of a journey fairly finished
ted closer, comforting him by the feel of her
s. Then her practical brain suggested needs more
n, none the less essential.
J est-you're simply exhausted. How about tea
eaded for a peg, if permissible. She fetched it
m tm-.ade tea; plied him with sandwiches and
bikes, for which he still retained his boyish
S.
i sng proved difficult. There were uncomfort-
In their first uplifted moment all had seemed
a-maing was simple, elemental, satisfying.
A initial glamour and passion of courtship
$av-selyl adventured, when the fabric of their
1 shattered by the startling events of those
H  -]Both were realising-as they stepped "au-
-/i  the fragments-that, for all their surface
ereti   stranger underneath.



<pb n="400"/>
400              FAR TO- SEEK
Roy took refuge in talk about Lahore; the',n
tribute paid to the conduct of all troops-Britis
Indian-and police, under peculiarly exasperatig
cumstances, the C.O.'s conviction that unless t
measures were taken-and adhered to-there wo
more outbreaks, at shorter intervals, better organise
He hoped her charming air of interest was ge
but felt by no means sure. And all the while, 
craving to know what she had to say for herself.;&i
doubting whether he could stand the lightest to
his open wound. Lance had begged him not to hurt
Had it ever occurred to that devout lover how shi
she might hurt him ?
Tea and a restful hour in an arm-chair eased&
strain a little. Then Rose suggested the garden, kn
him susceptible to the large healing influences of 
and sky; also with diplomatic intent to draw himt
from the house before her mother's meteoric visita
And she was only just in time. The rattle of:
shaw wheels came up the main path two minutes:
they had turned out of it towards a favourite
which she had strangely grown to love in the las
weeks.
"Poor darling ! You've just missed Mother! "',
condoled with him, smiling sidelong under her la
and she almost blessed her maternal enemy for 
back the familiar gleam into his eyes. 
"Bad luck ! Ought we to go in again ? "
- "Gracious, no. She's only tearing home to c
for an early dinner at Penshurst and the theatre.
way, please note, you're immune from the for
We're going to have a peaceful time, quite indepe
of Simla rushings. Just ourselves to ourselves."
" Good."
It was an asset with men-second only to her b
-this gift for creating a restful atmosphere.
Her nook, in an angle above the narrow path,
grassy bank, looking across crumpled ranges-v
soft in the level light-to the still purity of the sno
"Rather nice, isn't it " she said. "I'm no
to mooning out of doors; but I've spent several v
here . . . lately."
"It's sanctuary," Roy murmured; but his 



<pb n="401"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL               401
:trith apprehension. Flinging off his hat, he
d full length on the gentle slope, hands undef his
: nd let the healing rays flow into the deeps of his
being.
sat upright beside him, her fingers locked loosely
one raised knee. She was troubled too, and quite
'loss how to begin.
S: you've not been going out much? " he asked,
P'a prolonged pause.
56-how could I-with you, so unhappy, down
eand'.. ."-She deliberately met his eyes; and
look in them impelled her to ask: "What is it,
-lurking in your mind  "
sA I-to be frank  "
t shivered. " It sounds-rather chilly. But I sup-
re'd better take our cold plunge-and get it over I "
e "--he hesitated palpably. "It was only a
S  wonder-if you care . . . all that . . . now he's
how could you deliberately hurt him so-while he
drew in her lip. It was going to be more un-
tg than she had foreseen.
EOW can a woman explain to a man the simple
B'ttat she is incurably-perhaps unforgivably-a
oi't know. I hoped you could-up to a point,"
toy, looking away to the snows and remembering,
:tty, that was where he ought to be now-with
lways Lance: no other thought or presence
d vital to him, these days. Yet Rose remained
:  a End desirable-and clearly she loved him.
'obesn't make things easier, you know," she was
in her cool, low voice, "to feel you are patently
g events that, unhappily, did hurt-him; but
gavie me to you . . .
-beauty, her evident pain, penetrated the settled
-tit- enveloped him like an atmosphere.
rng--forgive me!"   He reached out, pullin
s apart, and his fingers closed hard on hers.
ty eing-clumsily-to understand ; :.'
I godness knows .I'm wiling to help yroV' she
returmnng his presure. "But-I'm afrafi; the
--isay for bmysef won't do much to re gi  ay



<pb n="402"/>
402              PAR TO SEER 
halo-if there's any of it left! I gather you M.
very well up in women, or girls, Roy ? "
" No-I'm not. Perhaps it makes me seem to y
bit of a fool ? 
" Quite the reverse. It's all along been a part of,
charm."
"My-charm    "                            ? 
There was more of tenderness than amusement in.
low laugh. "Precisely ! If you didn't possess--
magnetic quality, could I have been drawn away:f
a man-like Lance, when I'd nearly made up my
-to face the music."
For answer, he kissed her captured hand.
Then: "Roy, if it doesn't hurt too much," 
urged, " will you tell me first-just-what Lance sail
It would hurt, horridly,- But it was as well she s
know; and not a word need he withhold. Could.,
be a finer tribute to his friend ? It was his own 
in their last unforgettable talk that could not 
produced.
"Yes-I'll tell you," he said. And, his half-
eyes resting on the sunlit hills, he told her, in a v
from which all feeling was carefully expunged,.
so could he achieve the telling; and she listened wtt
interruption, for which he felt grateful, exceeding
When it was over he merely moved his he i;.
looked up at her; and she returned his look, h  -
heavy with tears. Mutually their fingers tightez;4.,
" Thank you," she said. "It makes me . . asl i
but it makes me proud."                    ,
" It made me angry and bewildered," said Roy'  &
you really were . . . coming his way, what the[
did I do to upset it all ? Of course I admired you it
I was interested-on his account. But-I had no tho
-I was absorbed in other things- "          *
She nodded slowly, not looking at him. "Q
And I suppose-being me-I didn't choose that 4
should dance with me, ride with me, obviously a
me, and yet remain absorbed in other things. '
being you-of course it never struck you that, 
kind of girl, your provocatively casual attitude. 
amounted to a challenge. Besides-as I said-y
charming; you were different. Perhaps-if '



<pb n="403"/>
:       DUST OF THE ACTUAL          -     03
hde less sure-of Lance, if he'd had the wit even to
Mlm keen on some one else ... he might have saved
itself. As it was-you were irresistible."
She heard him grit his teeth; and turned with swift
impunction.
'"' My poor Boy ! Am I jarring you badly  I suppose,
II talked till midnight, I'd never succeed in making
inman like you understand how purely instinctive
-all is. Analysed, like this, it sounds cold-blooded.
It, it's just-second nature. He-Lance-understood
p to a point. That's why he was aggressive that day:
h-furiously angry; all because of you. The pair you
re! He said if I fooled you, and didn't play fair, he'd
tek out, or insist on a pucca engagement. And-yes-
id have the wrong effect. It made me wonder-if I
~kd marry a man, however splendid, who owned such
Feting standards and such a hot temper. And there
te you-an unknown quantity, with the Banter-
rangle discreetly in pursuit. A supreme inducement
fitself !-Yes, distinctly, that afternoon was a turning-
fit. Just Lance losing his temper, and you coolly
etting an arrangement with me-"
She paused, looking back over it all ; felt Roy's hold
leken and unobtrusively withdrew her hand.
NS Soon after Kapurthala, he was angry againb And
time, I'm afraid I reminded him' that our engage-
t was only ' on' conditionally; that if he started
rying at me, it would soon be unconditionally offx---"
[&o it should have been !" Roy jerked up on to his
*ow, and confronted her with challenging directness.
nee you could speak like that, feel like. that, you'd
tight to keep him hanging on-hoping when there
practically no hope. It wasn't playing the game--"
s time she kept her eyes averted, and a slow colour
ded her face. There was a point beyond which
ie frankness could hot go. She could not-would
-tell this uiflatteringly critical lover of hers that
not in her nature to let the one man go till she
,morally sure of the other.
had only a profile view of her warm cheek, her 
fe nostril a-quiver, her lip drawn in. And when
Hvoke, it was in the tensex passionate tone of that
at Anarkarlit



<pb n="404"/>
404              FAR S  ) SEEK 
"Oh yes-it's easy work sitting in judgment'on 
people. I told you I hadn't much of a case-I asi
you to make allowances. You clearly can't. He as
you-not to hurt me. You clearly feel you must. Y
-in justice to you both-I'm doing what I can. I
never before condescended to explain myself--aino
excuse myself-to any man;. and I certainly
shall again. It strikes me you'd better apply your o
indictment . . to your own case. If you can think 
feel . .as you seem to do, better face the fact and
done with it --"
But Roy, startled and penitent, was sitting up
by now; and, when she would have risen, he seized 
crushing her to him, would she or no. In her pain
anger she more than ever drew him. In his utter he'
loneliness, he more than ever needed her. And thew
minder of Lance crowned all.
"My darling-don't go off at a tangent, that w
he implored her, his lips against her hair. " For 
it's a sacred bond. It can't be snapped in a fit of te
-like a bit of knotted thread. I'll accept . . w
can't see clear. We'll stand by each other, as you-r
Learn one another-Rose. . .!    My dearest 
don't--  !"                                 *
He strained her closer, in mingled bewilderment 
distress. For Rose-who trod lightly on the he
men, Rose-the serene and self-assured-was sobl
brokenly in his arms.... 
Before the end of the evening, they were more of
themselves again; the threatened storm averted -
trouble patched up and summarily dismissed, ans
lovers can dismiss a cloud that intrudes upaonf.1
heaven of blue.             .       .    .
-   Ia



<pb n="405"/>
-  05
~.,
.'..  -
CHAPTER XIII.
!ILLe pire douleur est de ne pas, pleurer ee qu'on a perdu."--DB
3ULBVAIN.
j-T as days passed, both grew increasingly aware of
he patch; and both very carefully concealed the fact.
Mhey spent a week of peaceful seclusion from Simla and
|or restless activities. Roy scarcely set eyes on Mrs
ilton; but-Rose having skilfully prepared the ground
ehe merely gave her credit for her mother's unusual
tplay of tact.
Neither was in the vein for dances or tennis parties.
-ey rode out to Mashobra and Fagu. They spent long
ays, picnicking in the Glen. Roy discovered, with
Ifsfaction, that Rose had a weakness for being read to
a fair taste in literature, so long as it was not poetry.
l  also discovered-with a twinge of dismay-that if
were many hours together, he found reading easier
a talking.
#in the whole, they spent a week that should, by
ts, have been ideal for new-made lovers; yet, at
t, both felt vaguely troubled and disillusioned.
|,?ain and parting and harsh realities seemed to. have
tbbed the bloom   off their exotic romance. And for
see the trouble struck deep. She had deliberately
ted to put aside her own innate shrinking from the
Oi  n strain in Roy. But she reckoned without the
Bing effect of her mother's plain speaking. At first
twad flatly ignored it; then she fortified her secret
by devising a practical plan for getting away:
friend in Kashmir. There was a sister in Simla
to join her. They could travel together. Roy
fo0llow on. And there they two could be quietly 



<pb n="406"/>
406               FAR' TO SEEK
married without fuss or audible comment from t
talkative little world.
It was not precisely her idea of the manner in w
she-Rose Arden-should be given in marriage. B3
the main point was that-if she could help it-
mother should not score in the matter of Roy. Co
she help it t That was the question persistently kno
ing at her heart. 
And she was only a degree less troubled by the p
verse revival of her feeling for Lance. Vanished
hold on her deeper nature seemed mysteriously
strengthen. Memories crowded in, unbidden, of :i
golden time together just before Roy appeared on.t
scene; till she almost arrived at blaming her delib
ately chosen lover for having come between the sr
landed her in her present distracting position. For
it was the ghost of Lance that threatened to come/:
tween her and Roy; and the irony of it cut her to
quick. If she had dealt unfairly by these two
whose standards were leagues above her own, she 
not, it seemed, to escape her share of suffering. . , -
For Roy's heart also knew the chill of secret di
sion. The ardour and thrill of his courtship see
fatally to have suffered eclipse. When they were-:
gether, the lure of her was potent still. It was in t
gaps between that he felt irked, more and more,-:
incipient criticism. In the course of that first talk,-
had unwittingly stripped herself of the glamour t
was more than half her charm; and at bottom-
Eastern subconsciousness was jarred by her casual .
tude to the sanctities of the man and woman relat
as instilled into him by his mother. When he qual
with her treatment of Lance, she saw it merely as
rather exaggerated concern for his friend. There a
that in it, of course but there was more.   -
Yet undeniably Desmond's urgent plea influence
own effort to ignore the still small voice within him,
protested against the whole affair. At another $
he would have taken it for a clear intimation from
mother; but she seemed to have lost, or deserted 
these days. All he could firmly hold on to, at-prZ
was his loyalty to Lance, his duty to-ERose; and
Seemed to point in the ame i,  tn..       . ;:i. ut .



<pb n="407"/>
DUSt OF THE ACTUAL                4 t 
It strek hm as strange that she did not mention
be wedding; and she had been so full of it that very
irst evening, Once, when he casually asked if any
ixtures were decided on yet, she had smiled and an-
wered, "No    not yet."  And some other topic had
ntervened.
.It was only a degree less strange that she spoke so
iten of Lance, without attempting to disguise her
miiration-and something more. And in himself--
trangest of all-this surprising manifestation stirred no
Rekcer of jealousy. It seemed a link, rather, drawing
hem nearer together. She frankly encouraged talk of
heir school-days that involved fresh revealings of Lance 
it every turn: talk that was anodyne or anguish-
aeording to his mood.
She also eneouraged him to unearth his deserted novel
xE read her the opening chapters. In Lahore, he had
.aged for that moment; now he feared lest it too
harply emphasise their inner apartness. For the Indian
trosphere was strong in the book; and the Indian
tmosphere jarred. The effect of the riots had merely
aen repressed. It still simmered underneath.
nly once she had broken out on the subject; and  d
een distinctly restive when he demurred at the injustice.
f; sweeping indictments against the whole eountry, be-
Hse a handful of extremists were trying to wreck the
hip. Personally he blamed England for virtually assist-
in the process. It had come near to an altercation-
very rare event with Rose; and it had left Roy feeing
tore unsettled than ever.
: few readings of his novel made him feel more un-
mfortable still. Like all true artists, he listened, as
e read, with the mind of his audience; and intuitively,
O felt her antagonism to the Indian element in his char-
tes, his writing, his theme.
1lor three days he persisted. Then he gave it up_
bThey were sitting in their nook; Rose leaning bak,
?eyes half closed, gazing across the valley; I:t .a
of a flagrantly Indian chapter, he  roe  of:
tetined to take it lightly; not to make  grievance
equally determined she should hear no more.
a f-ew,*eotd Aie did .ot-realise. Thena she
au d lo1oedupliin.u "Wel-, i sthatall I "



<pb n="408"/>
4t08             PA-  R .O) SEEK 
"Yes. That's all-so far as you're concerned" -: 
Her brows went up in the old beguiling way. He
her t*ying to hide her thought, and held up a w
finger.
"Now, don't put it on ! Frankly-isn't she reliev
Hasn't she borne the infliction like a saint "
The blood stirred visibly under her pallor. "It
not an infliction. Your writing's wonderful. 
uncanny-the way you get inside people and things.~;
there's more-go on."
"There's a lot more. But I'm not going o
at her Majesty's express command!-Look here, 
-. . let be." He suddenly changed his tone. " I
feel howitlbothers you. So-why pretend . . . "
She looked down; twisting her opal ring, m
the delicate colours flash and change.  I
( It's a pity-isn't it ? "-she seemed to muse alo
"that more than half of life is made up of pr
It becomes rather a delicate problem-fixing
lines. I do admire your gift, Roy. And yoke
tensely human. But I confess, I-I am jerkedy 
of your theme. Doesn't all this animosity and
vilification affect your own feeling about-thing
least bit " I-;
"Yes. It does. Only-not in your way. It
me unhappy, because the real Indi-asnowed under
specious talk and bitter invective-has less chanee
than ever of being undefstood by those who caan'
below the surface."
"Me-for instance ? "
He sighed. "Oh, scores and scores of you, 
at Home. And scores of others, Awo have far less
That's why one feels bound to. ' what one can . *
His thoughts on that score went too deep for utt
But Rose was engaged inhlf&r own purely perso
liberations. 
"Yot might want to come out again...
wardS .                   -                 ' .. 
"Yes-I should hope to. Besides . . . there
cousins.  ." '    . .                     ''
"iriain ones --." .    : .               -::
"Yes.   Very clever.  Very o.rtig.- ,
vou've-beenf six vetars in Tniia,. Ra2*e v -iva'



<pb n="409"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL                409
friendly way, a cultivated, well-born Indian-man or
mnan ? "                ,
M'N-no. Not worth mentioning."  ' 
"And . . . you haven't wanted to  " 
lHe felt her shrink from the direct question.
': Why press the point, Roy ? It needn't nlte any
Mi difference-need it-between you and me ? ,
Rer counter-question was still more direct, more
arching.
"Perhaps not-now," he said. "It might . .. make
lot . .. afterwards-"
At that critical juncture their talk was interrupted
- a peon with a note that required immediate attention:
Ld Roy, leftjone, felt increasingly disillylsp ed and
Smayed. iF-
Later on,   his relief, Rose suggested a ride. She
mned suddenly in a more elusive mood than he had
.periecied since their engagement. She did not refer
,ain to his novel, or to the thorny topic of India; and
eir parting embrace was chilled by a shadow of
nstraint.                                  If 
"'How  would it be-afterwards " he wondered,
ling back to the Club, at a foot's pace, feeling tired 
Ad feverish and gravely puzzled as to whether it might
it-on all counts-be the greater wrong to nmake a
bish of a bond so rashly forged.            .' 
To-day, very distinctly he was aware of the inner
e had been trying to ignore. And to-day it wasi;.
Operative; less easily stilled. Could it be . . ;  ''
bly, his mother, trying to reach him-and 
e flrst time . 
That thought prompted the test question-if shewe 
[ve, how would he feel about bringing Rose home-as
lkter-in-law, as mother of her grandson .. .the
gifts   If she were alive, could Rose herself have
eed the conjunction ? And to him she was still verily 
l'e--or had been, till his infatuate passion had binded
m to everything but one face, one form, one desiare,
Tht' lht there came to him-on the -vege c-' ieep
Bie ~d thrilling sensation that she wasrthere-yeatn- 
g to him across an impassable brier. And this time 
Ai-ew-with a b'iter Teeirtanty-that the barrier was
iiiMnlsfilf. Bvfrv newve in Ehm erSved-ras he had    .



<pb n="410"/>
410             FPAR TO SEEKi
not craved this long while-the unmistakable sent'
her that seemed gone past recall. Desperately,   I
strained every faculty to penetrate the resistant medi
that withheld her from him-in vain.
Wearied out, with disappointment and futile effort,: i
fell asleep-praying for a dream visitation to revive 
shaken faith. None came; and conviction seized   i
that none would come, until ...
One could not, simultaneously, live on intimate t
with earth and heaven. And Rose was earth in its inm
alluring guise. More: she had awakened in him seni
tions and needs that, at the moment, she alone ec
satisfy. But if it amounted to a choice; for him, tX
could be no question.... 
Next day and the day after, a sharp ifurn of f
kept him in bed: and a touch of his father in 
tempted him to write, sooner than face the strain ot
final scene. But moral cowardice was not among[
failings; also unquestionably-if irrationally-he waf
to see her, to hold her in his arms once again.  ..
On the third morning he sent her a note saying)[
was bettelr  he would be round for tea; and reee
a verbal answer. Miss Sahib sent her salaam. She wo
be at home.                 .
So, about half-past three, he rode out to the house-
s Elysium Hill, wondering how-and, at moments, wh
-he was going to pull it through ..             -
Her smile of welcome almost unmanned him.n
simply did not feel fit for the stratin  It would boE
much easier and more restful to yield to her spell. 
"I'm so sorry. Idiotic ff me," was all he said ; a
went forward to take her in his anrs.         ,in
But she, without a word, laid both hands on :
holding him back.                              ^ 
"Rose ! Wha's the matter t " he cried, ge
upset. Nothing undermines a resolve like findfi
forestalled. 
"Simply-it's all over. We're beaten, Boy,'":l
said in a queer, repressed- voiee. .( We can't go on-
this. *And-you know it."                      :
"But-darling L" He took her by the arms. 
"   No ...   o! "'  The passione' protest w*'W



<pb n="411"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL               411
ressed to herself as much as to him. "Listen, Roy.
ve never hated saying anything more-but it's true.
ou said, last time,-' Why pretend ? ' And that struck
ome. I knew I had been pretending hard-because I
anted to-for more than a week. You made me realise
. . one couldn't go on at it all one's married life.-
ut, my dear, what a wretch I am ! You're not fit . .."
" Oh, I'm just wobbly . . . stupid," he muttered, half
ized, as she pressed him down into a corner of the
hesterfield.
"Poor old boy. When you've had some tea, you'll be
)le to face things."
He said nothing; merely leaned back against the
ishien and closed his eyes-part of him rebelling
riously against her quiet yet summary proceedings-;
bile she attended to the sputtering kettle.
How prosaic, after all, are even the great moments oj
e! They had been ardent lovers. They had come
the parting of the ways. But a kettle on the boil
ould wait for no man; -and, till the body was served,
.e troubles of the heart must wait.
She drew the table nearer to him; carefully poured
it tea; carefully avoided his eyes. And--in the
tervals between her mechanical occupations-sghetold
m as much of the truth as she felt he could bear to
ar, or she to speak. Among other things, unavoid-
Ily, she explained how-and through whom--he
other had come to know about their reservation- 
"That young sweep!" Roy muttered, so suddenly
lf-alert and fierce that amused tenderness tripped up
Ir studied composure.
"You'd go for him now, just the same, I believe I"
"I would-and a bit extra. Because-of you."
She sighed&  "Oh yes, it was a mauvais quart d'hetre
the first order. And coming on the top of your
Iashing letter- -"
He captured her hand. Their eyes met-aad softened.
" No, Roy," she said, gently but inexorably releatg
, fingers. "We've got to keep our headfs tbay,
Caahow."                           .. 
i Has yours so completely taken command of affairs "
Am amraid-4it    ;ha" 
Xet-you stood up toyour mother $ "



<pb n="412"/>
412'             FAR TO SEEK           -
"Oh, I did-as I've never done yet. But afterw
I realised-it was only skin deep. She said . .
I can't repeat; but equally . . . I can't forget; th
about .. .possible children .. ." 
The blood flamed in Roy's sallow face. "Confo
her ! What does she know about possible children? .",.
"More than I do, I suppose," Rose admitted, wit
pathetic half smile. "Anyway, after that, sherefus
to countenance the engagement-the wedding-- 
Roy sat suddenly forward, scorn and anger in h
eyes.
" Refused--  ! After the infernal fuss she made o-
me, because my father happened to have a title aid
garden. And now-" his hand closed on the edge !
the table. "I'm considered a pariah-am I ?-sim
on account of my lovely little mother-the guar
angel of us all !"
His blaze of wrath, his low passionate tone, startl
her to silence. He had spoken so seldom of his motl
since the first occasion, that-although she knew-l
had far from plumbed the heigh o and depth of his 
ship. And instinctively she thought, 'I should 
been jealous into the bargain.' 
But Roy had room just then for one considerat
only. 
"Here have I been coming to her house on su
ance . .. polluting her precious drawing-room,
ashe's been avoiding me as if I was a leper, all bec
I'm the son of a sainted woman, whose shoe she wol
have been worthy . oh, I beg your pardon---
checked himself sharply. " After ajl-she's your moth 
Rose felt her cheeks growing uncomfortably warm.; 
did warn you, in Lahore, some people felt ... that way-
"Well, I never dreamed they would behave that 
It's not as if I'd been born and reared in India
might claim relations in her compound."
"My dear-one can't make her see the differe'
Rose urged desperately. 
"Well, I won't stay any. longer in her house. I 
eat her food--" 
He pushed aside his plate so impatiently that
felt almost angry. But she saw his hand tremblev
covered it with her own. 



<pb n="413"/>
D UisT UV' TJLj  AL'TUAli        413
" Boy-my dear! You're ill; and you're being rather
exaggerated over things--"
"Well, you put me in such a false position. You
ought to have told me."
She winced at that and let fall her hand.
"That's all one's reward for trying to save you from
jars when you were knocked up and unhappy. And I
told you .. . I defied her . .I . . I would have
married you. .
He looked at her, and his heart contracted sharply.
"Poor Rose-poor darling!"   He was his normal
4elf again. "What a beast of a time you must have
had ! But-how did you propose to accomplish it--  "
She told him, haltingly, of the Kashmir plan; and
he listened, half incredulous, leaning back again; think-
ing: "She's plucky; but still, all she troubled about
really was to save her face."
And she, noting his impatient frown, was thinking:
'He's like a sensitive plant charged with gunpowder.
s it the touchiness of-- 
" I'm afraid I'd have kicked at that."  His voice
troke in upon her thought. "Such a hole-and-corner
!igsiness. Hardly fair on my father .."
?f' Well, there's no question of it now," she reminded
m  with a touch of asperity. "I've told you-the
ihole' thing's defunct. Later-we'll be glad, perhaps,
hat I discovered in time that part of me could not be
toerced--by the other part, which still wants you as 
Wuch as ever. We should have been landed in disaster
Jsoon or !ate. Better soon-before the roots have
ck too deep. But you're so furiously angry with
~  reason-that you seem almost to forget . . . the
His eyes brooded on her, full of pain and the old,
If-unwilling infatuation. He could not so hurt her
de as to confess that their discovery had been mutual.
t. her glean what satisfaction she could from having
en the lead-first and last. Part of him, also, still
td her; though in the depths, he felt a glimter of
ief that the thing was done-and by her.
N"Io," he said, "I don't forget the fact. But-the
un cuts deep. I want to know. -" he hesitated-
i. this.. anti.ati lhy you can't get over-you-land



<pb n="414"/>
414             jp A . TfV OJVSXbyL
your mother-the ordinary average attitude t Or is 
. . exceptionally acute " I 
She drew in her lip. Why would he force her to hi
him more,? For they had got beyond polite ev
Clearly he wanted the truth.
" Mother's is acute," she said, not looking at him
Mine-I'm afraid-is . . . the ordinary average fee
against it. The exception would be to find a gil
especially out here-who could honestly. . . get ^
it-" L             ,_:
" Unless-she cared in the real big way," Roy itner-
posed; his own pain goading him to an unfair hit 
her. "To be blunt, I suppose it's the case-of L
over again.  You've fbund ..  you don't love  ii
enough--  ?"                                  ^
\And you-?      " she struck back, turning on  t
the cool deliberate look of early days. "Do you I
me enough ? Do you care-as he did ?"
"No-not as he did. I've cared blindly, passlonait
-somehow we didn't seem to meet on any other Pa
In fact, it . . it was realising how magnificently airic
cared . . and how little you seemed able to appree
the fact, that made me feei--s I did, down tD
In a sense, he's been barrng the way . . ever since . ,*
" Roy I Eow strange I 'She faced him now, the m
of repression flung aside. "It's been the same-wi
me!" I 
"With you ?" 
"Yes. Ever since I heard .. he was gone, he
haunted me to distraction. I've seemed to see him-
feel him in quite a different way."        :-
"Good Lord ! "Roy murmur     ncr-inedulous, aa
"Human beings are the queerest things. If only .. 
you'd felt like that . . sooner-? " ..
" Yes-if only I had---!" she lamented 
looking straight before her.                    a
"I'm glad-you told me,"' aid her unaecout
lover.
"I nearly-didn't. But when you said that,: I-i
it might-ease things. And that was his great w:s
wasn't it ?-to ease things . . . for us both. O
there ever any one . .  quite like him ?"  k :e
Tears stood in her eyes, and Boy contemptlatig



<pb n="415"/>
DUST OF THE ACTUAL               415
seeing, for the first time, something beyond her beauty
r-felt drawn to her in an -altogether new way; ian
gting there they taked of him quietly, like friends,
ratber than lovers on the verge of parting for good.
As real to them, almost, as themselves, was the spirit
of the man who had loved both more greatly than they
were capable of loving one another; who, in life, had
rfused to stand between them; yet, in death, had subtly
thrust them apart. ...
Then there came a pause. They remembered....
"We're rather a strange pair-of lovers," she mur-
mured shakily. " I feel, now, as if I can't bear letting
you go. And yet . . . it wouldn't last.-Dearest, will
-you be sensible . . . and finish your tea ? 
"No. It would choke me," he said with smothered
a'ssion. "If I've got to go-I'm going."
He stood up, bracing his shoulders. She stood up
also, confronting him. Neither could see the other's
'face quite clear.
Then: " Only six weeks! " she said very low. "Roy
.,we ought to be ashamed of ourselves,"
4' "I am-heartily," he confessed.  I was never more
SO/."
She was looking down now, twisting her ring. " I'm
a4 ..   . I'm not talented in that line. Somehow
* .. except for Lance, I can't ereet it." She slid the
ing. over her knuckle.
"OB, keep the beastly thing!" he flung out in\an
of pain. "Or throw it down the khud. I said
would bring bad luck."
~ She sighed. "All the same-poor thing I It's too
lXveI .. .."
" Well then, don't wear it; but keep it "-his tone
hnged-" as a reminder. We have been something to
*ie another ...  if it couldn't be everything."
SIUer eyes were still lowered, her lips not quite steady.
f" ' You've been . . . very near it to me. Yet-it
4^ ^th more ... .I cared, the less I could get over
And I felt as if you-wouldn't get over . .
j*if   leod! It's been a bitter, contrary business a41
-; X  I can't,:a  h    'rang yog. And-the talk and
. " .S  iiodded. For her that was not the



<pb n="416"/>
416         -    FAR TO SEEK
least bitter part of it all. "And you --   Oh, Lord
-will it be Hayes to the fore again ? "
" No !" Reproach underlay her vehemence. "Mother
may rage. I shall go with Dolly Smyth to Kashmir.-
And you-- -"
"Oh, I'll go out to Narkhanda." 
"Alone ? But you're ill. You want looking after."
"Can't be helped. Azim Khan's a treasure. And
really I don't care a damn what comes to me."
"Oh, but I do-   ! "
It was a cry from her heart. The strain of repression i
snapped. She swayed, just perceptibly--
In a moment his arms were round her; and they clung 
together a long while, in the only complete form of 
nearness they had known. ...
For Roy, that last passionate kiss was dead-sea fruit.
For Rose, it was her moment of completest surrender to
an elemental force she had deliberately played with only
to find herself the sport of it at last ...
When it was over-all was over. Words were im-
pertinent. He held her hands close, a moment, looking.
into her tear-filled eyes. Then he took up hat and stick-
and stumbled blindly down the verandah steps. ..
Back in his bachelor room at the Club, he realised thatl
fever was on him again: his eyeballs burning; little
hammers beating all over his head. Mechanically, he :
picked up two letters that lay awaiting him: one fromi.
his father, one from Jeffers, congratulating him, in rather,
guarded phrases, on his engagement to Miss Arden.
It was the last straw.
END OF PHASE IV.
- I~



<pb n="417"/>
PHASE V.
A STAR IN DARKNESS



<pb n="419"/>
CHAPTER I.
"Thou art with life
Too closely woven, nerve with nerve intwined;
Service still craving service, love for love . . .
Nor yet thy human task is done."
-R. L. S.
the verandah of Narkhanda dAk bungalow Roy lay
me, languidly at ease, assisted by rugs and pillows
d a Madeira cane lounge at an invalid angle; walls
d arches splashed with sunshine; and a table beside
n littered with convalescent accessories. There were
me papers; there were books; there was fruit and
syphon, cut lemons and crushed ice-everything
)ughtfulness could suggest set within easy reach.
It the nameless depression of convalescence hung
ivy on his spirit and his limbs.
He was thirsty; he was lonely; he was mentally
ngry in a negative kind of way. Yet it simply did
b seem worth the trivial effort of will to decide whether
wanted to pick up a book or an orange or to press
syphon handle. So he lay there, inert, impassive,
ring across the valley at the snows-peak beyond
xring peak, ethereal in the level light.
Phe beauty of them, the pellucid clearness and stillness
early evening, stirred no answering echo within him.
brain was travelling back over a timeless interval;
ndering uncertainly among sensations, apparitions,
I dreams, presumably of semi-delirium: for Lance
s in them and his mother and Rose and Dyan, saying
1 doing -tapossible things. . .
And in clearer intervals, there hovered the bearded
e of Azim Khan, pressing upon his refractory Sahib
s infallible medicine, that 'chikken brath' or jelly.
d occasionally there was another bearded face:



<pb n="420"/>
420             FAR TO SEEK
vaguely familiar, though he could not put a na
to it. 
Between them the two had brought out a dodi
from Simla. He remembered a sharp altercation oi
that. He wanted no confounded doctor messing roi
But Azim Khan, for love of his master, had flatly defi
orders: and the forbidden doctor had appeared-in
ing further exhausting argument. For on no acc
would Roy be moved back to Simla. Azim      h
understood his ways and his needs. He was da
if he would have any one else near him.
And this time he had prevailed. For the doct
who happened to be a wise man, knew when acquiescen
was medically sounder than insistence. There 
however, been a brief intrusion of a strange woman,
cap and apron, who had made a nuisance of hers
over food and washing, and was infernally in the w
When the fever abated, she melted into the landseap
and Roy had just enough of his old spirit left tXi
to murmur, 'Shahbash ! ' in a husky voice: and A
Khan, inflated with pride, became more autocratic t1
ever.
The other bearded face had resolved itself into !
Delhi Sikh, Jiwan Singh. He had been on a t
among the Hills, combating insidious Home-Rule 
tales among the villagers: and finding the Sahib v
ill, had stayed on to help.
This morning they had told him it was the third-
June:-barely three weeks since that strange, poig'
parting with Rose. Not seven weeks since the ifinit
more poignant and terrible parting with Lance. Y
as his mind stirred unwillingly, picking up thready -.
seemed to be looking back across a measureless 
into another life..... 
"The Sahib has slept ? His countenance has 
more favourable since these few days ?1" 
It was the voice of Jiwan Singh; and the man h
followed it-taut and wiry, instinct with a dgree!
energy and purpose almost irritating to one U'w o
feeling emptied of both; aimless as a jelly-U i y
by the tide.                               --i
"Not smoking, HazI'  f Has that seounrel 
Khan forgotten the cigarettes" 



<pb n="421"/>
Roy unearthed his case, and held it up, smiling.
"The scoundrel forgets nothing," said he, knowing
very well how the two of them had vied with one another
in forestalling his needs. "Sit down, my friend-and
tell me news. I am too lazy to read." He touched an
unopened 'Civil and Military Gazette.' " Too lazy even
to cast out the devil of laziness. But very ready to
listen. Are things all quiet now  Any more tamashas ?"
' Only a very little one across the frontier,". said the
Sikh with his grim smile: and proceeded to explain
that the Indian Government had lately become entangled
in a sort of a war with Afghanistan; a rather 'k utcha
bandobast'1 in Jiwan Singh's estimation; and not quite
up to time; but a war, for all that.
"You mean-     " asked Roy, his numbed interest
faintly astir, "that it was to have been part of the
same game as the trouble down there?"
"God has given me ears-and wits, Hazirr," was the
cautious answer. " That would be pukkca bundobast,2
for war and trouble to come at one stroke in the hot
season, when so many of the white soldier-ldg are in the
Hills. Does your Honour suppose that merely by
chance the Amir read in his paper of riots in India, and
said in his heart, ' Wah ! Now is the time for lighting
little fires along the Border' "?
"N-no-I don't suppose-"
" Does your Honour suppose Hindus and Moslems-
outside a highly educated few-are truly falling on each
other's necks, without one thought of political motive? "  .-I
"-No, my friend-I do not suppose."
"Yet these things are said openly among our people:
and too few, now, have courage to speak their thought.
For it is the loyal who suffer-shurrum ki bhtt ! a Is it
surprising, Hazgr, if we, who.distrust this new madness,
begin to ask ourselves, ' Has the British Raj lost the will
-or the power-of former days to protect friends and
smite enemies'      If the noisy few  clamouring for:
fwardj make India once more a battlefield, your people
can go.. We Sikhs must remain, with. Phanand
Afghans--as of old-hammering at our doora--"
At sight of the young Englishman's pained.trown, he
. 1 Crude arrangement.       Sondangeent.
3 Shameful' tallk.



<pb n="422"/>
checked his expansive mood. "To the Sahib I can
speak-the thoughts of my heart; but this  not tDk
make a sick man well. God is merciful. Before a
lost-the British Riaj may yet arise with power, as,
the great days ..."                           ; 
But his talk, if unpalatable, was more tonic than;
knew; because Roy's love for India went deeper 
he knew. The justice of Jiwan Singh's reproach; 
hint at tragic severance of the two countries 
within him, waked him effectually from semi-to
and the process was as painful as the tingling
of life in a frozen limb. By timely courage, on the sw
the threat to India had been staved off: but it was t
still-sinister, unsleeping, virtually unchecked.
'Scotched-not killed.' The voice of Lance     
too clearly in Roy's brain; and the more intimate 
deadened a little by illness, struck at his heart !lw
sword. ... .
Within a week, care and feeding and inimitao  s
straight from the snowfields, had made him, physi
a new man. Mentally, it had brought him faee to,.
with actualities, and the staggering question, ' W
next'             .                          -' -I
At the back of his mind he had. kee  direading-t
evading it, because it would force him to look deep.
his own heart; and to make decisions, when the 
of making them was anathema, beclouded as he,
by the depression that still brooded over him f1e a
The doctor had prescribed a tonic and a whiff of i
frivolity; but Roy paid no heed. He knew his
was mainly of the heart and the spirit. The tue^
tive touch could only come from some arrowy. sha
would pierce to the core of one or the other.;-:
This morning, by way of reasserting his normal
he had risen very early with intent to walk oat 
spend the day at Baghi dak bungalow, tea miles 
Taking things easily, he believed it cotdd be 4eM.
would look through his manuscript; try and  ^e-
threads. SurAj could folow later; and he w .
home over the pass in the cool of the evenir .tSe,-
He set out under a clear heaven, misted wid4
promise of heat: the air rather ominously still. B
s~~~~~~~~ 



<pb n="423"/>
A 0'1'Afl - JAN UAK"JLMZiS        Cm.
read of a path winding through the dimness and
Lstness of Narkhanda Forest was ice-cool with 'the
:eath of night. Pines, ilex, and deodars clung miracu-
usly to a hillside of massive rock, that jutted above
m at intervals-threatening, immense; and often, on
e khud side, dropped abruptly into nothingness. When
e road curved outward, splashes of sunlight patterned
; and intermittent gaps revealed the flash of snow-
aks, incredibly serene and far.
Normally the scene-the desolate grandeur of it-
muld have intoxicated Roy. But the stranger he was
rrying about with him, and called by his own name,
acted in quite another fashion to the shadowed majesty
looming rocks and forest aisles. The immensity of it.
varied one mere suffering man to the.dimensions of a
;bble on the path. And the pebble had the advantage
insensibility. The stillness and chillness made him
31 overwhelmingly alone. A sudden craving for Lance
ew almost intolerable. ...
But Lance was gone. Paul, with his bride, had van-
ied from human ken; Rose, a shattered illusion-, gone
o. Better so-of course; though, intermittently,
e man she had roused in him still ached for the sight
.d feel of her. She gave a distinct thrill to life; and,
he could not forgive her, neither could he instantly
rget her.
Still less could he forget the significance of the shock
e had dealt him on their day of parting. Patently
e loved him, in her passionate, egotistical fashion--as
had never loved her; patently she had combated
r shrinking in defiance of her mother: and yet . . !
Rage as he might, his Rajput pride, and pride in his
jput heritage, were wounded to the quick. If all
glish girls felt that way, he would see them further,
fore he would propose to another one, or ' confess'
his adored Mother, as if she were a family skeleton'
a secret vice. Instantly there sprang the though
Arna--her adoration, her exalted passion; Arixa,
iom'he might have loved, yet was constrained to put
ide because of his English heritage; only to find him-
f put aside by an English girl on aeooant of his Indian
med. A pleasant prediament for a man who must
eds marry in commoan-aty to his father and himself.



<pb n="424"/>
424             FJAJA 'J   BjitiS
And what of Tara? Was it possible . . .   C 
that be the meaning of her final desperate, 'I eaw'tl
it, Roy-even for you' t Was it conceivable-she  i
loved his mother to the point of worship ? Still sma
from his recent rebuff, he simply could not tell. 
and Lance loved her too; yet, in Lance especially,;
had been aware of a tacit tendency to ignore the 
connection.
The whole complication touched him too nearly, h
and bewildered him too bitterly, for cool considerati
He only saw that which had been his pride conv
into a reproach, a two-edged sword barring the-
to marriage: and in the bitterness of his heart.
found it hard to forgive his parents-mainly his fatl
-for putting him in so cruel a position, with no w:
of warning to soften the blow. 
Perhaps people felt differently in England. If
India was no place for him. How blatantly juveil
to his clouded, tormented brain-seemed his ao
dreams of Oxford days ! What could such as he do'
her, in this time of tragic upheaval. And how coult!
the Indias he had seen-not to mention the many
had not seen-be jumbled together under that one:
leading name ? That was the root fallacy of dreaaxl
and 'reformers.' They spoke of her as one, when in 
she was many-bewilderingly many. The semi
of unity sprang mainly from England's unparall
achievement-her Pax Britannica, that held the se
even between rival chiefs and races and creeds; that
wrought, in miniature, the very inter-racial stability w
Europe hadvainlyfought and striven toachieve. Yeti
some malign power seemed constraining her, in theit
of progress, to undo the work of her own hands.. '.
All his thronging thoughts were tinged with the glt
of his unhopeful mood; and his body flagged with
flagging spirit. Before he had walked four miles>'
legs refused to carry him any farther.
He had emerged into the open, into full view of
vastness beyond. Naked rock and stone, iewelled-:
moss and young green, fell straight from the -
edge; and one ragged pine, springing from a
boulders, was roughly stencilled on blue distanee
purpled with shadows of thunderous-cloud.



<pb n="425"/>
A STAB IN DSARIKNESS             ; 
A flattened boulder proved irresistible; and Roy sat
down, leaning his head against the trunk, sniffing
luxuriously-whiffs of resin and sun-warmed pine-
needles. Oh, to be at home, in his own beech-wood!
But the journey in this weather would be purgatorial.
Meantime, there was his walk; and he decided, prosaic-
ally, to fortify himself with a slab of chocolate. Instead
-still more prosaically, he fell sound asleep. ...
But. sleep, in an unnatural position, begets dreams.
And Roy dreamed of Lance; of that last awful day when
he raved incessantly of Rose. But in the dream he was
conscious; and before his distracted gaze Roy held
Rose in his arms; craving her, yet hating her; because
she clung to him, heedless of entreaties from Lance,
and could not be shaken off . .
In a frantic effort to free himself, he woke--with the
anguish of his loss fresh upon him-to find the sky
heavily overcast, the breathlessness of imminent storm
in the air. Away to the North there were blue spaces,
sun-splashed leagues of snow. But from the South and
West rolled up the big battalions-heralds of the
monsoon.
He concluded apathetically that Baghi was ' off.' He
was in for a drenching. Lucky he had brought his
burberry. ...
Yet he did not stir. A ton weight seemed to hang on
his limbs, his spirit, his heart. He simply sat there,
in a carven stillness, staring down, down, into abysmal
depths....
And startlingly, sharply, the temptation assailed him.
The tug of it was almost physical. . . . How simple to
yield-to cut his many tangles at one stroke !
In that jaundiced moment he saw himself a failure
foreordained; debarred from marriage by evils sup-
posed to spring from the dual strain in him ; his cherished
hopes of closer union between the two countries he loved
threatened with shipwreck by an England complacently
experimental, an India at war with the British con-
nection and with her many selves. He seemed fated to 
bring hnhappiness on those he cared for-Ardna, Lance,
even Rose. And what of his father-if he failed to
marry ? He hadn't even the grit to finish his wretched
novel. ...



<pb n="426"/>
428              FAB TO SEEK                 i
He rose at last, mechanically, and moved 
to the unrailed edge of all things. The magnetism
depths drew him. The fatalistic strain in his blood4
him.... 
He stood-though he did not know it-as his m
had once stood, hovering on the verge; his own 
that she bore within her-hanging in the balance.
the fatal tilt, she had been saved by the voice 
husband-the voice of the West.. And now, at
critical moment, it was the voice of the West-of
-that sounded in his brain: "Don't fret your 
out, Roy. Carry on."                       /i
Having carried on, somehow, through four ye
war, he knew precisely how much of casual, I
pluck was enshrined in that soldierly phrase. It 
the note of courage and command. It was tan
carnate. It steadied him, automatically, at a
when his shaken nerves might not have respond1
any abstract ethical appeal. He closed his eyes a m
to collect himself; swayed, the merest fraction
deliberately stepped back a pace... . .-'
The danger had passed. 
Through his lids he felt the glare of lightnixgj
first flash of the storm. 
And as the heel of his retreating boot came
down on the path behind, there rose an inf
that jerked him very completely out of the cloud
"Poor Terry-poor old man ! " he murmurc,
ing the faithful creature; always too close by,
getting trodden on-the common guerdon of tihe
And the whimsical thought intrued, " If I'd
the good little beggar would have jumped  ^
Not fair play."
The fact that Terry had been saved from iit
suicide seemed somehow the more important ^
tion of the two.                        -
A rumbling growl overhead reminded him t
were other considerations-urgent ones.
"You're not hurt, you little hypocrite.  XI
We must leg it."
And they legged it to some purpose; Te-'-
vociferous-leaping on before..... 



<pb n="427"/>
421      -       -        :
CHAPTER II.
"I seek what I cannot get;
I get what I do not seek."
-RABINDANATH TAGOaN.
THEN the storm broke in earnest. ....
Crash on flash, crash on flash-at ever-lessening inter-
vals-the tearless heavens raged and clattered round
his unprotected head. Thunder toppled about him like
falling timber stacks. Fiery serpents darted all ways at
once among black boughs that swayed and mcbned
funereally. The gloom of the forest enhanced the
weird magnificence of it all: and Roy--who had just
been within an ace of flinging away his life-felt irra-
tionally anxious on account of thronging trees and the
absence of rain.
He had recovered sufficiently to chuckle at the ig-
nominious anti-climax. But, as usual, it was the creep-
someness rather than the danger that got on his nerves
and forced his legs to hurry of their own accord. ...
In the deep of'a gloomy indent, the thought assaited  '
him-" Why do I know it all so well     Where .. .
'When .   .."
An inner flash lit the dim recesses of memory. Of
'course--it was that other day of summer, in the far
beginning of things; the day of the Golden Tusks and
the gloom and the growling thunder; his legs, as now, in
a fearful hurry of their own accord; and Tare waiting
for him-his High-Tower Princess. With a aong lhe
recalled how she had seemed the point of safetybcaue
she was never afraid.
'No Tara waiting now. No point of safety, except a
very prosaic dak bungalow and good old Azim, wh would
fuas like the devil if rain came on and he got a wetting.



<pb n="428"/>
428              FAR TO SEEK 
Ah-here it was, at last! Buckets of it. Lashing his '
face, running down his neck, saturating him below his  i
flapping burberry. Buffeted mercilessly, he broke into 
a trot. Thunder and lightning were less virulent now;
and he found himself actually enjoying it all. 
Tired-   ? Not a bit. The miasma of depression   :i
seemed blown clean away by the horseplay of the 
elements. He had been within ah ace of taking ii
unwarranted liberties with Nature. Now she retaliated i
by taking liberties with him; and her buffeting proved 
a finer restorative than all the drugs in creation. 4
Electricity, her 'fierce angel of the air,' set every  0
nerve tingling. A queer sensation: but it was life. .
And he had been feeling more than half dead. ....
Azim  Khan, however-being innocent of 'nerves' :
-took quite another view of the matter.
Arrived at the point of safety, Roy found a log fire burn- :
ing; and a brazier alight under a contrivance like a huge- ;
cane hen-coop, for drying his clothes. Vainly protesting, ii
he *as made to change every garment; was installed ;f
by the fire, with steaming brandy-and-water at his elbow, 
and lemons and sugar-and letters . . quite a lit t: 
pile of them.                                   -
" Belaiti ddkl, Hazur,"  Azim  Khan superfluously ::
informed him, with an air of personal pride in the whole 
bundobast-including the timely arrival of the English 6-
mail.                                            : -
There were parcels also-a biggish one, from  him ,
father; another from Jeffers, obviously a book. And 
suddenly it dawned on him-this must be the tenth of 4
June. Yesterday was his twenty-sixth birthday; anq .
he had never thought of it; never realised the dated 
But they had thought of it weeks ahead: while he-  i
graceless and ungrateful-had deemed himself hbali
forgotten.                                        -¶
He ran the envelopes through his fingers-Tiny, Tarae i
(His heart jerked. Was it congratulations ? He had 
never felt he could write of it to her.) Arna; a blaak- ,
edged one from Thea; and-his heart jerked in quii*
another fashion-Rose !
Amazing! What did it mean ? She wasn't-going ba4t
on things . . . 
1 English mail.



<pb n="429"/>
A STAB IN DARKNIESS              429'
Curiosity-sharpened by a prick of fear-impelled
dim to open her letter first. And the moment he had
ead the opening line, compunction smote him.
"Roy-my Dear, I couldn't help remembering the
linth. So I feel I must write and wish you 'many
lappy returns' of it-happier than this one-with all
ny heart. I have worried over you a gooddeal. For
M'm sure you must have been ill. Do go home soon and
be properly taken care of, by your own people. I'm
oing in the autumn with my friend, Mrs Hilton. Some
Lay you will surely find a wife worthier of you than I
rould have been. When your good day comes, let me
now-and I'll do the same by you. Good luck to you
lways.-Ros."
Roy slipped the note into his pocket and sat staring
t the fire, deeply moved. A vision of her-too alluring
or comfort-was flashed upon his brain. She was con-
oundedly attractive. She had no end of good points:
itt . . with a very big B. .... 
His gaze rested absently on the parcel from his father.
That the deuce could it be I To the imaginative, ani
nopened parcel never quite loses its intriguing air of
iystery.  The shape suggested . a  picture.  His '
lother . . . T 
With a luxury of deliberation he cut the strings;
emoved wrapper after wrapper to the last layer of 
issue  ...
Then he drew a great breath-and sat spellbound;    :
azing-endlessly gazing-at Tara's face:-the wild 
>ses in her cheeks faded a little; the glory of her
air undimmed; the familiar way it rippled back from
er low, wide brow; a hint of hidden pain about the
)Asitive 'lips -and in the hyacinth blue of her eyes.
'nly his father could have wrought a vision so appeal-
gly alive., And the effect on Roy was instantaneous
. overwhelming. . I .
Tara-dearest and loveliest! Of course it was her
-always ha been, down in the uttermost depth&  The
'easure he had been far to seek had blossomed beWi e
im since the beginning of things: and he, with his eyes
lways on the horizon, had missed the one'incomparable
ower at his feet...



<pb n="430"/>
430              FA:s TO SEEK 
Had he missed it t Had there ever been a
What, precisely, had she meant by her young, ve
refusal of him ? And-if it were not the dreaded
-was there still hope ?  Would she ever unde
. . . ever forgive . . . the inglorious episode of
If, at heart, he could plead the excuse of 
could not plead it to her.
Reverently he took that miracle of a picture b
his hands and set it on the broad mantelpiece,;:
distance might quicken the illusion of life.
Then the spell was on him again. Her sweetlesks
light seemed to illumine the unbeautiful room.
truth he knew, now, what it meant to love and b
love with every faculty of soul and body; knew it.i
a miracle of renewal, the elixir of life. And-a
light of that knowledge revealed how   seoda
part of it was the craving with which he had
possession of Rose. Steeped in poetry as he was,:
stole into his mind a fragment of Tagore-' She
had ever remained in the depths of my being,
twilight of gleams and glimpses .  . I have roamed
country to country, keeping her in the core of my
Al the jangle of jarred nerves and shaken
all the confusion of shattered hopes and ideals.,,
resolve itself into coherence at last-if only :,
only-   !   -
And dropping suddenly from the clouds, he
bered his letters . . . her letter.
A  sealed envelope had fallen unheeded fro
father's parcel: but it was hers he seized-~
hesitated to open. What if she were announcing h
engagement to some infernal fellow at homel
must be scores and scores of them....
His hand was not quite steady as he unfo
two sheets that bore his father's crest and t 
stamp, 'Bramleigh Beeches.'
" MY DEAR ROY (he read),
"Many happy returns of June the 
It was one of our great days-wasn't it ?-one.6
time. All your best and dearest wishes we amre
for you-over here. And of course I've heard
mendous news; though you never wrote and d



<pb n="431"/>
A STAR IN DAeKNESS                431
rhy ? You say she is beautiful. I hope she is a lot
re besides. You would need a lot more, Roy, unless
've changed very much from the boy I used to know.
It is cruel having to write-in the same breath-
ut.Lance. From the splendid boy he was, one can
ss the man he became. To me it seems almost like
E of you gone. And I'm sure it must seem so to you
ly poor Roy. I don't wonder you felt bad about the
of it; but it was the essence of him-that kind of
Ig. A verse of Charles Sorley keeps on in my head
r since I heard it:-
'Surely we knew it long before;
Knew all along that he was made
For a swift radiant morning; for
A sacrificing swift night shade.'
I can't write all I feel about it. Besides, I'm hoping
r pain may be eased a little now; and I don't want
wake it up again.
But not even these two big things-not even your
bhday-are my reallest reason for writing this par-
lar letter to my Bracelet-Bound Brother. Do you
lember ? Have you kept it, Roy ? Does it still mean
thing to' you. It does to me-though I've never 
itiOned it and never asked any service of you. But-- 
going to, now. Not for myself. Don't be afraid!
for Uncle Nevil-and I ask it in Aunt Lil~mani's
ie,
Roy, when I came home, the change in him made me
erable. He's never really got over.losing her. And
've been sort of lost too-for the time being. I
see how he's wearing his heart out with wanting you:
ugh I don't suppose he has ever said so. And you-
there, probably thinking he doesn't miss you a mite.
row you-and your ways. Also I know him-which
ay ragged shred of excuse for rushing in where an
el would probably think better of it!           -
He has been an angel to me ever since I got back;
it seems to cheer him up when I run round here.
I do-pretty often. But I'm not Roy! And perlaps
'1l forgive my bold demand, when I tell you Aunt
e's looming-positively looming I She's becoming a
'ect ogre of sisterly solicitude. As he won't go to
;                    ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~..



<pb n="432"/>
432              FAR TO SEEK 
London, she's threatening to cheer him up by makingX
dear Beeches her headquarters after the season! j
he-poor darling-with not enough spirit in him to 
against the pricks. If you were coming, he would have
excuse. Alone--he's helpless in her conscientious talon
"If that won't bring you, nothing will-not even 
bracelet command.
"I know the journey in June will be a nightma
And you won't like leaving Indian friends or 
Arden. But think-here he is alone, wanting what
you can give him. And the bangle I sent you That D
--f you've kept it-gives me the right to say ' Com
quickly.' It may be a wrench. But I promise you wo
regret it. Wire, if you can.
" Always your loving 
-*      TAEA.y,
By the time he had finished reading that so char
istic and endearing letter his plans were cut and d
Her irresistible appeal-and the no less irresistible ^
within him-left no room for the deliberations oIl
sensitive complex nature. It flung open all the 
gates of memory; set every nerve aching for Ho
and Tara, late discovered; but not too late, he pa
ately prayed. ... .                           -'
The nightmare journey had no terrors for himn.
In every sense he was ' hers to command.' -
He drew out his old, old letter-case-her i
opened it. There lay the bracelet, folded ins
quaint, childish note; the ' ribbin ' from her 'pe
and the gleaming strands of her hair. The sightl
brought tears of which he felt not the least as
It also brought a vision of himself standing be
mother, demurring at possible obligations invol:
their 'game of play.' And across the years cnea
to him her very words, her very look and tone
member, Roy, it is for always. If she shall 4
you any service, you must not refuse-ever. .:.,:
keeping the bracelet you are bound . . .'
Wire ? Of course he would.            -
Before the day was out his message was se
her: "Engagement off. Coming first pos
X Yours to command-Roy."         -? V



<pb n="433"/>
CHAPTER III.
"Did you not know that people hide their love,
Like a flower that sedms too precious to be picked ?"
-Wu-TI.
SNCTUARY-at last! The garden of his dreams-of
Le world before the deluge-in the quiet - coloured
id of a July evening; the garden vitally inwoven with 
is fate-since it was responsible for the coming of Joe
radley and his 'beaky mother.'
Such gardens bear more than trees and flowers and
uit. Human lives and characters are growth of their
di. With the wholesale demolishing of boundaries and
Adges, their influence may wane; and it is an influence
-like the unobtrusive influence of the gentleman-that
iman nature, especially English nature, can ill fford
I fling away. 
Roy, poet and fighter-with the lure of the desert and
ie horizon in his blood-knew himself, also, for a spiritual
roduet of this particular garden-of the vast lawn (not
ite so vast as he remembered), the rose-beds and. the 
eeches in the full glory of their incomparable leafage; 
I steeped in the delicate clarity of rain-washed air-
.e very aura of England, as dust was the aura of Jaipur.
Pinner was over. They were sitting out on the lawn,
and his father; a small table beside them, with
ass coffee-machine and chocolates in a silver dish; the 
aoke of their cigars hovering, drifting, unstirred-by any
:eeze. No Terry at his feet. The faithful creature-
vision of abject misery-had been carried off to eat 
s heart out in quarantine. Tanged among tre-tops 
t the ghost of a.moon, almost full. Somewhere q
a 'quiet of the shrueries, a- nightingale' wi.
with ts own heart in --liquid- undertones;



<pb n="434"/>
434              FAR  TO SEEK                  X
and in Roy's heart there dwelt an iridescence of pea 
and pain an4 longing shot through with hope--- 
That very morning, at an unearthly hour, he 
landed in England, after an absence of three and a  i
years: and precisely what that means in the way'.
complex emotions, only they know who have been ther
The purgatorial journey had eclipsed expeetati;qig
Between recurrent fever and sea-sickness, there hi
been days when it seemed doubtful if he would evi
reach Home at all. But a wiry constitution and the wi]
to live had triumphed: and, in spite of the early hou_
his father had not failed to be on the quay.  . 4
The first sight of him had given Roy a shock f'sj
which-in spite of Tara's letter-he was unpreparedt
This was not the father he remembered-humorov
unruffled, perennially young; but a man so cha r
and tired-looking that he seemed almost a strang,.4
with his empty coat-sleeve and hair touched with siliv
at the temples.                             -W
The actual moment of meeting had been diffiut 
the joy of it so deeply tinged with pain that they ^
clung desperately to surface commonplaces, becat"
they were Englishmen, and could not relieve the  i
stress by falling on one another's necks. 
And there had been a secret pang (for which ti
sharply reproached himself) that Taraw was not,.tt
too. Idiotic to expect it, when he knew Sir James
gone to Scotland for fishing. But to be idiotic i s
lover's privilege; and his not phenomenal gift oft.;
tience had been unduly strained by the letter awai
him at Port Said.                            -
They were coming back to-night; but he would .
see her till to-morrow. ....'-
In his pocket reposed a brief Tara-like note, bi
her 'faithful Knight of the Bracelet' welcome :'I
Vainly he delved between the lines of ier sisterly 
tion. Nothing could still the doubt that consume
but contact with her hands, her eyes.          s
For that, and other reasons, the difficult 
had been followed by a difficult day. They had wa
through the house and garden, very carefuy 
their emotions. They had lounged and smoked . i:
studio, looking through his father's latest 



<pb n="435"/>
A STA ;1       DARlETESS           435
ley had talked of the family. Jeffers would be down
-morrow night, for the week-end; Tiny on Tuesday
ith the precious Baby; Jerry, distinctly coming
und, and eager to see Boy. Even Aunt Jane sounded
shade keen. Ad- he, undeserving, had scarcely ex-
3cted them to ' tan a hair.' Then they discussed the
dian situation; and Roy-forgetting to be shy-
ged at finding how little those at Home had been
[owed to realise, to understand.
Not a question, so far, about his rapid on-and-off
gagement, for which mercy he was duly grateful. And
her, who dwelt in the foreground and background of
eir thoughts-not a word.
It would take a little time, Roy supposed, to build
eir bridge across the chasm of three and a half eventful
iars. You couldn't hustle a lapsed intimacy. To-
orrow things would go better, especially if . . .
Yet, throughout, he had been touched inexpressibly
his father's unobtrusive tokens of pleasure and
Section: and now-sitting together with their cigars,
the last of the daylight-things felt easier.
"Dad," he said suddenly, turning his eyes from the
rden to the man beside him, who was also its spiritual
oduct. "If I seem a bit stupefied, it's because I'm
11 walking and talking in a dream; terrified I may
ike up and find it's not true ! I can't, in a twiling,
just the beautiful, incredible sameness of all this,
th the staggering changes inside me."
His father's smile had its friendly, understanding
Lality.
"No hurry, Boy. All your deep roots are here. Change
much as you please, you still remain-her son."
"Yes-that's it.   The place is full of her,?" Roy
id very low; and at present they could not trust
emselves to say more.
It had not escaped Sir Nevil's notice that the boy
d avoided the drawing-room, and had not once been
der the twin beeches, his favourite summer retreat.
hammock was slung there now.
After a considerable gap, Roy remarked carelessly:
[ suppose tey must have got home by now ?"
"About an hour ago, to be exact," saad Sir Nevil;
fl PtflWa M't'iMtuntfx-rw at.a.t: iwnnvAd .Mm ;in atlff * ' YVnnl'fre



<pb n="436"/>
436             FAR TO' SEEK
not running round there to-night, old man. Th
be tired. So are you. And it's only fair I should a
first innings. I've waited a long time for it, Roy."  5
" Dads! " Roy looked at once penitent and re
ful-an engaging trick of schoolroom days, when hes
a scolding in the air. "You never said-you never 
me an idea." 
" You never sounded as if the idea would be ace
able."
"Didn't I ? Letters are the devil," murmured B
-all penitence now.  "And if it hadn't been i
Tara--"    He stopped awkwardly. Their eyes '
and they smiled. "Did you know . . . she wro
And that's why I'm here ?"                  .
"Well done, Tara! I didn't know. I had dim s!
picions. I also had a dim hope that-my picture m
tempt you-"
"Oh, it would have-letter or no. It's an insptr
thing."--He had already written at length on that
-" You were mightily clever-the two of you!"  :
His father twinkled. " That as may be. We hadt4
trifling advantage of knowing our Roy ! "
They sat on till all the light had ebbed from thef i
and the moon had come into her own. It was.
early; but time is the least ingredient of such a 
and Sir Nevil rose on the stroke of ten.
"You look fagged out, old boy. And the s-
you're asleep-the-sooner it will be to-morrow! .
axiom of yours. D'you remember " I
Did he not remember I                     A
They went upstairs together; the great house se
oppressively empty and silent. On the thresho
Roy's room they said good-night. There was an
of palpable awkwardness; then Roy-overcoming
leaned forward and kissed the patch of white h*i
his father's temple. 
"God bless you," Sir Nevil said rather 
" You ought to sleep sound in there. Don't
"But I love to dream," said Roy; and bl
laughed. 
" You're not so staggeringly changed inside !
as a gun, you'll be late for breakfast! "
And he did dream. The moment his liso ^



<pb n="437"/>
A SITA     IN DARKNESS            437
WVas there with him, under the beeches, their sanctuary
/o-she who all day had hovered on the confines of his
spirit, like a light, felt not seen. There were no words
between them, nor any need of words; only the ineffable
peace of understanding, of reunion ...
Dream-or visitation-who could say?    TQ him it
seemed that only afterwards sleep came-the dreamless
sleep of renewal ...
He woke egregiously early: such an awakening as he
had not known for months on end. And out there in the
garden it was a miracle of a morning: divinely clear,
with the mellow clearness of England; massed trees,
brooding darkly; the lawn all silver-grey with dew;
everywhere blurred outlines and tender shadows; pure
balm to eye and spirit after the hard brilliance and
contrasts of the East.
Madness to get up; yet impossible to lie there waiting.
He tried it, for what seemed an endless age: then
succumbed to the inevitable.
While he was dressing, clouds drifted across the blue.
A spurt of rain whipped his open casement; threatening
him in playful mood. But before he had crept down and
let himself out through one of the drawing-room windows,
the sky was clear again, with the tremulous radiance of
happiness struck sharp on months of sorrow and stress.
-Striding, hatless, across the drenched lawn, and
resisting the pull of his beech-wood, he pressed on and
up to the open moor; craving its sweeps of space and
colour unbosomed to the friendly sky that seemed so
much nearer earth than the passionate blue vault of
India.
It was five years since he had seen heather in boom
-or was it five decades ?: The sight of it recalled that
other July day, when he had tramped the length of tle
ridge with his head full of dreams and the ache of parting
in his heart.
To him, that far-off being seemed almost aMother
Boy is-another life. Only-as his father had feelingly
reminded him-the first Roy and the last were alike
imformed by the spirit of one woman; visible then,
invisible now; yet sensibly present in every haunt she
had made. her own. The house was full of her; the



<pb n="438"/>
woo~l:wae WM: . e; r.. But the pangs of reminder 
ha4 so dre adi   lved*themselves, rather, into a se
of ifale - b b1    real reunion,; ::He asked not
iet*: |n ithat .*      and wqrk should be f
*ith heilways:' hei   TaraT-di she so decreed.. .
ThoujStof Tara r      vii, mPpadtience, and drew hW
steps h  wtvard agami't:.         ;:
Stro.linf back thron   e wood, he came sudde
upon the open space w       he he *ad found the Golde
Tusks, and lingered t'.  a littie- remembering t?
storm and the terror andthe fight  a Tara and her brai|
let; and the deep unreaised significance of that chi
impulse, inspired by her, whose was the source of
their inspirations. And now-seventeen years aftd l
wards, the bracelet had drawn him back to them both;
saved him, perhaps, from  the unforgiveable sin Uj
throwing up the game. 
On he walked, along the same mossy path, almost in Oa
dream. He had found the Tusks. His High-Tows`
Princess was waiting-his ' Star far-seen.'
Again, as on that day-he came unexpectedly in view:
of their tree: and-wonder of wonders (or was it tlhb
most natural thing on earth?), there was Tara hersef
approaching it by another path that linked the av
with the grounds of the black-and-white house, whi&
was part of the estate.                         i
Instantly he stepped back a pace and stood still, thair
he might realise her before she became aware of him ;-
her remembered loveliness, her new dearness.
Loveliness was the quintessence of her. With wii
innate feeling for words, he had never-even accidental
-applied it to Rose. Had she, too, felt impatietieutt
Was she coming over to breakfast for a 'surprise'? ,
At this distance, she looked not a day older than ia.
that critical occasion, when he had realised her for twh
first time; only more fragile-a shade too fragile. It
hurt him. He felt responsible. And again, to-dayo~.
very clever of her-she was wearing a delphinium blul
frock; a shady hat that drooped half over her face;
No pink rose, however-and he was thankful. ROiOs
had still a too baleful association. He doubted if 
could ever tolerate a Marechal Niel again-as much-
account of Lance, as on account of the other. 



<pb n="439"/>
4-      A   WAR- IN. DARKNESS 
Tara Ws wearipg   is flower-sweet-peas, palest piak
ad lavender., Ad, at sight of her, every shred of doubt
Jemed burnt 'up)i the clear flame of his love for her:-  i.
o heady confuion of heart and senses, but a rarefied
Ltensity of both touched with a coal from the altar
creative life. The knowledge was like a light hand
,ining in his impatience. Poet, no less than lover, he
anted to go slowly through the golden mist...
But the moment ha stirred, she heard him; saw
m. .
No imperious gesture, as before; but a lightning
.eam of recognition, of welcome and - something
Lore      ?
He hurried now....
Next instant, they were together, hands locked, eyes -
iep in eyes. The surface sense of strangeness between
tem, the undersense of intimate nearness-thrilling as
was-made speech astonishingly difficult.
"Tara," he said, just above his breath.
Her senstive lips parted, trembled-and closed again.
"Tara !" he repeatedf dizzily incredulous, where a
.oment earlier he had been arrogantly certain. " Is it
ue . . . what your eyes are telling me   Can you    ;'.
,rgive . . . my madness out there ?  Half across the 
orld you called to me; and I've come home to you   . 
. with every atom of me . . . I'm loving you; and
m still . . . bracelet-bound . . ."
This time her lips trembled into a smile. "And it's
)t one of the Prayer-book affinities! " she reminded him, 
gleam of that other Tara in her eyes.
" No, thank God-it's not! But you haven't answered
e, you know .. ."
"Roy, what a story ! When you know I really said it
rst!" Her eyes were saying it again now; and he,
,reft of words, mutely held out his arms.
If she paused an instant, it was because she felt even
zzier than he. But the power of his longing drew her
ke a physical force-and, as his lips claimed hers, the
rror of love and its truth caught her and swept her
3m known shores into uncharted seas ...
This was a Roy she scarcely knew. But her heart
Lew;  every pulse of her awakened womanhood
Lew. ..
PD



<pb n="440"/>
440              FAR TO SEEK                  :
Presently it became possible to think. Very geal
she pushed him back a little.         ..       ,
"0-oh-I never knew . . . you were . . . like thFat
And you've crushed my poor sweet-peas to smithereet
Now-behave! Let me look at you . . . properly, ad
see what India's done to you. Give me a chance !" 
He gave her a chance, still keeping hold of her-t
make sure she was real.
"High-Tower Princess, are we truly US ? Or is it 
'bewitchery '? " he asked, only half in joke. " W
you go turning into a butterfly presently-- "   i
" Promise I won't! " Her low laugh was not qt
steady. " We're US-truly. And we've got to Farthes
End, where your dreams come true. D'you rememb1
-I always said they couldn't. They were too crazy.
So I don't deserve " 
"It's I that don't deserve," he broke out with sudd
passion. "And to find you under our very own tree
Have you forgotten-that day ?  Of course you we4
to the 'tipmost top'; and I didn't. It's queer-isn'
it ?-how bits of life get printed so sharply on your brain ;
and great spaces, on either side, utterly blotted o
That day's one of my bits. Is it so clear-to you "^ 
"To me --    "  She could scarcely believe he 4
not know. ... Unashamedly, she wanted him to kawi
But part of him was strange to her-thrillingly strange 
which made things not quite so simple.        .
" Roy," she went on, after a luminous pause, twist!
the top button of his coat. "I'm going to tell you p
secret. A big one. For me that Day was . . . i
beginning of everything.-Hush---listen ! "-Her ing
just touched his lips. " I'm feeling-rather shy, -
if you don't keep quiet, I can't tell. Of course I alwa
... loved you, next to Atholl. But after that  4
after the fight, I simply ... adored you. And . .
and . . . it's never left off since . . ." 
"Tara ! My loveliest!" he cried, between ees
and dismay; and gathering her close again, he
her softly, repeatedly, murmuring broken endear
" And there was I . . .! "
"Yes. There were you . . . with your poent-
Aunt Lila and your dreams about India-always:I
your head among the stars .. ."             *



<pb n="441"/>
A STAR IN DARKNESS                4#.
"In plain English, a spoilt boy-as you once told me
-wrapped up in myself."
"No, you weren't. I won't have it!" she contra-
licted him in her old imperious way. " You were wrapped
ip in all kinds of wonderful things. So you just . . .
iidn't see me. You looked clean over my head. Of
ourse it often made me unhappy. But-it made me
wve you more. That's the way we women are. It's not
he men who run after us; it's the other kind ...  !
expect you looked clean over poor Arina's head.
Lnd if I asked her, privately, she'd confess that was
partly why . . . and the other girl too . . . if .. ."
"Darling-don't! " he pleaded.   "I'm   ashamed,
'eyond words. I'll tell you every atom of it truth-
ully . . . my Tara. But this is our moment. I want
nore-about you.-Sit.   It's full early. Then we'll
o in (of course you're coming to breakfast) and give
)ad the surprise of his life.... Bother your old
,at! It gets in the way. And I want to see your
Lair." 
With a shyness new to him-and to Tara, poignantly
ear-he drew out her pins; discarded the offending
at, and took her head between his hands, lightly caress-
ig the thick coils that shaded from true gold to warm
elicate tones of brown.
Then he set her on the mossy seat near the trunk;
nd flung himself down before her in the old way,
ropped on his elbows--rapt, lost in love; divinely
ithout self-consciousness.
"I'm not looking over your head now," he said, his
yes deep in hers .-deep and deeper, till the wild-rose
Lish invaded the delicate hollows of her temples; adn
caning forward she laid a hand across those too eloquent
yes.
"Don't blind me altogether-darling. When people
ave been shut away from the sun a long time-"
"But, Tara-why were you . . . ' " He removed the
and and kept hold of it. "I begged you to come.
wanted you. Why did you ... . "
She shook her head, smiling half wistfully. "That's
bit of my old Roy ! But you're man enough to know
-now, without telling. And I was woman enough to
now-then. At least, by tistinet, I knew . *."    .



<pb n="442"/>
442              FAR TO SEEK                    :
"Then it wasn't because . . . because-I'm half!1
..    ajput "                                    i
" Roy !"  But for all her surprise and reproach,
intuition told him the idea was not altogether new to
her. " What made you think-of that ? "
"Well-because it partly . . .broke things off-out j
there. That startled me. And when Dad's miracle of a 
picture woke me up with a vengeance . . . it terrified-
me. I began wondering.... Beloved, are you quite
sure about Aunt Helen . . . Sir James . . . "
She paused-a mere breathing-space; her free hand.,
caressed his hair. (This time, he did not shift his head.)!
' I'm  utterly sure about Mother. You see . . . she
knows . . . we've talked about it. We're like sisters,
almost. As for Father . . . well, we're less intimate.-:
I did fancy he seemed the wee-est bit relieved when . . .
your news came .. ." The pain in his eyes checked hetr 
"My blessed one, I won't have you daring to worry
about it. I'm feeling simply beyond myself with happP4
ness and pride. Mother will be overjoyed. She realis-
. . a little . . . what I've been through. Of coursei.-,
in ow; talks, she has told me frankly what tragediI
oftenf i`:&,. from mixing such 'mighty opposites.'. Bi*
she saui all of you were quite exceptional. And ste
knows about such things. And she's the point. She ca:
always square Father if-there's any need. So just 1et
quiet-inside!"                                  "
"But . . . that day," he persisted, Roy-like," "yos^
didn't think of it--  "  '
"Faithfully, I didn't. I only felt your heart was to9"
full up with Aunt Lila and India to have room enough, fo
me. And I wanted all the room-or nothing. Vagnely,*t
knew it was her dream. But my wicked pride inss
it should be your dream. It wasn't till long after, 
Mother told me how-from the very first-Aunt i
had planned and prayed, because she knew mar
might be your one big difficulty; and she could
speak of it to Mummy. It was their great link; the i
behind everything-the lessons and all. So you see-
the time, she was sort of creating. me  . for s.g
And the bitter disappointment it must haveir
her! If I'd had a glimmering ... of all that-Ii
believe I could have held out against you -,-"  -



<pb n="443"/>
A STAR IN DARKNESS               443
"Then I wish to heaven you'd had a glimmering-
,ecause of her and because of us. Look at all the good
ears we've wasted-"
" We've not-we've not! " she protested vehemently.
If it had happened then, it wouldn't have come within
miles-of this. You simply hadn't it in you, Roy, to
ive me . .. all I can feel you giving me now. As for
ie-well, that's for you to find out! Of course, the
linute I'd done it, I was miserable: furious with my-
elf. For I couldn't stop . . . loving you. My heart
ad no shame, in spite of my important pride. Only
. . after she went-and Mother told me all-some-
hing in me seemed to know her free spirit would be near
ou-and bring you back to me .. . somehowj: till
. . your news came. And-look ! The Bracelet! I I
esitated a long time. If you hadn't been engaged,
'm not sure if I would have ventured. But r did-
nd you're here. It's all been her doing, Roy, first and
bst. Don't let's spoil any of it with regrets."
He could only bow his head upon her hand in mute
doration. The courage, the crystal-clear wisdom of her
-his eager Tara, who could never wait five minutes
)r the particular sweet or the particular tale she craved.
"et she had waited five years for him-and counted it a
ttle thing. Of a truth his mother had builded better 
ian she knew.                                      i
"You see," Tara added softly. "There wouldn't
ave been . . . the deeps. And it takes the deeps to 
lake you realise the heights - " 
'Lost in one another-in the wonder of mutual self- 
wvealing-they were lost, no less, to impertinent
ivialities of place and time; till the very trivial pang
I hunger reminded Roy that he had been wandering
or hours without food.
" Tara-it's a come down-but I'm fairly starving !"
3 cried suddenly-and consulted his watch. "line
clock. The wretch I am! Dad's final remark .was, 
Sure as a gun, you'll be late for breakfast.' Ad  it
.emed impossibla  But sure as guns we will be! Put t
i the precious hat. We must jolly well run for it."
And taking hands, like a pair of children, they ran.. .
.      ,I



<pb n="444"/>
444                        X
CHAPTER THE LAST.
"Who shall allot the praise, and guess
What part is yours-what part is ours ?"
-ALICE MEYNEiL.
"Perhaps a dreamer's day will come ... when judgment will be pro-
nounoed on all the wise men, who always prophesied evil-and were
always right."-JoHAN BOJER.
Two hours later Roy and his father sat together in the
cushioned window seat of the studio, smoking indua-
triously; not troubling to say much-though there was:
much to be said-because the mist of constraint thit,
brooded between them yesterday had been blown clews;
away by Roy's news. 
If it had not given Sir Nevil 'the surprise of its
life,' it had given him the deepest, most abiding gratifioa&
tion he had known since his inner light had gone A t
with the passing of her who had been his inspiration a,
his all. Dear though his children were to him, they hai
remained secondary, always. Roy came nearest-as ,S ;
heir, and as the one in whom her spirit most clearly:
lived again. Since she went, he had longed for the boy;i
but remembering her plea on that summer day of decia:
-her mountain-top of philosophy, 'to take by leavi3
to hold by letting go '-he had studiously refrained
pressing Roy's return. Now, at a word from Tara, i
had sped home in the hot season; and-hard on       !
heels of a mysteriously broken engagement-had claim.
her at sight.                                   t
Yesterday their sense of strangeness had made slzecO
feel uncomfortable. Now that they slied back- ia
the old intimacy, it felt companionable. Yet nei30
was thinking directly of the other. Each was ti
of the woman he loved.
By chance their eyes encountered in a friendly s
o.nA R.nrr wrnnlrn                             *-4B



<pb n="445"/>
A STAR IN DAEKNESS               4
' Daddums-you've come alive! I believe you're
Almost as happy over it-as I am ? "
"You're not far out. You see "-his eyes grew
,raver-" I'm feeling . . . Mother's share, too. Did
rou ever realise . . . "
"Partly. Not all-till just now. Tara told me."
There was a pause. Then Sir Nevil looked full at his
on.
"Roy-I've got something to tell you-to show you
. if you can detach your mind for an hour--  "
" Why, of course. What is it-where "
He looked round the room. Instinctively, he knew it
oncerned his mother.
" Not here. Upstairs-in her House of Gods." He
aw Roy flinch. "If I can bear it, old boy, you can.
Lnd there's a reason-you'll understand."
The little room above the studio had been sacred to
jilamani ever since her home-coming as a bride of
ighteen; sacred to her prayers and meditations; to the
andalwood casket that held her 'private god'; for the
ndian wife has always one god chosen for special worship
-not to be named to any one, even her husband. And
lthough a Christian Lilamani had discontinued that
orm of devotio, the tiny blue image of the Baby-god,
rishna, had been a sacred treasure always, shown, 
n rare occsions only, to Roy. To enter that room
ras to enter her soul. And Roy, shinking apart, felt  I
imself unworthy-because of Rose.
On the threshold there met him the faint scent of  -
andalwood that pervaded her. For there, in an alcove,  -:
tood Krishna's casket. In larger boxes, lined -witA 
andalwood, her many-tinted silks and saris lay lovingly 
Aided. Another casket held her jewels, and arranged
n a row of shelves stood her dainty array of shoes-
old and silver and pale brocades: an intimate touch
bat pierced his heart.
Near the Krishna alcove, hung a portrait he had
ot seen: a thing of fragile, almost unearthly beauty,
ainted when her husband eese home-and realised .. .
An aching lump in Roy's throat cut like a knife  but
is father's remark put him on his mettle. And, the
ext instant, he saw...
"Dad! " he breathed, in awed-amazement.
'Vl  Chn.a --w +-,  n-anll .-r- j 4--A*h.1n  n4ara ra  ^  44.A  l



<pb n="446"/>
446              PAR TO SEEK
dull red clay: unmistakably, unbelievably - the roe
fortress of Chitor: the walls scarped and bastioneds 
Khumbi R6na's tower; and the City itself-no ruin,m;
but a miniature presentment of Chitor, as she mighty
have been in her day of ancient glory, as Roy had bee® A
dimly aware of her in the course of his own amazing 
ride. Temples, palaces, huddled houses-not detailed, .
but skilfully suggested-stirred the old thrill in his
veins, the old certainty that he knew....
"Well- s " asked Sir Nevil, whose eyes had not i
left his face.                                   ;
" Well! " echoed Roy, emerging from his trance: oft
wonder. "I'm dumfounded. A few mistakes, here aaBi;
there; but-as a whole . . . Dad-how in the worlCt
* . .could you know  "                          A
"I don't know. I hoped you would. I . . . saw it 
clearly, just like that -" 
"How     In a dream  " 
"I suppose so. I couldn't swear, in a court of lawm
that I was awake. It happened-one evening, as I -
there, on her couch-remembering ... going back 
things. And suddenly, out of the darkness, blossoe
-that. Asleep or awake, my mind was alert eneu
to seize and hold the impression, without a glimmer ,
surprise . . . till I came to, or woke uijr-whieh y
will. Then my normal, sceptical self didn'c know  
:to make of it. I've always dismissed that sort of t.:
as.- mere brain-trickery. But-a vivid, personal ex
ence makes it . . . not so easy. Of course, from readb'
sMd a few old photographs, I knew it was Chito'
and my chief concern was to record the vision in I
frst freshness. For three days I worked at it: oy
emerging now and then to snatch a meal. I beg
with those and that -"
He indicated a set of rough sketches and an impressi
in oils; a ghost of a city full of suggested beauty 
mystery. "No joke, trying to model with one hand
but you wouldn't believe . . . the swiftness . . 
sureness . . . as if my fingers knew ..."      ;
Roy could believe. Occasionally his own fingerst.
haved so.
"When it was done, I put it in here," his father
on, masking, with studied quietness, his elation



<pb n="447"/>
A STAR IN DARKNESS               447
Eelen. I couldn't write of it. I felt it would sound
erazy-"
" Not to me," said Roy.          ./
" Well, I couldn't tell that. And I've been waiting-
for you."
"Since-when   "
"Since the third of March, this year."
Roy drew an audible breath. It was the anniversary
)f her passing. "All that time! How could you--  
Why didn't you --  "
" Well-you know. You were obviously submerged-
rour novel, Udaipur, Lance. ... You wouldn't have
forgone all that . .. if I know you, for a mere father.
3ut you're here, at last, thank God. And-I want to
mow. You've seen Chitor, as it is to-day .. ."
"I've seen more than that," said Roy. "I can tell
Tou, now. I couldn't-before. Let's sit."
And sitting there, on her couch, in her House of Gods,
ie told the story of his moonlit ride and its culminatiorn;
told it in low tones, in swift vivid phrases that came
of themselves....
Throughout the telling-and for many minutes after-
wards-his father sat motionless; his head on his hand,
ialf shielding, hi face from view. ...
" I've only. o ken of it to Grandfather," Roy said at
ast. " And ti  all my heart, I wish he could see . . .
hat."                                              %
Sir Nevil looked up now, and the subdued exaltation
a his eyes was wholly new to Roy:
"I've gone a good way beyond wishing," he said.
'But again-I was waiting for you. I want to go out
here, Roy-with you two, when you're married-and
ee it all for myself. With care, one could take the thing
long, to verify and improve it on the spot. Then-
rhat do -you say ?-you and I might achieve a larger
eproduction-for Grandfather: a gift to Rajputab--
ay source of inspiration; a tribute . . . to her memory,
rho, still lights our lives . . . with the inextinguishable
amp of her spirit-"
The last words-almost inaudible-were a revelation to
Zoy; .an illumining glimpse of the true self, that a man
aes very carefully from his fellows; and shows--at
iup     moments only-to 'a woman when he loves



<pb n="448"/>
448   /          FAR TO SEEK 
.3
Shy of their mutual emotion, he laid a hand on
father's arm.                       ,
" You can count on me, Dad," he said in the same 1.
tone.  "Who knows-one day it might inspire the
Rajputs to rebuild their Queen of Cities, in white marbl-
that she may rise again, immortal through the ages . . ::. 
When they stood up to leave the shrine their eyes me',
in a steadfast look; and there wadtlhe same thought
behind it. She had given them to each other in a neoT
way; in a fashion all her own. 
For that brief space, Roy had almost forgotten Tar."l
Now the wonder of her flashed back on him like a dazzWi
of sunlight after the dim sanctity of cathedral aisles.
And down in the studio it was possible to diseusW
practical issues of his father's inspiration-or rather h:i'
mother's; for they both felt it as such.
Roy would marry Tara in September; and in No.:;
ember they three would go out together. There we al
bad days coming out there;' but, as Roy had 6ie
said, every man and woman of goodwill-British *
Indian-would count in the scale, were it only a gra
here, a grain there. The insignificance of the hum-i
unit-a mere fragment of star-dust on sidereal shorl
-is off-set by the incalculable significance of th*
individual in the history of man's efforts to be mrorW
than man. In that faith these two could not be founi
wanting; debtors as they were to the genius, devotion:
and high courage of one fragile woman, who had liveF
little more than half her allotted span. 
They at least would not give up hope of the lastfia
unity vital to both races, because political errors anr&
poisonous influences and tragic events had roused &
mutual spirit of bitterness difficult to quell....  "
Conceivably, it might touch the imagination of thi.t
Indta-Rajputana (Boy was chary, now, of the a-f
embracing word), that an Englishman should so leIt'
an Indian woman as to immortalise her memory ia- ,
form peculiar to the East. For a Christian Lilal
neither 'temple, nor tomb, but the vision of a -ilw
city rebuilded-the city whose name was written5 
her heart. In their uplifted moment, it seeme&d-
quite unthinkable.                , -



<pb n="449"/>
A STAR IN DARKNESS           -
psly failed to touch-if not done a good deal to
iench," said Roy, his eyes brooding on a bank of
irple-grey cloud, his own imagination astir . .
It was his turn now to catch a flitting inspiration on
le wing.
Would it be utterly impossible--  ?  Could they
iend a wander-year in Rajputana--the cities, the
%sert, the Aravallia: his father painting-he writing t
he result-a combined book, dedicated to her memory;
c attempt to achieve something in the nature of in-
rpretation-his arrogant dream of Oxford days; a
ndication of his young faith in the arts as the true
edium of mutual understanding. In any case, it would
a unique aelcievement. And they would feel they had
intributed their mite of goodwill, had followed 'the
eam.' .
"Besides-out there, other chances might crop up.
iea, Grandfather, Dyn. .. . And Tara would be in
all, heart and soul," he concluded-remembering,
[th a twinge, a certain talk with Rose. " And it would
) you all the good on earth-which isn't the least of its
rtues, in my eyes ! "
The look on his father's face was reward enough-for
.e moment.
"Well done, Roy," said Sir Nevil very quietly.
That year in Rajputana shall be my wedding present 
-to you two--"
Later on the 'inspired plan' was expounded to Tara
-with amplifications. She had merely run home-
corted, of course, through the perils of the wood-
impart her great news and bring her mother back
lunch, which Roy persistently called 'tiffin.' Food
sposed of, they stepped straight out of the house into
world of their own-the world of their'-Game-without- 
i-End'; the rose garden, the wood, the regal splen-
urs of the moor, gleaming and glooming under shadows
drifting cloud: on and on, in a golden haze of content,
llkin- endlessly talking. ...
The reserve and infrequency of their letters had left
hole ,tracts, outer and inner, unexplored.  Here,
ought Roy-in his mother's beautiful phrase-was
;he comrade of body and spirit ' that his subcon-



<pb n="450"/>
450              FAR TO SEEK          :
over the heads of one and another, lured by the fa:
yet emotionally susceptible to the near. Once-unbiddei
-the thought intruded: "How different! How 1u0
utterably different!"                             i
Reading aloud to Tara would seem pure waste of herld
except when it came to the novel, of which he had tolld
her next to nothing, so far ...
And Tara carried her happiness proudly, like a bannezi.
The deliciousness of being loved; the intoxication of ii,
after the last spark of hope had been quenched by that.
excruciating engagement! Her volcanic heart held Or
capacity for happiness as tremendous as her capacity
for daring and suffering. But the first had so long-
eluded her, that now she dared scarcely let herself-go. f -
She listened half incredulous, wholly entranced, whf
Roy drew rapid word-pictures of the cities they woi*-
see together-Udaipur, Chitor,'Ajmir; and, not least,;
Komulmir, the hill fortress crowned with the ' cloUN!
palace' of Prithvi Raj and that distant Tara, her nam6i
sake. Together, they would seek out the little shrine
-Roy knew all about it-near the Temple of the Mothae
of the Gods, that held the mingled ashes of those grea:
lovers who were pleasant in their lives and in deat
were not divided. ... .
It was much later on, in the evening, when they si
alone near the twin beeches, under a new-lighted moe
that Roy at last managed to speak of Rose. In thy
dimness it was easier, though difficult at best. But ag
day he had been aware of Tara longing to hear; upnabw
to ask; too sensitive on his account; too proud on hoe
own. 
Sir James and Lady Despard were dining, to honout
the event: and if Sir James had needed 'squaringtJ,
no one heard of it. Jeffers had arrived, large and genid
-his thatch of hair thinned a little and white as driv
snow. Healths had been drunk. It was long since t
Beeches had known so hilarious a meal. Yet the grac$
less pair had made haste to escape, and blessed  I3
Despard for remaining with the men.            -
Tara was leaning back in a low chair; Roy on a
cushion, very close; a hand slipped behind her
cheek against her arm; yet, in a deeper sense,^



<pb n="451"/>
A STAR IN DARKNESS               451
He did know.
" Tara-my loveliest-shall I tell you? " he asked
iddenly. " Are you badly wanting to hear ? "
"Craving to," she confessed. "It's like a bit of
lank space inside me. And I don't want blank spaces
-about you. It's the house swept and garnished that
;tracts the seven devils. And one of my devils is
lalousy ! I've hated her so, poor thing. I can't hate
er more, whatever you tell-"
"Try hating her less," suggested Roy.
"Try and make me!" she challenged him. "Are
)u-half afraid ? Were you . . . fearfully smitten ?"
"Wonderful Tara ! 'Smitten' is the very word."
[e looked up at her moonlit face, its appealing charm,
3 mingling of delicacy and strength. "I would never
ream of saying I was 'smitten '-with you."
For reward, her lips caressed his hair. " What a Roy
ou are-with your words! Tell me-tell from the
eginning."
And from the beginning he told her: first in broken,
)asmodic sentences, with breaks and jars; then more
iently, more unreservedly, as he felt her leaning closer
-more and more understanding; more and more for-
ving, whe-e understanding faltered, where gaps came.
-on account of Lance, and of pain that went too deep 
r words. She had endured her own share of that.
ie knew ...
When all had been said, it was she who could not
ieak; and he gathered her to him, kissing with a passion
' tenderness her wet lashes, her trembling lips
At last: " Beloved-has the blank space gone? " he-
iked. " Are you content now ? "
"Content! I'm lifted to the skies."
" To the tipmost top of them ? " he queried in her ear;,
id mutely she clung to him, returning his kisses, with  -:
Le confidence of a child, with the intensity of a 
oman....
All too soon it was over-their one mere day: the 
alk back through the wood-never more enchanted. 
an on a night of full moon: Tara, dropped from the
ies, lost to everything but the sound of Roy's ve in
.e darkness, deep and soft, like the voice of her owtiheart
n-. ;1  n Arnnnrw  T4- 'As   4,SnA'l ' 1- 4 1,- 4 4-1-d- 44n  -1 .a -



<pb n="452"/>
452              FAMG TO OSi;K MM
be to-morrow-and to-morrow-and to-morrow, worlli4
without end....
Back in the garden, Jeffers-a miracle of tact-wan-f
dered away to commune with an idea, leaving father!
and son alone together.
Sir Nevil offered Roy a cigarette, and they sat down:
in two of the six empty chairs near the beeches and-
smoked steadily without exchanging a remark. 
But this time they were thinking of one woman.:
For at parting Tara had said again, "It's all been her;
doing-first and last."  And Roy-with every faculty-
sensitised to catch ethereal vibrations above and below
the human octave-divined that identical thought isn
his father's silence. Her doing indeed! None of them
-not even his father-knew it better than himself. 
And now, while he sat there utterly still in the midst
of stillness-no stir in the tree-tops, no movement any-:
where but the restless glow of Broome's cigar-the in:l
expressible sense of her stole in upon him, flooding
his spirit like a distillation from the summer night,
Moment by moment the impression deepened and glowet,
within him. Never, since that morning at Chitor, had
it so uplifted and fulfilled him....
Surely, now, his- father could feel it too  ) Deliberatedl
he set himself to transmit, if might be, the thrill of h<:
nearness-the intimacy, the intensity of it.     :--
Then, craving certainty, he put out a hand and touche&
his father's knee.                             - 
"Dad," the word was a mere breath. "Can yew
feel . . .  She is here."
His father's hand closed sharply on his own.
For one measureless moment they sat so. Then thut
sense of her presence faded as a light dies out. Th#
garden was empty. The restless red planet was movig <:
towards them.                      :-?
On a mutual impulse they rose. Once again, as in 
shrine, they exchanged a steadfast look. And Roy h
his answer., 
He slipped a possessive hand through his father's
and without a word, they walked back into the hi j:
parkstone, February 1920. 
Parkstone March 27, 1921. 
THE END.     . -       .



