TRIXIE'S HONOR.
CHAPTER I.
LOVE THAT TOUCHES EVERY HEART.
"Love ! You are always talking about love," cried madcap Trixie Harlowe.
"And why 'not?" demanded Daisy Harris seriously. "Is there anything else in the world equal to it ?"
Trixie's brown eyes danced, her fair, round cheeks dimpled with mirth, and her rosebud lips parted in a smile that revealed two rows of pearls.
"You are right, Daisy," she laughed; "it has no equal for helping us girls to make fools of the men."
"Ah, Trixie !" said Daisy, casting an admiring glance at the lovely, witching face of her companion, "the man may come along some day who will use love to help him make a fool of you."
"All right !" cried Trixie, tossing her queenly little head defiantly, while a saucy grimace pursed up her red lips in a delicious pout, "the man who can do that is welcome to. I am not afraid."
"Don't think because your heart has never been touched, it never will be," Daisy said. "Love is a passion that touches every heart some time, and I know that when it touches yours, it will start a volcano of throbbing emotion into life, and will send the hot blood pulsing like molten lava in your veins."
A strange, unwonted thrill shot through the heart of the beautiful girl as she listened to these words that seemed to have the ring of prophecy in them,
She stopped right there in the street, and pressing one dainty little hand on her heaving bosom, while her great brown eyes seemed to swim in a sea of in-tense passion, she murmured :
"Daisy, you are right. You have read my nature like an open book. I laugh at love, and I play carelessly with the hearts of men because the spirit of wanton mischief seems to possess me; but sometimes, as in a dream, I seem to view my own heart, and then I tremble at the thought of what will become of me if ever the passion which I see there breaks its bonds and overwhelms me."
Daisy stared at merry, madcap Trixie with a sort of fright, for never before had she seen aught of seriousness in that sunny, laughing, elfish spirit.
"And up to this time;" she asked in a hushed tone, "have you never felt the faintest thrill of love in your heart ?"
In an instant a change flashed over Trixie, and she was her old, laughing self again.
"Thrill of love, indeed !" she cried gaily. "No, I never have felt it, but how I wish I could. Does it hurt, Daisy ?" she asked with pretended anxiety.
"Oh, Trixie !" said Daisy, "and do you feel no tenderness for poor Willis Trow, who loves- you so madly that when he is near you I can see such a hungry, passionate look in his eyes, as if he would devour you ?"
"Love him!" answered Trixie scornfully; "why, I would as soon think of loving that big tiger in the menagerie. He would murder me through sheer jealousy if I gave him any right to love me."
"But you lead him on, Trixie. I have seen you look up at him with an expression in your witching brown eyes that would have robbed most men of their senses."
"That is only for practise," answered Trixie, with a merry outburst of laughter.
"Trixie—Trixie !" sighed Daisy, "you have been
given a strange power over the hearts of men, and you should be careful how you use that power."
"Oh !" cried Trixie, "I will be true to the man I love, if ever I do love, and that ought to be enough. That is, unless he is poor ; but then I wouldn't let my-self love a poor man."
Daisy shook her head, but felt powerless to make any impression on her wilful, madcap friend.
"You are beautiful, Trixie," she said. "I think you are the most wondrously beautiful creature I ever saw; but you are only a factory girl, and, alas! the working girl is too likely to find the road to wealth paved with disgrace."
Oh, what a flame of pride shot into the brown eyes at these words!
What a flush of virtuous scorn mounted to the round cheeks!
"Daisy," she said, and the flutelike tones vibrated with the intensity of her meaning, "let me tell you that that road has been trodden by fewer working girls than by the so-called ladies. The dearest possession of the working girl is her honor, and she guards it as she would not guard even her life."
"What a strange creature you are," Daisy said, gazing with admiration and wonder at the flushed face of her beautiful companion. "One moment you are the wilful, laughing madcap, who sees nothing seriously ; and then you are throbbing with some passion-ate emotion. Ah, what a love yours will be !"
Again the silvery laughter of the little beauty rung out as if in mockery of love.
"You may be right, you sober Daisy !" she ex-claimed; "but in the meantime we shall surely be docked if we don't hurry and get on the elevated train that's coming now."
"Oh !" cried Daisy, her eyes seeking the clock in the jeweler's window, "I had no idea it was so late." "Come!" cried Trixie, her eyes snapping with fun,
"let's run for it. I know it isn't dignified ; but what has dignity to do with sweet sixteen? I'll bet you Willis T row's heart against a sponge-cake that I get to the top of the stairs first."
Carried away as she always was by the high spirits of the madcap beauty, Daisy sprung after Trixie, and raced with her up the long flight of stairs.
Two young men stood watching the girls as they ran. Both were dressed in the height of the fashion, and one of them was as handsome as ayoung Apollo.
"Great heavens, Allan !" exclaimed the latter, his blue eyes glowing with a look of intense admiration, "did you ever see such a beauty in your life?"
"Why," drawled Allan Williams, "she is rather pretty for a factory girl."
"Pretty for a factory girl !" cried the other indignantly; "why, she is pretty enough for anything. If she were dressed up she would grace any drawing-room in New York."
His tone was so fervent and intense that his companion looked at him with an amused expression, and drawled :
"Perhaps you think of having her grace your drawing-room, Leo. I wonder what your aristocratic mother would say to that ?"
Leo Brainerd shrugged his broad shoulders, and stroked his curling mustache that was the envy of his made friends and the admiration of all his female ones.
"You may laugh, Allan; but I assure you that I never was so struck by a face before. Of course I would never think of marrying her, but I have a strong inclination to follow her and make love to her."
Allan Williams laughed cynically.
"What a pity you had not thought of it sooner," e said. "She must have got that train."
"You laugh." retorted Leo, "but I assure you I
She Has Met Her `ate at Last.	9
shall meet her again somewhere some day, if I have to haunt this part of the city to do it."
"Oh," said Allan, "it does very well to get up at this unearthly hour of the morning when one has just returned from a yachting-party ; but to deliberately get up out of one's warm bed ! Oh, dear!"
"I shall do it, nevertheless," insisted Leo.
Allan shrugged his aristocratic shoulders again.
"And what will you get for your pains?" he drawled. "I am told that these working girls, poor as they are, are intensely virtuous. Nothing but marriage will do for your little beauty."
"Bah !" answered Leo, "I don't believe any such nonsense. I'll tell you what I will do ; I'll bet you a dinner at Delmonico's that within a month that pretty little creature will be mine without the interference of any priest."
"Done !" cried Allan Williams; and the two rich, young aristocrats clasped hands on the infamous wager.
"By Jove !" suddenly cried Leo, "the fates are with me! There she is now. She missed her train, and is waiting for the next. Good-by ! I go to make the first move in the campaign of love."
The next train was already in sight as he spoke, and he leaped swiftly up the flight of stairs.
CHAPTER II.
SHE HAS MET HER FATE AT LAST.
Leo Brainerd knew perfectly well that he was handsomer than most men, for he was the great match of the season in the world of fashion, and the belles of society had paid him such court that he must have been a fool not to discover what they all said of him.
With his wealth and good looks he had never had
12	She Has Met Her Fate at Last.
that she had hardly begun to wonder if no one would come to her rescue, when she felt herself pushed to one side.
"You scoundrel !" she heard a rich baritone voice say, in tones that thrilled her through and through, "how dare you molest the lady? Apologize to her instantly."
The rough looked at the handsome face, the rich clothing, the white hands of Leo Brainerd, and a scowl of contempt curled his lip.
"Who are you? Who gave you any right to put in your oar?" he demanded. "Now, you go on, or I'll spoil yer face."
"Will you apologize ?" demanded Leo hoarsely.
The guard stood as far away as possible, the passengers crowded back to be out of the way, and only Trixie stood near Leo, and she was moved by feelings of mingled terror and admiration.
She looked apprehensively from the elegantly dressed aristocrat to the burly ruffian, and with a pleading cry she said:
"Do not get in trouble for me, please. I can go in-side now."
"And he'd better go inside, too," the ruffian said. "Will you apologize ?" again demanded Leo, his voice low and vibrant with anger.
"No, but I'll	
And the fellow drew back his great fist as if he would strike Leo.
But the latter had not been captain of his college football-team for nothing.
The moment the rough raised his fist Leo was on) him.
It seemed to the spectators as if they could not see how it was done.
They saw the wretch wear a sudden frightened look, and then they saw him lifted bodily over the ra.1 of the platform a-. 1,'--1:1 suspended over the street below.
She Has Met Her Fate at Last.	13
A cry of dismay and terror broke from the lips of the spectators, for they believed that Leo intended tc drop the miscreant.
r And he seemed to think so, too, for as the cars sped along, and he realized that the elegantly dressed young gentleman was a giant in strength, and could dispose of him at will, he began to plead for his life in the most abject terms.
Leo shook him as a terrier might a rat, and said to him in tones which were almost as amused as stern:
"You brute, will you apologize to the young lady now ?"
"Yes, yes. Only let me get back on the car !" howled the wretch.
"Please let him back !" Trixie pleaded, terribly frightened lest he should let the fellow fall.
So Leo pulled him back over the rail with very little ceremony, and crushed him to his knees, where he held him while he mumbled an apology.
Trixie looked into Leo's handsome face instead of listening to the words of the frightened wretch, and he seemed to her like a god.
The train slackened and stopped at the next station ; Leo jerked the fellow to his feet, and thrust him off the car.
Oh! how noble, how magnificent he looked to little Trixie! It seemed to her that- he was everything she had ever dreamed of.
How strong he was, yet how composed ! He had disposed of the burly ruffian as few men could have done, and now he was bending over her with as tender a courtesy as if she were a queen instead of only a little working girl.
"Let us go inside where you won't be looked at as the heroine of this little episode," he said, his voice sounding like richest music in her ears.
She went in, without daring to answer, and with-
Looking at the Rosebud Mouth.
"I will go as far as the factory," he said in a soft, low tone that told Trixie as well as if he had explained in so many words, that he thought the same of her as if she had been the first lady of the land.
Daisy was in despair when she saw that her words had had no effect on Leo.
"Trixie," she said, when they were in the street again, "if we do not hurry, we shall be late ; and you know we shall be docked if we are."
Trixie knew it as well as Daisy; but it did not mat-ter to her, then, if she lost all her wages so that she had a few minutes more of Leo's company.
"I don't care," she said indifferently.
"Don't let me detain you," said Leo eagerly. "I will run with you if you wish to run."
Trixie looked up at him and broke into a merry peal of laughter that sounded to his ears like the mu-sic of silver bells.
"Oh, what would the people think to see us three running through the streets together ?"
"I suppose," he laughed, "they would think there was a fire somewhere."
"But I must hurry," pleaded Daisy. "I cannot afford to be docked."	.
"Then you may hurry," said Trixie, wondering as she said it, how she could have the courage to do so.
A gleam of joy flashed into the blue eyes of Leo, for that unguarded speech of the little beauty told him that she was glad to be with him, and preferred that no one else should be there, too.
Daisy ,_,	, ;4: ~ _'. ul glance a,t Trixi .. )nt she
Lookiu- at the Rosebud Mouth.	17
new the wilful little creature too well to hope to move er now, so she sighed and murmured :
"Will you come right along after me, Trixie ?"
Trixie's brown eyes flashed ominously. She did not like any one to suggest what she should do or not do, and the implication in Daisy's tones angered her.
"I will do as I think best, Daisy," she answered shortly.
Daisy had faith enough in Trixie; that was not wily she was troubled. But Trixie was so young, and had no one to guide her through the pitfalls of life.
"All right, Trixie," she said, and turned and hurried away.
And Leo saw her go with strange feelings battling in his breast. His better nature was telling him to fly from the temptation of wrecking the life of the beautiful little creature, who was fast falling into his power. His worse nature was urging him to continue as he had begun, so that he might win his wicked wager.
"Are you offended because she has left us?'" he heard the flutelike voice of Trixie say.
He looked down into the witching face, drew a deep breath, and went on by her side. He would win his wager at any cost; for he felt that he could not be happy without the love of this peerjess little creature, the mere glance of whose eye was enough to send his blood leaping through his veins.
So they walked on side by side, and Trixie learned as she went that this handsome stranger, who had come to her rescue so nobly, was to her the dearest object in all the world.
It seemed strange to her that it should be so, but she did not deceive herself. She knew by every sign that she had at last found the one man she could love
ith a passion so mad and furious, that it seemed to fairly c':~,	.ttel ance.
z8	Looking at the Rosebud Mouutth.
It was usually she who did the most of the talking It was customary for her merry, infectious laughter to be ringing out at every moment, but now she walked almost in silence by the side of Leo, quivering with ecstasy when by chance his arm touched hers as they walked.
And to listen to him was to drink in great drafts of rapturous happiness, while to look up and meet his blue eyes fixed searchingly on hers was to put all her senses in a whirl.
She knew she would be late in reaching the factory, but every moment by his side was too precious to be lest.
She knew that she ought not think of this wealthy patrician, whose life was cast in such different channels from hers. She knew that in all probability this would be the last time she would ever see him, and yet she clung to those few moments all the more tenaciously.
Ah! she knew she would probably not see him again, and yet down in her heart was a whispered suggestion that he loved her as she loved him, and that this meeting was but the first of many, each to be happier and sweeter than the last.
They reached the factory building- and, by the deserted doorway, by the hum from the windows, she knew that work had begun.
"Good-by !" she said hesitatingly, wandering if he would ask to shake hands with her, or if he would merely lift his hat and go.
Ah! If she had only known what was in his heart at that moment ! He was looking down at the rose-bud mouth, and was saying to himself that he must press those moist lips ere he left her.
He followed her into the deserted hallway and took her little hand in his. Her heart thrilled with delight as he did so.
"Trixie," he said, in that soft, murmurous tone
hich was so seductive to the ears of the innoceit girl, "we shall meet again, I hope."
"I don't know," she answered shyly.
"You would like to, would you not ?" he asked, drawing closer to her.
She lifted her wonderful eyes to his face and was startled by the passion she saw there.
"If you would like to," she replied, letting her eyes droop before his.
"Trixie," he said eagerly, his arm stealing around her waist so insidiously that it seemed. as if she were powerless to prevent it, "I could not leave you now if I did not know I should, meet you again. Trixie, let me take one kiss from those sweet lips, as a token that we shall meet again."
He bent over the startled girl, and she could feel his breath on her cheek ere she realized all that he was about to do.
Then, suddenly, she pushed him from her and cried out vehemently :
"No, no ! Oh! what would you do ?"
"Trixi-e," he cried reproachfully, "would you deny me a kiss? Surely, one little kiss is not much to pay for the service I rendered you !"
Again he would have pressed his lips to hers, but the agony of complete comprehension overwhelmed her, and she thrust him from her, crying out in a passion of grief:
"Oh! do you think so meanly of me? Ah, Heaven ! why must I have been taught this lesson? Mr. Brainerd, would you treat the sister of one of your friends as you have tried to treat me?"
"But, Trixie !" he remonstrated.
"I will listen to no excuse, no explanation," she said with the haughtiness of an offended empress. "I understand you now. Go, sir! I hope we shall never meet again. I trusted you, and you would have insulted me."
20	The Kiss that You Refused.
"But, Trixie," he cried, "won't you listen to me ?" "No !" she answered proudly, and turned from him, gliding through a door he had not noticed.
"Haughty little beauty !" he murmured passionately, "if I did not love you with a madness I cannot control, I would never return to sue for your pardon. I was too precipitate, fool that I was! Oh, how be-witching, how entrancing she is! I cannot, I will not give her up. She must be mine, because I love her."
CHAPTER IV.
THE KISS THAT YOU REFUSED.
A pang worse than death was in the heart of Trixie. She had given her heart to a stranger. She had loved, worshiped, trusted him ; and she knew that he had thought to treat her as he would not have dared to treat a lady in his own circle.
- "Because I am only a poor factory girl," she said to herself with an agony of bitterness, "he does not respect me."
At the door of the room where she worked she was met by a young man in blue blouse and overalls.
"You are late, Trixie," he said, his dark eyes softening at sight of her. "If you will hurry, I will see that nothing is said about it."
"I don't wish your favors," she answered curtly, visiting on his innocent head the wrath she felt.
"I didn't mean to anger you, Trixie," he said humbly enough to appease any one.
"I am late and can afford to be docked for it," sh said, and then swept into the room.
Daisy tried to ask her some questions, in her jo at seeing her beautiful friend arrive safely at the fac tory, but Trixie turned even on her, anr' -.lied ou
The Kiss that You Refused.	21
i unreasonable wrath, so that poor Daisy was fain to keep silence all the morning.
Then at noon Trixie's mood suddenly changed, and she became feverishly full of spirits, keeping the whole room in laughter over her bright, cutting speeches.
"Oh! how I hate him !" she said to herself with a little choking sob as she returned to her machine after the lunch hour was over.
But she did not hate him ; she loved him passionately. And, oh! how sore her heart was to think that, unworthy as he had proved himself, she could not help loving him!
"He is so brave, and he seemed so good and true," she moaned under cover of the noise made by her machine.
The afternoon dragged along, and it seemed to Trixie that she would rather (lie than go on living with the memory of the morning to always haunt her.
"I wish something would happen," she said with fierce impatience. "I would not care what it was. Oh! why are men so wicked ?"
Then, as sometimes happens, when evil is wished, something terrible did happen. The horrid, fearful cry of fire came up to the room, and was heard over all the din and noise.
The girls looked at each other without comprehending for a moment, and then the full explanation came with terrible distinctness.
A great, gushing volume of black smoke filled the only doorway, and they knew that the fire had cut them off from their retreat.
The terrible story of the scene that followed can lever be told in words.
The girls lost their senses, and behaved like mamacs. Only Trixie—pretty little Trixie—hot-tempered, high-spirited, merry, madcap little Trixie—of whom o one would have expected anything, r'taned her
22	The Kiss that You Refused.
presence of mind. But for her all of the girls would, have been lost.
She it was who discovered the- way of escape, and one by one led the girls thither, until they saw what she was doing, and began to flock thither in their wild, mad way until the danger was that in the struggle no one would yet be saved.
But she quieted one and another, and got order among them, so that one by one they escaped, though the chances of safety grew less and less with every moment until, when Trixie was left alone in the great room, the fire-escape fell from under her very feet, and she was left there in the midst of the roaring flames.
She had said in her bitterness and passion that she would not care if death came ; but now that it was licking the hem of her gown she found that life was still dear.
She looked hopelessly around ; there was one chance left; the end of the room that looked down into the street was freer from the devouring flames. She could at least appear at one of the windows and see if the people below could not devise some means of escape.
Choking and stifled by the smoke, scorched by the flames that enveloped the whole room, she fought her way desperately to the front windows, and climbed up on the sill.
The street below was a sea of human faces, and a shuddering roar went up at sight of the fair young creature so suddenly appearing there.
Oh, how far down the street was! To jump meant death. She looked despairingly at the network of telegraph-wires that ran in weird procession up and down the street.
She wondered if she might not jump in them and find safety, but the idea was so wild that it needed no ''loue-ht to tell her that it could not be done.
"Oh, T-'-de, I have found you at last!"
ne Kiss that You Refusuu.	. 23
The voice was at her feet. She almost tottered and fell at the sound of it. It was the voice of Leo.
"Trixie, I have come to save you, or to die with you.,,
"Oh, Leo !" she gasped.
"You spurned me this morning, Trixie," he said, "but you cannot do so now. I shall save you if I can, Trixie."
"Oh, Leo," she moaned, "you will be lost yourself."
"Trixie," he said, as he drew a ball of twine from his pocket, and cast it over the telegraph-wires, after securing one end to his wrist, "I was waiting for you to come out. When the fire came I made inquiries after you, and learned which part of the building you were in. Then I got this ball of twine. See, they know what to do with it."
She looked mechanically and saw that they had fastened a rope to the end that was down there. Leo began to haul up the twine as soon as he saw that the rope had been fastened, talking meanwhile to Trixie with a calmness that was terrible to contemplate.
"The fire is very close to us, Trixie, but I know I shall save you now. Trixie, will you forgive me for what I did to you this morning?"
"Yes, oh, yes," she wailed; "but you—will you be saved, too?"
"I will take care of myself," he said, fixing his eyes on her as he pulled rapidly on the twine; "but I have one thing more to say. Trixie, I love you! I loved you the moment I saw you !"
"Oh, Leo !" she gasped, her brown eyes expanding with a look of adoration.
"Will you not tell me, Trixie, as we stand here so near death, that you love me, too ?"
She placed her little hand on his shoulder, noting even then that his coat was all charred where the flames ad touched him.
The Kiss that You Refused.
"Leo," she said, "I do love you. I loved you tide first moment I saw you."
He smiled, and she thought she had never seen any-thing so sweet in her life as his smile was.
"Trixie," he breathed, "you were right this morning to repulse me. I loved you, but I was filled with an ignoble purpose. You do not doubt me now ?"
"No, no, Leo."
The rope was in his hands now, and he passed it rapidly round her waist.
"You are safe, my dar4ing," he said, his eyes dwelling on her beautiful face with an expression that made her cry out:
"But you will be sacrificed to save me."
"I will do my best for myself as soon as I have saved you," he answered evasively.
"Leo," she panted, "I would rather die with you than live without you."
He took her in his arms and strained her to him for a moment, the hungry flames growing nearer and nearer all the while, until they even darted-their red tongues about the feet of the lovers so strangely united.
24
"Trixie," he murmured, "will you give me the kiss now that you refused this morning?"
She threw her arms about his beck and pressed her lips to his in a mad passion of love and anguish, and he held her to him while he forgot all the world besides.
What did it matter to them, then, that hundreds of eyes beheld- them?' What did it matter if all the world knew, now, that they were lovers?
Leo knew, and it was dawning on Trixie that never again was it likely that their lips would touch.
It came to her as he strained her to his breast, and she pushed herself from him, and cried out
"You know that your doom is sealed. Leo.
You Will Drive Him Mad !	25
think to send me to life while you remain to die. I will not go. What is death to me by .your side? Oh, Leo ! I shall die with a smile on my lips now that I know that your heart is mine. Leo, cast off this rope unless it can save us both. Let us live together or die together !"
He did not answer, but strained her once more to his heart. Then, with a sudden movement, and de-spite her frantic struggles, he caught her beautiful form in his strong arms, and threw her from him.
A loud cry of terror arose from a thousand throats. Leo's noble heroism was understood.
Trixie's form hung on the end of the rope as it rested on the telegraph-wires, and, she was safe.
Leo stood in the flames that now filled the window, as if they had waited for Trixie to go.
"I have atoned," he cried, and disappeared in A he roaring, hungry flames.
CHAPTER V.
YOU WILL DRIVE HIM MAD!
A loud cry of horror, pity and despair rent the air when Leo disappeared from view within the burning building. Trixie alone did not see what had happened, for she was suspended in, midair in a half-fainting condition.
As for Leo himself, he did not doubt that he had taken his last farewell of life. He believed that the flooring must surely have burned away by this time, and that he would fall down into the very midst of the furious fire, and so die.
But it was as if a miracle had taken place for him.
The floor had not burned away, and the flames for
an instant seemed to suspend their animation.
He sprang to his feet, fought his wav to the win-
26	You Will Drive Him Mad!
dow again, and peered out. He saw one doubtfut chance for his life.
Ah, well, better to take that than to die like a rat in a hole ! His clothing was burned, and his flesh, too; but he was not conscious of it in his intense excitement.
He leaped once more upon the sill of the window, and took a swift glance about him.
He looked down into the sea of faces turned so pityingly and so despairingly up toward him. He heard the shout of encouragement, and a smile passed over his face. He saw that Trixie was lying sense-less in the arms of some kindly woman.
"She must not see me leap," he cried aloud. "She would be terrified. And if I reach the pavement but a mangled corpse, she must not see me."
What he saw, heard and said, occupied but a moment of time. He raised his eyes to heaven for a brief instant, then poised himself, measured his distance, and leaped.
A cry of horror accompanied his movement.
Women turned their eyes away; men gazed upward because they could not look away.
"The brave fellow! I understand," cried a fire-man.
Le- had leaped, not to the ground, but to the net-work of wires that ran along the street in front of the building.
It was a terrible risk, because the wires might send him whirling into the air in the rebound.
It seemed as if not a breath was drawn in all that enormous crowd while he was flying through the air. Then a gasp was emitted in unison:
"God help him !"
"He has landed fairly! He has caught hold! Ladders
The next instant his wavering body was seized by
You Will Drive Him Mad !	27
a pair of strong hands, as_the ladder, carrying a fire-man, was shot up against the wires.
He was dragged down to the ground almost sense-less, and men and women wept as they crowded around him to see the noble hero, who had risked his life for the factory girl, and then had performed a deed of extraordinary nerve.
"How handsome he is !" the women murmured. "Are you hurt?" fifty voices demanded.
"Not much," he answered feebly, not knowing how much he had been injured. "Is she safe?"
"Not hurt a particle, but in a dead faint," one of the firemen answered.
Leo shut his eyes as if going to sleep.
"He is hurt more than he lets on," the fireman said; "he has fainted."
a A police captain came up and bent over him. "Ah !" he murmured, "Mr. Leo Brainerd !" Then he added aloud :
"I will see that he is sent home."
"Do you know who he is ?" a young man asked eagerly.
He was the reporter on a daily paper, as the captain very well knew ; but he also knew that the aristocratic Mrs. Brainerd would pay well to have her son's name kept out of the papers.
"No, I don't know him," he replied shortly. "Out of the way, so that I may take him to a carriage."
"There is an ambulance here," some one said.
"He is not sick enough for that," the captain re-plied ; for he knew again that Mrs. Brainerd would never get over the shock of seeing her son brought home like any common person in an ambulance.
So Leo was placed in a carriage and taken home by the captain, who did not fail to tell the shocked and startled mother how well he had managed.
And the following day he received a handsome check at his private address.
28	ou Will Drive Him Mad !
"How did it happen?" haughty Mrs. Brainerd demanded after she had been assured that her darling's life was not in danger, and that he was suffering from nothing worse than some serious burns on the body.
The captain related in glowing terms the noble deed of which Leo had been the performer, thinking to see the mother's face mantle with glad pride.
But when he was through she cried out bitterly :
"What! he risked his precious life for a miserable factory girl! Oh, better she and all her kind had perished rather than that he should take such a risk. He, the heir to millions !"
The police captain was shocked to hear her speak out so openly in her haughty pride, but he held his peace because he feared to lose the reward which he knew would be his for keeping Leo's name out of the papers.
Mrs. Brainerd did not think to ask the name of the girl her son had risked his life for, for that girl was less to her than the earth under her aristocratic feet.
Ah! what would she have said had she known that her son took that terrible risk simply because he had given his heart to the mere factory girl?
Oh! what a proud, haughty woman she was! And yet for her darling boy she could dip her dainty hands into the ointment the doctor brought, and apply it to his burning wounds.
"My poor, foolish boy !" she cried, as she tended to his wants, "how could you let your brave heart so run away with your discretion? It was noble of you, but think of what little account that girl's life was compared with yours !"
"It was a human life, mother !" he said, not daring to tell her that it was the life of the girl he loved better than all the world besides.
"There !" she said, "we will not talk of that, Leo. Do you suffer much ?"
"A little,"	replied, hardly able .to suporeq-, the
You Will Drive Him Mad!	29
groans of anguish that rose to his lips as the torture of the burns ran along his nerves.
"Mrs. Brainerd," whispered the obsequious doctor, "your noble son is suffering more than you can conceive of. My unguents and washes will give him great relief, but I would advise that you send for a trained nurse at once."
"I can nurse him," she said proudly.
But the doctor knew that she would be unnerved by the sight of his suffering, and he therefore urged that a trained nurse should be sent for.
So Mrs. Brainerd obtained the necessary directions from him, and sent a messenger for the nurse he recommended. But as she looked at the address, her patrician lip curled with scorn.
"She must be a common person, doctor," she said..
"Oh, yes, ma'am," he answered, "she belongs to a poor family: but she has a genius for nursing. I recommend her because she is the best I know."
"-Would not a man have been better?" she demanded.
"A man has not so light a touch," he replied ; "and with wounds like these of your son's, a light touch is everything. This young woman is common, but very respectable, and knows her place."
So the messenger departed for the nurse, who dwelt in a very unaristocratic quarter of the city.
He knocked at the humble door up-stairs, while the grand carriage waited at the street door, for the idlers of the neighborhood to stare at.
"Does Miss Susan Danvers live here?" the man asked of the motherly looking woman who came to the door.
"Yes. Is she needed for anything?'"
"Doctor Ingersoll wants her to come right away to, nurse a young gentleman. who has been badly burned —Mr. Brainerd."
"Mv daughter is not feeling well." i e said, "arid
30	You Will Drive Him Mad !
is next door visiting a neighbor who was brought home a little while ago. I will go see her."
"It's a good place," the footman said. "Mrs. Brainerd is a very haughty lady, but she is liberal."
Susan Danvers was in a neighboring room, listening with intense interest to a tale which was being told her.
"And he risked his noble life to save yours?" she cried admiringly.
"He risked his life for mine," was the answer in tones so sweet that one hearing them was tempted to wonder if the voices of the angels could be sweeter.
"And do you know his name ?" Susan asked breathlessly.
"His name," was the low answer, while a deep flush mantled the fair cheeks, "is Leo Brainerd. Ah, how handsome he is !"
"Was he injured at all?"
"I could not learn, but I shall go out now and learn where he lives, so that I may inquire."
"Susan," said Mrs. Danvers, opening the door and entering the room, "there is a call to nurse a young man who has been badly burned. All do not escape as easily as you, my little Trixie."
Trixie, for it was she, started to her feet, and demanded breathlessly :
"Who is it? What is his name?"
"Oh," laughed jolly Mrs. -Danvers, "he is no acquaintance of yours, my pretty one. This is a young aristocrat. His name is Leo Brainerd. But I must go back to my baking. Come and talk to the footman, Susan !"
She hurried out without noticing the expression that darted into the beautiful face of little Trixie.
"Leo !" she murmured. "Oh, Susan, what a strange thing! Oh, I wonder if he is dangerously wounded. Of course, you will-go, Susan?"
But Susan shook her head as she rose to her feet.
You Will Drive Him Mad !	31
"I would like to go, for your sake, Trixie; but I shall be sicker to-morrow than I am to-day, and I shall not dare. But I will inquire of the messenger how sick your hero is."
She had almost reached the door when she felt a tug at her skirts, and looking down, saw Trixie kneeling there, her beautiful eyes filled with tears of pleading.
"Oh, Susan !" she coaxed, "stay one moment and listen to me! I could nurse him, and no one would know the difference."
"You nurse him! Oh, Trixie! Besides, you are not a trained nurse."
"I am not a trained nurse, Susan," returned Trixie, with pleading eagerness ; "but don't you remember how I nursed the woman who was so horribly burned with kerosene-oil ?"
"Yes ; but the doctor	
"If you recommend me he will ask no questions. Oh, Susan, remember that Leo saved my life. Susan, will you not do this for me? It is so little to ask, Susan dear," pleaded Trixie, fairly on her knees in the intensity of her desire.
"If anything should go wrong," said Susan, hesitatingly. "If you should be careless!"
"Careless !—careless with him! Oh, Susan!
I
would never close my eyes while by his side. I would study his least wish. I could learn to tell by a mere glance of his eye. Susan dear, let me go in your place. I will bless you as long as I live."
"But you have no proper dress," remonstrated Susan; but Trixie saw that she was yielding, and she leaped to her feet and threw her plump arms about her neck, crying :
"You will let me have one of your gowns and some of your aprons. All the money shall be yours, dear; and you know you need it badly enough. Let me,
32	Her Red Lips Pressed His.
darling, go in your place. Oh, you don't know how faithful a nurse I will be."
"If I only dared," said Susan, looking affectionately at the beautiful pleading face. "But who can resist you? Oh, Trixie! ' if ever you love a man you will drive him mad! You will be the making or the mar-ring of the man who loves you."
"I am to go then, you dear old Susan?"
"Yes, you shall go ; but you must account to the doctor for the nurse being so young and having such a pretty face."
"Oh, I will make it right with him, never fear. Now go to the man and tell him you cannot go, but that you have engaged the services of the best nurse in the world. But, oh !" she added with a sudden gasp of fear, "ask him how badly Leo is hurt. I almost forgot that in my joy."
CHAPTER VI.
HER RED LIPS PRESSED HIS.
The footman went down-stairs to wait, while Susan, with many misgivings, went into Trixie's room to dress her in the garb of the professional nurse.
"He says Mr. Brainerd is not very badly hurt, and is not burned on the face at all," she began ; "but, oh, Trixie, I don't know about letting you go ! Suppose anything should happen."
"Now what could happen ?" cried Trixie, in her witching way which few could withstand. "Won't I remember everything you have ever told me about nursing? And won't I look as, if I had the wisdom of a hundred in my head? And won't I walk like a cat, and order the servants around when I am in the sick-room? Oh, I know how a nurse ought to act !"
Susan laughed and kissed her.
-	- a
Her Red Lips Pressed His.
33
"You are a madcap, but I am sure you will do the best you can for the noble young man who saved your life. Only don't be so foolish as to fall in love with him. The man said he was very handsome, but he also said that his mother was the proudest woman in all New York."
"I fall in love !" murmured Trixie, bending her head to hide the color which rose in a crimson tide to her round cheeks. "Oh, I shall never love any more than I do now."
"Hard-hearted little beauty !" cried Susan, tapping the rosy cheek with admiration. "Ah! well, the time will come when you will meet your fate. Then see how soft and yielding you will be !"
The footman stared in amazement when he saw the demure, dainty little beauty come out of the house and say to him :
"I am the nurse."
As he said afterward in speaking to the other servants about it, he was so dazed at the unexpected sight that for a moment he had not the wit to open the carriage door for her.
He recovered himself in a moment, however, and Trixie was ensconced amid the soft cushions of the luxurious carriage, while the footman was climbing up beside the driver, and saying:
"Well, the sight of that face ought to be medicine enough for Master Leo."
"I thought," said the coachman, "that nurses were all old and ugly. I wouldn't mind falling sick myself if I could have a nurse like that."
"Yes," said the footman with a silent laugh of appreciation, "but what I'm thinking is : what will Mrs. Brainerd say to such a beauty?"
"Pshaw !" ejaculated the driver, "she will stare with stern disapproval of any one out of her own set being so pretty, and will freeze the marrow in this young woman's hnnes with her icy behavior"
34	Her Red Lips Pressed HYh.
It was just as well that Trixie did not hear what they were saying, for she was already frightened enough at the thought of meeting face to face the proud woman who was the mother of Leo.
She had a vague hope that she might steal up to the sick-room and see Leo before encountering his mother, but the hope was destined to be blasted, for Mrs. Brainerd was waiting to see the nurse to whom the precious charge of her son's health was to be en-trusted.
Trixie was taken to her room at once. She trembled at the ordeal, and tried to draw her laughing red lips into a sober straight line. Her eyes were already frightened into a sober expression.
But no effort of her will could alter the fact that she was the owner of as dainty, bewitching a face as ever mortal eye looked on, and Mrs. Brainerd started back with a frown and an exclamation of dismay at the sight of the ravishing beauty of the demure face.
"You a nurse?'" she cried.
"Yes, madam," was the faint answer.
"Are you experienced ?"
"Yes, madam, particularly experienced in burns. The nurse the doctor sent for was too ill to come, and she sent me in her place."
"What is your name ?" was the grim query.
"Beatrice Harlowe," was the answer, for she was afraid that Trixie would seem too trifling to this stately lady, who was so hard and haughty, and so different from Leo.
"Well, I suppose you may go up to the sick-room, since you have come, but you need not consider your-self engaged until the doctor has seen you."
"As you please, madam," Trixie answered, awed by the stern. words.
"I will accompany you," Mrs. Brain A, .' ~~ifl, and
Her Red Lips Pressed His.	35
poor little Trixie felt all her courage ooze out at her finger-tips.
What if Leo should cry out in recognition of her? She knew that the haughty woman before her would have her turned ignominiously out of the house.
But never mind! she had come to take all risks for the sake of seeing Leo, and telling him how noble she thought him.
"I wonder," she murmured, as she followed Mrs. Brainerd over the soft carpet toward Leo's room, "how I could ever have distrusted him! But I am sure his mother will never consent to our marriage."
Never in all her life had she seen such a display of wealth and luxury as she saw in the home of the man she dreamed of as her lover. And she was op-pressed by it. It made Leo seem so far away from poor little Trixie, the factory girl.
She almost dreaded to see him now, lest it should turn out that she had made .a hideous mistake, and that she had only dreamed that the possessor of such wealth had said that he loved her.
But it was already too late to retreat ; for while these dismal thoughts were chasing each other in her brain, Mrs. Brainerd opened the door of Leo's room and entered.
Trixie followed her timidly, and hardly dared lift her eyes to look at the patient on the bed.
"Leo !" Trixie started ; the hard, cold voice was so soft and loving now. "I have brought the nurse. I do not know whether she will do or not, but we shall see. If she is not competent, we can always get another."
"Oh, how hard and cruel !" thought Trixie indignantly. "She speaks of me as if I were a sort of being different from her."
But even as the bitter thought flashed through her brain, her eyes filled with tears at the sight of Leo, 1,ing there so calm and still. She did not know that
36	icier Red Lips Pressed His.
he was calm because he was hiding a terrible spasm of pain.
He did not open his eyes for a moment; but when he did, he fixed them curiously on Trixie.
Trixie saw growing recognition, mingled with increduality in his eyes, and she would have given worlds to have dared to warn him ; but she did not dare to stir with the cold eyes of Mrs. Brainerd on her.
Leo stared, and then started up in bed with a cry that was full of a gladness that his mother could not comprehend, but which made Trixie's poor heart leap with joy. It told her that she had not dreamed that scene in the blazing window.
"You—you !" was all he said, and then sunk back with a grimace that even his bravery could not hide.
"What does it mean? Why did you cry out, Leo ?" demanded his mother, a perplexed frown on her proud face.
"I—I was so glad to see—see you, mother," he said stammeringly. "I was in such pain that I longed for a loving word from—some one. Oh, I was so glad to see—you."
"My darling boy," the mother said in a soft, loving tone. "I will remain and direct the nurse."
"No, no !" he said quickly, "I am feeling tired and nervous again. I would rather you would not remain now. I will send for you in a little while."
"But your wounds may need dressing," she said, "and I should be here to see that the nurse performs her duty properly."
"I feel as if I could go to sleep," he answered a little testily. "Please go, now."
"Come !" she said to Trixie ; "you need not re-main now."
"But I wish her to remain," Leo said pettishly. "How can I send for you if she is not here? Let her sit down over there—anywhere that I can't see her."
Her Red Lips Pressed His.
37
Trixie went meekly over to a far corner, and Mrs. Brainerd, after another effort to persuade Leo to let her remain, went slowly out.
The instant she was gone Trixie started up and bent eagerly toward Leo, but without hastening to his side as she wished to do.
He, however, cried out in a longing, eager tone :
"Oh, my darling; oh, Trixie! Cone to me, my true-hearted, my brave little one ! How good of you to do this! I have lain here cursing these burns be-cause they kept me from your side. But now I bless them, agony and all! Ah! my best beloved !"
He caught her little hand and drew her down to him ; and she, nothing loath, bent over until her red lips pressed his with a passionate fervor.
"My Leo !" she murmured, "I am so glad to be here where I can tell you again how I love you; to tell you, too, how noble and true I think you."
"Ah !" he said, with a sort of laugh, "you will never keep a kiss from me again, will you, dear ?"
"Oh, no, Leo ; for I am wholly yours now."
"And you will never doubt me again, either, will you ?"
"Never; for you have given me the dearest proof of your truth and honor. I will stake my soul on your truth, Leo, darling."
"And, Trixie, my darling," he went on, sinking his voice as if he feared to be heard, "when I am well you and I will be married."
"It shall be as you say, dear," she replied, a thrill of deepest joy quivering in her heart.
"You see what my mother is," he whispered. "It must be a secret marriage, darling; but after a while we will tell her, and shF will forgive me anything when she knows there is no remedy."
"I am so in awe of your mother, Leo dear," she answered.
38	I Give You Fifteen Minutes.
"She is very cold and haughty to those she deems below her in the social scale," he said; "but it shall be your task to teach her other views."
Trixie shook her head.
"I am afraid I shall not succeed," she said. "I am too much afraid of her."
"Ah, well !" he said gaily, "we will not borrow trouble. There will be time for that when I am well. Darling little nurse! Ah! I sha'n't be sick long with you to dress my wounds. Already I am so much better that I believe I could get up."
"Oh! you mustn't," she cried in alarm, really fearing he thought of doing it.
"I won't if you will kiss me again," he said wickedly.
CHAPTER VII.
I GIVE YOU FIFTEEN MINUTES.
The doctor looked aghast_ when he met Trixie that evening; but when he saw how deftly she went about her work, and when, more especially, he saw what a soothing effect she had upon his patient, he did not hesitate to fully indorse her to Mrs. Brainerd.
"She is very young, and very pretty," that lady said in response.
"It is a pity," the doctor replied gravely ; "but, of course, she cannot help it."
So Trixie, much to her joy, was installed as nurse to her darling. And the days seemed to both of the lovers to fly by.
She waited on him, read to him, sung to him, held his hand, laid her cool cheek against his, and, in short, did all those things which a passionate yet pure love could suggest to either.
And he grew better in a way to make the doctor
L
I Give You Fifteen Minutes.	39
believe himself a modern Aesculapius. Trixie pulled as long a face as she could, and sighed :
"You are getting well very quickly, Leo."
"Don't you wish me to ?" he demanded, twining his arms about her waist.
"Yes;" and a real sob rose up to put her pretended mirth to rout; "but at the thought of leaving you, I cannot help a fear	"
"My darling!" he cried passionately, "are you be-ginning to doubt me?"
"Oh, no, not you. But I fear your mother so. Oh! how she hates such as I. She would sooner see you dead at her feet than my husband, Leo."
He 'knew it was true. It wasp useless to deny it. He did not attempt to do so.
"Trixie," he said, "I do not care. Do you think I would sacrifice you to a foolish pride? No; my mother has not learned, as I have, that true nobility is as common in the factory as in the drawing-room of wealth. You are far too good for me, darling; but I will not give you up for that reason, either. When I am well, you and I will be married."
It was the only cloud on little Trixie's horizon: Could they marry in spite of Mrs. Brainerd? She looked now into Leo's eyes, and believed that what he was determined to do he would do.
"Oh, Leo, I am so happy !" she said.
But even as she said it a storm was brewing in that very house. Mrs. Brainerd was standing in her boudoir, her hand upon the knob of the door. She was going down-stairs to the parlor to see an insistent visitor, who had refused to go away without seeing her.
Seated on an easy chair in the room was a darkly beautiful young lady, who was listening to Mrs. Brainerd's words with rapt interest.
"I am glad you are back at last, Madeline. Leo is well enough now to see you. And now that I
40	Give You Fifteen Minutes.
know how passionately you love him, there i..,ea b~ no delay in having him propose to you. Oh, I know he loves you! I have noticed it in clays gone by ; and his interest is always deep when I speak of you. Be-sides, my heart is set on this wedding."
"You are sure," asked the flutelike voice of Made-line Delmar, "that he loves no one else? It seems to me that I could--"
She did not finish her sentence, but her fiercely passionate tone spoke volumes for her.
"I know there is no one else," Mrs. Brainerd answered. "But I will return in a moment. I shall soon dispose of my saucy visitor."
She sailed down the stairway in a mood to annihilate the forward man who had been so determined to see her, and when she entered the parlor and saw that that visitor was a working man, as was evident in spite of the fact that he wore his best clothes, she was furious.
"How did you dare	" she began when he interrupted her with a dark scowl.
"Never mind getting angry with me, madam," he said. "I think I have a bit of news for you that will turn your anger into another channel."
"What do you mean?" she demanded.
"How would you like a factory girl for a daughter-in-law ?"
"Impudent wretch !" she cried indignantly.
"Ah, don't start like that at the mere mention of it," he said ; "but let me tell you that it was love for a factory girl that led your son to do what he did at the fire the other day."
A look of deepest scorn was her instant response to this speech. Then she said coolly :
"I do not approve of such things ; but you must know that love—if love it be—and marriage are not the same things. You spoke of marriage, remember."
I Give You Fifteen Minuted
41
The man's face became ghastly white; then a sneer curled his lip, too.
"Ah, I understand you," he said vehemently. "You think like all your kind that a rich man has only to bend his finger to make a factory girl fall at his feet. But let me tell you that the factory girl holds her honor of as great value as the ballroom belle. At any rate, this girl who loves your son and is loved by him i as proud as you if it comes to that. It would be wife or nothing with her."
"You are mad," Mrs. Brainerd said coldly. "I can prove what I say," he answered.
"Do so, then, and until you are able to do so, I trust I shall not be troubled by you."
"Hold !" he hissed as she was turning to leave the room. "The proof is in your own house. Will you send for your son's nurse to come down here ?"
She stared at him for a moment as if she thought he had lost his senses.
Then she suddenly glided to a bell-rope and pulled it violently.
"Tell Miss Harlowe, my son's nurse, to come here at once ! she said to the servant who came in response to the summons.
There was not a word spoken between those two while they waited for the coming of the little nurse.
They heard her light footfall as she came timidly down the stairs, and they looked at each other, but that was all.
The man stood back in the shadow of a curtain when Trixie entered the room.
"Did you send for me, Mrs. Brainerd?" she asked in her sweet voice.
Mrs. Brainerd turned to the man and said harshly : "This is my son's nurse. Now what?"
The man thus challenged stepped out into the light and f-,c" TrixiP
42 With a Cry of Terror, She Turneu. She stared at him and uttered a little cry of may, cowering a little as she did so.
The man stared back at her with an expression which could not be fathomed.
But there was passionate love and bitter hate in it.
When he spoke, which he did after a number of efforts, his voice was rough and discordant.
"She is no nurse, but the girl whose life your son saved—a common factory girl. Her name is Trixie Harlowe, and I was her lover once."
Trixie sunk overwhelmed at the feet of the haughty woman whose eyes were fixed on her with hard, cruel inquiry.
"Is this true ?" demanded Mrs. Brainerd in a low voice.
"Yes, it is true," gasped Trixie, her pride broken by the sudden discovery.
"Then," said the haughty, implacable woman, her voice still cold and inflexible, "you will gather up your belongings and go out of my house. I give you fifteen minutes. You, sir, go now," and she pointed to the door. "And remember it will be useless," she went on, addressing Trixie again, "to try to see my son before you leave."


CHAPTER VIII.
WITH A CRY OF TERROR, SHE TURNED.
Trixie did not make any reply. She knew it would be useless to do so.
She rose sadly to her feet and went slowly to her room.
"James," said Mrs. Brainerd to a footman who was waiting in the hall, "see that this person does not go again into my son's room."
Such a cruel, wanton insult stung Trixie to the
With a Cry of Terror, She Turned. 43
quick. All her fiery young pride was aroused, and she turned upon Leo's mother with flashing eyes and head erect.
"There was no need to say that, Mrs. Brainerd," she said. "I know I was wrong to come here in the way I did, but the result would have been the same in the end, for if I had not come to Leo, he would have sought me."
"Sought you to your ruin, shameless creature !" cried Mrs. Brainerd, furious at Trixie's unwise words of anger.
"Sought me to wed me," Trixie said proudly, "and since you have driven me to defiance, let me tell you that wed me he will in spite of any opposition."
"And let me tell you, girl," retorted Mrs. Brainerd, almost beside herself with anger, "that if my son should so forget himself and his proud name as to wed you, I would disinherit him, and you would take a pauper instead of the rich heir you thought to capture."
A bitter retort sprung to Trixie's lips, but she realized that she had already said too much.
She bit her lip and swept through the hall and up the stairs with the air of an offended empress.
But as she passed indignantly through the hall she was just conscious of a dark, grandly beautiful young lady, whose flaming eyes seemed to pierce her through and through.
Mrs. Brainerd, a prey to the bitterest emotions, remained in the parlor until she heard the front door close after the man who had so treacherously betrayed poor little Trixie. It was Willis Trow, the factory foreman.
When he was gone, she roused herself from a sort of stupor of fury into which she had fallen, and started to go from the room, when Madeline Delmar faced her in the doorway.
"By an accident I have heard everytlhi+io.." she said,
44 With a Cry of Terror, She Turned.
her face white and her sloe-black eyes blazing like living coals of fire.
"It is nothing," Mrs. Brainerd said passionately. "It shall not disturb our plans."
Madeline glided into the room, and laid her hand on the older woman's arm.
"Mrs. Brainerd," she hissed, "you are mistaken; it is something. I saw the girl, and she is beautiful. Yes, she is far more beautiful than I. She has the witching beauty that makes men go mad with love. Leo loves her, and will wed her if he is not prevented."
"If he dare to wed her, he shall not have a penny of my money !" Mrs. Brainerd cried.
"If he loves her, do you think he will care for that?" cried Madeline passionately. "No, no ; you must say nothing to him about this. Make some excuse for her sudden departure. Say that her lover, that workman, came for her, and that she dared not refuse to go with him."
"But they will meet as soon as he is able to go out, and she will tell him everything."
"They shall not meet !" Madeline hissed, her expression so diabolical that even Mrs. Brainerd recoiled from her. "Do not let that trouble you. Only tell him a clever story, and leave the rest to me."
After a few more words, Mrs. Brainerd agreed to be guided by Madeline in the matter, and they separated. Madeline left the house, and Mrs. Brainerd watched to see that Trixie did not communicate with Leo.
But she need not have taken that trouble, for Trixie was too proud to risk another insult. Besides, she was sure that Leo would seek her out in spite of any story they might tell him.
She hastily packed the few things that were hers, threw on her hat and trim sack, and went down the stairs with her queenliest air.
With a Cry of Terror, She Turned. 45
Mrs. Brainerd met her in the hall, and held out a roll of bills, saying as she did so :
"Here is your money."
Trixie's lips curled scornfully. She pushed the money back and answered coldly :
"I nursed Leo because I loved him."
The next moment she was gone, leaving a furious woman behind her.
She swept out of the door, and up the fashionable street, hardly knowing whither she was going, for, although her manner was proud and composed, her brain was in a whirl.
She would probably have walked on until she had collected herself entirely had not a carriage drawn up beside her, while a soft voice addressed her:
"Isn't this Trixie Harlowe ?"
Trixie looked around in amazement, and her eyes fell on the occupant of the elegant carriage. It seemed to her that she had seen that darkly beautiful face before; but at the time she could not recollect where.	•
"Yes, I am Trixie Harlowe," she replied.
"I was sure of it," the young lady answered, and lowered her voice. "Come into the carriage, dear. I am a friend of Leo's, and have a message from him for you."
Trixie's face lighted up instantly, and without a moment of hesitation she stepped into the luxurious carriage. Leo had found her sooner than she had expected, but that was all.
"How did you know how to find me ?" she asked in happy wonderment.
"I saw you in the house only a little while ago," was the response. "I knew Leo would like to know how cruelly his mother had treated you, and I hastened to tell him. I have just returned from abroad; but Leo and I are old friends. My name is Madeline Del
46 With a Cry of Terror, She Turned.
mar. You are to go to my rooms in the Senlac, and' Leo will send a message there."
There was something hurried and, as it struck Trixie, insincere in the manner of Madeline Delmar; but she reproached herself for the thought, and made no objection to the plan.
So Madeline gave the order to her coachman, and he drove them to the magnificent, fashionable apartment-house up-town.
Trixie knew that it cost a fortune to live in that house, and she did not wonder when she saw the Iuxury of its appointments. And when she reached the apartments of Madeline, she was amazed at the lavish display of wealth.
"Nothing is in order yet," Madeline said carelessly. "You see I am very high up in the world ; but notice the fine view."
She led Trixie to the window and pointed out. Then, as if to give a still better view, threw open the window, and said:
"Step out on the balcony, dear, and look from the'i e.
Trixie had no care for view at that moment ; but, not to be discourteous, she stepped lightly out of the window and laid her hand on the rail.
But at the same instant she felt the structure giving way under her feet, and with a wild cry of terror she turned to leap back through the window.
It was closed, and the dark face of Madeline Delmar glared out upon her with an expression of horror and hate.
Trixie clutched at the window, at everything within reach, her terrified screams at the same time piercing the air.
The balcony gave way beneath her feet and she was suspended in midair, her little hands clinging with the streng`' ,f desperation to the rail, whIch still
Trixie's Peril.	47
remained fast to the wall of the building, but which was steadily giving way.
Far, far below was the cruel pavement, waiting to receive her lovely form. And there, glaring hate at her, but a few inches away, was the demoniac face of Madeline Delmar.
Suddenly Madeline opened the window and hissed into the ears of the agonized girl:
"You thought to rob me of Leo, but you shall die! die!"


CHAPTER IX.
TRIXIE'S PERIL.
Poor little Trixie! Life had been so full of sweetness to her, and now it was slipping away—a terrible death menaced her.
Even if she could cling for a few minutes longer to the iron rail, it would only be death deferred that long.
That hateful, demoniac face at the window added some slight horror to her death, but now that the end was so near she could not give much thought to that.
"Leo! Leo !" she moaned, "farewell !"
A mist swam before her eyes, her little hands were losing their hold, and the rail itself was loosening in the wall.
A crowd had gathered below, and was gazing up-ward with frozen horror.
When that slight form reached them it would be shapeless and unrecognizable.
Even Madeline Delmar, whose tigerish heart \vas cold and cruel and hard as stone, shuddered and shrunk back from the window.
Another moment and the delicate fingers would unfold, and down, down would that wondrously beautiful vo u.a – - i rl go.
t~.
48	Trixie's Peril.
But, Heaven be thanked, that moment never came; for just when it seemed as if the terrible moment had come the door of the apartment was flung open and a man, with a bound, was across the room and stretched out of the window.
His sinewy grasp was around the delicate wrist ; an awful struggle began. He must keep himself in place and drag her in, too.
Madeline, with a muttered curse, such as sounded horrible from her red lips, fell back like a wild beast at bay, and glared with startling eyes at the noble battle taking place in the window.
"If I dared !" she muttered, and crept like a blood-thirsty tigress toward the man, who lay prone upon the floor.
She would have sacrificed them both if she had dared to take the risk. But she saw that it could not be clone. And yet, if Trixie were saved, she would denounce her.
"Help—help !" the man gasped hoarsely.
Others might rush in at any moment and give the help it was in her power to afford. Her wicked brain worked like lightning.
"Ah !" she hissed, "it might be done. I will help him, curse him !"
She leaned over him and caught Trixie's dress in her grasp. The relief to the man was evident in an instant. He caught his breath, rested a moment, and then with Madeline's help, slowly dragged Trixie's now inanimate form in through the window.
"Merciful Heaven !" the man gasped as he sunk panting into a chair the moment Trixie was safe, "did I not warn you this morning that that balcony was unsaf e ?'"
He had warned her, or she would not have thought of such a means for poor Trixie's destruction, but she shook her head.
Trixie's Peril.	49
"No, you did not warn me. It was wrong, terribly wrong of you not to. This poor child might have met with an awful death."
"She has only fainted !" he panted. "She will be all right in a little while. In mercy, miss, do not tell the proprietor how remiss I was, or he will discharge me, and I have a family to support."
That cold-hearted creature cared nothing for his family, but her quick brain saw an opportunity to use the man, and she answered:
"For the sake of your family I will say nothing ; but some reason must be given for her presence on the balcony. What shall it be? Quick! some one is coming !"
"Alas! I do not know. Oh, think of something for me. If I am discharged for such a cause no one will employ me."
Madeline's black eyes snapped.
"I will say that she is subject to fits of madness, and that it was in one of them that she leaped out of the window. You need only declare that she fought you to prevent you saving her."
The door was suddenly dashed open, and several men sprung in.
They saw the form of Trixie lying on the floor, and comprehended at once.
"Thank Heaven !" cried the proprietor. "She is safe !"
Then he turned fiercely on the man who had saved her, and shouted:
"This is your fault ! If that young lady had met her death from that v\)'indow my business would have been ruined. Why did you not warn the lady that the balcony was being repaired ?"
The poor wretch turned his appealing eyes on Made-line. Her answer was given at once in cold, dignified tones:
"Do not 1 1 ame him. He has been very brave. Be-
50	Trixie's Peril.
sides, he did warn me, and I warned her. But, alas ! the poor child is subject to fits of insanity, and in one she tried to kill herself. No one is to blame ; but I beg you will all go out at once, and have a physician sent here. As soon as a physician comes I will have her taken quietly away."
"Yes," said the grateful wretch, "the poor thing fought me terribly to make me let go so that she might die."
With a look of wonder at the pale but strangely beautiful face, the men shook their heads pityingly and slowly filed out, not one thinking to doubt the story so cunningly concocted.
"Send for Doctor Simon Welford," Madeline said suddenly. "He is a specialist in such cases, and has seen this girl before. Don't send any other;_ I have the right medicine to give until he conies."
They did not stop to wonder at this statement but accepted it in good faith, and a messenger was sent for the doctor.
"You go, too," Madeline whispered peremptorily to the man, "or they will suspect something."
She had noticed that Trixie was recovering her senses. The man started up and hurried from the room. Madeline closed the door after him, darted a look of hate at the stirring girl, and then leaped to a drawer and snatched a little silver box from it.
"One of these will keep her still until I can dispose of her," she muttered.
She glided swiftly to the side of Trixie, just as the latter opened her great brown eyes and stared at her with a look of horror.
Quick as thought Madeline took a round, greenish-colored pill from the box and placed it between Trixie's lips.
Trixie made a futile effort to cast it out of her mouth, at the same time exerting herself to struggle to her fed.
Trixie's Peril.	51
But with a cry like a wild beast Madeline threw her-self on Trixie, forced the pill into her mouth, and held her down despite her efforts to rise.
Then it seemed to Trixie as if she were beginning to float in midair. She relaxed her struggles, closed her eyes and was still and lifeless. The drug had taken effect.
Madeline rose up with a look of diabolical triumph in her black eyes.
"It may be that this will be the best way, after all. They say that murder will out," she muttered. "Now, if my plan works, she will be lost to sight, and there will be no crime to rise up against me."
She exerted her strength to place Trixie on a couch.
She arranged her to look as if she had fallen aslk:4),
and then sat down to await the coming of the specialist.
The messenger who had been sent for him had gone * in haste, and Madeline had, therefore, but little time to wait.
She studied the face of the physician as he entered the room, and saw how his little, beadlike eyes swept furtively around the room.
"I have made no mistake," she thought.
"Is this the—the patient?" he asked, looking at
Trixie with undisguised wonder and admiration. "The insane girl," Madeline answered slowly, fixing
her black eyes on him.
"Insane?" he said with a little note of interrogation in his voice.
Madeline ignored the questioning tone, and asked in a careless way:
"Are you not interested in a private asylum some-where out in the country?"
He fixed his shifty eyes on her. "Yes," he replied.
"This girl is undoubtedly insane," Madeline said slowly, "aand I with her to be taken to a rood asylum
52	Trixie's Peril.
at my expense," emphasizing the words, "n-dy ex. pense."
The doctor smiled slightly.
"It might be very expensive," he said.
"I am willing to pay well," she replied.
"Two doctors must certify to her condition," he said.
"You can arrange the details," she answered. "I will foot the bill."
He looked at her for a moment; then a grim, wicked smile flitted over his weazened face.
"Let us be frank with each other. The girl is not insane, but she is in your ,way, and you wish me to put her where she cannot trouble you. Is that it?"	d
"That is it exactly. Can you arrange it ?"
"Without any trouble—if you are willing to pay well."
"I will pay anything. When can she be taken?"	g
"At once. The examination can be made after she is there. Within two days any reputable physicians will certify to her insanity."
Even Madeline shuddered at the cold, heartless tone of the man ; but she was not softened. Trixie had crossed her path, and must take the consequences.
"Can you not take her at once? She is under the influence of a narcotic now, and can give no trouble," she said.
"If you will go with me," he answered, "there will be no difficulty."
"Yes," replied Madeline, "I will go with you. Re-main here while I put on my street-garments ; then I will ring for assistance in carrying her down. Of course it will be best to have this part of it done in as public a manner as possible."
"You may leave that part of it to me," he answered with a cunning leer. "You have only to make a trifling payment first as evidence of your sincerity."
"What Horrible Falsehood is This ?" 53
<6i will draw you a check for five hundred dollars. Will that do to begin with ?"
"That will be amply sufficient," he replied, rubbing his hands with avaricious satisfaction.
Madeline left the room, and he approached and bent over Trixie.
"What a rare little beauty !" he muttered. "Ah! it will be something like to add you to the attractions of the asylum. Perhaps it will not be necessary to dose you with the black medicine. Love would be a sweeter sort of madness for such as you."
He looked gloatingly down at her, and rubbed his hands again.
CHAPTER X.
"WHAT HORRIBLE FALSEHOOD IS THIS?"
In the first fury of her anger and disappointment, Mrs. Brainerd had spoken of disinheriting Leo, should he dare to cross her wishes in regard to his marriage.
She had meant all she said, and would do what she threatened; but she knew Leo well enough to wish to avoid an encounter with him.
"He is so headstrong," she murmured, "that he may defy me. He would have his way, though it brought him ruin and death. I must plan some way to deceive him as to that girl. Ah, I have it !"
She called her maid to her. Jane Parker, or Parker, as her mistress always called her, was a silent, hard-featured woman of middle age, who understood her duties to perfection.
"Parker," said Mrs. Brainerd, "I need' your help, and will pay well for it."
"Yes, madam."
"I am sorry to say that Mr. Leo has become en-tangled with a common girl—in fact, with that nurse who was here."
"What Horrible Falsehood is This ?"
"Was here ?" queried Parker.
"I just sent her from the house. Mr. Leo is certain to ring for her in a few minutes, and I wish you to answer his ring."
"Yes, madam."
"If he asks for that girl, you will tell him that she has gone hurriedly away. I wish to prepare you for what other questions he will ask. Will you assist me? I will pay you well."
"I will do whatever you desire, madam," was the calm answer.
"I was sure I could depend upon you. - Now listen carefully." And Mrs. Brainerd rapidly, but clearly, mapped out her part for her.
Leo, meanwhile, waited impatiently for the return of his darling. It seemed to him that every moment away from her was wasted.
So he dwelt on her beautiful image, and pictured the happy little home she and he would have in some cottage not far from the city.
"I will marry her secretly," he said, "and no one need know anything about it until I am the possessor of some of my father's wealth. I wonder why he did not leave me some of his millions instead of bequeathing them all to mother! Ah, well! I would rather toil for my daily bread than to give up little Trixie."
He was a far different man from the one who had made so wicked a wager.
He was growing more and more impatient as the minutes sped by; though once he laughed outright as he thought :
"Poor mother! wouldn't she be horrified if she knew who my pretty little nurse was?' But some day she_ shall know ; and who will be prouder of Trixie than she, as soon as we have made our peace with her?
"How long Trixie remains away! I wonder what keeps her!"
He leaned over and struck the little bell that stood
"What Horrible Falsehood is This ?" 55
on the table. In a moment the door opened, and Parker entered in her calm, subdued way.
"Is that you, Parker?" he exclaimed. "Where is) !Miss Harlowe, the nurse?"
"Gone, sir."
"Gone !" he snapped irritably. "What do you mean by gone?"
"I mean she has packed her bag and gone from the house," she answered, without a trace of excitement.
He clenched his fists as if to suppress his anger.
"Are you crazy, Parker?" he demanded. "I am speaking of Miss Harlowe. Do you understand? Of my nurse."
"Yes, sir, I understand. There was a man came for her just now, and she ran up to her room and came down again in a great hurry, and went out with him."
Leo's face grew red with anger, suspicion, trouble, He could not comprehend. Trixie go away without a word to him !
"Send my mother to me !" he said peremptorily.
Parker went out, and Mrs. Brainerd came in, looking as if she suspected nothing of what he wished of her.
"Mother," he began, in a tone of intense excitement, "what is this I hear about Miss Harlowe going away? Parker says she has gone."
"Gone!" repeated his mother in a tone of amazement. "I know nothing of the matter. I will call Parker. Parker !" she called at the open door.
"Yes, madam ;" and Parker entered the room.
"What is this you have been telling Mr. Leo about the nurse? He says you tell him she is gone. When did she go? What do you know about it?'"
"I supposed you knew," the woman responded. "I only know that she was sent for to see a man who was waiting in the parlor. I happened to be down there at the time, and I heard her go in a-.d .ry out: 'Oh! is that you, Harry?' to which he answered : `Yes it is;
56	l alt Horrible Falsehood is This ?"
and I want you to come home. I didn't marry you to have you go away like this.' "
"Woman !" thundered Leo, "what horrible falsehood is this you are telling me ?"
"It is no falsehood, sir," she replied, with an indignant air. "The proof of it is that after some more words he swore he would have her home if he had to resort to the law. She seemed to be frightened and ran off up-stairs. She came down in a little while, and said to me that Mrs. Brainerd would send her money to her."
"She did not say a word to me," Mrs. Brainerd said. "She has gone without her pay. However, she is sure to come back after it. Meanwhile, Leo, you are well enough to get along without her. Nevertheless I do not like such conduct, and I will speak to the doctor , i about it."
"Speak to whom you please," cried Leo, laboring under the most intense excitement ; "but I tell you that there is more in this than appears. I know that she would not go from here with so little warning to—to me."
"It would seem that she has gone," Mrs. Brainerd answered coldly. "You may go, Parker."
"Married, too !" exclaimed Leo, in scorn. "As if I would believe her married. Mother, I will probe this affair to the bottom, and woe to whoever has meddled in it."
"Why should you suspect any one of meddling, Leo ?" she asked with uplifted brows. "What is there to meddle in? Why are you in such a heat over a mat-ter of such a creature's rudeness? It seems to me quite simple. Her husband has come for her, and she has had to go."
"Married! She is but a child, mother."
"Oh !" answered the proud woman, "these common creatures marry at any age. But let us not discuss her any more, Leo. I am delighted that you are so much
"What Horrible Falsehood is This ?" 57
10lietter. The doctor says you may go out for a ride now and then." "Yes," Leo answered curtly, "I am going out this very afternoon. Will you order the carriage for me?"
"Going out this afternoon, Leo ! Are you mad ?"
"No; I am well enough ; and I shall not rest until I have followed up this strange story about that poor girl. I will go to her home."
"You are wonderfully interested in her, Leo," Mrs. Brainerd said, with difficulty maintaining her calmness.
"I am indeed," was his answer.
It was Mrs. Brainerd's inclination to burst out into a furious tirade against Trixie; but she had begun with cunning, and she felt constrained to continue.
She swept to the door, saying as she went out:
"I will order the carriage since you wish it; but I protest against your going out on such an errand."
He made her no reply, and she was going angrily to her room, when the servant in charge of the front door announced the doctor.
Swift as the lightning's flash it entered her mind that she might find an ally in him.
"If I can but detain Leo," she thought, "until I have an opportunity to talk with Madeline again. That girl has such marvelous shrewdness."
She hastened down the staircase and intercepted the doctor as he was about to go up.
"One moment, doctor," she said hastily. "Come into the reception-room."
"Certainly. What can I do for you?"
"Doctor," she answered, "I have no time to explain now; but this is the case: My son insists upon going out this afternoon. For weighty reasons I do not wish him to. Ile is headstrong and will not be stayed by
ar t	t. Can you not help me?"
58 "What Horrible Falsehood is This ?"
"I do not quite understand," he answered, astonished at the excitement of this usually self-contained woman. She made a gesture of annoyance.
"I see I must be plain with you, doctor. My son must be kept at home at any hazard. Have you no harmless drug which will take the place of persuasion which he will not heed, or of force, which we cannot exert ?"
The doctor started and looked troubled, then .shrugged his shoulders and answered hesitatingly :
"Yes, I could give him a dose which would put him
to sleep for a few hours."
"Without danger to him ?"
"Without the least danger. But of course you understand, Mrs. Brainerd, it is a very unprofessional thing to do, and if it were discovered might get me into very serious trouble."
"You may make your own charge for the service, doctor," she answered, understanding him perfectly. He bowed.
"You need give yourself no uneasiness, Mrs. Brainerd ; Mr. Leo shall not go out. Indeed, it is of the utmost importance to his complete recovery that he should not, and I will take the responsibility of re-straining him."
A hypocritical smirk took possession of the doctor's face as he spoke.
He was planning the excuse which must be given to Leo later.
Leo was, with the assistance of his valet, dressing as, rapidly as he could when the doctor was ushered into his room.
As a matter of fact, Leo was quite well enough to go out, and had only consented to be an invalid so long because he knew that his charming little nurse would be dismissed the moment he seemed sufficiently well.
But when the doctor saw him in the act of putting
"What Horrible Falsehood is This ?" 59
on his clothes he cried out with an air of well-acted consternation :
"My dear sir, what does this mean ?"
"I am going out." Leo answered calmly enough ; for he had no thought of permitting the physician to deter him from his purpose.
"Going out !" cried the man of medicine, assuming a look of horror. "Surely you will not think of doing such a thing."
"I surely will," Leo replied quietly, continuing with his toilet.
"But the risk !" cried the doctor.
"I will take it," Leo answered. "Come, doctor, you know as well as I that I am quite well enough' to go out."
He did know it, of course, but he was too wily to admit such a thing. He shook his head gravely, and said :
"I know that you seem to be well enough, but, Mr. Leo, I also know that if you were to take cold now, erysipelas might set in, and death ensue. I cannot permit you to take the risk."
Leo laughed grimly.
"Them I shall have to take it without your permission," he said. "I ant going out in about five minutes, doctor. Wilson," he added to his valet, "see if the carriage is ready."
"Will nothing I say move you ?" the doctor asked with seeming anxiety.
"Nothing !"
"Then, at least," the wily physician urged, "you will permit me to give you a dose which will tend to pre-vent any untoward results from this excursion."
"Oh !" answered Leo carelessly, "if it will ease your mind to give me a dose, do so. I shall not object. Only you must make haste."
The doctor smiled and said it would not take him over a moment to prepare the dose, as he always car-
6o	In Deadly Agony of Spirit.
tied the drug with him. And, in fact, within two min utes the drug was down Leo's throat.
"Now," said the doctor, concealing a smile, "you may go when you are ready."
IN DEADLY AGONY OF SPIRIT.
It was late in the afternoon when Trixie regained her senses and struggled wildly to her feet.
It seemed to her that she came to all in a moment, and with consciousness came the recollection of her struggle with Madeline.
She rose to her feet, therefore, while still under the influence of the idea that Madeline was holding her down to the floor and trying to force a pill of some sort into her mouth.
In a moment she discovered that she was alone, however, though she had no notion of where she was, for she knew that it was not the room to which Made-line had conducted her.
Her head was so dizzy at first that she was forced to sit down for a little while; and while she sat she gazed wonderingly and fearfully around the room.
She could not help but be terrified by the strange silence which marked the place, for she knew by a terrible experience how wicked a foe she had to deal with.
"Oh, how awful !" she murmured with a shudder, as she recalled the face and words of Madeline. "She tried to murder me so that she might have Leo. Can she have any claim on him? But, no; if she had she would not have resorted to such a fearful device for putting me out of the way. I wonder where I am ?"
The room was furnished with extreme luxury ~ hit it did not require a very long examination to	~isfy
In Deadly Agony of Spirit.	bz
Trixie that it was very peculiar. The walls were covered with a thick padding, and the windows were heavily barred.
With a sinking heart Trixie rose to her feet and stole to the door, which she tried, though she had no hope that it would open. And it did not. Then she felt of the walls and stamped her little foot on the floor. The floor, like the walls, was thickly padded.
"No sound can escape from this room," Trixie murmured with a half-sob, for her immediate thought was that she had been brought there by Madeline so that she might be a more certain victim. "But, oh !" she cried, "I will not be so easy a prey to her cruelty as that. I will find something with which to defend my-self, and I will struggle to the last gasp."
But when the poor girl looked around for sonletliin~.; which might serve as a weapon she was startled and frightened once more by the singular fact that there was not a thing in the room that could be so used.
"All such matters have been carefully attended to, my dear," said a voice from the doorway, and when the startled girl turned her eyes in that direction, she saw that a man was standing there, the door closed behind him.
"Who are you?" she cried, actually less afraid of him than she would have been of that human tigress, Madeline.
"I am the doctor, my dear; but you need not be afraid of me. I am very kind to my good patients."
"Patients !" she gasped, a glimmering of the horrid truth forcing itself on her comprehension. "Where am I?"
"There now," he said coaxingly as he approached nearer to her, his eyes all the while devouring her exquisite beauty, "you must not excite yourself, little one. You are in a very nice private asylum, where your malady will receive very careful attention. Don't start, my dear! I thought it best to tell you at once,
62	In Deadly Agony of Spirit.
so that there would be no mistake about it. Besides, I have taken a fancy to you and will see that you have every attention if you can appreciate kindness."
"What do you mean ?" she cried, drawing away from him with a fast growing horror of his smooth and oily fashion of addressing her.
"Come, sit here beside me," he said, seating himself on the lounge and patting the seat by his side, "and I will tell you all about it. Wouldn't you like to hear how you happened to be brought here ?"
"Yes ; but I will not sit down," she answered in a frightened whisper.
"But I wish you to sit here," he said, with a frown; "and I am usually obeyed here. You wouldn't like to take the black medicine and become really insane, would you ?"
"Oh! no, no !" she wailed, terribly frightened.
"Then sit right down here, for I love you, my little beauty ; and, since your fate has brought you here, you might as well make the best of it. Sit down here, and what you will hear may not be so terrible, after all."
But Trixie already knew enough to make her creep to the far end of the room, where she cowered in deadly agony of spirit.
It was more like a horrible nightmare than a reality.
Then the little doctor rose to his feet, and a fiendish expression flashed into his black, beady eyes.
"Come, girl !" he hissed, "do not make me angry, or as I live I will pour the black me,-I'-;-- n your pretty throat, and you will go mad like some of the others here."
"Heaven have mercy !" she wailed, as she watched him creep nearer to her like some hideous monster of fable. "Go away ! Oh, God ! will no one help me?"
"No one helps those who come here," he cried hoarsely. "She said I must craze you at once ; but I
In Deadly Agony of Spirit.	63
would have spared you if you had not been a little fool."
He crept along toward her so slowly that it seemed to her that she would go marl with suspense.
Then suddenly he sprung at her with outstretched hands, and, with a scream of terror, she tried to de-fend herself.
She never could recall what she did, but she must have fought with the courage and strength of despair, for when a few moments later she stood in the middle of the room, she saw the doctor lying on the loon, the blood trickling from a wound on his temple.
He must have fallen against the table and so wounded himself, for there was no other way by which it zould have happened.
ixie stood looking at him, and panting with excitement and exhaustion, but not knowing what to do next, until it flashed across her that he must have a key to the door in his pocket.
It was with a shudder of horror that she prepared to search him, but she had the courage to nerve her-self to do it.
Fortunately for her the first thing that struck her eye as she approached him, was the handle of a key protruding from his vest pocket. Instantly she caught it, and ran to the door.
Her hand trembled so that she could hardly insert the key, for she thought with a quiver of misery that she did not know what she might meet on the other side. There is nothing more terrifying to the imagination than imprisonment in an asylum for the insane.
But at last she thrust the key into its place and turned it. As she did so, she felt the door snatched ^uddenly open.
She looked up, and a sickening terror took immeiate possession of her. A tall, gaunt, unkempt man, earing a long beard, and with a gleam in his restless
eyes that betokened insanity, stood before her, bran-dishing a glittering knife in his hand.
He looked down upon her with a grim, mirthless, hideous laugh, and whispered in a low tone :
"You thought to deceive me by turning yourself into a sweet-faced girl, but I know `you, doctor, and I am going to cut you up into little bits. Now, don't struggle, for it won't do you any good."
He caught her by the arm as he spoke, and with a dumb, strained cry in her throat, she found herself once more in that terrible room.
;HAPTER XII.
THE MIRE OF INFAMY.
chile Leo, his senses still enchained by the drug which the doctor had given him in the guise of medicine, lay on his couch in a profound stupor, Mrs. Brainerd sat in the library, waiting for the coming of Madeline.
There were a number of papers scattered over the desk in front of her, and her brow was sternly knitted as she perused one and another.
"If the proof were not so clear," she muttered, "I would never believe that Gerald Wright could be guilty of this theft. He has misappropriated at least ten thousand dollars. Well?" she demanded, as a servant knocked and opened the door.
"Miss Delmar is here," the man announced respectfully.
"Is she in the reception-room?"
"Yes, madam."
"I will go to her at once. But, no, ask her to be good enough to come here."
The man disappeared, ,and Mrs. Brainerd muttered to herself:
The Mire of Infamy.	65
"There may be some things said - that should not be overheard, and no room is as secure as this."
In a few moments Madeline was ushered into the library.
"Why are you so late?" demanded Mrs. Brainerd anxiously.
"I was taking care of our dear Trixie," answered Madeline ironically.
"And what have you done with her ?"
"Oh, she is in a pleasant place in the country, where she will remain until I see fit to let her re-turn. But how have matters gone since I left?"
Mrs. Brainerd pushed the papers from her as she replied:
"Badly enough. Here, for example, is the clear proof that my lawyer and confidential agent has been using my money. However, that is not so much, for I can stand the loss; but Leo has behaved so badly about that girl that I had to persuade the doctor to give him a narcotic to keep him from going out in search of her."
Madeline scowled. But she was rejoiced to see that Mrs. Brainerd was prepared to go any lengths to keep the lovers apart.
"Have you any plan ?" she asked.
"None that suits me. I have been waiting for you."
"You are still determined that Leo shall be mine?" Madeline queried, her eyes flaming ominously.
"If you are willing to take him, knowing all," was the answer. "For my part, I am satisfied that he will soon get over this infatuation."
"Mrs. Brainerd," Madeline sa0i'd, in a low, intense tone, "I would take him under any and all circumstances. I have worshiped Leo since I was a child, and I believe I would kill any woman who took hint from npc' Plan? Yes. I have thought of a nlan."
66	TI,e Mire of Infamy.
Mrs. Brainerd drew back from the implacable light that shone in the black eyes fixed upon her.
"What is your plan ?"
"Leo reveres his father's memory, does he hot?" Madeline asked.
Mrs. Brainerd's lips curled scornfully.
"Yes, he does," she replied.
"And, of course, he knows that Mr. Brainerd was my guardian until he died?"
"Yes."
"How would it do to let Leo think that a discrepancy had been discovered in his father's accounts, showing that I had been robbed of nearly two mil-lions ?"
Mrs. Brainerd stared aghast at her companion. Madeline laughed in a short, hard way.
"Don't you see that it could be presented to him in such a way that he could not help marrying me to save his father's good name."
"Ah !" cried Mrs. Brainerd, "if you had only thought of this yesterday—any time before this unfortunate episode of the nurse had led Leo to distrust me."
A dark frown corrugated Madeline's brow. Then it suddenly lightened, and she cried triumphantly: "Has Leo any faith in your lawyer?"
"Implicit faith; for he was Mr. Brainerd's lawyer and trusted friend. If it had not been so, I would not now be cheated out of some thousands."
Madeline laughed.
"Lucky loss !" she said. "Go to your lawyer and
tell him that you know everything, but are prepared
to condone his crime if he will go to Leo with our
story, and persuade him that his only way is to wed
me. In that way you will not appear in the affair."
"Excellent !" cried Mrs. Brainerd. "Doubly ex-
cellent, for Leo will not even know that I wish this
marriage. It shall be done. I will go at once. Leo
The Mire of Infamy.	67
may go out now. if he has the opportunity, before the lawyer visits him; for play this part Geraki Wright shall."
The two conspirators separated, and Mrs. Brainerd stepped into her carriage, to be taken to the office of Gerald Wright.
He was a white-haired old man, with a fine, intellectual face, which was seamed with deep lines of trouble and anxiety.
"Oh, if this should ever be discovered !" he was muttering to himself, in the privacy of his inner office, when Mrs.- Brainerd was announced.
He started up, and placed his hand over his heart, as if to still its beating. Then he collected himself by a mighty effort, and forced his face to wear a look of professional calmness.
"This is unexpected, Mrs. Brainerd," he said suavely.
"I suppose so," she answered curtly, "but you could not expect it to go on forever undetected."
The blood left his face at her cruel, cold words, for he knew they meant that his misappropriation of her money had been discovered.
"I—I don't understand," he stammered, with a feeble attempt to smile.
"Yes, you do, Gerald Wright," she replied sternly. "You know that your crime has been discovered. You are a thief !"
He fell back in his chair, his despairing eyes fixed on her hard face.
"For the sake of my wife and children, mercy!" he moaned.
She let him suffer for a full minute before answering his piteous appeal; then she said slowly :
"Well, I will. show you mercy; but on one condition—an easy one, I think."
"Z`~':	that condition? Oh, I bless, you for
68	ue Mire of Infamy.
your leniency, Mrs. Brainerd. I cannot tell you what agonies I have suffered since I was—was tempted."
"Put on your hat and coat and come with me," she said. "I will tell you what your task is when we are in my carriage. Of course, you are too good a lawyer not to know that, with the proofs I have, I can wreck your life and the lives of your wife and daughters."
"I know, I know," he answered huskily, while with trembling hands he donned his overcoat and placed his hat on his white head.
When they were in the carriage, Mrs. Brainerd revealed her plan to him. He listened in horror and anguish.
What! Must he tarnish the name of his dearest, kindest friend? Must he commit this terrible out-rage on the dead, in order to save himself? Ah, if it only were himself! But his wife and daughters!
He pleaded with the hard, haughty woman ; he wept and humbled himself in the dust. He used every argument he could command. She was inexorable.
"Do as I bid you, or go to prison for the remainder of your miserable life," she said harshly. "Who will be injured by telling my son this thing? It will go no farther, and it will save him from a terrible disgrace; for if he does not wed Madeline Delmar, he will marry a common factory girl. Let it be yes, or no. But do not forget that, if you refuse, you sink into the mire of infamy, and drag your innocent daughters with you. Will you do it, or not ?"
"I will do it," he responded hoarsely. "My God ! what else can I do ?"
"You have decided wisely, and just in time," she said; "for here we are at the house. I will get out alone : vo	o on for a block or two. and 2-et out.
The Mire of Infamy.	6g
so that you can walk here and there can be no chance for Leo to suspect me in the matter."
The broken old lawyer did not answer. He knew that his salvation depended upon his doing as she bade him, and he was prepared to do his best ;. but when he was alone he muttered bitterly :
"I am an old man, and a guilty one, Mrs. Brainerd; but there was an excuse for me. The time may come when I can deal you a blow for making me do this hideous thing; and deal it I will. I was already bad enough, but you have made me far worse."
Leo had by this time recovered his senses, and had raved furiously at his valet, who had been put in charge. But the valet had answered, in perfect good faith:
"The doctor was alarmed when he heard you were going out, and said he had given you an opiate be-cause he would not risk having you do so."
"Well, I will go out now, and take the risk," he had answered.
So the valet had finished dressing him for the trip out, and Leo was in the hall when Mr. Wright was admitted.
"Are you going out, Mr. Leo? I thought you were too ill for that; but I had something of the utmost importance to communicate to you, so I came. Can you not spare me a few minutes?"
"Can it not wait?" Leo asked impatiently. Gerald Wright drew nearer to him, and whispered in his ear :
"It is something that concerns your father's honor, Leo."
Leo started as if stung by a serpent, and stared at the lawyer with incredulous eyes.
"My father's honor !" he repeated ; "why, that is as secure as the Rock of Ages. Surely you can waif one day?"
Mr. Wright shook his head sadly.
70	Where All Sound is Stifled.
"Mr. Leo," he said, in a low tone, "if your father's honor and good name are as dear to you as you ever were to him, you will not ask me to risk them by delay. I assure you that what I have to tell you is of vital and immediate importance."
Ah! the wily conspirators had calculated well and safely on Leo's love for his dead father. His hand-some face paled, and he said huskily :
"You frighten me, Mr. Wright. I hope it is with-out cause. I will remain and hear what you have to say. The library is empty; let us go in there."
CHAPTER XIII.
WHERE ALL SOUND IS STIFLED.
Men who have been rescued from the very jaws of the lion declare that it was not fear so much as a painless stupor that possessed them at the most critical moment.
It was nearly so with poor little Trixie at the moment when she felt the clutch of the madman on her arm, and saw the door of the room shut with a click that told her that it had fastened itself.
The glare in the wild eyes that were fixed on her as the gleaming knife was brandished over her head assured her that she must look for no mercy from the crazed wretch.
Then it was that it seemed to her as if the poignancy of her terror gave way to the calmness of utter despair.
"Why do you seek my life?" she asked in a quiet tone.
An awful smile flitted over the attenuated face of the man, and he lowered his voice to a sort of confidential whisper, as he replied:
"It was very cunning of you to assume this form,
for you know how I worship beauty; but you cannot deceive me. The sentence of death has been read in the secret conclave, and your doom is sealed. You shall never torture us again. Aha ! doctor, you see, I know you."
"Do you take me for the doctor?" she asked, her heart beginning to beat with a wild hope.
He nodded his head affirmatively, and then said grimly :
"You may pray if you know how."
It seemed to Trixie that but for the steady glance of her eyes, he would have buried that terrible knife in her breast at once.
She dared not, therefore, take her eyes from him, and yet she was sure she heard the doctor stir where he lay on the floor.
Oh, if she could but direct the attention of the madman to the doctor!
She did not wish the death of the doctor, but she felt that it would be only just if the scoundrelly practitioner could be forced to take her place in the uneven struggle for life.
The doctor had brought her there against her will, and had threatened to wreck her intellect with some fearful drug- which he called the black medicine.
Might it not be that he was responsible for this man's condition?
"Yes, the doctor moves," she muttered audibly.
"Is that a prayer?" the maniac asked, his eves rolling terribly, and the knife quivering nervously in his hand.
A sudden thought flashed upon her brain.
"I cannot pray here," she said steadily; "take nee farther into the room."
"I never knew that the place made any difference," he said suspiciously. "Why can you not pray here? You are so cunning that I am afraid of you;
72	Where All Sound is Stifled.
if I take my eyes off of you, you may turn into a snake."
"How foolish of you!" she said, in the same steady tone, though her heart was throbbing wildly. "This part of me cannot change; it is only that other part which lies yonder. See, it is getting up now !"
Fortunately for her scheme, the doctor, being still somewhat dazed, did not comprehend what was going on in the room, and made sufficient noise in getting tip to attract the unstable attention of the maniac.
Swift as thought, the madman turned his head to look at the source of the new noise.
Instantly his hold on Trixie relaxed, and with a bound he was on the doctor, who was plainly enough the object of his insane fury.
She heard a cry of abject terror from the miserable 'doctor, but she dared not remain to see the issue of the struggle.
Quivering with terror, she glided to the door and unlocked it by means of the key, which fortunately remained in the lock, just as she had left it.
This time she took the key out and closed the door behind her.
It seemed a terrible thing to leave even the doctor at the mercy of the madman; but her life was clear to her, and she, therefore, left him to defend himself as best he could. . -
She was out of the room, but she was not yet out of danger, for she could not doubt that such a place would be well guarded.
She bent her head to gain some idea of what was going on within the room she had just left, dreading to hear blood-curdling cries for help.
And now she had a terrible assurance of the helplessness of the miserable beings who might be con-fined in the rooms of the asylum.
She listened intently, but could hear nothing. even
though she was certain that a terrific struggle must be going on in there.
"How well they have guarded against detection!" she murmured, with blanched face. "If I were to become a victim, I would know that my shrillest screams would not penetrate the walls of my prison. Oh, merciful Heaven, assist me no- w!"
The stillness of death reigned in the building, where hideous noises might well have been expected to be heard.
Which way should she turn? How was she to escape from that awful place?
There was little time to consider in. At any moment some brutal attendant might come along and see her. Then her fate would be sealed, and a dreadful fate it would surely be.
She crept to the head of the stairway which she saw at the end of the hall, then she stopped and listened, in the hope of hearing some sound which would help to guide her.
But not a sound of any description came to her ears. It seemed to her that even the wild howl of a maniac would be a welcome sound in that place.
"I must go down the stairs, at any hazard," she murmured.
It was a wonder that fear alone did not paralyze her limbs. Fortunately, however, she was more courageous than she knew herself, and was enabled to glide softly down the stairway without sinking in fright on the way.
She had hoped to see a doorway in the lower hall, which would give evidence of being an exit from the building, but nothing of the sort could she see.
Every door she saw looked as if it led only into a room. She cowered in a dark corner, trying to make up her mind what to do next, when suddenly she saw one of the doors open.
"Well_" she heard a voice say, "I suppose I must
74	Where All Sound is Stifled.
get supper for the keepers. You can go out and get ', those things the doctor wanted, while I'm down-stairs. Be sure you go out by the private' door, Maria."
"Yes, ma," Trixie heard a sharp, querulous voice reply.
The next instant the door was drawn wide open, and a tall, raw-boned woman came out into the hall.
Trixie shrank into as small compass as she could in her corner, and waited with terror to see if the woman's steps would draw her in that direction.
With the carelessness born of perfect confidence, the woman pulled the door shut after her, and turned toward another door without thinking to scan the hall.
She opened the door with a key that hung at her waist, and disappeared. For a moment Trixie dared hardly breathe.
Then she noticed that the door first opened had not been shut tight; there was some one in the room beyond, Trixie knew ; but she also recalled the words of the woman who had just disappeared: "Be sure to go out by the private door."
If she could only reach that door! She trembled so for a moment that she could do nothing; then she gathered up courage and stole to the door.
She tried to see through the crack, but was unable to do so, although she could hear the humming of the person left in there.
Time was valuable; danger threatened from every quarter. Trixie clasped her little hands in an agony of doubt and despair.
Then, suddenly, her course was decided for her. She heard a snarl from the girl who was in the room, and knew, the next moment, that she was hurrying toward the door.
"Ma left that door open. Wouldn't the doctor give her fits if he should come along and see it !"
Where All Sound is Stifled.	75
"If she shuts the door, I am lost," thought Trixie. She is a girl herself. I will go in and appeal to her. It is my only hope.
It was taking a desperate chance, but Trixie was in a desperate fix. She drew a deep breath, and stepped forward to the door.
She and the other girl must have reached the door at the same time. But Trixie, knowing that the other was there, pushed the harder, and in a moment was in the room.
The girl Maria started back with a cry of mingled amazement and anxiety at the sight of Trixie, and it seemed to our heroine that she must recognize her if she had seen her when she was brought in.
Trixie closed the door behind her, and studied Maria with an interest as deep as life itself. Alas! she found little to give her hope in the crabbed, ugly face of Maria.
"How did you get here?" Maria demanded, in a vicious tone, eying Trixie as a tamer of wild beasts alight one of his escaped animals.
"I escaped from my prison!" cried Trixie, with an (accent that might have softened a heart of stone. "Oh, won't you help me to escape from this house? You are young, as I am, and you know the awful fate that awaits me here. Will you not help me ?"
Instead of answering, the girl, with a hideous leer, began to creep to the other side of the room, and, with a thrill of terror, Trixie saw that she was nearing a bell-rope that hung against the 'wall.
"She is going to summon help to recapture me," she thought; and then, as if driven to desperation, she leaped with the swiftness of a tigress, springing on the heartless girl.
It was plain enough that Maria had no confidence in her own strength, for at the coining of Trixie, she made a vain effort to catch the rope, and, failing, gave vent to a screech that must have roused any
76 "You Have Stepped Upon a Snake.'
other household, but which Trixie was sure would' not be heard outside of the room in that awful house.
"Don't touch me !" Maria shrieked, as Trixie interposed her body between the girl and the rope.
Trixie saw that the girl was afraid of her, and swift as lightning her thoughts flew. And almost as quick were her actions.
She glanced around the room, and saw what. she sought—something to bind the girl with. Despite the cries of the cowardly creature, Trixie dragged her to a scarf that lay across a chair and tied her securely.
Then she caught up the street-garments which Maria had evidently been intending to wear, and threw them on herself.
Maria was making most horrible noises, but Trixie did not make any effort to hush her. Her one thought was to find the private door and escape.
There was but one other door besides the one she had entered, and that she tried. It opened into a short, narrow hall, at the other end of which was a door.
In an instant she was at the door. It was locked and bolted, but she unfastened it without difficulty, and tore it open.
Heaven be thanked! It opened into what seemed to be a patch of woods which grew almost up to the house.
Trixie took the key out, locked the door on the outside, and, with her heart in her throat, leaped away for freedom.


CHAPTER XIV.
"YOU HAVE STEPPED UPON A SNAKE."
At about the same time that Trixie was freeing herself, Leo led Mr. Wright into the library, pointed to a chair, and said hurriedly:
"You Have Stepped Upon a Snake.99 77
"When you appeal to me in my father's name, Mr. Wright, I must hear what you have to say ; but I beg you to be brief, for I have an errand of the utmost importance to be done."
"I will be as brief as I can," the old lawyer answered in a low tone. "Will you forgive me if I speak bluntly ?"
"Frankness will be your greatest courtesy, under the circumstances, Mr. Wright," Leo answered.
"Then I will plunge at once into the matter. You knew that your father was the guardian for Miss Madeline Delmar ?"
"Yes."
"And you knew that he had entire control of her enormous fortune, consisting of several million dollars' worth of property?"
"Yes," answered Leo, his face paling at the thought which inevitably suggested itself. "Yes, but there can be nothing wrong with that, surely."
"Alas! Mr. Leo, there is something wrong. I have everything at my office to demonstrate this to you; but it will suffice now to say to you that to-morrow, or the following day, at the latest, an accounting must be made to Miss Delmar's lawyer."
He paused, as if in sorrow for what he had to divulge ; but, in reality, because his bitter repugnance to his degrading task forced him to choke with the lying words in his throat.
"Yes, yes !" whispered Leo.
"And,, Leo," the old man went on, with a groan of angiish, "when the accounting is made, her lawyer will discover that two millions of dollars have disappeared."'
Leo rose to his feet and staggered like a drunken man, gasping:
"It is not true! It is a lie! If you were not an Old man, I_ would choke the falsehood in your throat."
9
78 "You Have Stepped Upon a Snake."
Mr. Wright recoiled, but shook his head with miserable objection.
"Alas! why should I say what is not. true?"
Leo buried his face in his hands, and then suddenly flamed out :
"Do you believe that my father would steal that money ?"
"Leo," answered the old man eagerly, "I do not believe he stole it. Your father was the soul of honor; but, alas! the money is missing in such a way that every one will believe that it was stolen. Leo, I have tried to think of some way of replacing the money, knowing your mother would give it, but it cannot be done. I see but one way of saving your father's name."
"And that is?" demanded Leo. "Why do you not tell me it? Do you think I will hesitate at anything to keep his name unsullied ?"
"Oh, it is not a difficult thing, Leo ; but it does not depend upon you so much as on the whim of a girl."
"What is it? What is it?" Leo demanded anxiously.
"If you could .persuade Miss Madeline to become your wife," the lawyer replied, "you, instead of the lawyer, would take over the accounts, and you could replace the missing millions with some of your mother's."
Leo listened with blanching face, and, at the conclusion of the lawyer's words, sank into a chair, crying hoarsely:
f
"Is there no other way? My God ! is 1 there no other way ?"
The old lawyer thrilled with a sudden hope.
"Are you already married ?" he demanded eagerly. "No," answered Leo, "but I am betrothed to one
whom I love with a passion that consumes my whole
being.	a factory girl, Mr. Wright ; but
"You Have Stepped Upon a Snake." 79
she is the noblest and purest of her sex. Oh, Mr. Wright! save me if you can from this awful fate !"
The old man arose and paced the floor of the room almost in a frenzy ! If he had only dared! And at moments it seemed to him that he would dare; that he would save this noble young man from the union prepared for him by his mother. But the next moment he would see his lovely daughters sharing the fate of a convicted thief, and his courage gave way.
"Leo," he said hoarsely, "there is no other way. But tell me! Does your mother know of your in-tended marriage ?"
"I think she suspects that I am in love," 7	answered, in a low tone.
A hard, iri-iAlacable look shot into the old man's eyes, and he muttered under hisbreath :
"I see it all. She hates the girl Leo loves because she is poor; and Madeline Delmar is in the plot. Oh, is there no way of punishing them without destroying myself?"
"Is there no way ?" Leo asked piteously. "You loved my father and he you. For his sake,, think of some way of freeing me" from this hateful marriage."
"Leo," said the old man, in a low'tone, "there is no way. You must marry her. Promise me that you will- wed her if she will. Promise for the sake of that father who so loved you!"
Leo rose unsteadily to his feet.
The awful expression on his handsome face told more than any words he had uttered how heavily the blow had fallen on him.
Mr. Wright was afraid his reason would reel.
"Trixie !" Leo whispered to himself, "I must give you ttp. I must not let my dear father's name be sacrificed. I know not if she will wed me : but I must endeavor to induce her to do so. Trixie, farewell forever!"
"Do not give way so, Mr. Leo !" the old man
8o "You Have Stepped Upon a Snake.'°
pleaded, his heart wrung by the agony he witnessed. "Do you consent to ask her hand in marriage?"
"Yes, I will ask it. And, oh! I do .not doubt that I shall be accepted; for my mother has often hinted to me that this marriage could take place. I will go to Madeline and ask her."
"But the wedding must be at once, Leo," the old man said pityingly. "You must urge her to a secret marriage at once."
"A secret marriage !" Leo cried, showing his repugnance in his tone.
"Do not forget that you have but a day to save your father's name."
Leo closed his teeth hard.
"It shall be as you say. I will seek Madeline, and I will so act my part that if she has any inclination for me she will yield. But I do not see how I can persuade her to a secret marriage, and at once."
"Tell her that you have sudden business away. And if she agrees to a .secret marriage, let me know at once, and I will provide the license and the clergy-man. The wedding may be performed at my house."
"It shall be as you say; everything shall be as you say," cried Leo, in a tone of agony. "But, oh, leave me for a moment. It seems as if I should go mad! But a few hours ago my bliss seemed founded on a rock, and now all my hopes of happiness are swept away, and my life is ' wrecked."
"You loved her very much, then ?" the old man queried.
"Oh, so much ! But I am not so selfish as to care only for myself. She loved me as much as I love her, and her poor heart will be broken. And yet, how can I tell her the truth? Oh, merciful Heaven! was ever man struck so fearful a blow?"
The old man walked unsteadily to the door. He turned when his hand was on the knob, and said huskily:
'..o u Have Stepped Upon a Snake." 8t
"Do not despair, Leo! There may be happiness in store for you yet."
With a gesture of scorn and despair, Leo turned away and sank into a chair.
The old man looked at him for a moment, and then rushed out, slamming the door behind him with a vehemence that showed the stormy nature of his feelings.
"Oh, I will pay them for the misery I have caused, and which I suffer," he muttered vindictively. "They shall find that I have not been a lawyer for nothing. They have me in their toils now, but my turn will come some time, and when it does, it will not be I who is crushed with shame and woe."
He crept down the hall, muttering fiercely to him-self, when the door of the reception-room opened, and Mrs. Brainerd mo Toned him to enter.
"What is the result?" she demanded eagerly. "He is heart-broken," the old man said.
"Pshaw !" said the hard-hearted woman scornfully; "he will get over that. Has he agreed to marry her ?"
"He will go to her at once to sue for her hand, and he will beg her to consent to a secret marriage."
"Why a secret marriage?" demanded Mrs. Brainerd.
"Because there is some excuse for having a secret marriage solemnized at once, and I feared that if the wedding were put off for any length of time, something might turn up to reveal the truth to Leo."
"You were wise," she exclaimed emphatically. "Yes, there should be a secret and immediate marriage."
"If she will consent, it is to take place at once in my house. I will attend to the details, and find a clergyman."
"And the moment they are wedded," Mrs. Brainerd said, in delight, "I will give you the pavers that prove	' -i me. You will be a free ma-
82	He Pushed Madeline from Him.
He bowed very low, but when he left the house he clenched his hand fiercely, and muttered :
"Curse you! You think me a worm, but you will find that you have stepped upon a ,venomous snake. Ah, the vengeance I have planned !"
CHAPTER XV.
All the light had faded out of the bright, sunny life of Leo Brainerd.
It was not possible for him to comprehend what Gerald Wright had told him of his father; for to him his father had ever been the very ideal of honor and uprightness.
But, on the other hand, he could not doubt the old lawyer, because he had been his father's truest and dearest friend.
-Why should he doubt the story told with such evident agony of spirit? Ah ! if he had only guessed that the old man's agony was caused by the necessity of lying away the fair fame of his dead friend.
But he guessed nothing, doubted nothing, yet believed nothing. He simply knew that a heart-breaking duty lay before him. He must pretend a love he did not feel, in order to do what he believed his duty as a son.
"Before I knew my pure-hearted, noble little Trixie," he murmured, in a voice choked with anguish, "I used to simulate love in order to flirt with the belles of society. Now I must recall the acting of those days, and play the tragedy of my life with a smiling face. By no fault of mine must I suffer a stain to c( 11, on my father's name.
His reso,i~.1_on vvas firm, but it was not easy for him
He Pushed Madeline froHim.	83
to act at once. He rose from his chair and began pacing the floor.
"I must tell Trixie that I cannot explain my act, but that it is imperative. Oh, surely she will under-stand that it must be something terrible in its import to make me give her up."
But while he tried to force himself to believe that she would comprehend, he knew that if the case were reversed, he would not comprehend. He knew that he would never give her up to another. And yet, it was what he wished Trixie to do.
His conflicting thoughts at last drove him so near to madness that he could bear it no longer.
"I will go and have it over at once !" he cried. "If I wait,. my courage will not hold out to the end. Yes, I will go to Madeline and play my ignoble part. Oh, Heaven! knowing that my purpose is a worthy one, help me to persuade Madeline that I love her."
He hastened from the room and out of the house. The carriage was at the door, and he sprang into it with a curt order to the coachman to drive him to Miss Delmar's.
Madeline met him with the smiling face of one who is pleased to meet an old friend. His own face was composed to a smile of welcome, and he was now nerved to play his part thoroughly, though it seemed to him that his aching heart must surely be-tray him.
"Welcome back to New York, Madeline," he said, taking her little hand in his with a fond gesture that was only partly justified by their old acquaintance.
A flush of passionate joy rose to her dark face at the pressure of his hand; for even while she knew all the reasons why he was there then, she loved him so madly that she was only too glad to deceive hers!-lf into believing that some part, at least, of his acting was genuine.
84	He Pushed Madeline from Hun.
"Are you really glad to see me back, Leo?" she asked, in a low, soft tone.
Ah ! how different that tone was from that which poor little Trixie .had heard, as she hung out before the window, expecting death at any moment !
"Glad !" Leo repeated, choking back a lump that rose in his throat. "Do you think your absence can have been of so slight importance to me?"
"I did not know that you would even remember that I was absent," she murmured shyly.
"Not remember it !" he repeated reproachfully, while he hated himself for the part he was playing; "why, Madeline, do you think there is any one who is more to me than you are?"
"Oh, Leo !" she cried.
"It is true, Madeline," he answered passionately, his thoughts dwelling on the importance of her relations to his father's good name. "You are very dear to me. Madeline, do not shrink from me like that. I know that what I say must seem very unexpected, very improper, if you will, when I have hardly bade you welcome yet, but I cannot—I cannot school my tongue to utter many words when my heart is urging me on."
He had so carefully prepared the words he would say to her! He had intended leading her on to a point where his declaration of love would seem natural, and now he had spoken out in few words, and they not well chosen.
But, in truth, he could not do more. His whole nature revolted against the deception he was practising.
"Leo," answered Madeline, "are you only rehearsing a scene with me?"
"No, Madeline," he answered, feeling that he must hasten to a conclusion or he would betray himself, "I am not rehearsing. I am not merely asking you to listen to words of love. Sudden and stsrt,np. as my
He Pushed Madeline from Him.	85
words may be to you, I have come here to beg you to be my wife. Can you be? Is there any love in your heart for me?"
Madeline felt with a bitter pang that he was not giving her his heart ; but she loved him, and she believed that she had forever removed Trixie from her path.
"Leo," she murmured, creeping closer to him, "I do love you. I have always loved you, and nothing in this world could make me so happy as the prospect of being your wife."
"My God!" he groaned.
In spite of all, he had been hoping in his secret heart that she would refuse him. Ah! he held his father's good name very dear, but it is hard to crush one's heart, even from a sense of imperative duty.
"Yes, Leo," she murmured, nestling close to him, and looking up into his face with an expression of adoration, "I love you, and I will try to make you very happy."
He let his arm twine around her because he dared not insult her by refraining from the act; but it seemed to him that he should hate her if he was forced to caress her then.
He felt that it was unjust and wicked of him to ask her to be his wife, and then feel repugnance to bestowing on her those marks of love which are so dear to every woman.
So, with an anguish which she could never have realized, he drew her to him, and looked down into her sloe-black eyes.
"Madeline," he said, in a low, hoarse voice, "I will do my best, with the help of Heaven, to make you a good husband."
Then he bent his head low to her expectant lips, and kissed her.
With that he would have withdrawn from her; but the fniirh of his lins had sent her hlnnrt lz yin in her
86	He Pushd Madeline from Him.
veins as if shot with flame,. and in an instant her round arms were about his neck, and her lips were clinging to his with passionate longing.
So Trixie—dear, little, lost Trixie !—had clung to him. The very act recalled her to him, and drove him almost mad.
With a wild, strangling cry, he pushed Madeline from him, and fell back against the wall, feeling that he must escape from the caresses which were so hateful to him.
Madeline stared at him, unable to comprehend. How was it possible for her, so young, so beautiful, to understand that Leo, whom she loved, should have felt in her passionate embrace as if he had been in the coils of a serpent?
And yet such was the case. He quivered from head to foot as he stood looking at her; and then suddenly his self-control came again.
He must not let her know. She was innocent. She was his victim!
Such were his thoughts.
"Madeline," he gasped, "you must forgive me. I --I have been sick—terribly burned. One of my wounds	
The explanation was sufficient. She believed that, in her passionate fervor, she had pressed upon one of his wounds.
- "Oh, Leo, my darling !" she cried, with self-reproach, gliding softly to his side and taking his hand caressingly in hers, "how could I have been so 'thoughtless?"
"It is nothing," he said hoarsely.
He took both her hands in his with the appearance of caressing them, but in reality to hold them so that she should not again embrace him, for he was certain that he could bear no more at that moment.
"If I had been more heroic, I would not have Vv : ; 1c e,l~';,	a pain so delicious."
He Pushed Madeline from Him.	87
"Let us sit down, dear," she said softly.
She seated herself on a couch, and he took his place by her side. If it had not been that he had yet to arrange for the speedy wedding, he would have gone away at any hazard. As it was, he was forced to make a terrible effort to control himself.
"Madeline," he said, forcing himself to put his arm about her waist, "do you really love me as you say?"
"Why should I say what I do not mean ?" she asked reproachfully.
"Oh, I did not mean to doubt you," he cried hastily; "but—but it seemed too—too much happiness. Madeline," he said, "what if I were to put your love to the test?"
She looked up into his face with an expression of passionate adoration that told as much as her words.
"Leo," she murmured, "there is no test that you can put me to that I will shrink from."
He had arranged in his mind how he would approach the delicate subject of a sudden, secret marriage; but he could not carry out his plan. He must trust to her love.
"Madeline," he said, "the test is this: There are reasons why I must wed you now—at once. Will you wed me to-night, to-morrow ?"
She started, as if shocked and surprised, though, in fact, she had been warned by a swift messenger be-fore Leo's arrival.
"So soon ?" she murmured.
"Do you shrink from the test, Madeline ?" he asked, and it may be that again his torn heart hoped that she would refuse.
She seemed to hesitate, then a swift look of love flashed into her black eyes, and she threw herself on his breast, crying as she buried her face on his shoulder:
"No, Leo, I do not shrink. It is a strange thing to
(T'_;	lie Pushed Madeline from Him.
do, but if you asked me to prove my love by 'eaping from yonder window, I would not hesitate."
Leo suppressed the groan that racked his breast, and said:
"Then we will be wedded this very night, Made-line. I will go and make arrangements for the ceremony."
"Yes, dear," she murmured.
"And in order that there may be proper respect for the formalities usual in such cases," he said, "I will have my lawyer, Mr. Wright, attend to the de-tails. Will that be satisfactory to you, dear?"
He forced himself to say that last word, for it seemed to him that one who loved as Madeline did must be treated as lovingly as words would permit.
"Whatever you do, Leo, dear," she murmured, "will be satisfactory to me."
"And will you be content that, for a time, the marriage should be secret ?" he asked.
"Quite content, if you wish it," she responded sweetly.
He rose to go. He felt that if he remained longer he must give way to his secret anguish.
"`Are you going?" she asked plaintively.
"I must. There is so much to be attended to," he answered. "But if I go from you now," he added, "it is only that I may make it possible never to leave you again."
He held her two hands for a. moment, and then would have gone, but her eyes flamed, while her red lips parted to titter the reproach :
"Without one little kiss, Leo ?"
"My God! I cannot !" he gasped, and was gone.
"All!" Madeline cried passionately, as she stamped her little foot on the floor. "He does not love me! But I \vill make him! Am I not beautiful enough? Oh, the accursed beauty of that girl!"
CHAPTER XVI.
A HOME FOR HIS BRIDE.
It seemed to Leo as if nothing but action, constant action, could keep him from losing his mind.
He could not brook the thought of going down in the elevator, swiftly as it descended to the street. He sought the staircase, and made his way down by it.
When he reached the street he dismissed his carriage, and set out on foot for the house of Mr. Wright. He set his teeth and clenched his hands.
"I will go on to the end," he muttered. "May the agony I suffer kill me!"
The old lawyer did not live extravagantly, and it was one of his daughters, a sweet-faced girl, who opened the door in response to his ring at the bell.
He noticed that she stared at him with a curiosity she could not suppress, when he told her who he was, but it did not matter to him. His heart was numbed with suffering, and he cared only to (lo what seemed his duty. All else was a matter of supreme indifference to him.
"Will you step into the parlor," she said to him. "Papa will be down in a moment."
He went into the cozy little parlor, and threw him-self gloomily into a chair. He no longer felt any need for dissembling his real feelings.
"You were successful, then ?" the old lawyer queried, with a searching look at the moody, troubled face of the young man.
"Yes, I played my infamous part well enough to deceive her," Leo answered. "Oh, Mr. Wright! can it be rigl t to trick that innocent girl into an unloved tnarri~;-re in order to save the reputation of one who
coo	A home for His Bride.
is dead? I keep asking myself that question over and over again."
"She loves you, does she not?" the old man asked quickly. "She would not marry you if she did not."
"Yes, she loves me," Leo cried vehemently ; "but, though I should only pity her, I swear to you, Mr. Wright, that I almost hate her. And I hate her most when she twines her arms about my neck and lavishes her loving caresses on me. My God! what will the end of this awful farce be?"
A strange, exultant smile played upon the lips of the old lawyer, but he took care not to let Leo see his face.
"The end may be better than you fear, Leo," he said.
"She consents to wed me to-night," Leo said. "Can you have everything in readiness? I will not answer for myself if I am forced to wait until to-morrow."
Mr. Wright rubbed his hands together, and re-plied :
"I was so sure she would consent that I took the chances of doing everything at once. The clergy-man will be here within half an hour, and will wait until you have brought your beautiful bride."
Leo shuddered.
"Yes, she is beautiful," he muttered. "Heaven help Jae to make her happy."
Again that singular smile flitted over the old man's face, but again it was gone before there was any chance for Leo to detect it.
"I thought it best to have a well-known clergyman, since the marriage is to be a secret one," Mr. Wright said.
"Yes," assented Leo.
"Both you and Miss Madeline know the Reverend Mr. Glenham, do you not?" the old lawyer asked.
"I know him by sight, as she does, I suppose. Yes, she must know him by sight, at least."
Once more that peculiar smile on the face of the old man.
"Well then," said the lawyer, "you may bring her here as soon as you please, for ere you can arrive, the clergyman will be here, as well as the witnesses."
"Will not your family act as witnesses?" Leo inquired, shrinking from having strangers present.
"No," replied the old man, with a sort of cry; "how could I let my darlings take part in a secret marriage?"
"You are right," acquiesced Leo bitterly ; "no good can come to any who take part in it."
"Oh, I did not mean that !" the old man hastened to say. "However, I will provide proper witnesses."
Slowly, and as if he were going to his doom, Leo returned to Madeline.
IIe tried to school himself to treat her as a bride should be treated; but when he stood in her presence he was like one repelled, though there was a light of passionate love and longing in her eyes.
"I am so glad you have come again, Leo," she murmured. "It has seemed as if I might wake at any moment and find that it was only a dream, and that you had not told me of your dear love."
She nestled close to him, hoping to awaken in him some of the fiery passion that flamed within her breast.
He bit his lip, and forced himself to put his arm around her.	-
"It is no dream," he said. "And I have come to take you before the clergyman who will make us man and wife. Are you still willing, Madeline ?"
\`'Vining.? She would not have given him up at any cost.
This wedding was the prize she had striven for so fiercely.
Ah, yes, she was willing! But it would not do to tell -him so as vehemently as she felt.
Home for His Bride.
"I am willing to do anything for you, Leo," she replied softly.
She looked up into his face as she spoke, and he could do no less than bend and press a kiss upon her moist lips.
But she knew that it was an unwilling caress, and her heart was bitter. She could take him from Trixie by her cunning, but would she ever win his love?
She had already made a toilet which she had hoped would win one admiring glance from him, and she was, therefore, ready to go, except for putting on her street-garments.
"The carriage is waiting," he said to her, with an involuntary shrinking, as if he feared she might wish him to bestow another caress upon her.
He suspected nothing, but he wondered how it could be that she was content with his conduct toward her on the very eve of her marriage.
"She must, indeed, love me," he thought sadly, "if she can overlook my coldness. I wish, for her sake, that I might better control myself ; but it is not possible. When I know I ought to love her, my heart bids me hate her. But I will make myself act differently to-morrow."
He said this to himself, too, when they sat together in the carriage, and he found himself shrinking from her.
When he led her into the lawyer's house, his face was ghastly pale, and his jaws were set like a vise. He did not dare to speak, even, for a little while.
"Everything is ready," the old lawyer said to them, as he led them into the little parlor, "excepting the witnesses; but it will not matter about them, as one witness will be enough, and I can be that one. Excuse me, and I will go bring the clergyman."
He went out; and Madeline, with a swift glance of scorn at the neat but not luxurious little room, threw off h wraps and stood waiting
A Home for His Ii
Leo watched her with a strange feel r,b _ his breast of having been made a captive, somehow. Ah! if it had only been little Trixie who stood there.
But he knew that if it had been Trixie, Ile would have been by her side, studying her every look and reveling in the bliss of her dear presence.
"I wonder what she is doing now?" he murmured under his breath. "What a foolish lie they told me about her! As if I could be made to believe aught against her! Will she believe me when I tell her what I have done?"
"He is muttering about her," Madeline said, with suppressed fury, as she watched him covertly. "Oh, she shall be made a raving maniac, and then I will have her beauty destroyed by some corroding liquid."
There was the sound of footsteps on the stairs, and then in the hall, and both looked up mechanic-ally.
"Mr. Glenham," murmured Madeline.
She had seen the famous clergyman, but had never met him before. It pleased her to think that his services had been called in.
Mr. Wright introduced them, and then whispered to Leo that it would be wise to stand up at once. So Leo took Madeline by the hand, and led her to where Mr. Glenham had taken his position.
It was not a wedding in which there seemed much joy. Even Madeline yielded t6 the depressing influence of the circumstances, and made her responses in a cold, metallic tone. Leo answered in a low, husky voice, and looked as stern and grim as if at an execution.
The ceremony was over. The clergyman kissed the bride, but no one else claimed that privilege—not even her husband, though she looked piteously up at him, as if begging him to do so.
"Sli ll we go home now, Leo ?" s1 -	°ried, as the
94	"I Will Wed You, Leo."
clergyman bowed himself out of the room, followed by the lawyer.
"Home!" he ejaculated, with a start. He ha: not thought that he must provide a home for his bride.
Madeline knew he had forgotten, and she bit her lip to keep back the angry tears.
"He would not have forgotten if that girl had been his bride," she thought fiercely.
"Perhaps," said Leo slowly, "it would be better, Madeline, if you went to your apartments as usual for to-night. I—I have some business which	
There was a tightening at the heart-strings of the girl who could be so cruel to others, but who so worshiped him.
"As you will, dear Leo," she- answered humbly. She had won him, and that must suffice for the present.
"Leo," whispered the old lawyer hastily, as he glided into the room while Madeline's back was turned, "I must see you again to-night. Do you understand ?—to-night."
In an instant he was away from Leo, and" the astonished young man could only think that the business had something to do with the events which had led to his marriage.
"I will take you home, Madeline," he said, with an effort to be courteous.
CHAPTER XVII.
"I WILL WED YOU, LEO."
Leo and Madeline stood together in the dainty little parlor in the great apartment-house.
"Leo," cried she passionately, "I have wedded you because you asked me; I have consented that you should leave me as if I were nothing to you; I have
seen you shrink at my caress. Leo, is there anything more I caa do, not only to show my own overwhelming love, but to call forth from you that love which you told me was mine?
"Oh, Leo ! it has been a strange day to me, but I have been unquestioning—I am still unquestioning. I ask you nothing, because my love for you is so great that whatever you do contents me. But, Leo, may I not ask just one of those fond caresses which a bride above all others has a right to expect?"
Leo felt that he was wicked and cruel not to respond by taking her in his arms and raining kisses on her beautiful face; but he could no more have done it than he could fly.
"Madeline," he said hoarsely, "you have a right to wonder; you have a right to condemn me. But, oh, Madeline! if you knew what I am suffering, you would be satisfied to wait. Let me go now, and some day I will tell you everything; and as long as I live I will bless you, and strive to repay in kind the sweet love you lavish so generously on me. Made-line, I must go."
He turned and fled like a man half-demented; and he was scarcely conscious of anything until he found himself walking furiously along Fifth Avenue.
"Now, I have one more duty to perform, and then I will see Gerald Wright. I must go to little Trixie and tell her what I have done. God help her, and me, too."
He had no idea of the time, nor cared.
He was faint with excitement, hunger, and weariness; but as long as he could sustain himself, it was enough for him.
Life, now, was but a throbbing bitterness to him.
He knew where Trixie lived, for she had told him more than once during the blissful days that seemed now so long ago.
96	"I Will Wed You, Leo."
He found the house, and climbed the long flights of stairs to the floor where he knew she lived.
It would be impossible for words to express his agitation as he drew nearer and nearer to where his little Trixie lived.
His Trixie, alas! no longer.
He knocked at her door, and his heart stood still as he waited to hear the well-known, silvery tones bid him enter. But, instead of that, he heard a step he knew was not hers cross the room.
The door opened, and he stood face to face with a stranger. He stared for a moment in dismay; and she stared at him, too, for his ghastly face betokened a terrible suffering.
"Trixie Harlowe !" he murmured. "Does she not live here ?"
"Yes, but you cannot	"
"Oh, Susan, it is Leo !" cried Trixie's voice, in a tone of almost frantic joy. "Leo, oh, Leo! come in. Heaven be thanked that you have come !"
Already he had pushed his way past Susan Danvers, and was staring at Trixie, who had leaped from a couch on which she had been lying, dressed and bearing every evidence of having great fatigue and trouble.
"Trixie !" he gasped.
"Oh, Leo !" she sobbed. "Heaven has sent you to me!"
She threw herself into his arms, and clung to him so passionately and convulsively that he was frightened. He forgot his own errand for the moment, and forgot, too, that he had no right to hold her dear form so close in his embrace.
"My darling," he murmured soothingly, "what is the matter? Why do you sob so? Why are your garments so torn and travel-stained? And why are you in this condition? Tell me, Trixie, my sweet love ?"
"I Will Wed You, Leo."
"Oh, Leo, the horror of it is on me still!" she gasped, clinging to him as if she feared he would go from her, "You will not take your arm away, will you, clear? Oh, I have prayed for you to come, Leo. Heaven sent you. I know that Heaven sent you."
She trembled so violently that he "led her to a sofa and sat down beside her.
He saw that Susan was looking on with tears streaming down her kind face.
He remembered now that he had no right to ,hold Trixie's beauteous form in his arms, but he would not put her from him while she was in such a state.
"What is the matter?" he asked Susan. "Can you tell me? There, my darling, do not tremble so."
He looked at Susan, and drew Trixie closer to him. Ah! if he had only had the right to be her comforter!
"Oh, sir," replied Susan, in a faltering voice, "it is the cruelest, most horrible thing I ever heard of. It's a mercy we see her alive and in her right mind. Because you loved her, they tried to make a mad-woman of her."
"What !" came from Leo's throat, in a strangled cry of anger, horror, incredulity, and pity.
"Oh, Leo !" sobbed Trixie, "it is true! I have been in a madhouse all the day, almost. And they threatened to give me black medicine to make me mad."
It was too horrible to grasp all at once. Leo stared down at his darling in a stupor of emotion.
"My darling," he breathed, "you frighten me. Who did this awful thing? You are not ill now?" He thought she might be in a delirium.
She pushed herself a little away from him, but without loosening her clinging hold upon him, and looked up into his face.
"Leo," she whispered, "when I left you I was sent home by -Tent- mother
98	"I Will Wed You, Leo."
"My mother!" he gasped, dreading to hear some horrible tale of her cruelty.
"Oh, she did nothing to me, Leo, dear. But when I was hurrying to reach home, here, I was overtaken by a young lady. Do you know her, Leo? Her name is Madeline Delmar."
"Madeline Delmar !" he gasped, in a tone of agony. He did not think of connecting her with Trixie's tale of cruelty and terror.
"You do know her, Leo !" cried Trixie, a look o f anguish on her sweet face. "Oh, Leo ! do you love her ?"
"Love her, Trixie ! No, oh, no! Would to Heaven I had never seen her! If I have any feeling toward her, Trixie, it is one of hate, though I could not tell you why, for she has never wronged me."
"Leo," whispered Trixie, creeping closer to him again, "I can tell you why .you hate her. It is be-cause you love me."
"I do not understand!"
"Leo," she tried to murder me,". Trixie said. "She took me to her room in a great apartment-house, and urged me to go out on the balcony. Then, when she believed I was about to fall because the balcony gave way under me, she told me I must die because I had tried to take you from her. Leo, did she have any right to you?"
"Am I mad?" panted Leo. "Madeline Delmar tried to murder you? Trixie, do you know what you are saying ?"
"Leo, it is true. And when I was saved by a miracle, she gave me a drug, and had me carried off to a madhouse away from the city. I almost go mad when I recall ,what happened to me there."
She shuddered, as if attacked with an ague fit, and clung ^it (--51,,- to him.
"A Will ,,V d You, Leo.'	99
And in his brain there was a whirl of thoughts that might well have driven a weaker man insane. He seemed' to see through all the tragedy of that marriage.
No, he could not quite see through it. But it was plain through the chaos of flying thoughts that he had been made the victim of a terrible conspiracy, in which Madeline, his wife, and Gerald Wright were the leading actors.
All design of telling his own story to Trixie was driven out of his mind. He thought only of fathoming this infamy.
Nor did he think of puttting his sweet love away from him. A terrible, dark change had come over his nature, but there was no change in his love for her.
He held her close in his arms, and plied her with question after question, until he had learned the whole of her terrible story.
But when all was told, he put her from him and rose to his feet with such a stern, awful face that Trixie cried out, and leaped into his arms again.
"Leo, darling!" she pleaded, "do not go away from me. Stay a little longer. I cannot let you go!"
"I will return, little one," he said, stroking the curly head. "But 1 must go."
"Oh, no, no !" moaned Trixie, completely unnerved by the fearful ordeal through which she had passed. "I feel that if you go from me I may never see you again."
"Mr. Brainerd," Susan Danvers said suddenly, "do you really love Trixie ?"
Mcec than my life, more than my honor!' he cried fiercely.
"Then why do you not wed her now ? She needs you if eve,- women needed a husband's cares"
zoo H	cashed Her in His EmL
"My God!" he faltered, a fearful expression creep ing into his face.
Trixie saw it, and misunderstood.
"Leo," she cried, "I did not ask you to wed me, but tell me that you will if I do ask. Were the words you spoke to me but this morning without meaning?"
Leo looked at her agonized face, thought of all she had suffered, of what might yet be in store for her, if she were not adequately protected, and breathed :
"We will go to a clergyman now, Trixie, and you shall be my wife."
"Leo !" murmured Trixie, her beautiful face all aglow with passionate love. "I do not wish that. I only feared lest—lest there might—might have been some mistake. Oh, we will not marry so hastily, dear !"
"Yes," he said fiercely, "we will wed now if you love me."
"I do love you, Leo, as woman never loved before, and I will wed you, Leo !"
CHAPTER XVIII.
HE CRUSHED HER IN HIS EMBRACE.
The thought of wrong from Leo never entered the pure and loving heart of little Trixie, and she clung to him with a passionate sense of security and rest.
She knew he was terribly moved by the story she had told, for she had never before seen that look on his handsome face.
And it frightened her, she hardly knew why.
But her gentle heart trembled for those against whom this anger was directed.
She wished for no revenge on her persecutors. If she had Leo's love it was enough.
He `.'asked Her in His Embrace. lot
She looked up into his eyes pleadingly, and some of the old, coaxing witchery filled them, as she murmured softly:
"Leo, darling! do not be so troubled. It is all over now; I have you and you have me. Sit here beside me, and I will win smiles from you again."
A shudder of agony passed over him as he looked down into that angel face.
Oh, why had Heaven permitted him to give to Madeline what belonged to Trixie?
"I—I must not sit. I—I must not think now," he said, in a low, hoarse voice. "We—we must be married, Trixie. Your friend, here, has seen the necessity. Not another hour must go by and leave us ununited."
"It shall be all as you say, Leo, dear," she answered, one of her little white hands stealing softly up to caress his face. "I will wed you if you wish, or I will wait forever for you. You are my all on earth, Leo."
A strangled cry of suppressed agony broke from his lips, and he crushed her supple form in his em-brace, as if he would mingle her very soul with his.
"Trixie," he whispered, "my love for you is a very madness. It seems to me that there is no deed, good or evil, that I would not do to possess you. When you look up at me out of your brown eyes, my soul leaps into flame, and it seems as if my heart would burst with the hopelessness of letting you know, of making you feel the throbbing passion that courses in my veins."
Susan Danvers stole softly from the room, but they had forgotten her altogether.
Trixie's little curly head drooped gently on Leo's broad breast, her brown eyes swam in liquid tenderness, and her moist, red lips parted to murmur:
"Do you think I do not know, my Leo? Do you think r	not feel? Do you believe there i no lava
i	mar cx.
102 He Crushed Her in His Embrace.
flood in my own veins ? Ah, Leo! " and her melodious voice had the melting cadence of far-away fairy music, "when you hold me thus, when your dear lips are pressed to mine, it seems to me as if we were veritably one, and that the very blood leaped from your veins to mine, and from mine to yours. Leo! Leo!"
I-ler further utterance was choked by the passion-ate, clinging kiss he pressed upon her rosebud lips.
When he released her from the delicious bondage of his loving embrace, his face was white and set, and he spoke quickly and urgently, as one who will not permit his own thoughts to master him.
"You are weary, my .darling," he said. "I know that, but you must make yourself ready. I will wait for you in your friend's apartments. We will go to a clergyman—some one you know. We must be married now, now. And to-morrow you shall be the little mistress of the daintiest cottage there is to be found. You will be quick, will you not, my precious ?"
"I think, Leo," she said, her ravishing face radiant with passionate love, "that I could rise from a bed of death to do your sweet bidding. Yes, I will hasten. And do not think me weary. Why, every-thing is forgotten and over. One moment in your_ arms is complete rest. Now, do not look so stern and angry, darling. Think only of the bliss of ours love."
Once more he caught her in his arms and rained kisses down on the sweet, dimpled face.
But when he put her from him, the dark look was still in his blue eyes, which seemed to be soft and tender when fixed on her, only to turn to steel when they looked away.
Ah ! would it ever be otherwise? How could the shadow ever go out of his wrecked existence ? Was there anything for him but to live to shield
He Crushed Her in His -Embrace. 103
Trixie from the knowledge of the wrong he was about to do her?
He was wronging her to make her happy, to protect her.
But he knew that if ever the knowledge of it came to her, she would turn from him and from dishonor, though the doing it killed her.
He went from the room, and knocked at the door of Susan's mother's apartments.
They admitted him, and Susan went to assist Trixie prepare for the hasty wedding:
"You're a noble gentleman to do this," Mrs. Danvers said to him, and he shuddered as he listened; "for if you had not wedded her and taken her away, to hide her, I am sure that her life, and her honor, which is yet clearer to her, would be sacrificed by that terrible woman."
"It is my excuse," he said hoarsely, and the good woman wondered why he so expressed himself.
"His looks are terrible," she murmured to herself. "I pity those who have done this thing to his darling."
Little Trixie had no such gowns as Madeline to choose from for her wedding, but it seemed to Leo when she glided into the room and stood before him, with a half-shy, half-coquettish air, that never in all his life had he dreamed of such wondrous beauty.
And, oh, the purity and sweetness that seemed to make a sort of halo all about her!
He was not taking this beauteous vision of purity to a wedding, but to an awful mockery—a sham.
And so she stood before him, a wondrous picture of ravishing, radiant beauty, a sweet, trustful smile on her red lips, her brown eyes melting with tenderness, while his brain was racked with a terrible anguish.
"Shall I rise up here and say to her all the truth?
104 He Crushed Her in His Embrace.
Shall I do it, save my soul from this awful crime, and fly from her ?"
He half-staggered to his feet, with a fearful effort to carry his thought into effect, when another thought came to him which shut his lips in a hard line, and made him sit down.
"If I leave her, she will become a prey to Madeline. No, my crime cannot sully her purity, and she need never know. I will hide her, and make her life a long dream of happiness."
"Leo !" faltered Trixie, her full under lip trembling, "why do you look so?"
He leaped to his feet and caught her little hand in his. The very touch gave him a strange peace, and a smile of melting tenderness came into his eyes.
"Did I look strangely, darling?" he asked caressingly. "I was thinking of what had been done to you—to you, so good and sweet and gentle."
She smiled bewitchingly up at him, and said gaily :
"There! we are not to think such thoughts any more. Now, tell me if you think I will do. It is the best I have."
"Do !" he cried rapturously, and making a movement as if he would clasp her in his arms, "it looks as if made by the fairies."
She drew back with a pretended look of alarm, crying in her pretty way:
"Oh, you mustn't touch me now. You'll muss my lace and my hair."
"How can I help touching you?" he demanded, drawing back with a sigh.
"Ah, Leo !" she murmured, her eyes swimming in tenderness, as she went close up to him. "I was not in earnest. I am yours, now and always."
"Heaven grant that it may be so!" he groaned, under his breath:
Mrs. Danvers and Susan went with them to the
Left Alone On the_ Weddiiig-riigiit. 105
clergyman, and the latter could ha'. e no doubt of the propriety of marrying the pair, for he knew Trixie and the Danvers well.
So the wedding took place in his poor little parlor, and for the second time that night Leo made promises to Heaven.
And if he had shuddered before, it seemed to hint now as if his heart, all torn and bleeding, was being gripped by fingers of ice.
But his mind was irrevocably made up now, and though anguish and remorse racked him, he did not once falter.
"At least," he said to himself, "the burden of the sin is mine, and I alone will suffer."
Ah! if he could have been sure of that.
He had not kissed Madeline, his true and lawful wife, but when the clergyman now pronounced the mocking words in all solemnity declaring them man and wife, Leo caught Trixie—poor, betrayed, happy little Trixie !—in his arms, and pressed upon her lips a kiss that was steeped in bitterness and anguish, though she knew it not.
"My own little wife!" he murmured.
"My husband !" she breathed.
"Mrs. Brainerd, let me congratulate you," said the venerable clergyman, with a kindly air of pleasantry. "Trixie Brainerd," said Susan.
The words stabbed Leo like knives thrust into his heart. Was he always to suffer thus?
CHAPTER XIX.
Leo drew the clergyman aside, and gave him a most liberal fee for his services. 66Y„ ' are very generous," stammered the clerzy-
io6 Left Alone On the Wedding-night.
man, in his surprise. "I—I will make out the certificate at once. Shall I look after having the marriage-notice published ?"
Published! Leo had not thought of that. Oh, it must never be published ; no one must know.
"I will not trouble you," he said quickly. "I will attend to that myself."
"As you please, sir," the clergyman responded.
He went into another room, to fill out the blanks provided for such use, and Leo returned to the side of the happy, blushing Trixie, whose brown eyes had followed his every movement with pride and devotion.
When he had wedded Madeline he had neglected to give her a husband's first kiss, and the thought of a home which he should share with her had not entered his brain until she suggested it.
But, ah ! he was thinking of the little home he would make with Trixie. A little cottage home, in some quiet place where they might be happy in their ou n way, with no one to interfere with the even flow of their happy life.
The cottage, however, had not been chosen yet, for the one he had thought of before must be abancloned now as too likely to be discovered by some one who knew him.
"My darling," he murmured, "to-morrow you and I will go together to seek a little cottage in the coun-
try.
"Oh, Leo! shall we not be happy?" she breathed.
"I hope you will never be anything but happy from this moment," he answered; "but, Trixie," he went on, his voice sinking low, and becoming hard with the bitter thoughts that surged in his brain, "the cottage is not ready yet, and I have no home ready to take you to."
"Where you are is home, Leo," she answered softly.
Left Alone On the Wedding-night. 107
"Yes, my beloved," he said, "and if a sweet little vine-clad cottage were not possible, I could go with you to the one poor little room where you have lived alone, and I could be contented there. But the cottage is possible, dear."
She knew there was something he wished to say, and she wondered what it was; for beneath the passionate love that shone in his eyes, she saw a hard, bitter look that warned her of more to come.
"Yes, dear," was all she said; but her soulful brown eyes questioned him.
"We might go to a hotel until the cottage is found," he went on constrainedly, it seemed to her ; "but, Trixie, I—I would wish to wait until the cottage were found."
She put her little hand on his arm, and in her eyes was a startled look.
"Leo," she murmured, "you do not need to explain to me. You are my husband, and what you say, I will do. But do not keep anything from me. Say to me, Trixie, do this or do that, and my love for you is so great that I will do it without understanding; but, ah ! my darling, have no secret thought from me."
IIis face became white with the fear that she might suspect something of the truth, but he scorned himself for the thought.
She suspected a secret, but nothing more. He must explain as much as he dared. It would be the wiser way.
"My darling," he said, "T will tell you what is in my mind, but I ask of you not to combat me, or seek to alter my determination, for it is fixed."
"Leo, you frighten me," she gasped, startled by the hard, stern look in his face.
"Trixie," he said, "I must begin a new life with you. All of the old life must be left behind. Aad to-night I must sever those bonds that hold nee to the o!d life. I must close accounts with what has been, so that
108 Left Alone On the Wedding-nigh c.
I may stand with my face turned squarely to what will be."
"What do your words mean, Leo ?" she asked pleadingly.
"They mean, my darling, that your enemies must be my enemies. They mean that this night I must have and make such explanations as will leave nothing to be guessed at."
"Oh, Leo! you will riot quarrel with your mother ?" Trixie pleaded.
"Trixie," he answered, his voice cold and stern, so that it struck a chill to her sensitive heart, "in this matter I know better than you can what is best to be done. I say to you, Trixie, go to your own little room for the last time. To-morrow morning we will face the world together, hand in hand, heart to heart. Oh, Trixie! I have an imperative duty to perform to-night."
"I will say no more, Leo," she faltered.
She could have begged him to take no heed of what had been done to her; but there was a look of tragedy on his face that told her that she would plead with him in vain.
When the clergyman came with the certificate, Leo took it and would have put it in his pocket, had not Mrs. Danvers laughingly said:
"The certificate belongs to the wife. Trixie should have that."
Leo started as if stung and thrust the paper into Trixie's hand.
She would have returned it to him, casting a reproachful look at Mrs. Danvers, and saying in her sweet, winsome way:
"What can it matter who keeps it? Of what real use. is it, anyhow? It is not as if 'a doubt were some day going to be cast on the marriage."
66Ah 1 who can tell ?" Mrs. Danvers said innocently,
t eit Alone On the Wedding-night. Iog
thinking only how often it happened that a marriage-certificate was needed.
Leo turned upon her, his face ghastly and his voice quivering.
"What do you mean by that?" he cried. "Why do you cast a doubt---"
Mrs. Danvers started back in a tremor of dismay. Trixie laid her hand gently on Leo's arm_
"Why, darling," she murmured, "Mrs. Danvers meant nothing."
Leo passed his hand over his forehead and stammered an apology, which Mrs. Danvers readily accepted, whispering to Susan that Leo could not seem to get over the effects of Trixie's story.
Together they now returned to the house where Trixie's home had been; though Leo knew that Trixie's friends would wonder and comment on his leaving Trixie while her bride's kiss was yet moist on his lips.
But there was a terrible feeling in his heart that told him he must see not only his dead father's lawyer, to extort the truth from him, but his mother and MadLline as well.
"Yes," he said to himself, "when I have seen Made-line and told her that I will never be her husband in aught but name, I may have some peace in the part I am playing toward my darling. For, oh! I cannot give her up."
He went with Trixie to her room—the little room in which she had lived so much of her sweet, young life —and when he stood alone with her, after the others had left them, he held out his arms and she fell upon his breast with a little cry of joy.
And so, without a word they clung to each other until, after a passionate kiss, he unwound her arms from ! ' „eck and put her gently from him.
10 Left Alone On she Wedding-night.
"To-morrow, my darling," he murmured hoarsely, "-,.re will begin life together. Farewell until then."
"Oh, Leo !" she murmured, "how can I let you go from me? Ah, do not be angry with me, dear! I am not finding fault; I am not even asking you to re-main. But I cannot quell a troubled feeling that will rise in my heart, and which seems to keep warning me that woe is hovering over our union."
"I would die to keep sorrow from you, darling !" he exclaimed, a pang of bitter pain in his voice.
"There!" she cried contritely, brushing a 'tear from her eye ; "I did not mean to trouble you with my silly whims. Take me in your arms once more, my Leo, and then you may go, and you shall see 'a smile on my face, so that your last recollection of me shall be that of the happy bride I am. Happy and proud, Leo, to be your little wife."
She wound her round arms about his neck as she spoke, and put up her red lips to be kissed.
And he strained her to him-and rained kisses down on her lips and her eyes, and on her dimpled cheeks. And then, as if he dared not trust himself to taste such happiness longer, tore himself away with one last lingering kiss, and was gone.
And she, true to her promise, beamed upon r him a sweet, loving smile that dimpled her beautiful face into the most bewitching curves.
But when the door closed, and she could hear his hasty footsteps going down the stairs, she uttered a little, wailing cry, and threw herself on the couch, burying her face in her hands, and moaning :
"Oh, what a strange wedding-night ! Oh. Leo, what is there between you and me? Why is there a quivering dread in my heart when there should he naught bill perfect peace and happiness ?"
CHAPTER XX.
I SHALL TRY TO ENNOBLE MYSELF.
Grim, stern, and implacable, Leo left his love and sought the house of Gerald Wright, the lawyer. There was something in the very manner in which he pulled the bell that might have told any one that a wrathful man demanded admittance.
But the face of woe that appeared at the doorway when the door opened was one to move even his fury to something like pity.
"Oh, Mr. Brainerd," the girl sobbed pitifully, "pay': is (lying ! He has clone nothing but moan for you. Oh ! please come up at once."
Dying ! Moaning for him ! He wished perhaps to make amends for the wrong he had clone, so that he might carry a clean soul to heaven.
But how could he make amends for the marriage which had been possible only because of that terrible story of dishonor, which Leo now knew was all false. As if his father could have clone such a thing.
"I will go with you," he said half-pityingly to the poor girl.
She led the way, suppressing her sobs as well as she could. and a few moments later Leo was ushered into what was plainly the chamber of death.
But the eyes of the dying man lighted up eagerly at the sight of Leo, and he began to gasp out incoherent words of joy.
But he ceased to talk when Leo stood by his side, looking reproachfully down into his ashen face.
"All out," he gasped. "Time—is—short. Dying.f9
His sorrow-stricken daughters understood and hastened from the room in mournful silence. He hardly waited for them to be gone, ere he gasped painfully :
"Your face—tells me—you suspect."
l
b
112	I Shall Try to Ennoble Myself,
"Your tale to me was not true," Leo said, his furious anger gone, but his voice filled with reproach. "All=all—oh ! the cordial! quick !"
Leo saw that he was near death's door and he caught up the bottle that stood on a table by the bedside and poured some out, and gave it to the dying man, who seemed scarce able to swallow the liquid, and who lay gasping for breath after having done so.
Then a look of terrible anguish filled his face and he tried again to speak, but his voice was so low that it was with the utmost difficulty that Leo could catch his broken words.
"False—father soul of honor. I was—thief. Mother forced me to tell. Ah, ah ! I must not—diedie. Madeline—Glenham—marriage—free. Oh, God! have mercy !"
He was dead. He had gone from the world carrying the details of his secret with him. But he had told Leo enough to prove that his mother, and probably Madeline had had a leading part in the crime that had been committed against him.
What else the dead man had to tell him he could not even suspect, and he knew not how to find out.
"But it is enough," he said sternly. "I have been the dupe, and he the instrument in a wicked plot. Oh, mother ! what wicked thing have you done! You have used the unsullied name of my father, you have wrecked my life and you have	
He was thinking of Trixie, and he dared not put his thought into words lest they should sear his brain.
He went sadly from the room and broke the terrible, yet not unexpected, intelligence to the dead man's daughters.
"Is there anything I can do for you ?" he asked them gently.
"Alas! no," the eldest replied ; "our neighbors are kind and will do everything that can be done, now." So Leo left the house, and leaped into the fiat cab he
i Shall Try to Ennoble Myself.	113
encountered, bidding the driver take him to the address of his mother.
It was late, but he did not doubt he would find his mother yet up; and so it proved, for she came down to him with eager alacrity.
She believed he came to tell her of his marriage with Madeline, and she was prepared to first upbraid him, and then congratulate him.
But when she entered the room where he was, she saw in an instant by the stern, hard expression of his face that he had not come to ask her forgiveness for anything he had done.
He looked rather like a stern and uncompromising judge who has a terrible sentence to pronounce.
And his first words confirmed the thought and caused her heart to sink with fear.
"I have just come from the death-bed of Gerald Wright," he said abruptly.
"Death-bed !" she gasped.
"He has revealed your miserable plot to me," Leo went on in a cold, hard tone. "I know now that you forced him to besmirch my father's fair name to induce me to wed that foul murderess, Madeline."
"Murderess !" breathed the startled woman. "Oh! what are you saying?"
"I am saying that Madeline Delmar, who is now my wife before the law, tried to murder my love, my darling, in order to get her out of the way.
"I am saying," he went on vehemently, "that after failing to murder her, she tried to wreck her reason. Thank God! she failed.
"And you aided that venomous creature to dupe me into a marriage with her. But it is a marriage ac-cursed of Heaven, and I shall never acknowledge it.
"Stop! you need not say one word to excuse your-self or her. You are my mother, and I do not wish to bandy words with you. I came here to say to you that henceforth T am a stranger to you.
1.14	I Shall Try to Ennoble Myself.
"My little income is enough to keep me until I can find some honest employment, so that I may make my-self worthy of the pure, sweet girl you have dared despise."
"Leo! my son !" wailed the haughty woman, frightened and awed by his bitter, stinging words.
"No," he cried, "not your son! Your son was an idle, worthless fellow, who cared nothing for the honor of women. I honor purity and virtue in a woman, and with Heaven's help I shall try to' ennoble myself by honest toil."
"Leo! Leo !" she wailed, trying to throw her arms about him to detain him.
But he put her hands from him, and strode to the door. There he stopped and said the one word, "Fare-well !"
Then he was gone from her presence and she sunk moaning to the floor. The edifice she had reared had tumbled to the earth, and she was crushed beneath the ruins.
Swiftly now, and with gathering fury, he hastened from the proud mansion of his mother to the great apartment-house.
He reflected, with bitter scorn, that the dwellers in the humble tenements would ere this be wrapped in toil-earned slumber, but that it was probable that these who dwelt in this great palace of stone were but just beginning to enjoy the pleasures of ball or fete.
He did not inquire if Madeline were at home, but went up in the elevator, and strode straight to her apartments.
It was her voice that bade him enter when he knocked, and it was she who uttered an involuntary cry of delight at the sight of him.
Her thought was that he had come back to her to say a word of love, or even to tell her that he had found a liorne f	h i ; ; fair bride.
But she `' n;ped l-:°..lf-way in her course to ",, -et him,
I Shall Try to Ennoble Myself.	115
the glad smile died on her lips, and the white anus dropped to her side.
"Leo !" she gasped, "what is the matter? Why do you look at me, your bride, in so strange a way ?"
"Because I hate you, tigress ! serpent! murderess '
"Ah !" and she shrunk back, her sloe-black eyes contracting and emitting flames.
"Do you understand," he went on, with implacable fierceness, "what I mean? It is that I know all your horrid infamy. Your victim has escaped and has told m all."
It seemed to Madeline that her brain was wig ir:ling, but by a terrible effort she controlled herself and panted:
"Of whom do you speak ?"
"Au !" he cried scornfully, "I speak. of my one love; I speak of Trixie Harlowe."
"That factory girl!" snapped Madeline. "Do you take her word without thought of any one else ?"
"I take her word, yes. If I knew from no one else it would be enough. But, foul. traitress that you are! I have come from the death-bed of Gerald Wright, who was one of your tools in trapping me into that in-famous marriage; I have come from my guilty mother."
Then Madeline knew that she was exposed, and fear and despair clutched at her heart, but hers was the nature of a tigress indeed; she would not give lip her prey.
"Fools ! fools !" she hissed; "but you are mine, Len. Be it that I tricked you ! Oh, Leo !" and her voice sung`. low and murmurous, "I tricked you because I lov::d you. What was her love to mine? Leo, forgive 1112 for what I did ! It was tivroll r, I know. But We a
wedded now, and we will begin from this day. I make myself what von wish nee. Leo, a	he toward him with a pleading smile on her _
forget the Dash.
izb I Shall Try to Ennoble MysJJ.
He drew back from her with the same loathing that he would have shown toward a slimy, gliding serpent.
"Do not come near me !" he cried hoarsely. "The Were thought of your touch makes me shudder. I seem to see blood on your hands. Oh, do you think I can ever forget or forgive?
"Madeline Delmar, I would take the foulest leper the world has ever seen to my breast rather than you. I despise you; I loathe you ; I hate you ! Do you think 1 will let you be wife to me? Not ten thousand ceremonies could make you such."
She recoiled for a moment, and then she turned upon him with blazing eyes, and the words seemed to drop molten hot from her fiery tongue.
"Ah! you hate me because you love her. You repudiate me because you would have her. You hope somehow to make her your wife. Listen to me, Leo ! I am your wife, no matter how I became such, and no one else shall have my place. Woe, woe to her if she try to take it.
"I am only a woman and you are a strong man, but I swear to you, Leo, that I will wreak a terrible vengeance on her if you put her, with or without law, in my place.
"Hide where you will I will find you out—I will find her out. I will make her life a curse to her. I will rob her of her beauty, of her peace and happiness, of all that makes live dear to her."
Leo's blood grew cold in his veins as he listened to these awful words, and realized that every one was laden with full meaning.
"Merciful Heaven !" he cried, "are you human?"
"Human to you, Leo," she answered, her voice suddenly changing to a soft, murmurously passionate tone of love. "Ah, Leo, take me in your arms!"
A shuddering horror overcame him as she held out her arms to him, and with a cry of loathing, he turned
=tc~. Good Name Bei-cee	7
and fled. But as he went from the roodus her furious cry rung in his ears:
"Curse her, curse her !"
CHAPTER XXI.
HER GOOD NAME BEFORE ALL ELSE.
No words can describe the furious anger, and the bitter, stinging disappointment of Madeline, as she stood alone in her luxurious apartments, after Leo had taken his departure.
It seemed for a moment as if she surely would strangle. She clenched her little hands, her white teeth gleamed between her distorted lips, and inarticulate cries broke from her throat.
Then with the scream of a tigress she began to pace the floor, as if that were necessary to prevent her heart from bursting with rage.
"I have lost him! I have lost him !" she wailed; then hissed: "But he is mine, and I will not give him up. Oh! there must be a way, if I can but find it, for bringing him back to me.
"Let me think! let me think! I must turn him from her, and her from him. I must separate them, and then destroy her beauty, her reason, aye ! her very life, if need be, so that they may never come together again.
"Yes, yes ! but how ? Oh! I will not ask how; I will say it must be, and it shall be. Money shall be poured out like water to accomplish it. And money can buy all things. Oh! I will win him back, if only to break his heart."
She ordered her carriage, and prepared herself to go out. A few minutes later she was on her way to see
J
Mrs. Brainerd.
She had felt that she must do something. and the
1 18 Her Good Name Before All Else.
most natural thing was to talk with Mrs. Brainerd, Perhaps she would know something that Leo had not told to her.
Mrs. Brainerd was awaiting her in the reception-room, where she had been pacing back and forth with a white drawn face.
"Oh," she cried at sight of the beautiful, furious face, "I knew you would come. You have seen hint, then?"
"Yes, he has just left me !" was the hissing reply. "He has discovered everything," cried Mrs. Brainerd, "and he has left me forever."
Madeline looked at her with a sneer of contempt.. She thought Mrs. Brainerd had no courage. She could not comprehend that underneath her hard, cold exterior Mrs. Brainerd was yet a mother.
"Yes," she said, "he told me he had left me forever, but it shall not be so. What! do you give him up just because he has gone from you in a fit of passion? Oh! I will never give him up."
"But," moaned Mrs. Brainerd, "do you not comprehend that he has discovered everything? And, oh! lie accuses you of terrible crimes."
iM-ladeline's lip curled.
"Yes," she answered, "he says I wished to kill his factory girl ; that I tried to rob her of her reason. Is it not so?"
"Yes," murmured Mrs. Brainerd, looking with a sort of fear at the beautiful girl, who could talk so sneeringly of these awful crimes.
"Well," said Madeline, "he was right. I did do those things, and if I had succeeded all would have gone well. Since I did not, all has gone wrong. But I will do them yet."
Mrs. Brainerd recoiled from this beautiful tigress. She was capable of much, but she had never conceived of so much wickedness.
"Oh! hoia- could you?" she murmured.
Her Good Name Before All Else. "9
Madeline glided to her side, and hissed in her ear: "Can you not see what will happen if she is not removed from his sight?"
"What can happen? He is wedded to you," replied Mrs. Brainerd.
"Yes, he is wedded to me, but he loves her. She is beautiful, and as long as she is beautiful he will worship her and hate me."
Mrs. Brainerd sighed and shook her head. What Madeline said was true.
"Alas !" she said, "I fear you are right. Indeed, he left me declaring he would find employment—my son working L —in order that he might be worthy of her."
"Ah !" cried Madeline, her sloe-black eyes flaming like live coals, "did he say that? What if he were to try to divorce me? I believe he could, were he to drag all the facts out to the light."
"heaven forbid !" moaned Mrs. Brainerd.
She was thinking of the terrible exposure of herself that must follow.
A new light flamed in Madeline's eyes. She saw that Mrs. Brainerd would become her ally in the future in order to save herself from exposure.
"Yes," she cried furiously, "I see it all, now. He will seek work like a common man, and will appeal to the sympathies of everybody by doing so. Then he will tell how we tricked ,him into a marriage, and the whole world will be against us. And after that he will wed that factory girl, and your proud name will be dragged down to her level."
The picture drawn by Madeline made the haughty woman shudder. She could submit to anything al-most rather than see Leo a workingman, the husband of a factory girl.
"It must not —it shall not be !" she cried. "We must and the means of preventing it."
"But you shuddered just now," sneered Madeline, "because I did what I did to keep those two apart."
12o Her Good Name Before All Else.
"And I still shudder," cried Mrs. Brainerd ; "but while I shudder I harden my heart. What right has that girl to come between me and my son? No, Made-line; I will strive with you to free my boy from that entanglement. Tell me what plan you have, and no false pity for her shall prevent me tearing her from him."
A gleam of such joy as must illumine the eyes of the arch-fiend when he has successfully tempted a victim, shot into those of Madeline at these words.
"Do you mean that?" she whispered.
"I mean every word," Mrs. Brainerd replied, her eyes fixed on her youthful temptress.
"Then,", cried Madeline, "we shall save Leo from this degradation, and I shall win him back to me. Ah! it is much that he is my lawfully wedded husband. The first thing is to be sure that she knows I am his wife; for she is as proud as Lucifer, and will be hard to pacify when she knows it."
"Yes, you are right," exclaimed Mrs. Brainerd. "I see your plan. We must advertise the marriage in the papers."
"Advertise it !" cried Madeline contemptuously. "We must do far more than that."
"What more can we do ?" asked Mrs. Brainerd wonderingly.
"Do you remember the young society reporter who had the audacity to try to flirt with me at the ball you gave early last season ?" demanded Madeline.
"Yes, the impudent wretch !"
Madeline laughed scornfully.
"Oh, yes, very impudent! Well, I am going to seek him to-night, and to-morrow there will be an account a column long of my elopement with Leo."
Mrs. Brainerd stared at her.
"Will you dare to do it ?" she cried
" V:b y not ? It will simply be what they 11 burning
Her Good Name Before All r;lse. 121
my bridges behind me. I cannot go back, nor can you, after that is done."
Mrs. Brainerd flared up with a sudden passion.
"You mean that you are afraid that my resolution will not hold out to the end," she said. "Have no fear of that. I will do anything that your mind can suggest to win my son back from the degrading path he has chosen to walk. Come! we will go to the news-paper office at once and see this young man."
"There is no need for that. He will be certain to be at the reception at Mrs. Lyon's to-night. It is not too late to go. Come !"
Madeline, thanks to having dressed as she had for the wedding, was in a fit costume for the reception ; but Mrs. Brainerd was obliged to change her gown.
It did not take her long, however, to do this; and within half an hour they were at the house of Mrs. Lyon, mingling with the guests.
Madeline had instructed Mrs. Brainerd in her part, which was to drop vague whispers of a romantic marriage between Leo and her.
She had calculated rightly as to the effect of this. The society reporter, who was present as Madeline had supposed he would be, found means to be with her alone for a moment.
He plumed himself on his achievement; but in fact Madeline had executed that maneuver herself.
"Miss Delmar," he whispered, "or shall I call you Mrs. Leo Brainerd ?"
He watched her face to see the effect of his question, and was delighted to see her change color and look conscious.
"How—how dare you !" she stammered. "Who—who gave you the right to—to say such a thing to me?"
He chuckled to think how slyly he had tricked this half-admission from the proud beauty. He had no lonrcr ~n~ hesitation. It was his business to dish un
122 Her Good Name Before All Else.
society sensations, and he was determined this one should not escape him.
"Ah !" he answered in a low, mysterious tone, "we newspaper men learn everything. I could have found out all I wanted to know from another quarter, but I preferred to come to you so that my account would be sure to be true."
"Your account !" she said haughtily.
"Certainly," he replied with a pleasant smile; for he believed he was gaining the upper-hand of this proud beauty, who had.. snubbed him so unmercifully on a previous occasion when he had presumed to admire her.
"You surely will not dare to print any account of my mar—I mean	 and she stopped in well-acted con-fusion.
"I shall print everything," he answered; "and you will be wise if you will give me the exact particulars so that it will he correct."
"But we did not wish it known for a while," she murmured, clasping her little hands in feigned distress.
"Too late to help that, Mrs. 'Brainerd," he replied, inwardly chuckling at the thought of the rare bit of gossip he would have for the readers of his paper. "It is already known; and it only remains to 'get the full particulars. Will you give them to me, or shall I seek them elsewhere ?"
"Oh, sir !" she murmured, "think how dreadful it would look in the papers to have it said that I have told you about what we hoped to keep secret for a long time yet ! Oh! what shall I do ?"
She acted so prettily that the society reporter was touched. He did not think of giving up his column of gossip. Oh, dear, no! But at least he could relieve the fears of the proud beauty.
"If you will tell me everything," he said earnestly, "I will promise you on my honor that it shall appear in
Her Good Name Before All Else. 123
my account as if I had gained the information accidentally."
"On your honor?" she asked pleadingly.
"On my honor," he replied.
As if relieved by this assurance, Madeline led the reporter to a quiet corner where, hidden from view by the curtains of a window, she told him all that happened in a way calculated to give a most romantic aspect to the wedding.
He listened, made copious notes; and when she had finished, thanked her effusively, and hastened from the house to write up his sensation.
Madeline sneered as she looked after him. He believed he had done a fine stroke of work, and she knew that she had made a tool of him.
"Men are such fools in the hands of a clever woman," she murmured.
When she returned home from the reception with Mrs. Brainerd, she related to her all that had been clone, and ended by saying:
"But we must not stop here. We must be sure that that girl reads the account in the paper."
"Do you think," asked Mrs. Brainerd, "that reading it will separate her from Leo? No, no! those common girls care little for the law. She will take him from you, and then wait until he can procure a divorce from you."
Madeline smiled bitterly.
"You know little of Trixie Harlowe if you think that," she said. "I have talked with her, and I tell you that the little fool values her good name before all else in this world."
"Do you believe so?" cried Mrs. Brainerd, unable in her arrogance to comprehend that the poor working girl had so lofty an ideal of honor.
"I know it. Ah ! I do not fear that. What I fear is the love—the mad, passionate love of Leo. For love of her, he will find some way of breaking clown every
124 Her Good Name Before All Else.

barrier we may raise between him and her. What we must do is separate those two."
"How?"
"How? Why, go yourself to-morrow morning, early, and show it to her. I will call for you and take you to her house. Do you know where she lives ?"
"The footman knows. He went for her when she came to nurse Leo. Ah! it makes me furious to think how I was duped by those two."
"Never mind that," said Madeline. "We will see that they do not dupe us again. You shall take the paper to her, and when she has read it she will be ready to die with anguish. Ah! I know her. How I wish I might be where I could witness her agony !"
"You can go with me," said Mrs. Brainerd, shuddering in spite of herself at the vindictive tone of her young companion.
"No; she must not see me. I shall keep out of sight. I know that she will be crushed by the blow, and I know she will have nothing more to do with Leo. But she will fear her own strength, and will fly from him instead of facing him and driving him from her."
"Do you think so? I would have supposed she would try all the harder to win him from you."
"Pshaw !" sneered Madeline. "That is what I would do. But in her circle women think so much of themselves that they would consider it a crime even to flirt with a married man, to say nothing of actually trying to make him love her. We aristocrats do that; they do not."
"You think she will fly, then ?" asked Mrs. Brainerd.
"Yes; she will fly from him, and then we must get her into our power."
Oh, the terrible look on her dark face as she uttered these words. Mrs. Brainerd shuddered. "What then ?" she asked.
Pity and Indignation.	125
"What then ?" and the wicked girl's voice rung with fiendish malice. "Why we will make her so that Leo cannot look at her without a creeping horror. Her beauty shall be destroyed, and her reason driven from her pretty, curly head."
"Must that be?" murmured Mrs. Brainerd. "That seems so horrible !"
"Yes," cried Madeline, her black eyes flaming malevolently, "it does seem horrible, but it shall be done, for in no other way can Leo be driven from her. And I tell you, Mrs. Brainerd, that I shall never rest until I have sundered those two hearts."
"And I say," murmured Mrs. Brainerd, in a low tone, "that I will do aught you suggest to prevent such a terrible disgrace to our name as the marriage of my son to that common factory girl."
CHAPTER XXII.
PITY AND INDIGNATION.
"Susan," said Mrs. Danvers to her daughter, as the latter was bustling about preparing.breakfast the morning after the wedding, "have you heard our little Trixie moving about ?"
"No, mother. I went to her door and listened, but she was not stirring. Poor little dear! I fancy she is so tired that she will be late in waking, even though so much happiness is awaiting her."
"And has not Mr. Brainerd been here yet?" inquired Mrs. Danvers, something like a frown on her motherly face.
"No. I have not heard him, and I have listened for him. In fact, I have left our door open, as you can see, so that I might invite him in to breakfast."
"It seems very strange," said Mrs. Danvers severe-
"It is not as loverlike as I would wish my husband
126	Pity and Indignation.
to be if I were Trixie. I tell you, Susan, I do not half-like his not taking her home last night."
"How could he, mother ?" said Susan, bent on ;;ma-king the best of the case, though even she thought it very odd that a man should seem to love as madly as Leo did, and yet be so indifferent to his dear little bride.
If it had been her own case, she knew she would have felt badly enough if her husband had treated her

"He might have taken her to a hotel at least," Mrs. Danvers said sharply. "It is my opinion, Susan, that he does not love her enough to conquer his aristocratic pride for her sake. Take my word--for it, he intends to bury her in the country where she won't be seen by any of his proud relatives or friends."
"Oh, mother !" cried Susan, greatly troubled, "I hope you are too severe on him. He is certainly the noblest-looking gentleman I ever saw. I don't wonder little Trixie loves him so madly."
"Well," said Mrs. Danvers, shaking her head, "I tell you I don't like it. Why, it is eight o'clock, and he should have been here two hours ago at least. Indeed, he should have remained in the street under her window all night rather than be so entirely separated from her."
"But, mother," remonstrated Susan, "you can't tell that he is not remaining away in order that she may have a complete rest from her terrible fatigue of yesterday. I am sure she must need all the rest she can get."
"That is true enough," replied her mother, "and if it were not for that I would go into her room and wake her this minute so that she might know from the first how much her aristocratic husband loves 1her."
Susan, to stop the expression of her mother's i digs. nation, bethought her of an expedient.
"Mother," she cried, "suppose I go out and buy a
Pity and Indignation.	127
, per to see how our little Trixie's new name looks in print."
"Do," assented her mother. "I would like to see her delight when she looks at her new name. Dear little Trixie, she deserves the best husband the world has to give, for she is as good as she is beautiful, and she is the most beautiful in all the world, I do believe."
Susan threw on her hat and jacket and ran out of the room.
She stopped for a moment at Trixie's door and listened there.
"How worn out she must be !" she murmured. Then she sighed. "Ah! I am glad of it, for I feel as badly as mother about her husband. Why has he not come to inquire after her? What if he is in the habit of rising late, he ought not neglect his little bride."
She ran down the stairs with rising indignation. She could not help thinking of all Trixie had suffered because of her love for Leo.
"I just think I will give him a piece of my mind," she muttered to herself. "When I think of it, it seems to me that he was not as ready to marry Trixie as he should have been; though, to be sure," and her face softened a little, "he did say the sweetest things to her. I wonder what makes me have such an uneasy feeling, as if something had gone wrong? Pshaw! I guess I was up too late last night ; that is all."
She hastened to the nearest news-stand and bought a paper; and, then, fearing that Leo might get to the house before her return, she folded the paper and hurried back to her mother.
"Well !" cried her mother, with an eager laugh that showed how much she was interested, "how does it look ?"
"I haven't looked yet," replied Susan, panting for breath as she unfolded the still damp sheet.
"Give it tope," said her mother ; "and you go on
128	pity and Indignation.
with the breakfast. Ah, well; there is one thing about it—Trixie will grace any station in life, and I guess she will win his entire love with her beauty."
She unfolded the paper, and Susan watched her as she went about her work. Mrs. Danvers looked and looked again.
"Can't you find the marriage column, mother?" asked Susan.
"I have found that," replied Mrs. Danvers slowly, "but I can't see our wedding noticed."
"Let me look," cried Susan; and immediately she was studying the column with her mother. "Why, it isn't here !" she exclaimed, a moment later.
"Must be in some other paper," said Mrs. Danvers in a. disappointed tone.
"Yes, of course," said Susan, ."that must be it. I wish I had looked before I came up-stairs. Why—why	 and she tottered back with staring eyes.
"What is the matter, Susan ?" cried her mother sharply.
"Look !" was all Susan could say, while her eyes seemed glued to the pager she held.
Her mother looked over her shoulder and uttered a cry similar to that of her daughter, and began to read aloud :
"Elopement in high life! Miss Madeline Delmar, the rich heiress and beauty, wedded in secret to hand-some Leo Brainerd !"
After she had read these words her voice died, and for many minutes nothing could be heard in the room but the ticking of the clock on the mantel and the heavy breathing of the two startled women.
They read to the end the account of Leo's wedding at the house of the dead lawyer, and when it was finished they turned their eyes on each other with a look of mute horror.
"That is why he did not come," said Susan at last...
Pity and Indignation.	129
"Thank Heaven ! our little Trixie is saved," said Mrs. Danvers. "Oh! how could he do so monstrous a thing?"
"Oh, mother!" murmured tender-hearted Susan, "I almost wish she would never wake to know this."
"Better to know it now than when it would be too late," Mrs. Danvers said. "I suppose," she went on, "that his heart misgave him when it came to the point of doing her wrong. Or, can he hope that his marriage to the rich heiress will not come to light?"
"But, mother !" cried Susan indignantly, "has he not committed bigamy? Is he not liable to the law for what he has done? He wedded Trixie before a clergy-man. It was a real marriage, and not a sham one. Oh! no punishment could be too hard for such a shameful crime."
"Hush !" murmured Mrs. Danvers suddenly. "There are footsteps on the stairs. Oh! if it should be he, I will tell him such truths as will scorch his black and wicked soul. At least we have saved our Trixie by this discovery. Heaven be praised for that."
"The steps approach her door !" whispered Susan. "Listen! he knocks! Oh! let us stop him on the threshold of her apartment !"
She leaped to the door as she spoke, and snatched it wide open.
The next moment she was in the hall. It was not Leo, but a richly dressed woman who stood at the door, knocking imperiously for admission.
She caught sight of Susan instantly, and asked in curt, ,haughty fashion :
"I am looking for a girl named Trixie Harlowe. I was told this was her room. Is it so ?"
Susan looked fixedly at the stranger, and in an instant it flashed over her comprehension that this haughty woman bore a resemblance to Leo.
"Is your name Mrs. Brainerd?" she asked impettt-,mslv.
130	Pity and Indignation.
"It is," was the haughty response, "but what con' tern is that of yours ?"
"Come in here !" Mrs. Danvers interposed at this moment, not a whit abashed by the haughty mien of the aristocrat, "and you shall learn what concern it is of ours."
Mrs. Brainerd stared coldly at the poorly dressed woman who addressed her so sharply, and responded :
"I came here to see that girl, and she is the only one I wish to see."
She knocked so loudly that there was no doubt she must arouse Trixie by the noise. So Mrs. Danvers stepped angrily into the hall, and said:
"Have your way, then, proud woman, but I tell you here that little Trixie has a champion in me, who will defend her against you and your wicked son. Yes, we will enter Trixie's room, since you insist, but before she listens to a word from your proud lips she shall learn from me of how your son tried so infamously to deceive her."
Mrs. Brainerd stared at her in amazement. Who was this woman who knew so much? By what right did she speak thus?
"I do not understand you," she said coldly.
It is the aristocratic way to endeavor'to chill those whom they are pleased to call their inferiors.
"Yes, you do," replied Mrs. Danvers hotly. "Your son was wedded last night to a girl named Madeline Delmar, is it not so ?"
"It is so," was the cold answer.
"He was also wedded to poor little Trixie Harlowe." "Wedded to her !" cried Mrs. Brainerd. "Are you mad?"
"No, I am sane enough," replied Mrs. Danvers, "but I wonder that I am when I think of such monstrous wickedness. Yes, my daughter and I were witnesses of L.eo Brainerd's marriage to that poor, de-
Must Have that Pape.	131
c :c ed girl. But come! we will go to her, although she has not yet risen."
She found by trying the knob that the door of Trixie's room would open ; and she entered without ceremony, her bosom swelling with fiery indignation, uid her soul filled with the desire to do battle for poor, oetrayed Trixie.
"Trixie!" she cried sharply.
"Mother," wailed Susan, "she has gone! Oh, mother, look !"
Over the face of the clock was pinned a sheet of white paper on which was written these words—so sweet in themselves, so terrible in their import :
"Good-by, my dear friends ! I am going away with my darling husband_ He has come for me. Fare-well ! Oh, Iam so happy !"
"Betrayed, dishonored! Oh, poor little Trixie!" And Susan and her mother burst into sobs of pity and indignation.
CHAPTER XXIII.
"I MUST HAVE THAT PAPER."
Leo left the presence of Madeline Delmar, shivering with terror. He did not fear her on his own account; but from what she had already done to Trixie, he knew that she would at least endeavor to do all she had threatened in her furious anger.
"What shall I do?" he asked himself, and the answer was almost immediate : "I will watch her, and guard my darling against her.
Therefore it was that he waited in the street be-low to di ,:over if Madeline had any sinister plan in her wicked br air] to put into immediate execution.
He had strode off into the deserted streets for a rnon ,_: c t _ :' k 'ad come immediately back, so that he
132	1 Must Have that Paper."
did not believe she could have gone out without hiE knowledge.
He was rewarded by seeing her come out ere long, and he followed her carriage, when it took her to his mother's.
He waited outside of his mother's house, and followed them when they came out and went to the reception at Mrs. Lyon's.
I [e was troubled and _entirely mystified by this con-duct ; but the very strangeness of it convinced him that in some way it concerned him.
How it concerned him, however, he could not guess; and he could do nothing but wait and follow them from the reception. He saw the carriage take his mother home, and then take Madeline to her apartments.
He was sure that whatever mischief had been contemplated was now done ; but he could make no guess as to what it was, rack his brains as he might.
But, as one place was as good as another to him that night, he wandered in the near vicinity of the great apartment-house until early dawn.
Then he turned his face toward the part of the city where his darling was, and went thither with rapid strides.
A dozen times he passed the sleepy newsboys, who were carrying their wares from house to house, leaving the papers in the areas; but it did not occur to him to buy a paper until it came to him that his marriage with Madeline might have been published.
The thought startled him. What if Trixie should see one of the papers? What was more likely than that she should buy a paper to see the announcement of her own marriage ?
He bought a paper, and scanned its columns by the light of a lamp, for it was not yet late enough for daylight.
Fate directed his eyes to that column which had
"°Y Must Have that Paper.	133
been furnished the society reporter by Madeline, and then he understood why she had gone to the reception.
"I understand," he gasped. "They meant Trixie to read this. But they shall be thwarted. She shall not read it, and she shall be far from here with me ere any one can point it out to her."
Spurred by the fear of losing her for whom he was periling his soul, he ran almost all of the way to her humble abode.
Softly, for fear of arousing her kind neighbors, he knocked at her door. She was awake, and he heard her little feet come pattering over the floor.
"Is it you, darling?" she murmured softly.
"Yes, dear," he answered huskily, "I have come to take you with me. Make no noise for I fear every-thing. Madeline has sworn to destroy you, and for very terror for you, I am going to take you far away. And no one—not even those kind neighbors—must know, lest we leave a clue to our whereabouts."
"Oh! Leo !" she murmured, "you frighten me."
"But you will come, dear ?" he asked in a quivering voice.
"Leo," she replied in a tone that made him thrill with a terrible joy, "if you asked me to die with you, I would do it. I will be ready in a few minutes."
"And I will wait here," he murmured.
And so he waited in the dark hall while Trixie hastily donned her clothes and packed a few garments to take with her.
In a few minutes the door opened and she was in his arms. He strained her to him for a moment and then led, or almost carried, her down the stairs.
"It seems like an elopement," she said half-gaily, half-sadly.
"No," he said somberly, "but it is a flight ; for I am a prey to terror lest Madeline should find you out, and harm you."
"Oh. Leo !" cried Trixie suddenly. "T must huv a
134	"I Must Have that Paper."
paper. Why, I haven't seen how my new name loop in print."
It was the sight of a news-stand that hail put the notion into her head, and she was looking at the papers before Leo could stop her.
"I will take that paper," she said, pointing to one with a happy smile. "Do you not see the head-lines? Look, Leo, dear !"
He caught her by the arm and forcibly dragged her away from the stand, saying hoarsely :
"I have a paper."
She looked up into, his face, and said :
"Why, Leo ! I saw your name in the head-line, and I must have that paper."
It was a terrible moment for Leo.
He knew that if she once read the head-line in full, her happiness and his own would be forever wrecked.
"Trixie," he said, looking down at her, his face very white, "I will get you the paper at another place. I beg of you, come with me, now."
She looked wonderingly at his troubled face and murmured :
"What is the matter, Leo dear? Why should your name be in the paper? And why do you not wish me to see it? For I know that you do not."
But she no longer endeavored to obtain the paper.
If he wished her not to see it, it was enough for her loyal nature; she did not wish to see it. -
By a violent effort Leo regained his composure, and contrived to say to her :
"You are right, Trixie, I do not wish you to see what is in that paper. It—it will surely make you unhappy, and—and I wish you would not ask to see it."
She smiled up into his face with, oh! such a trustful look, and said in a low, gentle tone :
"That is enough for me, Leo. Let us go on." "Merciful Heaven !" he groaned inwardly, "how can
"I Must Have that Paper."	135
I betray this innocent, trusting heart? God knows I do it to save her. My marriage to her is the only true one. The other was a lie and a mockery. Oh! it must he right. I will love her and guard her from harm, and Heaven will smile on us."
But even while he tried to delude himself with these thoughts, he knew that they were not true. He was basely betraying her he professed to love better than himself.
He knew that if the choice were given her she would not hesitate between the death and misery Madeline would mete out to her, or the wrong he planned for her.
But it is easy to delude oneself ; and for a time he was almost care-free and happy, as one will be who has just escaped a great danger.
"Where are we going, Leo?" Trixie asked after they had gone on for some time.
He laughed gaily.
"I do not know, my darling," he answered. She looked the wonder she felt.
"You do not know. Surely, you are jesting, Leo 'dear."
"No," he replied, pressing her arm closer to his side, and looking down at her with devouring love, "I really do not know, excepting that we are going far away from this great city to some smaller place, where I am going to look for employment, and where you and I can own a little cottage all to ourselves. Shall you not like that?"
"Oh, yes, Leo," she answered; "but will you?"
"I? Why, I have dreamed of a cottage in the country ever since I first saw your sweet face and learned to know what true love was."
"Ah, yes! the cottage part is delightful enough," she said seriously; "but the work. I fear, Leo dear, that you do not know what that means."
136	"I Must Have that Paper."
She sighed and looked troubled. He smiled down at the sweet face, and said :
"You think I shall long for the luxuries of my old life. Do not be afraid, my darling. Let me tell you everything."
"Please do, dear."
"I am not poor, even though I have vowed never again to live upon my mother's money. I have a little income of my own, which is sufficient for us to live upon. But the old life of idleness is so hateful to me that I must work."
He did not tell her that it seemed to be the only way to drown the remorse that kept ever obtruding itself.
"I am glad, Leo," site said simply. "If you were rich I suppose I should learn to spend your motley and live as other rich people do; but I know I shall be hap-pier making a home for you."
"I am sure of it, dear," he said, and then hesitated until she, seeing that he had something he wished to say, asked :
"What is it, Leo ?"
"I wish to hide from all my old friends; from my mother, too. From everybody, in fact."
Trixie was not averse to doing so herself. She thought of Madeline and her deadly hatred, and shuddered.
"I should be glad of that, too," she said.
"Then," he went on with a relieved expression, "it will be necessary for us to change our names, so that no trace of us will remain."
"Oh, Leo !" she cried. "I could not call you any-thing else but Leo."
"Nor could I call you anything but Trixie. I did not mean that; only to change the last name. We will not be Brainerd any more, but Field."
She laughed gaily.
"Oh! as for that, it won't matter." she said. "Since
"I Must Have that Paper."	-
I must change my name, it may as well be to Field as to anything else. So I am Trixie Field, then. How do you do, Leo Field? I think Field is a very good name."
He laughed with her because there was something so infectious in her laughter, but in his heart, there was agony and bitterness.
His first thought had been to go to the depot and take a train for any place that was far enough from New York.
But when he remembered how subtle and how vindictive Madeline was, he determined to throw her off her guard by taking a boat for some place.
He had no notion where the different boats ran to, but he procured another paper than the one he had in his pocket, and looked through it to learn what he could about the boats.
"We will go to Albany," he said.
One place was like another to Trixie so that Leo was with her. She smiled in her sweet, winsome way, and answered :
"I would like to go to Albany."
There are many who will never forget the terrible voyage the Mabel made that day. It began joyously with music in the great saloon, but it ended in flames and death for some; in fearful scars for others, and in fright for all.
No one knew how the fire began. It seemed to them all that the whole boat was wrapped in flame in a moment.
They were almost at the journey's end, when it happened, but there were no other boats in sight, and the panic that followed was more awful than the flames.
Leo was as calm as if in a drawing-room from the first, though his face was deathly white.
"Perhaps it has come to save her at the cost of life," he murmured to himself.
I38	"I Must Have that Paper:
Trixie, from whose cheeks the roses had fled, drew close to his side and looked up into his face.
"We have faced death from flame before, Leo dear," was all she said.
All around them men and women were surging in panic fright, screaming for help, praying, weeping, and doing all those things which people do in moments of sudden fear, with death staring them in the face.
"Trixie," said Leo, in a low, intense voice, which she heard because his lips were close to her ear, "what-ever happens, remember that I loved you better than fife, and that all I ever did, or thought to do, was prompted by love."
"You need not tell me that, my Leo," she answered, with an angelic smile.
By and by some sort of order was gained among the passengers, the crew working nobly to that end, al-though the flames seemed to narrow the space on which all must stand.
The boats were lowered at a terrible risk, and those who had not leaped overboard in the first paroxysm of fright, were gotten into them by means that seemed almost miraculous.
Leo and Trixie sat together in one overloaded boat. By their side was a half-maddened man, whose gray hairs proclaimed him past middle age.
His clothing told that he was a prosperous man ; but all those thought who saw him and heard him was that he had lost his only darling little girl. He could not tell where he was, and the crew had had to drag him from the burning vessel.
The tired, wounded sailors, and other men who had volunteered to row the boats, were putting for shore as swiftly as they could, when the gentleman raised a mad cry and attempted to throw himself overboard.
"There she is! my darling! my Lucy !"
Every eye was turned to the blazing wreck; and
"I Must Have that Paper."	139
there, in the midst of the flames, was a beautiful child, not over ten years of age.
Every heart there thrilled with an agony of pity at the sight; but strong men held the frantic father, telling him that he would but lose his own life in trying to save her.
"Then let me die with her," he cried_ furiously, striving like a madman to free himself. "She is my all. Better death with her than life with such a recollection as that. Oh, God ! will no one help me to shake off these demons who hold me ?"
Leo saw the struggling father and the doomed child. His face grew white as marble, and a smile that was as sweet as a woman's broke over his noble face.
"Trixie," he whispered in her ear, "I must do what I can. It is a call from Heaven."
To himself, he said:
"I will save her or perish. If I live and save her, it will be a sign to me that I am right in the sight of Heaven in doing as I do to Trixie. If I perish, it is best."
Trixie clung to him, her heart throbbing with terror.
"Oh, Leo ! would you leave me alone?"
"It is a call from Heaven, clear," he said, with gentle firmness; then turned to the frantic father and said in a tone that caught his attention : "I will save your daughter if it can be done."
"You will die in the attempt," said an officer, who was in the boat.
Leo only smiled, bent and pressed a long kiss anon the lips of his love, threw off his coat and leaped into the water.
"I shall never see him again," Trixie murmured with blanched lips.
And yet, oh ! how proud she was of him.
And now that it could not be prevented a cheer of enthusiasm went up from the passengers. The father
140	"I Must Have that Paper."
dropped on his knees in the boat, and his eyes were glued to the swimmer, while his lips moved in prayer.
Leo had already made up his mind to his course of action, and did not hesitate, therefore, in the least.
He had noted that there was less fire at the stern than elsewhere, and had also noted that there were ropes or chains at the rudder by which he might make shift to climb on board the boat.
Fortunately for him he was a trained athlete, to whom the task of swimming in his clothes was but little. He reached the rudder, therefore, only a little exhausted.
He waited for a moment to recover his breath, and during that moment cries of sorrow went up from the anxious spectators.
"He has gone down !" went up from fifty throats. "No !" panted Trixie, "he is only resting. See! he is climbing up the side. Oh, noble Leo !"
Yes, he was climbing up like an old sailor; and fortunately, his calculation as to the ropes had been correct. They enabled him to reach the blazing rail.
Now it was well for him that his clothes were saturated, for he might dare more than he otherwise would.
He had climbed over the rail, and with a wave of his hand to Trixie—she knew it was to her-he disappeared in the flames.
There was a hush of horror on all who looked. Would he ever reappear? Yes. A wild cheer rung in the air. He had the little girl in his arms, and was holding her up so that her father could see her.
He shouted something, too ; but the roaring of the flames prevented anything being heard.
"Leo, Leo ! my love," sobbed Trixie.
"Aye !" said an old and experienced boatman, "he has the child ; but can he save either himself or her, vow?"
"I Must Have that Paper"	14r
Leo had placed the child down and was making- motions with his hands.
No one understood but Trixie. :Lt. must have been her great love that enabled her to comprehend his least sign.
"Go around on the other side," she cried. "He thinks he can throw the child over there safely."
Then the others understood, too ; and in a moment broad backs bent to the oars, and the boats all swept slowly around the burning steamer.
Then they saw that Leo was right, and that it might be possible for the child to be saved. They drew as close as they dared, and waited.
"Heaven be merciful !" pleaded the father, "and let my little one be spared to me !"
A shudder ran over the spectators. They held their breath, and then uttered a cry simultaneously. Leo had taken the child in his strong hands and had cast her into the air.
Would she be dashed to death by the fall, or would a kind Providence so direct her fall that she would not be injured?
The lightest boat swept to the spot where she fell into the water, and, after a moment of terrible suspense, a cry of joy went up.
"Saved !"
Leo, standing in the midst of the flames, which, however, had not even scorched him as yet, heard the cry and smiled.
"Now it is my turn," he said. "As it is best for my darling," he muttered, "let me live or die !"
He drew back as far as the roaring, crackling flames would permit, and then took such a run as he had taken more than once on the football-field, when he had saved the day for his college.
A moment later those in the boats comprehended his
Waft.
142	The Glance of Bold Eyes.
He must clear the hungry flames in his leap or he would perish horribly.
It seemed as if no one breathed while he hung, so to speak, over the licking tongues of flame.
It seemed an age, but was only a moment of time. He curved gracefully over the flames and black smoke, was lost to sight for an instant, and then reappeared, plunging headlong into the water.
He was dragged into his own boat by strong and willing hands, and placed by the side of his beautiful bride.
Trixie had fainted.
The passengers would have made a hero of Leo, and would have made a great fuss over him, but he begged them so earnestly not to, that they refrained, though they voted him so much the greater hero for his modesty.
In truth, Leo was thinking chiefly of Madeline, and was fearful that if too much notice were taken oaf what he had done she would suspect who it was, and would follow after him.
And now, more than ever, he wished to be buried from all who had ever known him. He now felt a strange peace of mind. It seemed to him that he had an inward assurance that he was doing Trixie no wrong since he intended none.
"I can be happy with her now," he said to himself a hundred times a day.
He escaped from everybody but the gentleman whose (laughter he had saved from the steamer. He thought he had escaped him, too, but early the following anor:i;ng the gentleman sent his card up with the twee-	:might see Leo.
Leo could not refuse, but his manner showed the gentleman his repugnance to being thanked, so the latter exclaimed at once :
"I did not come to burden you with grateful words. One so noble as you can know without being told what my feelings must be."
"I beg you will say no more," said Leo.
"I must say something!" the gentleman cried. "Let me do something, at least. I am an older man, perhaps a richer man. Is there nothing you can ask of me just to give me the pleasure of granting it?"
"Really," began Leo, in a deprecating tone, when the other interrupted him.
"Oh, don't think I mean anything like reward. That would be an insult to such a one as you. But suppose you had not put me under an obligation, is there nothing you would like one to do for you ?"
A sudden thought came to Leo.
"Yes," he said, "there is something you can do for me-advise me."
"Advice is cheap," said the gentleman, and smiled.
"Here is the case," said Leo quickly. "I am 'just married ; I have a little money; I could be idle if I wished, but I do not wish. Can you tell me how such a person as I, who have had no business education, but can write well, and have had a good college education, can get into the way of work ?"
The gentleman's eyes sparkled.
"I wonder if you will believe me?" he said. "Why, the fact is that I know of a place that will suit you to a dot. This is the sober truth I am going to tell you. I have been looking everywhere for a confidential clerk. You are the man, of all others. If I could not trust you, then whom ? Will you come ?"
"It is not a place made for me?'" demanded Leo proudly.
"On my honor."
"I have no recommendations. I come empty-handed," Leo said.
"I will furnish you with the recommendation,'' laughed the gentleman in delight. "Now let me ex-plain the situation to you. My name is Robert Doite, and I am a manufacturer on a large scale—one of the 1r, gest in the country."
"I have heard of your factories," Leo said.
"Well, I have a nephew, who should be of assistance to me, but he is completely given up to pleasure. He will run mad over each new face, and will move heaven and earth to win her favor. I fear he is not always a scrupulous as he should be. It is the place he should fill that I wish you to take."
"I would not wish to incur his enmity," Leo said.
"You need not fear," replied Mr. Doite; "he cares nothing for the business. I—I--" he hesitated.
"Please free your mind," Leo said.
"Yes, I will," said Mr. Doite, smoothing the troubled look from his face. "My only fear is lest he should annoy—annoy you.'
"Annoy me !" repeated Leo. "How?"
"Your young wife is a most extraordinarily beautiful woman. Chauncey will surely pay attention to her, and he is said to be very fascinating with the other sex. He has a tongue so honeyed that it seems they do not realize their peril from him until it is too late."
Leo smiled serenely.
"That, sir, is a thing that does not trouble me. The one certain thing in this world is the love of my wife for me."
"And she would be mad not to love such a noble fellow," said Mr. Doite. "But I thought it fair to tell you of it."
Leo could hardly help laughing at the mere thought of any such fop, as he deemed Chauncey Doite to be, stealing from him the love of his darling,
Ah ! if he could but have seen a little way into the future !
"It is settled, then?" queried Mr. Doite, rubbing his hands joyously, for he was charmed at the prospect of having Leo by him always.
"Yes," Leo responded, "it is settled, and here comes my wife to join her thanks to mine."
Trixie, blushing like a peony, shyly stole up to Leo, and gave her little hand to Mr. Doite, while Leo rapidly told her of his good fortune.
"Oh! I am so glad !" Trixie said frankly. "We have so longed for a sweet little home in the country."
"All, Uncle Robert! you have had a narrow escape they say. And dear little Lucy, too !"
Leo saw the look of annoyance that flashed over the face of Mr. Doite, and he knew instinctively that the dark, handsome man who entered the room with the manners of a polished gentleman, must be that Chauncey Doite of whdm he had just heard.
It was hard to believe him what Mr. Doite had rep-resented, for his manner was so frank, yet easy and courteous, and his voice had a singular melody.
Mr. Doite turned toward his nephew and shook hands with him, giving a few hasty particulars of the fire.
"Isn't he handsome ?" Trixie said to Leo in her usual open way.
Leo started, he could not have told why, and fleshed a wondering look down on the wondrously beautiful face of his darling.
"Oh, Heaven !" he thought, "what if I were to be punished in that way. My God! to lose her love! Oh ! that would he worse than death in its most horrible form. But I am mad to let such a notion enter raw head. Trixie false to me! I could doubt the justice of Heaven sooner."
"Mr. and Mrs. Field," Mr. Doite was saying, "per-Alit me t,	n lv nephew, Mr. Chauneee Doite.
»
146 It is Not Her Husband She oves.
The dark eyes of Chauncey Doite fell on the ravishing face before him, and a singular look flashed into his face and transformed it for an instant. Then the look passed away and left Leo wondering uneasily what it was he had noticed.
CI-IAPTEIZ XXV.
IT IS NOT HER HUSBAND SHE LOVES.
A year passed away. Madeline had striven with all her cunning and shrewdness to discover some trace of Leo and Trixie; but all in vain.
'On that day, when she had taken Mrs. Brainerd to Trixie's house to deal her the blow that was to prostrate her, she had met with and made an ally.
Willis Trow, the foreman in the factory, had read the sensational story of the marriage between Leo and Madeline, and with his heart swelling with joy and bitterness at once, he had hastened to find Trixie.
So it happened that he had come in contact with Mrs. Brainerd, while she was talking to the Danvers, and had heard everything.
He was like a madman, and began to hurl bitter words at Mrs. Brainerd; so frightening that aristocratic lady that she fled down the stairs to the carriage, where she explained the cause of her fright to Made-line.
Madeline had it in her heart to curse as bitterly as Willis Trow had done; but she only showed her white, even teeth as her lips tightened over them in a hard line.
"Drive home !" Mrs. Brainerd said sharply.
"No," said Madeline, an idea flashing into her brain, "not yet. I wish a word with this Willis Trow."
So she had talked with him ; and at first he had been as furious an] brutal with her as with Mrs. Brainerd,
It is Not Her Husband She Loves. 147
but in a little while Madeline had conquered him and had made him her ally.
She entered into an alliance with him, for there were many things he could do for her that she could not do herself.
She schemed and planned, and he put all in execution. but without the least avail for a whole year. Then accident did what all her subtlety could not accomplish.
She was sitting in her little parlor one day thinking with fury how both her lover and her rival had escaped her.
"Shall I never see them again ?" she asked herself. The door opened and her maid said, almost as if in answer to her own question :
"Mr. Willis Trow."
Madeline looked up and encountered the ardent eyes of Willis Trow, who had begun by being the ally of Madeline, and had ended by loving her madly. If he had ever loved Trixie in reality, he had forgotten it in this new passion.
"Well ?" she said curtly, for she took a savage pleasure in playing on the heart-strings of this humble worshiper.
"Well," he replied, twisting his hat in his hand, and wondering if he might dare to sit down, "I have found them."
With a scream of a tigress Madeline was on her feet, her black eyes glowing and her breath coming and going so rapidly that her bosom rose and fell like a storm-tossed sea.
"Say that again! You have found them ! There is no mistake?"
"Yes,'° he said a little sulkily, for he could not help knowing that the woman he was so foolish as to worship really despised him and loved only Leo. if even she did not hate him more than she loved him. "I have
148 It is Not Her' Husband She Loves.

found them. They are very happy. They have a little girl named Beatrice."
Madeline ground her white teeth together in a way that was horrible to listen to.
"Tell me all about it," she panted. "Sit down. Hurry !"
"They are in a town called Hardenville. Leo is managing man for Mr. Doite, the richest man in that part of the country. I saw Trixie by accident as I was passing through the place on the cars, tracing that false scent you put me on."
"Is she still beautiful?" hissed Madeline, her eyes beady as a snake's.
"More beautiful than ever," he answered. "I got off the train and learned everything. Leo is prosperous, and is soon to be made a partner. He saved the life of Mr. Doite's daughter. Trixie is the queen of the whole country."
The expression on Madeline's face made even Willis tremble.
"And they still love each other as much as before?" she asked.
"Everybody speaks of it; though to be sure	"
he stopped.
"Why do you stop in that way, fool ?" she cried fiercely.
"Well, there is a very handsome gentleman who is everywhere that Trixie is. Some say she hates him, and some say she doesn't."
A gleam of joy, terrible to see, lighted up Made-line's black eyes.
"How does Leo like the gentleman's attentions ?"
"I only saw them all three together once; then it seemed to me that he looked troubled. But it was only a shade."
"A17 !" murmured Madeline with a sort of demoniac glee, "it seems as if my revenge were coming at last. I hav * d to wait a year; but it is h,t'	so. She
It is Not Hei Husband She Loves. I49
has a child to share her disgrace. That is a new torture for her. Leo suspects, or feels something is not quite right about the handsome admirer. He is inclined to jealousy. A torture for him. But that is only for a beginning. What is the young gentleman's name ?"
"Chauncey Doite."
"Chauncey Doite i Ah ! well I shall have to make his acquaintance. Willis, you have done well. Would you like to kiss my hand ?"
She held out her little hand in a half-mocking sort of way, but he caught it and pressed kiss after kiss upon it.
"There !" she exclaimed with an air of disgust she did not attempt to conceal, "that will do."
And she wiped the hand he had touched with her dainty cambric handkerchief,
"What are you going to do about them ?" he asked, abashed by her insolence.
She stared at him as if questioning his right to ask such a question.
Then she laughed scornfully, saying :
"I had forgotten that you once had in interest in them. Your love was short-lived, wasn't it, Willis ?"
He knew she was mocking him, but she had gained such an ascendancy over him that he did not resent it.
"Yes," he answered doggedly, "my love for her was short-lived for all her beauty; but I haven't forgotten how to hate"
"You hate !" she sneered., "You don't know how, you dull-witted fool! But, ah, I know how to hate !" "Ah !" he sighed, "you do indeed !"
"Oh, go !" she yawned wearily; "I want to sleep on this delicious news. Ah, what a surprise I shall tyre pare for them in their Elysian security! Happy as two dove, in a cote, are they? Oh, I will sear their lives Yes, I will wreak a terrible vengeance on her," she muttered, "and he must come back to mF tc be
15o It is Not Her Husband She Loves.
tortured, for, though I love him as madly as ever, T know he will never give me the love I longed for. He gave that to her, and he shall suffer. Go ! why do you stand gaping at me?"
He turned hastily away, and she closed her eyes, but not in slumber.
She was thinking. Suddenly she called her maid. "Pack me a trunk for a week's visit. One or two good gowns ; I may need them."
The next morning, as Chauncey Doite was riding his Kentucky thoroughbred along the road about three miles out of Hardenville, he was accosted by a very beautiful woman, who looked at him curiously as she said :
"I ask your pardon, sir, but are you not Mr. Chauncey Doite?"
He lifted his hat with the exquisite courtesy that always characterized him.
"That is my name. Have I had the happiness of---"
"You have never met me before," she interrupted with a smile; "and I know that as long as Mrs. Leo Field lives and loves—another, you will not care whether we meet again or not."
He started, and a faint red showed in his cheeks like a neglected danger signal, then was gone.
"I do not understand you," he said in his suave way.
"Well," she replied with a low laugh, "then I have the advantage of you ; for I understand you thoroughly. You love Trixie, the ravishing; but, alas ! she loves only	"
She hesitated and looked archly at him. He shrugged his shoulders and filled up her pause, saying : "Her husband."
"Pardon me," said the stranger, "hut in that you are rnistakcn. It is not her husband she loves. Thr' is not \ _ r ',t I was about to say."
He Was Willing to Sell His Sul 151
Chauncey Doite dismounted from his horse, and with the bridle-rein over his arm, stood facing the beautiful stranger whose eyes were a match for his own.
"Who are you?" he said.
"The bitterest foe to Trixie, who calls herself Field, that ever woman had," was the sudden, savage response. "And I came here to deliver her over to you in order to have my revenge. Do you want her?"
He recoiled a pace, but his face only showed eagerness and curiosity.
"Do I want her?" he repeated with a short laugh. "I have been wooing her hopelessly for a year."
"And have you the courage to take her if she flings herself into your very arms ?" demanded she.
"I wish she would try me," he answered. "Yes, I have that much courage, and more if needed."
"Then," hissed Madeline, for it was she, "come to the hotel in the village yonder, and I will convince you that I have the power and the will to throw her into your arms."
"Ah !" he said in his smooth fashion, "I would go farther than that for a less inducement. Why. m v
v
coy beauty!" he muttered between his teeth, "is it possible that there is a mystery in that placid life of yours? Perhaps the oath I swore to make you mine may be fulfilled. Who can tell ?"
CHAPTER XXVI.
HE WAS WILLING TO SELL 1-IIS SOUL.
It was with the fierce, malignant joy of a wild beast about to seize its prey that Madeline led Chauncey Doite to the little hotel where she was staying.
She had taken pains to learn all that ,he possihly co i '	him before taking steps to to t him ; and
152 He Was Willing to Sell His Soul.
she had been satisfied that he would .be willing to- lend his aid to carry out the nefarious design she had conceived.
Now that she had talked with him but a few minutes, she knew that he would stop at no obstacle that stood between him and the gratification of his mad love for Trixie.
"My vengeance is assured," she murmured to her-self as she walked along. "She at least shall sink into the mire of infamy, and it only remains for me to win him back to my side."
Chauncey Doite, on his part, went along wondering what there could be that the darkly beautiful creature there could tell him that would assure the success of his long and entirely unsuccessful suit for the love of little Trixie.
"I can detect violent hate and fierce, ungoverned passion in her black eyes," he said to himself ; "but what power can she have to throw the pure-hearted beauty into my arms? For Trixie worships her husband. But something tells me that the strange, meaning words of this woman hide a terrible secret. Ah! if it might but be so! If I might but learn the means for turning those wondrous blue eyes on me with such a look as I so often see in them when they fall on Leo !"
He gave his horse into the charge of a stable-boy, who came quickly out as soon as he saw handsome Chauncey Doite, for the young man was known to be like a prince in his liberality with all with whom he had dealings.
Then Madeline led him into the little parlor of the hotel. It was dingy, but it was deserted, and that suited them both better than the most costly furnishing would have done under the circumstances.
For a few moments neither spoke ; each was studying the other with renewed curiosity. It was Chauncey Doite who snake first.
He Was Willing to Sell His ou1. 153
"You have promised me a great deal;" he said.
"I have promised nothing that I cannot perform with your help," she replied quickly, "and unless I have misjudged you, you will and can give that help."
"Will you tell me who you are ?" he asked.
"Yes," she replied, without hesitation, "I have decided to tell you everything, because I can thus best serve my own ends. I am the only true and lawful wife of Leo Brainerd."
He started, but cried quickly :
"Leo Brainerd! who is he ?"
"He is known to you as Leo Field," she replied.
His dark eyes flamed up for an instant, and then grew into a strange, velvety softness that made one think involuntarily of a concealed peril.
"You are mad," he said, in a soft, purring tone. "Do you think you can persuade me that little Trixie would do aught wrong? Oh, no! I know her better than that. She is the very soul of purity."
Madeline smiled fiercely.
"She was deceived by him," she said. "She believes herself his true wife."
"You are sure of this ?" Chauncey asked eagerly.
Madeline took from her pocket her marriage-certificate and the paper in which was an account of her marriage to Leo. She handed them to him without a word. He took them and read them over, his dark, olive face flushing a deep red as he did so.
Madeline watched him with a bitter smile on her face. She knew her vengeance was certain, but it galled her to think that Trixie should be so fascinating that even this heartless man should thrill with joy at the thought of making her his.
Chauncey uttered a deep sigh of joy as he finished reading, and his dark eyes met Madeline's with eager passion.
"She is mine—she is mine!" he cried.
154 He Was Willing to Sell His Soul.
"Yes," she hissed, "but we must make our plans carefully, or you may lose her even now."
"I will do anything," he said. "Of course I under.. stand that you hate her for winning him from you. You will have a sufficient revenge in betraying her into my power; is it not so ?"
"Yes."
"Well, let me know your plan and I will cooperate with you. Do not hesitate to speak plainly, for I tell you I will stop at nothing to make her mine."
"You do not hope that she will turn to you of her own accord ?" Madeline queried.
A black look crossed the evil, handsome face.
"No; I cannot say that I do. She worships him. But this is in our favor ; he is terribly jealous of me. He does not doubt Trixie, and yet he cannot bear to have me near her. Some use can be made of that."
"Yes," hissed Madeline, "I had counted on that, and have made my plans accordingly."
"Tell me frankly what your plans are," he said.
A smile of demoniac hate crossed her face:
"When she knows that she is not his wife, that her child is but a nameless waif, she will leave him, will she not ?" she said.
"As certain as that she lives," was his answer.
"Then in some way she must be told the truth. But she crust be told it in such a way as to leave no room for doubt. If possible, she must fly from him without letting him know why she flies. At least, she should not talk the matter over with him."
"If we can convince her that he has deceived her," Chauncey said, "I am sure she will leave him without a word. But why is that so necessary?"
"Because, after she is gone—and we must know the instant she does go—we must substitute a note, forged in her writing, telling him that she leaves with yon."
"All, I see! Oh, you have the cunning and subtlety, of the evil one !" Chauncey cried.
He Was Willing to Sell His Soul. 155
"I have the cunning of mortal hate," she replied vindictively.
"Be its source what it may," he said with a triumphant smile, "it teaches you to plot well. And after she has fled, I am to disappear, too ; is it not so ?"
"Yes, you are to disappear ; but that is not all. You must prepare a hiding-place for her. Can you do that?"
"You mean a place where I can hide her with, or without, her willingness ?" he queried, with an evil laugh.
"That is exactly what I mean," she answered fiercely; "for I fancy that even you cannot hope to win her, though she has left her betrayer."
"No," he said with set teeth, "she will always love him, but I can arrange a little place of mine for her safe keeping, and I fancy I can persuade her to come to terms at last."
There was something so evil in his look that even Madeline shuddered. But she cried out with joy at the same moment :
"Ah! it was providential that I found you. You will second me in everything. We can help each other."
"Yes," he replied cynically, "we can help each other as long as our interests are the same. How shall we let Trixie know the truth ?"
"That is the one thing that troubles me," Madeline replied. "If we bungle with that, all our pains will be for nothing. Can you suggest any plan?"
Chauncey paced the floor for a few minutes, his brow knit in deep thought.
He was willing to peril his very soul to win the beautiful creature who had held him so coldly aloof for so long.
"I have it," he said at last, as he suddenly stopped in front of Madeline. "We must in some way make her think that this paper, with the account of your tnarri n c-p is Leo's."
156 He Was Willing to Sell His Soui.

"I do not quite comprehend," she said.
"Like this," he responded. "Suppose she should have his pocketbook put in her hands. Suppose in the pocketbook was this account lying side by side with your marriage-certificate. Suppose she should read them. Eh ?"
Madeline's face flushed.
"You complimented me with having the cunning of a demon," she said; "it seems to me I must return the compliment. The plan is a good one. But how to put it in execution."
"That will be easy enough. Their servant is a girl I have paid well to tell me everything that goes on in the house. Nothing has ever taken place, so that I have never had anything for my money; but the girl is devoted to me and will get the pocketbook and after-ward hand it to her mistress. And when Trixie has fled, the girl will see that any note we may write will be put in the place of the one Trixie writes."
"You will get me my marriage-certificate back ?" said Madeline.
"Certainly. When shall we put our plot in execution ?"
"Is any time better than the present ? Let us begin at once. If I had a bit of her handwriting I could forge the letter now."
Chauncey Doite smiled in his easy, wicked fashion, and drew a note from his pocket.
"You can see how much I love her," he said in a soft, murmurous way. "I carry a note of hers near my heart."
"Ah !" said Madeline, with ferocious joy, "you love her as a tiger loves blood."
Madeline conned the little note, which was no more than a formal invitation to be present at a little gathering at Leo's house.
"I can copy this writing so that she herself would mot know but	wrote it," she said.
Not a Shadow On Trixie's Life.	157
Chauncey went for writing-materials, and in a few minutes Madeline had produced a letter, which she handed to him to read.
"What do you think of it ?" she asked.
"I think it is perfect," was his response. "It will crush him to the earth, and he will not think of following her. You are a genius."
"Yes," she replied malevolently, "a genius of evil for her, I hope. Curse her! she has robbed me of him whom I loved with all the passion of my fiery nature, and she has known perfect happiness for a year. Now it is my turn !"


CHAPTER XXVII.
NOT A SHADOW ON TRIXIE'S LIFE.
Leo had prayed that he might die in trying to save Mr. Doite's little child, if so be that Heaven frowned on his conduct toward Trixie.
He had braved the awful peril of the fire and had escaped with the child's life and his own, and thence-forward he had been at peace with himself.
Everything seemed to conspire to bring him greater happiness.
He was prosperous in all his ventures, and was soon to be made a partner with Mr. Doite.
Not a shadow of anything rose up to betray him, and he almost forgot that his name was not Field, and that Trixie was not his lawful wife.
A dear little babe came to them, and they named it Beatrice, and when Leo looked gat the wondrously beautiful mother and her little golden-haired babe, it seemed to him that Heaven was actually smiling on him.
There was but one trifling shadow in his life, and for that he scorned himself, knowir' that it was but a f2-rne	f his fancy.
158 Not a Shadow On Trixie's Life.
He could not bear that Trixie was even commonly polite to Chauncey Doite.
It always seemed to him, when he saw Trixie and the profligate young man together, as if he must go between them and shelter little Trixie from the fascination which all said dwelt in the black eyes of Chauncey Doite.
But he never dared show any of this feeling to Trixie, although it was plain enough to others, who only smiled at his singular folly.
There was not a cloud, not a shadow on the sunny path of Trixie's life.
She was as happy as a pure-hearted, sinless girl can be.
Wrapped up in Leo and little Beatrice, she never dreamed of trouble to come.
She felt that the troubles of her life had been and were past for all time.
On the morning when Madeline and Chauncey Doite met at the little country hotel, she stood in her dainty sitting-room, the laughing baby in her arms, saying good-by to Leo.
"Remember !" she said, shaking her finger at him with a pretty little pretense of scolding, "you have promised to come home early this afternoon, to take me out for a drive."
He smiled, his eyes filled with passionate devotion, for it seemed as if he loved her more and more as the days went by.
"I shall not be likely to forget," he said in response.
Then he kissed her and the baby and went away, turning a dozen times before he was out of sight, for one more glimpse of his darling.
"How noble and good he is !" she murmured to herself as his form finally disappeared from her sight. "Ah ! little darling !" she said to the nestling babe in her arms, "rte ;one has so good a papa as you."
And, then, giving the baby to her nurse she went about the little cottage, singing joyously out of a heart filled with happiness.
The nurse, "in the meantime, put the baby's cap and cloak on and took it out for an airing in the bright sunlight.
She took it toward a grove of trees just back of the house, near where the main road ran, and an observant person could have seen that she was looking about expectantly when she reached there.
"Good morning, Nellie !" she heard a low voice whisper.
"Oh, good morning, Mr. Chauncey !" she answered with a little start.
She looked furtively toward the cottage to see that the mistress that she was betraying so foully did not notice -her, and then darted behind a thicket of witch-hazel, where Chauncey Doite awaited her.
"Anything new he asked.
"Nothing, sir," she answered, shaking her head in a hopeless sort of way. "I really don't think it's any use expecting anything. I never saw such a devoted pair of turtle-doves. Why, he is more a lover every day of his life, and she thinks the earth isn't good enough for him to walk on."
Chauncey laughed quietly in a way to show two rows of even, glistening white teeth. It was something like the way a wolf might laugh.
"Perhaps it won't always be so tame for you, Nellie," he said.
He gave her a five-dollar bill as he spoke, and it was easy to see by the greedy glistening of her eyes that she made money her god.
"What is to happen ?" she asked eagerly.
"In the first place," he said, "you are to get me a
pocketbook of Mr. Field's, and bring it here." "When, sir ?"
`Now, at once."
16o Not a shadow On Trixie's Life.
She mused a moment, and then shook her head. "I don't see how that will be possible, unless •" "Well! Unless what ?" he demanded impatiently. "Unless he happens to have left it behind, which is
not likely. Would his wallet do as well?"
"His wallet! Do you mean a large pocketbook the size of a bill ?"
"Yes, sir."
"Why," cried Chauncey Doite joyousy, "that is precisely what I do want. Can you bring me that ?" The girl turned pale, and trembled.
"Oh, Mr. Chauncey !" she cried in a fright, "I hardly dare, now I think of it. I know he must keep valuable papers in it; and if it should become known that I had taken it, I could be put in prison."
"Pshaw !" he answered contemptuously, "do you suppose I intend to take anything out of it? I promise you I won't even look at the, papers in it. All I shall do will be to place some other things in the wallet, and then let you take it back to Mrs. Field with the story that you found it on the road. Will that suit you, you foolish girl ?"
"If you really only want to do that," she answered, "I will get it at once. I know just where it is, and Mrs. Field will never suspect."
"I promise you it shall never go out of your sight," Chauncey said, hugging himself with joy at the thought of how well fate was working with him in his wicked scheme.
The faithless girl ran back to the house, made some excuse to Trixie for returning, purloined the wallet from its place, and returned with it to where Chauncey awaited her.
His black eyes flamed as she drew the wallet from beneath her apron and handed it to him.
"You shall be well paid if my plan works as it should." he said to her. "See! all I do is to nlace tbgea
1•. _.. a Shadow On Trixie's Life.	161
two papers in the wallet so that they will almost fall out as you hand it to Mrs. Field. Do you see that ?"
"Yes, sir," she replied, looking at him fearfully; for no one knew better than she of what villainy he was capable.
"And you will take care that they do half-fall out as you hand the wallet to her ?" he demanded.
"Yes, sir, I will. But, oh! Mr. Chauncey, I hope you mean my mistress no real harm, for you know that she has never shown me anything but kindness, and I would not like to think that I had injured her."
Chauncey Doite laughed at these belated scruples of the girl who had been his paid spy on her mistress for so long.
"No great harm will come to her, you foolish girl!" he said. "Don't you know that I am too madly in love with her to wish her any harm ?"
She shook her head as if not at all convinced by his argument; but when he drew out another five-dollar bill and handed it to her, she caught it greedily and stifled all her scruples.
"If you do exactly as I bid you," he said, "you shall have not five, but fifty dollars."
"I will do anything for you, sir," she answered,.. in a low tone. "You know, I do' not hesitate in your service."
He smiled significantly and glanced at the bill in her hand. She comprehended readily enough, and ex-claimed :
"Well, I am poor. I must earn money when I can."
"Quite right, my girl," he answered dryly. "Well, all you need to do to earn fifty dollars is to give this to your mistress, and then watch her as well as you can, and if she writes a note and goes out with the bab'It, you must bring the note here as quickly as possible and give it to this lady."
The girl started back in alarm.
"What 'edv?"
162 Not a Shadow On Trixie's Life.
Madeline Delmar, her darkly beautiful face distorted by a fierce joy, rose up from behind a clump of hazel and looked at the girl.
"Oh, sir !" cried Nellie, in affright.
It seemed to her, now, as if she were mixed up in some fearful conspiracy, the end and meaning of which she could not remotely comprehend.
"Well," he said sardonically, "what is the matter now? Is there anything in the looks of this lady to frighten you ?"
"No, no, sir; but what does it all mean! This wallet! ,the papers you place in it! the money you offer me! this lady !"
He shrugged his shoulders. Madeline spoke quickly, comprehending the girl's nature in an instant even bet-ter than he, who should have known her better.
"What does it matter to you," Madeline said, "what these things mean ? Is it not enough if you are well paid for what you do? Mr. Doite promised you fifty dollars. Listen to me! You have gone too far to think of drawing back. You have taken this wallet and that is theft, which can be punished by imprisonment."
"Oh, Mr. Chauncey !" Nellie cried in terror, frightened by the dark, implacable face of Madeline Delmar, "you promised me no harm should come to me."
Madeline held up her hand to check Chauncey's words.
"And no harm will come to you if you act like a reasonable girl," she said coldly. "I only wish you to understand that you have no choice but to do exactly as we tell you. Besides, I was going on to say that I will give you not only fifty but a hundred dollars after you have brought me the note which, no doubt, your mistress will write."
"One hundred dollars !" the girl murmured, at once frightened by the sum and drawn by the hope of receiving4 it "Oh! you must be going fn	~ )lue
Not a Shadow On Trixie's Life.	163
thing to my poor mistress. And she is so sweet and gentle to everybody."
Madeline shut her teeth together with a snap that made the girl think of a steel trap closing on an unsuspecting victim.
"Yes, she is very sweet and gentle," she said ; "but you must do as we bid you. Do you intend to ?"
"Yes, miss," the girl answered, cowed by the fierce light in the black eyes.
"Then take the wallet."
Nellie took the wallet from Chauncey, who had stood by, an amused listener of the conversation.
But before Nellie could go away with the fateful wallet, Madeline stopped her and bent over the baby, which had nestled innocently against the bosom of the treacherous nurse all the while.
"So this is their child," Madeline murmured, in a low, sibilant tone. "Let me take it !" and she put out her hands.
But Nellie, with a little cry of terror, drew back, clasping Beatrice closer to her, and murmuring :
"No, no! you shall not touch her. She has done no harm, and you shall not injure her. I love her, at least, better than money."
"Fool !" cried Madeline, with a scowl of hate, "do you think I would spoil my plans by injuring the child? I only wished to see whom she looked like."
But Nellie would not trust her. She backed away, hugging little Beatrice to her.
"She is most like her father, most people think," she said.
"Fool!" said Madeline, making no attempt to force Nellie to give up the babe; "go, do your errand, and see that you do it well!"
Nellie hastened away, and Madeline turned to Chauncey.
"I would give a fortune to witness her agony, when she read,: ,hat is in the wallet."
164	A. Look of Horror.
"Would you ?" said he. "Then steal up by that side path, and hide behind that clump of syringas. You can look into the sitting-room from there. I have often done it. In the meanwhile I will go and watch for her coming in the woods by the other road. I may have long to wait, but I know she will come. We have planned too well to fail."
"You are sure your house will be in readiness?" queried Madeline.
"I am sure. I sent a trusty messenger. Ah! my little Trixie! this night you shall rest under my roof."
CHAPTER XXVIII.
With a beating heart, but composed face, Nellie ran back to the cottage, and sought her mistress.
Trixie had just seated herself in the sitting-room by the window, her lap full of dainty garments for Bea-trice. It seemed to her that nothing else gave her such joy as fashioning new garments for her darling; and she bought delicate cambric and costly lace for her when she would not spend a cent for her own adornment.
"Leo loves to see her in rich garments," she murmured happily, "and I love to make them."
"Oh, Mrs. Field !" cried Nellie, running into the room, "I found this wallet on the road, and I am sure it must belong to Mr. Field."
She held out the wallet to Trixie, who looked at it with surprise.
"Yes," she said, "it is his ; but it is strange he should take it with him, for he usually leaves it at home. Well, I will give it to him."
She took the wallet from Nellie, and the latter con-
A Look of Horror.	165
trived so well that the papers placed there by Chauncey fell out upon the floor.
A little cry of distress broke from her lips at the sight of the papers; for they seemed to tell her that somehow they conveyed a message of woe to her sweet mistress.
Trixie stooped and picked the papers up. Nellie could not stand there and see what followed, but turned and hastened from the room.
"Leo is not usually so careless," Trixie murmured to herself. "I shall have to scold him," and she laughed softly at the mere thought of scolding him she loved so well. "I suppose," she went on, "they are papers he has been looking over, and has neglected to put away."
She sighed from sheer happiness as she opened the wallet and proceeded to place the papers in it.
"Why!" she murmured with a little start, "one of them is a piece of newspaper. I wonder what it is !"
Leo had often shown her the contents of the wallet, and time and again had told her he had no secrets from her, so that she did not hesitate to take up the paper and unfold it.
It was the front page of a New York daily paper, and bore marks of having been read and reread.
Her eyes opened wide with wonder when she glanced at the page, and the head-lines of one of the columns caught her attention.
"It is the paper I wished him to buy the morning after our wedding," she murmured. "He did not wish me to read it. Well, I won't now without his permission."
But even as she said this her eyes read the head-lines, and a little cry of amazement broke from her lips.
It was only amazement, but she could not resist reading the lines again, and then her senses Q-racned the
166	A Look of Horror.
full meaning of what was there, and her face be came deathly white.
"It must be some infamous thing concocted by that dreadful Madeline Delmar," she gasped.
How could she believe those terrible head-lines ? But it was not in nature to resist reading all that was said after seeing so much, and so she read.
The paper trembled in her little hands as she read, and her bosom heaved convulsively; and every now and again she would moisten her lips as if they were parched.
But she made no comment to herself as she read. It seemed as if her whole being were absorbed in the story she was reading.
At last she reached the end of the terrible story, and the paper fell from her nerveless hands, while her great eyes, filled with a strange light, stared upward, as if to Heaven.
For a little while she sat thus, hardly conscious of what her own brain was telling her.
Then she started up, and cried out pantingly:
"It is a horrible falsehood ! That is why he did not wish me to read it. He knew it would trouble me. Oh! I wish he had let me read it then. Shall I put it away, and say nothing of it ?"
She picked it up and commenced to fold it with a forced calmness, though her hands were trembling so that she could not make them perform their office.
Then she suddenly stopped folding the paper and read it all over again.
It was so terribly circumstantial. It told so many things that she could see were true.
"It was to deceive me," she sobbed. "That awful creature thought I would see it, and believe it. She did not know that Leo had made me his true wife. But, how did she dare? Everybody could read it, and the truth was sure to come out."
A Look of Horror.	167
The paper fell into her lap as she sunk into a chair ; and now she tried to comprehend how it could have been.
She remembered everything. She did not wish to. She told herself almost fiercely that it was only an infamous plot of Madeline Delmar, and that she must not let it trouble her.
But as she told herself this, the events of that night came back to her, and she recalled things she had not thought of since.
She remembered how Leo had looked, what he had said, what he had done. She thought of how he had left her alone that night, of how he had come to her and taken her away early in the morning before her kind neighbors were awake.
These thoughts came to her in spite of herself, and she fought against them, trying to prove to herself that they were most natural things for him to do.
She recalled how he had looked that moment when she was on the point of reading the head-lines which bore his name; and the head-lines were before her now.
She buried her face in her little hands, and a sob that seemed to wrench her very soul broke from her lips. Then she sprung to her feet, and cried out vehemently :
"Oh, this is untruth in me; I am almost doubting him. I will not permit myself to do that, for then I shall never forgive myself. As if he could have done as this says! Why, if he had wedded her, then—then it would—depend upon which	 Oh, I will not
shame myself by thinking it! I will go to him and ask him to explain; I will beg him to forgive me for doubting even for a moment. One word from him will make it clear. Ah ! I am so sorry I read it ; but a thing in print seems always so true."
She tried to laugh, but it was a pitiful effort. She brushed the tears from her eyes, rose to her feet and
I68	A Look of Horror.
r
began nervously to fold the paper. Then a sudden thought came to her.
"It isn't true! oh, I know it isn't true! If it were it would mean that he had married her first, and that
was only his Oh, no! Then Beatrice would be nameless! Oh, let me go to him! These thoughts will come, and they will kill me !"
She folded the paper with a desperate effort to keep her fingers from tearing it. She placed it in the wallet, and caught up the other paper.
"I will take them both—everything—and he will explain."
Heaven knows why she did not thrust them both in the wallet and shut them out of her tortured sight for-ever.
But no, she held the other paper in her hand and hesitated, looking at it with strained eyes.
"It may explain everything," she murmured. "I will look at it. He would always remember if I went to him with doubt in my heart. I will look at it."
She opened the paper with slow and hesitating fingers, and not until it was fully opened did she cast her agonized eyes on it.
Then an awful, ghastly look of horror and incredulity came into her face and seemed to fix itself there, as if forever.
With a moan she sunk in a heap on the floor, and for a brief while at least she was unconscious of her woe and misery.
And as she sunk down and remained in an unconscious heap, the face of Madeline Delmar was pressed against the window-pane with a look of gloating triumph that was horrible to see.
"This is only the beginning," she hissed.
CHAPTER XXIX. AN ETERNITY OF SHAME.
When Trixie recovered her senses after her swoon, it seemed to her at first as if she were merely recovering from a hideous dream.
She raised herself to a sitting posture, and stared about the room. The first thing she saw when her roving gaze settled again was the marriage-certificate, which had fluttered on the floor, and was lying in front of her.
Then everything came to her as a reality, and a low moan broke from her lips. Slowly she rose to her feet, taking the certificate in her hand as she did so.
Mechanically she glanced over it again; but it was agony and not horror that stood in her great eyes now.
She had put one thing and another together, and she was satisfied that Leo had deceived and betrayed her.
She did not hate him for it, as another might have done, for, through all he had been guilty of, she saw his great love and passion for her.
"But, oh! why did he do it?" she wailed.
She saw not only her own life ruined, but she saw the future of her child wrecked.
"Beatrice !" she moaned. "Beatrice what? Oh, my darling ! you have no name to bear ; you are a waif and your mother is an outcast."
She sunk into a chair and gazed dry-eyed on the evidence of Leo's treachery toward her.
She could not weep now. It seemed as. if her very soul was numbed by the shock of what she had learned.
Slowly and with a firm but nerveless hand she folded the certificate and placed it by the side of the saner in he wallet.
170	An Eternity of Shame.
"I will place the wallet on the bureau," she said, in a low, dulled tone, from which all the old-time music was gone, "and he will see it when he comes home, and will understand."
She had come to her conclusion almost unconsciously to herself. In very truth she had not formed her resolution, and she sat for a long time with her head resting on her hand by the side of the table.
Then she rose up and began to move about the room, mechanically putting it in order.
When she came to the basket of delicate garments which were all cut and ready for her deft needle, she picked it up and carried it out of the room and up-stairs.
The wallet, too, she had in her hand. Those two things she took up to her own room.
But when she entered her own sunny room, and looked around it, a flush rose to her white cheek, and she uttered a little cry of pain.
"I have been so happy," she wailed, "and every moment of happiness will now become an eternity of shame. Oh, Leo! Leo !"
But she went about this room, too, and put it in order, though she almost sunk to the floor many times as her hands touched the things that were Leo's.
Then, when it was all in order—though it had not been in disorder before—she gathered together some of the plainest of the clothes of little Beatrice, and laid them by the side of a traveling-bag which she had taken from a closet.
Then she donned a plain traveling-dress, packed the baby clothes, and stood as if ready.
A purse lay on the bureau, and she stood looking at it for some time before she approached it and took it in her hand.
"I would not take it," she murmured, "but for her. For her sake I will take it, and some day I will return it to him."
An Eternity of Shame.	171
But she would take nothing else that he had given her.
Costly jewels and rich gowns she had in plenty, but she would not take any more than she must in very decency.
"I earned my living once," she murmured, "and I will earn it again. Heaven help me and my darling!"
She donned her street-garments, and then stood looking wistfully around.
She could not leave the scene of her past happiness without a terrible pang.
"He will be unhappy, too," she murmured. "I do not know how he could be so cruel to me, for I know he loved me. Shall I go away without a word to him ? No, oh, no ! I will tell him why I go."
So she sat down to the little desk before which she had passed so many happy moments, and wrote him the saddest letter that ever was written.
It was not that the words were more sad than had -been penned before, but the woe that was inexpressible animated them.
"Dear Leo," she wrote, "you will know why I leave you without reading this, and I would not write it except to tell you what you cannot know otherwise. Leo, you have done me an irreparable wrong, and you have branded our innocent Beatrice with shame. But, Leo, I forgive you, as I hope Heaven will forgive you. And in the days to come, if we live to see them, I will teach our little child to love and honor the memory of him who was her father. Do not try to find me, Leo, for if you should do so, I might hate you.
"TRIXIR."
She placed the letter in an envelope which she sealed and directed, and placed under the wallet.
"He will see the wallet first," she answered, "and understand."
Now she called Nellie, and said to heu
172	An Eternity of Shame.
"Nellie, put, on baby's other cap and coat. I am going to take her out for a visit. I will .not be home to dinner."
Nellie looked into the white, set face, and her heart smote her. What had they done to her beautiful, kind mistress to cause her to look like that?
"Are you not well ?" she asked falteringly.
Trixie tried to laugh away the question, but the laugh died in her throat, and almost,turned to a wail of anguish.
"Yes, I am quite well," she said.
"Shall I tell Mr. Field where you have gone?" she ventured.
"He will know," Trixie answered. "You need say nothing. Only see that nothing in this room is disturbed."
Nellie looked around the room and noted how care-fully it had been put in order. A terrible fear of something unknown came over her, but she dared not say a word lest she should betray the part she had had in whatever infamy had been committed.
Silently she put on the baby's other garments, only venturing at last to say :
"Will you take baby out before she has had her nap?"
A strange look shot into the agonized eyes of the beautiful mother.
"Where I am going," she said, "she can sleep as well as here."
Nellie looked up into the drawn, set face and was awed and frightened.
"What have they done to her?" she asked herself. "May I not go with you?" she asked aloud.
"No," answered Trixie. "I shall go alone. But you
have always been true and faithful, Nellie, and I am,
sorry not to take you with me to-day."
Nellie said not a word; but for the first time in her
life the money that lay in her pocket as the wages of her treachery seemed worthless to her.
It was in her heart to tell her suffering mistress all that had happened; but she had not the courage to do so, and poor, deceived, betrayed little Trixie went out of the cottage that had been her happy home for one whole, blissful year.
Nellie, watching her through the shutters, saw her stop and look up at the window, with such an expression of agony as almost made her cry out through the tears that streamed down her face.
"Heaven forgive me !" she murmured, "I have had a hand in this."
But for the sake of the money she had and was to earn, she would not speak; and so Trixie, with leaden step, passed down the garden walk to the gate.
At the gate she stopped again, and turned her tear-less, sorrow-laden eyes back once more. It seemed that she took in every part of the little cottage in that look; then raised her eyes to Heaven, while a sob broke from her lips.
"Oh! my little nameless one ! we have no home now.,,
SHE STARTED BACK WITH A CRY OF TERROR.
Out upon the road went Trixie, and made her way wearily to the railway-station, where she went into the waiting-room.
"I must hide in the city," she said. "He may seek me, and he must not find me. I will go to New York. That is where the unfortunate always go."
She had put a heavy veil on so that she would be sure not to be recognized by any one who chanced to be in the station; although she was r ' dy to explain what ,-,z - was doing there with her Lei—.
1 74	A Cry of Terror.
She intended to say that she had been called suddenly away; but she hoped no one would question her.
She bought her ticket for New York, and then re-tired to the dimmest corner, where she sat and waited. for the train to come and bear her away.
No one came in that she knew, and no one spoke to her.
Little Beatrice slept peacefully in the tired arms of her mother.
Then the train came, and Trixie crept from her corner and got into the first car, where she. found an empty seat, which she took possession of.
But at the next station a pleasant-faced woman got into the car, and asked Trixie if she might share the seat with her.
Trixie looked up into the smooth; comfortable face of the stranger, and gladly gave her the half of the seat.
"I am sorry to trouble you," the woman said pleasantly ; "but it was the only seat with a lady in it. Is the baby asleep ?"
"Yes," answered Trixie, too sad to care to talk.
"I love babies," the woman said, as if determined to be pleasant whether Trixie cared to talk or not. "Are you going far?"
"To New York," was the answer, not curtly given, but wearily, as if she could not say more.
"Ah," said the woman, "I came near going to New York myself. My daughter, whose house I am going to now, wants a sort of companion and seamstress, and I was going to get one for her."
She sighed as if there was a great difficulty in obtaining such a person, and settled herself in her seat as if she were not intending to talk any more.
Trixie started and looked at her wistfully. Then she hugged her baby closer to her and stared out of the window.
"Oh," she 0-ought, "I wonder if I would do? But,.
no, they would not take me with little Beatrice, and I would not part from her. Together we shall live or die; for, Heaven forgive me! we can at least die, if worst comes to worst."
"I suppose," said the woman, starting up suddenly, "that you don't happen to know any nice person to take such a position as I speak of. My daughter is very nice,. and won't be too particular. You see she lives in a rather lonely place out in the country, where few people like to go."
A lonely place in the country! It seemed to Trixie as if fate had sent this woman to her. Oh, if only she would suit!
"I suppose," she ventured timidly, "that a young woman with a little baby would not do."
"Indeed she would, though," said the stranger quickly ; "nothing would suit my daughter better. You see a young widow, for example, with a baby, would he sure to be contented for the child's sake. Do you know such a person ?"
With throbbing heart, Trixie lifted her veil and looked wistfully into the face of the other.
"I am such a person," she said simply.
"You!" cried the woman in surprise. "Why, you are a lady!"
"I am poor, and—and my—my babe is fatherless," she answered with a choking sob.
"Oh !" exclaimed the woman eagerly; "then Providence must have sent me this way. Yes, you shall go with me to my daughter, and she will welcome you."
Trixie pressed one little hand on her bosom, and faltered :
"I can give no references," and added, with piteous eagerness, "but I am honest and faithful. And, oh, I will strive so hard to please !"
"Say no more, my clear," the woman said. "I can ead character, and I will be your rep re:?ce if you need v. Poor little thing! left all alonee	" little baby!
176	A Cry of Terror.
Well, well ! you shall not be without a good home in the future, that I promise you !"
Trixie could have kissed the fat, pudgy hand of her benefactress, so great was her gratitude.
"Oh," she murmured, "I will try so hard to please. I can sew well, and my baby is so good."
A singular smile flitted over the smooth features of the woman, but it was gone almost as soon as it came, and Trixie did not see it.
"What is your name, dear?" she asked.
"Trixie Harlowe," was the answer.
It was the only name she had any right to.
"My name is Martha Jones," the woman said, "and my daughter is Mrs. Robinson. I hope. you will be as well pleased as I am."
"I cannot help but be pleased," Trixie said grate-fully. "I think you are very good to take me, an utter stranger to you."
Again she did not see the singular smile that passed over the woman's face.
"I am kind to myself," she said.
Trixie did not understand her, but supposed she meant something pleasant, and did not ask for an ex-planation.
"Have we far to go ?" she asked timidly.
"No, not far. We get off a few stations below here,' and then take another train which will carry us within a few miles of where we are to go."
Trixie asked no more questions, but tried to keep up the conversation with her new-found friend because. she thought it her duty.
But, grateful as she was for the opportunity to find a refuge so soon, she was so heart-sore that it needed all her courage to keep from breaking down.
When they got off the train at the station, the woman insisted on carrying the traveling-bag for Trixie; and offered to relieve 'I rixie's tired arms by _ taki
A Cry of Terror.	177
Beatrice; but Trixie hugged the baby close and refused almost fiercely to give it up.
Poor innocent little Beatrice might indeed be the one proof of the wrong done her; but, also, she was Trixie's one treasure; and it seemed to her then as if she could never let her go out of her arms.
The ride in the next train was a tiresome one, and it seemed to Trixie as if she must be going back almost to the place she had started from.
Indeed she asked her companion if she was sure there was no mistake.
"It seems," she said, "as if we were going back to-ward Hardenville."
The woman laughed.
"I suppose it must seem so," she answered ; "but in truth we shall be a hundred miles from there when we reach our destination."
"It doesn't seem possible," Trixie said ; and then dismissed the matter from her mind; for as the clay wore on she began to think of how Leo would act when he hastened home to take her for a drive.
And it seemed to her that she would go wild with her agony.
If it had not been for the frail little creature, clasped to her breast, she felt that she must have laid violent hands on herself rather than endure the agony that rent her soul.
If she had loved him less she might have endured it better; but to love him, and to suffer with him be-sides bearing her own sorrow seemed more than she could bear.
"Here we are !" the woman cried at last: "and there is my daughter's carriage waiting Cor nr;e."
Trixie did not see then; but when she alighted from the train she saw a two-seated carriage, the driy er of which was the most unprepossessing man she had ever seen.
She slh lered involuntarily at the	of him.
178	A Cry of Terror.
The look was noticed by Mrs. Jones, who hastened to say
"He isn't handsome, is he? But he is very good. Besides, it is so hard to get help in this out-of-the-way place."
"Looks are not everything," Trixie said apologetic-ally.
"They are a great deal in a girl," Mrs. Jones re-plied, looking at Trixie with admiring eyes. "A girl. with such a face as yours need never want for for-tune."
"Beauty," replied Trixie in a low tone, "may be a terrible curse."
If she had been looking at the face of her companion, she would have seen her lip curl with a sneer; but her eyes were downcast, and her thoughts were all far away. She knew that her beauty had been the cause of her sorrow.
"Together they stepped into the carriage, and the man drove off at a rapid pace, as if glad to get away from the station.
Trixie could not help noticing how swift and spirited the horses were to belong to a person of the rank of Mrs. Robinson; but she reflected that there might well be a dozen reasons to account for the possession of such fine horses, and she dismissed the matter from her mind.
The drive lasted half an hour, and then the carriage stopped before a house which bore evidences of having once been a mansion of some consequence.
"MST son-in-law has only just bought the place," Mrs. Jones explained; "that is why it looks so dilapidated. Where is Mrs. Robinson, William ?" she asked of the driver.
"Got a sick headache," was the gruff answer, "and has to stay in her room.
"Very	said Mrs. Jones pleasant'1v • "mv young
,wend will excuse her for not coming down to meet us, I am sure."
"Oh, certainly," said Trixie, not at all troubled l,y the absence of the hostess, but chilled somehow by the terrible loneliness of the place.
Mrs. Jones led her into the house, which was as silent as though it had had no tenants.
"Has your daughter no children?" Trixie asked.
"None," was the response. "That is one reason why yours will be welcome in the old house. Come right up-stairs. I know which room will be given to you. Come right along."
Trixie followed her, and shuddered again as she heard the great hall door shut with a clang, that seemed to say it was closed for all time.
But when Mrs. Jones opened the door of one of the rooms up-stairs, and Trixie was ushered into a daintily furnished apartment, she could not suppress a little cry of amazement.
"You did not expect anything quite so pretty in the musty old house, did you, my dear ?" Mrs. Jones asked.
"No," replied Trixie. "And I am afraid I shall be usurping the room kept for guests."
"You are in the very room you should occupy, my dear," was the answer. "You need have no doubt of that. So put baby to sleep and make yourself look as pretty as you can, for my daughter loves beauty beyond all things."
There was a strange look on her face as she spoke, and a sudden thrill of fear shot through Trixie's heart, though she could have given no reason for it.
"I cannot make any change," she said, "because this is the only gown I have."
"It is not necessary. You need only make your toilet, and you will be beautiful enough for a king." "Shall T go down when baby is asie7n ?" asked
`=8o	A Cry of Terror.
Trixie, unable to account for the subtle change in the comfortable, easy-going Mrs. Jones.
"By no means," responded Mrs. Jones quickly. "Remain where you are until you are called for."
"Oh !" murmured Trixie, when she stood alone in the room, "I cannot understand what it is that seems to clutch at my heart. I suppose it is my sorrow, which must be ever present with me. And yet—but, ah ! what is the use of trying to analyze every new emotion ? My life is wrecked, and I cannot hope for peace until the end comes."
She fed Beatrice, and then made her toilet as care-fully as she could, and in spite of the sorrow which weighed her spirits down and dulled her bright eyes, she was wondrously beautiful.
Mrs. Jones came to her in a little while and smiled her approval of Trixie's appearance.
"Ah !" she cried, "the men must go mad over you ! Have you had many lovers, my dear ?"
Somehow Trixie shrunk from the question, and from the tone in. which it was asked. To her, love was too sacred a thing to be made the subject of idle conversation with a stranger.
The time had been when she would have talked of love with anybody who wished; but that time was long gone by, and would never return.
"I do not care for lovers," she said gravely.
There was something discordant in the laugh that greeted this speech, and Trixie drew herself up with a sort of wounded pride.
"There !" said Mrs. Jones, "do not be angry with me. I could not help laughing at the notion of one so beautiful as you not caring for lovers. Wait here and I will send some one up who may be able to convince you that you are wrong."
Trixie made no answer. She supposed Mrs. Jones referred to her daughter, though she could not under.
he Was Not Like a Sane eln. 181
stand why she should be expected to convince her of an error.
She went to the bed and looked down at the peace-fully sleeping child, whose clustering golden curls reminded her of Leon
"Ah, my darling !" she murmured, "you and you alone shall be my future love."
At that moment the door swiftly opened, and when Trixie looked up, expecting to look upon the face of Mrs, Jones' daughter, she started back with a cry of terror.
Chauncey Doite, his dark face glowing with triumph, stood before her.
CHAPTER XXXI.
What Nellie, the nurse-maid, might have done under the stress of awakened feeling for her tortured mistress, cannot be known.
She stood at the window, watching her for some time, and then turned with a sigh, and began to look around the room, shaking her head at the same time.
"I don't know what to do," she murmured. "I know something dreadful is going to happen, and I suppose I have done my share to bring it about. But she did look so wretched."
"Well !" said a sharp, incisive voice from the door-way.
Nellie looked up with a start of terror. She had heard the voice but very little, yet she knew it instantly. Madeline Delmar stood there.
"She's gone," stammered Nellie consciously.
"As if I would be here if she were not," said Made-
line contemptuously. "Where did she put her note." "I didn't see anv note."
182 He Was Not Like a Sane Man.
Madeline glanced at her and then began a search of her own. She first took the paper and marriage-certificate from the wallet.
"Put the wallet where you found it," she said peremptorily.
Nellie felt like a bounden slave in the hands of Madeline, and jumped to do her bidding. The moment the wallet was lifted from the bureau the note Trixie had written was discovered.
Madeline snatched it up and tore it open without ceremony.
A bitter scowl of hate distorted her features as she read the heart-broken message which poor little Trixie had left for the man whom she loved, but who had so cruelly wronged her.
In the place of that letter she put her own, first carefully comparing the direction on the envelope to see that it was just as Trixie had written it.
"If I had been poor," she muttered with a short laugh, "I might have made my fortune by forgery; the copy is perfect."
Nellie watched her like one fascinated.
She was terribly alarmed for the consequences of what she was doing, but she never forgot that Made line had promised her one hundred dollars.
But Madeline said nothing of the money until she had done everything she deemed necessary for the undoing of the two loving hearts she had sworn to torture.
When she was ready to leave the little cottage which had seen so much pure happiness, she drew out a roll of bills and counted out one hundred dollars to the girl, whose heart actually seemed to harden at the sight of the money which was the wages of her treachery.
It was about two o'clock in the afternoon when Leo Came up the garden path, his eyes eagerly watching
He Was Not Like a Sane Man. 183
for the rounded, graceful form of her he loved so dearly.
Not once had she missed meeting him at least on the porch steps, except when little Beatrice was born, and he expected her as confidently as he expected the sun to shine.
He had hurried home early in order that Trixie might enjoy the ride he was going to give her behind a pair of Mr. Doite's fast trotters.
But there was no Trixie to meet him; and when he reached the porch, and she did not leap out to clasp him about the neck with her soft arms, his heart sunk.
"Can she be ill?" he asked himself.
The mere thought made him dash open the door and leap up the stairs.
Nellie stood in the hall below and watched him with throbbing heart.
Suppose he were to suspect her part in what had happened?
He had always been a most kind and indulgent master, but something told Nellie that in this case he would be a terrible person to encounter.
Leo dashed into the little bedroom, glanced hastily around it, and then called out :
"Trixie, Trixie! do not hide from me, darling."
Nellie knew that he was standing still, that he might hear the least noise. Then she summoned courage to call to him.
"If you please, Mr. Field, Mrs. Field was called away this morning."
Leo leaped to the head of the stairs, and looked down at Nellie.
"Called away—where to ?"
"I do not know, sir. She left a note for you on the bureau."
To come home and not see her who had never be-fore failed him, had unmanned him and filled his heart with a vague fear.
.184 He Was Not Like a Sane Man
And now; to hear that she had left the house and gone somewhere, leaving Nellie behind, set his heart beating wildly, though he could not have reasoned why.
"Where is Beatrice ?" he demanded. "Is she with you?"
"Mrs. Field took baby with her," Nellie said in a quavering voice.
Leo passed his hand over his eyes and stood dazed for a moment. He was almost angry to .think that Trixie had done it, knowing how he counted on having her meet him.
He swallowed a lump in his throat and went into the bedroom wondering why Trixie had gone away. And then a thought somehow flashed into his brain that Chauncey Doite might have had a share in it.
How or why he did not reason. He knew that Trixie had a contempt for Chauncey Doite.
The note lay on the bureau. He caught it up and pressed it to his lips.
His confidence all came back at the sight of her handwriting.
"Dear little Trixie!" he murmured as he tore the note open. "What a fool and worse than fool I am to think the thoughts I do. I wonder what has called her away."
He began to read. Nellie listened in the hall below. What was in the note? What would happen when he read it ?'
"DEAR LEO : Perhaps you will not be surprised to find nee gone from the little nest that has been so sweet for a whole year. I do not know whether you have ever read my heart or not. Sometimes I think you have. I hope so now, for I like you well enough to wish to spare you unnecessary pain.
"I have gone away from you, Leo, because I have been i:r:, :_"_Hd lw my heart to do so, and because I
He Was Not Like a Sane Man. 185
knew that the time must come sooner or later when you would be the one to tire of our simple country life.
"Did you think, Leo, that I was not aware of the pretty little deception you had practised on me? Why, Leo, I have known almost from the first that I was not your wife.
"At first I was angry to think that some one else had a better claim on you than I, but as a new love developed in my heart, I could not help being glad that the tie that bound us together was so weak a one.
"Good-by, Leo ! Try to find some one to take my place. ii would leave little Beatrice, but after all she is as much my child as yours, and he promises to be kind to her. Forgive me for taking her with me, but

I could not part with her. Good-by!	'TRIxIE.'The letter so devilishly concocted by Madeline was
read ; and Leo stood with ashen, distorted face by the bureau. You might have thought him carved in stone so still and lifeless he looked.
There was enough of truth in the terrible lines to impose upon him the belief that his little Trixie could 'have written that infamous confession.
He stood there, his eyes fixed and staring, and only his heaving breast to show that he was alive.
Then all at once he roused himself and grinding his teeth together, he hissed like a madman :
"Chauncey Doite ! I will hunt him down and kill him!"
He was not like a sane man any longer. He did not reflect on anything; he was possessed of one idea : He would kill the man who had robbed him of his love.
Trixie he never once blamed; though he wondered and could not comprehend. But Chauncey Doite he would kill.
He was like a man insane, but he was not wild.
186 He Was Not Like a Sane Man.
Only his rolling eyes told the story of his fearful passion and fury.
Nellie shrunk behind a portiere when she heard him coming down the stairs with heavy footfall, and she almost screamed out in her terror at the sight of his face.
"There will be murder," she thought ; "and. the blood will be on my soul. I will tell him though he kill me."
She stepped up to him shrinking and trembling so that she could barely stand, and it is likely her courage would not have carried her through had he not caught her by the arm with a viselike grip,,;and demanded :
"What do you know, girl? Your face betrays you. Will you tell me all you know, or must I farce it from you ?"
"I will tell you everything," she cried in terror.
"Ah ?" he gasped, and leaned against the wall as if he could not stand else.	.
Terror so paralyzed the senses of the nurse-maid that she was unable to utter a word to enlighten Leo.
He stood leaning against the wall, holding her arm as in a vise, and she was endeavoring to collect her-self sufficiently to speak to him.
"Will you speak, girl?" he demanded hoarsely. "I—I will tell you what I can. Ask me any question," she stammered.
"What had Chauncey Doite to do with my wiwith her disappearance ?"
"I can only tell you, sir," she replied, afraid to tell him the whole truth, "that he has been in love with her for a long time."
Leo ground his teeth in rage.
"And she?'" Leo demanded.
"Oh, sir, you know she did not care anything for him."
Leo looked at her out of his bloodshot eyes.
He Was Not Like a Sane Man. 187
"Then why has she gone?"
"Oh !" cried the girl, glad to tell a part of the truth at least, "she did not go with him, I can swear. How could you think so ?"
Leo stared at her. He took the letter and held it before her, saying in a low, hoarse whisper: ,
"She says in here that she has gone with some one. What does it mean ?"
The girl trembled so violently from fear that for a moment she could not say a word. Then she stammered incoherently :
"Oh, sir! let me go, and I will tell you all I know. But you must promise not to hold me accountable. I needed money. That is why I did it. I loved her, and the baby. Indeed I did."
He released her arm, and cried :
"Speak, be quick !"
"She did not write that letter, sir," Nellie gasped, shrinking back in her terror.
"She did not !" cried Leo, holding the letter up so that the light from the sitting-room window would fall on it. "It is in her writing. Ah! what is this? Come in here !"
He dragged the terrified girl into the sitting-room and eagerly began examining the handwriting.
"It is a forgery. Oh ! why did I not detect it? Speak, girl ! Tell me all you know, and I swear to you that if you have betrayed me or your mistress for gold, I will double all you have received for the truth, now.,,
Even through her terror this appeal reached the wretched girl.
Her eyes glistened, and she launched into her story at once.
"I was long ago bribed by Mr. Chauncey to tell him all that went on in this house. He loved your wife, and hoped she might some day quarrel with you. Then he would have tried to take advantage of
188 He Was Not Like a Sane Man.
her anger to win her from you. He had done such a thing before."
"Scoundrel !" muttered Leo, his eyes blazing. "Go on !"
"I never had anything to tell him, and he was a good deal discouraged. But this morning he came to me and forced me to put two papers in your wallet, and then take it to your wife, telling her I had found it in the road."
"What was in the papers?'" he asked quickly.
"I do not know. All I can tell you is that they knew
"They ! You just now spoke of Chauncey Doite. Who are they?"
"A lady I never saw before was with him." "Ah! what is she like?"
"Very dark. Beautiful, but with a temper like a tigress. Oh ! her black eyes seemed to scorch my very soul!"
"Madeline Delmar!" he cried in agony. "Oh, I begin to see it now! Go on."
"She seemed to know that Mrs. Field would go away, and that she would write a note to you." "Yes, yes."
"I was to steal the note and give it to the strange lady. But after Mrs. Field had gone, the lady came into the house and took the papers out of the wallet where Mrs. Field had put them, and then changed the note Mrs. Field had written for this one."
"And she took the other note?'" he demanded.
"Yes. She took it when she went away."
"You do not know what was in the other note?" he queried eagerly.
"No, sir."
"Nor what the papers were about ?" he asked again.
"I know nothing more than I tell you, excepting that Mr. Chauncey followed Mrs. Field when she left the cottage."
He Was Not Like a Sane Man. 189
"How! what—did Mrs. Field seem much distressed ?" he asked falteringly.
"She looked as if death would be welcome to her," the girl answered. "I never in my life saw such woe and misery depicted in the human countenance."
Leo asked a dozen more questions, but it was soon evident that she knew nothing more of consequence to tell him, until in desperation he demanded :
"Do you know where the woman is?"
"Yes, sir. She is waiting in the little hotel near Densb•urg village."
"How do you know she is waiting there?" he demanded.
"I was to go there and tell her what happened after you returned home."
"Ah !" he hissed, "I will do your errand for you."
Almost as he spoke he darted from the house, bent on seeing Madeline Delmar. It was all terribly plain to him now.
He did not know the details of the plot which had wrecked the happiness of his darling; but at least he was able to see what part Madeline had played, and what pact Chauncey hoped to play.
"Heaven help me to thwart them!" he cried as he hurried from the house.
He seemed to have all his senses about him now. To all appearances he was cold and calm; "although within him there was a raging volcano.
Straight he went to the house of Mr. Doite and ordered the horses he was to have driven. Then he went in and asked for Mr. Doite, who asked anxiously :
"What is amiss, Leo? Tell me what has happened !"
"Nothing concerning you, sir," Leo answered. "My poor wife has been made the innocent victim of a hellish plot by your nephew, Chauncey. May I use your horses to , ? ursue him?"
Igo He Was Not Like a Sane Man.
"Has she eloped with him ?" cried the horrified gentleman.
"Heaven forbid ! I fear he will endeavor to entrap her and take her his prisoner. The horses!"
"Take them ! Kill them if you will ! And Heaven help him! Kill him, too, if you find he has done you wrong."
Leo did not stop for any more words, but ran out and helped put the horses to the carriage.
Then he leaped in and drove with the speed of the wind to the little hotel.
He tossed the reins to the hostler and sprung out. "There is a dark, beautiful woman here from New
York; her name is Miss Delmar. Take me to her,"
he said to the landlord.
The landlord knew him and bowed` low.
It was well to be on good terms with the man who was soon to be a partner in the great manufacturing firm.
"I think she is in the parlor," he said. "She is expecting some one, I believe. I will show you the way.
"You need not," Leo said curtly. "I know the way. She is expecting a message I bring."
He did not stop for the formality of knocking at the door of the parlor, but threw the door open and strode in, his face set and stern.
Some one started up at his entrance, and in a moment he found himself face to face with Madeline—Brainerd.
She started back at the sight of him, and looked inquiringly at the door, as if wondering who else was coming.
"I bring the girl's message," he said grimly.
In an instant Madeline was herself. A sneer curled
her thin lips, and she said :
"So you have discovered, eh?"
He Was Not Like a Sane Man. 191
"Yes, I know the infamous part you have played," he answered.
A lurid flame seemed to shoot from the black eyes of Madeline.
"My part infamous !" she cried, with a bitter laugh. "I would have supposed it was your part that was in-famous. I did but put the truth in the sweet creature's way. I only let her know that her child was nameless. Ha, ha!"
Leo writhed with shame and anger. And yet what she said was mainly true.
He had been guilty of a worse infamy than hers.
"It is idle to bandy words," he said, with forced calmness. "I wronged her because it seemed the only way to protect her from. you. But I love her and will not have her suffer more than she must. Where is she ?"
"No doubt," said Madeline tauntingly, "you would like to know."
"I shall know," he said, his eyes gleaming furiously. "Not from me," she replied, her eyes meeting his without flinching.
"Yes, from you, if you know," he retorted, stepping toward her menacingly.
She drew back and her face paled, but the sneer did not leave her lip.
"Would you use force to compel me to tell you?" she demanded ironically.
He stepped nearer and nearer until she could get no farther from him, when he put his hands out and held her by the shoulders.
"You shall tell me," he hissed. "Act like a human creature, and I will treat you as one. Act like a venomous serpent, and as a venomous serpent I will treat you. Act like a tigress and I will so treat you. Yes, Madeline Delmar	
"Brainerd." she interposed moc'n,41 ,
192 He Was Not Like a Sane Man.
"I will strangle you as I would a serpent, if you do not tell me what has become of her."
His hands were actually on her white throat as he spoke.
She looked into his eyes and believed he would do as he said. A strangled cry broke from her lips.
"You might kill me," she said furiously, "but you would never get the information from me, because I do not know where she is. Chauncey Doite did not trust me with the place of concealment."
She laughed hideously as she spoke, and Leo threw her from him. His heart sickened with dread as he thought of all her words implied.
It was certain that Chauncey Doite intended to abduct Trixie and hide her in some secure place.
"Curse him !" he hissed between his shut teeth, "I will find him. I will save her from him."
"Perhaps you will be too late," she sneered. "But. if not, Leo, can you not comprehend that she will have nothing to do with you ?"
"I do not hope for that," he said, with a groan of shame and anguish.
She laughed exultantly.
"Ah! I swore I would have my revenge, and I have it, now. I found her happy in her ignorance of the truth, and I enlightened her. Yes, I watched her while she read the paper which contained the account of your marriage to me, and the certificate of marriage. I watched her and gloated over her agony. I laid the plot by which she will become the prey of Chauncey Doite, a man without scruple when he believes he is safe. Ah ! Leo, much better for you would it have been had you been true to me."
A deep groan of utter misery was his only response
to her cruel words. He turned to go ; but as he did so
his eye caught sight of a folded piece of paper, which
he instantly divined to be the real note left by Trixie.
He did not know what its nurnort might be ;_he
—wet
I Cannot Do the Thing He Asks. 193
could not hope for anything that would make his heart lighter ; but at least he would know her own words.
With the swiftness of thought he leaped forward and snatched the paper from its place in Madeline's girdle.
She screamed fiercely when she saw what he had done ; and then, seeing that it was beyond recovery, laughed mockingly :
"Read it, infatuated fool ! It will do you little good."


CHAPTER XXXII.
At the sight of Chauncey Doite standing in the doorway of her room, Trixie uttered a cry of terror.
An evil smile played upon his lip as he took a step forward into the room, and closed the door behind him.
"You hardly expected to see me, I fancy," he said in his smoothest tones.
"No," she answered ; "and I beseech you as a gentleman to leave me. Oh! Mr. Doite, I am too miser-able already. Have mercy on me, and do not offend my ears by a word that you would not have said be-fore my	"
Alas! she could not say her husband any longer.
"Your what?" he inquired suavely. "Do you mean Leo Brainerd, and do you hesitate for a name to apply to him? Then permit me to do so for you. He was a black-hearted scoundrel."
"No, no ! Oh! I do not know what to think. Will you not leave me, Mr. Doite ?"
"I will do almost anything you wish," he said ; "but before I obey you, I beg that you will hear me out."
"Alas! T have no heart to hear anything," she an-
194 I Cannot Do the Thing He Asks.
swered. "Wait until some other time and I will listen to you."
"But you should know this now," he persisted. "I know that you are not the wife of Leo Brainerd; you know that I have loved you since the first time I saw you."
"In mercy, in honor, do not say such a thing to me. What have I done that you should insult me ?"
"Insult you!" he repeated. "Why, you seem to for-get that you are not a wife."
"And if I could forget, is it the manly part to re-mind me of it ?" she asked, more sadly than bitterly. He shrugged his shoulders.
"I must tiemind you in order to make you heed my words," he said. "Leo Brainerd betrayed and deceived you. I wish to play a more honorable part. I ask you to be my wife."
She shuddered at the bare thought.
"It cannot be," she said.
"Think of your child," he said. "I will give it my name, and it shall grow up ignorant of the taint of shame in its blood. Bethink you, Trixie, that it is a girl! Remember that it is not a boy, who can live don n such a stigma, but a girl, who will live to sink under the shame and misery you have brought upon her."
"Oh, that at least is not true !" cried poor Trixie. "I was as innocent of wrong as she is."
"But," he cried quickly, "if you refuse my offer now, it is the same thing as if you were guilty. I offer her, through you, a spotless name."
Trixie clasped her hands and cast her eyes heaven-ward. Chauncey Doite believed she was about to yield to his persuasions. But, no, it was not so.
"It cannot be," she said at last. "I do not see through it. all, but this I know: That in the sight of Heaven I am the wife of Leo Brainerd, and while he lives I can be united to no other.
I Cannot Do the Thing He Asks. 195
Chauncey stamped his foot in his impatience.
"That is sheer folly," he cried. "I will not permit you to cast me aside in such a way. You must and shall wed me."
"I will not," she retorted, her little head thrown proudly up.
"You are in my power," he said grimly.
"I do not care," she retorted, "you cannot persuade or force me to wed you."
"Have a care !" he cried, his black eyes glowing v, raflifully. "I have danced attendance on you for a year. and I shall hold myself entitled to use any means to bring you to terms."
She trembled at the menace in his tone, but she would not yield a point.
"You are entitled to nothing but my contempt," she said. "You tried to dishonor me with your base love, and I scorned you then as I scorn you now."
He laughed harshly.
"Ah, well !" he said, "if you prefer war, then you shall have it. Know then that I would not have made you my wife, nor do I intend to do so. You are my prisoner here, and you cannot escape. When you are willing to act like a reasonable creature I will treat you as well as Leo Brainerd did. He dispensed with legal formalities, and so will I."
He looked so coldly, cruelly wicked as he spoke that Trixie's heart sunk within her.
But she had the courage of despair, and would not show the terror she felt.
"Leave me !" she said with a queenly gesture. He laughed, but did not move.
She felt his eyes fixed upon her, and she knew that they were burning with admiration ;' but she did not look up, because she felt a sickening sense of fear creeping over her, and she did not wish him to suspect it.
196 I Cannot Do the Thing He Asks.
is no one in the world half so beautiful. Come ! be reasonable. Give me just a little love, and I will do all I can to make you happy. I will take you abroad, and your child shall be educated with the best. You shall have money, and all money can buy. You must give Leo up now. You could not bring yourself to go back to him. I know that. Will you come ?"
"Why do you insult me by asking, when you know full well that my answer must be no. Do you think my misery makes me less proud? No, no, no!"
"But I won't take no for an answer," he said.
"You must," she replied, her heart beating rapidly.
"You forget that you are my prisoner, and helpless," he said.
"I have but one answer," she said, "and that you have."
There was a silence for a brief space, and she knew he was devouring her with his eyes. She looked up *nd faced him,.
He smiled.
"T'rixie," he said, "I am going to press those sweet lips of yours with mine. Ah, do not draw back and think to frighten me with words. Why, I have looked at those ripe, red lips of yours until I have almost gone wild with longing. I have sworn a hundred times that the day should come when they would be mine to kiss when I would."
"No, no !" she gasped, lifting her little hands to her face as if to protect her lips from him.
"And now," he went on, drawing nearer to her by almost imperceptible degrees, "the time has come as I Swore it should. I can kiss you, and I can make you mine. You foolishly think I am not in earnest. Ah! I will show you by culling the sweets of your lips that I mean all I say."
He leaped toward her as he spoke, his arms out-wretched to catch her.
I Cannot Do the Thing He zisKs. 197 '
She uttered a wild cry of terror, and seemed to look for some means of escape.
He fully expected her to struggle and try to escape him, and he was prepared to have her do so.
In truth, for one moment it was the bitterest, most terrible anguish she had ever known ; then inspiration came to her.
She leaned over the bed, caught up the sleeping babe and hugged it to her breast, crying out with angelic dignity :
"It is not the wife nor the outcast you are insulting, but the mother."
A dreadful oath fell from his lips, and he recoiled from her.
He did not understand, himself, why the sight of that infant in its mother's arms should deter him. from his purpose; but it did.
And Trixie stood there like an outraged queen, her little head held back, her glorious eyes shining like stars.
Defeated in so simple a manner, Chauncey stood for a moment in indecision, then turned away and left the room.
Trixie sunk on her knees and gave thanks to Heaven for her escape, for she knew that but for babe she would have been forced to endure the touch of his lips. - What could a weak woman do in defense of her-self?
But, oh, what was to be the end of this terrible ad-venture? She knew she was the victim of a carefully laid plot, and she could not doubt that Chauncey Doite was capable of the worst actions.
Alas! she was not to remain long in doubt of what was to follow his first attempted infamy.
He had gone from her furious as a wild beast balked of its prey, and had begun to pace the hall below, when all at once he uttered a little cry of exultation, and ran to the door of one of the rooms.
198 I Cannot Do the Thing He Asks.
The man, whose face had seemed so forbidding to Trixie, was in there with the woman who had called herself Mrs. Jones.
"Come, Bill ! come, Martha !" he cried. "I have something for you to do. Come up to my obstinate little beauty."
They followed him without demur, nothing but curiosity depicted on their faces. He took them to Trixie's room, and unceremoniously opened the door.
"Trixie," he said to the startled girl, "I have had an inspiration just about equal to that of yours in making a shield of your baby."
She looked at his smiling face with terrified expectation, but did not speak.
"I am going to take your baby away from you," he went on, "and you shall have it again only when you are reasonable."
The piteous cry of terror that broke from her lips, as he said these cruel words, might have touched a heart of stone, but it did not move him from his purpose—indeed, the very agony she displayed only made him more determined to rule her, with her helpless babe as a weapon.
"Take the child from her," he said to his two tools.
Trixie sunk on her knees in beseeching, terror in her sweet eyes, and her lips pouring forth entreaty that might have won compassion from any but such hardened wretches.
"Oh, do not take my darling from me!" she wailed. "Let us die together, and I will bless you. I cannot do the thing he asks, not even for her dear sake. Oh, Heaven, is there no help for me? No, no, no ! Do not take her. You will kill me, you will drive me mad ! Oh, my darling—my little one! No, no! Oh, give her back to me—give her back !"
They had ruthlessly torn her from her mother's arms, and despite the piteous wails of the infant were
carrying her away. At least the woman was carrying the hapless child while the man held the almost crazed mother.
"Will you do my bidding?" demanded Chauncey with demonaic cruelty.
"No, no," panted Trixie, "I will place myself and my poor babe in the hands of Heaven ! No, I will not yield."
"Your child shall have no food until you yield," he said savagely.
"Oh, mercy—mercy !" she wailed.
"Take the child away !" he ordered.
Leo had read the note which Trixie had really writ-ten for him to read, and although he was unutterably saddened by the pitiful words, yet strangely enough, he was calmed by them.
He knew she was lost to him forever, but the knowledge that she loved him as her sweet letter told him acted like balm to his spirit.
"I have cruelly wronged her," he said to himself, as he drove away from the hotel, "and I am punished. She will forgive me, but she will ever hold me apart from her life. I have lost her and I have lost my child, and yet it is so much better than I was wicked enough to believe when I read that first letter. Now I' have only to deliver her from him."
He had hastily made his plans for finding Chauncey, and now he urged his noble horses on until they fairly flew over the ground.
It was not long ere he had drawn up in front of a stylish residence on the main street of Hardenville. It was where Chauncey Doite lived.
20o	You May Go Free This Time.
Leo alighted from the carriage, gave the horses into the care of a boy, who came running out of the stable, and went to the front door.
To the servant who came he said that he wished to
see Mr. Doite, or if he were not in, then his valet. The valet came to him in the reception-room.
Leo had seen him often, and had the same repug-
nance for him that he had for his master.
He spoke without preface.
"Do you know where your master is ?" he asked. "No, sir," was the prompt reply.
Leo paused a moment to make his words more impressive, then said :
"Your master has abducted a woman—my wife. I wish to know where he has taken her."
The man stared at him in such a way as to satisfy Leo that he knew nothing of the affair.
"I know nothing about it," the valet said.
"You are not telling the truth," Leo said sternly. "Now listen to me! You can tell me if you will what place your master would be likely to take a woman he had abducted. If you_ will tell me I will reward you liberally. If you will not tell me, I will have you arrested. You know that' I can do it. Take your choice."
The man looked at the stern, determined face of Leo and hesitated. After reflecting for a while, he said :
"How much will you give?" .
"Name your own price," said Leo quickly.
"Two hundred and fifty dollars," was the response. "Give me that sum, and I will tell you where he has undoubtedly taken her."
Leo took a great roll of bills from his pocket and paid ,the man the sum he had named. "Now tell me," he said.
You May Go Free This Tim.	2o1
"I will do better," said the valet, "I will show you the way. I am tired of his service, and shall leave it."
"Come !" said Leo sharply, "we have no time to lose."
"Have you a revolver with you?" the valet asked. "No; I never carry one."
"I will bring you one. You are going to a dangerous place. A pistol will be a good thing to have with you."
When he came down and joined Leo at the carriage, he handed him a revolver, which Leo placed in his pocket. Then the valet got in beside Leo, and the horses were off like the wind.
More than once Leo blessed Mr. Doite for his noble horses. They flew over the soft country roads at a terrific rate of speed. It was a long way from Hardenville, and Leo realized that he would never have been able to find the way alone.
"There is the house," said the valet at length. "Drive to the back of the house and leave me here. I have no desire to have my brains blown out. Get your revolver "ready. You will need it."
Leo did not hesitate to follow .the advise of the man, and approached the house at the back, his revolver in his hand, ready for use.
He had no intention of knocking for admission, for he (lid not doubt that he had been brought to the very place where Trixie was enduring captivity.
Had he known what more she was enduring at that moment he would not have had the patience to cautiously` open the door by prying it.
He did work patiently, however, and was presently rewarded by seeing the door open.
He glided inside of the house and listened.
For a moment there was no sound that he could catch ; then he heard cries in a voice he could not
202	You May Go Free This Time.
mistake, and the next moment he was flying up the stairs.
The moans and cries of his darling, as she begged for mercy from her cruel captors, almost drove him out of his senses.
He did not know what they might be doing to her.
And they were far too much engaged with her to take note of the noise on the stairs until Leo had rushed past the woman who held Beatrice in her arms.
Chauncey was the first to be aware of his presence; but he had hardly time to utter a cry of rage and hate, when Leo had caught him in his stalwart arms and had thrown him like a sack of flour against the opposite wall of the room.
"Leo ! oh, Leo !" Trixie cried in a tone of unutterable joy.
The ruffian by her side loosed his hold of her, and drew a revolver from his pocket and attempted to fire on Leo.
But our hero was quicker than he, for with one leap he was by his side, and in the next moment he had" felled him senseless to the earth with a terrible blow with the butt-end of the revolver.
"Beatrice! my baby !" cried Trixie, and sped into the hall in pursuit of the woman who had stolen her.
Beatrice was lying on the floor, where the frightened woman had placed her.
Trixie caught her up and hugged her fl-antically to her breast.
It seemed to her that she had not known how dear the little helpless creature was to her until she was robbed of it.
When she returned to the room, she saw Leo standing over Chauncey Doite, who still lay prone on the floor, his face ghastly white.
"I do not know," Leo was saying sternly, "why I do not take your miserable life. It would be better for the world if you were out of it."
"How very virtuous !" sneered Chauncey. "You never betrayed a trusting girl, did you ?"
Leo turned whiter than Chauncey at this terrible question. He took a step back and answered hoarsely :
"Yes, I did; but Heaven knows that I meant her no wrong."
"Let us go, Leo," he heard the gentle voice of Trixie say.
He did not look at her; but addressed himself to Chauncey Doite.
"You may go free this time; but I most solemnly warn you that if you molest this lady again I will hold your life of no more value than that of a dog."
With these words he turned and led Trixie from the room, though he did not venture to look at her, or to address her. Oh! how wretched he felt in the presence of his victim.
And she did not speak to him, but walked sadly by his side to the carriage.
"What can you do, now ?" he asked the valet.
"I can walk to the nearest station. It is not far away."
Leo assisted Trixie into the carriage, and she sat there hushing Beatrice while he drove away in perfect silence.
"Where shall I take you ?" he asked at last in a humble tone.
"I wish to go to New York," she answered in a choking voice.
He did not gainsay her, or venture a word in excuse of what he had done. It seemed to him now, that he was too base to even touch her garment.
He remembered passing a station on his way to the house, and thither he drove Trixie and her child—his child no more.
CHAPTER XXXIV.
SATAN REJOICED OVER OUR VOWS.
No word had passed between Trixie and Leo on their way to the station where she would leave him—; leave him forever.
He had hoped that she would speak ; but she did not, because there was nothing she could say.
If in honor she could have gone back to the little cottage with him, how gladly she would have done so!
A man was loitering about the station.
Leo called him and asked him to hold the horses while he got out with—he was going to say his wife and child, but he checked himself with a suppressed groan and substituted the words, "lady and child" in-stead.
She touched his hand in alighting from the carriage, and it thrilled her as it had done in the times before they were wedded—before he had deceived her so cruelly.
"Where shall I get tickets for?'" he asked.
"I need but one ticket," she answered in a low tone. "I will get that myself."
"T'rixie," he said, his voice quivering with an emotion he could not hide. "Is there nothing I can do to atone ?"
"Why ask me?" she queried drearily. "Is there any reparation to be made when a man who is wedded wrongs a woman? Oh, Leo !"
He hung his head, not so much with shame of what he had done as with anguish for the misery he had caused her pure heart.
"Trixie," he answered huskily, "I know there is no reparati ; but, oh ! if you could but know how it all came to pass!"
Satan Rejoiced Over Our V ows. 205
"What use for me to know that ?" she said sadly, a choking sob in her sweet voice. "Is it not enough for me that my child is nameless ?"
"I was tricked, deceived, played upon," he pleaded. "Is it so ?" she asked, her great eyes looking up into his agonized face for the first time.
"Yes," he answered eagerly, "I hated her, and would have scorned her love if it had been offered me, but they told me that my father's name was at stake, and that I must wed her to save it from obloquy. I hated her, and so they tricked me into the marriage."
She shook her head. She did not feel bitter toward him, but her agony was not lessened by his words.
"You were tricked and deceived by one you hated," she said, in a low, sad tone. "I was tricked and deceived by one I loved with all the purity and earnestness of my being. You blame her whom you hated. Can you excuse yourself ?"
"I do not excuse myself, Trixie," he said miserably. "I was base and wicked. But you were in trouble ; I feared for your safety if you were not protected from her, and so I wedded you."
"Ruined me !" she interposed.
"Yes, I ruined you," he said ; "but, Trixie, she has never been aught to me. She is my wife in name only. Before Heaven you are my only wife!"
"Heaven !" she murmured mournfully. "Do you think Heaven recognizes such a tie as held you and me together? Alas! no. Satan was rejoiced when our vows were spoken. Oh, Leo ! if you could not think of me, who would have died for you, you might at least have had some thought for this little one, who, all innocent as she is, must yet go through the world with the mark of shame on her pure brow."
"In mercy do not say these things to me, Trixie ! My punishment is great enough without your words. Ah ! Tr ire ! I believed Heaven had condoned my crime when I was permitted to live through the fire on the
206 Satan Rejoiced Over Our Vows.
steamboat. I prayed then that I might die if my con-duct toward you was wrong. I lived, and I believed I was forgiven."
"I do not understand it," Trixie said. "All I can certainly know is that you and I must part. I do not go from you in anger or bitterness, Leo; for I love you now too well for that; but you must not try to find me, or I may learn to hate you."
"You will not let me provide you with money, Trixie ?" he pleaded.
"Not one cent, Leo," she replied firmly.
"But, Trixie," he cried, "what will you do ?"
"Do you forget that I was a working girl when you met me ?" she asked sadly.
"But you have little Beatrice, now," he urged. "You cannot do as you did before, and surely you will not risk having her starve."
"Leo," Trixie said, and her great, mournful eyes were fixed on him with an expression he never forgot, "she shall not starve. I know a way to prevent that. No harm shall come to either of us."
"You frighten me, Trixie," he said. "What do you mean ?"
"It does not matter," she answered. "It is enough that what I say is so."
It seemed to him that his agony was more than he could bear; but he felt that he could say nothing of his suffering when hers was so much greater.
"Oh, Trixie !" he cried, "it seems as if this should not be. We love each other, and we have been so happy together. There is little Beatrice to be a bond between us. And yet you go from me, and I, who would die for you, must see you go away into the world where every danger threatens you."
"There is no other way, Leo."
"Trixie, she is my child as well as yours. Why may I not do something for her if not for you?" "Leo" . ri Trixie solemnly, "she-is not	,hill
Satan Rejeiced Over Our Vows.	207
at all. She is mine, and mine alone, and I shall love her the more dearly that I have no name to give her."
Leo looked into the sweet, sad face and saw that there could be no such thing as moving her from her determination.
"May I kiss little Beatrice?" he asked humbly.
A sob choked Trixie's utterance, and great tears welled up into her eyes. She bent her head in assent, and he stooped over the little one that was to be his no more, and pressed a kiss upon her soft cheek.
"Good-by, Trixie !" he said.
"Good-by, Leo !" but she did not offer him her hand.
He turned away, and it seemed to her that she could catch a sob. She stepped toward him with out-stretched hand. He did not know it, and went slowly and heavily toward where the horses stood.
He gave the man a coin for holding the horses, and then sat there listlessly. He could not go away from her. It must be she who left him.
"If there were only some way out of this misery!" he murmured.
Trixie had gone into the station and had asked for a ticket to New York.
"I cannot sell a ticket through," he said. "This is only a branch road without connections. I can sell you a ticket to Mendon, and you may change cars there for New York."
She paid for the ticket, and was appalled to find that she had scarcely a cent left. Would she go on notwithstanding? Would she trust to finding some-thing for her hands to do to keep her baby and herself alive?
Yes, she would not go to Leo, for that would be asking the wages of sin. It was possible for her to starve, it was not possible for her to do the other.
The train came and took her away, and Leo could not see that she held little Beatrice up at the window
208 Satan Rejoiced Over Our Vows.
for him to look at, while her own tear-dimmed eyes were looking their last upon him.
But so it was. He sat in the carriage and watched the train whirl her away from him, and then he turned with the heaviest heart that had ever dwelt in the breast of man.
"I have lost all I care to live for. Why should I live, then ?" he cried.
He put the whip to the mettlesome horses, and they carried him back to Hardenville. He went straight to Mr. Doite's house, where the horses were put in the stable and cared for.
Mr. Doite, they told him, was in the library, and there Leo sought him. Leo was a very great favorite with the wealthy manufacturer, who saw in a moment that something terrible had happened.
"Tell me the worst at once," he said. "Is Chauncey as much to blame as we thought?'"
"He had abducted her, and would have done her violence but for my timely arrival. She is safe from him now."
"Scoundrel !" cried Mr. Doite. "It is the last time. I shall cut him off from, everything that would have come from me. He shall never set foot in my house again. Where is your wife now, Leo ?"
"Mr. Doite," said Leo, "there is something I must tell you. Have you the time to listen ?"
"Surely. Speak freely."
"You know we have talked of my taking a share in your business," said Leo.
"Yes ; and now that Chauncey is finally disposed of so far as I am concerned, you must have a larger share even than was at first contemplated."
"I can take no share at all, Mr. Doite," was the sorrowful answer; "I am going away from here." Mr. Dolt,- ?f-,oked sharply at him.
:~aan Rejoiced Over Our Vows.
"What does this mean ?" he asked quickly.
Leo rose to his feet and began to pace the floor. He walked up and down many times before he could find words with which to begin.
He was going to tell Mr. Doite everything.
The latter watched him with troubled face. He had learned not alone to respect Leo, but to love him, and so he watched him, in troubled silence until he was ready to speak.
"You must know," said Leo abruptly, "that I am one of the most contemptible wretches that ever lived."
"Leo, you are mad! I do not believe it. Why do you so accuse yourself ?'"
"I tell you only the truth. You shall judge for yourself."
Then he told Mr. Doite everything as well as he could recall it at the time, and Mr. Doite listened in doubt, amazement, pity and sorrow until Leo was through.
Occasionally he interrupted to ask some question in a low tone, but otherwise he did not speak until all the sad story was told. Then he rose to his feet and looked at Leo.
Leo went over to where his hat lay and took it in his hand. He felt that Mr. Doite must despise him, but he had felt that he must tell everything in order that Trixie might not be unjustly blamed.
He ' started toward the door without looking around. "Leo, my poor, unhappy boy !" said Mr. Doite, in a low tone.
Leo turned and stared at him.
He had not expected pity or sympathy. The most he had hoped for was that he would not be driven out of the house with scorn and contempt.
"Oh, how wicked you have been !" Mr. Doite said sorrowfully ; "and yet I am sorry for you, Leo." "I am not worthy of your pity, sir." Leo said "She
210 Satan Rejoiced Over Our Vd,-vs.
was the purest and best of women, and I have dishonored her. I should be stoned to death."
Mr. Doite shook his head.
"I will not say a word in excuse of what you have done, Leo," he said; "but I cannot desert you. Wrong as you have been you are still dear to me. No, I will not desert you."
"But I must go from you," Leo said. "Even if you were willing that I should go on as I have been doing, I could npt bear it. I must go away from here. Yes, I must hunt her out, and watch her to see that no harm conies to her, or the little one."
"Sit down, Leo," said Mr. Doite. "A thought struck me while you were talking. We must not be hasty. Yes, we will find Trixie, and she shall take from me what she could not from, you. But that is not all. Have you no suspicions?"
"Suspicions! I do not understand you. Not suspicions of Trixie. You cannot mean that ?"
"No, no! I mean do you not suspect that woman, Madeline, of any wrong?"
"Of every wrong. She is a fiend on earth."
"I do not mean in that way. There was a great deal of trickery and treachery in that marriage of yours to her. Think of it."
"I have thought of it many times ; but see no loop-hole there. Mr. Glenharn is a well-known clergy-man."
"It may be so," replied Mr. Doite ; "but somewhere, somehow there is a wrong done. It is fair that you should suffer, for you have done grievous wrong; buy it is not fair, nor just, that she should suffer, and while you live you must think only of how you can give her child the name that is hers by every right, but that of the law."
"I cannot hope for much," said Leo sadly ; "but at least it will be doing something toward righting what I have done."
The Plain Gold Band.	211
"That is right, Leo. You shall use my money as if it were your own; and rely on it, Leo, Heaven will not suffer that sweet angel to be wronged."
CHAPTER XXXV. THE PLAIN GOLD BAND.
On the cars Trixie, as soon as her stifling grief would permit her, made inquiries as to the sort of place Mendon was.
She learned that it was a small manufacturing town, and that there was always a demand for girls to work in the factory.
"It is the place Heaven has directed me to," she said to herself. "I will go there and find work. Perhaps I can earn enough for Beatrice and myself. Besides, I shall be better hidden there than elsewhere."
It was night when she reached the place ; but she was directed to a small hotel, where she went with her few belongings.
She noticed a pleasant-faced girl in the back yard, which her window overlooked ; and when Beatrice was asleep for the night, she stole down and sought the girl.
"I am a stranger here," she said, in her sweet, win-some way; "will you answer some questions for me?"
The girl looked at the sad, beautiful face, noted the wedding-ring on Trixie's finger, remembered the baby, and guessed that poor little Trixie was a widow.
"I will answer as well as I can," she said.
"I must work," Trixie said, "and I thought you might tell me about the factory here."
"You work !" cried the girl thoughtlessly, as she looked at the soft, white hands which the year of luxury had given Trixie. "Have you no one to take care of you?"
212	The Plain Gold Band.
"No, I have lost my husband," Trixie answered in a low tone.
For the sake of little Beatrice, she must pretend that she was a widow.
"I am sorry," the girl cried. "Forgive my thought-less tongue. But how could you work, with such dainty little hands ?"
Trixie smiled sadly. She recalled the time when she had never known any other life.
"Oh, I can work well enough. I am strong, and well. Besides, I must work, for baby's sake. Is there any chance for me, do you think, at the factory?'"
"Yes, more girls are needed, but	"
She shook her head and stopped, as if to check her-self ,from saying what she had not intended to. "But what ?" queriedmTrixie.
"Nothing. It does not matter. Yes, if you Must work, there is room for you, I know. I work there myself."
"And would you help me to get a place there?" asked Trixie eagerly.
"You won't need any help," the girl said. "They will take you at once. But I will go with you. What will you do with the baby?"
"I must find some good woman who will take care of it while I am gone. Do you know any one who will take me and baby for boarders ?"
The girl reflected for a moment, and cried out :
"Why of course! the very one. Aunty Cole. She is the dearest body you ever saw—aunty to everybody in trouble, and so fond of babies that she borrows. them of the neighbors to take care of. I will ask her to come see you if you like."
It seemed too good to be true, and it was to Trixie as if a sunbeam had broken its way through the dark clouds tl; 'F hung so low over her wrecked life.
The Plain Gold Band.	213
The girl, whose name was Jenny Dent, was so eager to help the pretty little widow who had appealed to her, that it was not long before she returned with old Mrs. Cole, or Aunty Cole, as everybody called her. And in a short time Trixie had made an arrangement with her by which she was to take a tiny room the old lady had to spare, while the good soul was only too rejoiced at the thought of having little Bea-trice to consent to take anything extra for her care.
So Trixie went there that night, and Jenny agreed to call for her in the morning with a view to taking her to the factory.
That night Trixie lay clown on her humble cot feeling as if Heaven had pointed out the way for her, since she had found such good friends so quickly.
When morning dawned Trixie was awake, and soon had little Beatrice washed and dressed, very much to the dissatisfaction of Aunty Cole, who declared such duties were hers.
In her anxiety to be ready on time, Trixie was out by the gate of the cottage looking up the road for Jenny.
It was a glorious morning, when no one should have been unhappy, but in spite of everything Trixie could not look up to Heaven with her usual sunny smile of happiness. She did not think there was to be any more for her.
Suddenly she heard a clatter of hoofs, and when she looked up she saw a pair of riders coming toward
_
her.
One led the other by some distance, and as they came nearer, Trixie could see that the first rider was a girl not over ten, while the other was a gentleman, who probably was her father.
The little girl had evidently been racing with her companion, whoever he was, and was in great glee over beating him.
214	The Plain Gold Band.
She was looking back and laughing, when suddenly her pony took fright at a piece of white paper on the road and shied.
If she had been looking in front of her no harm would have come of the sudden movement of the pony; but as she was looking back and was unprepared for the leap, she was thrown from the saddle, her foot remaining in the stirrup.
Frightened by the drapery of her skirt, the pony started off on a mad run, dragging the poor child over the rough road.
Trixie remembered afterward seeing the gentleman throw up his hands in horror and grief. At the time she was conscious only of taking a swift determination to save the child.
Perhaps if she had had time to reflect on her own danger she might not have done it; but she neither reflected nor waited.
She leaped out into the road and caught the frightened animal by the bridle. She caught a firm hold, but he was strong and terror stricken, and she was light of weight and unskilled in such emergencies.
He tried to fling her hand off, and, when he could not, he reared and threw her to the earth. But Trixie was brave if not strong, and she clung to the bridle, utterly regardless of her own peril.
She would have clung to the bitter end, whatever it might have been ; but just when her senses were leaving her, she felt herself caught about the waist and lifted up.
"Heaven be thanked !" she heard a voice say ; "you have saved my sister's life."
She raised her eyes and looked into the face of a noble-looking young man, who, she now saw, must have been the little girl's companion.
e ?" she asked, extricating herself from
The Plain Gold Band.	215
his supporting arms and flushing under his earnest, admiring gaze.
He pointed to the side of the road, and there Trixie saw the child, supported in the arms of Aunty Cole, who had hastened out when she saw the runaway pass the cottage.
"You were very brave," he said gravely, his eyes
dwelling on her face in a way that troubled her.
"I deserve no great credit," she answered nervously.
"I hardly knew what I was doing."
As she spoke she ran quickly over to the little girl; who was evidently still suffering more from fright than from any injury she had sustained.
But she rose up at Trixie's approach and threw her arms about her neck, crying:
"Oh, how good you are! I know I should have been killed by Vixen if you had not saved me. Where is Vixen, Cecil ?"
"Gone home to alarm mother, I fancy. Suppose you get on Selim and let me lead him. You are not afraid to, are you?"
"Of course I'm not afraid. I would ride Vixen if she were here. Put me up."
He lifted her in his arms and placed her on the saddle.
She whispered something in his ear as he did so, and he nodded his head.
He turned to Trixie and, with a low bow, said:
"I must ask your pardon, but it is my misfortune
not to have met you before, so that I do not know to
whom we are indebted for this little madcap's life." "You make too much of what I did," answered
Trixie in embarrassment.
"But you will tell us your name, won't you ?" cried the child.
Trixie smiled a little sadly at the impetuous little thing.
216 '	The Plain Gold Band.
What was the use in telling them? And yet), why not?
"My name is Harlowe—Trixie Harlowe."
"And, Miss Harlowe," cried the gentleman, "won't you, add to our obligations by telling us where you live? My mother will wish to call."
Trixie shook her head sadly, and half-turned away. Aunty Cole, who saw no cause for concealment, ex-claimed :
"Bless you, Mr. Sterling, she isn't Miss Harlowe at all, but Mrs., poor thing."
Cecil Sterling cast a swift glance at the little hand that hung by Trixie's side, and for the first time noted the plain gold band that encircled the third finger.
His face paled a trifle at this sign of wifehood, and his glance sought that of the old woman, who was trying to let him know, by motions of her lips, that, Trixie was a widow.
He understood at once, and a pleased expression flashed into his eyes. He nodded his head to show that he comprehended, and said once more to Trixie :
"You are a stranger here, I fancy. Won't you tell me where you are stopping? You will like my mother."
"Indeed you will," cried the little girl ; "and she will like you, too, because you saved me to worry her a lot yet."
Trixie smiled, and then turned to Mr. Sterling.
"I am afraid you do not understand," she said in a low tone. "I live in this little cottage. I am very poor. Your thanks are enough. Do not make nie receive any more. Good morning! I must be off."
She almost fled away lest she should have to hear protests from his lips, and it wearied her to have to talk to him, bright and handsome though he was.
She had seen Jenny coming toward her, and she hastened to meet her.
More Villains than Brave Men.	217
"Looks like Mr. Sterling and Daisy. Was it?" "I believe so," was Trixie's response, and then asked
some question about the factory, thus turning Jenny's
attention from the young gentleman and his sister.
The factory hands were streaming into the yard gates when Trixie and Jenny arrived, and many a curious glance was cast at the former.
It was not only that she was a stranger, but that she was so strangely beautiful and so sad-looking.
"I hope Mr. Cumberland has come," said Jenny; "but if he hasn't we'll have to go and apply to Mr. Gavin."
"Who is Mr. Gavin ?" asked Trixie timidly.
It was so long since she had mingled with strangers that she was abashed; and yet the time had been when no one was saucier or more self-possessed than she.
"Mr. Gavin' is the room foreman, and he can take you on if he wishes to."
Jenny led Trixie up-stairs, and, when she found by inquiry that Mr. Cumberland had not come yet, she sighed softly and said:
"Then there's nothing for it but to go to Mr. Gavin. The one comfort is that you will be put in my room if he takes you on."
"You don't seem to like Mr. Gavin," said Trixie, fearfully. "Is he so cross?"
"Cross to some and not to others," answered Jenny. "It's no use crossing Fox River until you get to it. Maybe you won't have any trouble with him. I hope so, anyhow. Here he is now."
A dark-browed young man, with a heavily set, mus-
218	Mc ie Villains than Brave Men.
eular frame, walked toward them, his small eyes fixed on Trixie with open admiration. "Oho!" he exclaimed ; "who's this, Jenny Dent
?—a friend of yours?"
"Yes, sir; and she wishes employment here."
"She wishes employment !" exclaimed Mr. Gavin.
"Why, she looks like a lady. What's the name?" "Mrs. Harlowe," replied Jenny.
"Mrs. Harlowe, eh? What does your husband do?" demanded Gavin bruskly, coming closer and eying poor Trixie with open admiration.
"She's a widow," cried Jenny.
"A widow! How was I to know? You should wear black if you. don't want such questions asked, my dear. Besides, how are the young men to know you are in the market unless you let them know ?"
"For shame, Mr. Gavin !" cried Jenny, seeing Trixie shrink as if she had been struck. "She isn't in the market."
"Suppose you go to your work and let me alone !" he said sharply. "Come! hurry up, or I'll dock you for short time."
Jenny could not afford that ; so, despite Trixie's pleading glance she hastened away, while Gavin, seating himself on a box, contemplated Trixie's rare beauty with coarse insolence.
"So you want work, do you?"
"Yes, sir."
"What do you know about this kind of work? Ever done any of it?'"
"No, sir."
"Well," and he moved over toward her and laid his hand familiarly on her shoulder, "if you will behave, yourself I guess we can find something for you. Eh! what's the matter ?"
She had shrunk away from his touch, and was gazing at him with wide open eyes of detestation.
~,.. More Villains than Brave Men.	gig

"A little shy, eh?" he said, with a rough laugh. "Oh, well ! pretty girls can afford to put on some airs, I suppose. But we'll cure you of that. You just go into that office and wait for me. I must go see that everything is going on as it should. After that I'll come back, and see if I can't find something for you. Deuced pretty pair of lips you have, Mrs. Harlowe. I'll be back in a few minutes, my dear."
Trixie stood where he left her. The blood boiled in her veins at his treatment of her.
Her first thought was to leave the building at once. Then she remembered little Beatrice.
"After all, why should I?" she murmured. "He dare not really insult 'me. He has done the worst he can do. No doubt from the way Jenny acted, he treats all the girls in the same way. I will wait and get a place where I can be buried from all who have ever known me, and where I can earn something for little Beatrice. She is all I have now."
A choking sob rose in her throat at the thought of what she had lost; but she swallowed it, and hid her pain in her heart.
And, oh ! what a pain it was! and how that poor heart ached !
She turned toward a window that opened on the factory yard, and looked over the wall into the rolling country beyond.
She looked out and saw the countryside dotted with homes, and she found herself wondering how many of them were happy ones, and how many were threatened by sorrow of which they knew nothing.
"It seems as if there is something unreal in all this," she murmured at last. "It was only yesterday that I rose as happy as a lark, my heart as light as air, and not a care on my mind. Oh, if it were only a dream ! If I might only wake up from it to find myself sitting
220	More Villains than Brave Men.
in the little room in the cottage, working on the tiny garments for Beatrice !"
"What ! not tears in those pretty eyes? Come, my dear, that won't do. Here's a kiss to make you forget your troubles."
Before she was aware of his presence she felt the arm of Gavin wound about her waist, while his face was so near hers that she could catch the odor of his tobacco-laden breath.
With a wild cry she broke loose from his grasp just pn time to frustrate his design of kissing her.
He laughed boisterously, and stood before her in such a way that it was impossible for her to escape.
"How dare you ?" she cried, her old fiery spirit asserting itself in the emergency.
"Oh, I dare a great many things," he laughed. "I make it a point to kiss every pretty girl who conies here for a job, so you might as well submit with a good grace, for it will be done whether you like it or not."
"Stand aside, sir !" she cried imperiously. "I do not wish employment in this place."
"Too late to back out now," he said with a sneer. "Come now, don't be a little fool. I have made up my mind to taste those sweet lips of yours, and I am going to do it."
"I will cry out for help!" she said desperately. He laughed.
"Do you hear the roar of the machinery?" he said. "Cry your very loudest,. and who do you suppose will hear you? Pshaw ! you don't suppose I didn't know what I was about when I asked you to stay here, do you ?"
Her face paled with terror. She realized that what he said was true. But she never thought of yielding.
"Conic," he said impatiently, as he stepped toward her, "I can't stand here all day. You shall go to the
Cecil Dropped Like One Dead.	221
same machine as Jenny Dent if you will give me my kiss like a sensible girl."
"Never!" she wailed as she felt his hands clutch her arms despite her utmost efforts to escape him. "Unhand me. Help, help, help !"
"You scoundrel !"
A terrible blow followed the-ringing cry of indignation, and the scoundrelly foreman measured his length on the floor, while Trixie's grateful eyes fell upon the face of Cecil Sterling.
CECIL DROPPED LIKE ONE DEAD.
"You !" cried Cecil Sterling, the moment he obtained a clear view of the person he had rescued from the scoundrel he had felled to the floor. "Did he dare to offer you such an insult?"
"Oh! let me go away from here," cried Trixie, her Courage almost gone.
"Certainly. Come! But how come you to be here? This is no place for you."
"I came here to obtain employment," she sobbed, her .strength and courage giving way together. "I must work, and I thought I could do so here. Oh! let me get away."
"You work!" he cried, looking pityingly at her. "Oh! this is no place for you, even though you must work. But let me detain you for a moment. Sit there ! I see that that wretch is rising to his feet. I must speak with him at once."
He gently urged the frightened Trixie into a chair, and stepped closer to Gavin, who had now risen to his feet, and was staring with fury in his small eyes at the young man.
"Thomas Gavin," said Cecil sternly. "you, may re-
222	Cecil Dropped Like One Dead.
port at the office and draw your money. This is your last day in this factory. Go !"
Gavin said nothing, but eyed Cecil as a wolf might eye one it had a bloodthirsty, desire to attack. Trixie shuddered at his evil, malignant look.
Cecil turned from the wretch and was walking toward Trixie, when she started up with a wild cry.
Cecil turned to see the cause of her alarm, and as he (lid so a crashing blow fell on his shoulder, and he dropped like one dead.
Gavin had caught up a bar of iron and had leaped upon him to do him to death. But for Trixie's cry he would have accomplished his purpose.
The instant the deed was done, the foreman leaped past Trixie and ran like a deer down the corridor.
But Trixie had no thought of him at that time. She feared her brave defender was dead, but in the hope that he was not, she tore open the door of the little office Gavin had pointed out to her, and found what she sought—water.
She snatched up a glass, poured the water into it, and returned and knelt by the side of the injured man. He opened his eyes and smiled despite his pain. He wished to reassure her.
"Oh! how much are you hurt ?" she demanded anxiously.
"I do not know," he answered, trying to get up. "Ah! I fear something is injured in my shoulder. I will not try to move. But do not be troubled. It can-not be much."
"Tell me what to do," she cried, clasping her hands in her distress.
"Go down-stairs first and tell them in the office that I am here, and how I was hurt. Then go quickly to my mother—you will find my carriage down-stairs--A--and tell her before the report can reach her in some
Cecil Dropped Like One Dead.	223
exaggerated form. That is the best service you can do me."
It seemed really to be so, and Trixie ran down to the office and did as he requested as well as she could ; though it was not easy to tell a coherent story to the startled questioners.
After that she hastened out to where the carriage was, and bade the driver take her quickly to Mrs. Sterling's house.
Little Daisy stood in the hall as Trixie entered the great house, and when she saw who it was, flew to the stairs, crying out joyously :
"Mama, mama, come down quickly ! The lady who saved me is here. We were just going to call on you," she added, turning to Trixie. "I am so glad you came, and so mama will be."
There was a rustling of a gown on the stairs, and Trixie looked up to encounter the gaze of one of the sweetest matrons she had ever seen.
Mrs. Sterling was past middle age, and was inclined to stoutness, but her hair was silvery white, and there was something so motherly and kind in her face that Trixie felt drawn to her at once.
She thought it little wonder that both Cecil and Daisy had been so sure that she would like their mother.
"We were just going to find you," Mrs. Sterling said, "if you really are Mrs. Harlowe. How could such a little creature do so brave a thing? Oh, what a risk you ran! But I am glad you did, for I could not afford to lose my little torment yet."
She kissed Trixie as she spoke, and led her into a cozy reception-room.
"Do not think I came to be thanked," Trixie said hastily. "I only came as a messenger from your son."
"From Cecil? Is anything wrong? Please tell me quickly_."
224	Cecil Dropped Like One Dead.
"He is hurt—I do not think very badly. He was struck a severe blow on the shoulder in trying to de-fend me from the assault of a ruffian in the factory."
The mother's face paled, but she did not lose her presence of mind. She took Trixie's hand as if to hold her attention more certainly.
"You are sure he is not fatally injured?" she queried anxiously.
"I am sure of it," Trixie answered earnestly. "It was he who asked me to come to you with the truth so that you would not be alarmed by a false rumor."
"It was like Cecil. Oh! he is the best of sons. I will go to him. Please remain until I return."
"They are bringing him, mama," cried little Daisy, who had run to the window.
It was so. The doctor had providentially been found near the factory, and had first examined the injury, and then superintended the removal of Cecil to his
home.
The mother was by her son's side the first one. She held herself in check, and asked the doctor calmly how bad the injury was.
"Nothing worse than a broken bone," said Cecil, as cheerfully as he could. "I shall soon be up and .around, mother. Where is Mrs. Harlowe?"
"In the house, dear."
"Don't let her go away until I have talked with you, will you?"
They carried him, into the house and to his own room, where the doctor assisted to undress him and make him comfortable.
"Is he badly hurt?" asked Trixie anxiously, of Mrs. Sterling.
"A bone broken. Careful nursing is all he needs, I
fancy, and then he will be up again in a little while."
"Could I be of any service to, you?" asked Trixie
Cecil Dropped Like One Dead.	225
earnestly. "I am so sorry that he was hurt in my defense."
"Don't be troubled by that, little one," said the good lady. "It is an honorable wound, and he will be proud of it. And so shall I. Will you excuse me while I go to him again?"
"Yes; and I will go if you think I cannot serve you," said Trixie, who was very fearful of thrusting herself on these kind friends.
Mrs. Sterling smiled.
"Oh, I cannot let you go yet," she said. "I may find plenty for you to do. You see, you offered, and it is your own fault if I hold you to it."
Trixie sat down and drew little Daisy to her side, and proceeded to keep the volatile child quiet while her mother was up-stairs.
It was an easier task than she had hoped it would he, and Daisy was so loving and grateful that it seemed to poor Trixie as if peace were again stealing into her heart; not happiness, for that could never come again, but restfulness.
Meanwhile a conversation was going on in the sick-room up-stairs that would have greatly interested her if she could have heard it.
"Is she still here, mother?" Cecil asked.
"Do you mean Mrs. Harlowe, Cecil? Yes, she will wait until I return. Was it of her you ished to speak, Cecil ?" and the mother's clear eyes seached her son's face.
"Yes; she is a widow, mother, and very poor. Do you know that she was in the factory this morning trying to find employment so that she might take care of her baby and herself ?"
"She in the factory ! Oh, Cecil ! that must not be. She ha, L- ~,i delicately nurtured, I am siir "
*26	Cecil Dropped Like One Dead.
"I knew you would say so, mother; but you must be careful how you proceed, for she is very proud."
"I think I can find a way of helping her without of-fending her pride. How would you like her to nurse you, read to you, and the like, while you are ill? She might bring her baby here and remain until you were well."
Cecil glanced into the calm face of his mother to see if she meant more than she said ; but he could discover nothing.
"I would like it better than anything you could do, mother," he replied.
When Mrs. Sterling went down-stairs she found Trixie with Daisy by her side, and she was reading to the child.
"How is he now ?" Trixie asked, rising as if preparing to go.
"He is easier, I think. He does not suffer much, but he must be quiet. I shall have to find a nurse for him, and I do dislike to have one come into the house. But I do not see any help for it."
Trixie's face flushed.
She remembered how she had nursed Leo through the illness due to his burns.
She wondered if she would be skilful enough to nurse Cecil Sterling.
She did not offer her services ; but she wished Mrs. Sterling would put the question to her.
It would be so much better than going into the factory after her experience there.
"Have you ever done any nursing, my dear?"
Trixie started at the question. It seemed so strange to have it come as if in response to her wishes.
"I have done some nursing," she answered; "but I am not a trained nurse. I could not take nz oner care of a diffic",' 4 case."	_
Cecil Dropped Like One Dead.	227
"Would you be willing to take care of this one ?" Mrs. Sterling asked.
"If you will trust me, I should be glad. I must earn my living in some way, and I do not seem to have the courage I once had."
"Poor little thing !" said Mrs. Sterling gently. "You have courage with the best ; but I fancy you have suffered very much in your short life; is it not so?"
Tears welled up into Trixie's great eyes, and she nodded her head in reply. She could not speak.
"And you will nurse Cecil, then? Good! That disposes of one difficult matter. You will go get your baby after luncheon, won't you?"
"Bring her here?" queried Trixie, a flame of joy lighting up her eyes.
"Oh, how sweet !" cried Daisy. "A dear little baby."
"I am afraid she will be a great trouble," said Trixie, her eyes fixed pleadingly on Mrs. Sterling's face.
"Trouble ! not at all. You do not suppose I would let you separate yourself from your baby, do you ?"
"Oh, I could not separate from her altogether ! I should have to see her every day ; but I knew that when I tried to work I should have to leave my darling. But, oh ! if I might have her with me. You do not know how I would try to make up to you any annoyance you might suffer. And she is such a dear little thing."
"Bless you, my dear child !" said Mrs. Sterling, "you shall go for her at once. Daisy, order the carriage."
"May I go with her?" demanded Daisy.
"If Mrs. Harlowe will have you."
"Oh, she will !" cried Daisy, and was off at a run.
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
MORE LOVE AND MISERY.
And so Trixie was installed in the big house instead of becoming a factory hand.
The days went by rapidly enough, and Trixie soon found that if she would listen to her new friends, she would be nothing else than a favored guest.
But she would not permit them to make a pet of her as they wished, and insisted on performing certain du-ties about the house.
She nursed Cecil as much as he needed nursing; she read to him, and held him entranced as she did so. But it would have been the same to him if she had read in Hebrew, for what he enjoyed was listening to her voice and watching her sweet face.
As for little Beatrice, she grew fatter as the days went by, for she had no cankering care at her heart to make her sad and dispirited.
"Mother," said Cecil one day, as he sat in an easy chair looking out of the window—for he was able to be about now, "I wonder what it is that always keeps Mrs. Harlowe so sad."
"I cannot guess, dear," she replied, "unless it be the loss of her husband. She may have been greatly attached to him."
"She never speaks of him," Cecil said moodily.
His mother looked at him, and shook her head as if feeling sorry for him.
"She may think too much of him to dare trust herself," said Mrs. Sterling.
"No," said Cecil emphaticahy, "I do not believe it is that. Mother, do you like Mrs. Harlowe ?"
"I am very fond of her indeed. I should be since I owe her Daisy's life."
lViore Love and Misery.	229
Cecil twisted a piece of paper in his nervous fingers. "I am fond of her, too, mother," he said at last. "Yes," she replied, "we all are. Daisy loves her." "I love her," Cecil said sharply.
His mother looked steadily at him for a moment and then smiled in her own sweet way.
"I know you do, Cecil. I have known it for a long time."
"You have known it !" he cried. "Then you do not disapprove."
"I do not disapprove; but that is little to comfort you, Cecil. Does she love you ?"
His face was paler than his illness made it to be.
"I don't suppose she can love, me as I love her," he answered. "I would not hope for that. I would only, ask a little love."
"Do not hope too much, Cecil. A woman's heart is a strange thing. No one can tell what its promptings are."
"Mother," he said, "I have watched her with love and longing these many days, and come what may of it, I must tell her of my love. I am not worthy of her, but I love her dearly, and would strive hard to deserve her if she would but give me the right."
His mother rose from her chair with a little sigh. She knew no more than he, what Trixie's answer would be, and she could not ward off the blow of a refusal if one there was to be.
The only thing was that she could not comprehend how any sane woman could put aside the boon of such a love as that of her noble-hearted Cecil.
She went into the library, where she knew Trixie would be, reading to Daisy, who was insatiable in her demands on Trixie's time.
"Will you read to Cecil, my dear?" she said to Trixie, "unless you are too tired. Daisy, it is not right for you to ask so much of Mrs. Harlowe. She will be wishing to leave us if you do."
More Love and Misery.
"I won't let her go," Daisy said imperiously. "She must stay now. She had no right to come here if she did not intend to remain."
Trixie smiled and disengaged the little hands that dung to her.
"I will go read to Mr. Sterling," she said.
She selected the book she had been reading to him,
and took it to the sitting-room where he was. "I have come to read," she said to him.
"Shut the book," he said. "I don't wish you to read now. I have something I wish to say to you."
She closed the book and sat with her great eyes fixed on him. She-had not the remotest idea of what he wished to say.
"Mrs. Harlowe," he began, "I want. your advice. I wish to marry."
She stared at him in amazement. It was the first she had heard of such a thing, and she was startled. It seemed such a pity to break up that happy home.
"I did not know," she began.
He stopped her.
"I have known it for some time," he said, fixing his eyes on her eagerly.
She smiled slightly.
"That would be only natural," she said. "I meant I had never heard any lady spoken of in that connection."
"You would not be likely to hear her spoken of in that connection," he said. `Besides," he went on slowly, "I do not know that she will have me. Do you think she will ?"
"Oh, I cannot answer that," she replied gravely. "One can never tell. I will confess that I would think her hard to please if she would not accept you; but there may be some one else, you know."
,.c
More Love and Misery.	231
He flushed at her words of praise, but they did not give him great comfort. Trixie spoke so calmly and collectedly.
"Yes, there may be some one else, but I do not think So. She is a widow, and what I fear is that she adores the memory of her husband so much that she will not marry again."
Trixie fixed her calm eyes on him.
"I do not know how a woman could marry the seccond time. It would not seem right to me."
His face became pallid, and he cried out imploringly :
"Oh, please do not say that. A second love may not be as great as a first one, but I am sure it could exist. Oh, Mrs. Harlowe—Trixie! can you not see that it is you I love?"
"Love me ! she cried, starting up with a face of real horror. "Oh, you do not know what you are saying! Oh, Mr. Sterling! Oh, please unsay that!"
He shook his head miserably. He knew from her tone that it would be useless to plead, but he could not change the fact.
"I cannot unsay it. I love you. I loved you from the first moment I saw you, and I have gone on loving you more and more every day, until now I worship you madly."
"Please, please !" she cried, rising in her distress. "If you only knew !"
"Knew what? What is there worth knowing if you do not love me? Ah, Trixie! I would try so hard to please you and make you happy ! I do not need to be told that I am not worthy of you. I know that al-ready, but I might learn to be. Is there really no hope for me ?"
"There is no hope, Mr. Sterling," she answered sadly. "Oh, why did you not let me see this in time?
%2	More Love and Misery.
1 could have gone away from here ere it was too late."
"You might learn to love me," he pleaded.
"If I learned to do that—though it is impossible—, ::dill I could not be your wife. Where is your mother?" she demanded wildly. "I must bring her here. 1here is something I must tell you both."
She hastened from the room. Mrs. Sterling was still in the library. She looked anxiously up as Trixie entered.
"Will you come with me to the sitting-room ?" she asked. "Not you, Daisy, dear; I only want your mother now."
There was something in her face that stilled the unruly tongue of little Daisy. Mrs. Sterling rose with a 'Dale face. Trixie led her into the sitting-room, and then began at once :
"Mrs. Sterling, your son has done me the great honor of asking me to marry him."
"I knew it was his intention. I approved of his de-sign."
Trixie covered her face with her hands for a moment. Then went on :
"I have treated you shamefully, wickedly, but I did not mean to do so. I should have told you every-thing. I can see it now, but I did not see it at first. Now it is very hard."
"Tell me in a word, Trixie," said Cecil hoarsely, his face very pale.
"I cannot tell you in a word," she answered. "I must begin at the beginning and tell it all. But I will tell it briefly:
"A little over a year ago I met and loved and was loved in turn. I had every faith and trust in him, and I trust and love him now, strange as it may seem to you, who have not passed through it.
"I married him, and went away from the city to a town in the "niintry, where we lived. oh so hannuily,
blot the Wife of Leo Bramera.	233
for a year.	He prospered and was growing rich.	One
morning he went away. When he returned I was gone with my babe, never to return. I had learned that I was not his wife, that my child had no name but such as I gave it in pity for its innocence. I am an outcast! Forgive me! I did not think when I came here that it was my duty to tell you this."
She covered her beautiful face with her hands and sobbed. It all came back so clearly to her now as she told it.
"He was a false scoun	
"Stop !" cried Trixie fiercely. "You shall not say a word against him. He is suffering more than I. He loved me. I love him now more than ever before. Oh, Heaven! why must I forever live apart from him ?"
She broke down and wept for a moment, then roused herself and looked up.
"I know I should have spoken before. I see it now, but I did not think. Well, you will soon forget. You have been very kind to me and to my little one. Good-by ! I will not take long."
She looked wistfully at the face of Mrs. Sterling. "Trixie, my poor, betrayed girl, do you think we will let you go from us?' Oh, no, no, no !"
Mrs. Sterling held out her arms, and Trixie sunk sobbing at her feet, her head on the noble lady's knees.
CHAPTER XXXIX.
Madeline's plans had not worked quite as she had wished, but she had wrecked two lives, and that was something to her.
She left Hardenville and returned to New York because she knew it would be useless to attempt to draw I_en hack to her.
234	Not the Wife of Leo Brainerd.
If there had been any way of doing him any further harm, she would have gone far out of her way to do it, now, for she hated him with as passionate a fervor as once she had loved him.
Trixie had disappeared from her sight, and since she was finally separated from Leo it did not matter what became of her.
So, with a heart full of hate and venom, Madeline returned to New York. She' did not acquaint Mrs. Brainerd with the fact that she had discovered Leo, but let that wretched and almost repentant woman suffer in ignorance.
One day a singular thing happened. She met face to face in the parlor of an acquaintance the Reverend Mr. Glenham, who had married her to Leo.
She was introduced to him, and was talking with him in the corner of the room. Who can tell what demon of malice prompted her to say to- him :
"This is a somewhat different meeting than our last."
He stared at her in a questioning way and murmured :
"Eh?' I do not quite understand."
"I am afraid your memory is bad," she said with a short laugh. "Do you not remember meeting me under peculiar circumstances more than a year ago ?"
He looked more carefully at the dark face of his companion, and shook his head.
"I have -no recollection. You will have to enlighten me," he said.
She shrugged her shoulders.
"It was at the house of Gerald Wright, a lawyer now dead. Indeed he died the very night I speak of. You remember now ?"
"Upon my honor, I do not. I do not remember even to have heard of Gerald Wright. And I am sure
II never was at his house. What happened there, pray?"
Madeline stared at him. with a strange look in her black eyes.
"You married me to Leo Brainerd that night," she said.
He was silent a moment, and then shook his head.
"It is a mistake. I do not forget so easily. It was some other clergyman who did it."
"It was you," she said half-angrily.
"It was not I," he said.
"I have the marriage-certificate signed by you," she said triumphantly.
"Well, if you have that I will believe that I am mistaken," he replied. "Will you show it to me ?"
"Yes," said Madeline, "if you will go to my apartments with me."
"This is altogether too interesting an affair to let pass," he said. "I will certainly go with you. Let me make my excuses to our hostess."
In a little while they were on their way to the apartments of Madeline.
And on the way, Madeline continued her efforts to make him remember the night in question, but he obstinately refused to remember a thing.
When they reached her apartments she went to her drawer and brought out not only the certificate, but the paper in which the account had been printed.
He merely glanced at the paper, and then pushed it aside while he should examine the certificate which she gave him.
He read it slowly and carefully, and turned it over several times. Madeline watched him anxiously.
"I did not sign this certificate," he said. "It is not even a forgery. Let me show you my signature," and he wrote it with a pen picked up from the table.
236	Not the Wife of Leo Brainerd.
Madeline compared the signature with that . on the certificate, and trembled.
What was the meaning of this?
"That is not all," went on the clergyman. "I was not in the city for a week, at and after that time. If I had been, I should have contradicted this news-paper article. It was not I who married you."
"It was somebody who looked exactly like you, then;'a•-said Madeline, puzzled.
"That may well be, but it was not I. Moreover I will venture to say that no proper record of this has ever been made. Young lady, you have been deceived."
Madeline turned paler than before. It was clear enough to her that in some way she had been duped. She was not the wife of Leo Brainerd, and Trixie was.
She asked all manner of questions of Mr. Glenham, and finally they went out together to examine the official records.
There was not a scratch to show that she and Leo had been wedded, but when she looked for his name she found that his marriage to Trixie was recorded in the proper way.
They went together to the house where the ceremony had taken place, but the daughters had been unable to keep up the modest house and had moved long ago.
"Now come home with me," Mr. Glenham said, "and I will show you by various documents that I was five hundred miles from here on the date of this marriage."
She went with him, and that, too, was proved to her satisfaction, and she knew to a certainty that she was no more Leo's wife than Mr. Glenham's.
She kept her temper well enough before him ; but she fell into a fearful passion when she reached her apartments.
Not the Wife of Leo Brainerd.	237
"She is his wife, after al,l. What shall I do? I have discovered this, and so may he. Shall I leave it to chance to bring them together to be happy? No, no, no! I will hunt her out and devise some means for tearing her heart in twain."
She was like a madwoman for a while, then sub-sided, and became the incarnation of evil, ripe for any wickedness.
She paced her room like a tigress eager for blood, but not certain how to obtain it. Then a thought came, and she acted on it.
She went straightway to a private detective firm and described Trixie as she was in Hardenville, telling what had become of her afterward. She ended by saying:
"I wish you to find her for me now. Can you do it?"
A detective never gives a direct answer, and above all never admits that anything he has to do is easy. This particular detective looked very wise, pursed his lips and said:
"It would be impossible to tell. It is difficult to gage the depth of this mystery. The only thing I can assure you of is, that if she is on the face of the earth I will find her."
Well, it so chanced that the fellow was shrewd enough to hit upon the right plan for tracing poor Trixie ; and one day, therefore, he made his appearance at Madeline's apartments to give his report.
"Well ?" she queried eagerly.
"I have found her," he said.
"Ah! tell me where she is."
"She is in a place called Mendon, in the family of the Sterlings, who are the wealthiest people of the place."
"Do you mean that she is a servant there ?" queried (Made,— sharply.
238	Not the Wife of Leo Brainerd.
"No, indeed. She is the prime favorite ; and if she chose could be married to the son. He asked her and was refused.
-You are sure of that?" demanded Madeline, gnashing her teeth with fury to think that Trixie's lines had fallen in such pleasant places.
"Perfectly sure. I obtained the news from a servant, who had overheard the mother and son talking together.
Madeline heard all he had to tell her, and then dismissed him. It must be said in justice to him, that he had told her almost all there was to be told concerning Trixie.
When she was alone she begun to pace the floor after her tigress methods, plotting and scheming and plotting again to think of some way of compassing a greater ruin for poor Trixie.
So far all she had done had seemed in some way to help Trixie instead of hurting her. The next thing must be better carried out.
"One thing is certain," muttered Madeline, "she shall marry that man Sterling, to begin with. I can sce my way clear to that for all her prudery.
"And after those two have been wedded some time I will let Leo know the truth, so that he may suffer; but he shall not know where Trixie is until I have told him of her deed.
"After that, curse her! she may die or live as she pleases, so that she does not attempt to rejoin Leo.
"Yes, that is my plan. So now to go to Mendon and start things going. Ah ! my pretty Trixie! you little dream that I am still on your track, and will never rest until I have ruined you body and soul."
CHAPTER XL.
For some minutes after poor little Trixie had made her confession to Mrs. Sterling and Cecil, and had been told that they respected her no less than ever, there was silence.
She could not speak, for she was sobbing, and they would not intrude upon the grief that was so hard to bear.
Then at last she raised her head from the kind lady's lap and rose to her feet, her beautiful eyes dewy with tears of shame and sorrow.
"You are very good to me," she said gratefully. "I should not have kept this from you."
"Cecil," said Mrs. Sterling, "will you not leave us for a while?"
He rose feebly, and Trixie, with instinctive helpfulness, ran to his side and assisted him.
He turned to her for an instant, and then looked at his mother.
"Oh, mother," he said, "plead for me with her!"
"Oh, no. oh, no !" cried Trixie, "she must not. I cannot marry. Do you not understand that while he lives he is my husband as much as if the law had made us one? I cannot, cannot marry."
"Mother !" was all the answer Cecil made as he went slowly from the room.
"He wishes me to plead for him," Mrs. Sterling said.
"But you will not," said Trixie. "You are a woman, and can understand. I cannot wed another."
"Yes," replied Mrs. Sterling, "I do understand, and I honor you, Trixie, for the way you feel. If you did not feel so, I might doubt you."
"Oh, thaaj‘	thank you !" breath_ _r;	r Trixie.
240	If You Were Free to Marry.
"But tell me," said Mrs. Sterling, drawing Trixie into a seat by her side, "is it not true that but for this you would wed my boy ?"
Trixie cast her eyes into the mother's, and then let her head droop.
"I must be honest with you," she said. "I do not love your son. My whole heart is given to Leo Brainerd. I can never love another."
"And yet, Trixie," insisted Mrs. Sterling, "if the time should ever come when you were free to marry, would you not take Cecil?"
"I could never love him, Mrs. Sterling," answered Trixie sadly.
"But he loves you, and he could make you at least as happy as you now are. He could secure you against want or privation, and in time he might win your love."
"Ah, Mrs. Sterling!" sighed Trixie, "there is but one love. I gave mine wholly and irrevocably to Leo. I have no more to give."
"But you respect Cecil ?" persisted Mrs. Sterling, who was doing battle for the happiness of her son.
"Oh, yes, I respect him and like him, but not as a husband should be liked."
"There is one more thing, Trixie," said Mrs. Sterling. "Do you not realize that you owe something to little Beatrice ?"
"I would give my life to make her happy."
"And do you think she ever can be happy if she grows up with a stain on her name? You know what the world is, Trixie. It is hard and cruel."
Trixie sobbed piteously.
"Oh !" she moaned, "I have thought of all this and
more many a night ; but why do you torture me? I cannot give my darling a name at the expense of my honor. Now I am a victim; but, if I were to wed
If You Were Free to Marry.	241
your son I would be guilty of dishonor, and never again could I look my Maker in the face."
"And I would never ask you to do so, Trixie," was the response, in pitying tones, "as long as matters are as they are; but I do ask you to let me carry some comfort to my son, who worships you."
"Tell me what you would have me do."
"Tell me—and remember, I ask it, too, for the sake of little Beatrice—that you will wed my son if ever the time comes that you can."
Trixie raised her tearful eyes to heaven, and answered :
"Yes, you may tell him that—for the sake of my child I will wed him then. I cannot see how that time can come, but, if ever it does, I will wed him. But tell him, too, that I cannot and never shall be able to love him."
"Poor little girl! forgive me if I have tortured you; but, alas! some must suffer while others are made happY !"
She left the room, and Trixie turned sadly away, and went to her room, where little Beatrice was with the nurse.
"I will take her out for an airing," she said; and presently she was wheeling Beatrice out on the road, where the trees were.
Her thoughts occupied her so completely that she did not notice a man who was watching her.
He hid behind the bushes that lined the road until she was past, when he rose cautiously, up and looked after her.
"How pale and sad she looks," he murmured wretchedly. "Ah, well! it is she, and my search is ended. Now I have only to find some way of remaining here unknown to her."
She li	> ssed almost out of sight before he ven-
542	If You Were Free to Marry.
tuned to step into the road, and he had hardly done so when one of the servants from the house came out and walked toward the village.
"I beg your pardon," he said, "but will you tell me how to reach the railroad-station? I am a stranger here."
"About a mile farther on," the girl answered, thinking the stranger very fine-looking and very polite.
"I would have asked the young lady rolling the baby-carriage," he said, "but she looked so sad that I had not the heart to disturb her. Does she live here?"
"That was Mrs. Harlowe," the girl answered. "She is sad, poor thing ! She has lost her husband, but I guess she could get another if she liked."
"Indeed," he said, his face turning ghastly. "Why do you think so?"
"Oh! she is so pretty. Besides, did you never hear of the romantic thing that happened at the factory ?" "You know, I am a stranger," he said.
"Oh! to be sure. But to think of me standing here talking to a perfect stranger !"
"I am sure I am interested," he said politely. "Please tell me about it."
"Why, Mrs. Harlowe was at the factory looking for employment, and there was a foreman there who was just as wicked as he could be, and he tried to kiss her. Did you ever hear anything like it ?"
The stranger ground his teeth with silent rage.
"Scoundrel !" he murmured after a pause, during which he had seemed to be gaining control of him-self.
"Wasn't he a wretch?" the girl exclaimed. "But it happened that our Mr. Cecil was there, and he rescued Mrs. Ilarinwe. The foreman almost killed him for interfe~ i-	~.lt Mrs. Harlowe was trots,.,	right ,to
If ;or Were Free to Marry.	243
the house, and has lived here ever since. I guess she is likely to remain."
"Perhaps they are already engaged," suggested the stranger, his face pallid as death, and great beads of perspiration running down his face.
"Oh, nor the girl replied. "But I must be off. Good day ! if you should remain in the neighborhood I should like to see you again."
"Oh, merciful Heaven ! is this to be my punishment?" the young man groaned.
He walked on at a hurried, disordered pace for some time, then stopped and rested against a tree while he reflected on what he should do.
"I will go to the factory and apply for work as fore-man," he muttered. "I can keep out of her way, and I know enough of the business to take a foreman's place. It will be' work to keep me sane, and it will be near her."
He turned into the woods and made his way by a circuitous route to the factory, where he asked for the person in charge.
"I hear," he said at once, "that you need a fore-man here. If so, I would like to have the place."
"Have you ever done this sort of work before?" asked the superintendent, eying the handsome fellow approvingly.
"Yes, sir."
"In what place ?"
"In Mr. Doite's factory at Hardenville. I can refer you to him," the young man replied steadily.
"Come in, and let me ask you some questions amid the 'machinery," the superintendent said. "What is your name ?"
'Barnard."
The superintendent led Barnard into the factory an ~1 as1 ed him many questions, the ready ans.-	to which
244	if you Were Free to Marry.
proved the ability,, of the applicant. Then he took him, into the office and said:
"I am satisfied that you will do. I will write Mr. Doite for a reference, and in the meantime, I will give you a note to Mrs. Sterling, who, in consequence of the illness of her son, is in charge of the mill. Will you go up to the house at once ?"
"If it is necessary," was the troubled response.
"Yes it is. I could engage you subject to her approval, but you might as well have the approval in the beginning."
So Mr. Barnard took the note and went toward the Sterling mansion. On the road he saw Trixie with her little Beatrice.
"I can avoid her and get to the house without being seen by her," he said to himself. "I must get the position if I can. No other would be half so good."
He crept into the woods and made a wide detour, which brought him to the house toward which he went with confidence.
Mrs. Sterling saw him at once, and was won instantly by his noble, manly bearing.
She asked him but few questions, and then took him to see Cecil.
They did not keep him long, but assured him that if the ans-:'ter from Mr. Doite was satisfactory he should be taken into the factory.
"In fact," said Mrs. Sterling with a smile, "we shall be glad to have a gentlemanly person in the position. The other foreman was a miserable wretch, Who abused his position."
"So I have heard," Mr. Barnard said with consider-able feeling; "and I beg to say that I honor Mr. Sterling for the noble part he played in rescuing a young lady from the insults of the wretch."
"Ah !" said Cecil, "I was happy to have the ()Door-
Y W ould Like to Play Gipsy,	245
tunity. I cannot comprehend how any man could be so wicked as to think of insulting the lady in question. I hope you will like , the place, Mr. Barnard."
Mr. Barnard said he had no doubt of doing so, and bowed himself out.
"They will be kind to her," he muttered, as he left the house. "I have only to guard her against Made-line."
CHAPTER XLI.
With the implacable, concentrated hatred which was characteristic of her, Madeline set about carrying out the design she had formed of blasting poor Trixie's life.
It was easy for her to procure letters of introduction to the best people of Albany, and with these she went to that city and established herself at the best hotel on the pretense of being where she could watch the workings of the State government.
In truth, she hardly knew there was such a thing as a government; but it served her purpose to look enough into the matter to be able to talk about it.
She was beautiful and rich, and those two qualities sufficed to make her an instant success in Albany society.
Once before in her life she had deemed it worth her while to make the acquaintance of a reporter. Now she made it the business of her life to know as many as possible.
One after another she became acquainted with them, sounding each one with extraordinary skill until she knew his character.
And one after another she turned from them until at last sl1e met with one gifted man, who wag perfect
246 I Would Like to Play Gipsy Queen.
seemingly excepting in one particular—he was fond of drink. Drink was his enemy and one day would be his ruin.
She cultivated this man, and made him believe that she loved him, and admired his great ability. She led him to call upon her at her rooms in the hotel.
And every time he called she would give him champagne to drink; so that it was not an infrequent thing for him to leave her more unsteady of head and foot than he should have been.
But he was too infatuated to think much of how she plied him with liquor, and day after day returned to see her.
In the meanwhile, however, she met with a singular adventure. It was her habit to ride out on horseback every day. She would go to a little hotel some miles out of the city, and there would receive a letter.
These letters, in fact, were written to her to keep her informed as much as possible of the actions of Leo Brainerd.
As yet, however, they had told her nothing, for the reason that Leo had disappeared and had not returned.
So one day she muttered to herself as she rode homeward in the gathering dusk :
"He must be far away. I will wait no longer for him. I will act at once."
With her mind made up thus, she touched her horse with the whip, for she did not like being out at that hour of the day. There had been several daring robberies of late, and she did not wish to be one of the victims.
But it was her destiny. That night, the time and place being favorable, she was stopped and asked to deliver over all the money and jewels she had.
There was no help for it, and she did as she was bid-den with the best grace she could, wondering angrily
1
Would Like to Play Gipsy Queen. 247
why it was that such wicked doings could not be pre-vented.
But all at once she heard one of the men mutter something to another in a strange tongue which she did not understand.
It gave her a quick thought, however, and with the boldness which was a part of her hard nature, she exclaimed :
"You men are gipsies, is it not so ?"
One of the men uttered a violent oath, and would have dragged her unceremoniously from her horse had not the chief interfered and said in a surly tone :
"It is best to ask no questions. Go while you are permitted."
"Not at all," she said, reining in the animal, which he would have driven off at a gallop. "I have some business to transact with you if you are gipsies. It will pay you far better than stopping people on the road, for in a little while you will be caught at this work."
"You give us work !" muttered one of the men.
The chief swore at him and bade him hold his tongue. Then he addressed all the men in the gipsy tongue, and they walked away, leaving him with Madeline.
"Now," he said, "if you really have a proposition to make, make it. But let me warn you that it is dangerous trifling with desperate men."
"I have no desire to trifle with you," she said. "Have you any women with you or are you alone?" "We are alone here," he answered.
"How soon could you get your women with you?" she asked.
"In a day."
"Do you know where Mendon is?" she asked. "Well. But why these questions?"
248 I Would Like to Play Gipsy Queen.
"One moment. If I could make it worth your while, could you be in Mendon day after to-morrow, in the morning ?"
"Certainly."
"With your women? With everything just as you go traveling through the country, telling fortunes and	"
"Stealing," he added sardonically. "Yes, we could be there."
"Very well ; you have only to name your price to be there, and to promise to do my bidding, and our bar-gain is made."
"But," he objected, "give me some idea of what you wish us to do."
Madeline looked all around as if fearful that she would be overheard, and then leaned over her horse's neck and whispered something in his ear.
If she had supposed he would be startled by the proposition, she was vastly mistaken, however; for he shrugged his shoulders and said quite calmly :
"It is dangerous and must be paid for; but we will do it for you."
"I would like to play gipsy queen for a little while, too," she said.
"Play what you like if you pay for the privilege," he said with a hoarse laugh.
"Then it is agreed and understood," she said. "You know the conditions, and you have only to fix the price. What shall it be ?"
"One thousand dollars to-morrow morning," he re-plied readily, "and as much more when the trick is done."
"It is a bargain," she said. "Who will call for the money ?"
"I." wi . the laconic answer_
r ould Like to Play Gipsy Queen. 249
fie gave him her address and rode off, reaching her hotel at a late hour.
On the following morning the bold thief called at her hotel, and she gave him the money, telling him it would be to his private advantage to keep faith with her.
"We gipsies always keep faith," he answered. "We will do all I have agreed to do."
When he was gone. she went to her writing-desk and took out a great number of newspaper scraps, which she began to read one after the other. They were all about fires in large buildings, explosions in factories and the like.
After she had read them diligently, she got out pa-per and ink and began to write. What she wrote first did not suit her; but after a while she seemed to fall into the style that was what she had sought, and she wrote on for several pages.
When she had finished she read the matter over and corrected it carefully. Then she destroyed the scraps she had been studying and smiled, saying :
"I fancy that reads as if Stanley Worth had writ-ten it."
Stanley Worth was the reporter she had been coquetting with so assiduously for so long.
She now dressed herself and went out. Her first visit was to a typewriter, to whom she gave the effusion she had written, and asked her to copy it at once.
The girl did so, and was given a generous payment for her services. Madeline placed the original and copy in her pocket, and took a carriage to the house where Stanley Worth lived.
She knew enough of his habits to be sure that he would not yet have gone out. She remained in the carriage, and sent word to him to come down. He came in an instant, rejoiced to see the siren who was treat22- him so ill.
250 I Would Like to Play Gipsy Queen.
"I am going for a drive into the country this after noon," she said to him. "Can you not take a vacation and go with me?"
"I will do anything to be with you," he answered. "You know that."
She smiled sweetly at her miserable dupe.
"I shall go to the neighborhood of Hardenville," she said. "Tell them at the office that you are going out that way and will pick up any items."
"No need for that," he said.
"Nevertheless, do it," she said.
"If you wish it, certainly," was his response.
It was a small matter to do it for her without a reason being given.
"You shall drive," she told him. "Come to the hotel and we will start from there at about two o'clock. Don't keep me waiting !"
"I will be there," he answered.
She returned to the hotel, made all her arrangements for leaving, sent her trunk back to New York, paid all her bills, and then hired the buggy, and paid for it, saying that Mr. Worth would drive her to a station some miles away, because she had a business appointment to meet.
Why should any one doubt rich and beautiful Miss Delmar? Surely not the hotel-keeper, whose bill was paid without any fault-finding.
And as she was liberal to everybody, everybody was naturally sorry to see her go.
But go she did at two o'clock, at which time Stan-ley Worth assisted her into the buggy, got in him-self, and drove off ; he, at least, as happy as a king.
She directed him how to go, and finally showed him the little inn where she had once met Chauncey Doite.
There they_ alighted, and she ordered the very best
I Would Like to Play Gipsy Queen. 251
dinner the landlord could get up, together with his best wine.
"None of it may be very good," she said to Stanley Worth, "but good company will make worse wine taste good."
"Even water in your company would be like nectar," he said.
They walked about in the woods for some time., and she permitted him to be as sentimental as he pleased, all the while inwardly scorning him for his easy folly.
Then they returned to the hotel and ate dinner, after which she began in her usual way to ply him with wine. And he, poor fool! drank because she poured it out for him.
And so the wicked game went on until he was so intoxicated that he hardly knew what he was doing.
At that point she dropped a little powder into his glass, and after he had drank the wine, he let his head fall with a maudlin groan on the table.
"Fool !" she muttered. "It was a great deal ,of trouble, but I shall not mind if my plan is successful."
She now called the landlord, and, with crocodile tears in her eyes, pointed out her companion to him.
"His terrible habit got the best of him," she sobbed. "Will you not have him put to bed? And I will send a message to his newspaper to say where he is. Will you have the message taken to the post-office ?"
The landlord promised to do anything and every-thing. He had the drugged reporter taken up-stairs and put to bed to sleep off the effects of the drug, and then he was ready to convey the letter to the post-office.
Madeline had taken from the drugged wretch's pocket one of his cards and a large envelope, such as he was accustomed to send material to, the -news-paper office in.
252 A Veil for Shame to Hide Under.
She imitated his writing as well as she could in ad-dressing the envelope, and then put the matter she had had typewritten in it, together with his card.
"It is his custom to send these things in in this way. They will not be particular about the hand-writing. They will say that he has become intoxicated again, and will think he has had this typewritten for him. He has told me a dozen times of doing this very thing."
She sealed the envelope so prepared, and handed it to the landlord.
"When will it get to Albany ?" she asked.
She had already ascertained the fact that it would get there that night, or she would not have pursued this course. The landlord assured her it would get there before ten o'clock that night.
Her work there was done now, and she paid the landlord liberally for all he had done.
"I will leave the carriage for him to go home with," she said.
Then she had herself taken to the nearest station, and in a little while was on her way to Mendon.
CHAPTTR XLII.
A VEIL FOR SHAME TO HIDE UNDER.
"Oh, Trixie dear !" cried Daisy, one day, "do come with me! There are some gipsies down the road, and they are telling fortunes. Come !"
Since the day when she had told her story, she had been called by the name of Trixie by every member of the Sterling family.
"You are one of us, my dear," Mrs. Sterling had said.
"I don't care for the gipsies," Trixie said, "and I don't wish rnv fortune told."
A Veil for Shame to Hide Under. 253
"You selfish darling!" cried Daisy. "As if you were the only one to be considered ! I do care for gipsies, and I do want my fortune told."
"Come on, then," said Trixie, who usually yielded to all the whims of the child, when she was sure they would not be wrong.
They went together down the road, Daisy chattering all along the way.
"Oh, Trixie, you ought to see the new foreman ! He isn't a bit like that horrid old one!"
"Is he young?" asked Trixie indifferently.
She had heard 'about the foreman occasionally but had never asked any questions concerning him.
"No; I guess he's about forty," answered Daisy, to whom forty represented a great age. "But he is very nice and obliging. Don't you want to go down to the mill some day, and walk through it ?"
"No," replied Trixie decidedly.
Ever since the day she had first gone there, she had avoided the mill. It had no pleasant recollections for her.
"There are the gipsies !" cried Daisy suddenly. "Aren't they just lovely ?"
"No ; I don't think they are at all lovely," answered Trixie with a smile. "They seem to me very dirty and disagreeable."
"Dirty ! Oh, just wait until you see the queen ! She isn't dirty a bit. The others are a little, I must say, but she isn't. Hush ! there she is now!"
As Daisy spoke, Trixie saw a slender, gaudily dressed woman walk out of one of the tents, and approach them.
She walked with a proud, self-reliant step, and, as she drew nearer, Trixie saw that her face was almost hidden under the singular turban she wore, the fringe dropping from the front of which almost made a rnasL
254 A Veil for Shame to Hide Under.
"Ah r' exclaimed the gipsy queen, as she drew near enough to her visitors, "so the laughing fawn and the mourning doe have come to learn what fate may have in store for them !"
Trixie flashed a startled glance at the gipsy, which the latter bore with perfect composure.
"'You come doubting," she said ominously ; "you will go away trembling."
"I came to please this child and not to learn aught for myself," Trixie responded, unable, nevertheless, to avoid. a feeling of uneasiness in the presence of the gipsy, who seemed to pierce her through and through with her gleaming eyes.
"You will obtain what is your due despite your utmost efforts to hinder," was the answer. "Let me look at your hand."
"I do not care for my fortune," Trixie answered coldly.
"Yes," said the gipsy, "I can read that much with-out your hand. Life and all it holds is indifferent to you. You would wed where you cannot, yet you will wed where you wish not.
"Come away, Daisy!" cried Trixie, in more terror than she would willingly show.
"Why such haste ?" laughed the gipsy. "Do you fear to know what must come? Do you not dare to show me a hand that has been given, yet not taken ?"
"In Heaven's name ! who are you?" cried Trixie. "What do you know of me ?"
"I know nothing of you but what my art tells me," replied the gipsy. "Show me your hand, and it may be I shall read you a better fortune."
"My fortune is told," said Trixie sadly_
"Let her see your hand, please, Tr xie," said Daisy. "I want to hear what she has to say."
Trixie held out her hand without a word, glad,
perhaps, to yield to Daisy, when she would not have yielded to her own curiosity.
The gipsy took the little hand in her own, and a low laugh came from her lips.
"Why," she said, "I see strange things here, little lady. This hand has seen hard toil, for all its dainty littleness. I see a ring here, though, that does not belong here. Nay, nay ! Do not draw away the hand until I have told you. all.
"The ring does not belong here, but another will soon be in its place which has a right. Ah ! there is trouble ahead ! What is this? A death ! Blood on that ring, little lady ! Ah, it is red now. Ah, ah! I am sorry for you !"
"Enough !" cried Trixie, pale and trembling in spite of herself. "I do not care to hear any more."
"It is a sad fortune, with worse behind," said the gipsy, letting the hand fall from her grasp. "You may run from me who tells it, but you cannot escape fate that deals it. Death and marriage, with a name to bear, a name to give where it does not belong, and a veil for shame to hide under. Yes, go, but do not hope to escape the rain-drops when the thunder rolls !"
Trixie, horrified by what she heard, had taken Daisy's hand in her own and had fairly dragged the child away from the spot, pursued by the ominous words of the gipsy until she was out of hearing.
"Oh! why did you take me there ?" wailed Trixie.
"I am so sorry, Trixie dear," said the repentant child, frightened by Trixie's face. "I did not think she would be so horrid."
"It does not matter," replied Trixie, but she could not recover from the effects of the meeting with the gipsy, and when she reached the house again, went up to her room to be by herself, where she might reflect on	ho strange things she had heard.
25b A Veil for Shame to Hide Under.
"Can it be," she murmured, "that I shall yet marry Mr. Sterling? That could only be after Leo's death: Ah! if kind Heaven would but take me first, and let him live! I do not care to live except for the sake of Beatrice, and now that she has good friends, I could die in peace."
But it is not so easy to lay down the burden of life. Trixie might wish to die, but the time was not yet. There was more for her to do in the world.
Mr. Sterling had begun to get about more now, and was usually at meals.
That evening he sat with them, but as he ate but little he finished before the others, and asked permission to read the paper, which was an Albany daily.
He commented on the various bits of news as he read, and finally said with a touch of horror in his voice :
"There has been a terrible accident in a mill in one of those towns north of Albany."
"North of Albany !" repeated Trixie, looking up quickly. "What is the name of the place ?"
"Harclenville. It is the great factory owned by Mr. Doite."
It seemed to Trixie as if the room was going around.
The words of the gipsy came to her with terrible meaning.
"What—what," she gasped, "was the nature of the —the accident ?"
"Boiler burst. Five men killed outright and many wounded."
"Are there—there any—any names?" faltered Trixie.
"Yes, the names are given," answered Mr. Sterling, unconscious of the effect on Trixie. "The first is a partner of the chief owner, a Mr. Leo Brainerd--"
She is Right to We .	.257
"Leo, Leo, my darling! Oh, merciful Heaven ! let me go with him !"
Trixie staggered to her feet, raised her hands pleadingly to Heaven and sunk swooning at the feet of Mrs. Sterling.
Daisy had said that the new foreman was forty years old. Her ideas of age were very vague.
He had a beard, and that was what Daisy judged by.
As a matter of fact, Mr. Barnard was a comparatively young man, but he had shown himself competent for the position he had taken, and was moreover so willing and courteous that he had won the regard of all.
He had been to the house of Mrs. Sterling a few times, but had shown himself so shy that he had not been asked to go there often.
And yet, strange to say, he seemed to like the place so much that often he wandered there by night, and many times went out of his way in the morning to pass there.
Perhaps if Mrs. Sterling had seen him on some of these occasions she would have been troubled, and might have asked him his reasons for his peculiar behavior.
What he did was to steal nearer and nearer the house, and watch it until a certain window was opened in the morning or until its light was extinguished at night.
And that window was the one in Trixie's room. If by any chance Trixie showed herself, the strange
foreman would mutter a blessing, and would look wist-
;iilly at 1-i- until she disappeared.
258	She is Right to Wed.
And yet if there was any danger of meeting her he would do anything to get out of her way.
Several times it chanced that Mr. Barnard met the nurse out with little Beatrice, and the good nurse was soon convinced that the foreman was a fine young man because he showed such fondness for the baby.
He was good to the nurse, too, and fell into the way of giving her little gifts such as there was no harm in her accepting, especially as she, was old enough to be his mother, and as his sole object seemed to be to win her to let him take Beatrice in his arms now and again.
"I don't dare," she had said at first ; "you might let the darling fall."
"No fear of that, nurse," he had answered earnestly. "I would rather let myself drop over the cliff yon-der than have anything happen to the sweet thing."
Nurse declared in the kitchen that she was certain she had seen Mr. Barnard crying over the baby, from which she guessed that maybe he was a widower and childless.
"For," she said, "it isn't natural for a man who has never had -a child to cry over a baby."
"She is very beautiful," he said once to the nurse.
"She'd ought to be," the nurse had responded ; "isn't her mother the prettiest creature ever was seen!'
"Ts she?" Mr. Barnard had asked earnestly. "And I suppose she is very happy?"
"Happy!" repeated the nurse. "Poor dear! not she. She lost ,her husband, you know, and I reckon she loved him a lot, though she never says a word about him."
At first Mr. Barnard had seen nothing of young Mr. Sterling ,on account of the injury he had received, but lost imediately after the announcement in the pa-per of the r ath of Leo, a change came over the in-
She is, Right to We.i	2:59
valid, :r he was soon going down to the factory every day.
He liked Mr. Barnard at once, and when he discovered how much superior to the ordinary foreman he was, he would have had him up to the house.
But that was something Mr. Barnard utterly refused to do. He was not discourteous, and Mr. Sterling could only put his refusal down to shyness.
"I will go down to-day to see the foreman, if you wish," Trixie said one day, when Mr. Sterling had been asking her to go with him.
Trixie had never told him how much she disliked going to the factory, so he had no hesitation in asking her to go there.
"I would like you to see him at work with his sleeves rolled up. I think," said Mr. Sterling, "that he is the handsomest man I ever saw. Come."
They went together, into the great room full of the noisy, rattling machines, and Mr. Sterling pointed out Mr. Barnard to her.
He had his back towaxd them, not knowing they were there. And he would have remained in that posittion until they had. come up to him, if one of the Otis had not shouted in his: ear:
"Here comes Mr. Sterling and Mrs. Harlowe." "Where 7" he demanded, his face filled with consternation.
He did not move from his position; however. "Behind you," the girl said. "They will be here in a minute."
He did not glance behind, but looked down at his arms, which were all covered with grease, and cried out:
"I don't wish a lady to. see me looking like this. : will `o	ep,"
,vords he darted away. and Susie Rile
26o	She is Right to Wed.
wick, who was the girl who had spoken to him, said afterward that his face was scarlet with embarrassment.
"Where did Mr. Barnard go?'" asked Mr. Sterling of Susie.
Susie laughed deprecatingly and glanced admiring-'y at Trixie.
"I think he was shy of being seen so dirty," she replied. "He is very particular. He will be back in a few minutes."
"Well," murmured Mr. Sterling, in amusement, "I think he is the shyest man I ever knew. He must have known there was a lady with me, and that is why he ran. Let us give chase and find him. If you can get him talking once you will be surprised. He is as well educated as I am, and is a perfect athlete. I don't , understand what he is doing in such a position."
"He may wish to learn the business," suggested ~frixie, who had very little interest in the matter.
"He knows it well now," was the reply. "But come, let us start in pursuit."
They did not find him, however, and were forced to go home without another sight of him. Mr. Sterling laughed at him the next day for his shyness.
"I don't think I am so shy," Mr. Barnard said quietly. "I prefer not to make the acquaintance of any ladies."
"Oh !" said Mr. Sterling dryly.
"I hope you won't be offended," said Mr. Barnard. "I mean no discourtesy toward the lady who was with you."
"I did not suspect you of it," said Mr. Sterling. "I would like you to know that lady, however; for, in confidence, Barnard, I hope to marry her some day."
For some reason the face of the foreman grew ghastly. He staggered back against the wall, and stood loog at Mr. Sterling.
he is Right to Wed.	261
"Marry her !" he said hoarsely.
"Yes. I hope to make her my wife."
"Is—is the day fixed?" Barnard asked huskily.
"No, but I think it will be soon. There are some circumstances connected with Mrs. Harlowe's widow-hood that make it a little uncertain."
Mr. Barnard looked as if he were on the point of asking some other question, but he checked the words as they were on his lips, and turned away to his work, his face still white and drawn.
"Marry her !" he murmured to himself. "Would she marry again? And yet what right have I to say one word in opposition? She is nothing to me—oh, Heaven ! that it is so !"
It was Leo Brainerd, who had found Trixie, after a long and anxious search, and had taken this step in order to be near his darling, to guard her against harm, and to feast his hungry eyes on her.
He had been almost happy until now, but the care-less words of confidence from Mr. Sterling had pierced his heart with a new and unexpected anguish.
He had never thought of Trixie marrying again. He knew she had loved him, but he did not know of the account that had been in the Albany paper of the ex-plosion at Mr. Doite's mill.
If he had seen the account he would have known at once that it was the work of Madeline, and he would have taken steps to have the report contradicted.
But he did not know of the report, and it filled him with terror to think of Trixie marrying another.
"I know I have no right to her," he murmured, in agony; "but it will kill me to see her the wife of an-other. Oh ! that I might come forward and make her mine. But no! I wronged her once, and I am nothing to her now. She is right to wed again, if only for the sake of my little Beatrice, who is doomed never
It Was Not to Be.
to know a father's love. Oh, my darling ! my dar-

ling!" It was noticed by every one in the factory that Mr. Barnard was growing very taciturn and gloomy. He was never harsh or discourteous: but he never had a pleasant word for any one.
All wondered what had happened to make him so ; but no one could guess, least of all the unconscious cause, Mr. Sterling.
He had taken a great fancy to Leo and was most anxious to push him forward in the factory. He hinted at this once, but received the grim reply :
"If I do not suit exactly where I am, I will leave you.,,
Mr. Sterling frowned slightly. He did not `know how to take his foreman any more. He looked at him, but saw only trouble on his handsome face.
"I wish I knew his trouble," he said to himself. "I wonder if it would do for me to ask him?"
He made up his mind that it would not do, and so the question was not asked. Leo hated him. He knew it was unreasonable, but he could not help it. Mr. Sterling was going to rob him of Trixie, and so he hated him.
"I must go away from here," he said to himself.
He said it many times, but he did .not go. He could not. It was impossible for him to go away from Trixie, but he was fast changing under the strain of remaining there hopeless and wretched.
CHAPTER XLIV.
IT WAS NOT T'O BE.
"My darling! it would be wicked for mama not to give you a name, would it ,not?" Trixie was bendiiig- over the acnib of her darling,
It Was Not to Be.	Z63
great tears dropping from her eyes upon the white coverlid.
"Papa is gone from us, dear—gone with his sin and his sorrow. But, oh! I loved him, my little one ; and I would have loved him had he wronged me more. He was all the world to me. Oh, my darling! how can you ask me to take another to my heart as I took him who was your real father ?"
Little Beatrice stirred in her sleep as if to repel the accusation that she was urging such misery on her clear mother.
"Ah !" murmured Trixie in a heart-broken tone, "it was nothing to me to go through the world dishonored; but I dare not give you that heritage. You have done nothing to deserve such sorrow, and I shall not be so selfish. Yes, T will go to him to-morrow morning, my darling, and ask him if he still will take me. I must tell him that I do not love him and never can."
She sunk on her knees and prayed by the side of the little crib. She was asking for strength to go through the ordeal'.
"I know he will say yes, dear," she went on, after rising to her feet again, "and then I shall be married to him. But for me it will be a terrible mockery. Leo—Leo ! shall I be yours in the world to 'come? Oh, I cannot belong to any one else in heaven.
"Surely we have expiated our wrong now. You are gone, and I live in misery and sorrow. Beatrice, may you never know what I suffer for your dear sake."
The next morning as Mr. Sterling was preparing to be driven to the factory, Trixie, her face like marble, went up to him in the hall and said, in a low, unsteady voice :
"May I see you in the library, Mr. Sterling?"
"Certainly," he answered, and followed her thither.
He did not suspect at first; but when he saw how she hesitated, the color flooded his face, and he stepped eagerly to her side.
264	It Was Not to Be.
"Trixie, dear," he said, "may I—dare I hope	" "Yes, you may hope everything," she answered its a low tone.
He wound his arm about her waist and would have drawn her to him, but she gently pushed him away, saying :
"Mr. Sterling, I said I would marry you if ever the time :ame when I could. You know that the time has come, and yet you do not call upon me to fulfil my promise."
"I could not do so yet," he said.
"I know how generous you are," she said ; "and I thank you for it. Let me beg one indulgence of you." "Anything," he answered.
"You know that I do not pretend to love you. I wed you because of Beatrice. I am sure your mother has told you everything."
"She has told me everything, and, oh ! my respect for you is boundless."
"I wed you for the sake of my nameless child. When we are married I will be as dutiful and affectionate as I can; but until then, sir, may I not ask you to treat me as before?"
"You mean that you wish me to be as distant as be-fore?" he asked, a note of pain in his voice.
"Please forgive me !" she pleaded. "But do you not see? I do not love you, and your caresses would be maddening to me, and I cannot help it, indeed I can-not."
"I shall not ask you to help it," he said sadly. "I know you do not love me; but some day you shall if devotion can win love."
"I am so sorry," she said humbly.
"I beg you will not think of it again. Have you considered when you will be willing to have the marriage take place ?"
It Was Not to Be.	265
"That I will leave to your mother . and you," she answered. "Any time will suit me."
She left him and ran to her room, where she threw herself on her couch, weeping as if her heart would break.
"Ah, Heaven !" she moaned, "there is no longer any escape for me. I have passed my word."
Mr. Sterling went to his mother elated in spite of the strange way his bride had come. to him.
"Mother," he said, "Trixie has consented to wed me at any time I set. When shall it be?"
She hesitated for a moment, and then drew him down to her side.
"My son," she said, "I think it had better be soon. Something tells me that Trixie is not to be with us for long. Let us make the most of her."
"Mother," he said in a husky voice, "she is grieving her heart out for the scoundrel who deceived her! Oh, why cannot I win such a love as that ?"
"It was not to be, my son."
"And do you not think I can wean her from his memory?"
"My boy, you do not comprehend the heart of woman. Trixie gave her heart to that man, and she will never cease to love him. She left him and would not live with him ; but if he had really dishonored her in-stead of himself by his act, she still would have loved him."
"Then all I may ever hope for is the shadow of a dead love," he said sadly.
"It is all I can bid you hope for," his mother said. He bowed his head. He was not content, but he had a strong man's hope.
He believed in spite of all that he would win Trixie's love.
"When shall the wedding be?" he asked.
266	It Was Not to Be.
"Has she positively no choice ?" she asked.
"She said she had none. She left it entirely to you and me."
"Let it be one month from to-day," his mother suggested.
And so it was settled, while Trixie lay on her couch in her room, weeping with breaking heart.
That day Mr. Sterling, drawn into confidences with Leo, he knew not why, said to his taciturn foreman :
"It may interest you to know, Barnard, that I am to be married in one month from to-day."
"In one month !" was the hoarse response.
"In one month. I think it will be a long month to me."
Leo had a fierce desire to take him by the throat and choke his life out; but he turned away and went on with his work.
"I hope you will be there on that day, Barnard," said Mr. Sterling.
"I be there !" panted Leo. "I would not go if you were to give me the riches of the world. I see you married to—to	Who is the bride?"
"Mrs. Harlowe has done me the honor to take my name."
"To take your name !" whispered Leo—"to take your name!' Oh, Heaven! why was not that my privilege?"
"I did not catch that," said Mr. Sterling.
"Sterling is a name of worth," said Leo, and then turned to his work, and would not speak again except by short, curt monosyllables.
In a little while every one knew of the intended marriage, and Leo had the misery of hearing constant encomiums passed on the man who was to give Trixie a name.
Sometimes he thought he would not remain until
It Was Not to Be.	267
the wedding, but he knew in his secret heart that he would not go away until it was all over.
He knew that as sure as fate he would be found on that terrible day in a spot from which he could witness the ceremony, of which he had once made a mockery.
Sometimes the thought came to him to go to Trixie and tell her that he would not permit the marriage, but those times were his moments of frenzy.
He was too loyal to the girl he had injured to do aught against her wishes now.
He never dreamed that she loved him still, and that she would not wed but for the belief that he was dead.
He did have a glimmering idea that she was marrying to give Beatrice a name, and when he thought of that his soul was humbled indeed.
How could he complain of anything she did after what he had done?
Was not little Beatrice entitled to be brought up as an honest girl with a name like other girls?
Did he wish his child to grow up to some day curse him for what he had done to her mother? No, it was a thousand times better that Trixie should wed, but, oh ! the maddening anguish of it!
He grew more morose and taciturn as the days went rapidly by, but he attended to his work with such fidelity that no fault could be found with him.
Mr. Sterling ceased to try to talk with him.
He watched his foreman, however, because he feared he was threatened with a brain trouble.
And surely Leo gave cause for such fear, for he was haggard and thin, and his eyes were large and staring.
He was at least nearer to madness than was well for him.
For Trixie the days passed with frightful rapidity. They came as the days come to the doomed prisoner.
The only thing that sustained her was the feeling that she was doing her duty to her child, who through it all maintained that stolid calm which is the most blessed thing in a baby.
Mrs. Sterling insisted upon buying a costly trousseau for Trixie, though the poor girl would rather have been married in black, as better suited to her feelings.
She made but little opposition to anything her kind friend suggested, for down in her heart she knew that Mrs. Sterling understood her, and was only making these preparations on account of her son.
She did not wish him to feel that his wedding was a gloomy affair, and so she (lid many things which her own heart told her the poor bride would find only misery in.
Once in a while the longing came to Trixie to snatch up her baby and fly from this marriage which was so terrible to her ; but each time it needed but a look into the sweet little face of her innocent child to calm her.
"For your sake, little Beatrice! For your sake, my darling !"
The days sped along until the wedding-day came. Trixie would have given the world for one day more of respite, but how could it be?'
Everything was ready, and it was not possible to ask for another day. What excuse could she give? And after all, what did it matter—what was one day more or less?
So she submitted to be dressed in the pretty wedding-gown that had been made for her, and stood up to be decked by the nimble fingers of the maid, directed by Mrs. Sterling.
"You are very beautiful, my dear," said Mrs. Sterling, pausing in her work for a moment-in very won-der at the ex -aordinary beauty of the bride
It Was Not to Be.	269
Trixie did not even blush at the compliment. What did it matter how beautiful she was? She did not care.
All was done. The clergyman waited in the drawing-room. The happy groom—for he was happy—took her arm in his and escorted her down-stairs.
Every one exclaimed at her beauty, and said her husband was a lucky man. Only some of them noticed how pale and indifferent she seemed.
On the porch, hidden behind a Virginia creeper, was Leo, peering through the window, his eyes glowing like living coals out of his white, haggard face.
When Trixie came into the room, escorted by Mr. Sterling, Leo clenched his hands and bit his lip.
"My God !" he groaned, "how can I live through this? What right has any one to take her from me? I wonder I do not go mad with all this fever in my brain."
He saw them take their places together in front of the clergyman, and although he could not hear the words he knew what was being said.
"I should know," he muttered miserably, "I have twice gone through the same ceremony."
He followed everything with eager, fascinated attention, now craning forward, and now starting back in fear of being seen.
And as the ceremony went on that took his Trixie from him, it seemed to him that he was tasting the uttermost of the bitterness of life.
"Have I atoned yet?" he muttered hoarsely.
He kept his burning gaze on the pair at the altar, and saw the groom lean over with joy in his eyes, and press a kiss on Trixie's lips.
"Enough ! enough !" he cried aloud, and covering his face with his hands, fled away from the house. "I will never return," he said in his awful misery;
270	She Will Be Dishonored.

and ran to the railway-station and boarded the first train that came along.
"Only death can cure my misery now," he cried to himself.
CHAPTER XLV.
WHILE I LIVE SHE WILL BE DISHONORED.
Trixie, with pale face and composed demeanor that belied her wildly throbbing heart, was receiving the congratulations of the guests, while Leo was sitting in the railway-car, his eyes fixed moodily on the flying landscape.
He saw nothing that was before his eyes, but only the picture of Trixie being kissed by the man who was her husband.
The train whirled on, and he knew not where he was going until the conductor came to him for his ticket.
"I have none," Leo answered, with so wild a mien that the conductor was startled. "How much shall I pay?"
"Where are you going?"
"I do not know—anywhere ! Where does this train go?"
"It goes to New York," was the reply. "Do you wish to go there?"
"As well there as anywhere," was the response. The conductor shrugged his shoulders, told Leo the price of his ticket, and made him out one.
He sat moodily, his head resting on the palm of his hand, his eyes fixed on the landscape.
"It looks as if we were going to have a storm," said a hearty, pleasant voice from behind him
Leo heard hut ignored the speaker, though he knew the rerm' —'	' ld ressed to him.
She Will Be Dishonored,	271
Why should he answer the drivel of every stranger? What did he care for such trifles as the weather:
The speaker glanced with an air of concern at the conductor, who shrugged his shoulders and whispered:
"Looks to me on the very verge of madness."
"I will make him talk," said the person who had addressed Leo.
The conductor went on, and the stranger leaned over the back of Leo's seat and said in his cheeriest tones:
"A shower would be a good thing, would it not? The country hereabout seems to need rain."
Leo turned to look at the importunate stranger who wished to engage him in conversation.
His blue eyes opened wide as he looked, and these strange words, full of bitterness, fell from his lips:
"Is it you? We are well met. I dare not curse you, yet but for you I might to-day be the happiest of men! Oh, Heaven ! why am I not dead ?"
The stranger stared at him as if he believed the young man had really taken leave of his senses.
"Why, why !" he stammered. "I do not understand you. You take me for some one else, I fancy. I do not remember ever meeting you before. Certainly I have never intentionally done you an injury."
"Of what account is intention? I never intended to injure her I loved, but I did, and now I am dying, with my very soul rent in twain with anguish."
There was such a sincerity of sorrow and despair in Leo's voice that the other could not be angry with him.
"Poor fellow !" he said. "But in what have I done you wrong?"
"Are you not the Reverend Mr. Glenham ?"
"Surely I am, and I may say that I am grieved in-deed if I have injured you by intention. or without. Pray, tell me why you hold me accountable ?"
"You married me to a human fiend, and I became
272	She Will Be Dishonored.
a scoundrel, and ruined the life of her who loved me, and whom I loved better than my life."
"Married you! I do not recall it. When was it? What is your name ?"
"What does it matter? All is over now."
"It matters much. Tell me your name."
"Leo Brainerd."
Mr. Glenham started.
"And do you claim that I married you to Miss Madeline Delmar ?" he asked.
"You see," said Leo bitterly, "you do remember now."
"Ah !" said Mr. Glenham, "what I remember is that I did not marry you two. It was a trick of some sort. I cannot pretend to tell you what trick. I only know that you and Miss Delmar were never married. She, at least, is satisfied of that fact."
Leo stared at him as if he had become bereft of his senses. Mr. Glenham became alarmed. "Did you understand me ?" he asked.
"You say you did not marry us ?" Leo demanded slowly.
"I did not marry you two."
"You say we are not man and wife?"
"There is no record or other document in support of such a thing," was the response. "I searched care-fully with Miss Delmar, and I am positive."
"It does not seem credible. I saw you at the time."
"You saw an impostor," Mr. Glenham said. "I explained all that to Miss Delmar and she was thoroughly satisfied. She could not be otherwise. The same evidence is open to you."
Leo covered his face with his hands in order to think it out. He had not been married to Madeline. Then Trixie was his lawful wife.
"Merci	r `.:a',-cn !" he moaned. "She is n_ine, but
She Will Be Dishonored.	273
another possesses her. Dare I go to her, now? I shall be too late. The curse of Heaven is on me. Let me die !"
In his frenzy he would have gone to the platform to , throw himself off the moving train.
"Unhappy man! what would you do?"
"I would die ere I can bring more misery on the woman I worship. She is my wife—the mother of my child, and yet I saw her wedded to another with these very eyes. Why did Heaven permit it? You are a clergyman and should be able to explain that. Why did Heaven permit that awful thing? If I live, she is dishonored. Let me die ! it is better."
"Tell me everything," said Mr. Glenham, terribly shocked. "Perhaps I can help you."
Leo looked at him for a moment, then said mechanically :
"Her name was Trixie Harlowe. To-day she married a man named Sterling. This is enough. My destruction lies in that little."
"Go back now. You may be in time," said the horrified clergyman.
"It is impossible ; but I will go back," said Leo, with a calmness that was more terrible than raving would have been.
"He will destroy himself if he does not find her in time," the clergyman said to himself.
But there was nothing he could do.
He let Leo get off at the first stopping-place. He shook him heartily by the hand and said a cheery word to him.
Leo went into the station and asked questions.
He learned how to get back to the little village, and then with the calmness of one upon whom death has made a mark, he waited or traveled as the case might be.
The car- i i not run so that he could mp' ^ :, speedy
474	Pure and Good as the Angels.
journey ; but he never seemed to fret over it. He did the best he could.
It was morning when he stepped out of the cars at the village.
It was very early; but that did not hinder him from going at once to the house of Mrs. Sterling.
He did not go to the front door, but to the back, where he accosted a servant.
"Where did the bride and groom go when they left here?"
He was not even sure that they had left home ; but he put his question in that way, nevertheless.
"They went to Albany on their way to Niagara Falls, I believe."
"Yes, that is likely," said Leo, in a quiet tone. Then he walked away from the house.
"It is too late, now," he said to himself. "I can see but one way. As long as I live she will be dishonored. By my death she will become his lawful wife. I hope Heaven will forgive me. I shall die at once. It will be a relief. Ah ! how I have suffered !"
He took the street that led out into the more open country. He stopped and muttered :
"P'er'haps she left little Beatrice behind. I have a right to kiss her good-by. i will go there first. After that it will be time."
It was a long time since he had felt so much at peace with himself.
"Perhaps this is my atonement," he said.
CHAPTER XLVI.
PURE AND GOOD AS THE ANGELS.
Leo had kissed his child—his child and Trixie's—" and had gone away from it with death and despair his hear.
Pure and Good as the Angels.	275
He knew he had lost Trixie now, and he could not. doubt that he had Iost her love as well ; for he could not comprehend how she could have wedded another if she still Ioved him.
"It is my punishment," he said to himself, "and I must accept it. But she is innocent and should not suffer. I must die, and she must know I am dead, lest in the time to come she should learn the truth."
To die was nothing to him, now that he believed she no longer loved him; and he was in such a frame of mind that it seemed to him his duty to die to save her from the infamy again of finding herself a wife in fact, but not in name.
His anguish was not at the thought of death. but at the thought that he had forfeited Trixie-'s love. He did not blame her for an instant.
To him it seemed only right that she should marry another, and so protect herself and give her child a name.
He went from the house to the little store in the village where he knew they kept all sorts of things.
He tried to put the awful rook of despair from his face, but -it was not possible, and the storekeeper said afterward that he was frightened by the expression that was on the face of the handsome foreman.
"You keep revolvers, do you not?" Leo asked, trying to smile in an indifferent way.
"Yes, sir," the man replied hesitatingly, though without the remotest suspicion of what Leo wished the deadly weapon for. "I have several kinds."
"I want one that carries a large ball," Leo said.
"Yes, sir," said the man, bringing out several cases and opening them. "I suppose you are out at night, sometimes."
"Yes, and one never knows when he may need a weapon. This looks like a good one. I think I will take it."
276	Pure and Good as the Angels.
"That is the most expensive I have. Mr. Sterling bought the mate to it. A pity he didn't have it the time he had the fracas with the other foreman."
"Yes," replied Leo absently, weighing the pistol in his hand.
"Ah !" said the storekeeper reflectively, "that was a lucky thing for his bride. Why, if it hadn't been for that she would be working in the factory now. She played her cards well, though."
"What do you mean, you scoundrel!" cried Leo fiercely, his hand across the counter and on the man's throat in an instant. "How dare you speak so of that lady ?"
"I—I mean no harm, sir. I beg pardon, sir !" stammered the poor wretch in a terrible fright. "I—I know she is a lady every inch."
Leo threw him away from him with an impatient, contemptuous push, and threw down the price of the weapon.
"Take care how you malign your betters," he said hoarsely.
"I—I didn't mean any harm," the man said abjectly, with a lively remembrance of the sinewy hand that had held him by the throat. "I only repeated what others are saying."
Leo turned to go as if he would not waste words over the matter; but stopped as he reached the door, and said :
"The worst that any one can ever say of Mr. Sterling's wife is that she was a working girl; and I tell you, sir, that that is a title she may well be proud of. She was neither high-born nor rich, but she was virtue itself—pure and good as the angels."
"No one ever said anything else," the storekeeper hastened to say. "Everybody admits that she is as good as she is beautiful ; and words could say no inure "
Yure and Good as the Angels.	277
Leo left the store, muttering to himself in a voice of agony :
"As good as she is beautiful ! Alas ! that she is lost to me ! Ah, Heaven ! and the terrible part is that she is lost to me in the very moment when she is mine by the laws of man as well as by the laws of Heaven.
"Ah! I can comprehend now why I was permitted to live when I prayed Heaven to let me (lie if it was not right that I should go on living with Trixie as if she were my wife.
"I was doing her no wrong, even while I was injuring myself. I was sinking myself to the bottomless pit, while she, in her purity, was every moment drawing nearer to the angels."
He went to his room and set about arranging his affairs, his thoughts all the while busy with the course he should pursue in regard to his death.
All he cared for was to so act that when Trixie some day discovered the truth she would not have to look upon herself in any wrong light.
"I must make her think I died before the wedding," he muttered. "But no ; that alone will not be enough. Madeline may discover what has happened; and then she will drive my darling to misery and shame. No, I must think of some better way than has yet occurred to me. What shall it be? What shall it be ?"
He had finished the few things that were necessary, and he began to pace the floor in his anxiety.
"I must save her honor and her happiness," he muttered over and over again.
He paced the floor with corrugated brow, suffering such agony as could not be measured by one who has not himself suffered the tortures of the' damned.
Suddenly a thought carne to him, and he stopped his hurried walk. He held both hands to his head while he reflected on the sudden thought that had conic i o him.
"It is the best way," he cried. "So she .shall he saved from the wretchedness of any discovery."
He threw on his hat and coat and' hastened out of the house. His steps took him back to the Sterling mansion, which he had thought never to see again.
"I wish to see Mrs. Sterling," he said to the servant who came to the door.
Mrs. Sterling came down to him at once, deeming that some business matter connected with the factory had brought the new foreman to her.
"Ah !" she said pleasantly, "is there anything at the factory needing my attention?'"
Leo shook his head.
"No, madam," he replied in a low tone, "I do not come on your business but on my own. May I hope that you will hear me to the end?"
"Surely," she replied wonderingly.
"And will you reply to certain questions I shall ask you without taking offense if I swear to you that T shall ask nothing in idle curiosity but only with solemn earnestness and by a sacred right."
"You alarm me while you arouse my curiosity," she replied. "Please be seated."
She seated herself, but Leo remained standing, his face very pale, and his blue eyes almost black with the intensity of his feeling.
"Mrs. Sterling," he said in a voice choked with emotion, "I take it for granted that you know the story of the past of your son's bride. Is it so ?"
Mrs. Sterling started and looked wonderingly at Leo.
"It is so," she said with cold solemnity. "What do you know of it?"
"Did she tell you how she was betrayed by the wretch who should have given his heart's bloorl to keep 'er fair name unsnlirched ?"
"Yes,"
Pure and Good as the Ange's.	279
There was something so cold and stern in the voice of Mrs. Sterling that Leo could not help seeing how the world would judge his act. But the world could be no harder than he was to himself.
"I am the man," he said in a husky voice.
"You !" cried Mrs. Sterling, recoiling in horror and dislike. "I would not have believed it of you. You are Leo Brainerd ?"
"I am Leo Brainerd."
"And you are not dead," she cried with a sudden thought of Trixie.
Leo started, a new light breaking in on him.
"Did she think me dead? Is that why she wedded again? Oh, tell me !"
Mrs. Sterling looked at him with cold suspicion. It was impossible for her to comprehend the agony of his contrition. Her only thought was to save Trixie the knowledge of his existence, knowing that she would be wretched to know that Leo was alive and she the wife of another.
"She wedded my son," she answered, "because he loved her well enough to think nothing of the wrong that was not hers, and because she wished her child to grow. up untainted by the wrong her father had bestowed upon her."
Leo's face was ghastly white.
"I merit all the scorn, all the contumely you can heap on me," he said. "I came to you with no though of having my crime condoned, but only that my darling might suffer no more through me."
"As long as you live she will suffer," Mrs. Sterling said indignantly.
"I know that," he answered more calmly than lie had yet spoken ; "and I do not intend to cumber the earth for long. I shall die before night falls."
She star, ed in horror.
28o	Pure and Good as the Angels.
"Oh, I did not mean that !" she cried in dismay. "I hate you for the wrong you did Trixie, but nothing can excuse self-destruction."
"There is no other way," he said.
She looked up at him with greater kindness. If he was willing to die to make Trixie happy, then he could not be bad.
"There must be some other way," she said; "and if you are in earnest in wishing her well, we can find some other way."
"I can see no other way," he said sadly. "I know that it is a terrible thing to destroy oneself, but I owe Trixie every reparation in my power, and even at the cost of my future happiness."
His intense earnestness, the honesty of his purpose, impressed Mrs. Sterling, and she cried out involuntarily:
"If you loved her so, how could you have committed such a crime ?"
"Alas !" he answered, "I have no excuse to make, for there can be no excuse for such a thing. But this I will say : I saw her threatened by an implacable foe; although I had gone to her to tell her the whole truth, I choked back the words I would have uttered, and in my mad desire to save her, I did her this wrong."
For the first time, Mrs. Sterling felt sorrow and pity for him. She saw that, despite what he had done to Trixie, he had loved her with a true devotion. His willingness to die for her happiness now was a certain proof of it.
"No wonder Trixie loved you," she cried.
"Loved me !" he repeated. "Did she love me when she married your son?"
"Alas, yes ! If it had not been that she believed you dead, she would not have married my son. As lone- as von lived she looked upon you as her hus-
Pure and Good as the Angels.	281
band, though the law did not give her the right to your name!"
"My God ! this is more than I can bear," groaned Leo, sinking into a chair such a picture of unutterable woe that Mrs. Sterling cried out :
"What difference can that fact make ?"
"What difference? Ah! if I had only known it we might now be dwelling happily together, man and wife before man and God."
"How?" cried Mrs. Sterling. "Is your wife dead, then ?"
"She never was my wife. The ceremony that united us was a mockery ; I did not know it until yesterday, too late to stop the Wedding. Trixie has been my true wife all along."
Mrs. Sterling started to her feet ; the whole terrible truth flashed on her comprehension.
"Then she is not my son's wife !" she cried aghast. Leo shook his head.
"Do you comprehend now?" he asked miserably. "If I had known it in time, I might have saved her this thing. I might have claimed her for my wife. But it is too late now. She must never know that she is not his wife."
"But still," gasped Mrs. Sterling, in terrible distress, "she is not his wife! You were alive when the ceremony was performed !"
"That is the thought that brought me to you," he said huskily. "She must be married to him again at once—I mean after I am dead. Then she need never know, and Madeline Delmar will be powerless to strike at her.
"Do you not see that all this is her awful work? Who but she could have made it known that I was dead. She had discovered that she was not my wife, and she struck this subtle blow at Trixie. Do you think I will let my darling suffer? Oh, no—no! I can die for her, and I will !"
282	Pure and Good as the Angels.
"You must not," cried Mrs. Sterling. "Heaven wig_ not forgive you if you do, nor me if I permit it."
"It is my punishment," he said. "You have no part in it. It only remains for you to save my darling by insisting, upon some pretext, that she wed your son over again. I must leave that for you."
"I will not permit it," she cried, catching him by the arm.
"What!" he cried, "do you, too, think there are circumstances that permit one to contemplate the dishonor of a pure girl ?"
"Oh, Heaven !" wailed Mrs. Sterling, all her composure gone, "how can I decide ? I know it is not right to destroy oneself."
"You have no voice in this matter," Leo said, with noble simplicity. "I, too, know it is wrong; but can I hesitate when it is a choice between my misery and hers? Ah, you little know how I love my darling if you think I will hesitate. Farewell! Be good to my wife. Heaven be thanked that I did not wrong her. I shall be no more ere the sun sets. Farewell !"
She, screamed out in the terror of seeing him go from her on his fell errand of self-destruction; but he did not heed her.
He ran swiftly out of the house and disappeared in the woods as quickly as he could reach them.
"Now, I may die in peace," he said to himself. "I know that she loved me to the last, and I am happy. Oh, that I might live and earn her forgiveness ! But, since that cannot be, at least I can rejoice that I have never lost her dear love. Now let me go far from here and die in some place where I shall not be known, and where only my new name of Barnard will be given to a wondering and shocked world."
CHAPTER XLVII.
It seemed to Mrs. Sterling that an invisible force held her when she tried to leap after Leo to withhold him from his terrible purpose.
He was gone from the house before she could summon the strength to run after him and plead with him again to desist from his design of self-destruction; and yet she did not know what alternative to offer him.
It was as clear to her as to him that Trixie would die of shame and horror, were she to discover that she had wedded again while Leo, now her true husband, was alive.
Mrs. Sterling stood at the door of the house, wringing her hands in anguish, and wondering what she should do to prevent the catastrophe, when the nurse-maid who was in charge of little Beatrice, came runing toward the house, her face white and frightened.
"Oh, Mrs. Sterling ! oh, ma'am!" the girl cried, at sight of her mistress.
"What?" gasped the troubled lady.
It seemed to her that some new and terrible calamity was about to come to her, although she did not guess the truth.
"Beatrice, ma'am !" gasped the girl, incoherent with terror.
"What about the baby? Speak !" cried Mrs. Sterling, this new alarm taking her mind for the moment from Leo.
"Gone ! oh, it's gone!"
"Gone where?"
"Oh, I don't know. I left it in its carriage sound asleep .,.,d my back wasn't turned five minutes. When
284	She Shall Be an. Outcast.
I returned it was gone, and nothing but this note for you in the carriage."
Instinctively Mrs. Sterling snatched the note from the agitated girl and tore it open. It began abruptly and as if addressed to no one in particular, although the address on the envelope was Mrs. Sterling's.
"The nameless brat shall be brought up as befits its mother. She shall never know a better life than her mother has led. She shall be an outcast all her life."
Mrs. Sterling staggered back against the house, her face white as death.
"Oh !" she moaned, "how have I kept the trust her mother reposed in me?"
It seemed for a moment as if her faculties were paralyzed, and that she could not even think. Then she rallied as suddenly as she had been struck the terrible blow.
"Quick, girl !" she cried. "Go to the factory and tell there what has happened. Beatrice has been stolen. Tell them to send out men to have the country searched at once before the robbers can escape."
The girl stared for a moment, and then fled away like a deer, eager to do something to offset the mischief her carelessness had done.
Mrs. Sterling ran into the house and called the servants together, and addressed them in a few sharp words.
"Little Beatrice has been stolen by some wicked person. It can have happened but a few minutes ago. One of you go to the railway-station, another to the village, another take a horse and hurry to the next station above. Each one spread the news, and each one telegraph in every direction, describing Beatrice. I will decide upon my own course in a moment."
Nothing more was needed to make the servants hasten to do Mrs. Sterling's bidding, for every one loved Trixie and her child.
She Shalt Be an Oute	285
They wasted no time, but scattered to arouse the neighborhood, each taking the task best suited to him.
The one who went to the railway-station stopped every person he met on the road to impart his intelligence.
Once it was a woman who was sauntering along by the roadside.
"Have you seen any one going along by here with a little baby ?" he asked.
The woman bent her black eyes on him and answered:
"I have seen no one until you came along. Whose baby? What is the matter ?"
"The baby of young Mrs. Sterling. Tell everybody you see; I must go on."
The black-eyed woman looked after him for a few moments, an evil smile on her face.
"Aha !" she muttered, "so my vengeance falls on her. Curse her, curse her !"
A rustling in the bushes behind her made her start and turn quickly.
. "Leo !" she cried, involuntarily stepping .back.
"Yes, Leo," he answered. "What have you done to my child?"
"Nothing; I had nothing to do with it," she cried, stepping back before his threatening gaze.
"Nothing !" he repeated harshly; "then why this disguise as a gipsy? You have not come here in this guise for nothing, Madeline Delmar."
"Madeline Brainerd," she repeated quickly.
"No," he thundered, "Madeline Delmar, as you well know. I was never married to you. What have you done with my child ?"
"I know nothing of her. Why should I touch your brat?"
"Because of all the evil that has happened to me or Trixie, you have been the author. Once more I ask you where is my child?"
"I do not know, Leo Brainerd, and if I did, I tell you plainly I would not tell you. Oh! I hate you and yours, and if by word of mine I could condemn then both to everlasting torment I would do so !"
Driven beyond forbearance by her evil words, Leo sprung toward her and caught her by the two shoulders, his eyes blazing and his whole form trembling with rage.
She cowered under his glance, but her own eyes flamed with a demoniac rage as they met his.
"You are unwise to drive me too far," he said in a low tone of intense passion, "for I am a desperate man. To you I owe it that my life is worthless, and I know I should be doing my darling the greatest service if I would follow the promptings of my passion, and take you out of the world with me. Where is my child, I say ?"
But frightened though she was, Madeline Delmar would not yield if she knew. She gave him hack glance for glance, and openly defied him.
"Have I driven you to desperation ?" she cried. "IIa, ha! I knew you would writhe under the last blow I struck you and her. She is wedded to another, and now her real disgrace begins. Ah ! I knew she was your wife when I plotted to make her wed him."
A white look came into his face, and it seemed to him that his eyes were filled with blood. He hardly knew what he did. All he was `conscious of was that he caught the wicked girl in his arms, and carried her into the woods, despite her shrill screams.
"Ah !" he hissed, "ci y out and alarm the whole world, if you can. I came here to think of my own death, and now I can as easily compass yours. You
She Shall Be an Outcast.	287
are not fit to live," he went on in a tone of frenzy, "and I shall be doing the world a. service in ridding it of you. Pray, if you can."
She saw that he was half-crazed by passion and the sense of his bitter wrongs, and she became terribly frightened. She did not wish to die.
"Leo," she cried, "you would not do it. Oh, Leo!"
And she covered her face with her hands, for he had taken his revolver from his pocket.
"Madeline," he said in a hoarse voice, "I know it was by your act that my child was stolen. Tell me where it is, and I will spare you, but delay one minute, and I swear to you I will send your guilty soul to its outraged Maker."
She cowered for a second, but a glance up into his implacable, wild eyes bade her hasten if she would save her life.
"I will tell you the truth," she cried. "But put that terrible pistol away. I am frightened by its murderous look."
Leo put it in his pocket, but eyed her narrowly as if he believed she would attempt to deceive him in some way.
"Tell me the truth," he said, "and you shall live, but deceive me, and I swear to you I will hunt you over the face of the earth and kill you where I find you with as little remorse as -if you were a venomous rep-tile."
He spoke in a low, subdued tone that was far more frightful to her than if he had raved, for it told her that he was holding himself in check only by a terrible effort.
"I did not take the child," she said.
"I ask where it is," he said in the same measured way, 4, and wandering toward his l cket.
288	the Shall Be an Outcast.
"I do not know. I will tell you all I know, Leo. Do not touch that pistol again. You have murder in your eyes, Leo."
"It is in every drop of my blood," he said slowly. "It dances before my eyes, and throbs in my veins. It is in my heart. Speak quickly."
"I hired some gipsies to steal it," she cried fear-fully. "I do not know where they are, but they were to take the child to the gipsy-den in Mott Street, New York. Here—here is the address."
She fumbled in her pocket and brought out a piece of paper, on which was written in a shaky hand an address.
He glanced at it, and thrust it into his pocket. "What arrangement had you with them for stealing it ?"
"I was to send them five hundred dollars."
"Give me all the particulars," he said peremptorily. "Let there be no evasion with me."
He looked so terrible that she cried out:
"I was to send a messenger with this ring"—handing him a ring—"and they were to tell him what had been done, and where the child was."
"You have told me the truth ?" he demanded. "I swear I have."
"Then go! But remember that I will find you out if you have deceived me. Then woe unto you ; for I am a man doomed to die, and have no hope."
She waited for no second bidding, but glided away through the woods.
He watched her until she was lost to sight.
"I may not die until I have returned Beatrice to her mother," he said ; and walked rapidly away.
I MUST SAVE MY DAUGHTER.
The country had been roused, and it would have seemed that it would be impossible for the kidnapers to get away undiscovered.
Nevertheless the day went by, and the next one, and no trace of the missing child was found.
Mrs. Sterling did all she could, and then waited in agony.
Able detectives from the city were called by wire to cooperate with the town and county officers. And the story filled the papers. Yet the cunning child-stealers were not discovered.
Trixie and her husband were telegraphed to hasten back, and Mrs. Sterling was awaiting their coming in misery and despair.
In the meanwhile Leo had taken the first train to the city. He was feverishly anxious to find Beatrice, so that he might get out of the way.
There was a light in his eyes that made people look at him twice and wonder what was the matter with him.
"They cannot have reached here yet," he said to himself as he alighted from the train in the Grand Central Depot. "I will go home. I will tell my mother of the harm she has aided in doing, and I will ask her to repent. She is my mother, though she has been cruel to Trixie."
He hardly knew what he was doing. There was a sort of well-ordered madness in his blood, and it had been there since the moment he had sprung out on Madeline on the edge of the woods.
Peonle on the streets as he walked along, drew to
one side to let him pass, and more than one murmured that he was mad.
He walked up the broad stone steps of his mother's palatial residence, and rang the bell. The servant who opened the door gave a cry of pleasure, and then of stifled terror.
Leo hardly noticed the man, but said in measuted tones, without any inflection :
"Tell my mother I am here."
He went into the reception-room and sat down. A few moments later his mother swept into the room, her arms wide open, a cry of wonderful joy on her lips.
"Oh, Leo, Leo ! you have returned to me at last. I heard that you were dead."
"No, mother," he said coldly, repulsing her, "I am not dead, but I soon shall be, and I have come to you only to bid you repent of the evil you have done."
She looked into his face and noted the wildness of his eyes, the red, burning spot on his cheeks.
"Leo," she wailed, "what is the matter?"
"There is not time to tell you," he said. "I am to die because of your cruelty to one I loved."
"Oh, Leo !" she cried sadly, "I have long since repented of that. If it were possible for her to forgive me, I would do anything to win it. Look at my face, Leo, and see how remorse has fed upon my cheeks. Oh ! I have suffered with every, passing day. Will she forgive. me, Leo?"
"She is an angel. Yes, she will forgive you. And I forgive you, too. I am glad I came to see you, mother. Farewell ! I hope you will never in your life for-get that purity and virtue are the only grounds for pride. Farewell ! you will never see me again."
"You are ill, Leo," she wailed, trying to clasp limy h heir arms_ "You must not go from we "
I Must Save My Daughter.	291
"I must," he replied. "I have a duty higher than that of son. It is that of parent. I must go save my daughter from misery. Farewell!"
"You are ill," she pleaded, holding his hand with both of hers.
"I am well enough to do what is assigned to me to do," he answered in a monotonous voice. "Something is pressing hard here," he added, touching his fore-head with his disengaged hand, "and it feels as if it would burst soon ; but I shall be able to do my work. Farewell; mother!"
He broke from her and ran into the street, where he hailed a passing cab and jumped in.
"Where to ?" the driver asked.
"Down-town," was the response. "I will tell you later where to go."
The cab carried him rapidly down-town until he attracted the driver's attention by rapping on the glass, when he gave him the address on the paper Made-line had given him.
"They cannot have reached there yet," he muttered with a frown of pain, "but I will go there, for some-thing is the matter. I do not know what I am doing. I wonder if I am going mad! Something happened when I was with Madeline. I would have killed her. I am glad I did not."
The carriage went on and on, and finally stopped in a neighborhood where carriages seldom went. The driver looked his disgust when Leo stepped out and paid him, giving him thrice too much.
Fixing his mind on the task before him with an effort that troubled him, Leo went into an alley and followed it with a sort of shudder.
He asked a question of an evil-looking man he met, and was directed to the building be sought. In the doorway was a group of desperate-looking wretches, who eve(' him suspiciously.
292	:\lust Save My 1iaughtei.
He looked at his slip of paper for guidance, and in a slow, hesitating manner, quite new to him, asked for the person whose name was written there.
The men stared at him, and then one of them offered to guide him, casting meaning glances at the other men.
Leo noticed nothing, but followed with a dull f eeling that, if the adventure did not end soon, something would happen to him.
The man ushered him into a room filled with tobacco-smoke and reeking with the odor of liquor. A number of men and women were crowded in there, talking and laughing.
Leo's guide whispered something to the man nearest him, and receiving a low-spoken reply, led Leo to the other end of the room, saying suddenly :
"Here is the man you want !"
At the same moment Leo's hands were caught be-hind him and held as if in *a vise, and a steady, harsh voice said in his ear:
"One word and you are a dead man. Speak law when you answer my questions. What do you want here?"
"Free my hands," answered Leo, speaking mechanic-ally, "and I will deliver a ring which is my pass-port."
"Let him go," said a grim voice, which Leo could dimly see belonged to a burly man sitting in front of him. "Now give me the ring. What does it mean ?"
Leo handed him the ring and said :
"I was to give you five hundred dollars and you were to tell me about a-	"
"That will do! Come with me!"
The man arose and walked away, Leo following in a stupor, which was every moment increasing.
CHAPTER XLIX.
A MADMAN'S QUIET WAS HIS.
The man who led Leo was a dark-visaged man, who looked as if a deed of blood would be far more to his liking than any other.
Leo was only dimly aware of this, for a mist seemed to be growing in front of his eyes, which made it difficult for him to see.
The man stopped in a small, foul-smelling room and turned abruptly on Leo.
"Now go on !" he said gruffly, looking at Leo with suspicion.
"I was to pay you five hundred dollars on the assurance that you had taken the baby as agreed on."
"Got it with you ?" the man demanded with an evil look.
"Certainly," Leo answered, "I brought it with me because I had a proposition to make."
"What is it?" the man demanded, fingering the haft of a great knife.
Leo did not notice his movements. Besides, his head seemed whirling, and he was hardly conscious of anything. He was merely carrying out a plan he had already formed.
"First tell me if the child is here yet."
"Yes."
"It was quickly done," Leo said. "I hardly expected the child to get here so soon."
"It is here. The work was in the hands of one who seldom fails at that sort of thing. What is the proposition? Let me have the money since you have it."
"Let me see the child first," said Leo stolidly.
The man looked at him, and shrugged his shoulders. Then he placed his dirty fingers in his mouth and whistled.
A woman came to the door at the summons, and said something in a language Leo did not comprehend. The man replied to her, giving an order, as Leo sup-posed, from the tone.
"The baby will be brought here," the man said. "Give me the money.
"When I see the baby." Leo answered.
The man laughed grimly.
"You are a fool," he said. "Don't you know you are in my power here, and that I could take the money if I wished?"
"It would do you no good," said Leo. "There is
much more to be gained by treating me well."
"Do you know the child?" the man asked. "How
are you going to tell whether I cheat you or not ?"
"I know the child. I saw it before it was kidnaped.
The lady had to trust me long ago, because she needs
me to carry out her whole plan."
"All right," the man said. "It is so much the bet-" ter, for we don't intend to cheat you. What is the matter with you? Are you sick? What makes you look like that?"
"I guess I am a little sick," Leo said.
"Or a good deal drunk," the man laughed. "`-Well, that is your business, not mine. Here is the baby."
The woman brought a baby into the room, and Leo sprung eagerly to look at its face. Something told him not to betray himself, and he stood silent, looking down into the placid face of little Beatrice.
The man had not lied to him. His child was there before him. He would be able to return her to Trixie. "Well," said the man, "is it the child?"
"Yes."
"Take it away !" said the man peremptorily, and then apparently gave the same order in the other language.
"Wait a moment," Leo said, holding out his hand„ "My proposition concerns the baby."
A Madman's Quiet Was His.	295
"That doesn't matter. The baby won't run away, I guess. Give me the money."
It was useless to struggle against the will of the man. The woman left the room, and Leo drew a pack-age of bills from his pocket and handed it to the man.
The fellow took the money and counted it carefully. Then he placed it in an inner pocket of his vest, and, having carefully buttoned it up, said :
"Now the proposition."
"I want you to hand the child over to me."
"I was to keep it, and bring it up here," said the man.
"I know it; but the latest plan is to give it to me." "All right ; but I haven't heard your proposition yet," and he leered at Leo.
"My proposition, of course, is to pay you for giving me the child."
"How much?"
"How much do you want for it ?"
"How much have you with you ?"
"Nothing. The lady will be waiting, and will give you what we agree upon."
The fellow laughed and emitted a horrible oath. "I see you did not trust me too much," he said. "Will you give a thousand ?"
"A thousand is a great deal," said Leo, "especially as the child is a dangerous thing to have about."
"Easy to ged rid of," the wretch said, drawing his hand suggestively across his throat.
Leo shuddered. A faint feeling was taking possession of him. He dared not parley any longer. Indeed it was not to bargain that he had talked so much, but to rob the man of suspicion.
"Well," he said, "I will agree to the thousand dollars."
"Let us go get it. Where is the lady?"
"Waiting a few blocks from here." Leo answered.
296	A Madman's Quiet Was His.
"I hope," said the man, eying Leo ominously, "that there is no trick in this. I would be an ugly man for that."
"Would I go about it this way, if I was up to any trick ?'" Leo asked.
"Come on, then !" the man said.
"Bring the baby, too," said Leo.
"That would be a great risk," the fellow said reflectively.
"But what else could be done?" demanded Leo, keeping his head clear only by the most strenuous efforts. "It is the baby we want."
"Well," said the man, "I suppose we can arrange it. You walk ahead, I will follow. The woman with the baby will be in the rear. The moment you give me the money, the woman will run up and put the baby in your hands. Can you hold a baby, do you think ?" he asked, with a coarse laugh. "A baby is a mighty heavy thing for most men to carry."
"I can hold the baby," Leo answered.
"Follow me, then. I will tell the woman now."
Leo staggered up against the wall of the room as he tried to follow the man, and the weary thought came to him:
"Oh, if I can but get her away from here and in her mother's arms, I shall die in peace. What is this that troubles me ?"
The man laughed at him, believing him intoxicated. He even offered him a drink, but Leo refused it. The man called out something to the woman, and a conversation followed.
"She doesn't like to take the risk," he said to Leo. "Confound the little brat ! I'm only too glad to ged rid of it. Come on!"
He led Leo to the street, and the fresh air revived Leo somewhat. though the man laughed and said
A Madman's Quiet Was His.	297
"You've been going it pretty hard,, eh? You'd bet-ter sober up, or you'll be having trouble."
Leo led the way for a couple of blocks, then turned and said:
"Here is where she should be. I fancy she was afraid to remain here. Never mind! I have the money. Here it is. Where is the baby?"
The man snatched the money, Leo reeled as if he had been struck, and it seemed to him as if the world was growing (lark.
Something was thrust into his arms. He caught it convulsively and clung to it. He knew it must be Bea-trice. He wondered why she did not cry out.
He turned from where he stood and staggered along the street, boys and men hooting at him for being drunk.
He knew that his senses were failing him, and it was a sort of instinct that made him hurry to get away from the vile neighborhood he was in.
Suddenly a terrible thought flashed across his brain: What if the child he held in his arms were not Bea-trice?
He stopped and leaned against a railing, steadying himself as well as he could, and trying to clear his brain.
He hardly dared look down, for it seemed so probable that he had been deceived. And, if he had, what could he do? He knew he would lose his senses ere
long.
By a mighty effort he seemed to force himself to see clearly.
He looked down and drew the shawl that enveloped the child away from its face.
For a moment everything swam before him. Then the little face grew gradually distinct, and he smiled. "It	my little darling!" he murmured.
298	You Must Wed Her Again.

When he wondered why the little face was so white and still.
"Have they murdered her?" he whispered to him-self.
A crowd was gathering, and, when he observed it, he stifled the wild cry of misery and dread that rose to his lips, and pressed the little face to his.
"It seems cold." he muttered.
He did not realize that his own face was burning so that any other would be cold to it.
He hugged his precious burden closer to his breast and staggered on again.
If there had been a policeman there to see him, no doubt he would have been arrested and thrown in prison for being intoxicated.
The crowd followed him a little way, but he did not give them name for name, nor make any response to their gibes ; so they dropped away, and he staggered on with little Beatrice hugged tight to his breast.
But everything spun around him, and at every few steps he was obliged to pause to collect himself. He did not even know where he was going.
His only consciousness was that he had saved little Beatrice.
He went blindly on until his knees gave out under him, and, with the still little form in his arms, he sunk unconscious to the pavement.
CHAPTER L.
YOU MUST WED HER AGAIN.
The agony which Leo suffered was no greater than that which Trixie experienced as she sat by the side of Mr. Sterling, and realized that she was his wife.
She believed Leo dead, but none the less it r-emed
You Must Wed Her Again.	299
to her now that she had done wrong in wedding him who sat there by her side, looking so happy.
Yes, he was happy, although he knew that she was suffering; for he told himself, with the infatuation of one who loves, that she would soon learn to give her whole heart to him.
She knew he felt so, and it seemed to her that she must hate him for it. It seemed to her that it was heartless of him not to comprehend how she felt.
And yet she knew, as she thought it, that he was a noble-hearted, generous man, who would sacrifice him-self to her least whim.
"If I could but forget Leo !" she wailed in her secret heart. "But I cannot. As long as I live his face will be before me. Oh! I wish I was dead !"
The train sped on, and her companion tried by every means in his power to win the smiles to her face, but it was not possible for her to smile.
The other passengers looked at them, and whispered to each other that they were bride and groom, with that unerring certainty that every one has of such a. relation.
"Just married, I don't doubt," said one to another ;
} "but I must say the bride doesn't look any too happy." "Traded her good looks for his money, I reckon,"
said the other.
And so the comments were secretly made, all thinking they could read that sad heart, and all failing be-cause they made their own selfish natures the key to hers.
But Trixie did not suspect their thoughts, nor would she have cared if she had, for her heart seemed dead within her.
The train was a through express—the swiftest on the line, but it stopped a short time at Albany. There was a buffet car on the train, and Trixie could have
300	You Must Wed Her Again.
what she wished there, but Mr. Sterling thought he might be able to tempt her to eat if he could get her some oranges.
"I will get off the train," he said. "I am sure you would like an orange."
She cared no more for an orange than for anything else, but it seemed to her that she could breathe more freely if he were not by her side, so she answered :
"Yes, bring me some oranges."
He asked the trainman how long the train would stop, and was told an hour, so he had no hesitation about leaving the depot and going some distance up into the town.
Trixie sat in her section, watching the hurried life on the platform, and thinking with a terrible sorrow of what her life had been.
"Sometimes," she murmured to herself, "it has seemed to me that if Leo should come to me and say, `Come, Trixie, I know we are not wed by the laws of man, but I am sure Heaven sanctions our union; come with me!' I would go with him. Ah! I might have gone with him, but if he were to rise from the grave now and bid me follow him, I would have to say nay, for I am bound to another, whose honor is in my keeping."
Suddenly the train started and roused her from her reverie. She looked in alarm for her husband. He had not returned.
"My husband went out and has not come back," she said to the conductor, who was passing.
"Very sorry," the conductor said; "but I could not wait for him unless he was on the platform. Look out and see if he is there."
She looked out of the window which the conductor threw up, but there was no sign of Mr. Sterling. "He is not there," she said.
"Then T have no choice," the conductor said respect-
You Must Wed Her Again.	301
fully ; "but you can telegraph him where you will await him."
Such a feeling of freedom swept over Trixie's soul ; for a little while longer she would be free.
"I think," she said quickly, "that I will go right on to Niagara Falls. We have our rooms engaged there."
"That will be wise," he said. "It will not make much difference, for he will reach you the morning after you arrive."
That ride to Niagara was like a respite to the condemned.
"Oh! that it might be forever !" she moaned.
She had telegraphed at the station at Albany that she would go on to Niagara as the conductor had suggested, but now and again the wild, desperate thought came to her to telegraph again and say that she would return.
That would give her a further respite. And she knew that he would not even be vexed with her, even though he should pass her on her way back.
But she did not do it, for her sense of justice with-held her. She had married him, and she must he true to him, even in little things.
When the train reached Niagara and she alighted from the car, she had evidence of his thoughtfulness for her.
A man came to her with a card from the proprietor of the principal hotel, on which was written :
"Mr. Sterling has wired me to meet his wife at the depot and take her to the hotel."
A private carriage was there for her, and she was taken to the hotel without any confusion or annoyance to her. And at the hotel she found the most sumptuous apartments reserved for her use.
"Your husband said I was to do the best I could for you until he could join you."
302	You Must Wed' Her Again.
"He will probably be here in the morning," Trixie said.
"I think not," the proprietor said kindly. "There is a telegram for you on the dressing-table. I think your husband met with a slight accident."
Trixie turned pale. She could not bear to think of him injured, for he was a noble-hearted gentleman, and. she respected him if she did not love him.
She snatched up the telegram and tore it open, anxious to learn the full extent of his injury.
"Do not be alarmed," it read. "I have injured my shoulder again by a fall. It is note bad, but will detain me here for a day longer. Remain at the Falls until I join you."
"Always considerate and thoughtful of me," she murmured. "Oh ! I would go to him if I thought I could reach him before he started again."
She passed a troubled night, and the next day wandered wretchedly along the walks that overlooked the great Falls.
In the afternoon, while she-was sitting looking with fascinated gaze at the terrible rush of water, a servant from the hotel came to her with a telegram. She (lid not doubt that it was from Mr. Sterling, and opened it, expecting to learn how he was. She read :
"Come home at once! Let nothing delay you."
Mrs. Sterling's name was signed to the telegram, and a terrible fear rose in Trixie's breast that some-thing had happened to Beatrice.
"I should never have left her !" she cried. "Oh! if she is ill I shall never forgive myself."
She hastened back to the hotel, settled with the land-lord and took the first train home. Before starting she telegraphed to Albany to tell Mr. Sterling what she was doing-.
When ,h-	ched Albany she was not r " -tT er
head— .
You Must Wed Her Aja ll.	303
surprised to find her husband waiting for her. Together they returned ,home.
Mrs. Sterling, in the carriage, met them at the station, and it seemed to them both that she looked as if. an age of woe had passed over her head since they had( left her.
"Beatrice !" cried Trixie. "Tell me of her first."
"Trixie !" wailed Mrs. Sterling, taking her to her breast, "your babe was stolen from me. I do not know where she is."
Trixie's agonized thoughts flew instantly to Made-line Delmar, her implacable foe, and with a loud cry, she swooned.
"Misfortune dogs this poor child," Mr. Sterling said pitifully.
"What more ?" demanded Mrs. Sterling, her face white and set.
"I have been separated from her almost since we have been gone," he said. "I was left at Albany, and only just rejoined her."
"Oh !" cried Mrs. Sterling, with a glad intonation, "Heaven be thanked for that. Ah! there is one ray of sunshine coming out of this dark cloud of sorrow."
";That do you mean, mother ?" he cried, wonderingly, as he bent over Trixie and tried to bring her to.
"Let her recover of herself," his mother said hurriedly, "and listen! The man. she believed had betrayed her by a false marriage was her husband."
"Yes, mother," he answered, seeing by her eyes that more was to fallow.
"And he was not dead when you and she were wedded."
"My God!" he cried, in misery. "Am I to lose her?"
"Oh, my son," said Mrs. Sterling, "he was a noble man. He left me determined to take his life rather than let her know that she had committed a sin by her ma	— to you. Alas ! I do not doubt he did as
304	You Must Wed Her Agaiin.
he determined to do. Heaven has spared her. You must wed her again ; and she must never know that he lived. It is for her good, my son."
He bowed his head, overwhelmed by what he had heard.
"Mother," he said huskily, "I do not know that I could have been as noble as he was. I pray Heaven that I shall love her no less than he did. He must have been worthy of her."
When Trixie recovered her senses, they were afraid she would sink into a serious illness; but she rallied, and by the very force of her will, declared she would not be sick while her darling was in the hands of her wicked enemy; for she never had any doubt that Made-line had dealt her this blow.
She listened to all Mrs. Sterling told her, asking questions and making suggestions' with wonderful keenness, though her heart was breaking.
"You seem to have done everything but one," she said. "Madeline Delmar must be watched. That is all I have to say ; but I think I shall go mad if my darling is not found."
"I will go to New York and see that the woman you speak of is watched," Mr. Sterling said, his face white as chalk.
He was giving up the woman who was his wife in name, but not in fact.
"You are right," his mother said.
Trixie secretly thanked Heaven for his absence. He went away without an hour of delay.
"He will not come back until your child is found," Mrs. Sterling said.
"He is very good," Trixie said.
Mrs. Sterling stroked the curly head, and looked wistfully into the brown eyes, seeing the relief that her son's absence brought to Trixie.
CHAPTER LI.
HER VOICE CALLED HIM BACK TO LIFE.
When Leo fell he was immediately surrounded by a crowd, some of whom jeered him, while others cried out in indignation against him for being intoxicated with that babe in his arms.
A policeman came up, and would have raised him roughly and with brutal indifference had not a carriage whirled up at that moment.
"He is my son !" cried a sorrowing voice.
Everybody looked up and gazed in wonder or pity at the pale, drawn face of the richly dressed woman who sprung from the carriage.
"Shame on him !" some one cried. "A baby in his arms, too!"
"He is ill, not intoxicated," cried Mrs. Brainerd, looking indignantly at the crowd. "Help him into my carriage," she begged the policeman. "I will reward you well."
The man was instantly obsequious and could not do enough for her.
He helped Leo into the carriage and did all in his power to please Mrs. Brainerd, who slipped a bill into his hand.
Then she had Leo driven hastily to her home, holding in her arms the silent babe.
"How beautiful !" she murmured, "but how still! Ah, I see! It has been drugged in some way. Oh, my son, if you will but forgive me for the evil I have done you and your wife, I will never let my proud nature lead me astray again."
She was a contrite and broken woman. She had learned through the Reverend Mr. Glenham that Madeline was not Leo's wife, and thus she 1-new' that
306 Her Voice Called Him Back to Life.
the child she held so lovingly in her arms was her own lawful grandchild.
When they reached the great house, which had been a house of mourning for so long, Leo was carried, raving incoherently, to his own room.
A doctor was sent for, and he shook his head as he studied Leo's _condition.
"I fear brain fever," he said at last. "There has been a terrible shock, and he has been living on his will-power for some time. It is a mercy he is not dead now.
The doctor was able to bring little Beatrice out of her torpor, and Mrs. Brainerd found solace in nursing the winsome little creature, who seemed to recognize something kindred in her.
For several days Leo hung on the verge of brain fever, and then his condition changed, and he lay like one dead.
"I do not comprehend," the doctor said.
By some chance Mrs. Brainerd looked at the morning paper that day, and after skimming it idly, she suddenly became absorbed, and presently started up and cried out :
"I comprehend."
She sent for the doctor again, talked a long time with him, put little Beatrice in the hands of a skilled nurse, who had been hired for the purpose, and then left home, saying she might be gone two days.
Trixie was in utter despair. Nothing had been heard of little Beatrice, and it seemed to her as if Heaven's favor had been taken from her.
The clays went by, and still there came no word of hope. Mrs. Sterling wondered how long the brave little mother could keep up.
One de T"ixie was walking off her rest t -ssness in
Her Voice Called Him Back to life. 307
the garden. Mrs. Sterling was with her; and care and sorrow were written in deep lines on both their faces.
"Trixie," said Mrs. Sterling, "surely we shall hear good news soon."
"I do not know," the poor girl answered dully, "I have grown sick on false hope."
"A stranger is .coming up the garden path," Mrs. Sterling- said. "Do you go in, and leave me to talk t6 her."
Trixie looked up, and a strange expression crept over her face.
"No," she said, "I need not go. I think it is some one to see me. I hope she comes in peace, for my heart is too sore to bear much."
"Who is it ?" Mrs. Sterling asked.
"It is Leo's mother." Trixie answered.
She stood there waiting, her fair young face, with its lines of care and trouble, so beautiful that it seemed to Mrs. Sterling that the angels could be no purer and nobler.
"Is it you, Trixie ?" cried Mrs. Brainerd, as she Crew near and could see Trixie's face better.
"Yes, Mrs. Brainerd, it is I. Ah! {lo not reproach nee for the past. I have suffered enough. I have lost everything the man I loved, my little child."
She bowed her head and wept. Mrs. Brainerd glided to her side, and took her little hand.
"Trixie," she murmured, "I have come here to ask your pardon for the cruel wrong I did you."
"Ask my pardon—you !" cried Trixie, her sad face expressing her wonder at this concession from the haughty woman.
"Yes, Trixie, I ask your pardon humbly and sincerely. But that is not all. I come to bring you happiness."
"Happiness, my child!" cried Trixie eagerly.
"Yes, yotrr child. She is in my home, where I hope
308 Her Voice Called Him Back to Life.
she will ever stay, for she has won my sore heart with her angel smiles."
"Oh, my darling, my darling!" cried Trixie.
She threw herself into the outstretched arms of Leo's mother and wept in her gratitude.
"But that is not all I have to tell you of joy," said Mrs. Brainerd. "Your husband, too, awaits you at my house."
Trixie looked up with a shudder. She thought of Mr. Sterling.
"Is he there ?" she murmured. "Why is he there ?" "It was he who found little Beatrice. But he is very'
ill, and I think he will not live if you do not come to
drag him from the brink of the grave."
"I will go. You, too, Mrs. Sterling, will go? Mrs. Brainerd, this is Mrs. Sterling, his mother."
"His mother!" cried Mrs. Brainerd. "Ah, I under-. stand ; but I speak of Leo."
"Leo !" cried Trixie, ghastly white. "He is dead." "No—no. He is living and will come back to us if you call him."
Trixie looked at Mrs. Sterling. She wondered if she had heard aright. How was it possible?
"Trixie," Mrs. Sterling said, "I do not doubt that Leo is alive. I saw him alive after your wedding. And, Trixie, you do not understand ; but he is your true and lawful husband. He was never wedded to Madeline Delmar. My son knows all this, and that is why he went away without claiming you as his wife. Heaven guarded your honor, and you can go to Leo, who loves you and is worthy of you now. Go, my darling, and take my blessing with you !"


Trixie sat by the bedside of Leo. It was in the same room where once she had played nurse to him In her arms was little Beatrice, nestling- there with
Her Voice Called Him Back to ,tie. 309
the contentment that is only possible when the mother's arms enfold her child.
But Trixie at that moment was thinking little of Beatrice. She was sitting there, with her soul on the rack, waiting for the time to come when she should obey the doctor's instructions and call upon Leo to come to her.
The doctor had said that her voice might bring him to life. That was after he had been informed who she was, and how much Leo loved her.
So there Trixie sat with her babe and her husband, waiting for him to stir, and show such sign of life as would justify her in calling on him.
He lay like one dead, except that he breathed heavily. But presently he moved without opening his eyes.
"Leo. Oh, Leo, my darling! Come back to life for my sake. It is Trixie who calls."
Slowly his eyes opened, and there was a look of fear and wonder in them, as if he had actually come back from the vale of death to look at her.
She leaned over him and pressed her dewy lips to his parched ones.
"Leo," she wailed, "come back to me and to Bea-trice. We cannot live without you. Leo ! Leo, my darling !"
"Am I in heaven ?" he murmured feebly. "This could only be there."
"Oh, no, Leo !" she sobbed, "you are here on earth, where you must remain for my sake. Say you will remain here to love me."
He smiled at her.
"Do you think I would go when you ask me so?
I will remain."
*	*	*	*	*	*	*
Leo and Trixie were reunited, and lived always with Mrs. Brainerd, who never ceased to worship her daughter-in-law as one of Heaven's messengers.
3i0 Her Voice Called Him Back to Life.
Mr. Sterling proved his love for Trixie by giving his friendship to Leo, and by growing sweeter for his disappointment.
Madeline Delmar, unmasked, disarmed, and scorned by everybody, sunk into an unlovely, unloved old age.
Mr. Doite was a stanch friend of Leo and Trixie, and when he died, left all his property divided between his daughter and Trixie; so that, as Leo said in jest, Trixie could no longer call herself his poor wife.

THE END.
No. 1179 of the NEw EAGLE SERIES, entitled "Driven From Home," by Wenona Gilman, is a charming tale brimming with joy and tears that will hold your interest to the very end.
Charles Garvice
This author wrote some truly great love stories. All of his works are extraordinarily good, when compared with the work of the average author published in bock form, hut there are some of Mr. Garvice's books upon which his remarkable reputation in this country is founded.
For example, we doubt whether there is any better character drawing anywhere in modern fiction than there is in his A Jest of Fate." There is a wonderful spice of adventure in "The Fatal Ruby." The pathos in "Better Than Life" would appeal to the histrionic ability of a David \ Barfield.
if you want to be really thrilled by what you
P	-	-
read, the three books mentioned above will do it.
STREET & SMITH CORPORATION 79 Sever th Avenue	New York City
15 Cents the Copy
Not How Much


But
HOW GOOD
In the editorial preparation of the STREET & SMITH NOVEL the question of how much in money we were going to get for each volume never really occurred to us. We lost sight entirely of the fact that these books sold at 15 cents the copy. and gave as much serious consideration to the selection and preparation of the stories as though they were going to sell for ten times as much.
We think, after all, that this is the real test of service. That we are performing a service to millions of American readers, there can be no doubt. Never before has such reading mat-ter been placed within the reach of the modest purse. We have striven to keep our line clean and feel confident that we have done so.
The very nature of the stories published in the STREET & SMITH NOVELS insures them consideration from people who have no time nor inclination to read the classics, and who probably would not read anything else if they did not have the STREET & SMITH books.
Any decent literature that instills a desire on the part of the general public to read is, in our opinion, performing a real service.
STREET & SMITH CORPORATION 79 Seventh Avenue	New York City
