<pb n="9"/>
<header>GUY EARLSCOURT'S WIFE.</header>
<header>PART FIRST.</header>
<header>CHAPTER I.</header>
<header>DUKE MASON'S ADVENTURE.</header>

<p>DUKE MASON had lost his way.</p>
<p>There could be no doubt about it. As he paused in perplexity and gazed around him, five struck sharply from the distant Speckhaven churches, clearly heard through the still, frosty air, and at 5:10 the express train from London left Speckhaven station. Only ten minutes to spare, and completely lost and bewildered, a stranger in Lincolnshire, and with not a notion of whereabouts he might be now.</p>
<p>Mr. Mason paused with a face of disgust at his own stupidity, and looked about him. Westward lay the fens and marshes, melting drearily away into the low gray sky; eastward spread the wide sea, a bleak blast sweeping icily up, with all the chill of the German Ocean in its breath; and north and south, the dismal waste land stretched away treeless, houseless, unspeakably forlorn and deserted.</p>
<p>The month was March, the day the 25th. Was Duke Mason
<pb n="10 DUKE MASON'S ADVENTURE."/>

likely to forget the date of that memorable day, when he lost his way, and the romance of his life began?</p>
<p>For seven and twenty years his life had gone on, as flat, as dull, as uneventful as those flat marshes that lay on every side of him, as gray and colorless as yonder cold gray sea, and on this twenty-fifth of March, wending his way at his leisure, to catch the express train for London, and mistaking the road, an adventure so singular and romantic befell him, as to almost atone for those hopelessly stupid and respectable seven-and-twenty years.</p>
<p>The short March day was darkening already. The yellow wintry sun had dropped out of sight down there behind the fens and sandhills; sky and sea were both of the same cold gray, except where one long yellow line westward marked the sombre sunset.</p>
<p>"It reminds one of Byron's poetry," thought Mr. Mason, who, being an artist in a very small way, had an eye for atmospheric effects; "lead-colored sea, melting into lead-colored sky--dull yellow glimmer westward. Flat marshes, and wet fens, sea-fog creeping up, and solitary individual in foreground, gazing moodily at the creeping gloom. I've seen worse things on the line, in the academy, and hundreds of people agape with admiration, only unhappily this sort of thing is much more attractive in oil or water colors than in reality, at five o'clock of a cold March evening, without a house or a soul near, and just too late for the train. I wonder where I am. I'll try on a little way, and find out if I can, without going round to the town."</p>
<p>Mr. Mason gave up contemplating the general Byronic aspect of the scene, and went forward on his <hi rend="italic">lonely</hi> road.</p>
<p>He was mounting the rising ground now, and in ten minutes more stopped again and knew exactly where he was.</p>
<p>"The Grange, by all that's mysterious!" he exclaimed aloud; "and five miles from the station if an inch. What an ass I must have been, to be sure, to take the wrong turning, when I've been along here fifty times during the last fortnight."</p>
<p>It looked like the end of the world. A high stone wall rose up abruptly, barring all further progress--two massive stone gates frowned darkly on all observers. Within rose the waving trees of a park, and in their midst you caught sight of tall chimneys and the peaked gables of a red-brick mansion.</p>
<p>Duke Mason had come upon the Grange in the spectral twilight of the March day, and the Grange was that most awful habitation, "a haunted house."</p>
<p>It was a weird scene and hour. He was perhaps as matter
<pb n="DUKE MASON'S ADVENTURE. 11"/>

of fact and unimaginative a young man as you will easily find, but Duke's skin turned to "goose flesh" as he stood and thought of the awful stories he had heard of yonder solitary mansion among the trees.</p>
<p>It was so deathfully still--it was like the enchanted castle of the Sleeping Beauty, only far more grim, else the handsome young price had never summoned up courage to enter; it was like a huge mausoleum; no smoke curled up from the great twisted chimneys, no dog barked, no sound but the moaning of the wind among the tress, broke the ghastly silence.</p>
<p>"And yet people eat, and drink, and sleep there," mused Mr. Mason; "and it's more dismal and more dead than the tomb of Pharaohs. And they say there's a lady shut up there as lovely as all the houris of Mahomet's paradise. If a fellow could only get in there now and see for himself."</p>
<p>The young man looked wistfully at the frowning gates, at the solid masonry, as he had many a time looked and longed before. You have read how African travellers brave burning winds, sandy deserts, fever and plague, to return to that fatal and fascinating land once they have seen it. Some such irresistible witchery did this lonely, haunted house hold over this very commonplace young man from London.</p>
<p>Day after day he had come thither and sketched the grim stone walls, the massive gates, the tossing trees, and the peaked gables, but no sign of life had he ever seen, no glimpse of the Sleeping Beauty, hidden away in its desolate walls, had he ever obtained.</p>
<p>The place was known as Lyndith Grange, and like sweet Thomas Hood's Haunted House, lay</p>
<p>"Under some prodigious ban of excommunication."</p>
<p>Two hundred odd years ago, before this gray March gloaming, in the days when gentlemen wore velvet doublets and slim rapiers, and pinked their neighbors under the fifth rib for very little provocation, there dwelt in yonder silent mansion a fierce old warrior, who had brought home to the Grange a pale, pensive young bride, as fair as a lily and almost as drooping. Inside those walls the honeymoon had been spent, and then Sir Malise went forth to fight for his king, and the pale bride was left lone. And then, the legend ran, of a fair-haired, handsome cavalier, who made his way through the ponderous doors, of a servant's betrayal, of a fiery husband returning full of jealous
<pb n="12 DUKE MASON'S ADVENTURE."/>

wrath, of a duel to the death in one of those oaken rooms, and of the handsome cavalier falling with a sword thrust through the heart at the frantic lady's feet--of a mad woman shut up to shriek her miserable life away in those same dismal rooms, and of a stern old general who fell at the head of his men. And the fair-haired cavalier, and the lady with the wild streaming hair and woful face, <hi rend "italic">haunted</hi> (said the legend) Lyndith Grange to the present day. No one lived in the place long, for certain, whether it was the ghosts, or the damp, or the loneliness that drove them away, and things gradually fell to decay, and the Lyndith family left the Grange to the rats and the spectres, and its own bad name, for many and many a long year.</p>
<p>But two years before this especial evening upon which Mr. Mason stands and scrutinizes it, the neighboring town of Speckhaven was thrown into commotion by the news that the Grange was occupied at last.</p>
Furniture had come down from London--two servants--a hard-featured old woman, and a stolid boy, had purchased things in the town and brought them to the Grange. And in the silvery dusk of a May evening a tall gentleman--dark and grim--had been driven with a slender lady, closely veiled, to the haunted house from the Speckhaven station.</p>
<p>After that, for three or four weeks, no more was known of those mysterious people or their doings. They were still at the Grange, but no one visited them; their very names were unknown, the great gates were always locked and bolted, and the hard-featured old woman and stolid boy kept their master's secrets well and told no tales.</p>
<p>One stormy June night, as Dr. Worth sat in his parlor, in the bosom of his family, slippered and dressing-gowned, thanking his gods that the work of that day was ended, there came such a thundering knock at the front door, and directly after such a peal at the office bell, as made the chief physician of Speckhaven spring to his feet and grind something suspiciously like an oath between his teeth.</p>
<p>"It's a lady took sudden and uncommon bad," his servant announced, "which the gentleman says his carriage is at the door, and you're to come immediate, if you please, sir."</p>
<p>Dr. Worth groaned; the rain was pouring, the night was dark as the regions of Pluto, and his ten o'clock glass of punch stood there untasted, and his bed all ready. In five minutes, coated and hatted, he joined the gentleman waiting in the passage. He had declined to enter.</p>
<pb n="DUKE MASON'S ADVENTURE. 13"/>

<p>"I took a sharp look at the fellow, sir," Dr. Worth always said when relating this marvellous story, and it was a story he was very fond, indeed, of relating. "I had a sort of presentiment, if you believe me, even then, that there was something wrong about this sudden call. None of my lady patients were likely to be 'took sudden and uncommon bad.' You see that account could only apply to one interesting class of patients.f2

'd I scrutinized my gentleman keenly as he stood in the pas-

isage. But his broad-brimmed hat was slouched over his nose,

itd his overcoat collar so turned up that I could see nothing

Ibt a luxuriant crop of black whiskers and a cruelly aquiline

Uose."

:   "Who's the lady, sir?" brusquely demanded Dr. Worth.

."No patient of mine, I know. And what's the matter ?"

;: "For Heaven's sake, don't stop to talk now!" exclaimed

he gentleman. " We've five miles to go and the road is beastly.

!'ll tell you as we drive along."

The doctor hastened after him to the carriage-a handsome

:landau and pair-and the driver whirled them off directly.

?Only once during that night drive, through the pouring rain and

inky darkness, did the stranger open his lips.

X "We are going to Lyndith Grange; and the case is what you

:i medical men call an interesting one, I believe. I have only

One request to make; that is, that you will talk of this matter

as little-as possible. I will double, treble, quadruple your

fee." And then silence fell.

"And you might have knocked me down without a feather

[ when I heard our destination," says Dr. Worth, when he

? tells the story, and he tells it to this day with the greatest gusto.

-. "I was to visit the Lyndith Grange, see the mysterious lady,

and get my fee quadrupled. Not speak of it, indeed-I who

. never had an adventure in my life. It was teeming, a clear

r case of cats and dogs, but what would a water-spout have mat-

t: tered now ?"

They reached the Grange-the ponderous gates flew open-

they whirled up a long avenue and stopped. A minute later

and the doctor, at the heels of his leader, was traversing

draughty corr-dors and endless suites of dreary rooms. At the

door of an apartment, in a long, chill hall, the mysterious

gentleman halted.

" Your patient is h :re, doctor," he said, impressively. " Use

all your skill to-night. Remrember, the lady must be saved / "

And then he held the door open for the doctox to enter








<pb n="14"/>
14         DVUE MIASON'S ADVENTURE.

closing it immediately, and Dr. Worth found himself in a vas,

room, all oak flooring, oak panelling, massive old furniture,

and a huge curtained bed in the centre of the room, big enough

and gloomy enough for a sarcophagus. A wood fire burned in

one of the tiled fireplaces-a couple of wax candles made

specks of light in the darkness, and the hard-featured old

woman sat in a chair, sewing on little garments by the wan

light.

At half-past ten Dr. Worth entered that room. At half

past two he left it. The old woman held a female infant, this

time, in her arms, and during all those hours the Speckhaven

doctor had never once seen the face of his patient. The

heavy silken curtains shaded her in deepest gloom, and her

face had been persistently turned from him and buried in the

pillows.

She seemed very young-on the delicate left hand a wedding-

ring shone, masses of golden hair fell like a veil over her-the

voice in which once or twice she answered him was sweet and

fresh-beyond that all was guesswork.

The man, still hatted and overcoated, was pacing up and

down the long hall when the doctor came forth.

"Well ?" he asked, in a voice of suppressed intensity.

"Well," replied Dr. Worth, rather shortly, " it is well. The

lady's 'as well as can be expected,' and the baby's about the

size of a full-grown wax doll."

"And she is sure to live ?"

"That depends upon which 'she' you mean. They're both

shes. If you mean the lady-"

"The lady, of course !" said the gentleman, angrily and

haughtily.

" The lady's all right, then, with common care, but I wouldn't

like to stake my reputation upon the baby's existence. Still,

as it's a girl, and taking the natural obstinacy and contrari-

ness of the sex into consideration, I dare say it will insist upon

living also, in spite of nature and its present Liliputian pro.

portions. I'll return to-morrow, of course, and-"

" And, with all deference to you, sir, you'll do nothing of the

sort. You'll return no more. Here's your fee-I think you'll

find it ample. My man will drive you back to town, and the

less you say of this night's work the better."

In another half hour the Speckhaven doctor was again in the

bosom of his family, tl e richer by fifty guineas for his four hours'

vork.








<pb n="15"/>
I -       DUKE MASON'S ADVENTURE.                15

i  ,And just two weeks later the mysterious inhabitants of the

|- Grange vanished as suddenly and strangely as they had come,

- anld the old house was given over again to the murdered cava

? lier and mad lady.

For nearly two years, and then again, as unexpectedly as be-

t fore, a tall gentleman came down by the London train, bring-

s ing a slim, veiled lady and same two servants back. The

gentleman left the lady and returned by the next train, and

| who they might be, and whether they were 'he same, and

! what they could mean by such unaccountable goings on, all was

I conjecture in the town of Speckhaven. This was two months

before this twenty-fifth of March on which Duke Mason stands

and gazes, and no one had penetrated the secret, or seen the

lady yet. If he only could be the man.

He had wished the same wish at least a score of times, and

Iiothing had come of it.

: On this evening Destiny had made up her mind to let him

:ive his way.

;::As he stood there in the gloaming, he heard, for the first

time, voices and footsteps within. His heart gave a leap.

The footsteps were fast approaching, the voices drawing near,

. carriage-wheels ground over the gravelled avenue.

' "You'll need to drive fast, Joseph," said a woman's voice.

7 "You haven't ten minutes to get to the station, and it's as

- much as your place is worth to keep the master waiting."

"Don't I know that-hang 'em !" responded a sulky voice;

"a string o' oaths fit to sink a ship if a chap's half a quarter o'

a second behind time. I tell you what, Misses Grimshaw, the

- wages is good, I don't deny, but I'll be jiggered if I can stand

7_ this life much longer. Newgate's a pallis 'longside of it."

The sound of bolts withdrawing, of a key turning slowly in a

k. rusty lock, warned the listener they were about to appear.

-Duke Mason darted behind one of the huge buttresses-the

: falling darkness screening him as well. He could see quite

plainly, himself unobserved.

A heavy-featured groom drove out in a two-wheeled chaise,

: and an elderly, thin-faced woman stood looking after him, and

swinging a huge key.

-   " "Look here, Joseph," she said, " I wish you'd lock the gate,

and take the key with you; I've the master's dinner to get, and

you know how particular he is, and it's nigh on a quarter of a

mile's walk down here from the house, and it's no good fetch-

ing me dawn again when you're coming back.   Just lock








<pb n="16"/>
i6     WHAT DUKE MASON SAW AND IHEARD.

fhe gate on the outside, Joseph, will you, and take the key

along ? "

She inserted the key on the outside, and huirried rapidly up

the avenue out of'the cold, shutting the gate before she went.

Joseph looked stolidly at the closed gates.

"I've left it unlocked afore, and no harm came If it, and 1

arn't going to gel down now. If there never was a lock on

this old rat-trap, people would run a mile sooner than ienture

in, ald wery right they is. I'll be' back in an hour, and arn't

goin' to get out to do it, and save your old bones, Mother

Grimshaw."

With which Joseph gathered up the reins, ai gave the horse

his head, and trotted off.

Duke Mason emerged, his breath fairly taken av ay with sur-

prise and delight.

At last! There stood the gates unlocked and unbolted,

and'the way to the hidden princess was clear. He drew the

key-from the key-hole, opened the massive gate cautiously,

drew it"after him again, and in the chill gray of the March

evening stood within the grounds of the Grange.

CHAPTER II.

WHAT DUKE MASON SAW AND HEARD.

LONG avenue of firs, black against the evening sky,

led up to the house. Through the spectral trees the

B  wind wailed in a very uncomfortable and ghastly way,

considering the evil reputation of the place, and I

don't think Mr. Mason would have been very much surprised,

if the fair-haired cavalier, all gory and ghastly, had stepped out

from beneath the sombre shadows, and barred his way. Noth.

ing ever did surprise Duke very greatly, for that matter; he

might have been a scion of all the Tudor Plantagenets, so un.

affectedly nonchalant was he.

Grasping his walking-stick a little tighter, Mr. Mason made

his way up the gloomy avenue of firs. It was quite dark now,

and the very "blackness of darkness" reigned in this most

gloomy drive. There would be a moon presently; pending its

rising, the gloom of Tartarus reigned. It was just a quarter ol








<pb n="17"/>
WHAT DUKE MASON SAW AND HEARD.              I7

a mile to the house. Five minutes' sharp walking brought hint

to it, looming up a blacker, Lulkier shadow among the shadows

A long, low, irregular mansion, much inclined to run to chim.

heys and gables and turrets, with small leaden casements,

iand two lamps burning over the portico entrance. If it had

been broad day, and he could have deciphered anything

ihrough the ivy, the intruder might have read how the house

La.d been built by one Sir Henry Lyndith, in I552, when good

.Queen Bess, that first asserter of woman's rights, had ruled

merry England with an iron rod.

The neglected grounds were entirely overrun with tall ferns;

athe trees grew unpleasantly close to the small diamond-pane

I:asements.

.:' One gigantic elm spread its branches so near that, swinging

lhimself into its lower arms, Mr. Mason could sit at his ease

ind stare through the only lighted windows in the whole long

jiade of the dreary mansion. Away in the rear another light

simniered from the kitchen regions, no doubt. Along the

'ont, a red glow shone from the curtainless and open case-

aents, and more vividly interested than he had ever been in

the whole course of his life before, Duke Mason bent forward

i listen and look.

I "If it were a stall in the third row of the Britannia, and

was waiting for the curtain to rise on a new drama of my own,

i could not feel one whit more breathlessly absorbed," the

'young man thought. " I wonder what Rosanna would say

--f she could see me now; and I wonder how this lark of mine

ts going to end. Won't the fellow stare when he finds the key

gone" 

: The picture Mason saw was one that haunted him in his sleep-

ag and waking dreams his life long. A long low room, oak

nelled, oak floored, with here and there rich rugs covering

slippery blackness, faded tapestry on the walls, tapestry

ught centuries ago by many a fair Alice and Edith of the

yndith race, massive furniture, rickety with time, a wood fire

zing cheerily on the hearth, the only cheery thing in the

!} artm nt, and a little cottage piano in a corner standing

[~en, with music upon it, as if the performer had but lately left.

The piano was the only modern innovation. Th e room tool

,you back a couple of centuries, and the cavalier with his pow.

!-dered love-locks, his velvet doublet, his lace ruffles, and deadly

rapier, would have looked a much more proper gentleman in

.onder than a young man of Mr. Mason's sort in a cutaway








<pb n="18"/>
18     WHIAT DUKE MASON SAW AVND HEARD.

coat, mutton-chop whiskers, and the baggy, cross-barred trou.

sers, so dear to the masculine British heart.

- "A very charming bit of still life, after Watteau," thought

the spectator; "a very pretty interior, indeed. Now, if the

dramatis personae would but appear !"

The thought had barely crossed his mind when, as if it had

evoked her, the door opened, and a young lady came in.

Duke gave a gasp-.

Here was the sleeping beauty, the hidden princess, the mys-

terious houri of the haunted house, herself.

" And, by Jove ! a beauty of the first water !" thought Duke,

with as near an approach to enthusiasm as was in his nature;

" the best-looking young woman I've seen this month of Sun-

days."

Mr. Mason was right-she was very pretty-very pretty in-

deed. A petite figure, slim, youthful, supple, two great dark

eyes, that lit up her small face like dusk stars, a profusion of

waving yellow hair, that fell in a shining shower to her waist.

It was before the days of gold powder and copper filings, so

that abundant cloud of amber tresses was doubtless the lady's

own, direct from a beneficent Providence, instead of a Parisian

hair-dresser. The large dark eyes and the golden hair made

such a very remarkable contrast that you quite forgot whether

her nose were aquiline or Grecian, whether her forehead were

high or low, her mouth a rosebud or otherwise.

A dress of wine-colored silk trailed behind her, diamonds

twinkled in her ears and on her hands, and in the firelight she

made a picture so dazzling that Duke gazed breathless, be-

witched.

She went up to the mantel, a tall structure of black marble,

and leaning lightly against it, looked steadfastly into the red

flame. Her clasped hands hung loosely before her, the wil-

lowy figure drooped, the straight black brows were bent, the

mouth compressed, the whole attitude, the whole expression,

full of weary, hopeless pain.

"Can that be the heroine of Dr. Worth's story?" Duke

wondered. "She had a child, and this small beauty seems

little better than a child herself. 1 shouldn't take her to be

seventeen. No, it's quite impossible; it can't be the same.

She's uncommonly pretty, and got up regardless of expense,

but she's in very bad hum-"I all the same."

For nearly ten minutes t} e young lady stood without mov-

ing, still gazing with knit brows into the leaping firelight. Thei








<pb n="19"/>
WH.4T DUKE MASON SAW AND HEARD.               I

i.-th a tong, heartsick sigh, she started, crossed the room once

-er twice, always lost in deep and painful thought, then sud

:e!ly seated herself at the piano, and began to sing. She be

rn very low and plaintively, but as she sung, her voice rose,

r black eyes kindled, a flush passed over the clear, dark

j.-llor of her face. Her whole heart was in the song, "Roberto

Hi tu che ado o /"  Lovingly, lingeringly, with a sort of in.

sionate intensity, she dwelt on the name, on the caressing

Olian words, "Roberto oh tu che adoro /"

, Then, more suddenly than she had sat down, she arose, her

lole face working, and held out her arms with a suppressed

"Robert!" she cried, "oh, my Robert ! my Robert! come

Duke Mason thrilled to the heart as he watched that pas-

te, despairing gesture-as he heard that wild appeal. It

-the old commonplace story, then--so old, so common-

so unspeakably pathetic always-" crossed in love," as

housemaids call it. This beautiful and mysterious fairy

ess imprisoned here had a lover in the background, just

e ordinary young persons, and a flinty-hearted parent or

ian had shut her dp here, pending such time as she should

e to her senses.

-Just at that instant the rapid roll of wheels outside told l uke

chaise was returning. An instant later, and the gates were

wide open, and the chaise whirled rapidly up the dri e to

I-house.

i" I wonder what he thought when he found the key goie !"

ted Mr. Mason with a chuckle,

The chaise stopped before the portico entrance, and, by the

.of the lamps, the watcher in, the tree saw a tall man spring

t- say a few words rapidly and authoritatively, as one accus-

d to command, and disappear into the house. The car-

was driven round to the rear, and silence fell upon Lyndith

~ ge.

1!'he young lady in the lighted room had heard, and seen too.

en Duke looked again, her whole attitude had changed. She

erect, her little figure seeming to dilate and grow tall, her

"thrown back, her great eyes alight, her small hands tightly

ched.

" Like a little game-cock ruffling his feathers for the combat,"

ght the watcher. " I wonder if this is Robert now ! Not

_ly though, or she wouldn't look quite so belligerent."

~;(








<pb n="20"/>
go     WHAT DUKZE MASON SAW AND HEARD.

That moment the door was flung open, and the gentleman

entered. A tall gentleman, elderly and stout, and florid and

good-looking, with a great profusion of whiskers and iron-gray

hair. A gentleman as grim and stern as Lyndith Grange itself,

'rho gave the young lady a cool glance, a cool nod, and a cool

greeting.

"How do, Olivia? How do you find yourself to-night?

Any change for the better since I saw you last, two weeks ago ? '

He whirled up the easiest chair in the room before the fire

as he spoke, stretched out his long legs to the blaze, threw back

his head, looked half contemptuously, half compassionately, at

the rigid figure of the girl.

" Don't stand there as stiff as though you were posing for

one of Pygmalion's statues, Olivia," said the gentleman; "and,

for Heaven's sake, don't let us have any high tragedy to-night.

it's all very well on the boards of Covent Garden, but in pri-

vate life let us drop the tragic toga. Come up here, and let

me see how you look, and tell me if you are tired of Lyndith

Granige, and the rats, and the ghosts, and the solitude, and if

you are prep red to listen to reason, and return to town yet.

Come 1"          .

She drew near obediently, leaningin her first attitude against

the mantel, her large, starry eyes looking bigger and blacker

than everwith excitement and-defiance. The firelight shone

upon them both-a very striking picture; on the girl's dark

red dress and loose golden hair, on the man's black whiskers,

and stern, powerful face. There was a resemblance between

them both that marked them of the same blood, and some of

the man's iron will flashed back at him out of the girl's impas.

sioned eyes.

f I will never go back to town on your terms, Uncle Geoff.

rey 1 "'she said, her voice trembling with excitement. "Never !

never! I can live here--I can die here, if you will, but I'll

never: yield I I only wish I auld die, but I live on, and on,

with all that makes life worth living for gone." Her lips trem

bled, her'voice died away,

The man looked at her with a sneering smile.

"Which translated means Robert Lisle is gone, and after

him the deluge. I wonder you like to allude to him, my dear.

Disgrace has rarely come to people of your blood, and such

disgrace as .you have brought upon us, rarely comes to any

family. You will not yield. May I ask what you wean to

do?"








<pb n="21"/>
;SAW AND ReARD.         21

..r ey," looking at him with a

dilated eyes.  " You know the

r.v the firs ? Well, sometimes

_?..as /t, of all that is coming, 1 just

-:aud-throw   myself in, and make an

_'is shoulders, the sneering smile

-onal idea I am 'quite sure passes

.ini into the fire.

h*rdlder  than iron, Geoffrey Lyn-

E n d~.~ : still smiling, " don't

- i_~B~~~  :~il      r-its .always a

:,' :or: things, how easily

lW h~-  rsy whatever.  Yes, I dare say

y poor Livey, but you must recollect we

e, from old Sir Malise, who ran the

l' the body, in this very room, I believe.

your father, was a hard man, and if

e of the traditional hardness, my love,

persist in rebellion in this obstinate

i,     romy child, you owe us some reparation

the girl, with sullen anger; "you

_ 9:!~e  so often, I think. I'll not marry

_iAt'A what you mean, I'll not ! I'll die

eat her, as a man might look at a

"with all its small might.

poor little romantic Livey ! It's so

v hard to do. The heroines of your

die upon the. smallest provocation,

.'?trally of heart-disease in the midst

a hectic flush upon their cheeks,

fteir eyes, when their Charleses or

ult we don't do that in everyday

:nromantically healthy and long-

I  or3e likely to finish with apoplexy

se, or decline. And I don't

l  iivery sweet to'young persons

e lst their Robert--"'








<pb n="22"/>
22     WHAT DUKE MASON SA V AND HEARD.

Tie girl started up, goaded to a sort of frenzy.

" Uncle Geoffrey, do you want to drive me mad ? D)ori t go

too far ! I warn you, it is not safe ! Ah, Heaven have pity,

for there is none on earth ! "

She broke out into such a wild storm of hysterical sobbing,

that the man she addressed was really a little startled. Only a

little, for he knew women very well; and he knew when the

tears and the sobs come, they are by no means at their most

dangerous.

When the lightning blazes there is some cause for alarm;

when the rain pours the storm is pretty well spent.

He sat and watched her as she wept, her whole slight form

shaken by her sobs-watched her quite calmly.

Duke Mason, on the outside, set his teeth, and clenched his

fists, and felt a true-born Briton's instinct of hitting out from

the shoulder strong within him.

"What a comfort it would be to go in and polish off the

scoundrel !" thought Mr. Mason.

Geoffrey Lyndith stretched out his hand and touched her.

She shook it off as though it had been a viper.

" Don't touch me !" she cried-" don't speak to me ! You

have been the cruellest guardian, the most unfeeling uncle that

ever lived. You say my father was a hard man. Perhaps so;

but he never would have broken my heart, and driven me to

despair, as yot have done!"

"Your father would have broken Robert Lisle's head! " re-

torted her uncle, coolly. " He would have shot him like a dog,

as he was, and instead of bearing with your rebellious humors,

as I have done, he would have made you marry Sir Vane

Charteris months ago. Take care, Olivia, that you do not 

weary even my patience and forbearance! Take care I do

not force you to obey !"

"You cannot!"

"That remains to be seen. What is to hinder my fetching

Sir Vane and a clergyman down here, and marrying you out

of hand ? "

"No clergyman would perform such a marriage."

" The Reverend George Loftus would. He owes me his liv-

Ing, and he understands this case exactly, and knows I am but

obeying your late father's instructions. I give you one more

week, Olivia. If your reason has not returned by that time,

we will try what a little wholesome coercion will do. Once

married, these whims and vapors of yours will end. You wll 








<pb n="23"/>
MR. MASON ELOPES.                23

r Vane-women always like their husbands after mar

ityou know, and I dare say you'll be a very sensible wife,

es go, yet. I'm going down to dinner now."  He pulled

ws watch. "Will you take my arm, Miss Lyndith ?"

t I want no dinner."

you please. Think matters over, my dear, and, for

3 sake, do try to be calm, and drop melodrama. Give me

promise, and I will fetch you back to town to-morrow.

Lyndiths always keep our word."

e left the room as he spoke. The girl crossed to the win-

wringing her hands in frantic, helpless, despairing appeal.

1h! she cried, "is there no help in all heaven and earth

was standing close by one of the windows, and the pas-

teprayer was scarcely uttered before it was answered.

an leaped out from the elm-tree-a man's face looked

-through the glass-a man's voice spoke.

't be alarmed," said the voice, as the man pulled ofl

*" I'l help you, if you'll only tell me how !"

CHAPTER III.

MR. MASON ELOPES.

/HE young girl recoiled, as she very well might, firom

1 so unexpected an apparition, and gazed at the stran-

ger with large, frightened eyes.

"Don't be alarmed, madame," Mr. Mason re-

id, with the greatest respect; "I am a friend, if you

:permit me to say so. An hour ago, chancing to pass your

s, and finding them, for a wonder, unlocked, curiosity

h ted me to enter. I concealed myself in yonder tree-

^ unpardonable on my part, I know; but, again, strong

Bty must plead my excuse. And in that tree I must own

yed eavesdropper. I have overheard every word of your

sation with the gentleman who has just left this room.

k father suspicious, apparently, I own; but really the

on, the whole occurrence has been so strange, so oul

r'








<pb n="24"/>
24         ,     MR. MASON ELOPES.

of the sual course, that singularity must plead my pardon. As

I said before--now that I am here-if I can be of the slightest

ise to you, madame, pray command me."

And Mr. Mason paused for breath. He was not long-winded

as a rule, didn't in the least shine in conversation, and lo ! heze

he was breaking forth, an orator. Dire necessities demnarl

stringent measures.

Mr. Mason rose with the occasion, and was eloquent I

The young lady listened and looked at him, still surprised,

still doubtful.

"I-am a stranger here," pursued Duke. "I came from

London two weeks ago, to visit an old friend residing in Speck-

haven. To-night I was to have returned home, and thinking

of something else, took the wrong turning at the Cross-roads,

and found myself here. I am an intruder, I know, and have

no business whatever on the premises, but again I repeat:

being here, if I can be of any use to you-"

She drew near, her lips apart, her eyes shining, her hands

clasped .

"You will help me! I want to escape. I am a prisoner

here. Oh! surely you are not deceiving me! You are not

an emissary of Mr. Lyndith or Sir Vane Charteris !"

"Madame, until within the last half-hour, I never knew those

two gentleman were in existence. I will help you in any way

. you may please to name."

There was no doubting the sincerity of his tone. Still, the

mysterious young lady gazed at him, as if to read his heart in

his face. Poor Duke ! it wasn't at all a handsome face. His

eyes were of the palest, most insipid sky-blue-his nose was a

decided snub, his whiskers were sparse, and wont to crop up in

a variety of pale-yellow and dull-red stubble, that surprised

even himself  The most sentimental school-girl could not for

the life of her make a hero of Marmaduke Mason, but the silli.

est school-girl of them all might have trusted him, as she could

nave dared to trust few of his sex. Lost dogs wagged their

forlorn tails, and followed him home from the streets; children

game to him and demanded pennies with a confident assurance,

touching to see, on a first introduction. Men slapped him oz

the shoulder, and called him " Mason, my boy ! " and " Dukzy.

old fellow !" before they had been half an hour in his society.

It was an honest face, and the clear eyes searching it knew'

they might trust him. She leaned forward to him through the








<pb n="25"/>
MR. MASON ELOPES.                  25

.The moon rising now gleamed forth from

clouds, and silvered the sweet, pale face.

Whelsp me to escape?" she whispered, earnestly.

:here-I have been for the last two months.

guardian, and he wants me to marry a man I

-:she set her little teeth, and the big, black eyes

~i1l run away to-night, if you will help me."

*you. Tell me what I am to do ? "

ipta say you got in? The gates are always locked

not this evening. The servant who drove to

t it too much trouble to descend and lock

: a-appears he is in the habit of leaving them

I 1 ~ar£m has ever come of it. I was in hid-

1t I'drew the key from the lock-here it

-t- know what he said or did, I'm sure,

Ifound it gone."

/-     ng to prevent my escaping. Oh, thank

~   rt should go mad if kept another week here.

ask of you, a stranger, to do what I want."

t too much. Please don't think of me. What

'ed anxiously over her shoulder.

seen I don't know what may happen. Mr.

.1 an awful man! and he will return here di-

going to stay all night, and the doors and win-

fi'ade fast in an hour. If I get away at all it will

llly before. I dare venture. And in the mean-

looked at him more anxiously.

-Lyndith. I beg your pardon, but I heard him

know."

As Olivia Lyndith. But between this and mid-

jH only seven o'clock now, oh, Mr. -"

s Lyndith."

, how will you manage ? These March nights

d five long, lonely, freezing hours ! No, it is

:r hands and looked at him in despair. Duke

-'think of me, Miss Lyndith. I will wait with

-mlife . I don't mind it-upon my word and

I-.like it-yes I do-it's an adventure, you see,

m adventitr before in the whole course of




<pb n="26"/>
26              MR MASON' ELOPES.

my existence. I will go back to my friend, the elm-tree, and

wait for midnight and you. May I ask how you propose get-

ting out?"

"Through this window. Oh ! how kind, how good you are,

sir, and I am quite friendless and alone here I These windows

are secured by bolts on the inside. I can easily draw them, 

lift the window, and jump out. And you have the key of the

gate; you say ?"

"Yes, madame. And then ?"

" hen-Mr. Mason, when does the earliest train from Speck-

aiaven start for town ?"

' "I really don't know; that we must ascertain at the station

before the people here g, . up, that is certain. But it is clear

five miles to Speckhaven; can you walk it ?"

"Mr. Mason, I could walk fifty miles, I think, to escape this

dreadful house. Oh ! if I can only reach London and start for

Paris before they miss me here."

i;For Paris?" Mr. Mason exclaimed. "Is Robert in Paris,

I wonder?" he thought. 

-"Yes; . -have friends in Paris-my mother's friends, who

will protect. me even against my guardian, I think. Hark !

Oh, Mr. Mason, go-quick, for pity's sake. My uncle is here !"

She sprang back from the window. Duke made for his tree.

Jist as -he regained his roost the door opened, and Mr Lyn-

dith,lo6king-less grim and more humanized, as the most sav-

age of men, I notice, are apt to do after dinner, came in. 

The young lady had flung herself into his arm-chair before

the fire. She arose sullenly at his entrance.

"Don't disturb yourself, Olivia-don't, I beg; I am sorry

you didn't dine; Mrs. Grimshaw is an excellent caterer really. -

What ! you're not going so soon ?"

"Your society is so pleasant, Mr. Lyndith, and your con-

versation so profitable, that it must seem strange to you, no

doubt," the girl said, bitterly.  "I am going, nevertheless.

Good-night."

"But, Olivia, wait a moment, I beg. Won't you give me

some music, my dear? these March evenings are so confoundl-

edly 1'mg, and the wind positively howls dismally enough to

give a man the horrors."

"With a clear conscience like yours, Uncle Geoffrey, I won;

der such nervous notions trouble you. No; I shall give you-

no music to-night."

" Then, perhaps, you will give me an answer, Miss Lyndith ?' 








<pb n="27"/>
l       .wMR!. MASON ELOPES.               27

what, sir ?"

you return with me to-morrow to London ?"

decidedly."

lthe promised wife of Sir Vane Charteris ?"

I"

you prefer remaining a prisoner indefinitely?'

_Hj   refer anything to marrying Sir Vane Charteris. Good

Jncle Geoffrey."

i, Olivia--"

/b    od-night !" Olivia said, with a flash of her great blaci

_   nd with the words she was gone.

-_;man started up with an oath, and made for the door.

-e back, Olivia!" he cried. "I have something to

-only'the ghastly echo of his own voice came back to him

W-^e lonesome gallery. Miss Lyndith's taper gleamed

i. bar above in the upper rooms, and the bleak draught

idrearily up and down the black-oak hall.

-oosed the door with a shudder, and began pacing

'-:up and down the long, firelit room.

.her obstinacy !" he muttered. "But I might have

:she was always a headstrong little devil. And she

et that fellow, dead or alive. In his grave under the

rAtlantic, he is as much in my way as he was three years

s in England. The child is my last resource-she will

terms for its sake. Yes, I must give her the child;

- promise anything for that-anything. I'll make her

: to-morrow, and end this infernal business. Once in

I:n of Vane Charteris, and your airs and vapors will

-an end, my lady."

_*s^umled his chair, rang a hand-bell, ordered wine and

_       _t a savage tone, and stared moodily into the fire.

_^fresnhments brought, he sat smoking for upward of an

ordered candles, and departed. A minute later, and

:shone in an upper window; fifteen more, and Mrs.

and Joseph went their rounds, fastening up for the

/_Bi~'t do no good a badgerin' of a chap now," Jose)ph

/, in a voice of sulky injury: " it's gone. and that's all

-r -.Your barking won't bring nothing back, will it? 1

_jk     :@it, I tell you. I left it in the keyhole. I did, so

-_ and when I came back it was clean gone. There i

i nothink more about it. We can bolt the ga:es,

     ~~~~i 








<pb n="28"/>
28              MR. MASON ELOPES.

can't we-who's a-coming to rob this hold Castle Dismal- And

I'll get a key to-morrow over in Speckhaven."

And then the window was closed with a bang, and secured

and the servants left the room, and only the smoulderir.g glow

of the dying fire was left to console Mr. Mason on his perch in

the tree.

Jo.;eph sloucled down to the gate, returned, and the last

Joor closed for the night. Two more lights shone up above foi

half an hour longer, then all Lyndith Grange lay wrapped in

the silence and darkness of death.

It was now close upon ten o'clock. The cold March moon

was sailing silvery up the steep blue sky, and by its ivory light

Duke looked at his watch. Ten! Two mortal hours yet to

wait, in cold and loneliness, and in a haunted park ! He must

stay here till midnight-awful hour ! when, according to all re-

ceived traditions, the gory ghost of the murdered cavalier, and

the shrieking lady, might be looked for, if they intended to put

in an appearance at all.

Duke didn't believe in ghosts; none of us do, in broad day-

light, with the sun shining, and the world astir about us; but

this was quite different, you see.

" Put yourself in his place" up a tree, not a creature near,

in a graveyard, say not reported to be haunted, even, and see if

every gleam of moonlight isn't a ghost, and every sough of wind

the unearthly rattle of skeleton bones.

"Oh, Lord!" groaned Mr. Mason; "to think that I, who

never lost a wink of sleep, or a meal's victuals in my life, like

most fellows, for any woman alive, should come to this for a

young person I never laid eyes on until within the last two

hours. To think that I, who never was in love in my life,

should be going to elope at midnight now. Great powers I

what would Rosanna say if she could see me now ? "

And Duke waited. One by one the minutes told off on his

dial-plate; slowly the crystal moon swam up the purple sky;

brightly burned the frosty stars, and slowly, from head to foot,

the watcher grew benumbed. Most lugubrious, most unearthly,

wailed and moaned the wind through the trees; in the dead

silence he could hear the dull roar of the surf six miles away.

Would midnight, would Miss Lyndith, never come ?

Yes. At half-past eleven exactly he heard the cautious with-

drawal of the window-bolts. With an inward thanksgiving, and

all cramped and stiff, Duke got down from the tree, and ap-

proached. Yes; there she stood, the moonlight shining on








<pb n="29"/>
29

acloak and hood, and

:im -to silence, opened

trough the narrow aper.

but Duke lifted her

-Her teeth were chatter

texrtr.

was no time for here

-dg e an~d hurried with 'her

i-tpre. a The gates were sei

_Ai t ~them back easily, and she

A.i-pe tor, as she glanced back,

_iwevs  egocbackck   alive."

-X'~  =opidly on.           Ex.

p  neither had

:   th  .t c night. They were

a  breathless.  To Duke it was

:  ---re-this . fairy figure on his

e Rosanna at my door, order

he'-:   thought, "and find all thie

panion. How pale she was,

in the moonlight like snow,

in thle cold silver rays. And

h  a;mere child, and running

secuted.

.8~ tiipssin      it is so easy to

t she:was the lady of Dr.

so pretty; and the old rascal

at himself for his late scandal-

tolookather.   I wsh,

to anything sentimental

'fe wasn't a woman-hater;

indispensable, indeed, hi

_    seacts, but he had a cons

ad inferior animals, as

1 -F








<pb n="30"/>
30             .ZR. MASON ELOPES.

They reached the town as the Speckhaven clocks were

striking the quarter after midnight. It lay still in the moon

light-solemnly still-white and cold. They hnrried throug

its quiet streets, not meeting half-a-dozen people until they ha

left it behin1d.

The station stood, as it is in the nature of stations to stand

in a dreary track of waste land, on the outskirts of the town.

At half-past twelve they reached it. One or two official , wit

blue noses and leepy eyes, stared at them stolidly. The ne

rain for London was a slow train; and it would pass at 2:15

Nearly two hours to wait ! She sank down in a seat, exhauste

-white as a spirit. Duke left her by the fire, and went i

search of refreshments; but at that hour there was nothing t

be had. He returned to tell her so, with a disappointed face,

and to his surprise she looked up at him with great tear

shining in the dusk eyes, and took his hand in both her own.

" How good you are ? " she said. " How good! how good

;low caa I ever thank you, Mr. Mason?"

Mr. Masan had, like all his sex-devoid of little weaknesses

of any gort ithemselves-a strong aversion to scenes. He

turned very rd, and drew his hand away, as if those soft fin-

gers burned him-nmuttering something incoherent about "not

mentioning it-taking a httle nap in her chair before the train

came."

"Wait a minute," she said: "we don't know what may

happen! I may be followed, and brought back in: spite 

you; and some day I may need a kind friend's help again

Take this ring; it is worth a great deal. Oh, you must-an

keep it for my sake. Give me your London address, no

that we have time, and whether we get safe to Paris or not

Some day I may seek your help again; and if I ever need you,

you will come ? "

" I will come," he said, simply.

He gave her the address, No. 50 Half-Moon Terrace

Bloomsbury, and she wrote it in a little pocket-book. Th

ring she had forced upon him blazed in his hand like a glowin

coal. It was an opal, curiously set in dead gold-most siniste

and beautiful of stones.

"Thank you, Mr. Mason," she repeated, looking gratefully

up with those wonderful black eyes. " I will never forget yo

kindness while I live. And now I will try to rest until th

rain comes."

She sank hDwwn in her chair before the fire, shading her f








<pb n="31"/>
6 "SUCH A MARRIAGE NEVER         MMnt

'   cignt her head in token of assent, and 

..ii the library window Sir Vane Charteris

ole extraordi,,ry proceeding, utterly astout

i mean ? I ad this reckless girl outwitted'

.i.e came forth into the hall. She flung back.

Plt t time, and met his angry, suspicious pai

^  .srless eyes. The sight of him restored all

ht desperate courage and defiance. Wea

.ere wholly gone now.

.   '" Miss Lisle," he demanded, sternly, -"

O "Sir Vane Charteris," she retorted, meeting

.;ithout flinching, "it means that you are.

-',shed-that you are no longer my tyrant, 

-.means that at last I am out of your power

im.free!"

~:!His dark face turned yellow with rage. 

understood it after, he understood on the.'

place. She had married Guy EarlscourL,

"  '.$o into the library," he said, briefly, and.:4

i    eed her, and closed the door. She.

lai   y erect, her eyes alight-her haughty

-  esolute face white as death.  "Yod "

i^wtcout ? "                           <-

<:'. .I have married Guy Earlscourt" I 

- ;,And then, for fully five minutes, they stodI

. combatants in a duel to the death. It '

'i aie might-storm as he would-it was

nmidone. She was married, and out of 'i-

~iomwt--he could do nothing-nothing

-i.'~ Dnaried," Paulina said, her voice 

* _; o escape one brother I have:ad

i    b^ hear that, Sir Vane

_  bt:ive to.it by you and Lorid      I

_E       .f*plot! to carry me off to 'The  i

.        --uiulaalr tishould be forced into a 

S^r.. Si Vane Charteris, if there had  iS

irou.d have escaed by death. Guy 

lexile has married. e, and freed me f

.  - On the eve of his exile, Paulina ITh

eighty thousand pounds need hardly. 

~ 7.o_; hi his place you certainly wou

, happens to possess the 








<pb n="32"/>
32            IN THE WAITING-ROOM.

Mr. Iyndith from his entrance never noticed him, thlcgh

his glance scanned the bleak apartment in search of any one

who might be his runaway niece's companion. He came up

close to her, grim as an Egyptian death's-head.

"What does this mean, Olivia ? "

She looked at him and laughed, a hard bitter, laugh enough.

" I think it is pretty plain, Uncle Geoffrey. I am tryirg to

run away. In fifteen minutes more I should have succeeded,

too. Why have you followed me, Mr. Lyndith ?"

" Rather an insolent question, I think, and an unnecessary

one, too."

" For its insolence I don't know-of its necessity I am very

sure. Why have you taken the trouble to follow me ? You

certainly don't expect I shall go back ?"

They were strikingly like each other, as they stood there, a

red sullen glow of anger burning deep in their eyes, the young

girl's handsome, resolute lips compressed. The man knew her

well, and knew that the hour had come when he must play his

last card.  He did not answer her last defiant remark; he

asked a question very quietly:

"Are you alone, Olivia?"

"Who is likely to be my companion ? " she answered reck-

lessly. " What friend have I-thanks to you-who is there in

the world to be my companion in any of my rebellious flights ?

I stand here as I stand on earth-alone-Heaven help me !"

Her voice broke a little. With a passionate gesture she

turned away and looked into the fire. Mr. Lyndith regarded

her in stony calm.

" May I ask your present intentions, Olivia ? It would be

a pity for us to misunderstand each other in the least."

" I am going to Paris," she answered, her reckless manner

returning. " Madame le Comtesse de Florial was my motlher's 

friend. She will protect and shelter me."

"She will not defy your guardian. A Frenchwoman brought

up as Madame de Florial has been, would be the very last on

earth to countenance a young, unmarried girl in such insubor.

dination as yours, Olivia; and if it were otherwise, I have law

and right on my side. Remember, I am your guardian !"

" You are my tyrant-my jailer ! I will never go back to

the Grange-never, so help me Heaven !"

She raise her arm with a gesture wo-thy Rachel hcrs(lf.

Mr. Mason, in the doorway, contemplated her admiringly.

" There is a court of appeal for such as I, even in Englandi








<pb n="33"/>
ieesee whete

e, or not. In

i fifteen tin-

kGeoffreg

se  it, and

I  T. cannot

nyyou, and

we to Park

_i: something

sition, my

Y...ous  ill

o me

tfiarrySir

before-her

ls breathless

y as young

You Shal)

r:the honor

sis on the

maternity a

Vane would

bbhim with an al

ot please. Tlis

it. Now sup-

e in the hanLd-

She was trem-

s excitement.

with a gaze








<pb n="34"/>
34            iNy 7- k£ WAITING-ROOM.

"-In that case you shall never see it alive or dead. It shal

be taken from the comfortable home in which it is now, an4

given over to the poorest hind I can discover. It shall be

brought up in squalid poverty and vice, a creature, which,

when it attains womanhood, you will be the first to shrink witbh

horror fi n. That is all.'

A more pallid hue came over the girl's pallid face-herver

itys hitened to ashes.

" t will be a fate good enough for Robert Lisle's child.

For you, Olivia-you are but eighteen-for three years more do

as you will, say as you will, the law makes me your master.

Your talk is nothing but talk-the only thing you can bring

against me, is that I try to carry out the conditions of you

late father's will, and see you Lady Charteris upon your eigh-

teenth birthday. You refuse-I have reason to fear you will

run away and go to the bad, and to prevent it, I fetch yo

down to my country house and leave you there with two trusty

servants. Your orphan's court will tell you, I am doing my,

duty. - And should you make any such appeal "-his face grew

black ad rigid as iron-"I will tell to the world the whole

story of the' shameful past-how you, a cliild, scarce sixteen,

ran away to Scotland with a yeoman's son-a thief, Miss Lyn-

dith, caught in the very act-a fellow drowned, as he deserved:

to be, in his flight to America. The world shall know this

charming story, though the honor of all the Lyndiths that ever--

lived go with it. You are very young, Olivia, you are very|

handsome-you are proud, and came of a proud race-how will

it be with you then "

All her high courage-only a frantic woman's courage at

best, had given way under the lash of his scorpion tongue,

under his resolute man's strength. She had covered her face'

with both hands-dry, hysterical sobs shook her. The excite- 

ment of the night-the cold-the desolation, were telling on

her, as such things tell on her sex. Duke Mason's fists

clenched-the desirto go and punch Mr. Lyndith's head was

growing too great for human strength to bear. 

"I am sorry to distress you, Olivia," her uncle said, after a

very brief pause; "but my poor, impulsive, headstrong child,

it is for your own good. You must obey your dead father.

You must marry the man he chose for you-you must.

submit to the inevitable. Let the disgraceful past be blotted

out, become the wife of an honorable gentleman, and be-

have like a rational being. You can't suppose I want teo.

.                  .~~~~~~~








<pb n="35"/>
-"^^^^^^^^^^H~l tyor folly-

_TFi ' on hei.

,on my

-as you

4-;~;re eight

them to

ntic, and

ArOivia."

.before

-looked

welan-

b{i'ding-

. She

Robert,

H the, dark

*^ ~baby-my

swhat be-

to St.

^^f   ^!^-~ated,

tafarce

.0 :Slog-4S

Hcain

^^^^^--Kiti








<pb n="36"/>
36             IN THE WAITING-ROO,.

"The five minutes have expired, Olivia," say the pitiless

tones of Geoffrey Lyndith, close beside her; "is it to be yes

or no?"

She turned around and lifted in the gas-lEght a face so death-

like, eyes so dim and lifeless, that even he shrank away.

"It is yes, Uncle Geoffrey, and may Heaven forgive you.

I never will."

"You are hysterical, Olivia-I pardon your wild words

You promise, if I restore to you your child, to marry Sir Vane

Charteris "

"I promise !"

The words dropped like ice from her lips. He held out his

hand, looking at her uneasily.

"It i3 a compact between us-you will keep your word,

Olivia?"

She drew back from his extended hand with a gesture of in.

describable repulsion.

"I will never shake hands with you again as long as I live,

and will keep my word. Have you not said we Lyndiths al.

ways do that. I could tell you of a promise I made two years

ago that I am breaking now, but you would say rash promises

made to yeomen's sons are better broken than kept. Are you

quite sure, Mr. Lyndith, you will keep your pledge to me ? "

"On my sacred honor. And now I must send Joseph back

io the Grange, and there will be barely time to get our tickets

before the train comes."

He hastened out. Miss Lyndith at once crossed the wait.

ing-room to where Duke Mason still stood unseen.

I' I am going with my uncle," she said hurriedly; " there is

no alternative. Whatever happens, with all my heart I thank

you."

She took his hand in both her own, and looked steadily up

in his honest, homely face.

"You have a home, a wife, mother, sister, perhaps? Tell

me."

" I have a home, such as it is, and a sister to keep it-.yes."

The large, dark eyes still searched his face, the soft patrician

fingers still clasped his own.

"You have a good face, an honest face, and a kind, loyal

heart, I know. If it is ever in your power, Mr. Mason, I won.

de:r if you would aid me again ? "

"As freely as I have aided you to-night, madame."

'Then-I have your address, you know-if I ever send for








<pb n="37"/>







<pb n="38"/>
0                ::  L -, - OBE ^ RT HRAWKSL EY.- 

....'' I    - 'We will weigh anchor this evening in

' ellth!e gentleman addressed made answer, " I am so

if :.I never feel so much in my element, as I do

;I believe an All-Wise Providence originally cut. me

an old salt, and by some mistake I was born Baron Mon

instead. It's the old story, captain, the round pegs

the square holes, and vice vers4. As a first class seam

':h--  dea. beenof some use" in my generation-as it is"

. slhrgged his shoulders, and sauntered away. 

lE"r.haad told Nugent Horatio Earlscourt, Baron Mon

t hat he was a very proud man, and an aristocrat to t

of his heart, I don't think he would have believed y

ti-:was quite true, however. He went in for all sorts of rep

etlcan doctrines, and radical reforms, and the rights of the pe

9p6, and thought the Americans the greatest and noblest peo

aiive (or said he did), and would no more have entertained

i.mereantile prince, or a cotton-spinning millionnaire at his tabl

in he would a chaw-beacon off his estate down in the gre

.old-of Lincolnshire. A Geraldine de Montalien had coi

ewith the Conqueror; a Rodolf Montalien had forcedKi

to sign Magna Charta; a Prior, Francis of Montalie

been great Earl Warwick's right-hand man; a Guy Mo

ie  had died fighting for the "White Rose and the lo

of hair." A Jasper Montalien, the legend of their hou

ihad made sad havoc with the virgin heart of Queen Ei

b, being a tall and proper gentleman, cunning of fence, an

'isome as a Greek god, as it was in his nature to be. The

ilRbeen strong barons, and skilled warriors, from time imme

and they had quartered their arms with royal houses be

and brides with princely blood in their veins ha

lacross the threshold of Montalien Priory. And th

:-...'d of hundreds of haughty barons had gone down t

l-;:thel present lord of Montalien, and he would hav

i-t-' .you with his classical, patrician face, and told you

f dden- o birth was nothing less than nothing, that

~ '".. -?.: : 5-' J.. :  _  " True hearts are more than coronets,

-   And simple faith than Norman blood ;"

-L "Iad.y. Vere de Vere" had not then been written, An

'hilated y: with one glance of his steel blue eyes, had y

-it Aoie one inch nearer than it was his will to 








<pb n="39"/>
* -     '39

incogilito as " MT.

had almos enjoyed

a shot )r tuwo at

- less of a bore

:Ie was fiftj

jin his dai k

thEe broad

9ieed -r mouth,

a- -'

t, as he strolled

g in this lower

.a The big

e hme, and I

'a I'riHonitse.

it- M.ontalien

c  dowvagers witn

rror to me during

figure, leaning

intensity -quite. re-

lay, gazing so ab-e

tsteps.

;peer thought, with

enest he seems,

E England is

'to see Francis

-t  see Guy again.

ta! I'm afraid it

and I was fond of

i  -ke a woman's

, gazng at the sunlit

, sone five-arid-

king. More

pphre blue to

ia   and a fair

Se~in yihoz








<pb n="40"/>
40<         ROBERT HAWKSLEY. 

Lord Montalien had deigned to take the slightest interest was

this young man.

This young man who wore a rough, shabby coat, a felt hat,

and who was too poor to travel in the first cabin.

His name on the passenger list was Robert Hawksley; he

was a returned Englishman, who had spent the last two year

in roughing it in the Western States; and who, judging by ap.

pearances, had not made his fortune. Since he had come on

board at New York, an intense, a sickening longing to reach

England possessed him. He seemed unable either to eat or

sleep. At night, when the midnight stars shone over the pur-

ple sea, he paced the deck, hour after hour, ever gazing toward

where England lay, with a burning hunger of impatience in his

eyes. He was a self-contained man, who said little to those

about him, and this very reticence and quietude first drew the

nobleman toward him; he sought to make no acquaintances

-he was modest, and unassuming to an unusual degree, and

Lord Montalien, who kept sundry very wealthy fellow-passen-

gers at a safe distance, and who knew every sailor on board

by name, was on the most friendly footing with Robert Hawks-

ley. If he had sought to force his confidence or companion-

ship upon him, his lordship would have sent him to coventry

in three minutes, but he never did. He talked to my lord,

when my lord desired it, and if he were passed by unnoticed,

he did not seem to care one whit. He was so thoroughly in-

dependent, and manly, and simple, that his grave dignity

always commanded respect.

"Well, Mr. Hawksley," his lordship said, "we are almost

there at last."

"At last!" The young man drew a long breath, a long,

eager sigh.

" You say that as though we had been a month out, and yet

we have had a remarkably speedy passage. You are very anx.

ious to arrive ? "

"Very anxious; the passage has been intolerably slow to

me, and yet-and yet-perhaps, I had much better not have

come at all."

"That depends. You have numbers of friends, no doubt

who will rejoice to greet you after two years' absence."

The young man looked at him with those wonderful blue

eyes, and then away at the golden light on the sea.

"I have no friends, my lord-none. There is but on'eis al

England who cares for me, and she must be either more or les

than a friend." 








<pb n="41"/>
ROBrEfT HAWKSLEY.                 41

l-a 'lady in the case,' as they say in Ii ish duels.

home for a bride; that is tle cause of all this

lce. My lad, I congratulate you-I remem-

once myself, and it was very nice. And no

g lady counts the hours even more ilmpatiently

Robert Hawksley, " she does not even know 1

ou did not write and tell her?  You wish to

dramatic surprise, I suppose ?"

er written to her, my lord. During the two

en roughing it out there among the prairies, I

a line from her, nor from any one in England.

een know that I am alive. She is far above

talien, in rank, but two years ago she loved

-e going back, and you expect to find her un-

|nobleman said, with a compassionate smile.

w, in that world no one is remembered two

a woman living, I wonder, to whom two years'

not serve as a sponge to wipe out the memory

alive. What have beautiful, frivolous creatures

-with constancy, and honor, and truth, and all

uline virtues? They are butterflies, born to

t and flattery, and forget the rose in whose

this moment, for the tulip they fly to the

ds poetical, doesn't it, Hawksley? believe

true."

an started; he often did, as though the sound

ewere unfamiliar.

true," he said huskily; " she loved me !"

doubt-two years ago. And you have never

e, and you go back, and expect to find her

y lad, I never expect to find anything as I have

;3months' absence-and to trust to a woman I

a weathercock, trust to the shifting quick-

but don't look for fidelity from the fair, fickle

* I am fifty-three years old, Mr. Hawksley,

I - am talking about. And a wiser and greater

monarch and a poet, who had several thou-

istake not, has told us ' All is vanity' If she

Tsome other man months ago, then you may

-á fortunate fellow."








<pb n="42"/>
42              R OBERT HAWKSLE Y.

Robert Hawksley looked at him with an angry fla&h of

blue eyes.

"She was my wife," he said haughtily.

"Oh! yciurwife. Well, that's different, you see. A 

may expect fidelity from his wife, with some show of reas

And you have never written to her in two years. Hasn't

been a little oversight on your part, my dear boy ?"

"It would have been useless. I have told you, my lord, 

.s far above me in station, and her uncle, her guardian, wo

perrmit no letters of mine to reach her. I know him w

enough for that."

"Indeed! Yours was a clandestine marriage, then, I t

it?"

"It was. Poor child-I did wrong, I suppose-she

only sixteen, I twenty-two, she an heiress, and of as proud!

family as any in England, and I-a nobody ! But we lo

each other, and for four months were happy-were-in heave

"Then I don't say you have done so very badly, with 

life, after all," Lord Montalien remarked. "There are so1

of us who go through the world, and don't find four days

four hours of perfect bliss. And the flinty-hearted un

wouldn't be reasonable, and accept the inevitable? He t

his daughter away, and you became an exile ? And now y

are going back-may I ask-why ?"

"' To claim my wife, in spite of him-to fetch her to Ameri

if she will come. I can give her a home there-not such

she has been accustomed to, but if she loves me as she did, s

will be happier with me in a cottage than without me in a p

ace."

'" If" Lord Montalien repeated, half cynically, half sadly

"if she loves you as she did, Robert Hawksley. And she h

had two years to forget you ! Well, well. She is your wife

I willnot say a word, and I hope-yes, my lad, I hope y

will find her an exception to her sex, and true, and tender, an

ready to fly with you to the uttermost ends of the earth. Y

are a fine fellow, I am certain, and handsome, and there ar

women alive, I dare say, who would go with such a man as y

to beggary. I've never met any of those paragons myself, a

I don't think' I ever shall; but poets and novelists, and pla

. wrights, tell us they exist. Those stupid British theories 

birth! á As if a lusty young fellow like you, well-mannere

well-looking, healthy in mind and body, weie not a miate for

princess.








<pb n="43"/>
and Eve span,

%ho gentlemanT'

ihen all monarchies will end, and the

/~:!I: like the Americans; I like their in-

of their t ociety. I consider George

/greatest men the world has ever seen,

-better than to spend my life among

the.' herds of buffalo, and. the Indian

lexander, I would be-the other jlerson.

lien, of Montalien, I would be a hur.ter

But noblesse oblige, and all that sort of

means I must assume the old tread-mill

Fords, and society, and dinner-parties, and

- it all vanity and vexation of spirit. Why

ded English aristocrat, the uncle, have

ylour pretty bride;- why couldn't he havy

acts. as they do in theatres, and then

in the last scene with 'Bless you, my

you dog, and be happy !' Why couldn't

- this, my boy," his hand fell kindly on the

er, "if you ever need a friend, and I can

ie.; I never forget any one whom I once

7. Come to me, and command me in any

-i(ard, with his title, and "Montalien Priory,

i:.~unt Street, London," engraved upon it,

Robert Hawksley looked after him.

dith, or Sir Vane Charteris, had been'like

:'but no, it is only talk -after all. If she had

Fopr niece, he would have behaved just the

-same; I don't think Lord Montalien could

l tieachery, as Geoffrey Lyndith did to banish

gracious for Lord Montalien, in his posi.

ngs but haven't I seen him when that rich

tied to be hand and glove with him, put

*or three cold, sarcastic sentences?  He is

l his order, but she-ah, my darling! be faith-

~:come, and we will yet be happy together in

Hawksley, with his handsome face all

:-the sunlight, watched the land they were

art in his eyes.

e passengers of the "Labe of Columbia'








<pb n="44"/>
44               ROBERT HAWKSLEY. 

were safely in Liverpool. Lord Montalien shook hands with

Robert Hawksley on the quay, without one tinge of conLescen

sion or patronage. 

"Remember, Hawksley, if I can ever be of service to you.

come to me. I will help you if I can."

And Mr. Hawksley had said, "Thank you, my lord, I wil'

remember." And so they had parted, and how was either to

dream that that pr6mise involved the future lives of the two

dearest to them both ?

There was an hour to spare before the train by which the

young man meant to travel to London would start.    He

turned into a coffee-house, ordered his breakfast, and while he

waited, took up a greasy paper, lying on the table. It was a

copy of the London Morning Post three days old, but the

returned Englishman, to whom English papers were as rare as

angels' visits, read it with avidity. He was reading the fash-

ionable intelligence, whom were party-going, party-giving, who

was presented at the last drawing-room, whom were being

married, and to whoim. And in this list he came upon the

following paragraph:

" The marriage of Sir Vane Charteris, Secretary of Legation to Vienna,

to Miss Olivia Lyndith of Lyndith Court, Staffordshire, niece of Geoffrey

Lyndith, Esq., so long postponed on account of the young lady's ill-health,

is positively fixed for the fourteenth of the present month. Immediately

after the honeymoon, which is to be spent in Italy, Sir Vane and Lady

Charteris depart for the brilliant Viennese Court."

Robert Hawksley read this paragraph, and read it again-

slowly, painfully, with a face from which every drop of blood

surely receded. He held the paper before him, his eyes dila-

ting, his face, his lips turning to the hue of ashes. No word,

no exclamation escaped him; he sat as rigid as a man turning

to stone. The waiter brought him his breakfast, and stared at

him aghast. He spoke to him, he did not hear; he touched

him, and a pair of sightless eyes looked up from the paper.

"Ere's your brekwist, sir-hany think helse, sir?"  But the

words fell on dull ears. "Blessed if I don't think he's goir.

to 'ave a fit!" thought the waiter, and left him.

Robert Hawksley sat there, and read again, and again, that

brief, commonplace paragraph in the Morning Post. Waiters

and customers stared alike in wonder at the young man, who

sat with his untasted breakfast before him, and with that rigid,

awfully corpse-like face.

a ully~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~








<pb n="45"/>
THE FOURTEENTH OF APRIL.               4 

at last, and laid down the paper. The waiter ap

and he demanded his bill. He had touched noth

*  paid it at once, and without a word walked out o4

ght April sun was shining, the streets were alive w ith

t Robert Hawksley seeing nothing, hearing nothing,

indly on like a man in a dream.

i ed!" the word tolled through his brain like a bell.

on the fourteenth.  And this is the thirteenth.

:I will be in London, and to-morrow is her wedding.

HIe laughed aloud in an insane sort of way, rather to

se of the passers-by. "And two years and a half ago

S'my wife. Lord Montalien was right then, after all.

it will be at St. George's, Hanover Square. Well, I

vited, nor expected, nor, I dare say, wanted, but still,

Charteris, Isb.Lll go to your wedding."

ur later, and the express train was flying homeward,

ert Hawk'sley sat gazing straight before him at the

lscape, and blue English sky, with that fierce hunger

eyes, and h;s teeth clenched hard behind his auburn

ed!" that bell in his brain seemed still tolling.

to-morrow, to Sir Vane Charteris. Well-when

w comes, we will see !"

CHAPTER VI.

iTHE DAWN OF THE FOURTEENTH OF APRIL.

Twas the thirteenth of April, and late in the afternoon

Sunshine flooded the quiet streets of Bloomsbury, and

: the windows of Half-Moon Terrace, happening to face

westward, were all aflame with the golden light of the

as blue as though Half-Moon Terrace were in Ven

ad of the parish of Bloomsbury, London. It , as an

ary brick boxes, and had only one side of the v, ay,

rbeing mews. And in the particular brick box, where

Mason had set up his household gods, he had a

~i''~~igmw.       di   h   atclrbikbx hr








<pb n="46"/>
46          THE FOURTEENTH OF 4PR.rL.

chimney-sweep for neighbor in the attic, and a lame cobble

who kept a shop on the first floor. Mr. Mason's domicile con-

sisted of four diminutive rooms, a kitchen, with a bedroom off

for his sister and housekeeper, a parlor, with ditto for himself,

and a dreary, unplastered apartment, also opening off the par.

lor, which served him as a studio; for Duke was an artist, as

you have been told-scenic artist, his little sign over the door

informed you-assistant scene-painter to the Royal Waterloo

Britannia. He was also second violinist, he likewise went on,

and played a witch in Macbeth, Second Grave-digger, etc., and

such powerful casts. Being an adept in the French language,

lie moreover adapted the plays of that nation, diluting them

with insular virtue, and straining the French morality a good

deal, in order to suit British stomachs. He also painted por-

traits when he got them to paint, so that you perceive Mr. Ma-

son was a gentleman of brilliant parts and great versatility of

talent.

He stands in his painting-room this sunny April afternoon,

hard at work. The ugly, bare room is flooded with sunshine,

and walls are covered with the works of Duke's facile brush.

Conspicuous among these is his great historical piece, the

Battle of Bannockburn," with a fiery sunset in the background,

and the faces of Sir William Wallace, and Robert Bruce, and

King Edward I., all ablaze with crimson lake and gamboge,

from the lurid glory in the skies. I am not positive that those

three august personages were all at the battle of Bannockburn;

no more was the artist; they were in the picture, however, the

Scottish heroes, in very short kilts, and standing none too

strongly on their legs, the royal Edward ferocious of aspect, and

in scale armor, and breastplate and helmet. Like most other

geniuses, Mr. Mason was unappreciated-the "Battle of Ban-

nockburn" wouldn't sell, and the artist had given up historical

painting and gone in for the Royal Britannia, which yielded him

an income of forty-five shillings a week.

This afternoon he is at work on a huge square that occupies

all one side of the room, and he is standing on a ladder, puttng

in skies and backgrounds. Close, it looks one huge chaos of

rubies and purples, and ultramarine and gold leaf-froim the

doorway it looks like a grotto set in golden sands, and in a.

strong lime light will no doubt come out in dazzling splendor to

the eyes of the frequenters of the Britannia.

In the parlor adjoining, the shabbiest and most spotlessly 

neat of parlors, sits sewing Miss Rosanna Mason. Her work








<pb n="47"/>
THE FOURTEENTH OF APRIL.               47

ywork-she does not look like one of your fiivolous

who give their weak intellects to gold beads and Ler-

it is-don't let me shock anybody-it is a pair of

sers, which she is mending. The full glow of the

ight floods Miss Mason as she sits and sews in its

if you are a frivolous person you will hover aloof,

with awe and silence. She is a lady of that age which

mentioned as uncertain; she is fifteen years the

seior, and Duke is five-and-twenty. She is tall and

mnaiden ladies usually are ; she has high cheek bones,

lips, and deep-set eyes, and a Roman nose, and a tre-

frontal development; and her hair, which is of the

sandy, is tightly pinned in a little knot at the back of

Her dress, old and faded, is daintily clean, as is, in-

ything about her, except, perhaps, Duke, whom she

prays for, and tyrannizes over, as some women do

en they like best.

l a tradition extant, that all old maids, at some epoch

s, ould have got married, if they had willed it, and

another cruel tradition, that all old maids wanzt to

Mss Mason triumphantly vindicated her sex in

:particulars. No man had ever asked her to marry

tno man had ever lived, whom she wanted to marry.

up before you in a glow of honest pride-a woman

old maid pure and simple from 'c/zoice. She de-

; she despised most women too-weak, purposeless

no higher aim than their husbands and their chil-

had no weakness herself; she had no pet dogs,

engendered fleas, the other was of the thievish

She cultivated flowers; the windows are full of

moment, and very beautiful they are amid the

e; and she loved children, and she was a devoted

Miss Rosanna Mason was a Christian of the aus-

whod6 looked upon theatres and ball-rooms as the

perdition, and a low-necked dress the first step to

s a thoroughly good and earnest woman in her

ts a very gloomy and ascetic way. If you were.

-d sit up with you night after night, knowing no

ing no reward, and in the dim watches, when the

ered, and your spirits were at their faintest ebb,

aloud to you, in a cruel voice, of the awful ter-

ptay, and the burning torments of such lost and

.yourself, until .your blood curdled and your








<pb n="48"/>
43          THE FOURTEENTH OF .4 PR.L.

hair rose. Duke stood in awe of her; hadn't she brorght II

up since boyhood, and slapped him, and scolded him for his

good, until the poor little fellow's life had been a misery to him ?

She had meant him to be a preacher, a missionary to the

heathen, anc lo ! here he was, at five-and-twe.'ty, a play-actor!

It was Miss Mason's bitterest cross, but she bore it, as we all,

iaints and sinners, must.

'lhe afternoon sun dropped low-Miss Mason glancing out

at the crimson golden radiance yonder in the west, opined that

it was almost time to go and get tea. Duke must depart for

the " regions of darkness," as she always thought of the Britan.

nia, at half-past six, and the pantaloons were done. She glanced

at their wearer and her grim face grew a shade more grim.

"At it again," thought Miss Mason; "he's growing worse

every day."

Duke was not doing anything very wrong-in fact, he was not

doing anything at all. He sat perched on the top of the lad-

der, his brushes and palette unused, staring very hard at nothing,

and whistling a pensive accompaniment to his thoughts. It

was quite a new habit of his this day-dreaming, a habit con-

tracted since his late visit to Lincolnshire. That was over

three weeks ago now, and as his sister said to herself, he grew

worse every day. He had not said a word, as you may sup-

pose, of the adventure of the night of the 25th of March-

very few people felt tempted to pour the story of their follies

into the vestal ear of Rosanna, and he had hidden the opal ring

deep in the recesses of his pocket-book. He had told nobody

of that strange adventure, and he had contracted a custom of

thinking about it a great deal. The fair, proud face of Miss

Olivia Lyndith rose very often between him and the canvas,

and haunted his dreams. What had become of her? Had

she married the baronet ?-he was a baronet, Duke supposed-

or had Robert turned up ? Of course not; Robert was drowned.

It was all darkly mysterious. Just at present he was wonder-

ing how the young lady's escape had come to be discovered go

speedily-it was the missing key did it, no doubt.

It had been the missing key. Mrs. Grimshaw had found

herself unable to sleep that night on account of it. Had the

spirit of the slain cavalier whisked it off, or had Miss Lyndith

anything to do with it?  After tossing several hours, Mirs.

Grimshaw grew desperate-got up-stole to the young lady's

chamber to see that all was safe. The door was unlocked, the

bed unslept in, the young lady gone. Half an hour after, Mr,








<pb n="49"/>
Ifiw








<pb n="50"/>
so          THE FOURTEENTH OF .PRIL.

Mr. Mason dashed in his skies and clouds energetically

feeling guiltily all the while, that his accusing angel in the par

lor was about to bring him to book.

"I don't want to hear about your Coral Caves and yo

Venus thingamies, Duke Mason," his sister retorted, sternly

"it is bad enough to know such sinful things exist, and that m-

own brother is risking his eternal welfare among them. I wan

to know what you mean by that odious habit you have con

tracted of sitting for hours and staring at nothing, like an idio

It means something-don't tell me, sir-I know better ! I

"Then I suppose it means laziness, Rosanna," Duke an

swered, good-humoredly.

"It means more than laziness, though that's bad enough

You know what the pious and wise Dr. Watts says: 'In work

of labor and of-' "

"Oh, dear! Yes, Rosanna, I know; don't repeat it,'

groaned Duke.

( But it isn't laziness; it's worse, Duke ! " in her cruelles

voice. " Don't prevaricate to me. You have fallen in love."

If Miss Mason had said, and truthfully, "you have committe

a murder," her brother could hardly have looked more alarme

and guilty. Was it love, to be haunted by day and by nigh

by one beautiful face, to wear an opal ring in a pocket-book

and have a secret hidden from an only sister ? Guilt was ther

and guilt told.

"  see I am right," Rosanna said, after a thrilling pause.

"Duke, who is the young woman ?"

" Upon my word, Rosanna, there is no young woman. Th

is, there isn't-she doesn't-I mean-"

Rosanna shook her head bitterly.

"That sounds very plausible, no doubt, brother Duke, bu

it doesn't deceive me.  'There isn't, she doesn't,' indeed 

Oh, Duke, have I brought you up to this time of day, and i

stilled the catechism into you, only to see you come to this

The theatre was bad enough, but to fall in love! And ne

you will want to get married ! Duke ! I command you-W

is the hussy ?"

"There's no hussy in the case, and I'm not in love, and

don't want to get married. Good Gracious ! Rosanna, wha

crime will you suspect a fellow of next? Upon my word an

honor," cried Duke in a paroxysm of torture, "I haven't

notion of getting married now, or ever-oh ! there's the pos

man. Don't mind, Rosanna, I'll go."








<pb n="51"/>
THE FOURTEENTH OF APRIL.                51

Ioimced off his ladder, and rushed to the door. The

_6hf,.anded him two letters, both addressed to hi!1,sclf.

[      llMJason had never been guilty of epistolary follies,

lhathan other follies, in her life. One was fi-om Ti:i-l

/_      .. !reproving him sharply for recent unpunctIualiJy, alnd

g an early attendance in the orchestra that evenilr.

a heavj fine. Duke flung this to the farthest c jr

room, and glanced at the other. Slippery nhite

, a faint odor of perfume, a delicate, spidery female

ewax seal, with crest and a motto. All the blood in

's arteries rushed into his face; and there stood

-that frigid vestal virgin, with piercing eyes fixed on

ty blushing face. She saw his look, and answered it

n-3fg sarcasm.

don't mind me. Read your letter, by all means, and

--, when I ask you who it's from, that 'there isn't-

t'-that' there's no lady in the case'-and that you've

of being married.' Don't mind adding a few more

- to your already over-burdened conscience. Read

A unhappy young man, and tell me it's from those

A.men, who employ you in their godless work, if you

-ce of scorn and sorrow combined, and Miss Mason

! to the kitchen. With a sort of groan the badgered

Hfr opened the dainty missive, and read:

e'omised to come to me, if I should ever want you. Tzhe

2e when it remains for you to keep that promise. If

.iy pity for an unhap py, friendless girl, you will

oe d clock to-morrow morning, to the address belowz.

ea gate at that time, and you will confer a deathless

her whomyou once so generously served. O. I."

s an address at the bottom of this note-the num-

se in Park Lane. And the blood left Duke's face,

thrill ran through him, as he thought of the dread- 

iies involved. Did she want him to run away with 

Wasn't it a penal offence to elope with a:n heiress ?

sure-his knowledge of Blackstone was foggy. And

iant him to go to France with her, and his repu ta-

stake, not to speak of his time; and what would

no, he couldn't bear to think what Rosanna would

horrors as this. He folded the letter up, and thrust

the cavernous depths of his biggest pocket, and

edly out at the red light in the sky. At three in

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~








<pb n="52"/>
o        SáTHE FC URZ ESNTTs OF APRIL.

tlie morning ! Why, there was something unholy in the

hour-it smacked of gunpowder plots, and secret assae

tion. If he were seen hovering about a gentleman's'ar

three in the morning, what would the policemen who 

Park Lane dream, but of burglary? And if he were c

leavirg the house with the young lady !

(I wot't leave the house with her!" resolved Mr. M

firmly. '" She's very pretty, and all that, but I'll see her f

first ! I'll n:n away with nobody any more. Adventur

all very well, but I'd rather take part in them on the s

the Britannia than in private life. I'll go-I would be a

to refuse-and what excuse will I make to Rosanna?

that it matters much, for she won't believe me, let me fab

what I please."

Hie rose, and paced softly up and down the parlor, fe

like the wretched conspirator he was. He could hear Ros

.bustling about the kitchen, the clatter of cups and saucers,

the general preparation for tea..

"i'Ul have to stay out all night," mused Duke, " I coi

sleep if I went to bed. What can she want ? I thought

promised to many Sir Vane Charteris. It was bad enou

run away with a young lady. It would be worse to run

with a baronet's wife."

" Come to supper," called Rosanna, and Duke went o

the kitchen, which was also the dining-room, meekly, and

all his wrong-doing palpable in his face. How was he to

weak tea, and eat slices off a stale quartern, with that secr

his mind, and that letter. buried in his pocket? He rose

two-or three gulps swallowed spasmodically. Rosanna, e

with the powerful appetite of strong virtue that can relish

tea and stale bread. saw all his confusion.

"You needn't sit up for me, Rosanna," the artist said,

nervous hautry. "I shan't be home to-night. Tinsel & S

gle have been blowing me up for laziness, and I shall

double tides to make up for it. I shall work at the Brit

until three or four this morning, and-ah-good-eve

Rosanna."

1 ies were not at all in Duke Mason's way-this was a

one, but still it nearly choked him. And, of course, Ros

did not believe one word. She listened, and ate on in om

silence, making no response to the fraternal good-night;

Duke drew a long breath as he closed the street door 

him, and hurried on his way. A blue, silvery haze fill.

.              .~~~~~~m,








<pb n="53"/>
_   URTEENTH OF APRIL.            53

TIhe gas lamps twinkled. One cr tvc

the blue, and a cloudless sunsef , 't a

-:took an omnibus, and reachcl:d J1t

hbur than he had done for weeks,

/oe.ngratulated themselves that thcbi

second violinist good.

s of the melodrama that night, Dil;ie',.

-~ark Lane, and he played false notes,

play altogether. It was an unuttera

n fell, and the audience poured out

-  aPS free to think as he pleased.

d away from the theatre. and

him to Park Lane. He found

big, black-looking house

iaristocratic front. A little

blocking the way, told

. e thought. "I wonder why

it the morning, instead of three?

e next two hours ?"

l  riliantly, the stars were numberless,

I  mer.. This, at least, was a consola-

" into his surtout pockets, and plodded

plaintively.  ,7zat could she want

carry him off to Paris?  Any human

/.ouglh could always do as they pleased

Wa Rosanna asleep by this time, or still

/osanpa-could sit up for a month, without

i.b!,' none the worse for it," though'

* "I wonder if she really sleeps a.

/. Elike the weasel's, with one eye open.

/.to snore a long winter night through, in

-world and its wickedness, must simply lbe

-<* run away to Paris .with Miss Lyndith, I'll

her again-never ! "

inberless city steeples. Duke lit a cigar,

in an open square, where the trees made

e' moonlit grass, and the lamps waxed dim

' oWWhat a strange, long night it was-would

nd how was it going to end ?"

i-He started up. He was a couple of miles

it would be three when he reached it,

..








<pb n="54"/>
54          THE FOURTEENTH OF APRIL. 

Still smoking, he hastened on. One or two 'guardians of

night" glanced at him inquiringly-one or two belated pe

trians he passed, a few hansom cabs tore by him with the h

of abnormal hours, but the aristocratic streets of the West 1

lay very still under the stars. A feeling of awe came over

young man as he glanced up at that glorious sky, and tho

of Him " Who keeps the vast and silent city while it slee

The big black house in Park Lane loomed up before hil

the clocks tolled three. All was dark and quiet now.

string of carriages had vanished-the party three doors offi

broken up early. He leaned against the area railings, looki

up at the dismal, unlighted mansion, when a cold hand

suddenly and swiftly laid on his. He started, and barely 

pressed an exclamation; he had heard no sound, yet here;

his side stood a woman.

"Hush !" said -a voice; "not a sound. You are D

Mason ?"

"I am."

"Tell me the name of her who sent for you ?"

" Olivia Lyndith." 

"Thank Heaven! Come down-tread softly."

He descended the area steps, and stood beside her. 

was a tall young woman, but she was not Miss Lyndith.

" I am the child's nurse," the girl said, answering that lo

'Take off your shoes. The least noise may betray us."

Duke obeyed. Her description of herself was rather 

intelligible, though. The child's nurse ! and what had he 

do with children ? Miss Lyndith wasn't a child, by any mea

What did she mean ?

There was no time to ask questions. He removed

shoes, ard followed her into the basement regions, up a fig

of steps, and found himself in a lofty-domed and carpeted ha

The moon's rays shone brightly, and tall marble statues glean

like ghosts in its light. A great staircase, carved, and gilde

went up in majestic sweeps to the regions above. A thi

soft carpet muffled the tread as Duke followed her to a seco

stately hall, hung with pictures, and lighted by a large Malte

wind: w. Many doors were on either side; one of these 

open Id, motioning the wandering Duke to follow, and he fou

himself in a spacious and elegant antechamber, dimly lighte

by two wax candles-an apartment more luxurious and bea

ful than any the scene-painter had ever beheld. 

"The Coral Caves of the Dismal Deep are very dazzl

* 04








<pb n="55"/>
iIR2T'EENTH OF AP.TLz.             55

he thought, "but for permanence give me

Pak Lane."

:   samid, laconically. A second after, lift

:urtain that draped an arch, she let it fall,

I   like the Arabian Nights," mused Mr. /[a-

upon a velvet fauteuil, "where Mr. Abou

at the gates of Bagdad, and wakes to find

nbers, and beside the dazzling Princess

ake presently, no doubt, and hear the

r the way rubbing down their horses, and

-sweep upstairs starting on his morning's

in the curtain was lifted by the servant,

livia Lyndith herself appeared; Duke rose.

g white dressing-gown, her abundant lair

shouIders, her large eyes looked bigger

r in her small, pale face. Again she took

:rown, as on that memorable night, when

and looked at him with her dark, solemn

:  ld come," she said. "I knew I might trust

or you on a matter of life and death to me.

today--is my wedding-day."

;Mr. Mason responded, feeling that politeness

- y'something, and wondering if young ladies

their wedding-days as matters of life and

e could possibly want of him in this state of

~fby enemies, who call themselves my friends,

I :lam. I am going to marry a man whom

espect-a man whom'I fear. For myself, it

ter. I don't care what becomes of me-"

recklessness in her tone and look, that

but there is one in this house whom I do

osave from the men who have made my

a child. To obtain possession of her, I

rry the man of my guardian's choice.

y after the ceremony, I start for Italy,

dn the power of Geoffrey Lyndith. I

will not trust him-her life would be

s-has been. She must be removed out

ot f their power. That is why I have








<pb n="56"/>
56          THE FOURTEENTH OF APRIL. 

sent for you; I have not a friend I dare trust-they are all

uncle's friends, and her birth is a dead secret. Will you t

her away with you to-night ? Will you keep her, and bring 

up as your own ?-you and your sister. You shall be w

paid, and, if it is ever in my power, I will claim her. Don't

fise; have pity on me, her most wretched mother; have pity

her, a helpless babe. You have a kind heart-you helped 

before. Help me now, and may Heaven reward you ! "

She clung to his arm-passionate tears stood in her pro

eyes. Duke stood absolutely transfixed. 

' You shall be well rewarded. See! here is this pocket-boo

it contains one hundred pounds, all I have now, but I will se

you more. Take it, take it. You will not refuse-you cann

Wait one instant and I will fetch her."

She darted away. Duke stood looking blankly at the R

sian-leather pocket-book in his hand. A child-her child !

his head was in an utter whirl.

She came back in a moment, holding a bundle wrapped in

shawl, in her arms. She flung this wrap back, as she came cl

to Duke, and he saw the cherub face of a sleeping child. 

"She has been drugged to keep her quiet-she will n

awake for an hour. .See what a lovely little angel she is! Oi

my darling ! my darling ! my darling !"

She covered the baby face with passionate kisses. With he

wild, loose hair, her wilder eyes, her frantic mener, she seem

like a creature half distraught. On the instant, far away in th

house, they all heard the sound of an opening door. The se

vant appeared in alarm.

"Miss Olivia, do you hear that ? He must go. Mr. Lyn

dith has the ears of a cat, and the eyes, I believe. Give him th

child, and let him go, for pity's sake? "

She absolutely took the childfrom the arms that pressed it s

convulsively, wrapped the shawl closer around it, and caugh

Duke's hand.

" Come !" she said, " there's not a moment to lose."

"Be good to it! be good to it!" Miss Lyndith cried; "a

you hope for salvation, be good to my child."

She sank down in a great carved and gilded chair-a sina

white figure, and burying her fa-'e in her hands, her suppresses

sobbing filled the room. So Duke's last glance saw her as he

quitted it. Beyond that "oh, indeed!" he had not spoken a

word--he had not been five minutes in the house altogether

Like one ii a dreamy swoon, he followed the nurse, throug








<pb n="57"/>
O   E's, HANOVER SQUARE.         5

mtil once more they stood un:er t.t

"the girl said; "you will find a cab stand

á The baby will not awake until you gel

chdupon him. He took it mechanicall)

ended the area steps, looked back, and

to do? It would never do to stand there

by a passing policeman, with a suspicious

. Still, like a man in a dream, he started for-

bn the girl had pointed out, found the cab-

eminutes more was rattling over the stony

buryward. Then he opened the shawl. Day

ng and the first little pink ray stole in and

eeping face, framed in tiny flaxen curls.

he was taking it home. This was how the' ad,

night had ended. And he had safd he would be

:o:yal ~Britannia, until daylight.

Ve " thought Mr. Mason, his very heart seem.

ahim. "WHAT will Rosanna say ?"

CHAPTER VII.

T. GEORGE'S, HANOVER SQUARE.

*was just rising, as the hansom tore through

iet streets of Bloomsbury, waking the peaceful

aing, respectable, third-class inhabitants from

slumbers.  Sunrise was a phenomenon Mr.

often witnessed in the course of his checkered

$ng him up in the morning before eight being

s bitterest crosses. He looked at it now, at

e in the east deepening and deepening until

as glorified, in much the same way as men on

the carved rails of the dock, the hats of the

he bonnets in the gallery, while waiting for the

Guilty or Not Guilty."








<pb n="58"/>
AT ST. GEORcLES HANOVER SQUARE. 

And still the child slept peacefully, sweetly, like one o

Correggio's smiling angels.

He reached Half-Moon Terrace-lie paid and dismissed th

cab. He met the little black sweep whistling merrily, as

started on his day's work, and who gave him good-mornin

Duke shrunk guiltily even from Aim. The cobbler oi3 the fiix

floor was opening his shop; he too, looked askance from i

young man to the bundle, closely muffled now in the shawl. l; i

Rosanna was sure to be up; didn't she always rise at son

dislmal hour in the bleak and chilly dawn? Duke set histeethi

and opened the kitchen door; a man can die btt once; 

well face the prdeal first as last.

Duke opened the kitchen door, stalked in, and confronte

his sister.

If it were possible for Miss Mason to look more uncompromis

ingly awful at one hour of the twenty-four than another, it wa

at this. Her thin face seemed cut in gray stone, her lips wer

more rigid, her eyes more steely, her spare figure more angular,

and the milk of human kindness in her breast a little mor

strongly acid than at other seasons. The Iron Duke himself

or Jack Sheppard, or any other hero, might have quailed

before the scathing glance that fell upon the intruder. The

pale daylight streaming in through the one window gave Duke

a ghastly and unnatural look perhaps, for she continued to

stare speechlessly, first at him, then at the bundle. He set

his teeth a little harder, and opened it. If you have to jumpi

over a precipice and break your neck, shut your eyes and take

the leap at once; the torture ends sooner. He flung off the

shawl, and the sleeping child lay revealed.

"DUKE !"

Only one word, but the tone! In some such voice of"

anguish nay the great Napoleon, at St. Helena, looking back&

.at one disastrous day, have exclaimed, "Waterloo!"

"It's not mine, Rosanna-I swear it's not !" Duke cried;

out. "I never set eyes on it until within the last two hours." 

"Not on it, perhaps-but its-mother-" 

"Nor its mother either-so help me ! until three weeks ago! 

Good gracious, Rosanna ! what a mind you must have to sus-

p(ct a fellow in this way, without giving him a chance to?

explain ! I never saw the child until it was given to me-no,

forced upon me, by Jove! two hours ago; and its mother,

if she be its mother, I met for the first time, three weeks ago

down in Lincolnshire."








<pb n="59"/>
IANO VER SQ UARAE

ildhome! Misguidedyoungman'l ;:

e sqch a story as this ?"

e he truth. Don't stare at me in

osanna, as if you were the Gorgon's ,

child, I'll shut the door, and tell yot

'L :know what to do with it, and here,

_ie baby. Even Achilles had a vulnera- 

his heel, and Miss Mason had one in

ys found its way there at once. She

H i tenderness, and removed the shawl

shawl, she saw to her great amaze.

- its eyes-two big blue eyes, and looked 

iionder up in her face. It was the pret-

Fvable-a child of a year and a half or  :

le  features a rose-bud mouth, and

_ rystal clear. A baby girl with dainty 

f ing,a little blue-silk dress, the hue of

chain and locket round her neck. Curi-

o :0ther feeling, even virtuous maiden in-

st of Miss Rosanna.

ke, Duke, what does it mean, and who is

I know. I don't know her name, nor

a;the dead. All I do know I'll tell you

X  ay keep those things."  He drew forth

t iThere's a hundred pounds here, which

i ad here's a ring, also given me by hei

ook like that, Rosanna! Miss Lynditl's

ry flunkies, I dare say, would look down

gnna said, in a spectral voice.

e's anything wrong it's not my fault. 

I  from first to last, and much more like

,hlamas at the Britannia than the events of

ittle one lay in Miss Mason's arms, and

isolemn, baby eyes, Duke went back to

told the story of that night, all he had

This was the cause of his dreaminess,

Ithe change she had nc ticed in him. 

ai te   f the previous afternoon, and








<pb n="60"/>
o6       AT ST. GEORGE'S, HANOVER SQUARE.

gave it to her to read, and related all that had befallen h'

from three o'clock until now.

His sister listened breathlessly.  She had never read 

novel, nor witnessed a play in her life. She had nevel been 

love, she had no data to fall back upon, that might help her 

realize this story. It was like hearing Greek to her. All s

knew was that Miss Lyndith, be she never so rich, was'

young woman, no better than she ought to be, and that th

child in her lap was doubtless the offspring of - . But

looked down, and the angelic face broke into the beautif

smile of babyhood, and two little fat hands held themselves u

"Polly want her bek-fas."

The little silver voice went straight to that vulnerable sp

in Miss Mason's chain-mail armor. Perhaps if Nature ha

never meant her for a wife, it had meant her for a mother. 

glow came actually into her tallow complexion, she raised t

child, and pressed it to her vestal bosom.

"You're the prettiest little thing I ever saw in my life. M

little pet, tell me your name."                      i

"Polly," whispered the child. "Polly want Dozy."

" What " -

" Dozy."            -

Rosanna looked helplessly at Duke. Duke sat astounde

to hear the midget speak at all.

- "Perhaps it's her nurse," he suggested. "I think now, 

heard Miss Lyndith call the name 'Rosie,' in the inner room.

" Dozy, Dozy," repeated the child, impatiently. "Poll

want Dozy! Polly want her brek-fas.   Polly want to ge

down."

"Polly, put the kettle on," Duke murmured, abstractedly .

"put Polly down, Rosanna. Let's see if she can walk."

Polly could walk very well.  In her blue-silk dress a

flaxen curls, her gold chain and locket, her glimmering bronz

boots, and silk stockings, Polly looked a thorough baby arie

tocrat from top to toe.

"Like a small duchess, by George !" said Duke, admiringly

"a fellow might make his fortune if he could paint her. She

ooks like Miss Lyndith, too, about the nose and chin, an

"Duke," his sister said, sternly, "never let me hear th

name of that young person from your lips again. We will kee

the child;" her hard face softened, as she locked at the tinj

beauty in blue silk; "but speak nc more of a creature wh








<pb n="61"/>
; RGE'S, HANOVER SQUAARi.       6

K wedding-day, who is called AMiss Lyndith,

child to be hers. She has reason to be

q  that she has been snatched from that sinl

ashcionable world, at so early an age."

not seem particularly thankful.

" :Dozy" two or three times in vain, Poll)

b mouth, and set up such . howl as made

rdle with new terror.

Ftied, aghast, "what will the neighbors say?

this abominable story you have just told

it account for the child in some way. What is

aid Duke; "there's no other way. We have

the country, or up in the moon, who has

4 left us his only child, as an heirloom. The

l e cousin by the name of Mason. Hfer name's

ly, I don't cotton to that cognomen some-

s; like Louisa Victoria, or Eugenia, or Evan-

0common for such a little gentlewoman as that.

j Fess-she looks one--I'm Duke-she's Duch,

' and Duke laughed boyishly at his own

a ;such a relief to have the story told and

H ess-little Polly, come here, and give me a

a temper, and flung herself away, and wailed

ozy, and her bek-fas !" " Go 'way," she cried,

proffered face. " You's a big, ugly man, and

lace, and she's a ugly thing, too. Oh, Polly

olly wants her bed and milk ! "

have bread and milk," Miss Mason said, sooth-

'd be quiet; dear. I suppose we must fabricate

Neighbors, Duke; and may the Lord forgive us.

pitch without being defiled. We can't have

e wicked ones of the earth, without sharing in

A; been up all night, Rosanna, I'll turn in until

Duke answered; "rout me out at half after

ig to strike work this morning, and go to St.

er Square, and mingle with the bloated aris.

this young lady's mamma married. Beg your

,for alluding to her-I won't do it again.

ia temper the little angel has I"








<pb n="62"/>
62      AT ST. GEORGES, HANOVER SQUARE.            *

I)uke went to bed; Rosanna pacified Polly, with so

trouble, and more bread and milk. For o-ce in a way, s

was almost excited. A child to dress, and scold, and lo

and a hundred pounds in her pocket.

A hundred pounds! She had never had quarter that si

at once before in her life. An illimitable vista of the things

be had with a hundred pounds, opened before her. A n

a.rpet for the parlor, a painted stand for her flowers, a ne

Sunday suit for Duke, a new Bible, gilt-edge, morocco-boti

for herself, a set of china tea-things, even a dress, perhaps, a

a pair of new shoes. It would not purchase a farm down i

the green heart of rustic England; and that was the life-Ion

ing of Rosanna Mason, but it would do so much, so much 

the city. And the ring-she was no judge of such things-b.

the ring must be worth fifty guineas, at least. 

Of course, they wouldn't sell that-it must be kept for t

child-poor little stray waif-and the locket as well.  Sh

called the little one overt and opened the locket. It held

short curl of auburn hair, and the picture of a young man-

handsome young man-who looked up at her bright, smiling

life-like, from the golden setting. A dim possibility, that if

held things for the young and handsome, which she had neve

known-beautiful, sweet, solemn things-stirred faintly in h

forty-year-old heart.  She closed the locket, and kissed th

child almost as gently as a fair young mother might have done

"Poor little thing!" she said; "poor little, pretty baby

There has been a great wrong done somewhere, and you ar

to pay the penalty. Well, the Lord helping me, I will biin

you up good and happy, and healthy, if I can." 

At half-past eight precisely, she summoned Duke to break

fast. The young man found his sister in better and gentler

mood than he had ever known her in his life at this early hour

There are a great many people in this world-very good-nature

people, too, in the main, who don't get their tempers properl

aired, and on, before ten A.M. It was the humanizing influenc

of the child, no doubt.

Polly had gorged herself like a small boa-constrictor, with

bread and milk, and :now, standing on one of the parlor chairs

looking out of the window at the busy scene in the mews oppo

site, was wailing in a plaintive minor key for "Dozy." Sh

never called for her mamma, Rosanna noticed, as most babie-

do-always " Dozy"

Duke ate his breakfast,. started off at a rapid pace _for ,ho








<pb n="63"/>
GER7G'S, HANOVER SQUARE.

; of St. George's, Hanover Square. There.:

i-f a row, he thought, at the sceneloonl o1

FneqLuence of his non-appearance, and Tin

d fine him, very likely; but a man who ixo  :

o .of a hundred pounds can afiord to deft 

theatre.

L turned off," thought Duke, elegantly, "and .il

e, Spangle ; and cursed be he who first cnes 

n when the scene-painter reached his destin 

len a-sunny April day, warm as mid-June. A  ;|

of elegant private carriages,filled the street-* 0|

t in May Fair, it seemed to the simple denizen ;

errace-and a mob of idlers on the lookout @

ate, turning sharp round the angles of one of f

d vehicles, ran violently against a gentleman

aste from the opposite direction.

pardon, sir. Didn't mean anything offensive, i

~e said politely. "I hope I haven't hurt I

n made no reply. He did not even seem to ? |

ees were fixed upon the church with a hungry, H

y of gaze. 

r ! " Mr. Mason thought. "That young-

ysomething on his mind. He is a gentlemlan, 

l of his rough shooting-jacket, and foreign hat.

g the look of a sailor."

the object of his thoughts turned round 

qujite disconcerting, and addressed him:

iBid me who is being married here this morn-

dn't like to swear to it, but I think Sir Vane :

stranger ground out that little word between

amiliar to. Mr. Mason on the boards of the I

to Miss Olivia Lyndith. But as it is onlyd,

part, suppose we step in and ascertain ?"i

L  the stranger said, falling back a stew

k  hurry !"

in a little surprised, but not much.

usyoung man, with the auburn bead  n4








<pb n="64"/>
64      AT S7. G0ORGE'S, HANOVER SQUARE. 

remarkably handsome- face, should be 'Robert' now

thought: "and she should recognize him, and shriekin

is HE !' fall swooning at his feet, it would be quite a

scene for St. George's." 

These sort of rencontres were very common on the 

and Duke saw no reason why they should not be in ev

life as well.

He led the way into the church. It was almost filled

elegantly dressed people. Two weddings were going on 

the altar was quite a bewildering spectacle, with snow-

and azure-robed ladies, and solemnly black gentlemen.

of the pew-openers gave them a place near the door, as

came their shabby coats and clumping boots.

The stranger, as he removed his hat, Duke saw was a

fair man, despite the golden bronze of his skin; and the f

rigid.pallor of his face, the wild intensity of his blue eyes

trayed that his interest in what was going on was no ordinary

"They're coming!" Duke said. "We've missed the wed

after all. The thing's over."

He was right. The newly-wedded pairs had signed the

ister, and were sweeping down the aisle. The first bride

a Junoesque lady, with high color and modestly downcast 

They barely glanced at her. She and her train sailed by. 

second bridal party came-the bride this time-there was

doubt about it-the late Miss Olivia Lyndith.

It is proper, of course, for brides to look pale at this supl

hour of their lives. This bride was pale beyond all ordi

pallor of bridehood. Her face was ghastly; her great-

eyes looked blankly straight before her, with a fixed, sigh

stare; her very lips were ashen. The bridegroom, on the

trary-a portly, undersized, florid, good-looking man-

flushed, excited, exultant. His restless black eyes mr

about ceaselessly in a quick, nervous sort of way, and a

drew near, the stranger sitting beside Duke suddenly rose 

It was impossible not to look at him. The stony bride r1

looked, certainly; but the smiling bridegroom did; and

smile froze, and the florid color died on his face, and anl a

look of fear transfixed it. A wordless cry appeared to

and die u'pon his lips. He seemed for an instant rooted to

spot. Then the crowd, pushing on, bore him with it, and

Mason was alone with his extraordinary companion.

strange: still stood in that rigid attitude, like a man slowly

difying.

~:i








<pb n="65"/>
65

Iddn't think any. hu.

the Britannia could

old Quill knows

-: eiodramas. This

-igmpertinent

echanically. He6

ing was stupefied

)tun round,

d if you

your very

hiis hand heav.

You !"

-   have had the honor

e hours, and though

shave been very friendly

= spast.  And if you had

pon her yesterday, I

to see you. Yesterday

Lady Charteris-all the

u C        lShe has .not forgot

eyes like live coals.

_dly not-but at the same

t 1 me. You are Robert Lisle,

and turned abr aptly away.

-    -- -id,a coldly; " and I must see

cl"enched his strong white teeth

hurry, then," suggested Duke, po-

- ay in hour's timne, I have reason

now it's all TTP! Brides don't

en on their wed ding morning,








<pb n="66"/>
66      AT ST GEORGE'S, HANOVER SQUARE. 

but this seems an exceptional occasion, an d she may see

Shall I order you a cab and tell them where to drive ?" A

Duke, inwardly burning with curiosity. 

Mr. Hawksley nodded and slouched his hat down over

eyes. The last of the aristocratic vehicles had-vanished I

before. Duke led the way to the nearest cab-stand, and'

tered the hansom after the stranger. Mr. Hawksley  mi

order him out, but he was willing to risk it. Mr. Hawksle vy

not, however; he sat with his hat over his brow, his arms f¡

ed, his lips compressed under that beautiful, tawny beard,

whole way.

"He looks like the Corsair by Medora's deathbed," refle

ed Duke. " He has a very striking pair of blue eyes. So 

little Polly. Now wouldn't it be rather queer if (Mr. Rob

Hawksley, I think he said,) should be Polly's father ?" 

The carriage containing Sir Vane Charteris and his br

reached the mansion of Mr. Geoffrey Lyndith, in Park La

The silence that reigned in Duke's hansom reigned also in

elegant coach and four. The bride sat like some marble biid

as pale, as cold, almost as lifeless-the bridegroom sat with

leaden face of abject fear. 

"Did Lyndith see him, I wonder ?" he thought. "He 1

the church before me. To be balked like this at the last ho

after waiting so long, after risking so much. At the last ho

when the game is all my own, to have him start up as if fr

the very earth. And I thought, we all thought, him dead t

years ago."

He let down the glass and loosened his neckerchief; so,

thing in the air seemed to choke him. He glanced at 

bride, and. a storm of rage at her, at himself, at Geoffrey Ly

dith, at that apparition in the church, swept through him. 

"She looks more like a dead woman than a bride.

twill every one say? Why can't she smile, or rouge, or

something except look like that-death in life ? I scarce

know whether I love or hate her most-one day or other s

shall pay for this. And to think there should have been a chii

too, and she should spirit it away. She has the cunning of t

old fier.d when she likes." 

The carriage stopped. He descended, and handed his bri

,ut. The other carriages disgorged themselves. The inst

he espied Mr. Lyndith, he motioned him apart.       :

"Corle into the library," he said.  ( I have a word to

to you."                                           :

: 5' '








<pb n="67"/>
GE ORGE'S, hANO ER SQUARE.          67

the way instantly  Something had happened.

Vane's leaden face.

?" he asked nervously. "Quick, Charteris;

at our absence. Let's have it in a wcrd."

is alive !-is here !-I saw him in the church I "

you mad ?

I was when I believed your story of Lisle's

the fellow is alive, and here. I saw him in

e out."

Heaven, Charteris ! this must be folly-mad.

_ Royal Charter" was burned to the water's edge,

on board perished. And he sailed in the

."  I tell you it is impossible !"

l   you I saw Robert Lisle, face to face, as I left the

. d not, or I think, in my soul, she would have

i e spot. He stood up, and gave me a look I'm

.   Curse it, Lyndith," he cried, in a sudden

.I could mistake him of all men ? Before

se, Robert Lisle will be here."

.e !"

net cried, bitterly, "you will believe it when

e will be a lovely scene -a beautiful sensation

We  know what she will do, if she once catches

All the story, so long hidden, will come out, and

nd ith it means simply ruin! "

see her. By God, he shall not!"

meeting if you can. He is a.desperate man

.     .desperation in human eyes. You will find a

4_ |m the Robert Lisle of two years ago. And

I  we will be missed. We must go up and smile

es, and play our part, until the spectre appears

u  of the library. Mr. Lyndith followed him.

el fr it-their absence was already commented

s. They took their places at the table, all

rand crystal; and everybody noted their al-

a ghastly bride, and such a strange pallor

host and Sir Vane. Something was wrong.

delicioftsly expectant of more to come.

for came. The breakfast was not quarter

ik ~thundered at the grand entrance-an omina








<pb n="68"/>
68         "WHISTLED DOWN THE WIND."

ous and authoritative knock, that thrilled through them all. ,.

Vane was raising his glass to his lips, and again the smile seem

to freeze on his face, and the glass remained half poised ini

hand. A dead silence fell. In that silerce tie sourd of 

altercation in the hall reached them in thaL distant aparttmel

Mr. Lyndith rose abruptly-white and stemr-made a hurir

apology, and hastened from the room. A lmoment later 

all was still. The disturbance was quelled; but Geoffrey L-

dith did not come back. What did it mean ? Even the p

cold bride lifted her heavy eyes and looked at the leaden f

of the man she had married, and waited for what was to co

next.

CHAPTER VIII.

"WHISTLED DOWN THE WIND."

EO'EOFFREY LYNDITH'S face was an index of h

character-dark, stern, resolute. While he had s

at the head of his table, smiling upon his guests, a

eating and drinking mechanically, his ready brain h

been at work. Plotting was work that subtle brain was we

used to, and his mind, prompt in thought, quick in actio

grappled at once with his danger. As Sir Vane Charteris ha

said, the coming of this man in all likelihood meant ruin--ruui

for him, Geoffreyt Lyndith, Esquire, of Lyndith Grange a

Park Lane. He had thought the man dead for certain: he ha

driven him out of the country over two years ago, and the shi

in which he had sailed had been burned in mid-ocean, and ri

soul left to return, and Robert Lisle was here on Olivia's we

ding-day. Was Satan himself at work to balk him, he wo 

dered ? He had got Robert Lisle in his power two years ag

by a cowardly and infamous plot, worthy the Newgate calen

dar; that power he still held over him, but who knew?  i

part in it might conme to light after all, and what horrible shai

and exposure that would involve! And at the first sound

his voice, at the first sight of his face, his niece would fly to h

arms, to cling to him through misery and death, if need wer]

He was poor, and his riece was rich; her money would 








<pb n="69"/>
I 'LDD DOWNA THE WIND."           69

money was the one great want of thii man's

ra he compelled his niece to marry him, Sih

^Bd promised hini a check for ten thousand

lng had gone on so well; he had been in a

t exultation for a few weeks past, and now---

with a red, evil fire as he descended the

set behind his black beard. He could cbn

l ical danger with the'brute courage of a tiger

s gains, be his case strong or weak," he was

,  by facing the worst boldly; weakness and

sfail, as they deserve to do." It was his

d upon it, in every crisis of life, and up to

d it succeeded. His face looked as if carved

descended to the entrance hall, for all trepi-

;anger, fear, or any other human emotion it dis-

butler, two high footmen, all were formed in a

he enemy-a tall, young man in rough coat

med hat.

nothink with him, sir," the butler explained, in

ce. " which he says, like his impidence, as he

y. Lyndith, sir."

;looked each other full in the face, one level,

B The younger man took off his hat. Goo( 

orrible reason Geoffrey Lyndith had to know

sunburnt face.

-'s person, Edwards," Mr. Lyndith said, very

see him. Follow me, sir."

y to the library, a stately apartment filled

;busts and bronzes, and into which the noon

softly tempered through closed venetians.

turned the key in the door, crossed the room,

upon the crimson-velvet mantel, and faced

It was a duel to the death; and both knew it,

e asked or given-one or the other must gc

-left that room.

of the Old Guard, otherwise the master ot

ceedingly unexpected honor, Robert Lisle.

I sand a half ago in the ship ' Royal Charter,'

l n.' The ' .oyval Charter' was burned, and all

IMAay I ask how you came to be alive?"








<pb n="70"/>
70      :"'WHISTLED DOWN THE WIND."

His tone was perfectly cool; his face admirably calnrl

manner as nonchalantly gentlemanlike as though he had 

remarking on the fineness of the weather, and the possibilit

rain next week. Yet under all that high-bred composure,

horrible fear he felt of this man! I

" 1 did not sail in the ' Royal Charter,"' Robert Lisle answe

f I took my passage-you saw my name on the passenger 

vely likely. At the last hour I'met with an accident-a 

trifling one-which made me lose it. I sailed in the ' West

Star' the following week. Are you satisfied now that I am

wraith ?"                                         -

"More than satisfied. I congratulate you upon your esca

Providence,"-the sneering emphasis was indescribable-" Pr

idence watched over you, no doubt. You were wise to le

England the following week; it was certainly no place for y

Why have you been so very imprudent as to return to it ? " :

The flashing eyes of the younger man met the hard, glitt

ing black ones with a fiery light. 

"You ask that question, Geoffrey Lyndith ?"      i

"Assuredly, Mr. Lisle-why?"

"I have returned to claim my wife. To expose you

your villany to the world you delude; be the penalty to m

self what it may ! " 

"When you use that sort of language, Mr. Lisle," the eld

man said, with unruffled composure, " you have the advant

of me, of course. Persons in your class generally do resort 9l

vituperation, I believe, when annoyed. You will oblige mei

keeping to the language and bearing of a gentleman, if you ca

while talking to me. You have returned to claim your wife

Ah ! but there is no such person in England, that I am awar

of  Out there among the aborigines indeed-'"    

Robert Lisle strode toward him, a dangerous light in

blue eyes.

"Do you dare to sneer at me-you of all men alive ? It 

not safe; I warn you, it is, not safe !" 

"Ah ! I wish you would have the politeness to hear me out

If you mean Lady Charteris, she never was your wife-no, n

for one poor hour. And if you have come to claim her, yo

have just come two years and three months too late. She dii

remember you for two or three months after your very abrup

departure from England, I will own, and then came the natur

revulsion  More than she had ever loved-pshaw! fancie

she loved ihe yeoman's son, wish his tall, shapely figure, a








<pb n="71"/>
_TLD DOWiv    TILE WIND." 

Shehated, abhorred him. Hei mad folly,

pn her, in its true light. She saw'what !;

-he had fallen, how you had played upon 

and dragged her down, and she hated--

s , Robert Lisle-she hated your memory il

er dreamed she possessed. The Launo ft!

graceful secret should be known to the

her mad.   She bu ied herself alive down

for a time-she went abroad with me.  Her 

n her that her health was affected. All -

husband, the man of her dying father's  -

side, ever tender, ever devoted-and she 

he full value of that which she had flung

him with a love, all the greater that it was 

Then came the news of- the loss of the

all on board. She was free! I remember

er," Mr. Lyndith said, looking dreamily

n who beholds what he relates; "and f

me among the list of lost. For amoment 

e  She had always a tender 'heart; poor 

a horrible fate to be burned alive in the

Then she threw the paper down, flung

is, and sobbed in wild hysterics: 'Oh, _

I s it wicked to be thankful to Heaveri for '

t?   And I liked him once, and his fate 

e, and yet my heart has no room fot any-

that I am free. Now the exposu.e of a

u   necessary-an exposure which I think

k Heaven, without it He has given me

- nd after this she rallied, and gave Sir

become his wife."

to this lengthy speech, with a smile of

dsome bearded mouth.

orator, Mr. Lyndith," lie said, quietly;

r forte, I remember, and graceful fic-

it in your character. I see time but '

In plain English, I don't believe one;l

:---Olivia Lyndith was not the sort of;

lover down the wind, after aGny such 

asand she loved-Heaven ! loved so

ofGeeoffrey Lyndith grew black with 








<pb n="72"/>
72        "WHIST'LED DOWN THE WIND." 

"You are an insolent boor," he said: "but you were al

that. Two years' sojourn among the refuse of the wor

trans-Atlantic cities would hardly be' likely to improve you.

tell you Olivia Lyndith never was your wife-never ! You 

alive, but no divorce will be needed. A girl of sixteen r

away to Scotland and goes through some sort of Scotch c

mony, that may pass for marriage beyond the border. It

not hold in England, as you very well know. A minor i

tract a legal marriage, forsooth! You are old enough, at le

to know better, my good fellow. The marriage was no m

riage, the child illegitimate." 

He stopped short-he had betrayed himself in his mom

tary burst of anger. The young man started, and a dark fii

passed over his tanned face.  -

" The child !" he said; " there was a child ?"  .

It was too late to draw back-the truth, neatly glossed o

with falsehood, must be told. 

"Yes, a child, who died two days after its birth, thai!

Heaven. That makes no difference-Sir Vane knows. W

was she but a child herself, poor little Livey, when you led 

astray. Little wonder she abhors your very memory. 

now, to add one last outrage, you come here to cover 

with shame, to rake up from the dead past the story she:

lieves buried in oblivion, which she would die rather than hai

the world know.  Robert Lisle, you are less than man

blight the life of an innocent girl."

The face of the young man turned white, a cold moistf

broke out upon his forehead. Was this true, after all ? H

Lord Montalien been right ? Was he forgotten-abhorred.? 

"I will see her, at least," he cried, hoarsely. "From hn

lips alone will I take my death-warrant. If she tells me to

I will obey her-yes, though I should hang myself within 

hour. But I know you of old, Geoffrey Lyndith-a man wit

out heart, or truth, or honor ! Oh, don't think I am afraid

you ! This is no time for fine words. Bring her here-let h

tell me she hates me, let her bid me go, and I will go, ai

never trouble her more in this world."

Geoffrey Lyndith looked at him, the dull, red glow  oi

visible than ever in his evil, black eyes. 

"Bring her here?" he repeated: "I would see her dea

first! Do you know what you ask? She does not kno

whether her first marriage was binding or not--like all gir

she thinks it was. She believed you dead-she thought h








<pb n="73"/>
"WHISTLED DOWN THE, WIND."              73

a widow, and has married again-a man whom she lo-res,

inher wildest fancy she never cared for you. Do you know

the consequence of bringing her here will be ? It will

Ether, I think-just that ! The exposure, the scandal, the

of the husband she loves. She would never hold up her

d again. If you ever loved her, Robert Lisle, you should

her now."

: Loved her ! Oh, Heaven ! "

teV flung himself into a chair, and buried his face in his

ds.  Was Geoffrey Lyndith not right?  She had been

and sensitive of old, and now the wife of two men,

tefrom both, and the first a-.  He shuddered through

;is frame, as he sat there.

he elder man saw his advantage, and followed it up piti-

´ You insist upon seeing Lady Charteris ? Well, if you are

ermined upon it, of course you can. Would you like to

-the result? She is torn from the arms of her bridegroom

e story of her folly is given to the world-she is known as

wife of two men, until at least it is proven that the first

nomarriage at all. If the blow does not kill her, she is in

;reunited to Sir Vane, but the scandal follows her her life

Supposing the first marriage to have been legal, even,

rce can be procured, and she is still free. In any case,

u can do to Sir Vane is to separate him for a few months

his bride, to whom finally (always supposing the exposure

-nai kill her) he will be again united. And now for your

i L.Ii the hour you stand face to face with Olivia Charteris,

all be given over to the hands of the law. For her sake

ed you two years ago-for her sake you shall be branded

thief you are, then. Do you know what' your sentence

b=-e? One-and-twenty years, at least, on Norfolk Island.

ll have broken her heart, driven her into her grave, in

obability, and yourself in a felon's cell. Now, choose!

lway lies yonder. Go up to the room above, you will find

re, happy, by her bridegroom's side. Go up, I will not

er to hinder you, and on the instant you set your foot

te first stair, my servant shall summon the police.

our choice, Robert Lisle, and quickly."

lrew out his watch: in fifteen minutes more the newly

pair were to start on the first stage of their wedding

i, The self-command of Geoffrey Lyndith was great,

ips were gray now, and drops of moisture stood on his








<pb n="74"/>
74           AT HALF-MOON TERRACE.                H

face. He touched the young man on the shoulder, cold

inward fear.

"You have your choice," he said, "decide!  Go u

kill the woman you pretend to love, by the sight of y(mu

demn yourself to a felon's cell for life, or go out of y:

door, and never return. Quick !"

Robert Lisle arose, and turned to his torturer. To hi

ing day, that ghastly face haunted Geoffrey Lyndith. In

instant he felt as though he had stabbed him to the heart.

"I have decided," he said hoarsely, "and may the

above judge you for it! You are as much a murder

though my blood reddened your hand. Her life shall nev

blighted by me; her proud head brought low in shame tlr

act of mine.  She loved me once-aye, say as you

liar and traitor!-as she never can love the man by 

side she will spend her life. I go, and as you have dea

us both, Geoffrey Lyndith, may Heaven deal with you !" *i

He raised his marm, and the man before him recoiled.

was not superstitious, nor cowardly in any way, but his 

stood still for a second, and that cold dew shone in great d

on his face. 

"I have conquered," he thought, "and another such vi

would drive me mad 1"

He heard the door open and shut, and drew a great i

ofunutterable relief. His enemy was gone; he was gave

CHAPTER IX.

AT HALF-MOON TERRACE.             I

Mg  HE interview had occupied half an hour precis

and during that half-hour, Sir Vane Charteris

amid his wedding guests, and ate, and drankL;

laughed, and was serenely courteous to all, w

horrible dread filled him. Except for that one instant, hi

never blanched, nejer altered. Does the old blood tell-i

Charteris family had been baronets since James I.), or ar&

only true to the traditions and codes of their order? :








<pb n="75"/>
_ AT HALF-MOON TERRACE. 

arranges his necktie, and bows his smiling

fiends, on his way to the guillotine: Sir Vane

f his wedding breakfast, knowing that the bride

dly won might be torn from him forever in ten

iled, an] jested, with an unmoved front. But,

Y Lyndith never come?                  t

tlast-very, very pale, everybody noticed, bul

apologized with courtly fluency, for his extra.

atkHR    ~e fat such a time, and resumed his place at Lis

_   I^^hm  r Vane never glanced at him after the first mo-

nuptial breakfast went on, and came to an end

st! To the bridegroom it seemed an eternity

down. The bride went upstairs, to put on her

s-gthen for a few seconds Sir Vane got Mr. Lyn-

-recess of one of the windows.

e ? " he asked.

- forever," Geoffrey Lyndith answered.  " I

as I did before. Of his own free will, he has

country, and her forever. If quite conveni-

jiephew, I will take that promised check.

~rosom smiled grimly as he produced the check

t and handed it to his new relative.

Circassians sold in Stamboul, and quadroons

;|!ndies, but never Circassian nor quadroon were

'bought and sold than your haughty little niece.

ch a dot as hers, one can afford even the price

pounds."

Miflater, and the happy pair were off, and away or.

o6f their Italian honeymoon.

E   st!ruck blind and deaf, Robert Lisle passed out of

light of Mr. Lyndith's stately hall, to the broad,

8- the April noon. He staggered almost like a

a red-hot mist swam before his eyes-a surging

wers sounded in his ears-he put his hand as if

blinding brightness of the noonday sun. He

eps, and passed on; he had forgotten the wait-

,   and his new-found acquaintance still sitting

bered nothing, but that he had lost her-of

e had left her unseen, and forever. He went

d deaf to the busy life around him.

my man ! do you want to find yourself under

:By Jove ! he is there !"

g the street; why, he could not have told








<pb n="76"/>
76            AT HALF-MOON TERRACE. 

A carriage pole struck him on the head, aftel he wasi

The horses were checked immediately; the driver le i

and drew the fallen man from beneath his phaeton.

"Such infernal stupidity!  Is the fellow blind? I ca

him, but he wouldn't get out of the way. If he is killed 

fault of mine"-this to the gathering crowd-" I s

man, I hope you're not very badly hurt. Gad! I'm af

is! Does anybody here know him ?" 

I know him," said a voice; and Duke Mason elbo

way through the throng. 

"I wish you swells would mind where you are goin

not knock the brains out of every peaceable citizen wh

to cross the street! Hawksley, my poor fellow!: 

Heaven ! he's dead ! "

He did not look unlike it, truly. The blow, at leas

s'tunned him; he lay quite white and rigid, his eyes close

blood trickling in a ghastly way from a cut near the te

" No, he's noti" said the young military " swell" whose

ton had knocked him over; "but he came deucedly near it.

only stunned. Take him to the nearest apothecary, an.

fetch him round. I'm very sorry, and all that, you know

the fault wasn't mine."

With Which the cornet got into his trap again, with ra

injured expression, and drove off 

Duke and another man lifted the rigid form of the p

Hawksley, and carried it to the hansom. 

"Drive to the nearest chemist's," Duke said to the ca

and they rattled off, and stopped in five minutes in fron

drug-store. Mr. Hawksley was borne in, the apothecary

set to work, and consciousness after a while returned. 

only opened his eyes to close them again with a fint mn

pain, and relapsed into a soft of stupor.

"There's something more to do here than the blow 

temple," the apothecary said, with a perplexed face.  I s

think, now, he had had a slight touch of congestion of the,

Better take him home at once, and nurse him for a fewv

Perfect repose may restore him; but I'd call in a regular

ttitoner, if I were you."

Take him home! Duke stared blankly at the man ofm

as he uttered the simple word. Take him home ! Whe-  i

his h-me ? He bent over him, called him by name, ad

to arouse him to consciousness. In vain; he lay in th

stupor still, only turning his head restlessly and utteri

faint, dumb moan of pain.

: :-








<pb n="77"/>
^N HALF-MOON TERRACE.

he apothecary said; "he isn't able to answe,

HIe may in a few hours, though. Don't; :-X.  -

e lives ?"

t'" said Duke; "I never saw him in my life

alf ago. What shall I do. I couldn't klave :0

,now, I suppose ?i "

t. You- might get him admitted:into a: hos A

say, :if you set about it properly. And now 

him along, for it isn't a pleasant sight fo 

an lying like dead here, you see. I suppose 

f your own-? As you seem to be a friend o

nk you might take him there." 

indeed?" 'a  retorted Duke, in bitter sarcasmsm  .

Ia sister there, with a temper no better than; 

d sharpened by one trial already tot:y!

t:ecoachman, " bear a hand here, and hele me

fellow to the cab. I can't desert him o I

e until he comes round, and the Lord 'only 

a will say."

r,-"To Half-Moon Terrace ! " and sat with - 

sto be: envied, watching' the streets fly by,:

ace of the man before him, until Bloon - 

tg,"r' Dtke.mused, darkly; "that's the onl  . 

e she'd behave like an angel to me if I -,

dcline, or asthma, or something of that

p her hands half the time; but while my -i

-pie and digestion remain, there's no hope

:She'll nurse this young man, I, have no

or guardian angel, supposing him to6:

as he's better and well out of the house,il

f's all! I'l not hear the last of it forA

rections,  Duke alighted.

that day a hansom cab had started eX

n Terrace out of their normal state +-

+~female  'heads came to doors and win-

4 Duke carried between them what 

s to b the stark form of a dead 

ipen the door before they hail:

b:rother did not choose to 1lok-a;

l  a borne into the little dingy parlh:r

ibedroom adjoining, and laid on Plket 

1 :00 0:if '' A








<pb n="78"/>
78           AT HALF-MOON TERRACE.

The drivel was paid and dismissed, and the tug of

near. Duke had to look at his long-suffering sister 

the expression of that stony face might have frightened

man. 

"Oh, Rosanna! don't scold. I could not help it,u

sacred honor, I couldn't." Duke cried in a sort of fr

you'll just listen half a minute I'll tell you all about itt

And thereupon, for the second time that day, Duke

out the story of his adventure into the wonderng

Rosanna. 

" Now, could I help it-could I ? I put it to your

sanna.  You wouldn't leave him to'die like a dog in t-

would you ? And he'll come round in half an hour, o

apothecary said he would; and go home himself where

longs. Poor fellow! It seems a pity to see him !

doesn't it, Rosanna?" 

"( Go right round to Mr. Jellup this very minute; tel

a case of life and death, and don't stand chattering 

an overgrown magpie," was Rosanna's answer: " that

die if something is not done for him shortly, and I'm n

to have any dead man on my hands. If Mr. Jellup isi

five minutes, Duke Mason-"                   -

But Duke did not wait for the completion of the a

tence-Rosanna's face completed it. He clapped on

and rushed after his sister's favorite practitioner, and Mr

was there in five minutes.                   "

Whether Mr. Robert Hawksley lived or died, the sI

the " Coral Caves of the Dismal Deep" must be pain

Tinsel & Spangle would be furious-more than fibr

Duke's fosing the best part of the day. But Mes-

sel & Spangle were men, Duke could stand the 

their wrath, and give them as good as they broug

Jellup and Rosanna would bring the young man ri

there was any earthly possibility of it, and wondering

deal whether or no he might not be little Polly's pi

Mason went whistling to his work. 

It was close upon midnight when, the play over, he-

to Half-Moon Terrace. A dim light shone from  f

windows; he let himself in with his nightskey. Ro

watching then. That was nothing unusual.    :

Rosanna could sit up to the small hours, and be up

lark, or rather with the chimney-sweep upstairs, and!

the worse for it. 

<? 00!








<pb n="79"/>
AT HALF-MOON TERRACE. 

ned the parlor door softly, and his sister met him

|ear-splitting "hish-h-h" most nurses affect.

:,'" said Duke, "he's here still, is he? And how's he

anna"

/ ked into the little bedroom. Robert Lisle's hand-

H  looked awfully bloodless in the dim, pale light, but

tranquilly as a child.

/i be up to-morrow. I shall watch with him to-night

to give him his medicine, and you can sleep on the

e. You'll fnd your supper in the kitchen."

na was as mild as sweet milk. She might be old, she

grim, she had not' the faintest touch of sentimentalism

ture, but she was a woman still, and a man struck

his strong manhood, and the pallid beauty of that

face, went straight to all that was womanly in hergrim,

er heart.

bl be a perfect angel as long as he's sick on her hands,"

uke, pouring out his tea, with a sort of groan;. "and

We he's gone, down she'll come on me for ever fetch-

here. A maiden sister's a blessing, no doubt, but I

Fe benighted bachelors would be more satisfied if they

e blessings."

stretched himself on the sofa, dressed and all, and

I  sleep of the just. The sick man slept in his bed;

t in hers off the kitchen; and sleepless and upright

sat and read her Book of Common Prayer, as befitted

nity of the hour and occasion; and the small hours

, and another day grew gray in the east.

uch had happened in the last twenty-four hours ! A

to nurse, and a little child to care for. She arose as

ht of Polly, and stole on tip-toe to the bedside. The

t,'her dimpled cheeks flushed, her rosebud lips parted

yvision, as all sleeping children are. The locket

1:il in the light of Rosanna's candle; with the child's

ad come open, and the tiny curl of auburn hair had

't. Rosanna took it up, looked at it-looked at the

ace-quietly at first-then with strange and sudden

'- A change came over her own face; she unclasped

ook it and the little curl into the sick man's room.

e tress close to his-hair; the two were the same ex-

r, texture, curl. She held the pictured face close;

ardless face, and the sleeper's auburn beard had,

strred some faint admiration within her, but thf

L''t.~~~~~~~~~~~~








<pb n="80"/>
o8            AT HTALF-MOON TERRACE,              i

two faces were the same. The same beyond doubt 

in the locket had been cut from his head, the picture 

picture of his face-younger and brighter than now.  t

it all mean ? 

Rosanna was quite pale as she fastened the locket

about the child's neck. The same thought crossed he

that had perplexed Duke-was this man Polly's father ?

It was Sunday morning. Duke had a holiday in s

Tinsel & Spangle. It was his first thought as he sat up,

ing, to find the little kitchen glorified by a burst of su

the breakfast in a state of preparation, and Rosanna 

down on him with a face of owl-like solemnity. Ws-

for it already ? " Was the justice of the king about to

"What is it, Rosanna? " he hazarded.

"Duke," responded Rosanna, "I have something

strange to tell you. That child has a locket, with a man'

ture and lock of hair, round her neck. Duke, the picture

hair both belong to that sick man."

"Rosanna !"

" It is true. Look for yourself, if you like. It's my opi

he's the child's father!"              .

"I think it's uncommonly likely," said Duke. " We'

and find out before he goes, Rosanna. If we're to bri

Mistress Polly, it strikes me I should like to know her na

least."

The brother and sister breakfasted together, Duke went-

for his morning smoke, and Rosanna washed and dressed P

who demanded "Dozy" and her "bekfas," the instant

opened her big blue eyes.

Miss Mason rarely missed church, but this was an ex

tional Sunday in her life-the recording angel must over

a little swerving from.the straight path for once. Polly's a

tite appeased, she went to see after her patient, with some 

and toast, and found him lying broad awake, perfectly ca

and conscious, gazing with dark, melancholy eyes at vacan

How like those sapphire-blue eyes were to Polly's ! It

Rosanna's first thought, as he turned them upon her. 

"Will you tell me where I am, and What has happened

he asked. "Have 1 been ill ?"

"For a day, yes, sir," Rosanna answered respectfully.

spoke and looked like a gentleman, she could-see. "

don't remember, I suppose, but you were knocked down b

carriage, yesterday, and :ny brother brought yo'i here. I

,                 -     -~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ l;i








<pb n="81"/>
AT HALF-MOON TERRACE.                8i

-   face, if you please, and you will eat some breakfast,

if you feel well you shall get up."

es thanked her. They were beautiful eyes, more and

e Polly's every second.

ahed his hands and face, placed his tea and toast

re him, and watched him, with that profound satisfac.

ly nurses know, eat a few morsels and drink his tea.

brother will be in directly, and will help you to dress,"

said, kindly. " Here he is now."

sauntered in, smelling of the stables opposite, where

been smoking.

good-morning, Mr. Hawksley," he said. " How do you

rself to-day? Met with an accident yesterday, you

ight have been worse though. I'll be vally, certainly.

e things along, Rosanna."

: Hawksley reeled a little when he first arose, but the

passed.  He dressed himself with some assist-

.from   Duke, and took the chair his extempore valet

for him among the roses and geraniums in the sunn;

e was a bottle of wine in the house, kept for rare occa-

and Rosanna gave her brother a large glass for her

i.t.

td if he'd like to smoke, Duke, I don't mind," she said,

; "nothing brings you men to themselves like a cigar."

ke stared in silent wonder. Mr. Hawksley accepted

he wine and the cigar-very glad to get the latter,

it was execrable. In what depths of despair, in what

es of unrequited love, won't men smoke and find them-

consoled ?

Yi have been most kind, you and your sister," he said,

A; "believe me, I am very grateful." And then he lit

, and looked at the geraniums, and the men cleaning

thAe ho-ses opposite, and the sunlit, close, little street,

s silent again.

I had known where your home and fiiends were," Duke

I would have taken you there. But you were quite

be of speech, you see, and I brought you here."

have no home," Mr. Hawksley answered, in the same

toe, "and no friends. I stand quite alone in England,

world, indeed. I only reached London yesterday morn

er two years' sojourn in America. But I will not tres-

i: n your kindness much longer, if I may further trouble

4*








<pb n="82"/>
82           AT HALF-MOON TERRACE.

you to get me a cab and tell the man to take me to some

quiet hotel. I-leave England again by the very next steamer.' i

"In that case," said Duke, "you shall remain where you are

until to-morrow, at least. Our rooms are of the humblest,"

with rather a rueful look around, " but such as they are, they 

are at your service, and you'll be better here than in a noisy,

bustling inn, particularly as you are still rather weak."

Robert Hawkslev stretched out his hand to the scene-painter. 

He spoke not a word, there were none needed between them.

So while the long, sunny Sunday wore away, the stranger within 

their gates sat by the window, and puffed his cigar-smoke into

the ose-bushes and geraniums, and listened to the sweet ring-

ing of the Sabbath bells, and watched the people who went by ;

in the dingy little street below. He ate his dinner, when din-

ner-time came, a very slender repast on his part, and then went

hack to the window, to his cigar, and his silence.

Ialf a dozen times little Polly ran in and out of the room,

artfully sent there by Rosanna, to attract his attention, but she 

signally failed. It is doubtful if he ever saw or heard her.

A sort of awe came over Rosanna as she watched him. 

There were troubles in the world deeper and heavier, she be-

gan to realize, than brothers who played fiddles late into the i

night, at godless play-houses, and painted scenes all day long.  !

The peaceful afternoon passed, they drank tea together in

the parlor. And the bells clashed out again for evening service,

and the sun went redly down, and little Polly went to bed, 

very sleepy and cross, and still Mr. Hawksley sat silent and

smoking, while the silvery twilight fell, the stars came out

above, and the street lamps glimmered below. 

Duke sat at the other window, and watched him; he was !

dying of curiosity, but somehow he could not bring himself 

to intrude on this man's thoughts. It was the man himself 

who spoke first. The human heart must find an outlet, even

in the most stoical, and there is something in that hour between i

the lights peculiarly adapted to confidence. Sitting in that

silver-gray twilight, his pale face seeming carved in marl le, 

the stranger whom Duke Mason had befriended told him his 

stuangely eventful story.








<pb n="83"/>
TOLD IN THE TWILIGHT.                83

CHAPTER X.

TOLD IN THE TWILIGHT.

OU wonder, very lilely," Mr. Hawksley began, with

perfect abruptness, "' that I should take a journey all

the way across from New York, and only remain three

or four days before going back. You will wonder

when I tell you why I came. I came to find my wife."

d-you have found her ?" ventured Duke, half alarmed

own temerity.

und her, and lost her forever, in the same hour."

e is dead ? " Duke had hazarded again.

H s" Hawksley said, in a strange compressed sort of

" Dead-dead. Would you like to hear the history of

hat has been a failure ? I feel in the mood to-night-for

t time in two years-for the last time perhaps in my life.

ntic story, my good fellow," with a sort of laugh: "of

eHson of a yeoman won and lost ' a lady of high degree,'

ld song has it. A yeoman son, educated far above his

by an eccentric godfather well-to-do in life, and started to

¢S fortune at the age of twenty-two, as secretary to a

n in the House of Commons. I fulfilled my duties, it

so satisfactorily, and was willing to receive such very

ivages, that my gentleman, who was neither rich nor

s, resolved to retain me as long as he could. And

he house dissolved, he took me with him to his country-

in the heart of Staffordshire. I met her there. It

T.ree years ago now, but in this hour, and to the last

e, I will see her as plainly as I saw her that first day,

east-high amid the waves of barley, her hands full of

s and poppies, her white dress waving in the sweet

ind, a golden gray sky over her head, and the rosy

hJuly sunset in her face. She was only sixteen, and

school for a two-months' vacation, an orphan

tha face like one of Raphael's Madonnas, and a

rt as constant, and as true, as the rest of her sex.

lheiress, engaged from her tenth year to a baronet,

arryim by her father's deathbed injunction-her

-ie dependent on it-if she refuse d, that fortune went

d build a hospital and library.








<pb n="84"/>
s84           TOLD IN TIE TWILIGHT. 

"I knew nothing of the engagement-it is doubtfulwhe

would have mattered much if I had; still I think now it,

have been more honest on her part, if she had told me. 

didn't care for her affianced husband, of course; he was 

her senior-she rather disliked him, indeed, in those early

.And she loved me" i 

He paused, the smoke from his cigar curled upward. !

R.osanna's lemon geraniums, and hid his pale face in the 

daylight. 

We fell in love with each other, after the most appr

three-volume romance fashion, and there were clande

meetings, and vows of eternal constancy, under the moon

arcades of the old court. Before a month had elapsed, we

made up our minds, and informed each other, we would a

edly die if separated, and that separation was very near. 

was going to spend a fortnight with a bosom friend in Scotla

before going back to school, and after that nothing remai

but a broken heart, and an early grave. My poor little 

How pretty she looked in the gloaming, as she clung to mya

and implored me to save her. Salvation seemed very

just then to me. She was going across to Scotland; what

there to hinder my following, and having our marriage

formed there. Private marriage was easy in Scotland

license, no witness-a quiet ceremony some fine day, and 

our happiness was secured for life. She was a little frighte

at first, at this high-handed proposal, but she consented sc

We said good-by-if any of the household suspected .

secret, I think the composure with which we parted must ef

tually have deceived them. She went to Scotland. Tk

days after I received a note from her. The next morning

went to my employer, and asked a holiday. It was the 

hypocrisy of my life, and I bungled over the simple reque

until he looked at me with wonder, but he granted it. I 

the Court ostensibly to visit my godfather, in reality to tr

to Scotland at full speed.                             5

" On the very day of my arrival, a pouring September 

our marriage took place. A superannuated old man, who i

been a minister, but whose too strong proclivity for the whi

bottle had caused a suspension of his duties, performed 

ceremony readily enough, for a few crowns. We were mai

according to Scotch law, without a single witness, but whet

such a marriage contracted by a minor under such circumja

ces would hold in England, is an open question.








<pb n="85"/>
TOLD IN THE TWILZGH7T.               85

her, Mr. Mason, as you sit there, and listen to this

yu are not thinking me a villain. To win a young

i~ons, to inveigle her into a clandestine marriage-

h er to poverty, to bring upon her the anger of hel

d e seem like the deed of a scoundrel. But we loved

'r, and twenty-two does not often stop to reason. She

B lsive, impassioned, romantic-I was madly in love,

d, and with a brilliant career before me. Twenty two

oos forward to a brilliant career, you know. Weve

rry at all hazards-time enough to listen to common-

erward. 

en her fortnight among her Scottish friends expired, she

home. I followed her in two days after, and things went

eir old way-the moonlight walks, the secret meetings,

vows, and talk, and bliss-old as Eden-the sweeter

-or being stolen.

-pleaded so hard not to be sent back to school until

ristmas, that her uncle, indulgent in all minor matters,

ted. Before Christmas we thought we would run away

rleaving a letter for Uncle Geoffrey, telling all, implor-

n,- and Uncle Geoffrey would foam, and rage, and

a while, like the light-comedy father in the play, and

awould descend finally upon a beautiful tableau of

- iation, we at his feet on our knees, and he with his

Outstretched, sobbing forth ' Bless you, my children, and

autumn passed-such a golden autumn! We had

r months married, when our well-guarded secret was

ed. My employer said nothing-he was a man rather

to talk-but suddenly, without a word of warning,

was spirited away. I was sent early one day on a

sion to the neighboring town; when I came back she

. That is more than two and a half years ago. I

er seen her but for one moment since, and that was

sed again to light another cigar.

Understood him perfectly. He was intensely inter-

his story-far more interested than the narrator yet

e was no scene; the uncle met me even more blandly

hamn usual; but I felt he knew all. Two days after,

as still unresolved what course to pursue, he called

sti d    is valet was blsy about the room, I reilemn








<pb n="86"/>
86            TOLD IN THE TWILIGHT. 

ber, at the time-and locked up in his safe, in my prese

quantity of unset jewels, and a sum of money in bank 

It was an old-fashioned safe, with an ordinary lock, by no

the kind in which to intrust three thousand pounds' Wor

family diamonds, and six hundred pounds in money. H

dictating -a letter to me while he did this, and I saw hi

the key of the safe in his pocket.

"' I am going to Swansborough this evening, Roberd

shid to me, in his most confidential way, 'and I shall pro

not return for two days at least. In my absence the ca

this safe is intrusted to you.'.

"I looked at him in surprise and distrust. 

"'Why leave such valuable jewels in the house ? Why

deposit them in the Swansborough Bank ?'

"His answer was very careless, and quite ready.

' ' Because, immediately upon my return, they are to be t

up to London, to be new set for Olivia. Her marriage

Sir Vane Charteris is to take place in two months, and 

are to be set according to her fancy.'

"He looked mie straight in the eyes, with a dark, sin

smile, as he said this, and left the house. It was the midd

the afternoon as he rode away. I recollect his turning ro

with the same smile on his dark face, as he rode down the 

nue.

"'Watch the safe, Robert,' he repeated; 'it will be

secure in your keeping as though in the strong room

bank.'

"It was the middle of the afternoon. As the dusk of

bleak December evening wore on, the postman brought Z

mail. There was a note from her, dated London, begging

to come to her at once-to lose not a moment. There

the address of an inn, where I was to stay, and at such an 

she would come to me there.  I never doubted that n

What was my employer, and his diamonds and his safe, to

then? I ran to my room, packed my portmanteau, 

until the house was quiet, and that very night, without inf

ing any one, was on my way to London. I reached the

late the next day. A great part of the journey was perfom

in stage-coaches. I waited for my wife, but she never ca

J waited three days. At the end of that time there came,

stead of Olivia, her uncle and an officer of the law, armed 

, search-warrant.

"On the night of my departure, my employer, retu








<pb n="87"/>
TOLD IN THE TWILIGHT.                87

expectedly, found the safe unlocked, the jewels and

ne. I was gone, too. Every inmate of the house

ined, but all proved their innocence triumphantly. 1

guilty party beyond a doubt, and I was followed.

0 days' search they found me. I and my luggage were

ained. I listened with astonishment and anger and

; Examine ! Let them examine as long as they pleased 1

arched me-a degradation I submitted to, afire with

- They examined my portmanteau.  There, carefully

Up in the lining, thejewels and money were found !

late employer dismissed the detective. We were left

together. He looked at me more in sorrow than in

and I-I sat benumbed. My guilt was plain; there

ejewels and money-the number of the notes all taken

d to correspond. What had I to say for myself that I

ot be handed over to the law? I had not a word. I

Iened, and listened to him while he talked. For my

arents' sake-poor but honest people-for godfather's

was willing to spare me. On condition that I left the

:at-once and forever, I should not be given over to the

eserved-hard labor and penal servitude, most likely, for

is niece, who had been greatly shocked by the news,

iged him to hand me a note; he would give me half an

decide and to read what she had to say. I tore open

as he left me, still too stunned to utter a word.

knew all,' she wrote: 'she begged me for Heaven's

ot to provoke her uncle to prosecute. He was merci-

once aroused, and everything was against me. She be-

n my innocence, would always love me, and be true to

l t I must fly now, and without seeing her. She dared

mne, it would break her heart, it would kill her, if I

rrested and condemned, as I would surely be-hanged,

perhaps.  She felt as though she were going mad-I 

yI must fly-if I had ever loved her, I would leave

now.'

'e gave me an address to which I might write to her, and

uld answer me, would fly to join me presently-any-

s that I did not suffer myself to be arrested for robbery

iat could I do? What would you have done in such a

E;I knew there was a vile conspiracy against me, of her

making, but I never thought he forged those letters,

;Sleen arrested would have been an end to all hope-








<pb n="88"/>
8             rTOLD IN TH      TWILIGHT.

my guilt seemed palpable as the light of noon. In a state ofi

sullen fury I accepted the scoundrel's terms-I left England,

flying from the consequences of a crime I had nc ver committed 

-almost maddened-with no hope, save in her truth and fi-

delity and love.

"I began my new life in a thriving western village, risingi

fast to a populous town. For twelve months luck went steadily:

against me; then the turn came. I ;,nd another started in a

business that flourished; we made money-the object of my

life was being fast accomplished-a sure and safe competence 

for the wife I had left behind me. I tell you here only the 

plain, simple facts of my story-of my sufferings-of my de.

spair, at times, of the hours when I was nearly maddened by

failure, and by the loss of all man holds dear-I tell you noth-.

ing of what sleepless nights and wretched days her silence and.

my suspense caused me.   For she never wrote-no letter

came from her to the address in London, to be forwarded to 

me. I wrote again and again to that address-the letters lay 

uncalled for. It was worse than useless to write to her to the 

Court; I knew her uncle well enough to be sure they would

never reach her. There were times when I was ready to throw

up everything, the tide in my affairs that was leading me slowly

along to fortune, and rush back to England, and brave all, and

claim her. But these moods passed. It would have been 

cruelty to seek her out until I had a home, however humble,

however unlike that to which she had been accustomed, to

bring her to, in this new, strange land. When at last common

sense, reason, prudence, all were forgotten, what do you think

caused me to leave all that was becoming so precious to me,

and rush madly back into the very danger from which I fled ? "

Duke made no reply. He was scarcely breathing, so vivid :

was his interest. Robert Hawksley did not seem to expect a

reply-he was looking out at the darkening, lamp-lit street.

"A dream-neither more nor less! A dream brought me 

back to England. On the night of the twenty-third of March -

the dream came to me first. She stood at my bedside, pale and

wild as I had never seen her, wringing her hands, and looking ,

at me with sad, imploring eyes. I started up wide awake, to:

find the moonlight filling my room, and my dream over. The 

next night, at precisely the same hour, near midnight, I dreamt 

the same dream again. But it was on the following night that

the strangest event of all happened, an event so strange that I 

have not ceased to wonder at it yet, and no less prophetic than

strange. 








<pb n="89"/>
--   TOLD IN THE TWILIGHT. 

the night of the twenty-fifth of March, having been reiy

day, and suffering from headache, I retired. early. J

fall asleep directly; I lay tossing about, and thinking

dream, full of fears for her, and doubt for myself. 1

tit was nine o'clock, the house was very still, 'he room

darkened, for I had closed the shutters and curtains,

tre was neither fire nor light  I was not asleep; I am

ty aware of it; I Was as broad awake as I am at this

,and my eyes were open, when suddenly a picture shone

l me through the darkness, and I saw every object more

|y than I see the lamps shining down there, in the twilight.

saw a room-long, low, dark, old-fashioned, lit by a wood-

a broad hearth. I saw an open window. I could feel

night air upon my face, as I lay. An open piano

near the window, through which I caught a glimpse of a

, moonlit sky, and tossing, wind-blown trees. By the

, looking out into the night, stood a girl, dressed in a

ed silk robe, which trailed behind her, and glimmered

bies in the fireshine. I could see the diamonds flashing

ears. and on her hands, her yellow, unbound hair, her

dark eyes. It was Olivia; pale and wan, as I had seen

my dreams, her sweet face hopelessly sad, the large eyes

rand haggard, I saw her stretch forth her hands with a

oate gesture, I heard her wild, despairing cry-' Oh, my

tY-mmy Robert-come back '

nthen it had all faded in the twinkling of an eye, and I

in my darkened chamber, sitting up in bed, with the cold

hieavy on my face.

days after, I took passage from New York to England.

or vision, whatever it was, it possessed me like an evil

I left everything, and came back to search for my lost

you found her ? " Duke breathlessly cried.

ert Hawksley made no reply. His last cigar had been

dout; he sat like a statue of black marble amid the

n found her," Duke repeated, unable to contain him-

a bride ! You found her at the altar, another man's

ksley, the least excited of the two, turned and looked

do you know that.? * he asked.

ow more than you think," said Duke, still excited

F  .0:~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~








<pb n="90"/>
go0       TOLD IN THE TWILIGHT.                  .

"You found her married to Sir Vane Charteris. The lady yo

saw in your vision was Miss Olivia Lyndith; and on that very.

night-the twenty-fifth of last month-I saw, and heard inl

reality what You saw and heard in that singular vision."

Robert Hawksley was fully aroused now. He had told hi,^

story dreamily, as much to himself as to Duke. His tanned

face flushed deep red as he rose.

"What are you saying?" he said, hoarsely. "You wouldi

not dare to trifle with me-'" 

"Sit down-sit down !" Duke interrupted. " I'll tell you the i

whole affair. It's the strangest, the most wonderful thing that;

ever was heard of.  Good gracious! what would Rosannal

say?"

Then Duke Mason, with breathless volubility, quite unlike

himself, poured into the listener's ear the story of the night of 

the twenty-fifth of March, every word he had heard, all he had:

seen, up to the moment of Geoffrey Lyndith's appearance at

the waiting-room of the Speckhaven station.

"And now! " he concluded, out of breath, and glowing with 

triumph, " what do you think of that? Are you satisfied now 

that she always lcved you-always was true to you ?"   .

The darkness hid the marble pallor that had fallen once 

more on Hawksley's face. Only the tremor in his voice be.

tokened what he felt, when he answered: 

"I don't think I ever really doubted it-no, not when 1

saw her at the altar with that man, when I listened to her uncle's 

falsehoods.  May Heaven's blight fall upon him! My dar-

ling! my darling!"  His voice broke; he put one hand up

over his face, even in the darkness. For a moment dead 

silence fell.

Mr. Mason, not used to this sort of strong emotion off the 

stage of the Britannia, felt exceedingly uncomfortable.

Hawksley broke the silence, and looked up.

"I beg your pardon," he said quietly, in his usual tone; 

will you tell me what argument her uncle used to induce her 

to yield, and go with him ? You say she defied him at first, 

and was resolutely bent on going with you."

"She was," Duke said. "It puzzled me for the time, but I

think I have nit on a solution of the mystery now. I did not

hear what he said to her after the first momeAt, but there is a

sequel to my story of that eventful night, which to my mind

lights up everything."     , 

'hen Duke went backward, and told that little episode of 








<pb n="91"/>
TOLD IN ThE TWILIGHT.                91

year and nine months before, when Dr. Worth had

uted out in the rain, to assist at the birth of a baby-

ydith Grange. Once more Robert Lisle started erect,

to listen  He remembered the words Geoffrey Lyn.

let fall, of a child that had died on the day of itr

y opinion iF," Duke said, "that old fluke of an uncle ab-

the child, and kept it from her all along; and on that

inthe waiting-room, promised to give it up to her if she

consent.  She thought you dead; she would sacrifice

g, like most mothers, for her baby, and she consented

e:sake. And," continued Duke, in a perfect burst of

h, "that child is in the next room ! "

Ithe next room ?" Mr. Lisle could but just repeat. "In

t room  " And once again Duke began-there seemed

to the story-telling-and related the receipt of Olivia's

and how singularly on her wedding morning she had

the child to his care.

ere can be no doubt whatever about it," Duke said; "it

-same cb ld of Dr. Worth's tale, and your wife ws the

ous lady   She told me plainly the child was hers, and

e assurance doubly sure, it has a locket with your picture

ar round its neck. My sister recognized the likeness this

ng, and snoke to me about it. You saw the child half a

itimes to-day-yours beyond the shadow of a doubt. Its

y is written in its eyes." 

ere was still another pause.  Duke got up and lit the

e avoided these blanks in the conversation.

fetch Polly in, if you like-she calls herself Polly-that

Bhe's not asleep."

Polly was asleep; and not for a regiment of fathers

Rosanna have her disturbed. She was reading Blair's

ns by a solitary dip in the kitchen, and looked about as

e and yielding as a granite Medusa.

Mr. Hawksley has waited so long, I dare say he can

ntil morning," was her grim reply, as she went back to

"Sermons.

rsister is right," Mr. Hawksley said. He was white

le, and looked almost as cold. "I will see the child

ow to say good-by."

d-by ! Then you mean to leave England-to give up

Charteris he ske the name quite calmly, quite

dy Charteris," he spoke the name quite calmly, quite

 na: 








<pb n="92"/>
92            TOLD IN THE TWILIGHT..

coldly, "is out of England by this time, on the first stage of

her bridal tour to Italy. For her sake I once gave up name,

character, and my native land; for her sake I make a greater

sacrifice now. I give up herself. Think, for a moment, of all'

that is involved in my coming forward and claiming her. Il

break her heart, I blight her life, and in the moment we meet

we are torn apart. \ I to stand my trial as a thief. I am inno-

cent; but I cannot prove it. It is the old struggle of might

against right. As it is, she may learn to forget; happiness and-

peace may come to her.  I cannot make her the talk of-

England.  I can't drag the story of her girlish indiscretion

before the world. She will cease to think of me, and I-" 

He clenched his hands, and great drops stood on his pallid :

face. "May God keep me from a suicide's cowardly end !" !

His folded arms lay on the table, his head fell forward upon ;.

them. So Duke Mason, with bated breath, and a great com- ~

passion in his heart, left him.

The morning came, gray and overcast. A London fog had

set in, and a sky like brown paper frowned down on the smoky

city. But little Polly, in her blue-silk dress, bronze boots, and

her golden locket, and flaxen ringlets, looked sunshiny enough

to light up the whole parish of Bloomsbury herself

The strange gentleman with the blue eyes so like her own,

and tawny beard, took her in his arms, and looked into her

small face; and Polly, who flouted Duke and Rosanna as

haughtily as though she had been Czarina of all the Russias,

"took to him" in a way that was quite amazing. She kissed-

his bearded lips, let him look at her locket, told him her name

was Polly, and that " Dozy" was " all gone away."

"I suppose her name is Mary," Duke suggested, "'and she

calls herself Polly for short."

"Her name is Paulina," Mr. Hawksley said quietly. "I am

quite certain of it. Pauline was the name of- of her maternal

grandmother, and of her mother's twin sister-an old family

name among the Lyndiths.  This child's name is Paulina

Lisle, I took my mother's name in America, and shall keep

it. Let her grow up as Mason; keep her with you always,

unless her mother should claim her. Her right is always first,

and most sacred."

He kissed the child yearningly, wistfully, and put her down

Half an hour later, andl he had left Half-Moon Terrace foi

ever.








<pb n="93"/>
TOLD IN    THE TWILIGHT.                  93

L  '0Land of Columbia' leaves again to-raorrow," he said

c; " I shall return by her."

shook hands and parted, with no more words, and the

iter went to the Britannia.    He was not sentimental

aginative in any way, but, all that day, and for many

e'pale face and dark eyes of Robert Hawksley haunted

e a ghost. The " Land of Columbia" sailed on Tues'

Frning.  On Tue3day night there came a letter to Half-

Ten ace, addressed to Duke.    A check for five hundred.

fell out when he opened it, and he read these lines :

spoke of wishing to save enough to purchase for yourself a home

aven, where you said there was a better opening for you than in

'It is my desire that you should do so at once, for my child's

O-Once a year I will write to you, and you to me, telling me of her

i   and welfare. I go to make a fortune for her; please God, my

er shall be an heiress, before whom those who scorn her now shall

w down. Let her grow up as your own-in utter ignorance of her

Fry. If I live, I may one day return to England, and to her-if I

her father in my stead.

"ROBERT HAWKSLEY."

d so' the first chapter in little Polly's strange hist Èry was

nd Mnded.

,H 0r:








<pb n="94"/>
PART SECOND.

CHAPTER I.

AFTER FOURTEEN YEARS. 

ND it will be the most splendid thing ever seen ir Speck

haven, Rosanna ! Figure to yourself yards and yards

[  .of Chinese lanterns sparkling through the trees, plash

ing fountains, and the divine music of Holmesdale' 

military brass band! Fancy the long tables groaning-that's!

the word-groaning under the roast beef of old England, and 

foaming flagons of ale! Fancy flags flying, and bells ringing, and 

everybody eating and drinking, and making merry, and your

little Polly sharing the glories of the hour with the Honorable

Guy Paget Earlscourt, second and favorite son of Lord Monta-

lien, of Montalien Priory, Lincolnshire."

"Polly!"

"Well, I mean as the prettiest girl at the feast. And I'm 

quite determined to go, Rosanna, so iron my white muslin

dress, like a dear old love, and say no more about it."  A

The spirited speaker of this oration stood in the middle of I

the floor, a tall slip of a girl, with a slim waist, sunburnt hands, 

and a clear, ringing, sweet young voice. The prettiest sight 

on earth-a fair, joyous, healthy girl of sixteen. 

It was high-noon of a delicious June day, and she stood in a :

burst of sunshine that flooded the little parlor, that flashed in J








<pb n="95"/>
AFTER FOURTEEN YEARS.                 95

ort auburn curls, and sparkled back from her joyous eyes.

-teen years ago you saw her a lovely baby, and now she is an

lish miss " of sixteen. And has the fair baby beauty fully

ts promise in the girl ? Well, at first glance you might be in-

d to say no. Crop the flowing locks of the Venus Anady-

e, give her a sunburnt complexion, and a smudge of dirt

er nose, put her in a torn dress, and what becomes of your

ess but a good-looking young woman with a pair of fine

[?  Polly labors under all those disadvantages at present,

her nice dusty walk through the blazing noonday sun; but

te of the smudge on her nose, it is a very pretty nose,

t in shape and chiselling. The mouth may be a trifle

than a rose-bud, perhaps, but it is a handsome mouth,

-that square cut at the corners, which makes a mouth at

:resolute and sweet. She may be tanned; you may see a

feckles under her eyes, but oh, those eyes !-so blue, so

sant, flashing with life, and health, and fun, and mischief,

; morning till night! You neither saw freckles nor tan,

e their lustre flashed upon you. The auburn hair is short-

ed, and all curling round her head; and standing there in

H     SJune sunlight, she looks like a saucy boy, an audaciously

y boy, ready for anything in the way of fun or frolic, from

ling a cigar to riding an unbroken colt round the paddock.

ut saddle or bridle.

osanna sits before her-Rosanna, whom old Time no more

approach than any other man. Fourteen years have left

Absolutely and entirely unchanged-grim of aspect, kindly

r, sharp of tongue, and a model of all the Christian and

tic virtues, with only one weakness, and that-Polly!

iwho has been her torment, her plague, her idol, any

those fourteen years; whom she worries about all day, and

innumerable sins and ill-doings keep her awake all

t; whom she scolds, and loves, and spoils, and to whose

e bows in as abject submission as her weak-minded

r himself.

lys earliest recollection is of this pleasant eight-roomed

i n the suburbs of Speckhaven, with its little flower-gar-

ifront, its kitchen-garden and paddock in the rear, its

;ss whiteness of wall, and brilliant green of shutters. Of

n, and "Dozy," and her baby life, all memory is gone.

eved the story of herself current in the town--a very

- ;story-that she is the orphan child of dear old Duke's

- dead and gone, ard left as the sole legacy o the dy.

Ff'?f








<pb n="96"/>
*96          AFTER FOURTEEN YEARS. 

"And a precious legacy I have been !" Poll) was won

observe in parenthesis. "Duke don't mind my enormit'

indeed, if I murdered somebody, I don't think it would sur

or trouble him any, but that poor Rosanna ! I've been bri

ing her gray hairs (she won't dye) with sorrow to Speckha

Cemetery, every hour since she got me first."

So Polly had shot up, tall, slim, pretty, healthy, and

willed. She had persisted in catching every disorder incidei

to childhood. She had made Rosanna sit up with her for wee

and weeks together, and she had torn more new dresses, 

tumbled off more dizzy heights, than any other child on recot

She liked her own way, and insisted on having it, with

energy worthy a better cause, and here she stood at sixteen 

prettiest and wildest madcap in Lincolnshire-a handsoe

blue-eyed brunette.

With Robert Hawksley's five hundred pounds Duke had p

chased this pretty cottage, just outside the large, busy town

Speckhaven; and Rosanna's dream was realized of a cotta

in the country, with flower-garden and poultry-yard.

Once every year since then, Duke had received a letter, co

taining fifty pounds, and all of those fifty pounds were safe

nestled in Speckhaven Bank for Polly. Mr. Hawksley ha

gone to California when first the gold fever broke out there, a

last Christmas, when his letter came, was there still; b

whether making that promised fortune or not, Duke had n

means of knowing, and Mr. Hawksley never said. Polly kne

him as her godfather, and was very much obliged to him indeed

for his handsome presents, which constituted such a nice littl

sum for her in the bank. She wrote him a letter every ye.

since she first learned to write; but beyond this of herself o

him she knew nothing. Duke still persevered in his old vocq!

tion, and was scene-painter-in-chief to Speckhaven Lyceum, an

portrait painter to the town.

The fourteen years had glided on smoothly, uneventfully-:

from which one eventful month shone out a bright oasis in th.

desert. He .walked to Lyndith Grange sometimes, in the gray;

of the summer evening, smoking his pipe, and thinking of that

cold March night so long ago, when the romance of his life be!

gan. Of the actors in that romance he had never seen any-

thing, since the day he had bidden farewell to Robert Hawksley 

Of Mr. Geoffrey Lyndith, of Sir Vane and Lady Charteris, he:

never even heard the names. They might be all dead and

buried, so completely had they dropped out of iis life. Th








<pb n="97"/>
AFTER FOURTEEN YEARS.97

ange was utterly deserted now; the grim gateway would

to any hand that chose to push it, but few ever chose.

y artists who thought it picturesque in its decay, made

es of it when the sun shone, but after nightfall neither

t nor peasant liked to linger in its gloomy precincts. Those

, and an occasional look at his treasured opal ring, were

t remained to Duke, besides his bright Polly, to keep the

ory of that past time alive. Dr. Worth still told the story

at rainy night, when he had been carried off bodily to the

e; but people were getting tired of hearing it, and were

ie interested in the great house of the neighborhood, Mon-

Priory, where great goings-on were this time taking place.

d Montalien's second son was just of age, on the third of

and there was to be a birthday celebration, and that's

olly stands here flushed, and swinging her gypsy hat by

oy ribbons, and talking with many gestures and vast inter-

o Rosanna.

nner at sunset on the lawn, Rosanna," the girl was say-

th her face all alight; "all the tenantry and all the

gspeople belonging to the Priory, and anybody the bailiff

Mrs. Hamper, the housekeeper, like to invite beside. 1

H an invitation from both of 'em, and I'm going with Alice

.    Then after dinner and speech-making, you know,

tl that, there's to be a ball in the great entrance hall,

g the old chaps in armor, and the antlers, and battle-axes,

ioomerangs, and things. A ball, Rosanna-a real out-and-

ALL," repeated Polly, with owl-like solemnity, and the

capitals.

t, Polly, you're not the tenantry, nor the tradespeople,'

ed Rosanna, who, having not an atom of pride for herself,

et heaps for Polly. "You're a young lady, and-"

iddle ! I beg your pardon, Rosanna, but I'm not a young

T;I'm Duke Mason the scene-painter's poor relation,

-t up out of charity, and nothing else. A young lady, to

d, is a person like-like Miss Hautton, now, who never

f' a muffin, nor washed up the tea-things in her life.' I

hatI am-I wish I was a lady, but I'm not. And I'm

to the dinner and the ball, Rosanna, and as it's my first

nend to dance with everybody who asks me. If one

rich and aristocratic themselves, it's pleasant to mix

ple that are, and the ladies and gentlemen are going

with the common herd, and be sociable for once, in a

8V06-    








<pb n="98"/>
g   B        AFTER FOURTEEN YEARS. 

Polly's grammar might be obscure, but her meaning wa

clear. She was going to the ball, and would like to see wh

would stop her.

"( Well, Polly, if you insist-but mind, I don't like it-" 

"Of course you don't, Rosanna; you never do like fun an

fiolic, and we're all worms, ain't we ? But I'm going though

so please hurry up and iron my new muslin dress, for I promr

ised to call for Alice at four o'clock. And oh, Rosanna ! wh

knows ? perhaps Lord Montalien himself may ask me to dance.'

"Stuff and nonsense, child ! Lord Montalien is sixty-seven

years old, and. has the gout. A pretty figure an old sinner like

that would cut, dancing with a chit like you. Have the quality

come down ? "

"Came this morning-Lord Montalien and his two sons

Mr. Francis and Mr. Guy, Sir Vane and Lady Charteris, and

their daughter, Miss Maud Charteris, and a Miss Diana Haut-:

ton. Sir Vane and Miss Diana are both second cousins of my-

lord."

Polly pronounced those great names with an unction good;

to hear.

"There's a Mr. Allan Fane, too, an artist, Mrs. Hamper told,

me, who is said to be paying attention to the rich Miss Haut-1

ion, and all the gentry in the neighborhood are to be there

to-day."

"I should think," said Rosanna, getting the muslin robei

ready for the iron, "Lord Montalien would have made all this

to-do when his eldest son and heir came of age, instead of this-

younger one."

'Mr. Guy is his favorite-everybody knows it. Mrs. Ham-

per told me the story. Lord Montalien," said Polly, intensely

interested in her theme, "was married twice-I heard all about:

it in the peerage, up at the Priory. His first wife was rich, and

plain, and ten years older than my lord, and a match of his 

father's choosing. Lord Montalien was in love with somebody 

else, but he yielded to his father and married the rich and ugly

Miss Huntingdon, and hated her like poison."

"Polly "         á 

"Well, I don't know, of course-I should think he did-al

would in his place ! /But, fortunately, she died two years after

her marriage, leaving Mr. Francis, and there was his lordship :

free again. Of course he immediately returned to his first love, :

an Italian lady, and oh, such a beauty! H er picture'- up there 

in her boudoir, and Mr. Guy is her son. She died before ag








<pb n="99"/>
A -   FTEP FOURTEEN YEARS.                9

~    :WhiJ.e too, and Lord Montalien has been a sort cf Bam.

[fore Carew ever since, wandering about like Noah's dove,

_   finding no rest for the sole of his foot.

Plly-don't be irreverent !"

nd so you see, Rosanna," pursued Polly, paying no atten-

"it's.clear enough how Mr. Guy comes to be his favorite.

H ooks like his mother, whom his father loved, and Mr.

is looks like his mother, whC.n his father detested. That's

isn't it? Mr. Francis is very well-looking, you know,

Mr. Guy-oh, Rosanna! Mr. Guy's an ANGEL !"

Pith which Polly bounced away before Rosanna's shocked

aation had time to be uttered.

' Make my dress nice and stiff, Rosanna," she called, over

Lhoalder; "don't spare starch, please. I must go and tell

he ran up stairs, three at a time, like a boy, and whistling as

0 -went, as few boys whistle. It was one of the dreadful

its she had. contracted, of which Rosanna could never break

- and which half broke her heart. She impetuously flung

n a door upstairs and flashed in upon Duke like the god-

s  or Hebe.

It was a room big and bare, and altogether very much like

tother painting-room at 50 Half-Moon Terrace. The " Bat-

of Bannockburn " blazed here in the sunshine, as it had done

rthe past sixteen years, a trifle dimmer and dustier perhaps

h time.

Duke himself was unchanged-the same pale-buff hair-pale-

complexion, mild, blue eyes, and paint-daubed, shabby coat.

~o say that Duke idolized Polly-this bright, laughing, joyous

i:ry, who glorified their humdrum household by her radiant

esence and ringing voice-would hardly be doing him justice.

He;was her abject slave. She twisted him round her little fin-

rShe tyrannized over him, and tormented and .admired

after the fashion of a spoiled younger sister. She made

teach her how to paint, to whistle, to row a boat, to fire a

,to rough-ride the ponies, to play the fiddle, and to sing

ic songs. She had a beautiful voice, a clear, sweet, vibra-

contralto, and knew everything from Kathleen Mavournee-i

im Crow. She sang in a choir in one of the churches, and

one occasion, at a Speckhaven tea-party, only three months

re, had nearly sent Rosanna into fits by giving them " The

t before Larry was stretched" when solicited for a song

e audience; who had expected "Ever of Thee," or "Beauti

t








<pb n="100"/>
1o0          AFTER FOURTEEN YEARS. 

ful Star," sat spell-bound for an instant, and then followed ii

the roar which Duke led. Everything Polly did, or said, ofz

thought, was good and admirable in Mr. Mason's sight.

" Have you heard the news, Duke?" the young lady de.-

manded; "about the dinner at the Priory, I mean?" "

"Yes," Mr. Mason placidly answered, he had heard some-

thirg about it; but hadn't paid much attention. Lords andi'

ladies and their jinketing didn't greatly trouble his repose. 

"Well, ITi going, Duke; and as it is my first ball, I should 

think you might take a little interest in it, and not go on paint- 

ing there in that unfeeling way."

"A person may paint and not be unfeeling. Don't be un- -

reasonable, Polly! So you're going to make your debut, are 

you ? What does Rosanna say ?"

"Rosanna doesn't believe in balls, and thinks dancing the ':

high road to-" Polly pointed downward. " But she's ironing.

my dress to go, all the same."

Duke looked at her admiringly. 

"What a clever little thing you are, Polly. I wish I could '

manage her like that. They say the Iron. Duke was a courage-' 

ous man," the scene-painter said, rather irrelevantly. " I think 

he and Rosanna must have been made for each other, and that 

he missed her somehow. And so you are going to the ball,

Polly ? Have the great folks all come down, then ?"   '

'Yes, all; Lord Montalien and his sons, Mr. Allan Fane. 

Miss Diana Hautton, and Sir Vane and Lady Charteris, and 

their daughter, Miss Maud."

Duke Mason was very carefully putting a -streak of purple 

into the horizon of his sketch, but the brush suddenly dropped

from his fingers and spoiled the opal-gray sky, in an unsightly 

blot.

"Sir Vane and Lady Charteris !" he repeated the names,

looking at her blankly; " Sir Vane and Lady Charteris ! "

For fourteen years he had not heard those names, and now 

to hear them from her lips !

"Certainly! Good gracious, how you stare, Duke! You 

don't know Sir Vane anc\ Lady Charteris, do you ?"     :

Mr. Mason drew a long breath and looked at his disfigured 

sketch.

"There's an awkward accident, and I've spent all the morn- 

ing over this. No, I don't know Sir Vane and Lady Charteris,

but the names sound familiar, somehow. And they'll be at the

ball, Polly? But of course you 1ll will see nothng of them."  ;

/'          of I








<pb n="101"/>
AFTER FOURTEEN YEARS.                10

-,Of course we will, though," cried Miss Mason with spiit;

e gentlemen are to dance with us girls. Mrs. Hanper told

o, and the ladies with Lord Montalien's tenants. They

[ going to be gracious and condescending, and mix with the

ton people for once. Oh Duke ! " the girl cried with sud-

passion, " why wasn't I born a lady, or why wasn't I born

me land where the poor man is the equal of the rich man.

spite of Fortune's caprices ?"

There is no such country, Duchess."

I wish I had been born in America," Polly went on, her

eyes flashing; " there's equality there, where a newsboy at

en may be President at thirty-five-ancr me equal of Kings.

tit's no use talking-I'm only Polly Mason, and I'll never

anything else."

"Unless some poor fellow in a moment of madness 'should

eday marry you, Duchess."

|^ Miss Mason looked up, the shadow clearing away, and her

lGnile at its brightest.

" Duke, suppose-it isn't likely, you know, of course-that

ne of these young gentlemen should fall in love with me. Jane

Wlyre wasn't pretty, and see how she married Mr. Rochester.

Kot that I think it was any great thing to marry a blind, mid-

le-aged gentleman with only one hand, and homely as sin.

Nuike, that Guy Earlscourt is splendid-splendid. His picture

hangs in one of the drawing-rooms-such a picture, and such a

drawing-room.  He is handsomer than Lord Byron himself,

and I'm in love with him already. I say, Duke, you might tall

for me after theatre-time-the ball won't break up until mid-

night. By-by, when I'm dressed I'll come in and you shall see

bow I look."

|T She ran out of the room, and down the stairs, and Duke .as

alone. The sunshine streamed on his spoiled picture, and he

stood staring vacantly at it, his brush poised, and his thoughts

k: . undred miles away. It had come at last theil-what he had

Treaded so often, and Lady Charteris wa; alive, and here, and

lthis very day would stand face to-face with her daughter. She

Shad never once written-no letter from her had ever reached

:Half Moon Terrace, and perhaps she was heartless, and proud,

nd had lost all interest in the child she had given to a stranger.

Would she recognize Polly ? she had her father's eyes and trick

flf manner-would she recognize it? would the name strike

heq memory, or was the man to whom she had confided hei

'baby daughter forgotten too ? Would this meeting of to-day

..end in Polly's being taken from them or-"








<pb n="102"/>
102          AFTER FOURTEEN YEARS.

The door opened, and Polly came in once more. 

She had been gone over an hour, while he sat there lost im

painful thoughts. To lose "the Duchess!"  Life held noa

misery so bitter as that for Duke. She came in dressed for

the fgte-very simply dressed in white muslin, a pink ribbof

sash, a cluster of pink roses lighting up the pure-whiteness, and'

her gold chain and locket her sole ornament. So with her cur-'

ling, auburn hair, her starry, blue eyes, her bright, sparkling face,

she stood, in the sunlight, a charming vision.

"Will I do, Duke?"

Something rose in Duke's throat and nearly choked him.,

Two willowy arms went round his neck in an instant. 

"Why, Duke! Dear old Duke, don't you want me to go ?:-

I never knew it-why didn't you say so ? I'll take off these

things, and sit here with you all the afternoon."     i

He held the hands that would have flung the roses out of her-

belt. 

"No, Duchess, go to the ball, and enjoy yourself-and God 

bless you, whatever happens. I'll call for you after theatre-time

and fetch you home." 

He opened the door for her, while she looked at him wonder- 

ingly, to let her pass out.

"But, Duke, you're quite sure you'd jut as lief I'd go ?

Rosanna objects, but then Rosanna says we're all worms, and,:

objects to everything except eating a cold dinner, and going to ;

church three times on Sunday.  But if you would rather I 

stayed-" 

"I had rather you would go-haven't I said so? There 

run away, Polly, I must get back to work."

"Good-by, then," Polly said, and the white dress and the

short yellow curls and pink roses vanished down the stairway, 

and Duke went back to his work. 

To his work. He worked no more that day. He sat holding 

his brush,.and looking blankly at his spoiled canvas. Was his 

dull life again about to be disturbed by the coming of this great ;}

lady? who was Polly's mother? how would the meeting of this  1

day end?"

The sun was low in the west,'when the door of the painting.

room was flung open, and Rosanna, pale and excited, stood 

before him. 

"Duke," she gasped, "I never. thought of it till this minute.  ~

I heard the name, and the truth never struck me. Lady Char. 

teris is at Montalien, and Polly has gone there; and Duke I

Lady Charteris is our Polly's mother !" 








<pb n="103"/>
' fONT"42LIEI N PRIORY.             10

CHAPTER II.

X AT MONTALIEN PRIORY.

precisely half-past three, by the parlor clock;

iMiss Polly Mason started forth to enjoy herself

ite muslin dress had been starched to the proper

e of stiffness, her kid boots were quite new, she

p her chain and locket until they flashed again,

Tithe young lady's state of mind can be described

perfect beatitude. The high road was dusty,

muslin was short, and she skirted daintily along

en fringe of grass by the roadside. The sun

:isky as blue as that of Italy, the grasshoppers

ther, and every person she passed gave the girl a

y, and an admiring glance. He would have

,indeed, who could have helped admiring her-the

face was so brightly pretty, so joyously happy, that

-sure only to look at her.

reams were about to be realized-she was to behold

:al flesh those splendid beings of that upper world,

ehad read so often-splendid, brilliant, beautiful,

gs who peppered their conversation so copiously

hphrases, who dwelt in halls of dazzling light, and

perpetual new silk dresses and diamonds. Thrice

is for whom existence was one long round of shop-

, dancing, driving, operas, theatres, court balls,

T tions, who never darned woollen hose on long

is, nor washed greasy dinner dishes, nor fetched

molasses from the grocer's. She was to see them

e had hitherto only seen them in books, and in her

read considerable-light literature chiefly, and a

of poetry. She knew all about the Corsair, and

d he Giaour, and Lara, and the other gentlemen

-she could spout whole stanzas of " Childe Harold,"

cpious extracts of the "Revolt of Islam"

you would listen. She had cried her pretty blue

:s errets over the "Scottish Chiefs" and the "'Chil-

bbey," and "Fatherless Fanny," in her earlier

i ore lately over beautiful " Ethel Newcome," and








<pb n="104"/>
104       SAT MONTALEN PRIORY. 

her troubles. She was intensely romantic. Oh, to b

Lady Helen Mar, and to dress as a page, and seek 

god-like hero in his prison, to have him torn from her ar -

break his noble heart upon the scaffold, and then in a f

after to break hers, promiscuous, as Mrs. Gamp woul

upon his coffin. That would be bliss! But she was 

Polly Mason, whom the grocer's clerk left old and valued 

mers to wait upon, and whom the haberdasher's young mani

home from singing school; and the Sir William Wallace

Lord Mortimers were not for her.

Polly had read other things than novels; she had aston

her teachers by her aptitude for mastering mathematics. 

liked history, and was well up in all the sugar plums-a J

of Arc, a Charlotte Corday, a Walter Raleigh, a beautiful

headed Scottish Queen, a Merry Monarch, a Marie Antoin

The little French dancing-master of Speckhaven, who 

taught her to dance like a fairy, had also taught her to sp

French. She could play the violin beautifully, though she

not know one note on the piano from another, and she 

painted in her way ever since she could hold a brush. She

a very clever little girl altogether, and as self-possessed as a

duchess in the land, and life was opening on a new pagel

her to-day, and her heart was throbbing with expectant raptl

Montalien Priory was just three miles distant from their 

tage; its great boundary- wall began almost where their li

garden ended. A vast and noble park spread along all

way to the right-to the left little cottages, standing in pre

trim gardens.

One of these, close to the great entrance gates, Polly 

tered. Dozens of pedple in their Sunday best, with hap

faces, were making for the Priory.

"Alice ! Alice !" Polly called as she went up the little g

den path, "are you ready' "

"Yes, Polly," a voice from an open window answer

"wait a moment until I find my parasol."           :

It was the cottage of Mathew Warren, the bailiff, and Mat

Warren's only daughter was Miss Mason's chosen friend a

confidante. She came out of the vine-wreathed doorway now

pretty Alice Warren, two years Polly's senior, resplendent

apple-green muslin, and cherry ribbons in her rich brown :

There were people who called Alice Warren the prettiest;

in Speckhaven, far prettier than Polly, who at this transiti

age was a trifle too thin, and pale, for certain tastes. Alice'








<pb n="105"/>
PRIOY               I

mlunp-rosy-d mpled---a

e teeth, light-blue eyes

Iup.!" Miss Warren re-

na's such a laun.

:oftone, "I've got

ame    home with me

4othy young man,

Wrren during

;with

_h  otorable

.  whole face one

to ug&ht they only came

;as almost dark, you know,

I :was all alone, and he came up

/w him at once, and he remembered

e lllme for four years. And, Polly,

I was afraid to refuse, and afraid to

the way, and I declare I hadn't a

_oi  id- he talk like Clive Newcome

e, ishe handsome ? "

he talked about-my neart was in my

tolly. He said it was a beautiful evening,

the country, and he told me I had grown tall

ier) than ever," said Alice, blushing. "And I

me; he's tall and thin, and wears a mustache;

ftest voice and hands, and-"

rhaps ! " said Polly irreverently. "I wish I had

_place, I'd have talked to him, and if my heart got

th I'dl have swallowed it! You'll introduce him to

, 'Alice ? I should like him to ask me to dance."

iisure I don't know," responded Alice, with a slid.

o f manner, and .a sudden recollection that some

ought Polly AIason quite as good-looking as herself

¤*I"








<pb n="106"/>
106           AT MONTALIEN PRIORY.

" I shouldn't like to make so free as that, you know. It'

very well if they take notice of us, but it wouldn't do for u

force ourselves upon them. He asked me if I wouldn't 

him as many dances as he wanted to-night; and Polly, do

know, he said he wouldn't be satisfied unless he got every ol

And then, he gave me a look-such a look !" i

"I wonder what Peter will say?" suggested Polly, mal

ously, and a trifle jealous, as young ladies will be of their.

friends on some occasions; "he has given you looks bef

now, too, hasn't he?  There ! don't be vexed, Alice, I hi

he'll dance with you the whole night long. I only pray I sha

have to sit out many-I should die of vexation if that El,

Long is asked and I'm left." 

They were entering under the great stone arch by this ti

with its escutcheon-two mailed hands clasped, and the motf

"'Semper Fidelis." This Norman arch, and one part of t

Priory, was old as the Conquest itself-erected by the hands-

Norman masons. An avenue a mile long led to the Prior

-a lofty and noble mansion, gray and ivy-grown, quaint a

picturesque.  Tall twisted chimneys reared up' against t

June sky, its painted windows blazed in the sun, its poin

gables, its lofty turrets, where a huge bell swung, and aroun

which the ivy, many and many a century old, had clung un

its girth was pretty nearly that of an oak-tree. Velvety glade

stone terraces, where peacocks strutted in the sun, long, lead

arcades, where cool green, darkness ever reigned, and glimpse

as they drew near the house, of a Norman porch, where woo

bine and dog-roses clustered, and an open door, revealing a

hall with armor on the walls, skins of Canadian wolves, o

Polar bears, and African lions, on the polished oak floor. 

noble hall, with a grained roof, and grand staircase, up whi

you might -drive a coach and four. 

"How beautiful it all is !" Polly cried. "How splendid

How grand! Think how for centuries and centuries it

descended from father to son, all brave warriors, great states

men, noble orators. And we have never had a grandfathe

How glorious life must be in the world these people live in !t:t

But Alice was not listening to this outburst-her eyes wer

wandering in search of some one-some one whom she did n

see. It was a pretty sight, too, and well worth looking a

The noble Priory, the sunlit glades, smooth and trim as a law

and shadowed by magnificent oaks and beeches, and gather

there nearly three hundred persons, men, women, and childrei








<pb n="107"/>
AT MONTALIEN PRIORY.                 07

laborers, servants and tradespeople, with their

arts, and children. And over all waving trees,

ne sky.

, Polly !" exclaimed Alice, breathlessly; "there

tefolks now."

her dreamy eyes. Something in the golden

ene stirred her heart with a feeling akin to pain.

ulp at the terrace to which her friend pointed, and

ladies and gentlemen looking down at the ani-

below. "Oh, Polly 1" breathlessly; "I wonder

us   Look ! he is coming down."

g man, in a high hat, dress coat, and white waist-

h the terrace stairs. Two long tables were spread

ow of the trees, laden with substantial viands,

d of one of these he took his place. A moment

second young man separated himself from that

terrace, and descended the stairs, and took his

a  of the second table.

uy";' whispered Alice.   "Shall we go over,

-he hasn't seen us."

at Guy Earlscourt as ne came down through the

e, and for years and years after the splendid

then haunted her with remorseful pain. She

est man she had ever seen in her life-youth,

t this his twenty-first birthday ? He was tall,

ike his brother, he wore a mustache, as be-

fyledged guardsman, and a certain air, as he

you as similar. Beyond that there was no re-

is Earlscourt was fair, with pale-gray eyes,

hair, full, rather large mouth, and a pale, re-

. Guy Earlscourt still wore his loose velvet

erhaps he knew nothing could harmonize

mbrandt tints of his clear olive complexion,

Lbrown eyes-eyes that had a golden light and

Vit them. A straw hat was thrown carelessly

:a slender chain of yellow gold glimmered

, and Polly clasped her hands as she looked.

1:< How handsome!" she said. " Hand- 

t:    picture in the crimson drawing-room.

omparing them-Mr. Guy is a thousand

o oalef ithe          think so.   er

~ Alie isaid; "I -don't think so.  Here's

~ i? g  et a place?"








<pb n="108"/>
108           AT MONTALIEN PRIORY. 

"Ohi, Mr. Warren, tell us first who are the I.dies up 

terrace ? I know who they are, of course, but I donutf

which is which.  That little girl is Miss Maud Chart

suppose ?" 

" The little girl in the pink frock is Miss Maud Char

said the bailiff, coming up, " and that small, dark lady, wi

fair liair and black dress, is her mamma. The tall, thiny

lady is Miss Diana Hautton, the gentleman beside her niS

Allan Fane, the short, red-faced, stout gentleman with 

whiskers is Sir Vane Charteris-and the tall, elderly gentl

with white hair is my lord himself. Now, you girls, i

want to get a seat, come along."

He led them, to his daughter's intense delight, to the

at which Francis Earlscourt presided. That gentleman's

lighted into a smile of pleased recognition at sight of 

smiles and blushes.

"Here, Warren, where are you going ? Miss Alice, ISK

been looking for you in vain the last half-hour." ("Tha

story to begin with," thought Polly.) "Here's a seat-I i

upon it-you shall sit here and help me do the honors." 

He made a place for her beside him, looking almost as

miringly at her companion. But there was no room for 

who declared she hadn't come to eat and drink, and w

hungry, and would wait. The bailiff left her; he had at

sand things to do, and Miss Mason, leaning against a i

chestnut-tree at some distance, regarded the people on0

terrace with longing, dreamy eyes. She did not know w--

pretty picture she made standing there, the slanting sunlig

her face and short golden hair, or that the group on the ter

saw her.

"' What a pretty girl! what a very striking face!" exclai

Mr. Allan Fane, the artist: "there under the chestnut,

Hautton, by herself. See, Lady Charteris, yonder. Likel~

of Greuzesblue-eyed, dimpled beauties."          .

Mr. Allan Fane should have known better, certainlly, ax

tomed to society as he was, than to praise one woman ii

presence of another, and that other Miss Diana Hautton. 

this was only a peasant-child-a pretty model, perhaps, ne

more.

Miss Diana Icoked rather disdainfully. She was a tall, 

thin, very high-bred young lady, with pale features, a

aristocratically aquiline nose-with quite a patrician hool

deed. She had three thousand a year in her own right-








<pb n="109"/>
rwAT MONTALIEN PRIORY.             10o

in England in her veins, but her hair was get

Çhe parting, and she was not-well, she was not as

had been ten years ago, when first presented by

, the Duchess of Clanronald. Ten years had

the Honorable Diana was Miss Hautton still,

; tions of Mr. Allan Fane had been decidedly

y and now he stood here, and his eyes lighted

s fire as he looked at a wretched little peasant-

er lighted while gazing on her.

her, Miss Hautton? Look at those delicate,

illed features--look at the noble poise of that

regal, by Jove ! look at the exquisite curve of that

oat-look at that taper foot, curved foot, like an

!: And such blue eyes ! I have seen their like

-etimes, and nowhere else. Gad! what a model

e would make ! "

seldom got excited; the artist sometimes suffered

carry him away. Miss Hautton raised her eye-

ht a glance of cruel scorn across at Polly.

dowdy, village-school girl, in a white frock, and

d like a boy's. I confess I never could see god-

urnt, red-cheeked dairy-maids."

tton dropped her glass, and walked over to her

'/Montalien. Lord Montalien, with a few more

nder his eyes-a little grayer, a little more bored

peope-otherwise unaltered since fourteen, years

stood on the deck of the " Land of Columbia,"

Robert Hawksley.

saw his mistake, and knew his duty was to follow

e the Honorable Diana. But the Hon. Diana

s his senior, and sallow of complexion, and ex-

temper, and in spite of her blue blood, and her

da year, apt to pall sometimes on the frivolous

'vbeauty-worshipping painter of four-and-twenty.

- the terrace there, Mr. Fane looked and admired,

with Polly on the spot.

I'aced suddenly on his own awoke him from his

dhand that made him start, and looking up he

rers.

t girl ? " she asked.

ars had done their work on Olivia, Lady Char.

k face Duke Mason had thought so beautiful inl

Iflight that March night so long ago, was worn








<pb n="110"/>
110           AT MONTALIEN PRIORY. 

and aged, as though she had suffered much in her thiN

years. She was fixedly pale, the large dark eyes looked 

unnaturally large in her small, colorless face, and the -

that came and went were rare and cold as starlight on

Her summer dress of black grenadine, with gold leaves, :

ened her pallor now..                           I

"< Lady Charteris looks like a person who has seen tro

people were accustomed to say of her, and then wondered

the trouble could be. She did not love her husband, tha

well enough known, but what of that? Wives who

love their husbands are not so rare, and as long as th

no open scandal, nor the Divorce Court called into requi

what does a little marital estrangement signify ?

Sir Vane and Lady Charteris, outwardly, were on the

litest and most amiable terms, the baronet particularly, w

all public occasions was almost remarkably civil and att

to his cold, silent, self-contained, handsome wife. 

Had Lady-Charteris forgotten ?-had all those years bl

out the memory of her childhood's romance-of the young

band she had loved and lost, of the child, his child, whom

had given to strangers?  Her proud, white face, her c

dark eyes kept their secret well; but the light in tA

dark eyes was the fixed light of settled sorrow. She hadi

leaning idly against a rose-wreathed pillar, her listless, mi

choly eyes, gazing without interest on the busy scene be

when Allan Fane's words sent her glance wandering to

chestnut-tree.  She saw a slender girl in white muslin,

profile turned toward her, and the sunshine gilding her f

and hei heart that had lain like a stone for so many-ye

gave one sudden leap.  That profile ! that attitude! w

had she seen them before?   She knew even as she 

the question, and turned faint and sick for an instant. :

next she started up', laid her hand on the young arts

and asked the question:                            !

" W7o is that girl?" 

The girl moved on the moment, and her face was tur

full toward them. The likeness that had struck on the hea

my lady like a blow vanished. The face she saw now bore

resemblance to that other face over which she believedi

waves of the Atlantic to have swept for sixteen dreary year

" Who is that girl ?" she repeated.

Mr. Fane looked rather surprised; it was something v

new for rmy lady to be much interested in anything. She








<pb n="111"/>
T MONTAF     IEZ A  PRA ORY.          II I

her lips were apart-her eyes fxe intently

h face that shone like a star under the chest-

-not know, would ascertain, if her ladyship felt

test in the matter. He was a languid young

Aicate pale face, and slender, white hands, whiter

deal than Polly's.

Du  don't know," Lady Charteris said, as if to

uire ? No, thanks; it is not worth while. It is a

if rettiness for a farmer's daughter-that is all."

anner returned-her interest in the girl seemed

so Mr. Fane's; he ran down the steps to inquire

ount.

et her to sit to me for my Rosamond," he

Hautton would do for Eleanor. It is a strik-

ty for a farmer's daughter, as her ladyship says.

achieftain did she derive that arched instep,

er might flow ? from what line of ' highly wed,

y bred' aristocrats did she inherit that Grecian

imperial poise of the graceful head? If she

a year, instead of the Hon. Diana, or half, or

-shall I go up and address her; she seems

wasn't aware whether or no it were necessary to

to this class of young persons; still he beckoned

A  over to him, and signified his gracious plea-

fellow, you're the bailiff, I believe, and know

cfourse. Who's that pretty girl over there ?

ewas a clever young man, who had made his

demy, and he spoke with a languid drawl of

sts so gracefully on strong young men, six feet

he third son of John Fane, Merchant Tailor,

don, who was a son of-well I suppose the

ust have had a grandfather in reality, but he

,to speak of.

l Diana Hautton wanted a husband, no doubt,

as good-looking, and elegant, beyond doubt,

n aware of this disgraceful fact, (of which we

e reader in confidence,) he would have been

iaout, within the hour. Diana Hautton, irst

, :ind a sister of a peer, narry the son of i








<pb n="112"/>
12           AT MONTALIEN PRIORY.          : 

merchant tailor ! Why, there were dead-and-gcne Hat

the great family Nault who would have turned with h

their graves at the desecration. He had taken his d

Oxford-society received him and made much of hihm

last winter's picture had been a success, and not ev

Earlscourt, his Damon just now, knew of the well-to-d

of Bond Street. 

Mr. Mathew Warren performed his part as master of

emonies, by saying with a grin:

"Polly Mason, here be Mr. Fane, a-wanting to be intr

to you." 

And Polly looked around with a bright.smile, and n

least in life abashed.

Abashed ! Wasn't Alice Warren, her friend, and Eliza]

her enemy, both looking at her! Wasn't Mr. Francisca

court talking to one, and Mr. Guy, the hero of the hour,

other. And one of these superior beings had taken the 

to come all the way down from the terrace to be introdu

her.

It was a lovely afternoon, Mr. Fane informed her, an

nice it was to see so many people enjoying themselv

heartily. And how was it Miss Mason had not dined, an

did she happen to be quite alone here ? 

Miss Mason responded with perfect self-possession ant

dor. She didn't come for dinner at half-past four in the-

noon. She had had hers at twelve, and she was alone

waiting until the dancing began, and some one asked her.

"Then you are disengaged! Miss Mason, will you-:

me with the first quadrille ?"

Honor him ! Honor him / Polly looked to see if he,

laughing at her, but Mr. Fane was quite in earnest. 

Miss Mason would be very much pleased to do so, thanki;

"But I shall not be satisfied with the first quadrille-

going to ask you to keep all the round dances for me

know you dance like a fairy, Miss Mason. I can always

Do you know we were wondering who you could be up 

terrace-vou look so different, so much superior, if you w

don my saying so, to the rest. Lady Charteris was quite

ested. She asked me if I knew who you were. If yoi

accept my arm, Miss Mason, we will take a turn unde

beeches; it is pleasanter than standing here in the sun.'!

Polly cast a bright, delighted glance up at the lady 

terrace who deigned to ask about her. And Lady Cla








<pb n="113"/>
C AT AMONTALIEN PRIORY.              13

Fe, and again the sharp pang of reserablance 

a this girl?  Could itbe-?  Her faceblanched

hy pallor, a sudden wild thought crossed her

itbe ? She would be about the age of this girl

sryo like-yet unlike the only man she had ever

eyes saw them as they paired off. Lord Mon- -

hs glass-Sir Vane Charteris glanced at Miss

covert sneer.

tty girl-eh, my lord? Fane's inflammable

tk fire again. We'll see no more of him for the

moon."

n's proud eyes flashed. She sauntered past

with a tired air and a suppressed yawn.

dit is ! Groups of peasants are very pretty in

, - la Watteau, but in real life-well I find it a

go to my room and finish my novel."

strains of the brass band reached Miss Haut-

ears as she sauntered up to her room, and her

was standing at the head of one of the quadrilles,

s countenance more animated than she had

e wasn't in love, of course; he was only tempo-

by a pretty face, but it was such a pretty face,

eyes flashed back the sunlight so joyously, and

irang out so clear and sweet, that something of

on of spirit seemed to infect him.

H danced! The Hon. Diana freighted with her

prience might have gone to school and learned

'Mons. Duclos understood his business, and the

orn and the girl's own. She tossed back her

ish curls, she danced, she talked, she laughed,

knowing it, and felt as though she stood on

t sward. What if Alice had Mr. Francis, and

either of them could dance or talk half as well

hiss was life, and she was in love with Mr.

efelt he was her destiny ! Next to a hero, a

Wallace, or a Lord Byron, her dream had been

long hair and melancholy eyes, and lo ! here

, paying her compliments, and asking her to

fair Rosamond.

Francis Earlscourt observed to his brother,

n the quadrille ended-the brothers left their

ed to meet-" have you noticed the fiercef

'i.- f  ;0i ;0 :   .








<pb n="114"/>
I 14          AT MONTAXLIEN PRIORY.

flirtation Fane's got up with that little girl with t

hair?" 

"What little girl?  Haven't noticed.  As Sir '

O'Brallaham observes, There's so much going on eveI

there's no knowing what's going on anywhere.' I hadt

girl myself, but she was tongue-tied, and lisped, aM

opened her lips except to say yeth thir, and no thir,;

through the whole dance."                     I

"'Fane's partner seems to have enough to say forb

Hear her laugh now. Her name's Polly Mason, po

but what's in a name. Still I don't believe we would

late Mr. Romeo Montague quite so much if the lady w

lowed the poison had been Polly Capulet." 

Guy Earlscourt looked lazily. The nonchalance aff

Mr. Fane was real enough in him, and honestly inherit

his father. His Italian mother had given him her S

eyes, her black silken curls, and the dusk Southern b

his olive face. If she had given him her Southern i

passion it all lay latent now, under the languid grac

creed and his order. At one-and-twenty this handso'

lent young guardsman fancied he had outlived every

human emotion, love, jealousy, ambition, and that li

nothing worth living for, save prime Latakia, good c

waltz with a pretty girl, and a well-made betting boo

ooked with his habitual lazy indifference at his friend,

friend's flirtee.

' Ah, yaas, she is pretty, deuced pretty, too pretty, by

for Fane to have things all his own way. I shall make:

troduce me presently, and go in, and cut him out." -'3

" It was not a very elegant sentiment in expression, :

fraternal to his Pythias, but Guy Earlscourt knew hims

able to do it.  He was the pet of London drawing

great ladies smiled on him for his fine eyes and his Re

face, so like some old Italian picture, and fair youn

tantes went dowr before him, during the season, like pa

in September before his fowling-piece. 

"All is fair in war," thought the young guardsman, qs

along with his eye on Polly, and not looking in the e

human being in pursuit of anything.            I

Mr. Fane left his partner on a rustic seat under a tr

went for an ice, and when he returned, five minutes at

stood GuyEarlscourt leaning over the back of the -;

Polly listening, and blushing, and smiling, with timid, 4X

eyes, and cheeks flushed like the June roses in her' sa








<pb n="115"/>
MOTLE  PRIORY.     I I

f  M:r. Earlscourt-Damon looked at Py

scowl.

brings you here ? You needn't trouble

ane," observed Guy, with the Brummel non

naturally on him; " your face says it quite

oesn't it, Miss Mason ? Miss Mascn arid

tought to be, which amounts to the same

cquainted with my portrait for the past ten

d really, my dear fellow, you can't expect

belle of the occasion in this preposterous

has promised me unlimited dances, and she

me in two minutes.

aas promised me unlimited dances, Mr. Earls-

;are much better broken than kept. Tra-

:iss Polly ! "

off, and the last thing Polly saw was the an.

-artist. 

obbed with rapture. This was excitement.

-gentlemen actually quarrelling about her al-

was very well, but Guy Earlscourt, the son

the hero of the day, was a great deal bet-

handsome he was, and how beautifully he

ed Eliza Long was looking, and dying ol

who had once called her a red-haired, for-

iDuke here, and Rosanna, and why hadn't she

e where Allan Fanes and Guy Earlscourts

ccurrences. If she had only been Miss Maud

a baronet's daughter, and some day, perhaps,

tdsman would fall in love with her, and-"'

ed all too Soon. And "I never regretted the

1 before," whispered Mr. Earlscourt, in her ear.

his arm, and brought her refreshments, and

eaten, up came Mr. Francis, requesting his

-thim, with his suave smile.

?Polly ! Mr. Francis demanded her hand for

'led her forth almost directly. Alice Wairen

Peter Jenkins, and Eliza Long wasn't dancing 

_Hne eyes were flashing with triumph and de.

burning deep red. With the golden rays of

p11n her she looked positively dazzling. Two

been a child in heart, but that child's heart








<pb n="116"/>
ii6           AT MONTALIEN PRIORY. 

seemed to have gone since those three men had held

gypsy hand, and looked in the frank, fearless eyes, an

that hot rose-tint to her cheeks. All the lissome,

grace that never returns to any girl after twenty, was 

might remain for years, but the little belle of this r

could never again be the happy, unconscious grown

of yesterday.

"She is a charming little enigma, Fane," Guy E

said to his friend; " she looks like a boy, she talks like

she has the grace and good-breeding of awoman of six

and she is but a handsome, well-grown child. She puz

and to be puzzled is the next step to being interested, ai

interested to falling in love. I object to falling in- 

principle, and I don't suppose the governor would wis

marry her if I did. I withdraw from the race there

Fane, and leave you-to a quiet walk-over." 

That day was a day to be marked forever in Polly's c

a day of perfect, unalloyed bliss. She danced again wi

Allan Fane when Mr. Francis Earlscourt was done wi

and she walked with him down the green, woodland pa

he quoted Byron and Moore, and other amatory poets,a

band played not earthly music, it seemed to her, but t

monyof Olympus. And Miss Long's green eyes were

than ever with envy, and Mr. Francis making himself gb

agreeable to his people, as became their future lord, t

time to devote to Alice. Once too, a little later, Ml

came back and asked her for another waltz. He didn'

about it himself, he rarely danced, it bored him; but 

asked her for it in the first zest of wishing to cut his 

friend out. The zest was past, still he would have this 

withher, and then go and talk to little Maud, and sm

cigar upon the terrace. Polly wished all Speckhavei

there to witness her triumph. If she had only kno

Lady Charteris was watching her from her post, that tri

would have been complete. But perfect bliss is not f

lower world. Polly did not know it, and presently th

went down in a red and golden glory, and the whole' 

aflush. Swinging her hat by its pink ribbons, she walk

and down the leafy aisles, and listened to Allan Fane'

dious voice, and promised to sit for the Rosamond. 

they talk about under those waving trees, with the ros

glorifying earth and sky, and the air full of music-? 

her of London, of that fair unknown world of her drea

'      ffH5








<pb n="117"/>
-:    A T MON',TA4LEN PRIORY.             I7

o the opera, of the. theatres, of poets who had

ry heart, of authors at whose feet she could

fallen and worshipped. He talked to her as he

;È it astonished even himself. But such a listener

at that moment might have inspired a far stu.

How pretty she was ! how pretty! how pretty!

marry the Honorable Diana, with her three thou-

ranm, her crows'-feet, her sallow skin, and her thirty.

B  The next moment he could have laughed at him-

flly-bewitched by two blue eyes and the face of a

asant child.

jien-lucky fellows with ten thousand a year, and a

ies old-might afford this sort of thing" (this sort

ig marriage with Miss Polly Mason), "but for

s son-bah ! I'm booked for the Hon. Diana, and

eicious little fairy to help while away a long sum-

~on."

y sunset faded, the white June moon rose up, and

me out.

s ame up once again, and asked her to lead off

nce with him.

i:v'as the young man from the grocer's, and the other

from the haberdasher's, now? Annihilated! They

-ventured to approach her that afternoon.

Ad  ;g sneered as she went by.

d in her happy triumph.

sitting out still, Liza ? " Miss Mason said superbly.

d it must be 1"

:. Francis heard, and laughed inwardly.

tss or my cousin Diana could not have stabbed

' "he thought. "What a thoroughbred little filly

io pretty as the other one, but a deuced sight clev-

:ler one" being Alice, whose plumpness, and dim-

ebe-like style suited him, and for himself he rather

men that were not clever.

Earlscourt detested dancing, as has been said, on

t .as so much physical labor for very little result.

: across country like a bird; he could follow the

ay, with the wind and sleet in his teeth; he was a

and long ago, at Eton, had been captain of the

wned as a cricketer. He was clever in spite of

sptoke three or four modem languages; had a

_   000f';f;0  0- ff:  Is      '       0       : 0








<pb n="118"/>
II8           AT MONTALIEW PRIORY. _         l

-hazy recollection of his classic studies; he was, :-

musician, an amateur artist, an amateur poet, playi

or three different instruments, painting in two or thre

styles, and distinguishing himself by his pretty comp

verses in ladies' albums. But all this sort of thing

and he struggled politely with yawns in the face vf hiA 

ner, and toiled weary up to the terrace when it waa

the-last extremity of-fatigue.-           V

The moon was shining now; the blue was aglitter

and the evening wind swept up from the sea, but L

teris still stood at her post, still watching with yearni

eyes that slim, white figure that now flitted before

vanished in the hazy distance. The thought had cros

it miight be the child whom fourteen years ago sheb 

away; it might-there was no- reason why it shoul

She hardlyknew whether she hoped or feared most. I 1

lost child, who could this girl of sixteen, who looked

and yet so unlike Robert Lisle? She was pacing up 

the long stone terrace, looking white as a spirit in th

light. A number of visitors-their country neighbors

rived, and Lord Montalien and her husband and Miss

were entertaining them. Her little daughter racedc

down with a curly King Charles at her heels. She w

alone, full of deep and painful anxiety, when she sa

Earlscourt lounging lazily up the stairs. She stopp

walk; he was a favorite of hers, as he was with all wo

"Awful hard work, Lady Charteris," he said, so

"worse than a day's run after the fastest pack in the-00

I've danced three sets of quadrilles, two waltzes, and 

tillon, and I give you my Word, I'm fit to drop. Look:

der light-hearted peasantry disporting themselves. Ega

energy with which they go in for it is fatiguing oily to-:

I never realized before how thankful we should be 

majority comes only once in a lifetime." 

He flung himself into an arm-chair, and produced h-

case, the picture of an utterly exhausted young man.:;--

"You will permit me, Lady Charteris?-ah, thank

hours in the saddle on a rainy day, when the House n

bad enough, but I prefer it to three hours' consecutivea

on the grass tinder a June sun, and with such energetic

ladies as those down there. Where's Di?"     -

"She has gone in. Guy!"

Lady Charter s spoke abruptly.








<pb n="119"/>
AT MONTALZ7N PRIORY,                    II

lady ,y."

tiat pretty girl in white I saw you dancing with

ago? Ah! there she is now, with Frank--fair

essed in white."

d is lazy brown eyes in the direction indicated.

i y',"he answered; "and Polly's as jolly as she's

lis saying a good deal. That young person in

w she laughs !-it does one good to look at her !

ly Mason, my Lady Charteris."

- One slender white hand of the lady rested on

oulder. He felt it close there now with sudden,

re. "Mason I" 

e before her at the sound of the commonplace

ion of a dreary railway waiting-room, a shivering

n  before the fire, and a pale-faced young man

sname and address, "3Marmaduke Mason, 50 Hfaf-

."  She grew so white, so rigid, that Guy half

cigar, and looked at her in surprise.

LaHdy Charteris, you are ill! Has the smell of my

e interipted suddenly, "will you give me your

- lik:le to go down there-to-"  Her voice died

I guardsman gave one regretful sigh as he flung

and newly-lighted cigar away, and arose. Some

ffor the martyr's cross and palm, and he was one

ven Lady Charteris, usually the most silent and

_tures, herself, was suddenly going in for excite-

was singled out to be the victim of her caprice.

his arm, with one gentle glance of reproachful sur-

hrown aaway upon her, as it chanced, and led her

-  million, it seemed-colored lamps flickered

es, the band still played, lads and lasses still

t antastic, and Gaffers and Goodies sat on rus-

a  0d contentedly watched the fun. They would

great domed entrance hall presently, where a

ated them, and at ten o'clock this goodly

retire, with three cheers, and "many happy re.

God: bless him !" 

gabe Polly Mason was dancing again, this time

aneighboring squire, who had seen her a score

ad never noticed her until to-night. Shewas








<pb n="120"/>
120           AT MONTALIEN PRIORY. 

whifling around in a polka as lightly as though she trod"

and it had been her first dance instead of her twenty-first,

looked at her in undisguised admiration.  . 

"I wouldn't have believed it," he murmured, gently,

hadn't seen it with my own eyes, that any human c:

could possess the staying-power of that girl! And the

wum.an the weaker sex!"                       -

At that juncture a man approached from the opposte

tion, and stood among some outsiders until the polkal 

be concluded. Lady Charteris and her escort were dr

near, but neither noticed this new-comer until Miss Mas

self chanced to espy him. 

" Duke," she cried, "you haven't come for me so 

Please, Mr. Basset, I must speak to my Cousin Duke."i

Mr. Basset released her, and Polly, all aglow, her blue

t;hining like azure stars, her lips laughing and apart, :

back her short curls, ran up to him.

"You haven't come for me so soon, have you, Duke

can't go-it's too soon. I'll stay until it's all over. 

Duke 1" lowering her voice, and her face beaming, "it

been a heavenly afternoon !"                   V

"I'm past my time at the theatre, Polly," Duke said; -:

I only called to tell you that as this gathering breaks up t

three hours earlier than you thought, you had better go ]

in Warren's tax-cart, with Alice. He'll drive you dog

can't come for you as early as ten, you know."

Polly looked down demurely, conscious smiles curlii

pretty lips, and a curious light in her eyes.

"Very well, Duke; I'll get home all safe. What a pit

can't stay and enjoy the fun, too !"           !ai

"I don't care for the fun. I'm glad you're enjoying

self. Good-night, little Polly!"

There was a touch of sadness in Duke's tone. It was d

ing on him dimly that the day was near when Polly wou

his pet and plaything no more, but a woman. He was tu

away, when suddenly his eye fell upoA a face that rooted

to the spot-that seemed to stop the very beating of his l

It was only a lady-a pale, black-robed lady, leaning o

ai n of Mr. Guy Earlscourt-a lady who looked at him:

dark, solemn eyes, and a face that seemed carved in ivoryie

Their eyes met, and Lady Charteris knew at last that

child-Robert Lisle's child-the baby daughter, whom

teen years ago she had resigned, stood yonder, fresh and b

tifulf in the moonlight, among Lord Montalien's dependai

t  ' 








<pb n="121"/>
ALw     N  T     IN LZ WDITH GRANGE."      121

:&clock, precisely, the merry assembly broke ul, and

with ringing cheers for my lord's younger son, to

le homes. And Polly was driven home in the tax

lOire, by Mathew Warren ! Was she, indeed ? Alice

the tax-cart, dutifully, if you like, and Eliza Long was

e by the young man from the haberdasher's; but

e, forgetful of the Hon. Diana, her three thousand a

_gentlefolks making merry in the long drawing-rooms

i of all the hopes and ambitions of his life, walked

r(ough the blue, moonlit night with Polly Mason !

CHAPTER III.

"ALL NIGHT IN LYNDITH GRANGE."

HE nine o'clock sunshine streaming in Polly's window,

awoke her next morning. Polly, as a rule, was in-

1dined to be lazy o' mornings, but brisk Rosanna'

= rrouted her out without mercy at six. To-day, she

Bsleep. The child hadn't got home until half-past eleven

.miles, you know, on' a lovely moonlight night, with a

Fe young man beside you, is a long walk. Rosanna

&thing of the handsome young man, she knew nothing

rs during which little Polly tossed on her bed, and

not sleep. Sleep! The red, the yellow, ,the purple

flashed before her, the band music clashed in her ears,

he_ faces: of Allan Fane and Guy Earlscourt swam in

n mist. Her breast was full of delicious unrest; he was

to-morrow, and all the to-morrows, and this was bliss,

as blove. Poor little Polly!

lbs glad tumult faded away in sleep-she awyoke with a

w iguilty start to see the new day's sunshine. She felt

nd worn, and suddenly grown old. Yesterday she had

tlitle girl running wild about the streets of Speckhaven,

he clothes, and tormenting Rosanna. She felt as if all

over, as if a gulf lay between the Polly of yesterday

Miss Mason of to-day. Yes, she was " Miss Mason;"'

e^Md called her so; she was a grown-uip young woman1








<pb n="122"/>
122     "ALL NIGHT IN LYNDITH GRANGE."'        :

whom gentlemen asked to dance, and nearly quarrelledl

She got up slowly and dressed herself. How ugly her 

washed, well-mended blue and white gingham looked; 

like a boy's was her Holland blouse, belted round her i

waist by a leather strap ! Why couldn't she wear pink silk

Miss Maud Charteris, and bind back her auburn locks 

rosy ribbons ? Her face looked thinner and paler than eve

the gaiish morning sun-she hadn't a trace of good l

about her. She was what Eliza Long had called her, "a r

haired tomboy," and nothing more. Why-oh, why ! had 

had her hair cropped? Would Clive Newcome ever h

worshipped Ethel, and Romeo ever have died for Julie

those young ladies had had their hair clipped close to t

craniums? The reaction had come, and Polly was miserat

Probably she would feel better after her breakfast; she said 

prayers somehow, and went down. Duke was at work in

painting-room, Rosanna was at work just outside the b

door, up to her elbows in suds. Polly's toast and tea awai

her, and, in spite of her unhappiness about her looks, and N

degraded state generally, she ate three large slices, and dr

two cups of tea. Then she got her sun-hat, and her draw

materials, and prepared to make a morning of it, as she oft

did under the greenwood tree or down by the shore-sket

ing from nature. Rosanna looked up from her suds and ij

terrupted.                                   _

It was wash-day. Would Polly just take off that hat, ai

put down that trumpery, and stay at home, and prepare t

hash for dinner? Hash! Polly loathed the name of has

she abhorred the thought of wsh-day ! In that world whe

they lived, that bright and beautiful world, of exquisite dishes

silver covers, of perpetual snowy linen, there were no su

words as hash and wash-day. With a sick, spiritless feelin

she prepared to obey, and then Rosanna taking a second lo

at her saw. her heavy eyes, pale cheeks, and languid moy

ments, and grew alarmed.                          -

"There's what comes of gadding, and dancing, and stayi

out till midnight.  Look at that child's face !" This to t

elements, for there was no one except the cat to look. 

" Put on your hat again this minute, and go out, and try

the fresh air will blow a little life into your dead eyes and p

cheeks."

" Yes, Rosanna," Polly said, with. very unwonted meeknei

.nd went. She did not go far, however. She perched hers

D Aii








<pb n="123"/>
" ALL NIGHT IN L YNDITH GRANGE"            123

den wall, and went wandering off into a dreamy

B : The faces of yesterday shone before her in the sun.

e darkling splendid face of Guy Earlscourt, with its

brilliant eyes, and lazy, beautiful smile.' The face of

ane, fair, womanish, perhaps, but eminently good-look

what Polly prized more, aristocratic. Tall, haughty

atton, dark, pensive Lady Charteris, little Miss Maud,

t rose-silk and streaming ribbons. Such high-bred

1i such lofty, high-sounding names. And she was Polly

B  Polly Mason, hopelessly vulgar, and common.

pose I was christened Mary," the young lady thought,

ns io great things, but it's better than Polly."

fthen mechanically she fell to drawing. The face that

-her most was the face her pencil drew almost without

hoer own. The pencil sketch was careless and crude,

_and full of power; so absorbed did she become over

rthat she never heard approaching footsteps, and a

her elbow suddenly made her jump.

ery good likeness, Miss Mason, but don't you think

e flattered a little-just a little-our friend Guy ?"

.Fane !" Polly jumped from her perch, with a gasp, and

heide away her drawing, in overwhelming confusion.

ud he think of her ? What could he think but that

had the audacity to fall in love with this splendid young

n, who had asked her for unlimited dances, and then

tzed with her twice ? But Mr. Fane set her at her ease,

feel a twinge of jealousy-the sparkling face had pur.

in dreams all night-it was such a rare face-such a

fIace. Pretty faces there were by the score, but only

Mason.

promised to show me the seaside cave, where you and

lice Warren used to play Robinson Crusoe and Man

sihe said, "and I have come to claim your promise.

ery afternoon, Miss Polly, I mean to drive you up to

ry, and hlave our first sitting for the fair Rosamond.

tton has been also kind enough to pose for my

eanor."

k Queen Eleanor must have looked like that," an.

1y, remembering thl haughty glances Miss Hautton

upon her humble self yesterday. "She seems as

could give a rival that pleasant choice between the

w and the dagger any day. No, thank you, Mr

i:'t take your arm; people don't do that in Speck

s--" she stopped and blushed.








<pb n="124"/>
124     "ALL NIGHT IN L YNDITH GRANGE."          .R

" Unless what, Miss Mason ? Unless they are engaged

that what you mean ? I see it is. Ah !" with a telling g

under Polly's old sun-hat. "That, Miss Mason, would 

much happiness."

He really thought so at the moment. When this yl

gentleman was fascinated by a pretty girl he generally hu

down his prey with something of an Indian trapper's inu:te

And the artist must admire those cloudless blue eyes,;

angelic mouth, those serene lines of future beauty, let the

cling to Miss Hautton's money-bags ever so closely.

Miss Long saw them from her window, and sneered, an

bitterly envious, and more full of hatred toward that "for

minx" than ever. They went down to the sea-shore, Wh

the long blue waves washed up on the sands, and the sun

sparkled until it looked like a sea of gold and fire, where 

fishing-boats glided and the fishermen on the hot sands sung,

they mended their nets. What does Byron say of youth

beauty, and the sea; a dangerous combination truly, and 

was romantic and he was an artist:

" How close to the stars we seemed

That night on the sands by the sea!"

"If I could only paint all this-that sea of gold, that sky

fire and azure, those swarthy toilers of the deep, and 

Polly, and immortalize myself, and-and lay my laurel cro

at your feet."

It was the first time he had called her Polly, and even 

was going tolerably fast. Her cheeks were red enough now

suit Rosanna, could. she have seen them. And Mr. Al

Fane pulled himself up with a gasp, feeling he was sinking in

bottomless quagmires and quicksands of untold danger.  :

"Good Heaven !" he thought, "what am I saying to t-

child ? I shall be telling her I am in love with her next. m

might have known how it would be," Mr. Fane conclu

rather dejectedly, -"when I got her to bring me to this co.

founded place. The seashore, a fine day or a moonlight ni

and a pretty girl, always did play the dickens with me, and

dare say, always will."

Mr. Fane, seeing his danger, and wise from past sad ex

enm e, shied off this dangerous ground, and betook himself

pleasant generalities. He was a good talker, as talking goe

general society, au fait of the last new opera, novel, act








<pb n="125"/>
'- "ALL NIGHT IN LYNDITH        GRANGE."        125

est Paris fashion; and all those topics were deliciously

dnew to Polly.

Us this love at first sight, Polly wondered; and straightway

ose before her a bridal vision-Mr. Allan Fane, looking

ly patrician, and she in floating white, with a point.

il and orange blossoms, and the Speckhaven church

/ed with eager, envious lookers-on; and after that a rose-

d life of perpetual Paris winters and London seasons, and

onnets, and jewelry, and the opera, and balls-Speck

:atnd wash-days only a hideous memory of the past.

went into the sea-side cave together, and the artist

sketch of it and the girl, with the wide sea before her,

e sunlight on her sweet, fair face. And then Miss Mason

I0r > him, that he might hear the echo ring along the rocky

-and Allan Fane wondered more and more. Such a

rare, sweet, and powerful. She did not sing "The

efore Larry was stretched;" she sang the song young

Durward listened to in rapture, so many years ago, in

nt old French town, and her thoughts left Allan Fane,

if olive face shone before her, lit by two brown eyes-the

Lord Montalien's favorite son.

"    "Ah! County Guy the hour is nigh,

X/Bg .|-I.'  :The sun has left the lea,

The orange flower perfumes the bower,

Ad.+C: * 0'  :The breeze is on the sea.

bill}. ':  : The lark, whose lay has trilled all day,

:-=*S~ ::.  Sits hushed, his partner nigh,

/- B ;?: ,5    Breeze, bird, and flower confess the hour,

But where is County Guy?

Ax -- ^^^  V  " The village maid steals through the shade

Her lover's suit to hear. 

To beauty shy, by lattice high,

Sings high-born cavalier.

The star of love, all stars above,

li 0 X:V :S  ~ Now reigns o'er earth and sky,

/H  !  X:-  And high and low his influence know,

But where is County Guy?"

ere!" answered a voice, as the last note died away: "if

n me/"     And to the immense confusion of Polly, and

oncealed annoyance of Allan Fane, Guy Earlscourt

i round the rocky entrance into the grotto.

sMason, your voice is superb-equal to Lind's, with

-  'Pon my honor, I thought it might be Circe or Calypso,

- wlatyou-call-ems, sirens, you know, of the AEgean Sea,

a concert by mistake on the Lincolnshire coast."

W ^  0D;            ':             








<pb n="126"/>
126     "ALL NIIHT TN L YNDITH GRANGE ." 

"What the-what brought you here, Earlscourt ?" dera

ed the artist, with no very friendly accent.

Guy looked at himt lazily from under his thick, black la

"In the character of 'Paul Pry,' for this odcasion - 

Well, my dear boy, don't pour the vials of your wrath on m.

a am Beauty's messenger. In other words, you promised:

drive Lady Charteris and cousin Di over to Heatherho

after luncheon, and as Di really seems anxious to go, I ca

.r search of you. Had I known-  " with a glance at Po

but Mr. Fane cut in rather abruptly:

"I asked Miss Mason to bring me here, that I might sk

this grotto. Shall we return, Miss Mason, or-"    '

"Oh, yes, please," Polly answered, shrinking away,

hardly knew why, under the gaze of the brown eyes she thou

the most beautiful on earth. " They will wonder where I ha

gone to at home." 

Mr. Fane'looked at Mr. Earlscourt, as if saying, " You he

You're not wanted. Be kind enough to go." And the yoi

guardsman answered the glance, and walking after Polly, beg

asking her questions about the town and the sands, as tho

the topography of Speckhaven were the vital interest of his l

Polly Mason walked back through the noonday brightr

with two gallants, instead of one, and flashed a look upon Eli

Long, as she passed her window, that made that young lag

grind her teeth for very envy.

" Montalien's been as dull as death this morning," Guy w

saying, plaintively. " Di's been sulky, Lady Charteris a pre

to green and yellow melancholy, Frank not to be found (

didn't look in the bailiff's cottage), and little Maud the oii

human creature in the place to speak to. I think, consideri

the emergency of the case, and the danger I was in of falling

prey to the blue devils, you needn't look so ferocious, Fane, a

my seeking you out in my dire necessity; need-he, Mil

Mason ?" 

Polly did not feel as if the interruption were by any mea

an unwelcome one.

Both gentlemen were delightful, no doubt, but Mr. Gu0

Earlscourt decidedly the more delightful of the two.  S

walked home in a happy trance, and it was all too soon whei

the little garden gate came in sight. Rosanra was hanging 

linen on the gooseberry bushes, and Duke could be'seen, 

his shirt sleeves rolled up above the elbows, painting in his -

bare, front room. 








<pb n="127"/>
::  ALL NIGHT IN LYNDITH GRANGE."            12      -

two young gentlemen said good-by to Polly, and left

r Fane made no further allusion to the sitting for his

osamond that afternoon. Queen Eleanor wished him to

er to Heatherholme, eight miles off, and of course she

e precedence in all things.

was almost one, and dinner was over in the cottage

Polly went in. Her portion of the hash stood covered

in the oven, and she sat down to partake of that refresh

Twith an appetite four hours' old, and sharpened by the

-nd. One may be in love, but one must eat; still she took

pick out the onions-never again would she eat vulgar,

ionions: that degradation at least it was in her power to

o is that young swell in the chimney-pot hat and dandy

' Duke asked, when Polly paid her afternoon visit to

ting-room. "I don't mean Guy Earlscourt, you un-

e other was Mr. Allan Fane," Polly responded, looking

the window. "He's an artist, Duke, and wants me to

Am for Fair Rosamond."

an Fane! Allan Fane!" Duke repeated, stroking the

yellow stubble-on his chin. "I've heard that name

Wand I have seen that face somewhere. It's a face I

ike, Duchess; it's a weak, womanish face, a false face,

greatly mistaken."      *

y looked at him reproachfully.

ats not like you, Duke," she said; "you don't often

i-ilof the absent, and of a stranger, too, whom you don't

Mr. Fane was very, very kind to me yesterday, and-

1e came home with me last night. I didn't ride (don't

-Duke), I didn't ride in the tax-cart. He didn't let me

single dance, and he left the ladies at the Priory to

e, and of course I feel grateful, and all that."

k looked after her as she walked out of the room, with a

ht in his eyes, the yearning light you see sometimes

eyes of a dog. Polly had been under his shelter for

-nyears-was the day at hand when all his love could

er from danger no longer ?

-l went through her usual afternoon's work of helping

a "redd up," in a state of dreamy happiness; little

s 0bubbling to her lips, smiles and dimples chasing

r over her face. She was always happy,. but somehow

$ltzevr shone so brightly nor had life ever seemed sa








<pb n="128"/>
18      "ALL NIGHT IN L YNDIT      GRANGE." 

sweet as to-day. Rosanna looked at her, and congrat

herself that she had made her go out that morning. 

presently when tea was over, she took her hat and went t

gate to watch the new moon rise-and wish--what did

Polly wish? It was very quiet. The new moon shining i

opal sky, a nightingale singing yonder in Montalien woodsr

soft flutter of the evening wind, sweet from the sea; the

odor of Rosanna's roses and geraniums in the open wind

that was the scene. And fairer than all, as Mr. Allan '

would have told her, had he been there to see the tall,

girl, with the sweet, happy face, and dreamy eyes of blue, s

singing "The Young May Moon."                    ;

As she stood there a group of four came up the road 

the town. Polly's dreamy eyes turned from that silver si

in the purple sky, and brightened into a light not so plea

to see as she beheld her arch enemy, Eliza Long. Miss L

was gallanted by the haberdasher's clerk, and behind ca

Alice Warren and her "young man," Peter Jenkins, of,

Mill.

" Here she is herself! " exclaimed Miss Long, with malic

vivacity; " I've just been telling Samuel of the grand conque

you've made. How are all your friends at the Priory, Pol

dear ?

"'All my friends at the Priory were quite well when I 

them last, Eliza," responded Miss Mason, promptly. "I'll 

them you inquired the next time I see them; they'll feel

tered, particularly Mr. Guy, who danced with you-on

wasn't it, Eliza ? and forgpt to come back."

"I didn't encourage him as much as some people might

retorted Miss Long.  "I don't believe in gentlemen boi

dangling after country-girls. I should be afraid of what peo

might say of me," concluded Miss Long, with a virtuous t

of her head.

"Then you needn't, Eliza, nobody will ever talk of you

that way, I'm quite sure. Gentlemen have such bad taste."' ~

"Yes," said Eliza, with a hysterical little giggle, "I thog

so myself when I saw two of them go by with you. I wond

Rosanna isn't afraid." 

"Afraid of what, Eliza? I'll thank you to speak ouWt

Polly's eyes were flashing now, as only blue eyes flash. 

< We all know Polly isn't afraid of anything," cried the youn

man from the haberdasher's, who was mortally jealous. "

wouldn't go three miles out of her way, as Jenkins did la1

week, rather than pass the haunted Grange."

:                : IS t;:5-;~~~~~'








<pb n="129"/>
' ' "'ALL NIGHT IN LYNDITI      GRANGE."      129

'" answered Polly, disdainfully, " I would not."

hat's easy to say," Miss Long said, with a second toss,

iot so easy to prove. Polly's as much of a coward as the

if us, I dare say, if the truth were known."

not a coward, and I'll thank you not to say so, Eliza.

ot afraid of you, or what people may say, nor of ghosts

if it comes to that."

ve it," cried the taunting Eliza, "prove it, if you dare,

:Mason."

s Eliza long understood her antagonist well. To dare

to do anything-however mad, however foolhardy was to

its being done. Had she not risked her life, only last

one stormy day, when dared to go out in a boat to the

side of Speckhaven Bay ? And now into Polly's eyes

l  the light that had shone in them then, and her hands

Aed together. She looked her adversary straight in the face.

ou dare me to what, Eliza ?"

oH pass a night alone in the Grange. You are not afraid

B st I Prove it, if you dare ?"

, Eliza, hush !" cried Alice Warren.

u hush, Alice!" Polly said very quietly. She was al-

quiet when most dangerous. "Iwill do it/ I am not

of ghosts, but if I were as sure as that I am standing

I should see the ghosts of the knight, and the lady, I

Addgo.  I will do it this very night, Eliza Long; will that

ayou !"

o,no, Polly," Alice cried again; and, "oh, by George,

u know," exclaimed the young man from the haber.

r's in consternation, while stolid Peter Jenkins stared

i :" Duke wouldn't let you, you know."

1sh  do it! " Polly said, folding her arms, and looking

rs and carving-knives at her enemy.

tes, said Miss Long, "and Duke need never know.

al going to a dance at Bridges'; that's only two miles

e Grange, and I'll tell Duke and Rosanna you're coming

s;.    r We will 'o with you to the Grange and leave you

and call for you again when the dance breaks up, at two

in the morning. That is, of course, if you really mean

:you know. I wouldn't, if I were you, if I felt the least

.word, the tone, the insolent sneer, stung Polly, as she

ishould. She opened the gate, and came out so sud

d with such a wicked expression that Eliza recoiled.

6',fC..f0i








<pb n="130"/>
130     "ALL AIGHT IN LYNDITH CRANGE."

' I'm not afraid, and I'll thank you not to use the wo

again. You're a coward, Eliza Long, and you know it, and y

hope something evil may befall me, and you would have givg

a year of your life to stand in my shoes this morning! Bah

don't think I don't understand you, but I'll go all the same." !i

Eliza laughed, while she grew white with anger. She did no

know she was a murderess in heart, but she did hope the ghos

of the Grange might whisk this insolent Polly Mason oftf to t

regions of the Styx, although Miss Long had never heard o

that gloomy river. She ran up to the house without a word

and came back in five minutes to say Polly might go to Mrs|

Bridges' dance.

" Don't do it Polly," Alice Warren pleaded in mortal dread

"you dount irnow what may happen. It's an awful place, an

I should feel as if we had murdered you, if-" 

Polly stooped and kissed her.

"You poor, little, frightened Alice! I don't believe in

ghosts, I tell you, and I shall go to sleep as comfortably in the

Grange as ever I did in my life. Don't let us talk about it.

Eliza Long shall never call me a coward."

It was quite useless talking to Polly when Polly's mind was

made up, whether for good or evil. 

Her blood was up now, and she was equal to anything. Her

eyes were like stars, her cheeks like rose-berries. As they

walked along in the misty moonlight, her laugh rang out clear

and sweet, her merry voice made people smile and look after

her as she went by.

Eliza could have stabbed her, so intense was her hate, he:

envy.  Never mind! let her pass a night in the Grange!-

People who had tried it, legends ran, had been found stark mad

next morning. No one would ever blame her; she had asked

Polly not to go. 

They passed Bridges': the town with its noise and its lamps

lay behind them; the lonely, open road that led to the Grange

lay white and deserted before them. They passed. the cross-¢

roads, where fourten years before Duke Mason had lost his

way.  A little more than a mile, and they would be at the.

Grange. Still Polly rattled on; a stranger might have said, to 

keep u) her courage, but in reality the girl was not afraid. 

Hers was a nature singularly free from superstition or fear of 

any kind. She was not afraid, every nerve quickened with ex.

citenment; she longed to show this vindictive rival of hers hri 

superior she was to her taunts.

.  i:.








<pb n="131"/>
ALL NIGIHT IN L YNDITH GRANGE "              131

_ reat gates, the grim wall, loomed up before them at last,

e suddenl) flung both arms about her frier.d.

; ghall not go, Polly-you shall not! What will every.

_ and who knows what may happen? Peter, don't let

speak to her "

i  ishe likes, for me," said Peter, boorishly.

I wouldn't go if I felt the least af-"

itl     fhe word, .Polly turned upon her so swiftly

0she said.  Alice, dear, hold your

- no human things there,

f you : need come

i esti clinging to

a in Eliza's greenish

/_-~ '?|^^teue inc dead silence    the unearthly

l    t ?Fthe place awed them. Polly spoke, as

[_H'l~Uiew, and her voice sounded unearthly.

rgoingo to .get in ? There's a window Iknow of

iionly raise it for me, Sam."

he very window, near the elm-tree, in which Duke

- and. stared that memorable night. The ivy made an

iaider- for Mr. Samuel, who in some trepidation moved

shicokl the casement. Wind and weather had 'done their

e window went crashing into tt room.

Miss Mason turned and faced Miss Long with the look of

iuellist waiting to fire.

'4 Will that room do, Eliza, or is there any apartment in the

use more especially haunted than another?  I should like

g please you, and it is all the same to me."

' Oh, don't ask me," said Eliza, shivering slightly as she

poke; don't say I want you to go; I don't. I think you had

inuch better turn back."

Polly laughed bitterly.

"I understand you, Eliza ! If anything happens, you must

E-prove your innocence.  Good-night, all; don't fret, Alice,

bort.t me."

g:. She seized the ivy, and with one light leap was inside the

room. Her dauntless smiling face looked down upon them

fora the window.

~ .?- , 








<pb n="132"/>
132     "ALL NIGHT IN LYNDITH GRANGE." 

' Co !" she said; "good-night."                  I

"Come," said Eliza, with another shudder; and "ol, Foll

Polly, come back!" came faintly from Alice.  She felt 

though she were leaving her friend to be murdered in cod

blood.

But the others drew her with them, and Polly was alone"I

the house where, sixteen years ago, she was born.  '

She stood by the window until the last echo of their f

steps, the heavy clang of the gates, told her they were goi

A great awe stole over her-not fear-the solemn stillne

of the night-the white spectral light of the moon-the mov

ing of the wind among the trees.

It was like living down among the dead. She turned ani

,glanced about the room. The little old piano stood in i

corner, the easy chair in its place before the black -hearthstone

a spindle-legged table, the faded tapestry, the bare oak flQor

Through the corridors the wind wailed, overhead the rats scam

pered. The girl shuddered for the first time as she listened t

them. It was so deadly still that she heard the clocks of th

town toll nine. Nine ! and she must.wait until two or thret

before they would return. If she could only sleep and dre

those long, lonesome hours away. She would try. She lne

down, her face in her hands, and said her prayers a little morI

devoutly than usual, and then cuddled herself up in the arn

chair.

Who had sat in this old chair last, she wondered ? She shut

her eyes, wrapped her summer shawl closer about her, and

tried not to think of to cavalier and the mad lady, not to hear

the wind or the rats. She tried to think of yesterday's delights/

of to-morrow's bliss, when she would go to Montalien Pri

ory, and sit for her picture. She was in love with Mr, Fane

-no, with Mr. Guy Earlscourt-she didn't know whichlv

Presently the white lids went down on the -purple lustre be-

neath, and the blessed sleep of healthful youth came to Polly. 

She slept for hours. The moonlight flickered in a ghostly

way enough across the floor, unseen; the rats scampered lik1

an army of spirits overhead. 

Was it in her dream that she heard the gates clang again

and the footsteps of her late companions drawing near the,

house ? Was it'in a dream that she heard footsteps that wer

not the footsteps of the rats overhead ?

She sat up all at once, with a start, broad awake. rhi

moon had gone under a cloud, and the room was in darknes

:^ AS-








<pb n="133"/>
FACE TO FACE.             "     33

bt was that? Surely, footsteps-human footstc ps- along

hal outside, and approaching the door.

s, the handle turned, the door creaked and opened !

h girl rose and stood up by no volition of her own, and

ed staring straight at the opening door. Her heart had

d to beat-she was icy cold all over. Was this fear?

had consciousness enough left to wonder.  The door

wide-there was what seemed to Polly a blaze of su-

tral light, and in that glow she saw the form of a woman

g, and coming straight toward her.

CHAPTER IV.

FACE TO FACE.

AD   Olivia, Lady Charteris, really grown utterly

heartless? Had she entirely forgotten the child she

had deserted fourteen years before? Was she a liv-

ing woman with a heart of stone? There were peo-,

R   who said so, people who said her nature was as cold and

Fess as her pale, unsmiling face, people who said she

neither husband nor child. Perhaps those people were

ir that last surmise. Her estrangement from Sir Vane

tes the whole world was welcome to know, so far as

tas concerned. They dwelt under the same roof, they

outwardly civil to each other, the husband indeed more

iil) assiduously polite and deferential to his statue of a,

i but for all that they were to all intents and purposes as

sundered as the poles. It had been so since the birth

WedIe Maud-no one.knew the cause. They met by chance

the stairs, or in the passages, (the only places they ever

;lone,) and the lady swept by with head erect and lashes

drooping, shrinking back lest he should touch the

+&f her garments. When he addressed her at the dinner-

her answers were always monosyllabic, and she never

d at him. It was a curious study to watch them--she

as lifeless to him as the Diana of the Louvre, whom

said she resebled; he with the red glow of sup.

,- 9 \ t  o 








<pb n="134"/>
1,34     *   :'    FACE TO FACE. 

pressed ftry and mortification rising in the sullen depths of

black eyes. 

Whose fault was it? Well, as is generally the case, the

came in for the heaviest share of the blame. She was an i

cle, not a woman. 'She was a marble statue, not a wife. 

Vane-was he not always bland, always sociable, always denb

znaire, the most delightful of men?  But opinions differe

Those delightfully social and brilliant men, in public, are some

times intensely selfish and cruel husbands, in private; an

there was a gleam in Sir Vane's black eyes-an expressio

about his heavily-cut mouth-that made some fastidious 

tures shrink away with repulsion, only to look at.    I

Once, and once only, Lady Charteris had spoken of the es-

trangement to Lord Montalien, whom' she esteemed most of a

men she knew, when he had striven (very faintly) to brin

about a reconciliation. 

"Sir Vane Charteris has insulted me, my lord," Lady Chars

teris said. "Women of my race have given back death bet

fore now for less insulting words. If I were on my death-bed

and he knelt before me, I would not forgive him." 

And the dark eyes had dilated, and filled with so terrible &

light, and over the pale face came a glow so deep, so burning:

that Lord Montalien knew she meant it. He bowed his head

and said no more, and from that hour never tried the r6le of'

peacemaker again.

'or little Maud, she was her father in miniature-the same

black eyes and hair, the same features, the same nature. Sh

was his idol. She had not a look of her mother, and he exulted

in it. She was all his own. Could Olivia Charteris, hating the

father, love the child?  And the little girl, clinging to hern

father, never seemed to have any special love left for her

mother. It was an odd, abnormal state df things altogether, 

and you see people were more than half right in calling Lady

Charteris a cold, unloving wife and mother.

But the child of her love, of Robert Lisle-that was quite

another matter. Her very love for that child had made her give 

it away to strangers, out of the clutches of her uncle and husbandr 

Had fourteen years steeled her heart there, as well ? Duke 

Mason, standing before her in the twilight of the fete day at- 

Montalien Priory, knew better.  Such passionate, yearning.

love as the eyes fixed on the fair young girl in white expressed,

he had never seen in all his life before, except once-once, it

an upper chamber of a house in Park Lane, where a mothewt

wept over the child she was resigning, perhaps forever.








<pb n="135"/>
FACE TO FACE.                   1

ty stood face to face, there under the green trees of the

land knew each other. Thus they met again. Duke

cold all over as he stood there. The hour dreaded un-

ly had come. The mother had found her child. He,

- spoke to him; they said "Stay!" as plainly as words.

was whirling away in the dance again. Guy Earlscourt

waiting with weary resignation to be led whithersoever her

ship willed. They moved on, her dress brushed him, her

whispered " Wait."  They disappeared in the silvery dusk,

~ tDuHe was alone.

e sat down on one of the rustic seats and stared blankly

him. The lights, the people, the music, all were discord

tumult. He was overdue at the Speckhaven Lyceum.

did that signify ? Polly's mother had found her out--

in all likelihood, about to take her away. Polly-the light

eir household-the joy of his life-who had loved, and

d, and tormentedhim for fourteen happy years. Polly,

toasted his muffins, and upset his paint pots, and made

f his pictures, and worked him pretty neckties, and went

ng through their humble home like some fair Esmeralda.

will never give her up," thought Duke, doggedly; " she

~ no right to take her away. I'll never give the Duchess up

s-unless she wants to go "-and at that thought Duke

e own. Polly would go-Polly, whose dream of life was

i"a lady "-who loved dress and adornments with the in-

love of girlhood-yes, Polly would go.

trees, the dancers swam before poor Duke's eyes in a

mist. His thoughts went back to last winter, when the

ox, that loathsome enemy, had come to Speckhaven.

had taken it-Duke took everything it was possible to

ever since when at six months he had had the measles-

lhrough dismal days and sickening nights Polly had nursed

nd sat up with him, and bathed his disfigured face and

and knew neither weariness nor disgust. She had done

for Alice Warren, nursing her through it in spite of

:~body. And she had never taken it; her perfect health,

did vitality, her utter fearlessness had saved her.

w brave she was ! What a great, generous heart she pos-

. People called her vain. Well, perhaps she was. Her 

sowed her a charming face, and she loved beauty in all

?. She might be' vain of that piquant face, but how':

eiy-.she had'risked its beauty for those she loved ! She wa 

a   wayward, and reckless, and something jf a "tom':








<pb n="136"/>
136               FACE TO FACE.

boy," as Eliza Long had called her; but-" God bless h,

God Almighty bless her ! " thought Duke Mason, and the t

were standing big and bright in his honest eyes; "and ift

wants to go, she shall go, and I'll never grieve her by lett

her see how it breaks my heart."

The summer light had faded entirely out of the sky, and t

moon, and the stars, and the Chinese lanterns had it all th

own way; and still Duke sat, and waited as patiently now

he had done fourteen years before, in the elm-tree, for 01l

Lyndith.

A cold hand falling on his own aroused him-the same chi

touch that had startled Lord Montalien's favorite son-an

turning round, he saw in the night light Lady Charteris. Sil

looked like a spirit-so white, so unearthly-her black e

wild and solemn. She had thrown a scarlet cashmere over hi

dark dress, and her small face shone from the rich red fold

like a wan star. 

"Come ! " she said, " come with me."

Her cold fingers still held his hand. Duke shuddered at

their touch. He was in no way fanciful, but just then he rei

membered legends ran of pale water-spirits bearing away hap-,

less mortals to their doom. 

She led him away from the noise and the people, down a

green aisle, in whose sombre darkness a murder might hav

been committed.  One or fwo red lmps' flickered luridi

athwart the blackness, and a nightingale piped its sweet

mournful lay somewhere in the stillness. Even the braying of

the brass band came faint and far-off, here. She clasped both

hands around that of her prisoner, and the dark, spectral eyes-

fixed themselves upon his face.

"She is mine!-my daughter!-my child-!-whom I gave

you fourteen years ago ?

"She is."

"You have cared for her all those years-! She has growni

up like that-strong, and tall, and healthy, and beautiful-l

beautiful as he was, and like him, and like him!"    "i

"Well, yes," Mr. Mason responded, thoughtfully, and quit

forgetting himself, "she is like him, and when her face isl

washed, the Duchess isn't a bad-looking girl."  . 

There was a vision before him as he spoke-Miss Polly, isn

the kitchen on washing, ironing and baking days, with spots ot

soot on her oval cheeks, and perenniial smudges of grime ot.

her pretty Grecian nose. Indeed, it seemed on these oc

D - . ~C. C








<pb n="137"/>
FA CE TO FA CA.                 137

s--as the young lady herself observed, with an injured aixr-

at she couldn't so much as look at a pot or a kettle with.

ialf the black flying off and transferring itself to her coun-

nce.

Does she know-who does she think she is?" the lady

Redly asked.

Se thinks she is Polly Mason, an orphan, the child of a

cousin of mine. The Duchess hasn't a notion of who shty

l The what?"

I. beg your pardon, my lady, I call her the Duchess, be-

e she looks like one, not tfiat I ever was personally ac

ted with any duchess," Duke put in parenthetically.

e called herself Polly; but I never took kindly to the

of Polly."

Her name is Paulina."

Yes,"; said Duke, forgetting himself for the second time.

Vknow it is. He said so."

KÚMWho said so? "

solemn, dark eyes were fixed on his face, the friendly

kness hid.the guilty red that flushed it at the question.

ho said so? who could know her name ?" the lady de-

ed, suspiciously.

'ItD was- it was a sick man who stopped with us, when she

"' stammered Duke, who never could learn the manners

society, and tell polite lies; "he suggested that her

emight be Paulina."

How should he think' of it-who was this sick man? "

His name was Hawksley, my lady."'

s heart was throbbing against his ribs. If she only

f she asks questions enough, she'll surely find it out," he

ht, with an inward groan. "I never could stand pump.

A ihy lady's thoughts had drifted away to more important

thin sick men by the name of Hawksley.

^W'hy ~did you leave London? " she asked; "do you know

ote to the old address twice, and my letters were returned.

ksfell into the hands of Sir Vane, and there was a scene;" 

itwisted her fingers together as though in pain: "and I

dared write again. I would rather have seen my darling

than that he should find her out. Oh ! if he should recog-

:th:e resemblance, and discover her identity, even now I

'-----f000  -                                        [ 1








<pb n="138"/>
r38               FACE TO FACE.

He knew there was a child-he knows I have hidden her awa

If he should find out! if he should find out!"  Stle clasp

her hands around his arm, and looked up at him with a fae

of mortal dread.

"He will not find out, my lady," Duke said, quietly, "ifyc

do not betray yourself. How should he--she is Polly Maso-

the orphani cousin of a poor scene-painter; and for the resew-

blance, he will not see it -as you do. You do not," he halI

gasped, as he asked the question. "You will not take het

away, my lady ?"

"Take her away!" repeated Lady Charteris; "never, y:m

friend--my good, kind, faithful friend! Do you love her?--

tell me-is she indeed dear to you? Would it grieve you to-

gve her up?

"My lady, nothing on earth could grieve me so deeply

I don't know how a father may feel for an only child, but I

know no father in this world could love a daughter more thanii:

J. love Polly." 

' "And your sister-she loves her too ? "

"She is the torment and the idol of my sister's life. Every

'one loves the Duchess."

She put -her hands over her face. Tears were falling-the .

happiest Lady Charteris had ever shed. When she looked up,

she was ineffably calm in the dusk. 

" I have been praying for my darling," she whispered. "Oh, i

God keep her-God protect her-pure from the world-safeI

from her enemies !" 

"Her enemies-she has none."

-'"She has a terrible enemy while Sir Vane Charteris lives. 

Save er from him. Look, Mr. Mason! I was an heiress, 1

it was for my fortune my uncle persecuted me, Sir Vane mar- .H

ried me. That fortune was so left me that it falls to my eldest; ?

hild at my death. He idolizes his daughter-it is his ambition ;1

that she shall make a lofty marriage-he has become almost a  ¢

miser that she may be a great heiress. And Paulita is my

eldest child-to Paulina it shall all go at my death-if they i

cannot prove my first marriage illegal and she illegitimate. -'

I speak calmly of these4 things, my friend, I have thought of 

them so often. Paulina will inherit in spite of him-the mar-. 

riage was legal, I know. I have consulted lawyers on the- :

subject. One hair of her head is dearer to me than a dozern"'

Mauds- it may be wrong; I cannot help it. At my death 'i

Paulina will come into an income of nine thousand a year-AlJ --

:~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0V : '.f,








<pb n="139"/>
FACE TC FACE.                  139

ghter will not inherit a shilling. It is well he has sufficient

I'fher. He is a bad, bold, unscrupulous man, who spares

her man nor woman in his wrath. I tell you this-because

know how he married me, while I loathed him, and told

I loathed him. A man who would stoop to such a mar-

e would stoop to anything. Would Paulina be safe, think

:then, in his power? We only remain here a week, ol

t jkeep her away from this place-during that time. tie

ects me now; since our return to England he has watched

ias a cat watches a mouse. I don't know what he suspects,

-t he fears, but it is so. Even now-I may be missed, he

jbe searching for me. Mr. Mason, I think I am the most

tched woman the wide earth holds-I think my heart broke

een.years ago when they told me my darling was dead.

_ only creature in this world whom I love is-yonder, and 1

e not speak one word to her, dare not give her one kiss for

ather's sake."

She covered her face again, and broke out into sobbing-

,.hysterical, but suppressed sobbing. Alas ! long years of

of surveillance, had taught her, that even grief was a lux-

se must not indulge in.

ehad nothing to say; a woman crying made him cold

hot, by turns. He wasn't much used to it--Rosanna was

r to crying as to all other weakness of her wretched sex,

Polly's tears, though they made him exquisitely miser-

-tthe time, they were speedily dried. They were gener-

tars of rage, indeed, not of sorrow; and as she scolded

nently all the while she wept, it was not in the nature of

her tempests could last long-their very violence used

-*up. But this was something different; this was sorrow of

the man knew nothing, and he shrank away, with a strong

to take to his heels, and escape. Some intuition told

ai ned him-she dropped her hands, and smiled through

hav'e no right to distress you," she said sweetly, "you

a  my best, my only, friend-the only friend at least whomn

trust with the secret of my life. Tell me of my child--

trthful, is she generous, is she noble-hearted, is she ami.

is she, in a word, like her father "  .

iable ? " Well, Duke wasn't prepared to say that Polly

all occasions. She had a tongue and a temper beyond

jt; she had a will of her own; too, and made most people

r.Bu-and Duke Mason's face lit up, and his eyes

...| .. W !  , -. :0  i                         _      ^:








<pb n="140"/>
140               F ACE TO FACE. 

glowed, and great love made him eloquent, and'he pictur

Polly to Polly's mother as he saw her-the bravest, the han

omest, the most generous and loving little girl in Great Bri

aimn.

"Thank God!" the mother said. "Thank Godi

thank you, who have been her father and friend, for so mn

years. Keep her still-keep her until I die and she comes 

to her fortune. She will be able to reward you then." 

"I hope that day is very far off. I don't want any rewari

for keeping the Duchess. Life without her would not be w

the having."

'Teach her what you can-I cannot even give you a paltx

hundred or two, for that. I have not a sovereign without th

knowledge of Sir Vane Charteris-not a trinket that he woul

not miss. I am poorer than she is, Mr. Mason."

"Oh, Polly isn't poor," cried Duke, forgetting himself for tha

third time; "thanks to Hawksley's generosity, she has seve

hundred pounds in the Speckhaven Bank."               '

_- "Who is this Mr. Hawksley ?" asked Lady Charteris, with

renewed suspicion: "who knows Paulina's name, and gives

her seven hundred pounds ? what does it mean ?"

'What a dolt-a dunderhead, I am !"' thought Duke, read

to bite his own tongue off. " I've got myself into a pretty mes

now! My lady," he said aloud, "Mr. Hawksley is only a very

generous and eccentric young man, who took a fancy to Polly' 

pretty face when a baby, and sends her a Christmas present oti

fifty pounds from the California gold-diggings every year. He

-was just from the States, you see, and I dare say that's how hke

came to guess fler name."

She had not the faintest suspicion of the truth, and this veryi

Nii explanation satisfied her.

"He is very kind," she said; "take the money then, and

educate the child as befits her birth and the station she will one

day fill. And now "-she laid her hand upon his arm and dreW

nearer to him-- a last favor. Will you accompany me to-mor-.

row night to the Grange ? A strange request," she added, as 'she

felt how Duke must be wondering; "but I dare not venture tdo

go in daytime.  ie. wouid suspect something. He is always I^

suspecting. And at night I fear to go alone. Not the cav ,i

alier's ghost," with a faint smile, " but the people I might meoet

at that hour. Will you be my escort to-morrow night ?" 

"Certainly, Lady Charteris."

"I go at night Lecause; when all have retired, I am free-

\:0 iS  i 








<pb n="141"/>
FACE TO FACE.                  141

then. And I go for something I left behind me in my

fourteen years ago-ah, you remember that night ? My

as miniature-my lost husband's-Sir Vane Charteris

ly that in name-some letters-trinkets-the. few presents.

vr gave me. They are dearer to me than anything in the

i, except his child. I had them ready, and forgot them,

ephow, that night in my haste. They may have been removed,

I.I think not-I left them in the secret drawer of an Indian

t, and I know none of the large furniture was ever taken

the Grange. At twelve, to-morrow night, I will be at the

will you meet me there ?"

I  will."                       -

took his hand and kissed it, as she had done that right

go in the waiting-room at the railway.

Heaven bless you, best of friends. And now I must leave

e has missed me long ere this." She flitted away with

s, and he was left alone under the red lamps and night-

s jug-jug.

looked at his watch-nine o'clock-the first act would

r; but better late than never. The first violinist of the

u  strode away at a tremendous rate toward the theatre.

ly at midnight, the following night, Duke, in a light

, was waiting outside the ponderous gate of the Priory.

re his nocturnal adventures never to end?" Duke won-

and " what would Rosanna say to-morrow when she found

ed unslept in ? "  Lady Charteris was punctual, and he

kher along through the quiet night to the haunted Grange.

You had better wait outside," the lady said, " and keep

c. I know how to effect an entrance, and I am not in the

Ataid."

e approached the house with a rapid and resolute step.

might be afraid of Sir Vane Charteris, she certainly was

of supernatural visitants.  The open window  caught

eye, she clambered up the ivy-rope ladder, and entered.

moon chanced to be obscured, and the figure asleep in the 

h escaped her eye. She carried with her a dark-lantern

she lit now, and passed out of the apartment and up1

- to the chamber, that had long ago been her own.

iw^ right in her surmise. The Indian cabinet had nol

irenoved. She found the spring she wanted, the draweil

: there lay the cherished packet. She caught it up

.. into her bosom, and rapidly descended.

the her footsteps awoke the sleeper.








<pb n="142"/>
142             POLLY'S MISDEEDS.

She opened the door. Polly was standing erect, and y'

wide awake now.

Lady Charteris paused on the threshold with a low, statll.

cry.

t/here, in the house in which she had been born, sxie

years ago this very month, child and mother stood face tc fac

CHAPTER V. 

POLLY'S MISDEEDS.

IoIPA |ACE to face, in the dead hour of the night, ii iaei

_rraK i desolate room of Lyndith Grange, Fate had don- he

j  I work, and brought those two together at last!  '

For an instant both stood speechless, spell-boumd--.

each with the same wild thought that they beheld a supernat

ural visitant. Then, as the light of the lantern shone mo

broadly over the face and figure of the lady, the girl recognized

her and all superstitious fears were swept away in an impulse

of uicontrollable surprise. 

"Lady Charteris !" dropped from her lips. The words, the

sound of a human voice, broke the spell. Lady Charteris

knew the slim figure standing before her was not the ghost of

the mad lady. 

"Who speaks?" she asked faintly. She was intensely ner I

vous, and her heart throbbed almost painfully. "Who aref

you ?"'

-'"I am Polly Mason." Polly's voice faltered a little a shev

said it. She always did feei ashamed of that intensely plebeia,

land unromantic cognomen, poor child. 

"Polly Mason !" the name of all others now most dear to;

the heart of the lady. She drew near hurriedly--half incredul

lous-" Polly Mason !"

She-lifted her light high-yes, it shone on the slender, girSi:

figure, the fair, drooping head, the beseeching eyesf the half.!

smiling, half-trembling lips, for Polly, thus detected, hardly

knew whether to laugh or cry.

A' My child ! my child !" the lady cried aghast, "what inthe

world brought you here ? You, of all people alive, and at thu








<pb n="143"/>
POLL Y'S 2MISDEEDS.              143

iy horn?"   Polly laughed a little hysterically-then

sobbed:

Oh,Lady Charteris, it was foolish, I know, and Duke and

la will be so angry when they find it out. I'm half-sonry

cane, but I could not help it. Eliza Long, you don't

her, of course-but we hate each other, she and I-dared

come here and spend a night alone among the ghosts,

I--well, I know I'm a little fool! " Polly cried piteously,

oking up, with her big blue eyes at the-great lady, "but

dared me to jump into Speckhaven Bay, I think I would

-   They left me here, and are to call for me at two

It must be near that now. And please, my lady,"

yhumbly,) "don't tell; I was not afraid, indeed 1 wasn't,

t   slept nearly all the time; but Duke would be Vexed-

e' s my cousin, please my lady,) and he's such a dear old

I hate to make him sorry. Oh, Lady Charteris !"

clasped her hands, " I know this is your house, but I did

kow w that you or anybody ever cathe here, or I'd never

ne it. Oh please don't say I've done anything so very,

?rong."

y could talk at all times, and awe of ladies, great or

she did not know. She wondered to find Lady Charteris

i,  t such a time, and she hoped Duke wouldn't discover

apade, but she was as prepared to converse with a baro.

y as with Rosanna.

a moment before my lady answered, a moment dur-

h  she stood looking at the girl, with her hand pressed

ver her heart. The blue, beseeching eyes were so like,

ly like eyes that seventeen years ago had been dearer

an earth and all its glory. It gave her a pang almost

pas death to see their counterpart thus. She scarcely

aword; she only knew that the child of her love stood

her.

darling! My darling!" she said, with a smothered

"oh: my darling ! " and the astonished Polly found herself

t in the lady's arms, and tears and kisses raining on her

isMason's first impulse was that Lady Charteris had gone

Mymad. It was not an improbable fancy, under the

ces, and much more alarmed than she had been any

t she strove to get away. She was prepared to meet a

like, but not a lunatic. Lady Charteris under

a an instant, and at once released hert








<pb n="144"/>
Ji,44  :POLL Y'S MISDEEDS. 

I have frightened you, my dear," she said, recoverirg

self-self-command was a fixed habit with her now, she -

not at all likely to give way again, "but you-yot reseM

some one I once knew. My child, what a strange thing f/

you to da-to come and spend a night in this dismal piI

W Vere you not terribly afraid? " 

'; Vell-no, my lady, at least not until I heard you upstai

i dof't mind a bit so that Duke and Rosanna don't find otu

" You are very fond of your cousins, my dear ? "

"Oh, very !" said Polly, "Duke especially; but every 

loves Duke-the starved dogs in the streets, the little begga

wno ask alms in the town-everybody !"              :

Her eyes lighted-yes, very fondly Polly loved " dearl

Duke."                                            :

"And you are happy--truly and really happy," the il

usked-so earnestly she asked it.

"Happy?" Polly asked; "well, no, not quite; I do

think anybody could be happy whose name was Polly Maso

Polly! it reminds one of a poll parrot in a cage asking

crackers."

Lady Charteris smiled in spite of herself.

"Is that all ? Well, my child, you can console yourself wi

the thought that, like most young ladies, you will one dt

change your name."

Polly blushed, and thought of Mr. Fane. 

"I ought to be a happy girl, I suppose, for everybody

very good to me. My lady, will you please tell me the timeg

It is just half-past one," looking at her watch; " my erran

here is done, and you will return with me. And Polly," 

aid her hand on the girl's shoulder, "you know some of 

ople at the Priory. I saw you dancing, you remember, ye.

tierdy; don't mention to any of those young men, should y

chance to see them, that you ever-met me here. Now cold

"My lady, I cannot go-I promised to wait, and I musg

They will call for me at two-only half an hour now; I wouldk

have them find me gone for the world when "they return.-

should never hear the last of it." 

: Who are they, my little one ?"                 f

"Ob, Alice Warren and Eliza Long, and two young me

you wouldn't know any of them. They'll be here at two, 

I mast wait-1 promised."                            h

"A promise must be kept, of course. Will you not get,

scolding to-morrow-from-this Duke you love so well, for

madcap prank ?" 








<pb n="145"/>
POLL Y'S MISDEEDS.               I45

A scolding! Duke scold/" Polly laughed aloud at the

endous joke-such a sweet, merry laugh. " Oh, dear no,

lady, Duke couldn't scold if he tried-least of all, me. But

would look grieved, and that would be ten times worse, and

er say a word, and be kinder to me than ever. Rosanna

ld scold, and I shouldn't mind it a bit; but Duke."  Polly

her curly head, with contrition: "No, I hope Duke

t hear of it."

Then, he shall not-from me. And I must go and leave

here. It seems almost cruel."

ou are very kind, my lady, but don't mind me; I'm not

d, and I couldn't go, that's the amount of it. Please let

help you out."

ady Charteris stooped, and kissed her very gently this time.

You are a brave little girl. Good-night, and don't come

ay more."

r:he benediction given with the kiss was uttered in the

heart. Polly helped her out of the window, and watched

sshe flitted down the avenue, her light steps lost on the

sy ground.

:*Now I wonder what brought her here?" thought Miss

on, " all alone, and at this time of night-morning, I mean

it's close upon two o'clock. Is she going to walk all the

-to Montalien Priory, and does her husband know she's

~? Ohdear!"

lly yawned dismally. "I do wish they would come." 

_ had not long to wait. Before two struck the quartette

n;lodder her window, filled with remorse and dire misgivings.

Id they find her alive when they returned; would they

Olher at all? Might not the cavalier's ghost carry her off

dily to the tld of restless shadows whence he came ? But

a   as bright as a new shilling, stood smiling before them,

leaped with the bound of a kid out of the window and into

arms of the haberdasher's young man.

.That will do, Sam; I don't want help," said Miss Mason,

er disdainfully. After Allan Fane and Guy Earlscourt it

ft likely she was ever again going to tolerate tradesmen's

reces.  "Yes, I'm safe, Eliza, in spite of you and the

sand the rats; and I've had a sociable chat with one of

hosts that haunt the Grange, and a very pleasant ghost it

I- hope you're convinced I'm not afraid now; and if

orany of you, let Duke or Rosanna find out this nigh's

Irll-'wel, don't you do it, that's all! I may be an








<pb n="146"/>
46       , : RPOLL Y'S MISDEEDS.        - 

idiot for my pains, but I'm not going to worry thboi into t

graves." 

Even Eliza Long promised.   She had been cnsider

alarmed during the Jhours of waiting. If they found Poi

dead or gone mad through fright, Peter Jenkins would tu~

Queen's evidence, she knew, and there was no telling w

the law might not do to her-hang her, perhaps. She promis"

and she kept her word-for two or three months-and by h

time it did no harm to tell. 

At half-past two exactly, Polly stole in through a kitch

window and upstairs in her stockings to bed, and fell aslee

and woke up and came fresh and smiling down to breakfa

none the worse for her night's dreary frolic. 

" He will be here presently," was the young lady's thought

and breakfast over, she went back to her room to get herse

up for the occasion. She looked over her wardrobe withji

melancholy sense of its deficiencies. A white muslin and

drab silk for Sundays. Polly hated that drab silk, which Ro

sanna had bought as a good serviceable color. Two fad

ginghams, much the worse for washing and mending, and las

winter's blue merino. That was all. She chose the blue me

rino, faded a little, but low-necked and short-sleeved, and tXe

color that suited her best, and put it on. A blue ribbon, thl

iue of her eyes, to tie up the short, crisp curls-and that wsi

the whole of her adornment. But the sloping shoulders

the rounded arms shone, and the sapphire eyes sparkled, a

the short, boyish curls were like supple gold, and, standing t)

fore the glass, the girl knew she was beautiful. 

Mr. Fane came, and not alone. At eleven o'clock he drov

up in a dashing little pony phaeton, with cream-colored, hig

stepping ponies, and Miss Maud Charteris by'is side. Po

ws seated under an arch of morning-glories, reading Tennyson

pos'ifor the occasion,' and Mr. Fane's speaking eyes told he

pretty plainly what he thought of her looks. He had come to

take her to the Priory for that first sitting for the fair Rosa::

nood, and-thiswas isas  M aud Charteris, Miss Mason, and h

:was quite sure each young lady would be charmed with the

other. Miss Maud Charteris gave Miss Polly Mason a little,

half-patronizing, half-haughty smile and bow, which the lattei

returned with.equal hauteur. She was not pretty-little Miss"-

-Charteris. She was pale and sickly of aspect, with her father!s ^

black eyes and tar-black hair, straight as an Indian's. The 

bright silks which that doting father liked to see her wear ri>n 








<pb n="147"/>
PO.L Y'S MISDEEDS.              1

ticd harshly with her smiall, pinched features and sickly 

Crlor. She was.dressed like a doll now, in tartan silk of bril.

nt hues, a white lace scarf, a Paris hat, wreathed with pin 

s-buds, and dainty boots, and gloves, and pink-silk and point

parasol.

roly saw it all, and the faded blue merinoe and her bare, 

own hands, and her straw hat, with its cheap ribbons, looked, 

Iel so unutterably shabby and poor and mean. How could

Fane ever look at her twice, beside the glittering little but-

ythis baronet's daughter, dressed in rose silk? She turned

with hopeless longing, and-yes, the truth must be told,

-and was driven to Montalien Priory, so silent and de-

sed, that she hardly knew herself. How could she tell that 

Fane never saw the tartan silk, the Paris rose-buds, or the

: lace? He only knew that the baronet's daughter was

and puny and not pretty, and that a girl as bright, as

ooninmg, as beautiful as Hebe's self sat beside him, with two

,eyes, whose like he had never seen before.

is Charteris deigned to talk a little to Miss-aw-Mason, 

h ~esteppers bore them along. Had she really lived all her

s dull, country town ? Had she never been to school,

to Paris-never even to London? It must be dreadfully

ch a life. She regarded the shabby merino and the

straw hat with pitying wonder. She was.unutterably

ding to this dowdy country-girl whom Mr. Fane

l o paint. The little embryo lady took the airs of a

idame as naturally as a duckling takes to water, and with

i question of the disdainful patrician, Polly grew more and

Iary.and sulky, and sorry she came; and it was in a

Ia humor, indeed, that she entered the dusky splendor of

land followed Mr. Fane into an apartment where

ed, and birds sang, and beautiful pictures were on

tall vases-taller than herself-stood, and a Tur-

l vered the floor, and silken draperies hung, and

el glimmered in the pale-green light. Her heart

dh ore at sight of all this splendor. No wonder

despised her-Maud Charteris, to whom-this

was only an everyday drawing. oom, and wh 

l  tartan :silks.

eti:heri for a moment to go in search of; Miss -

who Was to sit for Queen Eleanor. Misi 

ie xcsingk herself elaborately, to remove hex 

I i:lPbolly was alone. Silence reigned. ,It was 'e 

i i1   /t=.tf-A:0 H;Sf -  : f 








<pb n="148"/>
148             POLL Y'S MISDEEDS.

a chulch. She glanced about her in awe. But presn

through a curtaired arch at the farther end of the room, voex

came. One was the voice of little Miss Maud; the other 

languid, hauglty accents of Miss Hautton.

"Pretty?" she was repeating, in rather a contemptu

tone. "Did Mr. Fane really say so, Maud? He must ha

been jesting, surely. Why, the girl in white, with whom I sa

him dancing, was a perfect little dowdy."           .

"Well, I thought so too, Diana," said the piping- treble oft

little lady of thirteen; " and to-day-you should see her!-su

a dress. old and faded-and made-oh !" -

Words failed to describe the unfashionable make of this ol

faded dress. 

"How tiresome of Mr. Fane to fetch her here; and ox

must be civil to the little creature, I suppose. Pretty! a st

pid country-girl, with red hair and freckles."        B

Polly waited to hear no more; her heart felt full to burstinj

-she hardly knew whether with anger, or wounded feeling, o

what. She had been insulted, cruelly insulted; why had Mri

Fane ever brought her here ? She got up, and made her wy

out; how, she hardly knew, through long suites of rooms, and

down that grand gilded and carved stairway. She was out o

the house, and into the bright sunshine, with the summer wind

blowing in her hot face, and a swelling in her throat that nearl

choked her.

"A stupid country-girl, with red hair and freckles !"  Thafi

dreadful sentence rang in her ears like a death-knell all the way

home.

She went straight up to her room, and threw off the blue|!

dress and blue ribbon, and put on the shortest and mostA

washed-out of the ginghams, and looked at herself in the glass,

It was quite true, all they said of her. She was a dowdy,

and looked it. She had red hair, too-it appeared yellow to.

her. But red or yellow, it was all the same, and she hadf

freckles. The light was very strong, and by straining her eyes3

she counted seven under one eye and five under the other.

She was neither clever nor liandsome nor good; she was only

t sunburnt tomboy, and would never go near the Priory nor

those scornful ladies any more; and Mr. Fane should get hiss

oregi (Polly knew French) if he ever daredicome near her

again.

Polly worked for the remainder of that day with an energy thea

completely astonished Rosanna. Ironing was going on;

....4. -!           ? ?   ;!








<pb n="149"/>
POLLY'S MISDEEDS.               I4^

e got a table to herself, and ironed those clothes with a vin

tive energy, that left her cheeks crimson, and her eyes fill

streaming light. She was dead silent, too, and declined tak

ether tea, when tea-time came, and wentfout into the garder

let the evei-ing wind cool off, if it could, her flushed face

id as she reached the gate, there stood Mr. Allan Fane itr

"Miss Mason-Polly I " he began, " what on earth made you

away ? Did I leave you too long ? I give you my word i

f  not help it, and I hope you are not offended. What was

oIiy looked at him with flashing eyes. She would have cut

her right hand sooner than let him know how she had been

W What is it, Polly ? I think you said that I might call you

'" with a tender look.

You may call me anything you please, Mr. Fane-a dowdy,

country-girl, such as I am. If I were Miss Diana Haut-

-or Miss Maud Charteris, it would be quite another thing-

w could a shabby, ignorant, red-haired rustic expect

spect or courtesy !"

-iss Mason ! Good Heaven ! has any one insulted

iWh b came into the rooms while I was away?"

l   soul, Mr. Fane. But you should not be surprised at

l l   person in my class of life may do. We don't know

, and I got frightened, very naturally, at all the

about me, and ran away-just that. One word, one

from so grand a lady as the Honorable Miss Hauttin

have annihilated me; I ran away. Don't waste your

Ibig Mr. Fane, go back to the Priory and the high-born

areas thorough a lady as the best of them, Miss Ma-

wil pardon my presumption in saying so, and I

e five minutes with you for a day with the.

H ^4^truth-there was a glow on his placid face very

A    'he~ Folly, ~pretty at .all times, was tenfold prettier

angry. The haughty poise of the -heady the

the blue eyes, the flush on the oval cheeks, the

s of thecle~ar voice, became her well.

as offended-some one has insulted you, it a

iltwas-notI. ;If I only dared put in ord 

ie    v^; but no, even the deepest admiration maja

Ia<;ff S;S f$0 fSa00tsf 








<pb n="150"/>
150            POLL Y'S MISDEEDS.                  a

sometimes appear impertinence. Tell me you are not an

with me-I could not bear that, Polly."

His voice softened to a wonderful tenderness, the eyes t

looked at her were full of a light that shot the woids home

Mr. Fane having spent the past four years at the business wa*

past master of the art of love a la mode. And Polly's hea

stirred for an instant, and the fiery scorn died out of her fe;

and into its place came a beautiful, tremulous light; but s

laughed saucily even while moved.

"You are talking treason to your sovereign, Mr. Fane

What would Miss Hautton say if she heard you ?"

"Miss Hautton may go to Paradise, if she likes. What is

Miss Hautton to me ?"

"The future Mrs. Fane, or rumor tells awful stories !" 

"'Rumor does tell awful stories, always did. If I cared for

Miss Hautton would I be here ? Polly, you must sit for that

picture, only, by Jove, I shall have to paint you for Queen

Eleanor, if you look as you do just now. Won't you ask me-

in, and give me some tea, please ? I came after you in such

haste that I never waited for luncheon."

"What? " Polly cried, "has it taken you since one o'clock,

to walk three miles ? Oh, Mr. Fane, don't think me a greateri

goose than you can help. Come in, if you like, and I will see

if Rosanna will let you have the tea." 

"That doesn't sound too hospitable," the artist said," bu

where one is very anxious to obtain the entree, one must not.e.

stand on the order of his invitation. We shall have the sittings

here, Miss Polly, instead of at the Priory." 

-Mr. Allan Fane never once noticed the faded gingham  he

went into the house, meeting a rather cool reception from both

Duke and Rosanna. 

Polly was all mortal man could desire, and he lingered until

file moon'was up, and the loud-voiced kitchen clock struck

nine. The girl went with him to the gate, the moon shone 

crystal clear; what a night it was, what a beautiful, blissfu

world altogether ! And Rosanna called life a weary pilgrimage 

and earth a vale of tears. 

"May I come again-and very soon, Polly?" asked Mr. js

Fane, holding her hand, and looking into the eyes he thought :

brighter than all those shining stars above. 

"Certainly," Miss Mason responded demurely; "and if you 

make such progress at every sitting as you have done at this, 

Mr. Fane, the fair Rosamond will be completed before you .:,

*1~~~~~~ ~ ~~    ~     ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ \4 . .  : ,  - ''  \








<pb n="151"/>
POLLY'S MISDEEDS.                 I      v

it:"  Her deal laugh rang out, the truth being the artist 

d4 enrtrety forgotten fair Rosamond, Allan Fane being so en-

ssed by Polly Mason. He lit his cigar and walked home

ugh the soft summer night, with the uneasy conviction

wpinag upon him that he was falling helplessly in love. -There,

b been moments, this very evening, when it had been all he

iddo to restrain himself from snatching her to his breast.;

gng al' the hopes and ambitions of his life, and become

ssessor of those wondrous eyes of purple light, that darkling,

ling, beauteous face, that saucy, witching smile.

B  Jove!" he exclaimed, "what a face that girl has-what a

o:f eyes :!"

We thought of Diana Hautton, and her three thousand a

r, her lofty birth, her blue blood. She had blue ..eyes too,;

i aristocratic in all things, Miss Hautton was most aristo-

lfcally near-sighted, and the eyes were wofully dim an faded

omparison with those he had left. -

Why wasn't I born with two thousand a year?" the artist

ht, moodily. " I'd marry that girl out of hand, and go to

and sprend the remainder of my days lying at her feet,

ngnp at her perfect beauty, and fancy it always afternoon. '

hant she a fortune? My pretty Polly, I fear you and -

l a di- d not present himself at the cottage next morn-

half hoped; and after dinner, putting on her hat,

w   Btrdllled up to see her friend, Alice Warren. If Mr. Fane

cing, she would meet him, or if he went to the house,

-iT^bmd her out, it would do him no harm to wait. She did

hiBi,m however, and reaching the bailiff's abode, she.

E  alone. and in some perplexity.

atter, Alice?" Polly asked. " Where's your

igone to Speckhaven; father's out attending his

illy's off a-fishing; and here's a message from:

¤ ¡':to go up to the Priory as fast as he can.-

water party, and they want.him to row one of

ed up her ears. A water party! this was

not put in an appearance that morning .- -

-)toI4 her-nothing. of this ?

d  r.Guy can.row, but that artist gentle-

:i0kno  hunPollyacannot, and Billy's to rjowbi i








<pb n="152"/>
152             POLLY'S MISDEEDS.

A sudden inspiration flashed across Polly's mind-across 

speaking face of hers. She could row. An intense cur

possessed her to see how Mr. Fane conducted himself in ti 

society of Miss IIautton. He had told her yesterdayin the

plainest terms, the Honorable Diana was nothing, les tha

nothing to him. Here was a chance to prove his truth or false 4

hood. Alice read her mischievous design in her face, and

clasped her hands. 

"Oh, Polly, don't," she cried, aghast.     /

Only six weeks before, Polly had brought up some walnut;

juice and hair-dye, from among Duke's theatrical properties, [

and arrayed herself in Billy's garments, and stepped down to  ;

call upon Rosanna, and actually sat and chatted with that lady 

full twenty minutes, without her ever discovering how shame- L

fully she was being imposed upon. Polly's saucy face was full ;

of laughing, roguish, reckless delight now, at the prospect of fun.

"Don't, Polly !" pleaded Alice. " Only think, if you should .-

be found out."

"I shall!" said Polly; and her friend knew that "I shall"

was as unalterable as the laws of the Medes. "And I won't 

be found out. If I am, it isn't a hanging matter. I'/l go, and 

row the gentleman who can't row himself. Get the walnut- 

juice and hair-wash, and Billy's Sunday-go-to-meetin's, Alice !"

Dear, fair, sensitive reader, you are shocked, I am sure; but

please remember this shocking little madcap was only sixteen,

as full of frolic as a kitten; and even you, perhaps, were not 

as wise at sixteen as you are now. She acted on impulse-all 

the evil and misery of the girl's after-life came from that. She

acted on impulse; she never paused to think. There had gone

into the bailiff's house a pretty, fair-haired girl-there came out

swarthy-skinned, black-haired lad, whose straw hat was very 

much slouched over his eyes, whose hands were thrust deep in 

his jackt-pockets, and who walked along with your true boy's 

swagger. Alice looked after her, in laughing wonder, not un.

mixed with dismay. 

"Her own mother would not know her," the bailiff's

daughter thought; "but, good gracious! if she should be dis.

'covered !"

This dusky boy, who might have served as a model for 

Murillo, had that immortal been alive, sped along at a swinging

pace. Half a mile on he came face to face with- Mathew War

ren himself. 

"You, Billy! you hurry," called the parent gruffly. He rec, 

_0








<pb n="153"/>
POLL Y'S MISDEEDS. 

iZoed the hat and jacket, and took his offspring for granted

~   !"-Cut across them meadows now, and down to the lake like fun.

l-lThe gentry's awaitin'."

i The lad bounded across the meadows, every pulse tingling-

ith excitement and the fun of the thing. For the impropriety

well, did not Viola, in the garb of a page, follow her knight

l the wars? And did not Helen Mar, in male attire, pene-

ate to the prison of her Scottish chief? and was not Helen

Mar but one remove from an angel? If pages' costume were

the correct thing for ladies a few hundred years ago, where was

e great harm now in Billy's Sunday jacket and sit-upons ?

XAmid the wooded slopes of the great park lay the mere, or

e, a broad, deep sheet of water, embosomed in wooded

eghts, and with two small islands nestling like emeralds on its

ng breast. These islands were famous picnic places, and

present destination of the party.

^ There were three boats. As Polly sprang lightly down the

nslope, she took in the whole scene.  There-was Mr.

,  already launched in his white skiff, with Lady Char

eris and a Miss Mortimer, a near neighbor; there was Mr.

ith Miss Maud Charteris, and two other young ladies in

be muslin; and there was Mr. Allan Fane, standing be.

Miss Hautton, and looking helplessly at his "boat upon

. '  Why had he never learned to row? Would that

lboy never :ome ? For, if one may venture to use such

ion with regard to so high-born a lady, Miss Hautton

- the sulks. Had not Francis Earlscourt "chafed" Mr.

3e in her presence concerning his rustic inamorat, and

the Honorable Diana was disdainfully uplifted and in.

:;t tosuch people, she had felt a sharp pang of angel

i ealousy.  Just now she was haughty, frigid, and all Mr.

_ ffl up to this moment had failed to melt her.  . 

i, 1eaven !," he exclaimed; "here's that boy at last.

oe u can row, my lad?"

/    lg Bt^ h s¡heart was throbbing under Billy's best waistcoat i

hat hid the eyes that flashed so wickedly.

,assist you, Miss Hautton ?  The gentleman

helped his scornful, 'silent liege lady in ith' 

B- "(Shall we go in search of those water-liiesyQo

s ince, rmy dear Miss Hautton ?"   - ';:

l     : Miss ;Hautton answered, politely, tragling

o place as another."

--

_  v C :: t 2;? X f  u  0   V  u    f 








<pb n="154"/>
-54          POLL Y'S MISDEEDS.

The three thousand a year seemed melting away like mornli

ing mist. The young man grew alarmed, he might be in lo  i

with a dozen village girls, but when it came to marriage, MisS

Hautton was the lady. His attentions redoubled, his voice-:

took a pathetically tender accent, his looks might have gone; toi

a heart of flint. Ah ! Polly knew these very looks well-they

were his stock-in-trade, given to all alike. He had told her-;

faisehoods then, ne was the suitor of this middle-aged heiress.,:S

A red, angry glow began to burn under the walnut-dyed skin.:

Miss Hautton gradually deigned to relax. The afternoon was 

hot, the sunshine glorious, no one could be very frigid long in

such a tropical temperature. The patrician face under the 

white parasol relented into a smile at some especially gallant

whispel of the gentleman.

"Bah !" she said, "how much of all that is real, Mr. Fane? 

Does your little farmyard nymph appreciate your fine speeches,

I wonder ?"

She could not for her life help saying it, and yet she hated

herself for letting him see she cared enough for him to be jeal.

ous. Mr. Fane's face lighted perceptibly.

"What! " he said, with his frankest laugh, "little Polly! my

dear Miss Haughton, she is only a handsome child, a pictur-

esque model, with tawny hair, and melting blue eyes-a model

f6r Greuze. I have set my heart on making the ' Rosamond

and Eleanor' a success, and hers is just the face I want for my

Rosamond.- Who would make speeches as you call them to a

little rustic school-girl ? What I say to you-Diana !" a pause

before the name, and a look ! "I mean " 

"If you want water-lilies, hadn't I better take you there ?"

called the voice of the boy who rowed at this juncture; "they're

-thick there, Iknow!" 

He pointed to the smaller island of the two-the other boats

wee making for the larger. And under the straw hat, how 

two bright eyes were flashing.

"Very well," the lady said, more and more gracious, "let

.tf go there, then."

"Billy" rowed with vicious energy-full of thoughts of ven-

geance.  "A rustic school-girl"-a "picturesque model," 

indeed ! Perhaps before the day was ended she would teach

this matchless deceiver she was something more.

The smaller island, " Lily Island" it was called, was about 

ten minutes' walk in circumference, and two hundred yard  :

distant, either from the shore or the other island. Polly kne 








<pb n="155"/>
POLL Y'S MISDEEDS,

7llis, also that Mr. Fane could no more swim than row, and a

Vtengeful resolution came into her wicked, plotting little head.

; " Ill give you plenty of time to make love, and propose,

Mr. Allan Fane," she thought, as she ran her skiff ashore, and

ped out.

l ;Mr. Fane carefully assisted his lady. Was the boy sure the

rass was not damp, that the ground was not marshy? Yes:

ythe boy was positive on these points, and led the way to where

^he lilies grew-Lat a point directly opposite the landing, with

| polard willows and alders growing thick between.

-Go back to your boat and wait for us, my lad," Mr. Fane

;aid; " we will return in an hour or so."

"Will you ? " thought the youth addressed; <" that remains

to be seen."

I .The artist made a seat for the heiress, and began filling a.

smtall basket, brought for the purpose, with lilies and wild red

berries. He did not mean to propose just yet-he rather

k from that ultimatum, amd wished to postpone his fetters

laslong as possible, but otherwise he was all that the most ex-

acting lady-love could desire. And yards and yards away over.,

lehining lake the boy and the boat had gone.

I;!0o - Polly rowed straight to the shore, moored the boat,

th one vindictive, backward looks at the distant green

;:went coolly on her homeward way.

t swim, and they won't hear him if he calls," thought,

veng0er. ""When they see the boat here, they'll think he's

sned, and won't miss them for some hours. There's to be

r party to-night, and I rather think two of the guests

¤y9Fnlly returned to the bailiff's, doffed Billy's clothes, washed

D    the dye and walnut-juice, and went home. Rosanna

red at her variable mood, for the rest of that day. Some- =

aglow  ith inward wrath, and again bursting into in-

fits of laughter.

n a desert island," Polly thought. "I wonder

S    themselves by this time?"  How, indeed? 

i  ghere-d-the lady and gentleman had had a

the sun was dropping low, and Miss

etwach.   alf-past five, and they-dined 

te to go -home and dress. She took her

aXm and; went across the island to the boat.

the boat was gone. The deserted 

^^'^  ^''^-'.s; !-"^- ' '- '  around. .' ^ * .  .' .  . C  ,  _f  *  .  -  '  . ,  .  *  ' .








<pb n="156"/>
56             POLL Y'S MISDEEDS.

What does this mean?" Mr Fane asked;' "where c

that little wretch have gone?" 

He left the ;ady and went round the island. All in vain;

trace of the boy othehe boat remained. He ascended the high

point of the island, and looked across to the stsre; yes, ther

moored together, were the three boats. The whole party

returned-the diabolical urchin had got tired waiting, and g

off; they were quite alone-not a soul to be seen! i

The truth burst upon Allan Fane, and the curses, not loi

but deep, that followed, would have astonished Miss Hauttoe

could she have heard them  She did not swear when the trut

was broken to her, but a flush of intolerable annoyance and

mortification crimsoned her pale face. To be the subject of

a jest, a source of ridicule and laughter, was beyond all things a:

horror, to this lady's pride. And would not this story--this

being deserted on an island with Allan Fane, serve to keep her

friends in merriment for months to come ?          - 

"What is to be done?" she asked, trying to repress her in

tense anger and mortification. Mr. Fane did not know he was

out of his depth altogether. He tried shouting until he wa

hoarse-all in vain-there was none to hear. And the su

went down, flushing sky and lake with red light, and the mo-

ments wore on, and with each Miss Hautton's trouble deepg

ened. Great Heaven! she thought, if she should be obliged t

pass the night here! 

The moments, the hours passed-it was past eight. The

evening wind arose, chill from the far-off German Ocean, the

warm, red glow died out of the sky, it turned cold and gray. 

ripple darkened the glassy surface of the lake-a creeping f

was rising. And Diana Hautton covered her face with bot

hands, and burst into tears of rage, and shame, and fear.: 

relief was at hand-sent by the wicked plotter himself. Billy

-the real Billy, dispatched with a bribe, and a promise of i

violable secrecy, launched one of the skiffs, and reached th

island just as the darkness of night was wrapping sea and lan 

Mr. Fane sprang upon him with an oath. 

"You infernal young rascal! Why did you play us this

trick !"

Billy wriggled himself free, and looked up with a face of Wi,

'ured innocence.                .

"Lem me go. I didn't play you no trick. I an't been he

to-day afore." á

And looking closely at him, Allan Fane knew he had n-o








<pb n="157"/>
L tOVES 'YOUNG DREAM AND OTHER 7 fINGS. 15

then there dawned upon him a thought, a wild idea, but a

e one. He, said not a word. He helped Miss Hautton in 

ite meekly, and did not speak five words all the way home.

For Polly, she laid her head upon her pillow that night with

virtuous pride of one who has brought the wicked to

teous retributionand heaped coals of fire upon the heaJ

te deceiver and slanderer.

CHAPTER VI.

TREATS OF LOVE'S YOUNG DREAM AND OTHER THINGS.

CHESS," Mr. Mason said, the following morning, as

he arose from the breakfast table, "when you're quite

finished, and got the dishes washed, I wish you would

step up to my room before you go anywhere. I have

sal to make to you."

:  !" said the Duchess, "a proposal of marriage, Duke ?"

ing no attention to this flippant inquiry, the scene-painter

t; on his way upstairs, to his own peculiar sanctum. He

uIusually grave and thoughtful this morning, as Polly

i  have noticed had she not been in a rather spiritless state

:  The reaction that always follows excitement had set

though she had raged and laughed alternately yester-

s morning she was as dull as Miss Hautton had called

.:e did not even wonder how they felt after yesterday's

ture on the island. Why should she trouble herself to

-of them-she despised her, had called her ignominious

ando he was amusing himself with her rustic simplicity,

hing in his sleeve at the effect of his pretty speeches.

ly a hansome model," indeed! How glad she was she

aiver * given him even one sitting for the Fair Rosamond.

kst service cleared away and the little dining-room

she went upstairs wearily to the painting-room. The

s    of black were on the pretty face and hands, and

,pale and listless. She found the scene-painter not

ut sitting before a small shaving-glass, contem

h Ae-stubble on his chin.








<pb n="158"/>
158  LOVE'S YOUNG DREAM AND OTHER THINGS1

"I wonder if I could postpone it until to-morrow," he s:

as she entered; " shaving makes a man look cleaner, no dou

but it is an awful bother. Do you think the bristles will bety

strong, if I waited another day, Duchess."

"Mr. Mason, was that what you requested me to come up

here to decide ?"

" N, Duchess, don't be in a hurry;" Dtike turned from th&

glass, and leaning forward looked at her. How pale she wasif

In the garish morning light-how dull the brilliant eyes-almost

as dull as Miss Hautton's own! 

"Duchess, what's the matter? You're getting thin. You're :;

losing your appetite-you only took two cups of tea this mor- -!

ing and three rolls."                               ' S

" Do you usually count my cups of tea and the number of 

rolls, sir?" cried Polly firing up, for her powerful school-girl

appetite, so unlike her heroines, was rather a sore spot with

this young lady.

"You're getting thinner and pale; you're losing your good

looks, Miss Mason. You want a change, and you shall have: .

it. Duchess, you shall go to boarding-school!"      -:

" To boarding-school, Duke !" 

'. To boarding-school, Duchess."

The girl's face flushed, then paled; she walked to the win-

dow, and looked silently down the quiet road. To boarding- 

school! Why, it had been the dream of her life to go to school !:1

hitherto, but Duke clung to her bright presence with an almost :

selfish love, and could not bear to part with her. Now her

dream was realized, she was to go, and her first sensation was

one of blank dismay. '

Her silence, her rigid attitude, frightened her guardian. It 

had not been Lady Charteris's words altogether which had de- 

termined him upon this step; it had been the attentions of Mr. 

Allan Fane and Polly's evident-pleasure in them. To him :

there was something almost like a sacrilege-like a desecration - "i

of holy childhood-in a strange young man talking of love an4 +}

passion to his little sixteen-year-old child. He would quietly ?

and at once- remove her from danger. And now she stoodI

here pale-silent-and could it be that he was too late and the t.

mischief done?                                      : 

"Duchess-Polly!" he exclaimed in a frightened voice 

"you always wanted to go. Don't tell me you are going tq0

object now" "

She turned from the window, and the smile he loved lit up: 

ler face.

*  -  -  ,   '              - .  ;'X!  |








<pb n="159"/>
LOVE'  S YOUNG DREAM AND OTHER THINGS.           I-5

"No, Duke, I'm not going to object. I'll go with all the

leasure in life. I need school of some kind, goodness ki ov;s

stuch an ignorant, wild, good-for-nothing wretch as I am,

Where am I to go ?"

ff.-" To Bromptdn-to Miss Primrose's establishment. Squire

Weldon's daughter went there, you know. And I'll take you

iext week if you think you can be ready."

" 'r That's a question for Rosanna-I can be ready fast enough

iRf my clothes can. Can you afford it, Duke? It will cost

&eadfully, won't it ?"

i" 7You have your own private fortune, Miss Mason," re-

d-ponded Duke, gravely; " it shall come out of that. Out of

evIen hundred you can spare two for your education, I should

eope, and then when you can play the piano and work Berlin-

lpincushions, and are five-and-twentyyears old, we will marry

outo some sensible, middle-aged professional man-say a

yer or a doctor,".concluded Duke, with a ghastly attempt

jgta jest.   - ~ 

:Polly frowned and turned to leave the room.

'I' I hate sensible men-I abhor middle-aged lawyers and doc- 

rs, and I shall never marry-never ! I'll be an old maid like

||osanna; and if Mr. Hawksley ever returns from those savage

nds, where they dig gold out of the ground as people here do

Iips, I'll keep his house for him if he will let me. And now, as

I'e got to go into town for Rosanna, I'll bid you good-morn-

Ailng, if you're quite done with me."

Pa:olly departed, dressed herself mechanically, and went on

kIosanna's commission.  The bright sunshine, the fresh air

iblew away the vapors of the morning,, and before she had been

fifteen minutes abroad Polly was herself again. Her step grew

!ela0stic her eyes bright, her cheeks rosy, her smile radiant. Go -

1: school! of course she would, and study hard too, and come

iAme accomplished, a piano-playing, fire- screen making

talian-singing, crayon-drawing, perfectly-finished young lady.

i    -iss Hautton or no one else should call her an ignorant rustic

:agam.

'-- It-was late in the afternoon when she reached home, andthe

fist person she beheld as she neared the cottage was Mr.

)Allan Fane. -She had spent the whole morning in Speckhaver

|--dining with a friend there-and now as the western sky was

reddening, she sauntered homeward trilling a sorg in very

-ladness of heart. It was her favorite ballad of " County

iii;Cy-" 'and dit twas of Guy Earlscourt she was thinking as she








<pb n="160"/>
l6o  LOVAES YOUNG DREAM AND OTHER THINGS 

sang. He reminded her of the heroes of her books, with 

darkly handsome face, his large Italian eyes, with that sleep

golden light in their dusky depths, and his smile,- that not M

Allan Fane or his brother could rival. She wa:; heart-wh

where the artist was concerned in spite of her pique and mo

tified vanity-a very child playing at being in love. Ar.d thei

was all a child's audacity in the saucy smile, and glance, an

greeting she gave him now.

Allan Fane had been a little doubtful about his reception

ever so little uneasy. A conviction that it was this mischiev:

ous sprite who had left him on the island to punish him for his ¤

deception, had stolen upon him. As he met that brightly defi-

ant, saucy glance he felt certain of it. She looked like a boy 

that moment-a bewitchingly, pretty boy, and the blue Greuze-

eyes flashed with the wickedest fire he had ever seen in them. 

How pretty she was! how pretty  how pretty! He was an 

artist, remember, and an adorer of beauty in all things.  he 

wore the "serviceable drab silk," but she had lit herself up.

with knots of cherry-colored ribbon, and her head, with its yel- ;

low curls, was bare to the red sunshine. She was swinging her

hat by its strings, as she had a trick of doing, altogether heed-

less of tan, freckles, or sunburn.

"How do, Mr. Fane?" Polly said, with that rippling smile ;

"I hear you had a delightful water-party to Lily Island yes-

terday. I do hope, now, you didn't tire yourself too much-

rowing in the hot sun. It's lovely on Lily Island, isn't it ?" j:

She was quite reckless whether he knew of her masquerade

or not. What was he to her-what was she to him? Only af

" picturesque model !" 

" I can't row, Miss Mason, as you very well know, neither

can I swim. As you are strong, be merciful. Do I need to '

tell you of the melancholy accident that befell me yesterday?

How the wicked little Charon who rowed our boat left Miss '

Diana Hautton and myself alone on that confounded little two-

penny halfpenny island; how Miss Hautton wept witn anger 

and vexation; how I swore inwardly at my plight; how the :

sun set, and the fog rose, and it was half-past nine at uight be-

fore, sadder, wiser, wetter, colder, we reached the Priory. Ah.,

Miss Mason! even you I think might have pitied us if you ha4

beheld our forlorn condition."

Polly shrugged her shoulders disdainfully. 

"I- pity no one who is deservedly punished. It was onl

just retribution for something said r done. I am quitecerta

* 0:^000-








<pb n="161"/>
LOVAES YOUNG DREAM AND OTHER THINGS.               i6i

Charon knew what he was about, and served you right. What

E       lexcellent opportunity it afforded you, Mr. Fane, of turning

;night-errant, succoring beauty in distress. I think you should

fel grateful for having been left."

:- "Knight-errantry went out of fashion with Don Quixote;

id succoring beauty in distress-beauty being exemplified by

MEiss Hautton-is a r6le I shouldn't care to undertake. Under

ertain circumstances," with his eyes fixed on the face before

unm, I can fancy a lifetime spent even on Lily Island might

e pleasant."

But the same look given her now, had been given to another

sterday, and she met it with a ringing laugh:

-"Don't you think, under all circumstances, Mr. Fane, you

oud row over to the mainland after twelve hours or so, for

e vulgar bread and butter of everyday life, finding love and

es pall a little ? No; I forget you can't row. Take lessons,

r, before you go on a water-party again."

' I will take lessons in anything, Miss Mason, if you will

ch me."

E^ H;is face flushed, his eyes sparkled, he came a step nearer.

There was something in her manner to-day that made her a

Sundredfold more bewitching than ever-a sort of reckless

defiance, that lit her face with a new, bright beauty.

-~!:" I have better use for my time, sir. Instead of teaching, I

Am going to be taught, myself. Iamgoing away to school."

l: "Going away to school !"

A: The girl laughed. Coquetry comes naturally to most pretty

:women, and Polly was a coquette born. Somehow, to-day she

elt as though she were vastly above this young man-older,

wiser-his superior.

"::  , If I had said 'going to Newgate,' you could not look more

blank. Yes, Mr. Fane, I am going away-going to schorl in

London-no, Brompton-for the next two or three years.'

- "Two or three years!"

He did look blank. The possibility of her going away had

never occurred to him. He had not given the matter luch

thought, but it had seemed to him that the bright summer

aonths would go on like this, in pleasant interviews, and de-

lightfu sittings for his picture. The end must come some time,

-and he must leave this girl with the tawny hair and sap-

hire eyes, but the end had only been glanced at afar off, and

tween lay a golden mist of long delicious days and weeks,

And now she was going away, and there broke upon Allan








<pb n="162"/>
62z LOVE'S YOUNG DREAM AND OTIHA           THINGS.

Fane the truth-that he was in love !-not merely smitten, t

in love, with a slim, untutored little girl, with the manners,

when she chose, of a princess, and the beauty of an embryo

goddess. For the first time in his life, after tenscore flirtations,

Allan Fanie was in love ! He was white as a sheet; his eye,

his voice, his careless attitude changed in a moment. Th:

girl saw it with wonder and delight.

"Yes," she pursued, mercilessly, "I am going away in a fe:i

,days-as soon as ever my things can be got ready-and I am

wild to be gone. Don't you think I need it, Mr. Fane ? Even

'a pi zturesque model' is the better for knowing the nine parts

of speech, and how to spell words of three syllables. When

you and Miss Hautton go to St. George's, Hanover--Square, 

please send me the Morning Post containing all the particulars ':

-that is, if you haven't forgotten my very existence long be-: 

fore that time." 

"I shall never forget you !"

He spoke the truth. Allan Fane never did forget her.-

That hour came back to him years after with something of the -

pang he felt then. Weak, selfish, he might be, and was, but

the pain of loss was there, and as bitter as though he had been 

a stronger and worthier man. That hour came back many 

times in his after life, and he saw little Polly Mason again withfi 

the red light of the sunset on her sparkling face, and the gleams.

of scornful humor in her flashing eyes.

"You will never forget me!" she repeated with another :-i

laugh, that had yet a tone of bitterness in it; "no, I suppose

the memory' of the little picturesque model, with the tawny

hair, and blue Greuze eyes, may serve to amuse you and Miss-

Hautton, for some time to come. \ Pray don't speak in a hurry,

Mr. Fane, as I see you are about to do. Who would make 

speeches to a little rustic school-girl?  What you say to- ,

Diana-you mean."                                      :

She had remembered his very words, and could launch them--

back now, with telling reprisal. He caught her hand before 

she was aware, and held it fast.    - 

"I knew it was you, Polly," he exclaimed; "oh wicke4'

fairy ! to come in disguise, and overhear my meaningless words.-

Don't you know that in society we may pay those sort of-

compliments, and make these empty speeches to ladies, and

ladies take them as matters of course, and never think of themi

twice. I don't care for Diana Hautton- I swear to you, Pol

-1 t~l't."' 

" 0  f SC  f

,,  0000








<pb n="163"/>
L OVi:'S YOUNG DREAM AND OTHER THINGS.            163

"No;" Polly said coldly-proudly-and trying to withdraw

her hand. "I date say you don't care for her, but you are go-

ing to marry her all the same. Please let go my hand, Mr.

fFane ; they will see you from the house."

't ,What do I care if they do ? what do I care if all the world

::seee ?" He was quite carried away now by the excitement of

.the chase, and his face was flushed, eager. "Forgive me, Miss

.Mason--Polly-if anything I inadvertently said has wounded

you. Believe me, I would offend a hundred Miss Hauttons

sooner than lose your good opinion."

"My good opinion can affect you neither one way nor the

Bother. You are a gentleman, I am--

"-' A lady, by Heaven, if I ever saw one!"

"An ignorant country-girl," Polly went on, a tremor now in

S her clear tones, and she looked far away at the crimson west;

:-"not so ignorant, though, as to be deceived by looks and

.words from you. Our paths lie apart--let us say good-by, and

rmeet no more."

i':: "Polly ! what a cruel speech !"

: "A sensible one, Mr. Fane.    Let me go, pray," rather

hwearily.  "See! you have dropped something from your

: pocket."

It was a tiny morocco casket, which lay at his feet. He

pl icked it up, opened it, and took out a ring that blazed in the

sunshine. It was a cluster-diamond. The next instant he had

r- rpossessed himself of Polly's hand, and the shining circlet

- shone on one slim finger.

: He lifted the hand to his lips and kissed it passionately-for

the first-the last time !

-" Wear it, Polly, for I love you !"

Alas! for rpan's truth ! A fortnight ago that ring had been

-rdered of a London jeweller to fit the finger of Diana Haut-

ton. He meant to propose down in Lincolnshire, and this was

to be the pledge of the betrothal. Only an hour ago the Lon-

don express had brought it, and here it. glittered on the finger

of Polly Mason !

Heaven-knows what further he might have said, what words,

what promises might have been erchanged; Polly might have

become Mrs. Allan Fane, perhaps, and this story had never been

written, for the great romance of this young woman's life you

have yet to hear, but at this instant (sent there by her guardian

angel, no doubt) there appeared upon the scene the gaunt form

-of Rosa a, summoning sharply her youthfil charge in to tea.








<pb n="164"/>
164  LOVE'S YOUNG DREAM AND OTHER THI.VGS.7 

She tendered no invitation to the gentleman. She sci wled 

upon him, indeed, as this exemplary lady could scowl. Ro:S<

anna could lave told you stories fit to make your hair rise, o!:

"Squires of high degree," who came a-courting village maids,

and of the dire grief and tribulation the aforesaid maids hJid1'

come to, in consequence. Polly in love, indeed ! Pollyl--£

who had taken her doll to bed yesterday, as it were, and sangl 

it to sleep ! 

Mr. Fane lifted his hat and departed at once. The girl 

would not look at him. She could not meet the glance in his :-

eyes. Her face was burning, her heart thrilling. She hid the:-

hand that wore the ring, and followed Rosanna meeklyinto the ,

house. On the stairs she met Duke, and puke, as gravely as 

in the morning, summoned her into his own room. Miss Ma- 

son felt she was in for it.

"I wouldn't let that young man dangle after me too much, 

if I were you, Duchess," he began. "He isn't what he pre.

rends to be; he's a humbug, you'll find; a false, fickle, mean

humbug! His father's a very honest man, and a good tailor- 

a deuce of a screw, though-but-"

"Duke !" Polly cried with indignant scorn. "A tailor !" 

The young lady said it in much the same tone you or I might :

exclaim "A demon !"

"Yes, Duchess, a tailor. I've bought clothes at the shop in á:

Bond Street many a time, and I've seen Mr. Allan Fane when

he was a pale-faced little shaver in roundabouts. He doesn't 

remember me, of course, and I don't care about renewing the

acquaintance. He's a tailor's son, fast enouglh, and I dare say :

it's the only thing about him not to his discredit."

It-wasvery unusual for Duke to be bitter, or say cruel things

of the absent, but he felt terribly sore on the subject of this

dandified artist, with his shining boots and swell hat, and white _

hands, and soft voice, making a fool of his little Polly.

"He's a humbug, Duchess, and he's'trying to get that middle-:

aged Miss Hautton to marry him. She's rich and high-born,

and he's only an adventurer, with a good address and a univer-

sity education. Don't take his pretty books, or drawings, or

sit for him as a model, or hare anything to say to him-that's 0

a good girl, Duchess." 

"Have you anything more to say, Duke ?" Polly asked quite -;

meekly. 

She felt somehow that what Duke said was true, but still- -

the looked at her ring and her heart thrilled as she remembered








<pb n="165"/>
-   l:OFOVES YOUNG DREAM AND OTHER THINGSd:.        165

his words-words so sweet to every girl's ear and heart-" 1 

love you /" 

f|. And meantime Mr. Allan Fane walked home, and on the 

P way found out he had been mad, and a fool. What had he

tdone ? . Given up all the hopes of his life for a pretty face with

t:blne eyes. Very good and pleasant things in their way, but not

I available as ready cash: not to be exchanged for good dinners,

~ horses, opera boxes, and a house in May Fair. What had

d he done ? Dire alarm filled him as he walked along; he cursed

!fhis own folly and precipitancy with a fervor good to hear. Was

iet, after all, too late yet ? He had not asked Miss Polly Mason

to be his wife.

t He found Miss Hautton walking wearily round and round

ethe great fish pond, and joined her at once. 

ii:  Miss Hautton, like Miss Mason, informed him she was going

i laway.

"Montalien bores me, I find," the lady said, carelessly;

:' "more this year even than usual, and the Duchess of Clanron-

. aid is going to the Italian lakes, and urges me to-"  A dreary  7

: yawn finished the sentence.

The Duchess of Clanronald!

:   Her grace of Clanronald had a nephew-rather an impover

i ised nephew, who had made hard running last year' for the

i IHautton stakes. No doubt he would go to the Italian Lakes,

too. Starry blue eyes, a witching, gypsy .face, a supple form,

and sixteen sunny years, are very well, if set off with diamonds

and gilded with refined gold. He couldn't marry Polly Mason;

he couldn't turn itinerant portrait-painter in this dull town, and

merge his bright individual star of self into a shabby-hatted, rate-

paying, tax-fearing, cradle-rocking, fanily man. It was written-

it was his fate-he must marry a rich wife; and so-alas for

Polly !

Before Miss Hautton's yawn was quite ended, he had poured

forth the tale of his long admiration, and implored her to be 1. s

wife !

The rosy light of the sun went down, and Diana Hautton 

lirgered by the fish pond with her accepted lover. Her accep-

ted lover!

He was pale and cold, and something inside his breast, that

did duty for a heart, lay like a stone, but he lifted one of the

Honorable Di's skin-gold hands to his lips and kissed it. Cold

is that hand was, the touch of his lips seemed to chill it.

She looked at him, and wondered at his pallor. But oj








<pb n="166"/>
I66 HOW ROBERT HA WKSLE Y .EPT HIS WORD. .:

course he was agitated; he loved her so, and had drea'dd a

refusal.                                           -'

They ent red the house together betrothed, a satisfied smile-

on Miss Hautton's lips. She liked him very much; he wasi

handsome, and would make her a devoted husband. .No ring

glittered on her finger-that would be remedied speedily, Mt.

Fane whispered.

And three miles off a young girl; younger, fairer even tha  i

the Honorable Diana Hautton, stands watching that rosy light '

in the sky as it sparkles and flickers on the diamond ciret on

her finger. And the happy glow is in her eyes, the happysmile |g

still lingers on her face, when all the sky is dark.

CHAPTER VII. 

lOW ROBERT HAWKSLEY KEPT HIS WORD. 

T was the third day after Polly Mason stood at the |

parlor window, looking listlessly enough up and down I

'the deserted country road. There was little to be I

seen, there were few abroad.- The fine June weather,

that had lasted steadily over a fortnight, had broken up-yes-

terday it had rained all day and all night; to-day it had -

ceased, but still a sullen, leaden sky frowned darkly on a sod- 

den earth and muddy roads and lanes. A weak, complaining:

wind wailed up from the sea to the young girl at the window- 

all seemed the very abomination of desolation. Within, things

were in harmony-Rosanna was laid up with toothache, Duke ;,

had quarrelled with his employers of the Lyceum, and was out l-

of spirits, and Allan Fane had never once been near the cot- 

tage. since. There are times in all our lives when everything 

goes wrong, days that are cold and dark and dreary when

there seems neither joy on earth nor hope in heaven.  s

Allan Fane had not been near the cottage since-that was

the blank thought uppermost in the girl's mind as she stood

there. " He will be here, to-day," was her first thought, on,. t

morning after he had given her the ring, and her eyes and fae.-

had glowed with such a new baptism of beauty all day  t

I 0  '..  ,








<pb n="167"/>
H BOW ROBERT HA WSLEY KEPT HIS WORD. I67

6ke and Rosanna had looked at her in wonder, and felt in.

Wined to be resentful that the thought of leaving them and go.

ngto school should produce such rapture. A fever of restlessn

hssheld her all that day and the next-a fever that burned in

er eyesE and on her cheeks, and took away appetite and rest.

d he never came. Another dayj, another night, his ring still

ashed upon her finger, his words still rang in her ears, his kiss

tl burned on the hand that wore the diamond, but he never

a me. What did it mean ? Was he ill ?-had he gone away

Tuddenily?-why did. he not come? Another time and she

d have put on her hat and gone up to the bailiff's house-

e would be sure of ascertaining there; but a new, strange

pidity had taken possession of Polly. She did not care to

-out-even to go shopping with Rosanna, for her new

es--heavenly occupation at any other time. She just wan-

&dred about the house-no flying footsteps, no trills of song, no

aging of doors, no breezy rushing up and down stairs all day

-. The restless fervor held her, but she said nothing, only

ted, strangely quiet and docile.

-n the third day, reaction and lassitude followed. Rosanna

cross with toothache, Polly worked about, and listened to

-dfreary complainings as she listened to the sobbing rain and

d  A presentiment of evil took possession of her-she felt

i the very hour he had told her he loved her, Allan Fane

l d l rted her forever !

ll did not ,love him-no, the surface of the lake. is rippled

a ssing breeze, but the storm that stirs it to its very

but rarely. She did not love him, save as she

e:, -Clive Newcome, and Co. He was the hero of

pet stories-stepped out of the leaves into real life

well-dressed, well-looking, well-mannered young man

pad-her attention. Polly wanted to be a lady-he

_  hef r thaf--he, a gentleman who had taken his de-

the friend and guest of Lord Montalien. Had

I: BHher whole heart might have gone out to him--

oyal, loving heart, as she could have given ! But

s vanity that bled now, her woman's pride was

e had taken her fancy-not for one second her

pang -of loss and cruel humiliation was there all

.gj: h  ad 1been fooled, and she was intensely proud,

bitterly.

-¤ .      -bwarly away from the window, at a call from Ro-

Mfr -con G il   wool for that jumping toothache. " And if it








<pb n="168"/>
I68 HOW RCBERT HAIVKSLEY KEPT HIS WORD. 

doesn't hold up in an hour," she said, with a vengeful glafiej

'I'll go straight into Speckhaven and have it out  I'm nodt

going to be made miserable by a double tooth.- Polly, there's

a knock at the door." 

Polly's heart gave a leap. At last! surely this was he! Sha

stood stock still, with the cotton wool in her hand. Duke canme

oat of the painting room in his shirt-sleeves, and opened thi0l

house-door. A portly lady in a black-silk dress stood there,

a comfortable-looking basket in her hand-no less a lady than

Mrs. Hamper, the housekeeper at the Priory. 

Mrs. Hamper, as a visitor of distinction, was ushered into the

parlor, vhither Rosanna and Polly followed. Mrs. Hamper 

might not be the rose, but she dwelt near that splendid flower 

-she was not Allan Fane-but she brought news of him, no 

doubt. She would know now whether he were ill, or false, and

Polly sank on a low chair, and leaned her head in a weary way

against the back. Her pretty face had dark circles under the 

eyes, and looked wanner, it seemed to the housekeeper, than' 

she had ever seen-it.

' You're not looking well, Polly," she remarked, with her 

eyes fixed on that colorless, small countenance. "You're bili- :

ous, or growing too fast, may be. Growing girls are always thin .

-I tell Lady Charteris, Miss Maud will be less pale and puny 3

when she grows up. I've brought you some hapricots, and :'

peaches, my dear, which I know you're uncommon fond of both." -

She opened her basket, displaying a tempting heap of fruit.' 

Polly thanked her, but rather spiritlessly still-she liked peaches 

and apricots, but there were other things she liked better.

"And how are all the gentry at the great house, Mrs. Ham- ;

per ?" Duke inquired. " Lord Montaiien got back from town 

yet?"

"No, my lord had not got back yet, and everybody was well 

at the great house. 'The latest news-but, of course, Polly hadj

heard it long ago from Alice Warren ? "

"No, Polly had heard nothing; the rainy weather had kept 

her in doors, and she was very busy getting ready to go ay ',

to boarding-school. What was the news?"

Her heart thrilled as she quietly asked the question. Shei, 

knew it was news of Allan Fane. 

"Why, the engagement of tLe Honorable Miss Haultonto

Mr. Allar Fane. Which," Mrs. Hamper said, folding her :

on her fat stomach, "I think myself it's a lowering of a h  ii

granddaughter to go and marry a hartist, but then she ain't

: Q .








<pb n="169"/>
.ErT  A 'WISLEY KEPT HIS WORD. I

1was, :a nd never a beauty at best of times; and

t-spoken, good-looking, young gertleman, and

_P eey, r'll say that for him, and the family is willin',

iooked forward to this some time. He proposed

esday heening last, and he's going to haccompany

_  hortly for the July and Haugust months."

eeper paused for breath, her eyes fixed curiously

- ee   Was it altogether to deliver the fruit Mrs.

tepped out of her way, to visit Mr. Mason's ? It

et inth servants' hall at the Priory how Mr. Fane

gi after little Polly Mason, or that Miss Hautton

^ ^ - -She liked Polly, this fat, fair, and forty Mrs.

-       me token, some token, some cry of pain. There

The pale face kept its tired look, the long, dark

blue eyes.; Mr. Allan Fane might have been

3@esar, dea    d d gone, for all emotion that still face

edhertoo, in wonder and pride at her " pluck."

Fet:' he thought; "she's like her mother-ready

gement has been publicly announced then?"

d. d.i'" Will they be married soon-will the wedding

no;" answered Mrs. Hamper; "they won't be

! -in London, most likely, next spring; but ot

l:iink áof that is settled yet. Mr. Fane will wait

comes home and speaks to him as Miss Haut-

resrelative; though the young lady's quite hold

0   :lfact for herself  I say again it's a great match for

y- foor hartist-a hearl's granddaughter, and three

_   ! year. ".-.                   ..

~       s^.ran^ddaughter, and three thousand a year! And

_ought he was in love with her, and would be

ear f her seven hundred pounds ! A crushing

Fn. i  nsignificance, poverty, ignorance, low birth,

Wheat a   little fool she had been not to know

:he had been -only amusing himself with her

vanity! She clenched the hand that held the

unseen, and her face still kept its utter indiffer-

_   ropoed on Tuesday evening, and on Tuesday

told er he loved her, andhad given her that

KiC á staight from her to -Miss Hautton, and








<pb n="170"/>
17A   HOW ROBER2T t1WKSLEY KEPT HIS WORD. 

asked her to be his wife, and they had laughed together, Eon

likely, over the love-scene with the country-girl-the little co

ceited rustic, so easily gulled! Traitor! 'coward! The lit

white teeth clenched-if looks had been lightning, and Alla

Fane there, he had never left the house alive.

Mrs. Hamper rose to go, just a trifle disappointed.

had looked to see anger, mortification, sorrow on Polly Mason'

face, and she had seen nothing. The girl had heard the ne

with utter indifference. Perhaps the stories of the seran

hall were unfounded after all. It was qiuite clear tiat Poll

had sense, and thought nothing about him.

Duke accompanied the portly lady to the door, ard saw he

out. When he returned to the parlor he found Polly sitting

the same attitude, her head lying wearily back, her eyes close

her hands folded, so unlike herself                   I

"Will you come to the Lyceum to-night, Duchess?" Duk

said, after a long, blank pause-so gently he-said it. He ww

not sentimental in any way, he had never wanted to marr.

anybody in his life; yet by some prescience now, he knew jus

as well how his little girl's heart was bleeding, as though t

"loved and lost" business had been as familiar to him as 

scraping of his violin. "They're bringing out a new comed

in three acts: 'The Prince of Pipesandbeersbad,' and there's 

screaming farce to follow. Come, and have a good laug

before you go to Miss Primrose and the blackboard."

The girl looked up at him with a kind, grateful glan

"Thank you, Duke, I'll go if Rosanna can spare me, and hAz

wisdom-tooth stops aching." 

The scene-painter went back to his work.           !

"Thank God!" he thought, "she doesn't care for tl

puppy ! I'm not ordinarily of a pugilistic nature, and donfl

as a rule, let my angry passions rise, but if I. could give l

Allan Fane a sound kicking on the first occasion, I thik i

would do us both good!" i

Rosanna went to bed, groaning dismally. Polly took h

sewing and sat down by the window. The wind grew wil-

the leaden sky darker as the afternoon wore on, the rain-dri

began pattering once more against the glass. And in t-

young girls breast, as she sat, her needle flying, a sharp

cruel pain ached. She had been fooled, deceived, laughed C~

her woman's pride hurt to the core-she could never ag

her life long, have the same perfect faith in man orw

SL e had lost something, the :neffable bloomof perfect innoc








<pb n="171"/>
_rBejRT HAWKSLE Y KEPT HIS WORD. 171

trust, and Allan Fane's was the hand that had;

he ! how dare he!" she thought, her little Ila nd

ain; -"how dare he trifle with me so!"

er e for over an hour, her anger rising and swelling

nastant. The rainy twilight was falling, when suds

e a knock at the door. She knew that knock;

pped, but before she could rise the door was

te visitor, hat in hand, walked in. He had come

estood before her, his light summer overcoat wet

shigh riding-boots splashed with mud, pale, paler

he come ? He could not have told you he could

y, though he dreaded, coward that he was, to face

dgiven her up, basely, weakly, selfishly, but he

~ b!on:e'more into those matchless blue eyes, though

r 0of their glances slew him. And perhaps, too,

she might not know the truth. He could not stay

gh t be, it must be, the last time, but once again

upon the lovely face of Polly Mason !

e at her, as their eyes met, told him she knew

eup and stood before him! Even in the fading

I  see the streaming fire in her eyes, the scornful

h(andsome lips. The regal grace of mien that was

ie charm always, had never been half so uplifted

'She spoke first-he could not have uttered a word.

ave come for my congratulations, Mr. Fane," she

:dlear, ringing voice, that had neither quiver nor

!i    L: "I hear you are engaged to the Honorable

:tt. :eWell! you have them ! It is an eminently

t_! h in every respect: age,"-with cruel emphasis--

rank, 'and all !t

d Iat her with horror-struck eyes. What did she

stinging sneer? Did she know of that Bond

' Oh, ,impossible ! it was but a random shot that

every day," pursued Miss Mason, with a smile

i, 0"'that the son of a I ondon tailor gets an op-

mratrying an earl's granddaughter ! Ah! you feel

! with a scornful laugh.  I know your secret,

i fully guarded! But don't be alarmed.    I

riory, and tell Miss Hautton. I apn afraid,  a

_   W:,00000 S0;.00 .    :  :E:     ' 7:   --   I








<pb n="172"/>
172  lOW O' ERT HAWKSLEY KEPT HtS WORm

devotedly as she is attached to you, she might jilt you if

knew it. fwon't tell, Mr. Fane, and I wish you evey'

ness so suitable a match deserves-if the poor scene-pi

poor relation may presume to offer congratulations to a g

man of Mr. Fane's standing! And this ring, which yO?

kindly forced upon my acceptance the night before lastJi

voice faltered for the first time, "permit me to return iLt

you haven't purchaed an engagement ring for Miss Ha

dare s  you might make this answer."             '

He broke down. He was of a weak nature, impressio

as wax, but as strongly as it was in his nature to love ai4

but himself, he loved this girl. 

He broke down as a woman might-his face hidden 'h

hands-his voice faltering, and asked her to forgive him  -

She stoodiarid looked at him-rage, wounded pride, h

tion, scorn, pity, all in her glance. If she had never b

beautiful before she was beautiful in this moment.

"Forgive you," she repeated, and the hard ring died :

her voice and a great pathos followed. "You ask me to

give you! Well, Mr. Fare, I will try. It is not that I care

you much-no, Allan Fane, I know now I never cared for

but you have hurt me all. the same. I shall never h

same fith in mankind again-I seem * have lost my you

the moment it became mine. You have acted badly tb

badly! badly "'-the fire that can only blaze in bluefi

flashed from hers now-"but I will try ad forgive you

can. Take your ring!"         .                  :

" T cannot, oh, Polly!" 

She flung it at his feet in a sudden tempest of fy

quick fury of a very child.

"Don't ever call me Polly-how dare yott do it:? 

your ring this moment or I will walk straight out of this h

up to the Priory, and tell Miss Hautton every tdl I

your books, and yoar drawings-here they are-everythit 

ever gave  e, except the flo*rs, and those I threw i

fire an hour ag. Take them, I command you, Mr. Fai

What could he do but obey? He was afraid of erii

hour-afrad d  f her evei if she had not known his se

that made him her abject slave. He took the ringh

the little package, and a very sorry figure the conquerin

cut in the hour of his triumph. It struck Polly's sens :

ludicrous. In all tragedies do not the elements of  e

lous linger? and she burst out laughing, with the 

tears still in her eyes. 

: ::  ::'~~i~~i








<pb n="173"/>
^^r   7' h!AW'rSL Y K.R7T HIS WORD.        3

like' a colporteur going his rounds w.th tracts.

detain you an instant longer, Mr. Fane; Miss

want 't you. You have had your sport; and a

ountr-gir rl has helped while away a summe,

-e is no need to linger now; I have congratu

given you your belongings back, and now tht

aygood-by the better."

j a bow-Miss Hautton could never have sur

grace or insolence, and walked straight out of the

Allan Fane left the house, and coming to the

fltug  his bundle of books to the bottom. He

fung the ring after, but diamond rings cost, and-

tit n his pocket, and went back to his high-bore

an hour after he placed it on her finger, and Di-

ifnm his upper window, saw th, young man come

waited anxiously for supper-time and a pretext to

afflicted molar also gave over aching about that

-*he brother and sister uet in the small dining-room.

~-= :  got tea-the table was st, th toast buttered, the

.~kitchen stove burning cheerily. For the girl her-

is  quite white, quite still very silent, and the blue

e^dd weary and heavy. She was more womanly than

ver seen   , ut her,  t  sighed as he looked at her.

se'shbetter so," he thought; "quiet an young-

bt think Id, sooner have my wild little girl ply-

pipe on the fiddle, or even singing & The night

s stretched."  ' 

anoticed the pale cheeks, the silnee, and the lack

}child is growing bilious," the elder lady remarked,

^ong glare fixe on shrikikng Polly, "or about to

ki'aek 'f jaundice. People always turn green and

) spiits before jaundice. Do you feel a general

, 'oIt, ToIly, and an inclination to cr ? 

at: Duke and burst out laughing-rather hyster.

the least inlined to cy, Rosanna, thapn you,"

and her eyes had a dry, tearless glitter. ('I

yu want, but you, shant victimize me. 4.7 wnt

o htot baths, or vegetable pills, or any of the

_f  Uke to drench popr sick mQtal , wi*  Let n

_ | l,~n. 








<pb n="174"/>
174 HOW ROBERT HAWKSLEY KEPT HIS WORD. 

She left the room as she spoke. Duke looked wistfullydt

her.

"Let her alone, Rosanna," he repeated, "it's the best thii

you can do. I know what's the matter, and herb tea won

cure her. She is fallen into low spirits, as you remarked, 

I'll take her to see our funny new piece at the Lyceum, to

night, to freshen her up a bit." 

It rained still, but Polly never minded rain, and tam

Duke's arm went with him to the little Speckhaven the

She had delighted in the theatre hitherto, before Lord Mo

talien and his guests had come down to disturb the current 

her serene life, but to-night she looked at the glittering stag

lamps, the tinselled dresses, the rouged faces, with apatheti

eyes.

"The Prince of Pipesandbeersbad" was a very fat and funn

potentate indeed, who kept the Speckhavenites in roars for tws

hours, but the figures on the stage flitted before the youn

girl's gaze like puppets in a magic lantern. She sat with he

hands folded, no light in her eyes, no color on her cheeks, he

thoughts far away-far away.  Once, and once only, shle

aroused herself. Eliza Long, taken to the play by the haber-

dasher's youngmnan, watched that altered face with vicious de

light, and when the curtain was down made her way over j

Polly's seat for a little friendly whisper. 

" How d'ye do, Polly-isn't it awful droll? I've been dying

to see you, do you know, to find out if the news I've heard b

true. But, of course, it can't-being so took up as he wa

with you-I mean Mr. Allan Fane, the artist. William Shanks

that's one of the footmen at the Priory, you know, told pa

was engaged to Miss Hautton." 

Polly lifted her quiet eyes to the other's spiteful ones, d

answered slowly: 

"I don't know, Eliza-I'm not acquainted with Mr. Williai

Shanks, footman at the Priory; my acquaintance doesn't V

in the servants' hall. Is he the tall footman, or the very 4

footmnn-who has been paying attention to you since t

family came down ? As to his information, that sort of peope

are generally pretty correct in their news regarding their mi-

ters. In this instance he happens to be perfectly right. '

Fane was at our house in a friendly way, as usual, this afte

noon, and we had a chat over the matter. He is engaged i

Miss Hautton, and they. are going to Italy for the summer, a

will be married next May in London. Is there anything








<pb n="175"/>
V      rT HA WKSLE Y KEPT HIS WORD. [75

eto know, Eliza, because I might inquire of Mr.

Auld probably be even mere correct than Mr.

Sianks--the footman !"

M'iiss Mason turned her back deliberately upon

/iho returned to her seat worsted, as she always was

ter with Polly, but rejoicing.

iwhile at the Priory its lord had arrived by the

k train, bringing with him a short, sombre, stout

/ Ceal look. He was legal-he was Mr. Gripper, of

er & Grinder, Lincoln's Inn, London; and he

ontalien were closeted together on important busi-

/ (e time after their arrival. Mr. Gripper emerged at

!s shown to his room. He was staying over night,

; and Mr. Fane was shown into the library, where

ins were drawn, the lamps shone, while outside the

nid the black June night shut down. My lord sat in

m-chair, near a writing-table, staring in a dazed

y at the lamp before him. His usually placid face

ange expression, half perplexity, half dismay. For

/as the servant ushered him in, he too looked pale and

istured, and both were so absorbed in their own

:that neither noticed the expression of the other's

F/e took a seat opposite, looking singularly nervous

Iam given to understand by masculine friends who

the business, that asking the consent of a young-'

ior guardian, is much more disagreeable than ask-

ng lady herself. Mr. Fane had got through his part

autton glibly enough, and this asking Lord Monta-

he merest matter. of form; still, like Macbeth's

7 <the words " stuck in his throat." Lord Montalien'

is thoughts away from his own absorbing topic with

ffort, and listened with bland suavity to the young

ling words.

H to marry Diana, and ask my consent?  My dear

sent is quite unnecessary, as you know. Very cor.

u, though, to come to me. Of couise, I have long

thits, an- ai Diana seems pleased, I sincerely offer

congrtlaulations. There's some trifling disparity ol

aware, but you know the Scotch have a saying,

thWeife to be the elder brings luck to the house."

saisd nothing, but he looked somewhat rueful. He








<pb n="176"/>
1t6 HOW RpBERT HAV WKSLBY AKPT HIS WORD. '

was thinking he would rather dispense with a little of the il

and have the "trifling disparity" on the other side.

. "Then I have your approval, my lord," he said, rising, ' a

may consider all things settled ?" 

"You have my approval and best wishes. Diana is certei-

old enough to act for herself"-again the young man wince

"and her income, as you must know, dies with her. By the 

Fane,"-changing his voice with abruptness-" you mixedi

good deal among the people at the f6te the other day, and m

kniow-was there a man by the name of-of Trowel-n

Mason," referring to his tablets, "here upon that occasion ?  I

Allan Fane started, more nervously than before.

"There is a man by the name of Mason living about threy

miles from here. Mason is a common name, however; there

may be many Masons in Speckhaven."

"So there may. The fellow I mean is called Marmaduak

Mason, and has a maiden sister, Rosamond-Rosalind-ni

Rosanna," referring to the tablets again. "By occupation -

scene-painter." 

"That is the man, my lord. Yes, I know him." 

"And he has a ward-she passes for his cousin, a girl of six

teen-called Polly?"                          X       5

Had Lord Montalie  not been so engrossed by his table

and questions he must have noticed -Mr. Fane's greatly di

turbed face.                                         l

"Yes, my lord, there is a Polly Mason !"        :

"That's the girl !" His lordship shut up his tablets with t

triumphant snap. " Now, what's she like? I'll lay my life sh

has thick ankles, a Lincolnshire accent, and a turned-up nose -!

"You would lose your stake, then, my lord. Miss Masoi

is, with something of an effort he said this, "one of the very

handsmes girls I ever saw in the whole course of my life. :-

"Ah is she?" his lordship sighed resignedly; "all e

worse for me. An heiress and ward with a snub n:ose would -

trouble enough, but a ward with a Grecian nasal appendag

and eighty thousand pounds to her fortune ! Ah, well, myli 

has been one long martyrdom-this is only the last strwtha lY

very likely will break the camel's back" i - 

Allan Fane looked at the speaker with a face of ghasy

wonder. 

"My lord "he said, "I don't udtnderstand. Polly Mason 

no heiress-she is this scene-painter's poor relation-brout-

4P. out of charity."; '








<pb n="177"/>
-        e^ ^       X4-WiRJR.7sEr IPT  HIS5 WOR. 1      |

lw," Lord Montalien said plaintively, "she',

'itI 'kind. -She is my ward, and she has eighty

:  at this moment deposited in the funds for hei

^ ;0 dosn':t look so imploringly- its too long a storyg

_Tkhere's the dressing-bell--you sha'al: hea it at

_|      !..- = Allan Fane quitted the room, and- went up to

e H:did not seek his affianced-he was aghast with 

alarm. What did it mean?    Eighty thousand

olly Mason !

bell clanging high up in the windy turrets, at half-

-iormedd Speckhaven and its inhabitants that my

inily were about to dine, Lord Montalien took

o: a few minutes before going in to dinner, and pre-

congratulations to his cousin Diana on thisinterest-

in. her life. Mr. Gripper brought up the rear of

procession with Guy, and was introduced to tbe

around the table.

esn't look like the harbinger of romance or a fairy

or anything of the kind," Lord Montalien remarked,

l he is. He comes to inform a little country-girl

ts    she is my wiard, and: heiress of eighty thousand~

o any of you beside Eane know her ? Her name

isolly Mason !"

ntalien glanced around his.own board, and was

sprised at the sensation the very commonplace

vry commonplace young person created. Diana 

ted, and turned an icy look upon her lover-that

h fixed his eyes upon his plate and seemed slowly

y suppressed a whistle and looked unutterable

a my Lady Charteris' spoon dropped into her soup.

! a. cashrancis Earlscourt was. eagerly interested,

:   e, after one steady look at his pallid and startled

wit composure for the peer's next words.

d sahisi lordship, "you alllook as if you knew hel.

interested before I begin, how will you be thrilled be-

finished ?  Shall I go back and begin at the begin-

th this romance of real life, as the Penny Herald calls

g-ancd-thunder serials.? Yes, I will ?"     . 

nta-len pushed away his soup, leaned back i h

: n to ' thrill" his hearers. . 

l~  - 'ourteen years ago, 'n the second, of last April, hat

k foi       r ,Livrepot .. i rem emOtl. date, b.cauaus

8 : ~f:t.. 








<pb n="178"/>
r78  orW    ROBERT HAIWKSLEY KEPT HIS WORD.

of the profound regret with which I left America. I've not

had milch of what the world generally calls ' enjoyment' in my

life," the pathetic tone of the speaker was remarkable to hear:

"but I think those nine months out there among the herds b

w:ld buffalo, and herds of wilder Indians, on the Western plains

came nearer it than I shall ever come again. The passenge

of the ' . and of Columbia' were the usual sort of people one

meets, rich mercantile and manufacturing people from the

northern cities, with millions of dollars, going over to make

the g- and tour. There was only one among them I ever founid

worth the trouble of talking to, and he was a second-class fel

low-splendid proportions-tall and moulded like an athletic'

Apollo, with a face full of intelligence and self-repression. Self-i

repression in man or woman I like. This man looked as if he:;

had a story-he puzzled me-to be puzzled means to be inter- ,

ested. I was interested in Mr. Robert Hawksley; and on the

last day out, he told me his story, mentioning no names, not 

his own-the name he vent by on shipboard, even then, I sus-

pected, at times, to be assumed. 

"He was an Englishman, the only son of a yeoman farmer,

but educated as a gentleman. He had been two or three years !

before secretary to a man in Staffordshire. I think he said this 

man had a daughter or niece, I forget which, a great heiress, a 

great beauty, and six years his junior. She was home from

school, romantic as all girls home from school are, and she meets

my handsome secretary. What would you have ? Why fall in 

love with each other, of course-run away to Scotland, and _bt 

married!"               -                           :"

My lord paused. The fish had been placed upon the table), '

and he took his knife and fork and refreshed himself with a lit- 

tie turbot. And over the face of Sir Vane Charteris a strange

dark change was passing, and over the face of my lady a deathly ,

whiteness had come. She leaned a little forward, her lips apart,

her great eyes dilated--heedless of her.husband, of her dinner, 

of the people who looked at her. What story was this she was 

hearing?

ILord Montalien complacently set it all down to his own' :

' thrilling" powers of narration, and placidly went on: 

"Well, those two fo*lish, unfortunate, happy young lovers

kept their secret for four months; then the truth came out, and

the: thdle was the deuce to pay.  Little missy was spirited

away; my handsome secretary, through some nefarious plot on 

the part of the guardian, was found guilty of robbing money








<pb n="179"/>
rXOBERT HAWKSLEY KEPT HIS WORD.           79

and obliged to fly England. Now, two years after,

e  home and a competence, and he was returning

this wife and take her back to that new world. We

.e qifay. As we shook hands I made himpromise

in any way, I could serve him, he would command

lked the lad greatly-it was a brave and loyal nature,

,eve....e

?' said Lord Montalien, taking a little more turbot,

ears passed, and I heard nothing more of, or from,

i  :rt l Hawksley until yesterday. Until yesterday, when

e Gripper here, called upon me and informed me I

d to become guardian of a young lady, heiress of

snd pounds, and presenting me with a letter con-

ther particulars. The letter was all the way from

isco, and from my old acquaintance, Hawksley. He

he promise I had voluntarily made, and in the most

frank way asked me to fulfil it now by becoming

an and protector of his only child. And he told me

brief, from the time of our parting on the Liver-

.a4' found his wife-the wife on whose fidelity he said

. s ipboard he could have staked his existence-how

:ink?  At the altar-the bride of another-a man to

B:had been engaged before he had met her, of her own

station. There are more Enoch Ardens in the world

Tennyson's hero.   He left England again without

word to her, and he has never returned since. But

ystery, which he does not explain,.he discovered that

vd given birth to a child-a daughter-five months

st flight from England, which child, at two years old,

ven to a scene-painter, named Mason, and his sister,

:   0:)p. He found this child, begged the Mason people

ery care of her, and they should be one day well re-

That day has now come. In the California gold

man has made a fortune-eighty thousand pounds he

d to be his lucky little daughter's dowry, and I am

er guardian. He asks me to place her at a school

hil be educated in a manner befitting the station in

~.estined to fill; and he says that she may drop the

f Polly Mason' for her own rightful name of Pau-

:rm this t tis, therefore, it is plain that instead cf his

aksley, it is Robert Lisle !"

;tlien paused- not that he had finished by anj 








<pb n="180"/>
ISo     EAdDY C  JIMTERIS -fSARS THE TRUTI           :

means wih his interesting story-but at that moment- wi

gaspig cry, Lady Charteris fell forward, her head on the ta

All started up; her husband lifted her in his arms, alnamt

ghastly as herse   She had fainted dead away I 

CHAPTER VIII.. - :

LADY CHARTERIS HEARS THE TRUTH. 

i    S the night wore on the rain increased:  At half-pa

eleven, when Duke and Polly left the theatre, it wa

pitch dark and pouring torrents. Polly did not n'i,

:  the rain; in her .strong young girlhood she had not

had half a dozen colds in her lifetime, and the two had a nice

long, muddy walk through the blackness. Hackney-cache

there  ere, but all, had, been monopolized by greater folks than 

the scene-painter and h's cousin. They trudged contentedly

along, and who wast t ell either tha t twas for the last tiime ,

That with the new day, so near breakig, a new life was tg

dawn for this girl of sixteen ?             - 

Rosanna was up, waiting with dry clothes, a good fire, and -:A

coSey little supper. She was very tender with her child now tha

she was going away to school. Polly's spirits had risen with the;

walk in the fresh summer rain; they were too elastic to be long 

depressed, and then her wound was only skin deep. She ate:

the toast and drank the weak tea Rosanna had prepared, andi

la-uged once more about the "Prince of Pipesandbeerslba4" 

in a wa that did her hearers' hearts good, and went off, half

an hour past midnight, to her own' room, singing gayly as sh

went;

"And the best of all ways 'lengtle your days,

Is to stel a fe hoursl   the ngtt. my dear." 

"Thank Heaven," Duke thought fervently, "she can laugh

and sing again.  tss a complaint everybody has, everybody

gets over." 

Very true, Mr. Duke Mason, most people have it, and most:

people get over it. So, too, a great many of us take the sm'all 

po:; ad some of us get well, and not a trace remains to








<pb n="181"/>
' CAR7Y'ERIS HIEARS THE TRU7MY       x    '

odious disease has ever been; and others of us get

eat, and drink, and are merry, but the-scars remain1

deep, to the very last day of our lives !

e-paiter, with. a yawn, took up his bedroom can-

-his sister good-night, and was turning to quit the

nthere came such a knock at the front door as liter-

him drop it again with amaze. A knock that echoed

whole house, at a quarter to one; of a pouring

June morning. The master of the house looked at

ast.

it be, Rosanna, at one o'clock in the morning ?"

the light and I'll soon see," retorted the intrepid

; and taking the candle her brother had dropped, she

raight to the door and flung it open.

'Miss Rosanna Mason expected to see, it was evi-

did not expect the visitor she beheld, for with a loud,

y she :recoiled. At that cry Polly's curly head, peep-

y over the banister, came down another step or

e Sfrom his place in the kitchen advanced, and there,

.on the threshold, drenched through, splashed with

as death, with wild eyes and disordered hair, he

- Charteris! Lady Charteris, alone, wet through, so

B hme, and at that hour. Some prophetic instinct

understand all. He took the candle from his sister's

dwhispered in her ear:

God's sake, make Polly go to. bed !"

a left obediently, awed by the sight of that awfully

lie fa ce.

ma ia, Lady Charteris," Duke said gravely. "4 You will

death standing th   there i  therain. Are you alone "

not answer the question. She came in and stood

ftmn ia. the warm, lighted kitchen, her wet garments

gon ; the white floor, her loose hair falling about her

ie great black eyes fixed with spectral solemnity on the

:   Mason," she said, in a hoarse, unnatural sort of

^ you have deceived me, and I trusted you  My bus.

harter. is !"            -

ed glow leaped up in the dusky depths of her great

it Lady Charteris," she sail, in the same still, corn

..    : and you know it! I have neve for one hour








<pb n="182"/>
182    LADY CHARTERIS HEARS THE TRUTH. 

had a right to that hated name. I am Robert Lisle's wife, ai i

Robert Lisle is alive, and you know it."

"My lady-"               - 

"You know it," she repeated. "You have deceived me :!

long enough, all of you. I am no child. I will be deceived

no longer. This night you will tell me the truth. I have,

walked three miles through darkness and storm to hear the-

truth, and you shall speak it. On the day-the accursed day,: I

--upon which I stood at the altar, Sir Vane Charteris' bride, i.

Robert, my Robert, my husband, my love, was in the church ; 

looking at my perjury. And you knew it like the rest, and 

like the rest have hidden it from me-you who knew how I 

loved himr-you whom I never wronged." 

Her voice sank to an unutterable pathos, her eyes looked at :  .

him  unutterably sad, unutterably reproachful. Duke fairly .

gave way. 

"I did, my lady-forgive me if. you can ! It was wrong-I 

thought so from the first, but what could I-do ? He bade me :

keep his secret from you-from you most of all on earth. -

What could I do but obey ? "

"He-you mean-?" 

" I mean the man who called himself Robert Hawksley-  ::.

who was Robert Lisle, as I know very well now, and your hus- :I

band. You were out of England-he bound me by a promise

never to reveal his existence if I chanced to meet you again. :s 

What could I do, my lady ? I don't know how you have found:-

this out, the whole thing is so confused that I hardly know::'_

which is the right and which the wrong. I wanted to tell you

that night in Montalien Park, but I- feared-I feared! What

right had I to tell you you were the wife of two.living husbands,

bound to each by the tie of motherhood? And so I held my

peace. I am sorry for you, my lady-sorry from my inmost: -

heart. I would help you, Heaven knows, if I could."

"You can!" she said, still retaining that deep, unnatural

calm. "I have come to you for help. Twice before you  i

aided me in my great need; now help me again, for the third

time, in a greater extremity still." 

She held out both hands to him. He remembered the ges.

ture--the very same as she stood by the window of Lyndith 

Grange and imiplored him to aid her in her flight, as on that 

night he answered, more moved than he cared to show:

"I will help you, if I can. Tell me how, Lady Charteris ?" 

"Not that name !" she cried, rising passion in her voice and

:  '   '* '' 








<pb n="183"/>
_ DY CHARTERIS HEARS THE TRUTH.           183

ayetr again that name ! I loathe it. I abhor it, as

man E that bears it! I am Olivia Lisle-oh, thank

I can say it ! Thank God  that my darling lives,

hodld never see his face again !"

ito a chair, and the womanhood within her gare

overed her face with her hands, and the room wat

|       F :~her anguished sobs-anguish that was still half

jo y.i He lived !  Oceans rolled between them,

ol land divided them-a deeper gulf than earth or

d them asunder-the probabilities that they would

face to face again were as one in ten million-but

_  And the woman's heart yielded in such rushing tears,

sobs, as shook her from head to foot.

predicament for Duke-Duke Mason-a model of

e to all the married and unmarried raen of Speck-

t up here with another man's wife-nay, the wife of two

:, at this unholy hour of the morning! If anybody in

hiuld chance to see or hear-and what was Rosanna,

y-hole, thinking?   One may be virtuous and still in-

"cakes and ale "-one may be all the cardinal virtues

, and still listen at a key-hole. Duke felt dreadfully

i  this most unhappy lady-her tears and hysterics

him and made him nearly cry himself, but still he

ng  istractedly if anybody should find it out-if Sir

teris should unexpectedly appear, outraged, jealous,

e him. Visions of a dismal day-dawn, a lonesonme

Bewhere down along the coast, pistols for, two, and a

baronet, a dead-shot, with his evil eyes upon him,

:or the fatal " One, two, three !" rose before him.

Charteris looked up at last. As on that other night,

the_ trees of Montalien, she commanded herself for his

nd held back her passion of tears by the effort of self-

in, :that had become habitual to her. She held out her

^t^ w;him with a pathetic glance that went straight to his

cr, honest heart. 

4kve P me, Mr. Mason," she said sweetly; "it is weak

ish of me to distress you-you, my best, my most faith-

1  i    : II will not give way again. My own cowardice, my

t   weakness in fearing for my child, in wishing to ro

fer in itoo. readily believing the lies told me of-of hiJ

as, brought all this long misery upon me. I must beal

*     itmy liyfe's c ose alone. .But-I must hear all you have

:-   very word he spoke, everything he did-every.








<pb n="184"/>
I84    LADY CHARTFERIS HEARS THE TRUTIM 

thing you know. I am I think the most utterly wretched 

lost creature this wide earth holds. There are times whe!^5 

fancy I am almost mad. If you have any pity in your heart ftia:

so miserable a wretch, you will speak to-night and tell m  t

tl uth."

"I will tell you the truth, my lady," Duke answered,

voice full of great pity. " Heaven knows I would have toldK

you long ago if I had dared. A great wrong has been done-i

a great and cruel wrong. Whether it can ever be repair

now, is not for me to say. The dead and the living are al

to blame. Geoffrey Lyndith and Sir Vane Charteris! They

both knew on your second wedding-day that Robert Lisle wXa

alive.                                      . 

"Yes," she said, catching her breath spasmodicall, an

leaning forward in her eagerness. "Go on!" 

painter continued. He was walking up and down the kitchen

floor, now, and his thoughts went back to that past time, and

the sunny April morning; the throng of carriages and peoptle

before St. George's, and Robert Hawksley's white face, wereta

vividly before him. "I cannot understand it myself, but som

instinct told me who he was from the first. I knew but litt

of your story then, my lady, but I heard both yourself and M

Lyndith allude to a Robert Lisle, and when yugave me te child

you said was yours, I, of course, concluded that Robert Lisl 

had been your husband and was dead. Yet on that morning`.

when we stood face to face, I remember the thought coming

into my mind, 'What if this should be Robert Lisle 'in th'-

flesh !' It was the look his- face wore, I think, that first sug: s

gested the idea-a look I cannot describe-such a look as only

ai man in a case of the kind could by any possibility  ear

We entered the church together. He asked me on the wai if

I knew who was to be married, and I told him. The ceremony 

was over when w wewnt in, a few seconds later, and you cam

down the aisle on Sir Vane Charteris' arm. You did not ses.

us. You seemed to see nothing.   Your eyes were fixed

straight before you in a blind, blank stare. He rose up as yo. 

drew near and took a step forward, and his eyes met those oI

Sir Vane full. I never saw such a change come over aa

human face as came over that of 5the baronet in that instant-

an awful, ghastly horror, that seemed to stun him. But tl*

people pressing behind bore him on. Everybody lee t::

church, and Robert Hawksley and myself an4 the pew-oeirer

were there alone.' "








<pb n="185"/>
.ffA ER7 S HEARS THE 7RUTH. :18

^ f^nimself Hawksley, my lady. I turned to himi

'K and there with being Robert Lisle. 'My

y he answered, 'and I must follow that man.'

c:hurch together, called a hansom, and drove to

house on Park Lane. I remained in the cab;

n:dafer some trouble was admitted, ard your

in person, and they went into the library to

' It remember!" my lady said, in a hushed,

I remember the altercation in the hall, my

:us at the table, and a strange hush of expecta.

/nus. Oh, my God! to think that in that hour

/-the same roof with me-in that hour when it was

6late " Duke Mason answered. "Had he in-

ing you, that very instant he would have been

hhands of the law to answer for a crime he had

4:. Yet I doubt if that would have held him.

ade to believe that you abhorred his memory,

him a thief, that you had grown to love Sir

that if you knew the truth, the shame, the an-

would break your heart. He was told the

marriage, and would be so proven if he made

+t see or speak to you. It was too late, my lady.

iumhed. PRbert Lisle left the house, and fell

oat the sreet beforehe had gone ten steps.,

ne-mmy sister cared for him, and next day, as

eter, he told me his story  He believed what

dithhad said-that you were utterly false and

lady, I. knew better. I could not bear to hear 

aid aright or wrong, told him all I knew. It

j heearnd that the little child prattling about the -

-1:: believe that knowledge saved him from a

it gave him something to live for. Where you

altl iope was at an end-his mind was made upI

again at once and forever. His last words 

iolly: ' She shall be an heiress yet,' he said, as

: and parted. Every year since, that time he

:hristmas token of fifty pounds, and a few

t0 aikfif she were well. There, my lady, is the

t Iawkstey as I know iC    May I ask how you

' he is alive ?"  . .








<pb n="186"/>
186    LADY CHARTERIS HEARS THE TRUTH. 

She was sitting, leaning forward, her hands clasped tightly t&

gether in speecnless pain, her large dark eyes full of untold de-

spair. In afew quiet words she repeated the story Lord Mon

talien had told at the dinner table that evening. 

"I remember listening," she said almost dreamily, "with a 

feeling as of tightening around my heart, knowing from the first

that it was of my Robert he spoke. When he uttered his name !

at the last, the tension seemed suddenly to give way-a great i

darkness came before me, the room, the chairs seemed reeling,

and I fainted. I was in my own room when I recovered, withou

my maid and the housekeeper and Sir Vane Charteris (for the 

first time in fourteen years) beside me. I looked at him and 

pointed to the door: 'Go out of my room,' I said, ' and never

come into it again as long as you live.' The two women looked 

at each other; no one spoke. He went at once, and then for

hours and hours it seemed to me I lay there alone. I don't :

believe I suffered-all the troubles of my life appeared to fade 

away-my mind was almost a blank. I remember looking at r

the pictures on the wall, at the pattern of the carpet, at the wax-_.

lights burning on the table, with an almost painful intensity of 

interest. I remember trying to count the rain-drops pattering

on the glass; I even believe I slept for a time, and then, all at;

once, I was sitting up in bed, cold as death, with great drops 

standing on my face, repeating aloud, 'Robert is alive ! Robert 

is alive !' My maid came in from the next room, with a fright-

ened face, looking at me as though she thought me mad. I

sprang from the bed, seized a shawllying near, and rushed out

of the room and the house. I ran all the way down to the 

gates; they were open still, by some chance, and I came-

straight here. I never felt the rain. I suppose I was mad--

perhaps I am yet." 

She put her hand to her head in a lost sort of way. Duke

Mason looked at her in alarm, her face was as white as the face-

of a corpse-her eyes shone with a dry, bright glitter-hel |

voice was strangely quiet and slow-she spoke of herself as

though speaking of another. The hysterics were nothing to this.

Had her troubles turned her brain ? Should he summon Ros- 

anna ? 

Before he could answer his own mental question, a carriage

driven furiously stopped at the door. He heard it flung openI

with a crash, a man's heavy step sounded in the hall. Th4

next instant the kitchen door was thrown wide, and Sir Vane 

Chitteris stood before them I -








<pb n="187"/>
:   CHARTERIS HEARS THE TRUTH           187

Duke's thoughts flew back fourteen years to the

n waiting-room, at- the same abnormal hour, and

yndith standing dark and grim as Sir Vane Charteri |

Kii Once again with the same gesture the hunted lady

Whead and looked her pursuer full in the face.

florid countenance of the baronet was faded now

d pallor. There was a look about his mouth and

d to see.

Charteris," he said grimly, "come home !"  He ad

wrd her. She shrunk back, both arms outstretched,

of fear and horror.

touch me !" she cried. "Don't come near me!

me by that name! I am not your wife-I never

the hour you married me you knew my lawful, my

nd was alive ! And you lied to me and told me he

y6u false, false, false villain !"

ed with a diabolical smile, his glittering, sinister eyes

her wild face.

yo quite done, madame ? This sort of performance

ing enough with the stage-lights and appropriate cos-

at a suitable hour; but allow me to suggest that at

in the morning Lady Charteris should be at home

This is the scene-painter, I suppose," with a

lk   at Duke, ' to whom you gave that fellow's

eed a cry, and half sprung toward him.

dare !" she gasped. "You said it once. Take

e care!"

I remember," with sneering scorn. "You don't like

I I said it once, over thirteen years ago. I remem-

istinctly. I told you it was not an agreeable recol-

rnme ;that I had married the mistress of a country

frfom that hour to this we have been man and wife

lname. Is Mr. Robert Lisle's Interesting daughter and

ble, Mr.-ah-Mason?    I suppose not, though, at

-..I should really like to see her; but that ileasure

eserved for another time. For you, my lady-take

ked at her with a terrible glance. She shrunk away

~ from  head to foot.

Ey arm!)" he repeated, still with that basilisk stare,

:home. Home ! Do you know the sort of home

:;rsuch w omen as you?" 








<pb n="188"/>
i88    -  TNE DAW N OP THE NEW LIFE. 

She did not speak. Her eyes: looked up at-him full oGl

great horror. 

"A mad-house" 

He literally hissed the words, a devil of hatred and rage ir hid

black eyes. As he spoke he drew the shrinking hand withii-

his own, and forced her toward the door.

She went without a single word.  On the threshold shc-

looked back once at the humble, faithful friend she was leaving, 

and who stood so powerless to help her now. It was her fare- 

well; .                    .

So Duke Mason saw her in his dreapns, for years and years :

after, with that look of unutterable horror on her death-cold" 

face. So for years and years that farewell look haunted him- '

with much the same remorse as though he had stood by aid

seen her slain before his eyes. 

CHAPTER IX, :Y

THE DAWN OF THpE NEW LIFE.              ':I

N the stately turrets and iy-grown towers of Monta ;i

.!f  llien Priory, and on the two-sory wooden box of  r. :

Duke Mason, the light of a new and glorious das 

shone.

The storm had passed with the night. The June sunshine-

flooded sky and earth, the birds sang blithely, the busy town:

was astir, and at his painting-room window Duke Mason sat,- -

gazing blankly out, and seeing nothing but darkness and deso.- 

lation.

lie was going to lose the Duchess. It was all said in thate, 

Poll -his bright, beautiful, laughing, mischievous, troublesom e, 

loving little Polly-was going from him to return no more .

For fourteen happy years she had been the joy, the torment,

the delight of his life-now she was to be taken from hin, -.

And what remained ? He had intended to send her away t

school himself, it was true, but that sort of separationR wultd7

have been different. She would still ha-re been his, bel-ongi 1

to his world, and one day she would hai e come back to !ight#

-   :    I  if  -1'.f .,;. a,








<pb n="189"/>
7/f0 . DAWN OF THE NEW LIFE.            189

gray-colored life with her sunshiny presence again,

ihe was Lord Montalien's ward, and heiress of eighty

urds, and as lost to him, almost, as though the

ad closed upon her.

ere, unshorn and unwashed, neither handsonme noi

Xto look at, but with a sorrow as profound, a despa;i

h: te veriest hero of romance could ever feel.

notfbeen to bed all night. He and Rosanna hac

side in the little kitchen, while the storm clouds

dy a  the rosy morning broke, not talking, and with

oughts uppermost in both minds-Polly was going,

gay and grim Rosanna looked in this new day's

but se went about her work without tear or sigh,

ft eble deep in her heart, as few women do, and

B al the more bitterly.

r. With her flushed cheek resting on one rounded

sunnjl curls on the pillow, Polly slept, while her

d with the new day.

W     M that came at such an unearthly hour last night ? "

at:bitreakfast. "I heard doors banging and people

lldaybreak, it seems to me. And here you and Duke

::lenri as a pair of white owls this morning. Rosanna,

1ital about ? "

her ff with some evasive answer. It was impos-

t er  The blow must come, but it was beyond their 

t iflict it themselves. Selfish, perhaps-but are we

in   t u love and our sorrow ?

orning imlail brought Duke a letter--a foreign letter-

ga brief note addressed to "Paulina Lisle."

.aside-that name smote him like a blow-and

:n. NX words could be more manly, more grateful,

tha:a those of Robert Lisle, but the decree of part-

e be. By birth and fortune Paulina was a lady.

had her place to fill in society-in that world to

?Mntalien, as her guardian, could present her. It

; rgt he felt it plainly as any one, but the pain

th less acute. He sat there for hours, with thaJ

in:if hand. Rosanna sat idly by the kitchen fire

hd Rosanna been idle before ?  Polly had gone

dearlyca upon her friend Alice, and talk about hei

i her new school prospects-the ticking of the

preternaturally loud in the blank stillness








<pb n="190"/>
o90        THE DAWN OF THE l W LIFE.

" And so, when at half-past eleven Lord Montalien reached 

house, and knocked at the door, he found them. 

Rosanna's face betrayed no surprise when she admitted h

distinguished visitor. Yes, she answered, Mr. Duke Mas

lived here, and was disengaged, and would see him.

ushered the peer into the humble parlor, and Duke-got up, ai

put his letter in his pocket, and went slowly down stairs. 

"I see by your face, Mr. Mason," his lordship said, quietl

"that you know the errand upon which I have come  Yo!

have had a letter from California by this morning's post."

"I have, my lord." 

"It is doubtless painful to you to part with your adopted:l

daughter after all those years, but the thing is inevitable. In

any case, you must have lost her sooner or later. Mr. Lisle is

unbounded in his expressions of gratitude and respect for you.

Have you told her yet-does she know?" 

"She knows nothing, my lord !-I cannot tell her !" - Some 

of poor Duke's pain was in his voice and face as he spoke. 

"She thinks still, as she thought from the first, that she is the 

child of a dead cousin of my own. You will kindly undeceive 

her-you will tell her the truth. It will not be a hard task,

such pleasant news !"

He spoke a little bitterly-his heart was very sore.

Lord Montalien looked at him kindly. 

"I am quite sure the young lady will sincerely regret the j

*change of guardians-the news is pleasant, beyond doubt, but 

she will not leave her old friends without sincere regret. Mr. -

Mason, you know more of this young girl's history than even I 

do, for you knew her mother!"                          -

Duke started. The eyes of the two men met-the scene-

painter's, startled, alarmed; the peer's, keen, sharp, intelligent. 

"Don't distress yourself, Mr. Mason; I am not about to ask

you any questions. I had much rather, indeed, not hear the 

mother's name. It is a very painful story-let us hope the worst .

is over."

He spoke with a certain grave earnestness that made Duke  |

think he at least suspected the truth. He averted his eyes .un.

easily. He longed to ask for Lady Charteris, but dared not.  '

"Is Miss Mason-nay,. I beg her pardon," with a smile,

"Miss Lisle in? I should like to see her. I presume you 

have no objection to my telling her at once ? "

"Certainly not, my lord; she must kno-w it at once, of 

course. She will be in presently. May I ask how soon--"'

He stopped, ashamed of the choking in his throat.








<pb n="191"/>
:    THE DAWN OF THE NEW LIFE.               191

~      B leave that entirely to you and her," his lol dship an.

_You are aware it cannot be postponed long, but 1

:huarry her away. She is to go to school. I propose

_  >tr to the Convent of the Sacred Heart, in Paris. I

ijudice'against fashionable boarding-schools, as a rule.

ddaughter, she should never enter one; and I believe

~:lus of the Sacred Heart to be the best teachers and

plished ladies under the sun. But, for a few weeks,

not finish the sentence. The house door opened, a

_   step crossed the hall, a fresh young voice trilled a

the parlor door opened, and Polly herself stood re-

dntalien looked at her earnestly. What did he see ?

figure, two flushed cheeks, two bright blue eyes,

1 "running over with curls."  She paused short, her

away in a sort of consternation at sight of so un-

visitor. Duke rose up, and led her forward.

d," he. said, "this is your ward. Polly, Lord Mon-

come here to see you and tell you some wonderful

and not be angry with me for keeping it from you

dwhen you have heard all, read this letter."

her father's note in her passive hand, and went out

Polly sank down in the chair he had vacated,

large eyes of wonder. Lord Montalien took her

t his, and looked at her with a smile that went

her heart.

ave your father's face, my child," he said. "I liked

--sonment I saw him first; and I like you."

father !" the girl uttered. "You knew my father, my

uke's cousin ? "

g     t' Duke's cousin-no tie of blood or name binds you to

dyoung man, who has brought you up. Your father is

hat letter you hold is from him, and you are Polly

o longer, but Paulina Lisle!"

i  rew ashen pale, and began to tremble. What was this

bout to hear? The hand Lord Montalien held grew

his grasp. 

eed to tremble-no need to fear, my child. My news

news-the best of news for you. Your father lives,

sent you a fortune. You are the heiress of eighty

spounds, and I am appointed your guardian. Miss

' : il le: me be the first to congratulate you !"








<pb n="192"/>
192     THE DAWN OF THE NEW LIhE. 

She fell suddenly back in her chair. Lord Montalien sta

up in alarm. 

"I have told her too abruptly-she is going to faint i

might have known it ! Whom shall I call ?"

He was going to the door, but she put out one hand a

motioned him back.

"Wait," she said in a voice that trembled. "I shall ii

taint." She sat up bravely, as she spoke, and tried to smile 

with lips that quivered. "Please go ort, my lord: tell me all, h

And then, still clasping the small, cdld hand, still looking 

kindly in the pale young face, Lord Montalien told her "all.7-

How fourteen years before he had come over from America.1

with Robert Hawksley-of the story Robert Hawksley had told :

him-of the promise that had passed between them-and how 

that promise was to be redeemed-of the fortune that was hers }

--of his guardianship-of her new name-of the new life begi n

ning so brightly.

She had heard all. He paused, still looking at her, wonder- g

ing inwardly what manner of girl this child of sixteen was. 

She sat quite still, quite pale, the loud tick-tack of the kitchen

clock almost painfully, audible, the sunshine streaming unshad-1

owed in among Rosanna's roses and geraniums. At last she-

spoke, to ask a question, looking at the nobleman beside her

with big, solemn eyes: 

"' Who was my mother ?". 

"I do not know," he answered gravely y "your father never

told me her name." 

"Does Duke know?" ? 

"I cannot tell; I think it probable. But my dear Miss

Lisle, there may be reasons why you should not know."

"What reasons ?"

"Reasons impossible for me to explain," his lordship said, 

turning away in some embarrassment from the gaze of the in- 

nocent eyes. "You can ask Mr. Mason, however. If it i -;

right you should know, he will tell you."

" Right I A daughter should know her mother's name!" S

the girl repeated slowly. "My lord, you have told me about f

my father-my father who left England five months after his ,i

marriage, and never returned for two years. How then caie 

I to be given to Duke Masol-how came he to know anything -0

about me ?" 

"Your mother give you to Duke Mason, of course." 

Lord Montalien felt rather awkward as he answered--tha 








<pb n="193"/>
-I~:'THE-DA AW N OF TH YE EW LIFE.          193

ipt eyes still solemnly scanned his face. After all,

young person her own story, was not so easy a mat

hadthoughllt.

ther was a lady, you say;" Polly's heart thrilled as

. "Of high birth and station and wealth, and she

away to a poor mechanic, -and never comes to see or

again. Lord Montalien, is my mother alive?"

ation was growing worse and worse; Lord Montalien

picomfortable than he had ever remembered feeling

T reason to believe she is," he answered slowly.

id; she not leave everything, and go to America with

f when he came for her "

aI don't know. Yes, I do-I'll tell you the truth,

tmay. She did not return with him because-he

the wife of another man."

s svery lips blanched at the words.

wife of another man! She thought him dead,

not seek her out and undeceive her ?"

>he left England again and returned to America.

:e your mother, my child; she thought him dead;

Oierced into the second marriage, beyond doubt; and

, thinks your father dead. How she came to give

7 kre Mason, Duke Mason will tell you himself. She

treasons, be very sure; and she could not have

to a better man. Rest contented with your wonder-

rtune, my dear, and don't ask too many questions.

i great heiress now-try and think of that."

&at heiress ! " the girl repeated, and there was a world

!ess in her tone; "a great heiress, and yet poorer

oorest, with a father and mother alive whom I have

, never may see-a mother who cast me off in my

i  father at the other end of the world ! Lord Mon-

u may not tell me, Duke may. not tell me, but-I feel

^ -f my mother is alive, I shall find her out!"

ie up, striking her hand lightly on her breast, her eyes

'|   tPhte -fire of inspiration.

find out my mother, and ask her why she deserted

For my father "-she looked suddenly at the note

1'w^ill you permit me, my lord ? "

hiS ead silently. She opened the note and read.








<pb n="194"/>
1o94       THE DAWN OF THEI NEWV LIFE. 

It dropped from her fingers, she covered her face with L~

hands, and the tears fell, thick and fast. Her moods were th;

moods of an April day, sunshine and shower, bright and st oi

lived.

She looked up at last and dashed them away, smiling radi

antly. The color came back to her cheeks, the glad sparki

to her eyes, the joyous ring to her voice. She was rich, ri

beyond her wildest dreams. She was a young Jady of birth

and fortune. Lord Montalien was her guardian. All th

visions of her life were realized-more than realized. Wai

she dreaming or awake ? 

"It is like a fairy tale," she said; "like a story from  he

Arabian Nights. Oh, my lord, is all this true you have bee

telling me ? Am I asleep or in a dream ? "

Lord Montalien got up to go with a smile, holding out his

hand in farewell.

" Good-by for the present, Miss Lisle. I shall call again to

morrow. By that time you will probably have convinced

yourself that it is a very pleasant reality. You, and your good

friends here, shall fix the time of your departure. I shall not

hurry you, but I shall certainly expect you during your stayiw

Speckhaven to be a constant visitor at the Priory." 

Polly thought of Allan Fane and Miss Hautton, and flushed

all over her fair face. 

"Or why not make your home altogether at the Priory durir

ing the few weeks you remain ? " urged Lord Montalien. " Itr

is your home now and for the future, you know, and I need not 

tell you how charmed we all will be."                 -B

"And leave Duke and Rosanna!" Polly said, looking alt

him in wonder. "Oh, no, my lord. Thank you very muchll

all the same." 

"At least you will come to see us every day ?" ?iB

Polly shook her head.

"You will dine with us, then, once before you go. Don't be 1:

obstinate, Miss Lisle, and force me into the role of tyrannical

g iardian so soon." 

"Well-if you insist-but-"'                         :

Her reluctance was very visible. It was not shyness that he !

saw.  If the girl had been born in a palace her manner could,:-.

not have been more simple, more natural, more unafiectedly 

easy. What was it ? Lord Montalien wondered.

"Ylou know some of my people, I think," he said; " Francis u

and Guy tell me they are acquainted with you, and Allan Fa'ano

iF qTlit- in intimate friend."  -X X                 i








<pb n="195"/>
.THE DAWN OF THE NEW LIFE.             195

watching her closely, and the rosy light shone again

nsitive face. That was it! The peer understood at

Mir. Fane had been quite an "intimate friend."

II come to-morrow," he said, moving to the door,

fetch Gripper (Gripper's your lawyer, my dear), and

.me down here to draw up the necessary documents

ng me your guardian, and to explain to you the cir-

under which you come into your fortune. They

ewhat unusual, but considering your father's story, very

Now, my dear, good-day to you. Don't lose your

and sleep, thinking of this fairy fortune. But where is

fadvising you? Of course you will."

ughed. She was disposed to like this pleasant new

lready; and, indeed, it was no hard task for most

lFke Lord Montalien. She watched him out of sight;

went slowly into the house. She opened her letter

-:it again. Her father lived, and from over the wide

-  to her those sweet, solemn words of fatherly love;

she had ever heard. Again the great tears welled up

bislue eyes. She stretched forth her arms with an in-

-cry: "Oh, father! father! Come home !"

f.:nce in the letter he spoke of her mother. "YOUr

-ves, my child," he wrote; "a lady of rank and title,

f another man. But in your headt there must lie no

gts of her. Weak she may have been-guilty never.

e, believes still, that Robert Lile is dead--as I am

h One day I may return to England and my precious

sed the letter, put it in her bosom, and went in search

ends.

a was bustling about the kitchen, looking unutterably

d stern to hide all she felt. "Duke's upstairs," she

ly to the girl, and turned her back upon her. Strong-

-the spinster undoubtedly was, but she was not strong

o bear the sight of Polly just then.

Was painting and smoking furiously-always a sign of

ental disturbance. He looked round from his work

ed, rather a ghastly smile of greeting.

~.1. Duchess .'

i Duke !"

Ie over and stood beside him, resting one hand ca~-

Lo his shoulder. No need to tell-her what Rosanna' 

I  -a'd Duke's silence meant: she understood them per

tS 0 i L 








<pb n="196"/>
I96        THE DAWN OF TWE NEW LtFE.

fectly, nd loved them better in this hour than ever befoie

her life.

''Who knows but I have been a prophet," the scene-painte

said, still trying to speak gayly. "You may be a Duchess yet

Miss Lisle. I suppose it is the correct thing to call Lor

Montalien's ward and the heiress of eighty thousand, Mis

Lisl."                                              -

"Duke!"                                           ;

lie dropped his brush and held out his hand.

"I wish you joy, Duchess-upon my soul I do! And l

hope you'll be as happy in your new life as-as I have tried to

make you in this. You're going away, my dear-going awayi,

to come back no more; but I know you will not quite forget

Duke and Rosanna."

His voice broke. He dropped her hand and walked away

to the window to hide the tears of which his manhood was

ashamed. Two white arms were about his neck in an instant,

two warm lips impetuously kissing his averted face.

" Duke ! Duke ! dear old Duke ! the best, the kindest friend

ever was in this world ! Forget you and Rosanna! Why,

what a horrible little monster you must think mej! And I-^

don't know what you mean talking about my going away, never

to come back ! If I were Queen Victoria's ward, and heiress

of fifty hundred million -pounds," cried this impetuous young 

woman, " I should come back just the same. This is my homerne

--at least until my father returns from California to claim me. 

His right is first, and most sacred. Oh, Duke !. to think, Polly 

M son should ever have had a father !"

Duke smiled inf spite of himself.

" It is extraordinary. I should have liked to have told you 

ages ago, but you see I was bound by promises to both, and

dared not."

"Promises to both. That means my mother, I suppose ? " 

"Your mother. Yes, Duchess."

"'Tell me all about her, Duke. My mother ! how strange it

sounds ! What was she like? Was she handsome? Am I 

like her ? That sounds conceited, I am afraid, but I don't ;:

riean it so." 

"    She was-she is beautiful, and you are not in the least like 

her. You have your father's face and eyes, and a very good

face and eyes they are. Her eyes were black, and she was;

smaller than you." 

He spoke dreamily, thinking of the great, despairing black








<pb n="197"/>
l   THE DAWN OF THE NEW LIFE.               197

Iad loked at him so lately, full of woman's uttermost

eOI don't think I like my mother! She must have

and cold-hearted. Why did she give me up? Wh}

~ narry that other man?  I hate te'think of it even,

he not faithful through all things-to death-to the

Rand child she loved ?"

's eyes flashed-the losy light so quick to come and

that transparent skin, lit her gypsy face once more.

H ;t yu blame her, Duchess," Duke answered, gravely,

did it for your sake. She would have preferred

rrying Sir -  , I mean, marrying again on her own

She sacrificed herself for you. You were taken from

birth; she knew you lived, but nothing more, and

dto possess you. She feared for you more than she

herself-for your future happiness, life even; and

were made the price of her sacrifice she consented,

;borne imprisonment, even cruelty, rather than yield

ever more faithful to the husband she thought dead

te hour when he saw her at the altar, the bride of

a; for she sacrificed her own life to save his child.

you to me-with me she knew you would be safe, at

l  she dared not keep you herself. Your mcither is the

te noblest, the most injured woman on earth; a mar-

s, as surely as ever suffering made a martyr. Don't

| her-I cannot bear to hear you."

~loved my mother like this, Duke ?"

erenced her, Miss Lisle. I pity her as I never pitied

my life. She is very, very unhappy."

s her husband unkind to her ?"

t/ afraid so, my dear. And she knows you live, and she

and must live apart from you, and deny you a

Scare. Is that not enough of itself?"

e,' Polly said, entreatingly, "tell me her name. Do !

go to herr-only once, ever so secretly, and kiss her, and

ove her, and am sorry for her too. Do ! Oh, Duke

er cared for your little Duchess, whom you are going

B  ellme her name!"

lasped her arms once more around his neck; she

n  with tears and kisses. The strong man tremrled

i- clasp.

't, Duchess-don't ask me. God knows I would re-

0  rhing- if I could, but it must not be. You don








<pb n="198"/>
198       THE DAWN OF THE NEW LIFE.

know what you ask; be content. Love her as much      |

you like-she is worthy of it all-and hope for the best. 

the day when you may know your mother and go to her is not

yet. Look here; I have kept this for you for fourteen years

our ntother gave't me on the night I saw her first."

He drew forth the opal ring and slid it on one of Polly's slim,

ringless fingers. 

" It is yours, my girl; wear it for your mother's sake." 

"And it is all I may ever know of her," Polly sighed. "It

is all very sad and very strange. I used to think it would be

beautiful to have a history-to be a heroine of romance; and

now I am, and somehow it saddens me more than anything

ever did before. To think that I should have a mother who

dare not acknowledge me; that some day I may meet her, and

look at her, and not know her. To think I should have al

father, an exile, a lonely, solitary wanderer in those wild, far-off 

lands, who has lost wife and child, through no fault of his, and 

who may never return. But I will go to him, if he does not

come to me. Yes, Duke, when my two years' school-life are;

ended, if he does not return to me I will go to him. It will 

be like ' Elizabeth and the Exile of Siberia' over again. And

now I shall go straight this very moment, and answer his dear,

darling letter."  Which she did on the spot, dashing off page

after page in an impetuous, running hand. There was no end

of love, and no end of blots; and scores of notes of exclamation, g

and doubtful spelling and grammar; but when one's heart is 

full to overflowing, and one is a young person of sixteen, what

does a little broken orthography or syntax signify?  Polly's 

heart was in the right place, if her words were not; and proba- 

bly Mr. Robert Lisle, out in San Francisco, smiled a good deal 

over this epistle, even with the tears in his eyes.

The news spread like wildfire. Before the summer stars '

came out that night, every man, woman, and child in Speck.i!

haven knew that Polly Mason was an heiress, and nct Polly !i

Mason at all. The heiress herself had rushed headlong to see

her friend Alice, and tell her the wonderful news, and exhibited ;

her ring and her father's picture, which Miss Warren had-seen ;

scores of times before, and promised her unlimited jewelry and 

dry-goods, when she came into her fortune.

"And when I leave school you shall come and live with me,

Alice, if you are not married," Polly cried; "and when I'm:

gone you must write me long, long letters; and I shall ask

Lord Montalien for eno-xgh of my fortune to buy a locket for .








<pb n="199"/>
B   THE DA WN OF THE NEW LIFE.              T 9

nd some of my hair, to leave you. And oh, Alice !

e I shall ever sleep a wink again for thinking of it,

'I live !" 

0ams were rather broken that night, and it seemed to

p day would never dawn. She half feared the whole

I away in the darkness, and she would awake to find

ie Polly Mason again, instead of Miss Paulina Lile.

l   Lisle ! she repeated the pretty name over and over

-intense, childish ecstasy. She had hated her name

, she had so longed for some beautiful, stately appel.

lo ! here she had it. I believe her new name gave

more pleasure than the thought of her noble inher.

iVontalien came over next day with Mr. Gripper, which

^ tieman produced documents tied with red tape, and

m> solemnly aloud to his bewildered little client. It was

k or thereabouts to Polly, except one or two conditions

. mind graspedin passing. She was Lord Montalien's

she should come of age or marry. If Lord Monta-

before either of those events, the power of appointing 

dian was vested in him. And in the hour of her

ohether she married with or without the consent of

n, or during her minority, her fortune became abso-

wn fromw thenceforth.

s the proviso which his lordship had mentioned on

s day as unusual. It was easy enough, by the light

.Lisle's own history, to understand it-it was to save

er mother's fate. How little he dreamed in provid-

saving clause for the happiness of the daughter he

much trouble, and shame, and remorse, it was to

in the days to come !

ope from the Priory called upon Lord Montalien's

congratulations and cordial expressions of good-will.

cis, whom Polly did not like, Mr. Guy, whom she

anliked very much, and Sir Vane Charteris, who

er with his coarse mouth and fulsome compliments..-

i  ndered why he looked at her with such intensity, "

black eyes seeming to devour her. His little daugh- 

th him, beautifully dressed, and much more gracious

other memorable occasion. Sir Vane expressed

tt Lady Charteris could not have the happiness o I

is Lisle's charming acquaintance. Lady Charteris

edto her room-a nervous, hysterical attack, ltot








<pb n="200"/>
200        THE DAWN OF THE NEW        LIFE.

would probably be able to travel on the morrow, when he pr1

posed returning to town to consult an eminent physician o

the state of her health. Miss Lisle listened veiy coldly,- sl

disliked both him and his daughter, and was relieved lvhen the

went away. Miss Hautton also called with her kinsman, 1 or

Mlontalien, elegant of costume, indisputably high-bred am

patrician, but looking more elderly and faded than ever by con

trast with that fresh, bright face. Mr. Allan Fane did not caO

-he was eating his very heart out with rage and baffled love

Retribution had come very swiftly to the tailor's ambitious soni

Lord Montalien's ward, obeying the behests of her guar

ian, spent one evening at the Priory. Only one-Duke and

Rosanna must have all the rest. She went dressed in whit

tarlatan (white was the proper thing for a heroine), with a blue

ribbon in her amber curls, and a blue belt around her slinm

waist. And she looked lovely! The white arms and nec

glimmered through the flimsy tarlatan, and there was a flush on0

her cheeks and a light in her eyes. She entered those stately 

rooms a guest, an equal, she who had been Polly Mason last

week; and she sat at Lord Montalien's right hand at dinner,^:

and was the little queen of the feast. The dishes at that din-

ner were of " such stuff as dreams are made of."  She had

things put on her plate, and she ate them, and wondered in-

wardly all the while what on earth they could be. She drank

some sparkling Moselle, and she had a slice of pine-apple,

and did not make one single mistake. She was not awkward,'

she was in no way embarrassed, neither was she in the least bor ,

ward. Altogether she was charming, and Lord Montalien -as '

secretly fascinated by his little ward. 

"How true and clear she rings!" he thought; "if she 1 ad-

been bred a countess her manners could not be more simple  -

and perfect. What a charming little rose-bud she is, and how :;

gloriously destined to bloom in the future !"

Allan Fane sat opposite "Miss Lisle" at dinner, with lt e !

faded eyes of his high-born betrothed fixed icily upon hia.r

He was pale and cold, he sat silent at the banquet, with the 'l

fabled vulture of Prometheus gnawing at his vitals! TIhis it

beautiful little heiress might have been his, in this hour, and he ,;

had given her up, and bound himself to a woman he did notl ;

and never could love. ' It might have been."  He had;

wrought his misery with his own hand. If Polly thirsted fo9  i

vengeance on tiis recreant lover of hers, she had it.. But she.l

did not; she had met' him with a smile of perfect provoking








<pb n="201"/>
TE DAWN OF THE NEEW LIFE.               201

r and forgiveness. He was so utterly indifferent tc

at she had no room in her heart for him even to

happy.

ht marry Miss Hautton to-morrow, and she would go

ig with pleasure. He knew it too; no woman's

ood so frankly into the eyes of a man for whom

one straw.

dawing-room  after dinner, with some little urging,

* She did not mind singing at all, but she only

ipaniments of her own; she did not understand the

tdoes that matter, Miss Lisle," said Guy Earlscourt;

s for the accompaniment. I know you can sing-

yd ou."  Polly laughed, and blushed at the remem-

*e''That song has haunted me ever since, I assure you.

in, Miss Lisle, and exercise it."

her to the piano, and she obeyed. Her sweet, clear

the rooms. With proper training that voice alone

made her fortune. She sang again " County Guy."

. Ah County Guy ! the hour is nigh,

The sun has left the lea,

:-   The orange flower perfumes the bower,

The breeze is on the sea.

f '  The lark whose lay has trilled all day

Sits hushed, his partner nigh-

/.S -Breeze, bird, and flower confess the hour,

But where is County Guy ? "

beside her, bending over her, his dark, dreamy,

sixed on her face. What did Guy Earlscourt think

n days to.come did that sweet, youthful face haunt

-?Iin the girl's memory that night lived forever, the

i new existence, and there were hours when Guy

.sdark face rose up before her, like the face of a

I ghost. 'She never forgot it, nor him, as he stood

her, the dark beauty of his southern face, and his

r, such a marked contrast to her own. How hand-

-d looked! How happy she had been! She had

remember it-bitterly in the years to come.

, hovering afar off, took his punishment in sullen

B Uehad lost her himself, but that was no reason why

.t'; be savagely jealous of every other man on whom

-Gu:y had been his warmest friend-he felt as

him as it was in his shifting, selfish nature to be

:y oe but he could have murdered him to-n'ght

We9'f-S        ;








<pb n="202"/>
202                 THE LAST DAY,         '        :

This girl, his father's ward, with her noble fortune her peer

beauty, would be one day Guy Earlscourt's wife, and he-

looked with sullen, angry eyes at Diana Hautton, with her thre

and-thirty years and her faded face, and walked out of the roo

and out of the house. The soft summer rain was falling; t

never heeded it. He lit his cigar, and walked up and dow

under the fragrant trees, up and down, up and down. It gre|

late-Miss Lisle was driven home-she insisted upon',it-

heard the last sound of the wheels that bore her away, and th

he flung himself on the wet grass, face downward, and kne

he had lost forever the happiness of his life. 

CHAPTER X.

THE LAST DAY.

j  HE last day had come.

It was two weeks precisely since she had first heard:

the wonderful news, and Miss Paulina Lisle was enl

tirely ready. The warmth and splendor of mid-July}

lay over the earth. Montalien Priory looked gloribus in its

green and golden wealth, its rich cornfields, its spreading,

grassy slopes, down to the ceaseless sea, and its dense depths

of woodland, where the rare red-deer herded. The world-

had always been a bright and delightful world to Polly. i

but never half so bright, half so delightful as now. Every

dream of her life, it seemed to her, was realized--she had a i

living father and mother, like other people-she was the mis.,-;

tress of illimitable wealth, it seemed to her-Lord Montalien;

was her guardian, and his world and his order henceforth hers..:

There were times when this excitable nature was nearly wild '

with joy-other times when, looking at the sad, silent faces ol :

her two old friends, her tender heart was stricken with remorse, !

and she would fling herself into their arms, and passionately cry

&ut she was a wretch, a selfish, ungrateful Wttch, to feel all tli

bliss, when she was going away from them for two long, endles/s

years. Two years ! Those faithful hearts knew better thai-

that: not for two years, but for all time-forever. When thej








<pb n="203"/>
THE LAST DAY.                  203

'od-by, they had said it; their lives lay apart. It

self who hurried on the preparations for depart.

-e so willed it, the girl might have remained vith

tember, when the Convent of the Sacred Heart

chol. But it was inevitable, and the sooner it was

etter.

i1ul resignation might come when she was gone-2

,a calm despair." To see her now, knowing it

t time, was simply intolerable. Lord Montalien

proposal of taking the young lady for a midsum-

scamper through southern France, the Tyrol, and

ie; and Polly's eyes had flashed their electric, joy-

an instant, and then grew very grave and tender.

á-:tyou-no, my lord," she said; "I had rather not

to stay with-with them to the last."

had decided differently.

l go, Duchess; never mind about us; we are going

nd what does a week or two earlier matter? You

outhern France as soon as ever Rosanna has all

eady."           _

gsu were all ready now, and the day was fixed for

It was a wonderful fit-out in this young lady's eyes

d muttslins of all hues and the finest textures, and

d ed snow, trimmed with real Irish lace. Nothing

- ever dazzled the eyes of the late Miss Mason's

halt seven hundred pounds, so long laid away in the

drawn forth to furnish this wardrobe. For himself

tMr. Mason positively refused a farthing. His pale

s mild eyes quite flashed as Lord Montalien,

ately, made the offer. "All the gold in the Bank

dcould not repay me for the loss of Polly," he said.

u want to-insult me, my lord, you will never allude

ce Duke was dignified. Lord Montalien wrung his

ked     at him admiringly.

re a fine fellow," he answered simply, "and have ful-

trust to Robert Lisle right loyally."

, she would have liked to fill the little house with

rnings, and load down her two friends with costly

rfsed everything, and it was only when, hurt and

the girl was turning away, that Duke consented to

wbig silver th watch with a gold patent lever, and Ro-

sty brown with a new black silk, stiff enough in

.000-0.::t It  : '             A< '~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~








<pb n="204"/>
204                THE LAST DAY.

T                       I., .  -

its glistening richness to stand alone. Miss Alice Wairen 

a locket and chain, and numbers of pretty ornaments besi

She would have liked to have sent gold watches and I

dresses to every one in Speckhaven-the charity childreni

cluded.  she had even made friends with her old foe, w

whom she had waged vendetta so long. She had met E'i

Long on the street, and that young woman had turned awa

with sullen eyes and bitterest envy. There had been a m

ment's struggle in Polly's breast-then that generous natul

conquered, and she went up to her with extended hand a

pleading eyes.

"I am going away, Eliza," she said; "don't let us part ba

friends. I dare say I have been most in fault all through, bi

I am sorry. Do shake hands !"

Brave words to come from so proud a spirit! They ha

melted Eliza, and a reconciliation took place there and then.

And that night, when the handsomest brooch and ear-rin

money could buy in the town reached Miss Long, she fairl

gave way and sobbed over them, struck with surprise and con-

trition. She was at peace with the world' and all therein--

happy Polly-and no shadow of the darkness to come marred

to-day's brightness. 

The visitors at the Priory were nearly all gone. Sir Vane

Charteris, his wife and daughter, had left the day before the one

on which the heiress dined here. My lady, closely veiled, and

tottering as she walked, came forth leaning on her maid's arm.o

Once, as Lord Montalien said farewell, she had paused, catch-

ing his hand in both her own, and clinging to it as though her,

last hope were there. But Sir Vane had come forth, and she-

-had dropped it, and fallen back in a corner of the travelling

carriage, with her black veil over her face, and so the peer saw-a

her for the last time on earth. 

Miss Hautton had gone to Scotland two days after, to joinu

the Duchess, of Clanronald; Mr. Fane was to meet them in 

London, and accompany them to the Italian Lakes; Lord

Montalien, when his ward was safely deposited in her convent-

school, was to start for Syria; Francis Earlscourt was g-ing;

back to Oxford to read for his degree; and Guy wab .o rejoin

his regiment at Knight's Bridge. So the actors in this life. :

drama were situated this twenty-first of July, fixed for Polly's

departure. Widely enough separated, it would seem, but like

the cards in the same pack-sure to come together again wu

the universal shuffle.








<pb n="205"/>
THE LAST DAY.                  205

r  to star, by the noon-day mail, in tin.e to catch

/.,train that evening for Folkestone. She- h id bidden

all her old friends in the town, to her garden, to

iler violin, to her little attic room. Lord MIonta.

age awaited her outside the garden gate. My lord

/~'t in horrible dread of a scene. Alice Warren was

ide eRosanna-sobbing bitterly. "I feel as though

ing good-by forever," she said once. It was good-

thought she little knew it. The two friends would

iln each other's faces more on earth.

,looking as if carved in gray stone, stood stiff and

sde the kitchen fire. And up in the painting-room,

aa charming travelling suit of gray and blue, and a

h hat, had her arms around Duke's neck, trying to

- ili.. The little watch ticking at her belt pointed to

s to two; at ten minutes past their train started.

uke ! oh, Duke! how can I say good-by?      Oh,

_lireaks my heart to go ! "

-sobbing wildly. The scene-painter unloosed the

s, and put her gently from him, looking at her with

great sadness.

ist go, and at once, Duchess; good-by, my little

- od in heaven bless you !"

her out of the room. On the threshold he stooped

her for the first time since she had been a little tod-

crowing on his shoulder. Then the door shut upon

tory of Duke Mason's life was over-he had lost the

t back slowly to his old seat, sat down, laid his arms

and his face upon them, as though he never cared

gin. And so, when hundreds of miles lay between

i:his little one, and the starry summer twilight shone

_1 dd~ his sister found him.

kissed Alice, she had kissed Rosanna, sobbing vehe.

'xtears falling like rain, and she had fled from them,

e carriage with the coronet on its panels. The liv-

man started his horses; she pulled a little blue veil

ver her face, and turned away from her companion.

flying through the town.  She looked out with

Y     to take a last glimpse at the familiar streets

waved dieu to her from her window, Francis Earls-

g to the station, lifted his hat as she passed. And

all .her tempestuous grief, it dawned upotn the








<pb n="206"/>
206                THE LAST DA I'

young lady that she was reddening her eyes and swelling he!

nose in all probability, and that there would be plenty of tinm

to cry on the way up to London. Ah, me ! it is but a ste

from the depths of despair to the absurdly ludicrous: the philoi

opher who laughed at life and its follies and its pitiful weak

ness was the wiser philosopher of the two. Miss Lisle wiped

away her tears, and wondered if Guy Earlscourt would also be

at the station to say farewell. 

He was not there. She felt a pang of disappointment as she

saw Francis alone.

" I liked him best, and he might have come," she thought,

as. my lord handed her into the coaue reserved for themselves.,

It wanted but two minutes of starting-time-he would not:

come.

"Good-by, Miss Lisle; I wish you a pleasant journey,":}

Francis had said, shaking hands and stepping back. And then, 

at that instant, a tall, black horse came thundering in a cloud;

of dust down the road, bearing a breathless. rider. The black ,

horse was Thunder, and the rider Guy Earlscourt, late because

he had stopped to fill a dainty little moss-lined basket with 

rarest flowers and fruit. He leaped off his horse, and gave the 

basket to the guard for Miss Lisle. The young lady's heart

bounded as she saw him; flushed, glowing, handsome. 

"Rather a close finish," he said laughing, and holding out

his hand. "I should never have forgiven myself had I been

too late. Good-by, Miss Lisle; don't quite forget your Speck-

haven friends in your Parisian convent, and don't, I conjure

you, take the black veil. We cannot afford to lose you."

She had barely time to touch the hand he reached her through D

the window, when the whistle shrieked and the train started.

She sprang up for a last look; it fell upon him standing there,

hat in hand, the July sunshine on his handsome head. And ,

so the last face the girl took out of her old life, with the smile

upon it that lit it into such rare beauty, was the dark Italian -f

face of Guy Earlscourt.

C.. 








<pb n="207"/>
PART THIRD.

CHAPTER 1.

AFTER TWO iYEARS.

- glory of a golden September day lay over the

It was the middle of the month. Down at

Wntalien Priory, for the past two weeks, the sports-

n had crashed through the stubble, and turnip-fields,

p ring of their fowling-pieces echoed all day long

glden richness. Very fair, very stately, looked

Pivied old mansion, with its wealth of glowing dog-

shimng ^ivy, its waving oaks and cedars, its yellow

its blooming gardens, all gilt with the glory of

etember sun.

a half dozen men, all told; Lord Montalien and

ay, Allan Fane, the artist, and husband of the

iHautton, a Mr. Stedman, a Sir Harry Gordon, and

^ ^ illiers, of the Guards. All good men and true,

wobman in the house to mar their sport, all day

es, nor the perfect dinner Mrs. Hamper got

tation in the evening. It was Liberty -Hall;

did precisely as they pleased, and enjoyed them-

nies when women are desirable, nay, inevita.

lHourt said, in his lazy voice.  'They lnmbellish








<pb n="208"/>
208              AFTER TWO YEARS. 

life in a general wvay. At flower-shows and in ball-rooms th

are simply the necessaries of life; but commend me to a cot

fortable country-house, in the shooting-season, and not a sing

enchantress within three miles." 

"A declaration which, coming from you, Earlscourt, of a

men alive, should have weight," observed Captain Villiers. "

always fancied your idea of paradise was borrowed from t

Koran: a land of promise, flowing with wine, and peopled wi

black-eyed houris, or blue-eyed ballet-girls."

" Let me see," said Lord Montalien, peeling his apricots-If

"not a single enchantress within three miles! Yes, that'h

about the distance.  The bailiffs cottage is precisely three:

miles from the gates of Montalien."

"And never houri of Mussulman, nor ballerina of Covent

Garden, was half so lovely as the bailiff's blue-eyed daughter,'"

cried Sir Harry Gordon. "The most bewitching, the most

divine little piece of calico I ever laid eyes on. She is Hebe

personified."

"You are all in the same boat, then," remarked Mr. Allan

Fane. "In love with pretty Alice-Guy, as usual, stroke oar:

and safe to win."                                   V

Guy Earlscourt glanced across the table at his brother. 

"Well now, Fane, do you know I'm not so very sure of that

I'm the best-looking man here by long odds, and women,

whether they be peeresses or peasants, do go down, I admit

before me; but somehow the little warren seems to have very

poor taste, and to differ from the rest of her appreciative sex.

I don't seem to make as profound an impression as I would

like. Do you suppose I can have a rival ?"

His sleepy, half-closed eyes were fixed upon his brother

Lord Montalien laughed pleasantly.

"If you mean me, Guy, and you look as if you do, I plead

not guilty to the soft impeachment. Losing my head about:

.rustic nymphs, be they ever so charming, is not in my line." 

"No," answered Guy, a little thoughtfully, "as a rule I,

don't think it is. High-born beauty, with forty thousand downi;5

for her dowry, is your aim, dear boy. But the little A'ce i-

exceptionally handsome, and somehow, I think-well,' he,,

added, rising with half a yawn, " there have been worse-looking-

Lady Montaliens." 

There was little in the words, but his brother's face flushed

The women of the house of Montalien had been noted for genera. 

tions fo; their beauty-the mother of the present lord being tshti

-             -  : :X~~ ^M  








<pb n="209"/>
- /B -    AFTER TWO YEARS.                 209

_      f^tion. The first wife of Nugent, late Baron M ontalien,

_02     h'ard of feature and sour of temper, as her picture still

_B    iw you; and on this point, Francis, twelfth Baron

_lp :;.  was especially sensitive.

ncis Earlscourt was Lord Montalien now, the late

twelve months before passed to a better, and (with

Espect for the British nobility), let us hope, even a

re, where boredom is unknown. And his elder Fsn

his stead-that elder son whom, like his mother, he

loved.

/~'n dispersed in the South Coppice, and soon through

Boontide the sharp ringing of the guns cleft the hot,

FLord Montalien alone was missing as the afternoon

:i/ow in the summer sky, and a faint, sweet evening

se and stirred the leaves.

-   :bags other game than partridges," Guy said with a

ie's deuced close about it; but I know he's after

irl like a ferret after a rabbit, or a terrier after a

very poetical comparison," laughed Mr. Stedman.

,;compare the lovely Alice to anything but a rat.

r he comes. His wooing, if he has been wooing,

i  smoothly. Behold! the thunder-cloud on Jove's

-Ow I"

d away to a fir plantation a quarter of a mile

e a solitary figure emerged, carrying a gun. It

-  4ontalien, his straw hat pulled over his eyes, and a

ession on his face.

it has not sped smoothly," Guy said, regarding his

rwit no very brotherly glance. "She's a nice little

shouldn't like to see her come to grief. Monti

_    ^ Wtake care. She's engaged to a fellow in the town,

er, who would shoot him as fast as I this covey

g-piece rang out, and two birds came tumbling

_, then-" Stedman began.

_ Iterrupted  Guy. " I know. And you know, my

so doan't try it on with me. Frank's just the sorl

o lose his head after women, and to go straight to

when he does. It's no affair of yours or mine,

neither of us are prepared to set up as censors,

lice must look out for herself."








<pb n="210"/>
210             AFTER TWO YEAR.S 

He plunged ii-to the coppice and disappeared. Sted

looked after him with a peculiar smile. 

" If Miss Warren is capable of looking out fcr herself it

more than you are. You can see my lord's lithe game th

clearly enough, but you are blind as a mole where you i

concerned yourself. He hates you as a pheasant does ai

dog. Why, I wonder?"

HIe was a pale young man, this Augustus Stedman, wit.

high, thoughtful brow, a retreating chin, a thin mouth, a

shifting, hazel eyes. He was Lord Montalien's especial fi iei

There was an affinity in the deep, subtle natures of thi; t

men, both-the truth may as well come out-thoroughly cl

blooded and unprincipled at heart, and outwardly models:i

all domestic and social virtues. No one could lay any char

whatever at the door of either, and yet there were men w

mistrusted them, women who shrank away from them only

see them smile once.                               -

Lord Montalien walked up from the plantation, a dark fro

on his moody face. Have I described Francis Earlscou

Up in the long-domed picture-gallery the portrait of his mothe

Griselda Huntingdon, of the ancient and wealthy family

Huntingdon, hung. You looked and saw a lady in a hip

waist and leg-of-mutton sleeves,-a lady with a thin, salloi

face, a long, hooked nose, cold, glimmering, light eyes, and 

wide mouth,-a lady some forty years old. You looked at t

present Lord Montalieh, and you saw the same, fifteen yea

younger. His light-gray summer suit, his pale-brown hair, h

light eyes, his flaxen whiskers and mustache, his pale complex

ion, were all of the same neutral tints. He was a Huntingdo

all over, people said, not one look of the brilliant, swarth

Earlscourts, the handsomest men of their county. Did h

know-did he feel it? His best friend could not have tol

That still, secretive nature .made no confidants. He coul

smile and stab you while he smiled. He was called an excet

lent young man, an exemplary young man, who neither drank

norgambled, whose name headed every published subscription lis

-a little close with his money in the everyday concerns of life,

and not in the least like his late genial father, or that dreadfully

dissipated young guardsman, his brother. Of all men, Augustu

Stedman understood him best, and hid the knowledge in hi

own breast.

Francis, Lord Montalien, walked slowly up to the house, and

antered the library by an open French window. A noble rooml








<pb n="211"/>
AFTER rWO YEARS.                 211

l lined with books, statues, and bronzes, everywherd

les and easy chairs strewn around, pleasant recefses

g, and the .ellow, afternoon sunshine flooding all.

H ere three pictures in. this library-three pictures hang-

er over the tall, carved mantel. They were three

the late Lord Montalien, his second wife, and younger

etia, Lady Montalien, a portionless Italian girl, with

erfect beauty, such as one does not see twice in a

nd barely eighteen when her son was born. That

it hung by hers-the same dark, brilliant face, the

trous eyes of southern darkness, the same proudly

,the same exquisite, smiling mouth.

her had lain in her grave for many a year; and the

ht beauty was somewhat marred and haggard now.

tures were the first objects Lord Montalien looked

ie strode through the window, and a glance of bitter,

iatred flamed up in his light, cold eyes. He stood

R;egarding them with set teeth, and an expression bad

B e spoke to them as though they had been sensate

e said, " you have had your day-it is my time now!

haang-the father who could barely conceal his d&s-

:wI oman who supplanted my dead mother-the boy

l  have supplanted me had it been in his father's power.

~ Jur younger and favorite son, your Benjamin, every

could leave away from the entail; now is the time

how my gratitude. In your lifetime he was always

F ty, his brilliant gifts drew all to his side, while 1

;:over. 'What a pity Guy is not the heir !' my father's

dto say. ' Poor Frank is so dull-so like his mother!'

t so too, my lord-poor Frank went to the wall in

K   When the heir of Montalien came of age, who

ed? When Guy came of age,'bells rang, bonfires

the tenantry were feasted. Even those boors said

y Master Guy isn't the heir.' Ah i well, we'll change

inm Lord Montalien now, and Guy Earlscourt is I

~led him, on the high road to ruin-nay, a ruined

pauper to-day. 'Semper Fidelis' is the motto of

-;'nd Always Faithful' to my revenge, he shall pay

l'every sneer, every slight, every advantage over me,

farthing."

tcret of his life. Francis Earlscourt hated his








<pb n="212"/>
212              AFTER TWO YEARS. 

Once, it was very long ago,'some one, an old friend o

father's, had remarked to Guy how like he was to his sec

cousin, Clara Earlscourt. "Yes," the lad answered, with 

ineffable calm that always belonged to him, "I believe Clar

very handsome. The Earlscourts have always been a g

looking race, thank God ! Frank is the only exception on 

ord, and as he inherits his yellow skin and lantern-jaws f

he distaff side, poor fellow, I suppose he is more to be pi>

than blamed."  Frank was not fifteen at the time, but from

hour in which he heard that flippant speech of his precoci

younger brother, his hatred, dormant before, took shape, a

grew with his growth, all the stronger, all the bitterer, all

deadlier, for being so closely hidden. It was the old story

Cain's crime over again-he hated his brilliant, careless, ha

some younger brother, and there was no evil that could ha

befallen him that would not have rejoiced his fratricidal hear

He turned away from the three pictures at last-the smilB

faces of Guy and the dead Lady Venetia seeming to mock hi

from the canvas. 

"The day is near when I shall have the pleasure of putti

.you all three in the fire," he thought. "The day is near, 

Lord Montalien, when your beloved one shall drag out the

mainder of his brilliant existence within the walls of the Fe

Prison, or become an exile for life from his native land."

He turned his back upon them, brightened as they were 

the long red lances of the September sunset, and began pa

ing up and down the long apartment. 

Ruby and orange and purple, the sunlight streamed throu i

the painted windows of the stately room, bringing out in lu

fire the crest of his noble house, the mailed hand, and the lo

motto, " SEMPER FIDELIS." 

He paced up and down, up and down, while the surrdroppi

lower and lower, and not all the glory in the heavens coli

brighten the dark moodiness of his irate face. 

"Curse her Obstinacy," he muttered, sullenly. "With 

fair, drooping head, her fawn-like eyes, her timid blushes, a

flattering replies, she has the devil's own will ! She won't >i

-three times a day to church every Sunday, as long as she 

remember, and the Sunday-school betweern whiles, have don

their work. I could as easily remove the Baron's Tower yo}

der as that frail nmilk-and-rose cottage-girl. What the deue

shall I do ?-for, have her, I must, trough I paid the dire p

alty of- a wedding-ring !"

A~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ - z ,








<pb n="213"/>
AFTER TWO YEARS.                 213

to and fro, revolving this question, " VWhat shall 1

had a deep, subtle brain, like his Ismile, powerful

d or evil for himself or othlers. 

ays now past," he mused, "a post-chaise-and-foui

corner, two muffled bravoes, and a midnight abduc-

d  the thing! Or one might go seek that conveni.

friend, ever ready to personate the clergyman, and

age would settle the fair one's scruples. But that

ag exploded with ruffles and rapiers, I suppose. And

I don't know. What has been done can surely

i. Why not the convenient college friend, and

-marriage? She is as innocent as her own field

ear little verdant Alice, and she loves me with her

ittle heart, and would consent to a marriage, how-

,so that it were a marriage. Without the parson,

ing-ring, she won't listen to a word-thanks to

c prejudice, and the tenets of the Sunday-school.

age-rwhy not-why not ?"

tful frown deepened on his face as he trod to and

it out. Why not ? Every moment it grew clearer

every moment the diabolical scheme, impossible

at first, grew more and more feasible.' The

practicable, but where was the convenient college

found? Most men, not very good men either,

e to lend themselves to the misery and destruction

et, trusting young girl. He thought over the men

ine by one. Guy, reckless to madness, he knew

ltand and have a bullet' sent through his heart

a finger in such a matter as this, which he, the

brother, darkly revolved now. He felt this with

Allan Fane, weak and selfish, frivolous and false,

rng in. his indignation here. Sir Harry Gordon

iers were officers and gentlemen, to whom he

- 'have breathed a word of his plot than he would

his own mother had she lived. But one re-

-his face suddenly lighted as he thought of

-fof a cucumber fried in snow," he thought

with neither honor, conscience, principle

an poor as a church mouse--a man Lapable

own- mothel if he could benefit himself by the

and a  not be found out. Yes," he said, iun

''Stedman will do it"








<pb n="214"/>
214             AFTER TWO YEARS.

" Will he, my friend ?" said a cool voice, and a,, tall fi

darkened the sunlight, as Mr. Augustus Stedman step'

through the open window. "I thought it was only on 

stage and in mad-houses people talked to themselves. 

what is our Stedman to do, my lord ?"

He flung himself into an easy-chair and proceeded to i

a cigar. Lord Montalier looked at him suspiciously. 

" What brings you here ?" he asked. " How long were

watching me?" 

"Not over polite questions from one's host," murmured 

Stedman, tenderly pressing his Manilla. "What brings

here? Fatigue, my dear boy-four hours' popping at the p

tridges, under a blazing September sun, is somewhat exhai

ing. I remembered this apartment was one of the coolest a

pleasantest in the whole house, and that George Sand's l

novel was about somewhere, and so I came. Do I intr

upon your profound cogitations ? If so "-he made a moth

of rising and leaving.

" No, no !" Lord Montalien said, hastily. "Don't go; t

fact is, Stedman, I want you."

He said it with some embarrassment. Even to this mt

without-honor or principle, he found it rather awkward to ma

his proposition. 

Mr. Stedman, having lit his cigar, puffed away, his hat

deep in his trousers pockets, watching his friend with ke

steely eyes. 

"Yes," he said, "you want me. Proceed, my lordly fiie

-the lowliest of thy slaves hears but to obey." 

"Stedman, will you pledge your honor, your word as a. 

tleman, that this matter shall be an inviolable secret betw

us?" 

Mr. Stedman took his right arm out of his trousers poc

and elevated it. 

"I swear, by Jupiter and Juno, by all the goddesses

Olympus, by the honor of many Stedmans, by my fathe

beard, never to reveal to mortal man the secret about tof

di7ulged. Manshallah ! Upon my eyes be it!" 

" Stop that rot i" cried Lord Montalien, impatiently; "i

serious for once in your life, if you can. Can you gu

Stedman, what the business is in which I want your help ? '

"Something about our blue-eyed Hebe, the blushing div

ily, whose earthly name is Alice Warren."

"Exactly, Gus-I'm hopelessly done for in that quartel ji-

':-:lI








<pb n="215"/>
AFTER TWO YEARS.                     215

it ages ago, my friend. Not an hour since I was

|  to Guy that it was asclear a case of spoons as tvei

iy life. Watched you coming up from the planta-

/knew your little game in a twinkling. Oh, my pro-

i! Of course, it is all right, and it is ' Two sorls

a single thought, two hearts that beat as one.' Hey ?"

thing is not all right," answered his lordship, testily;

e, should I come to you for help ? "

aly not. I confess I don't very clearly see my part

estic drama. Is the little Alice insensible to your

tractions, and do you want your faithful Stediran to

/_   ~your cause with his honeyed words? I saw her

last Sunday as you walked up the aisle, and

rpassion was reciprocated."

t understand, my good fellow. That is all right

he girl loves me with all her heart, but she is fear-

onde    rfully obdurate on the point of marriage. She

ady to resign me, and break her heart in the most

'f:ashion, and go off genteelly in a decline, but-"

ts on the nuptial knot," interrupted Mr. Stedman,

0f course, is simply preposterous; and so there's

- it but to break both your hearts, and part. A case

vel and Lady Nan-cee over again. Or is there

e tse on the cards ? "

X  aid Lord Montalien. And then, still pacing up and

id bare his dark scheme.

|  Stedman listened, smoking with an immovable face.

fie said slowly, at last, "I see. The thing can be

ippose, but it seems rather risky. And my part, deal

_i~ to play the parson, and tie the knot ? Unfortu-

ee knows my interesting physiognomy almost as

does your own."

se not; but you may know some one who will play

_  have a very extensive and not too select circle

ces in London. Think, and see if there is not

_hem who will do the business; and believe me, I

ediy forget your service."

t from the eyes of Stedman, as Lord Montalien

lst swords, a gleam not good to see; over his thin

dawned  a faint, chill smile, that never came there

alint: ce of those two congenial spirits had come

icriously. Years before, a certain dashing young

awned faint,  c    hl snile ta never  c dane th








<pb n="216"/>
2i6              AFTER TWO YEARS.

London actress had fetteied Augustus Stedn.an in her :

chains. A thoroughly vicious woman, with nothing but

bold, handsome face to recommend her- -coarse, heartless,

avaricious. He had wooe d her long, and success seemed nm

when the Honorable Francis Earlscourt appeared- upon 

scene, with the longer pu.rse of the two. It is an epis

neither pleasant nor profitable to relate. Stedman retired~'

fled, but he took his defeat wonderfully well. From that i

lie became the chosen friend and associate of Francis E

court, forgiving him handsomely for his somewhat treach

conduct in the little matter, anda, with the patience of an In

chief, biding his time to wipe out the score.

Five years had passed, and the time had come !

The gleam in his gray eyes, the pale smile on his cyni

mouth, were unseen by his companion. He had turned

face away, and was looking at the amber light in the soft w

ern sky-at the green beauty of the sloping glades. For fr

minutes silence reigned; then his lordship's patience gave

"Well!" he said, with an oath; "speak out, can't yo:

Does your silence mean you decline ?"

'Silence means consent. Don't be impatient, my L

Montalien; a man can't review some six or seven hundred :

quaintances all in a second. I'll fielp you in this matter; a

I know the very man you want."

'You do ?"

'I do. A young fellow, destined for the church, on t

point of receiving orders more than once, but the matter 

been always postponed. He is the slave of the brandy bot

and ready to do anything short of murder-a highway robb

or a five-pound note. It is my belief he will never be

dained; but he will marry you. He lives with his uncle, 

incumbent of the Church of St. Ethelfrida, in the city, ai

nothing will be easier than for him to admit you, and perfor

the mock ceremony in the church after nightfall."  !

"In the church ?

"In the church. The uncle is down in Essex, as 1 hmppl

to know, for a fortnight's holiday; the nephew can obtaihi t

keys when he pleases. How soon do you want it done ?"  ¤

"Immediately-day after to-morrow, if possible." 

Ah ! " Stedman said, with a covert sneer; " the proverb

impatience of lovers ! I remember once before, five years ag

you were almost equally far gone." 

"Stedman ! I thought you had forgotten that. Remenm

I was only a lad of one-and-twenty then." 

.                     D~~~~~4








<pb n="217"/>
AFTER TWO YEARS.                 2 1

wi gh to be my successful rival,' laughed Stedn an.

t!o-gmorrow will be rather sharp work, but, if tle

ILdon't say that it is impossible."

will be willing. I shall see her this very evening

Aall  How do you propose to manage ?"

shall go up to town by the first train to-morrow,

an we want, bribe him, procure a special license

rslf), and have the job done next day. Miss

gt go up by to-morrow's evening train, and remain

decent lodging, until the wedding-hour. Your

nts you must settle yourself. Shall you accom-

here ? "

id Lord Montalien. '"The whole matter must

land my name in no way mixed up in it. I shall

;e9othing to do with her or her flight. She must

hiall follow on the next day. You see I have a

eep up," with a short laugh. " I have a lady in

mean eventually to make Lady Montalien. Be-

>iin such an affair as this might be a serious draw-

Would it be presumptuous on my part, to ask

e fortunate lady you intend to honor so highly?"

auna Lisle, my late father's ward, with eighty

ds down upon her wedding-day. Sir Vane Char-'

resent guardian, and she is still in France, but

hrtly. I remember her, a handsome, spirited

: and made up my mind, two years ago, to marry

she left school."

Lisle ! I think I have heard of her. But you

ouare going to have everything your own way

me young ladies, with eighty thousand down on

d  generally find more than one admirer."

to marry her," Lord Montalien said, shortly.

euss that question. Let me see. Guy speaks

t own to-morrow evening-why should not Alice

:et down as the companion of her flight ! Not

a. Well, my lord, suppose now you go, and talk

ti Miss Warren, as everything depends on her

your return, I will pack my portmanteau,

tie earliiest train."

en seized his hat, and grasped Mr. Stedman'g

lity very unwonted with himX-








<pb n="218"/>
28             AFTER TWO -YEARS.

"You are the Prince of good fellows, Gus! .Believe

shall not forget this." 

He wrung his hand, dropped it, hurried through the

window, and disappeared. 

Mr, Stedman looked after his retreating figure, and th

nous smile, the latent gleam, were very apparent now. ;

"No. my Lord of Montalien, I don't mean you shall

this. I think before the week ends I shall wipe out thi

gludge about poor Fanny Dashon."      .^

Lord Montalien strode through the dewy meadows an

short, sweet grass, full of triumph and exultation. For F

Earlscourt, from earliest boyhood, to set his-heart upow

thing was to strain heaven and earth to compass hisi

Years might come and go, but he remained faithful to hi¤<

pose. "Always Faithful," the motto of the  arlscourts

never more strikingly exemplified than in him. By fair

or by foul, he must win Alice Warren !  -            H

lHe found her where he knew she was always to be fou

this calm evening hour-milking. Flower, and Daisy

Moolie stood around her, the sweet scent of new-made

filled the air, the vesper songs of the birds rang down the

toral stillness, the last golden glimmer of sunset was fadii

the .cler-gray sky.. All things looked fair and sweet; and,

est, sweetest of all, the girl who rose with a blush and a 

to greet her lover.                         . 

"Come with me, Alice," he said. "I have something tl-

to you-something you must hear at once." 

She went with him across the long fields to the gloom

solitude of the distant fir plantation. Even in the heat o

wooing and success, he could remember prudence. Be

ihe sombre shadow of the trees he passed his arm around

waist, and whispered his proposal. Would she be his Wi

secretly, of course, but his wife ? 

The girl.lifted two large, searching eyes to his fe,

clasped both hands round his arm.

"Frank !" she cried, "your Wife-your very wife. I:

bailiffs daughter-you, Lord Montalien! Do I hear

a iht ? Do you mean it?"                          i i 

"More than I ever meant anything. Why not, my Ali

Mynu are fair enough and good enough to be a queen, and

is'there to say me nay. Only for the present it msu:

pnvate-strictly private, remember. Not a whisper- of

seci1d tt a living soui.'" 

*              X \,''m








<pb n="219"/>
_  ;  AFTER TWO YEARS             219

_n soft, caressing tones he told her what she was to

eal quietly from home, and take the 8.50 train for

go to a quiet hotel, whose address he would send

it there for him until the following day. And an

his arrival they would drive together to some ob-

ch and be married. Would she consent?

_ t! She clasped her hands closer around his arm, hei

with joy.

_    1: I to be your wife, I would risk, would do anything

_lB   e day soon, soon after our marriage, you will let ne

te1 father and mother. I can't bear that they-"

re not. After our marriage you shall tell them

Don't fail; and, by the way, if you should meet

t the station, you can travel under his protection.

e to him, of course, for the present, at least.

me as you say, Alice, you will be content to wait a

I present you- to the world as Lady Montalien."

ed him ! the innocent eyes looking up to him were

devotion. They smote him-heartless, selfish

they smote him, the loving, faithful eyes of the girl

ying

clanged out over the woods, the dressing-bell at

:  He Vstooped ha'stily and kissed her. "Good-by,

rthe last time. On the day after to-morrow we

Lnd London to part no more."

e !- He hurried away through the fir woods, and

a  i Priory, triumphant. He had won ! he always won

had wooed so long was his at last !

HStedman still sat where he had left him, dtlune in

dusk.

11 t two words as he strode in and passed hmn:

_   |    !thuE r later, as a second loudly clanging bell cirashed

ing stillness, Alice Warren entered her tlther's

_gtB|  %er awaited, but what cared she for supper. tfer

l         'r1 of obliss too intense for smiles or wordb. She was

his loving wife.

rren took dpwn the big, well-worn family Bible

:read aloud the nightly chapter. By what strange

te story of ary y Magdalen, that sombre, pathetic

1 hen the nightly prayers were offered, and the

night in a voice that trembled-the last good-

ips ever spoke in the house she had gladdened








<pb n="220"/>
2 0              AFTER TWO YEARS.

for twenty peaceful years. She took her light, and stole up

her room-not to go to bed-not to sleep.            :I

The clocks of Speckhaven were striking nine. The h

moon flooded the green earth with crystal glory and sham

her feeble candle. She blew it out, and sat down by the o

wirndow, to look at the great, white, summer stars, and think-

her lover. How great he was, how good, how generous, i

noble, how handsome ! Was there a king, among all the ki

of the world, half so kingly, half so brave ! She loved him, a

she was to be his wife-all was said in that. It was not for

rank she cared-his rank only frightened her-she loved Fr

Earlscourt, and was going to be his wife.             I

She sat there in a trance of bliss until past- midnight. T'

new day had come, the day in which she was to fly from.hor

She thought of her father and mother with a sharp pang, in t

widst of her joy. 

They would know the glad truth soon, of course; but mea

time they would suffer, they would miss her. If she only dar

write to them-but no-she dared not, she would say tC

much.

"I will write to Polly," she thought; "I must tell Polly!:!

She arose softly, re-lit her candle, and sat down to writ

The few words she had to say were soon written:  :

" M  OWN DARLING-I must speak one word to you before I goi

fore I go away from my home, my dear, dear home, to be married. Y´-

Paulina; Alice is to be married to one she loves-oh, so dearly-so dea

-the best, the noblest of men on earth. Some day you will know 

name, and what a happy, happy girl I am. Until then, love me, and tr

aiways your own                                ALICE !1*?

She addressed this brief note to Paris, to "Mlle. Paulih

Lisle."  She kissed the name, she took the locket from h

neck, and kissed the pictured face. " Darling little Polly," sh

said, "to think that when next we meet, Alice will be a 

too."

And then at last she said her prayers, and went to bed. B: 

the bright broad day was shining gloriously in before the hap

eyes were sealed by sleep, The newt day-the beginning f 

new life.                                             -

:   :   ~~~~~~~~: 0:








<pb n="221"/>
^,I ';::.THE 2?OAD TO RUIN.               221

SSraory to catch the last express. The gray of the

7erening was fast deepening to darkness as Mr. Guy

t jumped out, and ran to the office for his ticket. In

tes the train would start-one of these minutes he

t-office, the   other in lighting a cigar and look-

hi. Halfok   a dozen loungers were scattered about

::r.and save himself, there was dbut another passen-

orine a close black veepe,and who carried a small bag

in -this lonely female figure, standing- there in the

isoimething efamiliar, made the young Guardsman look

e -saw the glance, and came gliding up to him, and

tid had upon his arm.

- not lifted the close mask of black lace, but he

the voice, the whole form, the instant she spoke.

:Guy-I am going to London, and-and I am

to -go alone. Might I-would you-"

en, 7sir," cried the guard, holding open the. door of

compartment. " Look sharp, if you please."

y, Alice," exclaimed Guy, and the three words,

h   a whisper, reached the ears of the guard, to be

-his professional memory, and destined to be re.

after, with such deadly peril to the unconscious

R:h no: time for parley, no time for questions or re-

i:-B--Ie . assisted her in, sprang after, the whistle

thie express train flew away through the darken

hen, Miss Alice Warren, explain yourself? What

lady from Speckhaven mean by running away to

iuiholyhour and alone ?  I give you my word








<pb n="222"/>
á222           T7HE ROAD TO RUIN.          , 

I should as soon have expected to behold the Czarina o

the Russias at the station as you."               :

The veil was still down-its friendly shelter hid the burni

painful blush that overspread the girl's face, but he could

she shrank and trembled. 

"I am obliged to you, Mr. Guy."                --

"You are, eh ? . I hope for everybody's sake, my old fri

Mlathew knows all about it. And, if he does, my old fri

Mathew ought to be ashamed of himself-letting his prei

daughter run wild up to London. Where is Peter Jenki

too-the sturdymiller-that he doesn't look better after i

little affianced ?"

"I am not his affianced," Alice replied, between a laugh 

a sob; " I never was. And my father and mother don't kn

I've come-please don't blame them, Mr. Guy." 

"Then,. Alice, are you quite sure you ought to have com

all ? It is no business of mine, that is certain; but, for 

friendship's sake-we were always good friends, Alice, you kn&

--I should like you to tell me what is taking you to London

There was a gravity and earnestness in his tone and fa

very unusual.  He was the last man in the world to tu

censor of other men and women; if they went all wrong, at

came to grief, why, it was only the usual lot, and what h

happened to himself. Frank might do precisely as he plea<

-it was no affair of his or any man's; and with a woman

the world, Guy would have thought it a pretty equal conte

whetfe a fair field and no favor were all either had a right

expect. But this was different-this fresh-hearted, little co

try-girl whom he had known from childhood. "As in a gla H

darkly," he saw the truth, and for once in his life felt actual

called upon to remonstrate.

"Alice," he said, "I don't want to pry into any secret/!

yours-you know your own affairs best, of course; but is t

a wise step you are taking? Think, before it is too late, 

turn back while there is yet time."

"There is no time. It is too late. And I would not t

back if I could."                                  ;

She spoke more firmly than he had ever heard her. 

was thinking that this time to-morrow she would be Fran

wife.. 

"You know best. Pardon my interference. At least, :

will permit me to see you to your destination.'

She took fi om her purse a slip of paper and handed it to hi,








<pb n="223"/>
THE ROAD TO RUIN.                    223

ig there. If you will take me to it I will be very,

oe's Lodgings, 20 Gilbert's Gardens, Tottenham

read Guy. "Ah, I don't know. Mrs. Howe's

lbert's Gardens, sounds rural, though. Yes, MisF

-sall certainly see you there; and now, with yoni

ll read the evening paper."

silence fell between them. Alice Warren pm

,and looked out at the flying night-scene. The

erast-neither moon nor stars were visible. How

unearthly this wild night-flight seemed to her !

she have done but for Mr. Guy? He looked to

- as a- guardian angel, in her loneliness and strapge-

r ere possible to think anything but what was good

I might have thought it a little cruel, a little selfish,

hus away alone to that big, pitiless, terrible London.

ew best, and this time to-morrow she would be his

h eart throbbed with the joy, the terror of the

e looked askance at her companion. If Mr. Guy

ought, would he be so kind to her as he was now?

- known, that thought need not have dismayed her.

alien, like King Cophetna, might have married a

l   and if she were well-dressed and well-looking,

arlscourt would have embraced his new sister, and

- a thought to her antecedents.

Wiose upon midnight when the countless lamps of

t shone before the country-girl's dazed eyes. The

uproar of the station terrified her: she clung in

r. Earlscourt's arm. And then they were in a

d cab, whirling rapidly away to Gilbert's Gardens.

an unearthly hour," remarked Guy, looking at

"I only hope Mrs. Home-no, Mrs. Howe-is

receive us."

e was. Mr. Stedman had arranged that as well as

; and Miss Warren was affably received by a thin,

with ,a pinched nose and a wintry smile, and

e ladies' sitting-room at once.

er hand to her companion with a glance of teai-

0u very much, Mr. Guy. I don't know how U

-got here but for you.  Good-night, and oh,

ously--" don't say anything to anybody dowr

met me."








<pb n="224"/>
224              THE ROAD 70 RUIN 

"Certainly not, Alice-good-night." 

He had reached the door when a sudden impulse struck

and he turned back. He took both her hands in his ow

looked kindly, pityingly down in the sweet, tear-wet face.

"Little Alice," he said, "I'm a good-for-nothing feilo

I have a very tender regard for you. If ever you find yo

up a tree-I mean in trouble of any kind-I wish you'd 

to me. I'll help you if I can. Here is an address to&

you can write at any time, and if ever you call upon me-l

never fail you."

The dark,'handsome face, the brown, earnest eyes swa

fore the girl in a hot mist, If he had been her broth

could hardly have felt more tenderly toward her than a

moment. Trouble ! He knew, if she did not,. what dar

bitter trouble was in store for her, and he was helpless to :

t off.

"I've had the fortune to come across a good many insc

ble cards in my time," he thought, as he ran down stairs, 

for inscrutability, Monti puts the topper on the lot. Wha

infernal scoundrel he is; and what an inconceivable idiot

poor child ! Of course, he's going to marry her-nothingi

would have induced a girl like that to take such a step."

Mrs.'Howe led the way up stairs with a simper on her

face.

'I know all about it, miss," she whispered, confidenti

the young man as was here this morning-a most ge

young man he is-told me that you was going to be ma

you know, miss, and that is the gentleman, of course, a mil

gentleman, as one may see, and the very 'andsomest as 

set eyes on."

Alice shrunk away, almost with dread.  How dare

Stedman tell this strange woman her secret? She entered

room, a neat little apartment enough, but insufferably

and stuffy, as it seemed to the country-girl, used to the i

breath of the German Ocean, and the sweet breeze of the

colnshire wold.

Mrs. Howe set down the candle, still simpering, still co

ing.

"And if there's anything else, miss, hot water, or a Gu

tea, or a plate of cut 'am, or anything as you might mente

I'm sure I'd be most happy. Which the genteel young-

this morning paid up in advance, most generous-"  - 

"No, thank you; I want nothing," Alice answered, hurri

and the simpering landlady, with a last dip, walked away.

9  . .  -   "-     f?0000 -








<pb n="225"/>
, ,  0  THE ROAD TO RTUO                  225

d and locked the door, and sank down on her

he bedside, her hat and shawl still on, with an over-

Sense of desolation and loneliness. What were they

home ? What did they think of her? They would

tthe hour for evening prayers, and they would search

vain. She could see her mother's scared, white faces

s, stern, angry. Oh what a bad, cruel girl she was,

Wking of herself and her own happiness, and never car-

he grief she was leaving behind! Very soon they

ow the truth, that she was the happy wife of Lord

n, but'until then, what grief, what shame, what fear,

knot make them suffer !

n the neighborhood struck three. She had scarcely

t before-involuntarily her eyes were closing now.

p in a kind of stupor, removed her outer clothing,

lf half-dressed upon the bed, and slept deeply; 

ntil morning.

road day when she awoke and started up-nine

a dull, rainy morning. The crashing noises without

id her for a moment, until she realized she was in

erwedding-day ! She sprang up with a bound and

window. The ceaseless rain was falling, a dim yel-

d the air, the sky was the hue of lead. The dreary 

te muddy street, the dismal-looking' figures with un- 

ellas, passing beneath, struck with a chill to her 7

as it an omen of evil that the sun had not lhone on

day?   ,

shed and dressed herself-the landlady broaght her

t, and she sat down by the window to try and pass

iog hours. In the course of the forenoon Mr. Sted- 

d; she was glad to see even him then, though down 

she had disliked him. Everything was in readiness,

n told her; she might look for Lord Montalien a

resix oAlock.

ors to wait-would they ever pass, Alice thought. 

the landlady for a book, and tried to fix her attetn-

but in vain. For once a novel failed to absorb 

; She listened to the hours, and the quarters, 

two, three, four, five.

s Gardens the dark, rainy day was closing already,

lamps glimmered athwart the fog. Half-past five-

-oh,would he never come! She had worked








<pb n="226"/>
226             THE ROAD TO RUIN. 

herself up it to a fever of longing and impatience, when a l

som whirled up to the door, a man very much muffled lea

out, and rushed up the stairs, and, with a cry of joy, Alice fi

herself into the arms of her lover:             ,X

"Oh, Frank ! Frank ! I thought you would never conm

The day has been so long--so long ! "

He was so closely muffled that the eyes of love alone co

have recognized him. He looked flushed and eager as a p

spectivc bridegroom should.

" Dress yourself as quickly as possible, Alice," he said, h

nedly; "we will drive to the church at once."

In five minutes the girl's straw hat and simple shawl were o

She drew hei veil over her face, and with a beating heart 

led by her lover to the cab. A second more and they we

whirling away, and the curious eyes of the landlady were4

moved from the window. 

' could not see his face," she remarked afterward; t1

was that muffled up, and his hat was that pulled over his heye

but I know it was the same millingtary gent as brought her 

night afore." 

The Church of St. Ethelfrida was a very long way remov;

from Gilbert's Gardens, and it was entirely dark by the t

they reached it. A small and dingy edifice, in a small aI

dingy court, with not a soul to observe them, and only a so

tary cab waiting round the corner, from which Mr. Stedml

sprang to meet them. An old woman in pattens opened tJ

church-door-an old woman, who with Mr. Stedman was ti

constitute the witness of the ceremony. A solitary lamp lit t

dark edifice, and by its light they saw a young man, in a su

plice, standing behind the rails with a book in his hand. Lor

Montalien led the palpitating little figure on his arm up thli

aisle; and in less than ten minutes the young man in the sir

plice had gabbled through the ceremony, and pronounce

Francis Earlscourt and Alice Warren man and wife. Th

came signing and countersigning in a big*book-a fee w

slipped from the palm of the bridegroom into that of the youn

man in the surplice. Alice received her "marriage lines" an/

all'was over. At the church-door, the bridegroom stopped t

shake hands with his faithful friend and accomplice.  ' 

"You're a trump, Stedman ! Believe me, I shall not fog

what you have done for me to-night." 

Mr. Stedman, with his hands in 'his pocket,. and that palc

ominous smile on his lips, watched bride and bridegroom i

.f ~0 a








<pb n="227"/>
THE ROAD TO RUIN.                   227

and drive away; then he laughed to himself-

dt noble lord; I don't think you will forget in a

H have done for you to-night. I was to be the

I- the hanger-on who was to do your dirty

e my reward in being told I am a trump ? In six

iow7 if I am hard up, I shall know where to call,

~ iyour gratitude for a check for a couple of thou-

n thtnk that other little score, five years old, is

.7 wiped out at last."

yEarlscourt told Alice Warren that he was" a

gsort of fellow," he uttered a fact in which he

fond a great many people agree. As fast as man

that broad, sunlit, flower-grown highway, known as

to Ruin," Lieutenant Guy Earlscourt had been

the past three years.

when at twenty years of age he had begun his

l   life as fledgling guardsman and emancipated

-had been going the pace-with a recklessness, a

nce, that knew neither bounds nor pause. He

onths past three-and-twenty now, and over head

det, and irretrievably ruined.

year and a half ago his father had died, away in

id fever. Amid strangers, in a strange land,

rn Montalien's long exile of sixty years had ab.

d  He drifted out of life as quietly, as thoroughly

dand gentlemanly as he had drifted through it.

hour there were no vain regrets, or longings for

fends. Once he had thought he would like to see

A but a passing weakness; he did not wish a second

: was impossible. It was rather a relief, on the

to make an end of the general weariness and de.

n! i: dg.

either loved nor hated very strongly for the past

Where was the use, in a world where life at its

-t as a summer day, and in its first dawn, in its

ntide. the eternal night might come 

oked with a sort of pitying wonder upon his fel-

ly battling along the highway for-fame, for wealth,

wel--goals that led nowhere. He had seen .








<pb n="228"/>
S28S             TilE ROAD TO RUIN.

those men in the first fruition of success stricken dow

others stepping in over their stark bodies. The kno

that has made men great saints, heroic martyrs, was his'

fullest-the knowledge of life's nothingness-and it mad

a weary wanderer over the earth, with even heaven some

looking only a beautiful, impossible fable. 

His will had been made before he quitted England.'

that it was in his power to leave his second son he had

It was not much as that son lived-but a drop in the`

ocean of his debts and expenditure.               .

He had but one trouble--the thought of the girl whom 

ert Hawksley had left in his charge. Whom should he apl

guardian in his own stead ? He thought over all the me

knew, and there was not one among them suitable, or, if 

ble, willing to undertake the troublesome duty. He ha

most given up the problem in despair, when Sir Vane C

teris suddenly appeared upon the scene. It was no pre.

tated meeting: it was the merest chance-if there be su

thing-as chance-if the destiny that was shaping the end

Paulina Lisle had not driven him hither. He was the one i

whomihis lordship had not thought of. A vague dislike

distrust of him had been in his mind ever since the;|

upon which Lady Charteris had made her passionate dec

tion that he had insulted her, and that she would never fo

him.

Poor Lady Charteris ! it mattered little-whom she for

now; she was the inmate' of a mad-house I She had ne

recovered from that sudden illness down at Montalienh; 

three weeks from the time when her husband had taken er

to town her mind had entirely given way, and she had 7b

ever since the inmate of a private asylum. Her delusion

a singular one. Sir Vane Charteris was not her husband,

persisted; her lawful husband was alive, and in America

whom she was always trying to write. And having placed

insane wife in safe keeping, and his daughter at a fashioa

boarding-school, Sir Vane Charteris also set out, to drown

great trouble of his life, sight-seeing in distant lands.

At the close of a bright summer day, he entered the li

Syrian village where my lord lay dying. It seemed a Provide

to the sick man. Almost the first words he spoke were 

question-would he assume in his stead the guardianslp'

Paulina Lisle ?

There rose up over the swarthy face of the baronet'af

' f 0 i- 








<pb n="229"/>
F '   2 'ITHE ROAD TO RUIN.             229

the rosy light of the Eastern sunset. lie had

t of this! Among all the chances that weie to

Wife's elder daughter in his power he had nevei

l is ! It was a moment before he could answer-

during which his. face was turned far away from the

l   and his black eyes gazed at the rainbow light ill -:e

Then hepoke very quietly:

1 relieve your mind any, my lord, I willingly accept

i  With my unfortunate domestic affliction I had

t of ever again making England my home, but my

daughter, perhaps, should be paramount over

personal grief. I will become Miss Lisle's guar-

ulfil my duty to the best of my ability. She and

^l  C :e companions, and my sister Eleanor-Mrs. Gal-

ecollect-will preside over my home."

ary documents were immediately drawn up;; and

wen the great white moon rose up out of the Orient,

d Montalien, lay white and cold in death.

Charteris lingered in the Syrian village long enough

-his last duties to his friend. The body was em-

d transported to England; and perhaps among all

i: Bareheaded around,, whilst the great vault down at

pened to receive another inmate, Guy Earlscourt

iy mourner at heart. It had not been the way of

to speak of it, or even much to think of it, but in

tearts they had loved each other wonderfully well.

s, the new Lord Montalien, he looked, as he always

del of all filial virtues and quiet grief; but the dark

him exulted. His was the power now and the

not the dead man's favorite, reigned in Montalien.

ed with the same expression of subdued sorrow

will was read, and 'knew that his father had not left

ento of fatherly regard. All had gone to Guy-

ihaps, but all. He grasped his brother's hand when

alone together, and looked at him with glistening

,old fellow," he said, " thirteen thousand is not much

your habits and tastes, but when you are up a tree

iti without fear. The income of Montalien is a

2,tand I shall share it as a brother should. Stint your-

way-your debts shall be paid."

d his dark eyebrows, and pulled his musthch? in

kl           X;ent. 








<pb n="230"/>
230              THE ROAD TO RUIN. '

"Has Frank gone mad, I wonder " he thought; "he

my debts! Why, the selfish beggar would not give a so

keep me from starving! What the deuce does he meam

gushing in this way ? " But aloud he had answered: " Tha

very much; you're not half a bad fellow, Frank!" and:

straightway proceeded to squander his legacy, which he mana

very cbmpletely to do in a year.  v                I

Sir Vane Charteris made an end of his Eastern tour, andf

turning home by Paris, proceeded to call upon his ward. 

had informed Miss Lisle by letter of the change, and the yo

lady had shed some very sincere tears over the news, a 

for Lord Montalien, whom she had liked, and a few for hi

self, that she should be the ward of Sir Vane Charteris, wh

she disliked with a heartiness which characterized all this vo

person's likes and dislikes. The baronet called upon her 0

July day-the July preceding the September of'which I ha

written-and there descended to the convent parlor, a t

slim young lady, in a gray dress, with a pale face, and 1a

bright eyes. She gave her hand rather coldly to her guard

and listened whilst he unfolded his plans for her. I 

She was eighteen now, and the time for leaving school

come. Early in October his town-house would, be in ord

and his sister and daughter ready to receive and welcome t-

It was his wish she should enter society at once; her Graee, t

Duchess of Clanronald, had offered to present her at Cout

Pending the ides of October, would Paulina mind remaini

quietly where she was ? 

"Yes," Miss Lisle answered, "decidedly, she wozud mindin

She had no notion of spending the midsummer vacation in th

convent. She had promised her friend, Mlle. Virginia Dupo

to spend August and September in the fraternal mansion,

Versailles. And she was quite willing to make her debut i

society immediately, delighted, indeed. If Sir Vane Charter

should choose to come for her about the middle of October sh

would be ready to go to England.

The interview ended, and the baronet had got what he d

sired, an inkling into the character of the heiress. She had '

will of her own-that was clear, and a very strong fancy f

having her own way. It would require all the tact he po~

sessed, and all the strength of mind to come off victor in d

battle with her. 

"She shall marry in her first season," he thought; "and cA

man of my coosing. Robert Lisle will never dare lettrii-

:: :::;- ;IL








<pb n="231"/>
:  TH" E ROAD TO RLTIV.           231

Olivia's life will soon end in her mad-house.

er fortune becomes Maud's, for who is there to

a   an elder daughter ?"

ss Lisle was enjoying herself very much in her

there were several people across the Channel to

an object of great interest. Sir Vane Chaiteris,

ng his town-house in the aristocratic neighbor

rkeley Square, for her reception-Lord Montalien,

deup-hhis mind, entirely to his own satisfaction, to

ad the spendthrift and prodigal Guy, who was

mnded to do the same. His adviser was an

t of his father's, from whom he had expectations,

ready paid his debts, half a dozen times, and the

hose prospective legacy alone kept the Jews from

wn upon him.

the most reckless, the most wickedly extravagant

Guards," this ancient grand-aunt said to him in a

nd I will pay your debts no more, sir; do you un-

oGambling and drinking and horse-racing are bad

'n knows, but let there come a whisper of any-

to my ears, and I disinherit you, and give every-

; do you understand?"

isno mistaking your meaning, my dear aunt," Guy

ith imperturbable good temper. " I dare say you

ally; I'm an unlucky beggar generally, and it will

a piece with the rest, if you do disinherit me. It's a

ns sake, I don't go to the bad altogether."

ave gone there, sir!" cried old Miss Earlscourt:

race to your name and. family, sir. Why don't

ried? answer me that, and change your life, and

amy, and become a decent member of society ? "

ked at her with a face of unfeigned horror.

arned! Heaven forbid! My dear aunt,, I don't

your sanity, but to propose marriage to a man of

ieeand-twenty, odd ! No, it is not so. desperate as

tere is prussic acid enough left in the chemist's 'o

lide out of life."

curt struck her stick vehemently on the ground,

uch like a venerable witch.

Earlscourt, I say you shall marry, and at once I

l, who was your father's ward, she is rich- hfle

I say you shall marry her !"

n murmured Guy helplessly.








<pb n="232"/>
*232               '     &PA ULINA, 

" She is coming home next month,. I asked Frank, 

told me, and you shall make her fall in love with yo

marry you. You are handsome, one of the very ha

young men I ever saw, and a favorite with all the wo

don't go into society, but I hear-I tell you, sir, you

marry this Paulina Lisle, or I will disinherit you !"

I' But, my dear madame-"

"Not a word, not a syllable, sir ! It is your last cha

fore you become altogether disreputable. I have paid,

debts for the last time, and iy money shall neyer go

squandered like water.  Marry this young woman with

eighty thousand pounds, and you shall have every farthi

possess. Don't tell me!-a man with such a face, su

tongue, andi such elegant insolence of manner as yours, c

anything he likes with the women!  Now go !" and

witch's stick pointed to the door: "don't let me see li

wicked, spendthrift face again until you come to announc

heiress as your affianced wife!" ! ":

CHAPTER III. 

PAULINA. 

WAY along the dreariest part of the Essex coast ti

stood, and stands still, a lonely old manor-ho

closed in from the outer world by funereal trees, :

called "The Firs." It was the country-house of,

Vane Charteris, and had never beenr visited by him in the:i

twenty years. A gloomy and grewsome place, five niles fri

the nearest country neighbor, a squalid fishing-village lying

low, the long waves forever breaking upon the shingly sh

and the gaunt, dark firs skirting it, smothering it all around.:

The " Moated Grange " could hardly have been a more ln:

some and eerie dwelling, nor could "Mariana" have bewai

her hard lot in being shut up there much more bitterly than

the Mistress of " The Firs," the Widow Galbraith.  ' 

Mrs. Eleanor Galbraith was the only sister of Sir Vane

leris, and had spent the last nineteen years of her widow








<pb n="233"/>
PA MINA.                    233

ce at "The Firs." When one-and-twenty she had

setf away upon a subaltern in the 6oth Higllnders,

l less young officer, dying within two years,,;ft his

the cold charity of her only brother.

e had bitterly opposed the imprudent match; now he

Mrs. Galbraith in her weeds and widowhood by that

iphorism-as she had made her bed so she must lie.

li  ly about to contract a matrimonial alliance with

lthy and beautiful Miss Olivia Lyndith; and a sister in

an addition he did not at all desire in his nuptial es-

nt. There was " The Firs " if she liked. " The Firs "

need of a mistress to keep it from falling to decay, He

eant to go near it himself-its dismalness always gave

orrors.  If Mrs. Galbraith chose to go and reside at

'r she was entirely welcome, if not-

abraith did choose, wrathfully, and had become soci-

t from that hour. Nineteen years had passed, and

had stolen into her raven locks, and crow's-feet im-

mselves under her eyes. She was forty-one years of

|was a handsome likeness of her brother. She was

iajestic of stature; she had two bright black eyes,

l under straight, thick, black brows; she had a large,

ed nose, a large mouth, a massive under-jaw, brilliant

tand a mustache.

e had but acted as a brother," Mrs. Galbraith was

y to think, "and allowed me to go with him and his

enna, or even permitted me a few seasons in London,

te    redeemed my first error, and married well. Hand-

ng widows are almost certain to marry well-a second

y have the chance."

e years sped on, and she grew gray at "The Firs,"

t flesh. Look at her as she sits at her solitary nuid-

ith the hot September sunshine filling the long, dark,

d dining-room. A fine woman, most assuredly, in

:h crow's-feet-a stout, handsome, middle-aged lady

arain and a firm will.

ling of wheels on the drive without reaches her ears

iiuntasual sound. As she springs up and goes to the

h sees, to her ungovernable surprise, her brother, Sir

s. An instant more, and the old man who did

e, gardener, and coachman ushered in the lord A4








<pb n="234"/>
234                  - PAULINA.

Mrs. Galbraith could just utter the one word.

The baronet advanced with more cordiality than he had

displaed toward her, and held out his hand.    X

"4 y- dear Eleanor, I am glad to see you again."  He

her to him, and kissed her wholesome brown cheek. "

very glad, after so many years; and looking so :nicely

What ! luncheon already !"              -       :

He- flung hirmself into a chair, and glanced at the subst

ally spread table. 

"Dinner. Sir Vane Charteris! I dine at the hour at w

people of your world breakfast. One nearly forgets the u

of civilized life after nineteen years' solitude at ' The Firs.!

" hI-ope not, Eleanor," answered Sir Vane coolly, "as-l

sire you at once to return to my world, as you call it. I N

come down to remove you from 'The Firs' to mytown-hou

Mrs. Galbraith gave a gasp. At last !-what she had pi

fcr, prayed her, sighed for, during nineteen years had come

" You have heard of my unfortunate domestic calamiti

pursued the baronet; "I allude to my unhappy wife's insi

I had half resolved to'sell the lease of the Meredan St,

house ;. but circumstances have occurred latelythat have cau

me to change my mind. I have been appointed guardian t

young lady, an heiress, whom I wish to present to society."

"Indeed ! " said Mrs. Galbraith, with her black eyes fixe

her brother's face. I"I saw a brief paragraph in the M orrl

Post concerning it. A Miss Paulina Lisle, formerly the 

of the late Lord Montalien-is it not?" 

"The same ; and a very handsome and charming young la

I assure you, with eighty thousands pounds asher fortune. 

will be presented next season by the Duchess of Clanron

ant make her d6but, with yourself for chaperone. Meati

she comes from France in a month, and will go out a great di

no doubt, in a quiet way, this autumn and winter. The Chi

mas and hunting season we are to spend at Montalien Prio

My town-house must be set in order at once, and you shall p

side in my wife's place. Maud shall leave school, and havet

governess."

"You give yourselves considerable trouble for your n

ward," said Mrs. Galbraith, who knew that giving himself ti

ble for anything or anybody was not her brother's weakn

" Who is this Paulina Lisle ? One of the Sussex Lisles?"f 

"No; I believe the father was of Scotch descent"  5

" She is an orphan, of course" 








<pb n="235"/>
PAULINA.                    235

the father lives out in California, but not in the

return to England. He was an old friend ol

lien, and intrusted his heiress to him, with the

point a guardian in his stead in the event of his

I e been appointed, and trouble or no, I shall doe

s young lady."

ther is dead, I suppose !"

rse. Can you be ready to return to town with me

Eleanor ?"

," said Mrs. Galbraith; and then, while Sir Vane

y room, she finished her dinner, regarding her plate

tful frown.

schanged very greatly," she mused, "or he never

urdened himself with a ward at all. Is he keep-

back, I wonder ? Has he designs upon this Miss

ne? Does he expect his wife to die, and that this

ss will marry him ?"

ietand his sister returned to town early next day,

albraith set to work at once with a zeal and energy

she had lost none of her sharp faculties during

years' exile from the world. She saw to the re-

and repainting and rehanging of the house and.rooms,

the linen, the liveries, all. Long before the mid-

r arrived, the house in Meredan Street, Berkeley

uite ready for the reception of Miss Paulina Lisle.

brought his daughter home, and then started for

e baronet's daughter was in her sixteenth year now,

re, dark of skin, and with a pale, precocious little

had quite the air and conversation of a grown-up

w a deal of life, and French literature, could play

a little, draw a little, and dance and talk a great

aunt and she fraternized at once, drove out in the

h, and speculated what manner of person this Miss

be now.

father says she is very handsome, Maud," observed

ra.ith.

e ! oh dear, no; quite a plain young person, with

d sandy hair, and the rudest manners. Quite an

gawky country-girl !"

the evening of a dismal day in October, Sir Vane

arrived. It had rained and blown heavily all day

Lisle had suffered agonies worse than death cross-

el,and was as limp, and pallid, and woe-begone








<pb n="236"/>
236                   PALA       , IA

an object as can be conceived. Mrs. Galbraith shru

broad shoulders as-she looked at the wan, spiritless face.,

"And you called her handsome, Vane ? " she sail

brother.

Sir Vane laughed grimly.

"Wait until to-morrow," was his oracular response

too, in a used-up state, retired to his room. 

Lord Montalien, who since the middle of the previo

tember, had spent the chief part of his time in town, c

to be in the house. He was a frequent visitor. The

was pleasant, the wines and cook excellent. Mrs. Gal

a capital hostess and a clever woman, and little Maud,

year or two, would be marriageable.  Her mother's 

would be hers, and should Miss Lisle prove obdurate 

suit, why, it might be as well to win the regards of Miss

teris. To marry a rich wife be was resolved-at heart hi

a very miser, and worshipped gold for gold's sake.  ' -

"A sickly, sallow, spiritless creature as ever T saw '

Mrs. Galbraith's contemptuous verdict on her return 

dirawing-room. "There will not be much credit in'chap.

ing her. I dare say she will marry; girls with eighty thou

pounds are pretty safe to go off, but half the men in L

will certainly not lose their senses about her ! And my br

told me she was pretty !" 

"She was pretty,'" said Lord Montalien, "more than P

if I remember right, two years ago. Allan Fane, an 

friend of mine, the man who married Di Hautton, you 

nearly went mad about her when she was only a poor,

penniless-country-girl.  Some girls do grow up plain, a

suppose she is one of them. We shall be treated to au

convent airs, no doubt, and have to listen to Monastery 

and Vesper Hymns, whenever she sits down to the piano.",

"Come to dinner to-morrow and see," was Mrs. Galb

response. And his lordship laughingly promised and lef

house.

He did not return to his own elegant bachelor's lodgin

Piccadilly, but drove to Gilbert's Gardens, and spent the 

ing very agreeably in the society of a lady whom ae ca4

"Alice," and to whom he did not speak of the returm

Paulina Lisle.

Lord Montalien, as a privileged friend of the family,

early to the house cf Sir Vane Charteris the following eve

There was to be a dinner-party, but he was the first oi-








<pb n="237"/>
PA ULINA.                   237

| ~e.: Mis. Galbraith, in crimson velvet, stately

eeived him in the winter drawing-room. Two

re present, one in her simple school-room attire

i:  yet appear in public, another, tall and slender,

violets in her shining, gold-brown hair. Lord

roached her at once with outstretched hand.

the last to say farewell to Miss Paulina Lisle on

so let me be the first to welcome her back to

urned round, and gave him her hand, scanning

right eyes.

pardon, you were not the last to say farewell to

departure from England," she retorted, and it was

c  at her first words were a contradiction. "Your

e afer you, IMr. Earlscourt."

: Earlscourt now, my dear," smoothly insinuated

. "Lord Montalien."

I beg your pardon again. The other name was

iliar."

all me by whatever is most familiar," with a long,

"  as so old a friend should."

a friend !" Miss Lisle pursed up her bright lips with

"y grace. "Let me see-we met just three times

efore this moment ! Now, I shouldn't think three

uld constitute su'ch very old friendship, but, of

ordship knows best."

d away to a distant window, humming a French

-Montalien looked after her, then at Mrs. Gal-

sallow, spiritless creature," he said, quoting her

of yesterday. "Mrs. Galbraith, you are one of the

Hwomen I know, but don't you think you made ever

mistake yesterday ? "

as looking superbly. The slim form had grown

rather fuller, its willowy grace was perfect. The

as, was a trifle too pale and thin still, but the large

lhre eyes, the sparkling white teeth, the saucy,

smiles, and the aureole of bronze hair, would

y face into beauty.  In her nineteenth year, enough

d yet lingered to give her a frank confidence, that

trough later years. The blue.eyes looked you full,

edily in the face, the frank lips told you the truth,

?Rl audacity of a child. A lovely girl, in her first

:;i  000; ; 








<pb n="238"/>
238        '          PAULIEA.         ' ' 

youth, swith a will and a spirit, and a temper, too, of he

ready at a moment's notice to do battle for friends o

foes.                                .

"A half-tamed filly, with a wicked light in the eyes," th

Lord Montalien. " My dear Mrs. Galbraith, I don't wa

discourage you, but your spiritless debutante will give 

much trouble in the -future as ever debutante gave chap

That young lady means to have her own way or kno

reason why." 

"Young ladies with eighty thousand pounds general

have their own way," tife lady answered. " Do you 

enter the list, my lord ? The competition will be brisk. l

is a handsome girl, despite yesterday's sea-sickness. Jus

sort of girl men lose their heads for most readily. By th

she has been asking for your scapegrace brother."

Mrs. Galbraith rose to receive some new guest, and i

Montalien approached the window where Miss Lisle still 

gazing out at the twilit street. C She glanced over her

der, and asked him a question before he could speak.

"My lord, how long is it since you were at Speckhaven 

"A little over a week, Miss Lisle.  You mean to vi.

soon, I suppose? By the way, there is quite an old frien

yours stopping at Montalien." 

"Indeed ! Another old friend, like yourself, wh#m I I-

probably seen three times."

"More than that, Miss Lisle. I allude to Allan Fane.:

"Oh!" said Paulina, and laughed and blushed. "Yi

saw a good deal of Mr. Fane at one time. Hewanted

sit for a picture, you know. Mrs. Fane is there too, I

pose ?" 

"No, Mr. Fane is alone. Mrs. Fane is in Germany f

health, which is poor. They meet once or twice a year,'

lieve, and are always perfectly civil to each other; but,'

rule, they get on much more happily with two or three hun

leagues between them. Mrs. Fane grows old and sickly,' -

notoriously jealous of her husband."

" Pool Mr. Fane ! And your brother, my lord-is he, t

Alontalien?"          -                           ,,

"You remember Guy, then? poor Guy!" 

"Certainly I remember Guy. I 'saw a great deal ror

him than-I ever did of you; and two years is not such  I

nity! And why por Guy?" 

"Because-because-you haven't heard, then ?"      S

f -it

:                           V  . ,7=~~~~~~~;








<pb n="239"/>
PA   INA.                   239

taien, I only reached England late last night;

o hear -anything? Nothing very dreadful has be-

ther, I hope ?"

erest does.him too much honor. He is quite un-

e se?

+e-my dear Miss Lisle, it is not a pleasant story for

oryou to hear. Guy has gone to the bad, as they

know what that means.'"

think I did; it seems tolerably plain English. It

'spose, he has spent all his money, and got intc

tns that, and more," Lord Montalien answered,

"it means debt, and gambling, and all sorts of

aut you are very rich, my lord, and he is your only

should think his debts would not signify much while

nty of money."-

k kblood rose up over his lordship's face.

ijsle, you don't understand, and it is impossible to

tyou. Guy has gone to the bad in every sense of

Pray do not ask me any more."

ed away from the gaze of the innocent, wondering

:She did not in the least comprehend what he

to comprehend by his innuendoes. Guy gambled

this money; she understood just that, and no more.

she said, too highly bred to press an unwelcome

at was not what I wished to say. Did you hear-

ny news? "   She hesitated a little, and a faint flush

erher fair face. "Has anything been heard of

:en?" '

=stion confounded him, and yet he might have ex-

Warren," he stammered. "Alice Warren? Who

i|se s  'e Paulina repeated, emphatically; "you did

ask that question two years ago, when you admired

Lord Montalien."

her. so greatly ! oh, of course, I know now-how

you mean the bailiff's daughter, of course ?"

er the bailiff's daughter. Poor Alice!"

is no news of her, that I have heard. It is a very

I her runring away from home as she did."








<pb n="240"/>
2P0                   PA ULINA. 

," Not in the least strange," retorted Paulina, with her

tomary frankness. " She ran away to be married."  -

"To be married!" Lord Montalien's face was staitled

pale as he repeated it. 

' Certainly. She wrote to me the night before she left 

I have the letter yet. She told me she was going to be marri

"Did she tell you to whom ?" 

His heart was beating quick as he asked the question, th

he knew what the answer would be.

"No. To some one above her in rank, though, I k

Lord Montalien, don't you suspect it was one of the gentle

staying at your place last month ?" 

He had had time to control himself, otherwise the ga

the large, earnest eyes must have disconcerted him horribt

"Miss Lisle, I have thought, I have suspected! She

;ate in the evening. Have you heard who travelled up with

to London?"

"Of course not;- I have heard nothing but what her own

ter tells me, and a few brief lines from Duke Mason, saying

was gone, no one knew where or why. Who went with her

to London?" 

"Miss Lisle, will you take my arm ? They are going in

dinner. And will you forgive me if I do not answer your qi

tion ? She was your friend-it is not from my lips you sho

hear the name of her companion."

"Do you mean your brother ?" she demanded, abruptly.

"I am sorry to say-I do." 

"l Then I don't believe one word that she ran away to

married to him!" answered Miss Lisle, with calm decis

"She never cared for him, and he never paid her the least

tention whatever. He may have gone up with her to Ion

but I am quite certain your brother is not the man whom i

has married." 

"If she be married!" Lord Montalien said, stung to biti_

ness by her words. Miss Lisle did not blush one whit. 

looked at him with surprised, unshamed eyes; the open, f

less gaze of perfect innocence.

" Of course she is married !" she said; "she told me she

going to be. Do you think she would run away to seekd

fortune alone in London ? There were other gentlemen at)f

Priory, last September, beside your brother, I suppose ?" :,s;

"Three others: Allan Fane, Sir Harry Gordon, and -C

Villiers."








<pb n="241"/>
PA UZNA.                     241

W:=  00:0073::   :                  2

'at him searchingly a moment; his face baffled

tned away, and resumed her dinner with a resolute

!find out," she said, quietly; "I am going down to

the day after to-morrow to spend a week; I shall

n to Speckhaven," he echoed, "to spend a week

friend Mason, I presume."

ear old Duke ! He will be glad to see me. And

out all about Alice Warren."

alien was by no means allowed to monopolize the

e evening. Sir Vane had invited several very eligi-

i:red men, and Miss Lisle's beauty and spirited style

[tion had already produced considerable impression.

titer was simply perfect; a belle of four seasons could

en more entirely and gracefully at ease. She

-?much better than most'young ladies. Paulina was

had ideas of her own, and it was quite refreshing to

e men about town to hear her fresh views of peo-

She was charming; that was the universal

tiful beyond doubt, accomplished and rich. She

er, and her rich voice astonished her hearers, so

equal to Patti !" was the verdict of more than one-

"HIt is a superb soprano."

r, Miss Lisle's first appearance, though her part this

sa small one, was an entire success. Lord Monta-

mself fascinated in a way he could not understand.

Unlike the ordinary English Miss he was accustomed

so piquant, so sparkling, so brightly handsome and

tht: she bewildered him. She possessed that spell

_ in man or woman-the gift of fascination--her joy- 

_     VKi~her ringing voice, the bright flash of her eyes, took.

by storm before you knew it.                 l

e had said, in all honesty, that she meant to go

ckhaven in two days; but with the best of inten-

erest affection for her two friends there, two weeks

re the promised visit was made.

ight be empty to some people, and the season

ethis young lady, fresh from her twilight convent

thie most.populous and delightful of cities. She

!SLXX;0-:








<pb n="242"/>
~242            PAULINA. 

went out continually; and October was very near its:

when, one frosty evening, Miss Lisle opened the little g

gate of Duke Mason's, and walked through the ope!

door. There were changes, many and great, in herself, bf

one here. The roses and geraniums bloomed in perl

freshness, the old cat basked on the hearth, the old or

lence, cleanliness prevailed, and Rosanna on her kneei

toasting muffins for tea. Two,arms went around her necd

an impetuous kiss, the only kiss poor Rosanna had reI

since she had said good-by to her nursling, was pressed

her withered cheek. Duke came in presently. The fir,

shone redly through the room, the lamp burned on the m

the table was spread for supper, and a graceful, girlish:

sat on a low stool, fresh and beautiful as a rose-bud. :

stood a second regarding this picture, then advanced with

stretched hand.

"Well, Duchess," he said, as if they had parted two i

instead of two years before, " you have come back, after:

And so "Polly" was home again, but somehow it was

the Polly of old. The fault was not hers: she strove to 

all things precisely the girl who had left them, but she sa

fore them, a tall young lady, out of their world altogether

the new dignity of dawning womanhood upon her; educ

refined, rich, handsome, fairer than ever, but never again

"Polly." 

Late in the evening of the ensuing day, Mr. Allan 

busily at work since early morning, threw down brushes

palette, lit a cigar, and started for his daily, brisk, t

walk. On this particular evening, his steps turned shore

he strolled along through the lamplit town, and down to S

haven sands. The Cave was a favorite resort of his, wh

could sit and smoke and watch the gray, whispering se

think, perhaps, of the girl who had first brought himl' 

He was thinking of her now as he advanced along the'

path, whence'she had long ago led him. Thelast ray

fa(ing daylight were in the cold, gray sky; pale-yellow 

of wintry brightness lit the west, and there was a ring of 

TIess in the evening air. His steps echoed loudly on thef4

an:l a quiet figure standing at the entrance of the Cave,

inl those pale-yellow gleams, turned at the sound. A'

an]l Paulina Lisle stood face to face !       :

He turned pale at the sight. He had not dreameds

in Speckhaven. IHe had been thinking of her, imag

-  :  X








<pb n="243"/>
PA ULNA.                    243

Kier new life, and here she rose up before him, like a

/_     he gloaming ! She recognized him immediately, and

;hand, with her frank, bright smile.

r. Fane !" she cried. "The very last person I ex.

/_      see'! Lord Montalien mentioned your being at the

, but I had actually forgotten all about it."

whole story was told in those lightly spoken words

j "forgotten all about it," and all about him, as com-

s 'though he had never entered her life. He had loved

_bestly and strongly as an honester and stronger man

given her up of his own accord, and he had no right

n. But the bitter sense of loss was ever there-the

spirited face haunted him by night and day!

*Z:1said Miss Lisle, "you don't look very cordial, ]

t  * Do you take me for a ghost, or a mermaid, Mr.

.'You see I have been paying visits all day to my old

liand this, my seaside grotto, is the last on the list.

a ireally must go home. Poor Rosanna has a horroi

:"ews and night-winds. She takes me to be a fragile

that a sharp, autumn blast would nip in twain. If

say anythiqg else, Mr. Fane, perhaps you will say

laghed-Polly's sweet, gay laugh-drew her shawl

ot her, and turned to go. She was very simply

.in a dark merino, a soft gray shawl, and a little pork-

wt a scarlet birds wing. But though he saw her

silks and roses, the queen of the ball, never did

lovelier than at that moment. He spoke with some-

an effort-good Heavens, how cold and commonplace

sounded !

will permit me to see you home, Miss Lisle-it will

_   bdark before you are half way, and the town is full of

,down for the October meeting."

oking smile dawned on her face. She had nct en-

-       toten W the past, and the temptation to give him a

was irresistible.

not the least afraid; thanks, very much, Mr. Fane.

de-if is quite unpardonable of me to say it-I am

_ t have heard Mrs. Fane is--jealous! Do you think

*   mind very greatly if I permitted you to escort me

^ ked at her-a dark, painful flush rising 3n his face.

ae merciless," he said. " You had your revenge two

_   W )d-i:fi00E  0:   . : /








<pb n="244"/>
244                   PA ULZNA. _

years ago, on I :e day you gave me back my ring! You 

spare me now " 

"The ring you presented the same night to Miss Hau

I saw it ot her finger when I dined at the Priory. P1

don't try to be sentimental, Mr. Fane; I have grown drea

old and wise since that foolish time, and pretty speeche

quite thrown away upon me, I assure you. And you

walk home with me-let us hope Mrs. Fane will never hea

Her eyes were laughing wickedly. Indeed, it was a fw

ness of this heroine of mine. 

"She is always laughing--that Miss Lisle," an aggrieve

mirer had said; "and the deuce of it is, a man doesn't

whether she is laughing with him or at him."

"Pretty speeches are thrown away upon you, are the

said Mr. Fane, as they walked along, side by side. *" I cano

'ieve it-surfeited with them (as you are. Do you know:

Madame Rumor says, Miss Lisle ? "                -

" Very scandalous things, no doubt. What?" 

"That you are to be presented next season as my L:

Montalien !" 

"Then Rumor tells most unconscionable fibs!" answe

Paulina, carelessly. "I'm not" "'             - 

"You never liked Francis Earlscourt." 

"Didn't I ?"

"You don't like Lord Montalien." 

"Don't I?"

Miss Lisle, you know you don't! Your face tells the 

of your likes and dislikes plainly enough." 

"I must be very ungrateful, very unjust, if I do not. i

Montalien is most kind, most courteous, and we are all c

down to spend Christmas and the hunting season at the PA

To speak ill of one's future host in his absence is a ret

hospitality not strictly Arabian."

"And how does London life suit you?"

"Oh, excessively. I have been out every night since

return, and I don't know the meaning of the word fatigue,

I look forward to next season as a child to a holiday. D1

knlow'--hei girlish pleasure shining in her great eyesi

iuchess of Clanronald is going to present me ?"  ;

"You are to be envied, Miss Lisle. And after one 

brilliant seasons, the Morning Post will announce a b

ia.rrHige o  o h 

He could not help harping on this string. He had l

* e I  re i ~tS

á::  . 








<pb n="245"/>
PA U£LNA.                   245

her now as we do love the things we have forevet

s," said the young lady, coolly; "I hope so.

marries, and I suppose I shall after four or five sea.

I am quite-oh, quite an elderly person of four or

enty-some 'fine old English gentleman who has a

>e.' Are you quite alone at the Priory, Mr. Fane;

oe ask why you bury yourself alive there ? "

orking hard, Miss Lisle, and I find inspiration in

ckhaven. Do you recollect the 'Rosamond and

Yes, I see you do-I am finishing that for the

ition."

ed at him saucily.

Fwhat little country-girl have you chosen for Fair Rosa-

- Please be merciful as you are strong, Mr. Fane,

turn her head with your flatteries."

t my Rosamond from memory-my Eleanor is one

seaids at the Priory-a tall, black-browed, Roman-

g woman, And I am quite alone up in the big,

I mansion. Guy was with me during the races, but

'y Earlscourt!   Do you know I have never met

and people speak of him as though he were the man

Mask, or Guy Fawkes, or anything else dreadful.

raith calls him ' a determental,' whatever that may be.

has that unhappy young man done ?"

to any one save himself. You have heard of the

i I suppose ? Well, he has been going at a gallop

t highway for the last three years. The end must

-  soon now. If his old grand-aunt does not die, and

her money, he must, in a few months at the most,

is papers to sell and fly the country. He is involved

emption. Mrs. Galbraith is quite right; in a mar-

:^it^  point of view he is a determental."

iellow," Paulina said, her eyes softening.  "I am

used to like him very much.  He was so hand-

is still. I wonder his handsome face has not wen him

ong ago. It would, I think, if he tried, but he seemr

time."

ruined, as you say, how does he live ?"

al-made betting-book, by a run of luck at cards, by

tten magazine articles. Once or twice his aunt has








<pb n="246"/>
246                   PA ULINA. U                 i

paid his debts--he tells me she has refused to dr, it I

He has gone across to Germany for the autumn races." :

They had reached the house now, and Rosanna was wa

anxiously in the doorway. Miss Lisle bade him good-

and Allan Fane strolled homeward through the sharp Oc

night, thinking-well, not of his wife.

Sir Vane Charteris came down for his ward at the expira

of the week, and Paulina went with him very willingly. II 

pleasant to see her old friends, no doubt, but life in Duke

son's house seemed hopelessly dull to her now. Is there

any going back in this world ? Had she never left it she wV

have grown up there happy and content; now she cou!i

more have taken up the old life than she could have'

burning tears over the sorrows of Amanda Fitzallan.

On the night of her return she went to see Ristori in '

Stuart."  The house was full, the actress magnificent, and

Lisle, in pale, flowing silks and pearls, looking charmi

Fwo or three of her admirers were in the box; and whe

first act was nearly over there entered Lord Montalien. "5 E

eyes lit as they fell on her, hers gave him the briefest, co

possible glance. She did not like Lord Montalien. Thei

perceptive faculties were very keen. 'She knew him to beft

and cruel, smooth and deceitful. The expression of his mo

revolted her, the hard, cold glitter of his eyes made her sh

away.

"I hope you found all. your friends at Speckhaven :

well," he said to her as the curtain went down.  ;

"Quite," she answered, briefly. "All who remain." 

"Ah ! you allude, of course-"                    S

"I allude, of course, to my dearest friend, Alice Warre

to)d you when I went to Speckhaven I should penetrate,

mystery of her flight, and-I have failed." 

There was a satisfied smile just perceptible about his m^

-gone in an instant.

"I feared you would. Her father could tell you nothinl

"Nothing that you had not already told me-that i      _

brother travelled with her up to town." 

"Then Guy is the man. Are you satisfied now that m

picions are right ? " 

" Would you like me to tell you whom I do suspec

lord ? 

" Undoubtedly."

She looked at him-full, bright, dauntlessly, and ans








<pb n="247"/>
PA ULINA.                   247

your brother Guy was never the man Alice left

narry. She never cared for your brother-she did

uy may have travelled up with her to London -he

Wes it, indeed, but he had no part in her flight. He 

r:Warren's house, and told him so, and the old mar

He tells, frankly enough, his share in the busi.

let her at the railway station, he travelled up with

ame carriage, and at her request he drove with her

ation. That destination he refuses to tell-she

-by promise herself not to do so; and Mathew

snot urge him to reveal it. He is bitterly, cruelly

never wishes to hear her name-if she came to his

ed wife he would not take her in. He will never

-he will ot lift a finger to seek her. But I will ! '

i ey es flashing-"I shall find her, and that before

ask what you mean to do ?"

advertise-I shall employ the best detectives in

I will move heaven and earth to find her !"

hen she is found, will she thank you, do you think,

ing her from the privacy she seems to desire ? "

al forgive me--we loved each other. Lord Monta-

u tell me the truth, will you acknowledge you know

;: is ?"

Lisle, from any other lips the question would be an  i

1 know nothing of Alice Warren. Wherever she is,

s wife she may be, she is not mine. Will you not be-

whenI pledge you my honor, I speak the truth ?"

edfrom him, and back to the stage, as the curtain

n the next scene. Her face was set with an expres-

t: every one who saw her.

never rest until I know the truth; I will never de-

discover this secret. I shall find Alice Warren if 

tEgland, and the man who promised to make her

itS;  0S 








<pb n="248"/>
248 "rVOW I LIVE, AND AvOW MYI LIFLS iS D

CHAPTER IV.

"AND NOW I LIVE, AND NOW MY LIFE IS DONE I-

T was the afternoon of the first of November. -:i

That dismallest of months had come in with

easterly wind, with dull fog, and miserable 

rain, that wet and chilled you to the very mar

It was about four o'clock, and already the gas flared t

the city, glimmering in a ghastly way through drizzle and

At the window of the lodging-house in Gilbert's G

a woman sat looking out at the wretched prospect; ;

dark, drifting clouds; at the ceaseless rain, beating h

against the glass; at the blue-nosed pedestrians, hurryin

with umbrellas and overcoats, at the one lamp, flaring re

the nearest corner. A woman, pale, and wan, and ha

changed almost beyond recognition-Alice/ ! 

Only sevenr weeks had gone by since that warm Septe

night when, for love of Francis Earlscourt, she had fled

home and friends, and already the end had come. It w

natural ending of all such stories; but how was she to

that ! Mad passion for aqirtnight, cooling passion for a

satiety,' weariness, disgust.

The end had come. It was only the old, old story, told

told, and told-she had staked all on one throw; and--osT

She had sat for hours as she sat now, her hands lying he

in her lap, her haggard eyes fixed on the murky, London

The room was as pleasant as it is in the nature of L

lodgings ever to be. A fire burned in the grate, and o

little centre-table stood a glass, filled with yellow ad

itses. Their fragrance filled the room-their sweetness 

ing of the summer dead, and of all she had lost with its f

Te nearest church clock struck the quarter past four

she heard it, she moved restlessly for the first time, and a

of intense pain crossed her face. 

" He should have been here an hour ago," she said, in i

of frightened whisper. "Will he not come after all?  i

never come again?" ? 

She got up, and walked over to the mirror ona the :i

looking with piteous eyes at her own wasted face and








<pb n="249"/>
'-LZVE, AND IVOW MY LIFE IS DONE " 249

~ Ien crying for hours, crying until there were no more

;iow, and she beheld the natural result, dim, sunken

td and swollen face. It is not given to all, alas ! to

_ t pearly tears, such as you read of my Lady Rowena

1   her silken boudoir.

hiaad wept for hours, until eyes and heart ached

/e had dressed herself in her one best dress-poor

es of blue and white that "Frank" had once said

Jbit it hung loose from her shrunken figure now.

and youth, and brightness had all gone. She shrunk

st in horror, from the sight of her own pallid face,

wed, qulled eyes !

heused to praise my pretty looks! " she said. ." What

of me now ?"

; without being able to think very deeply, on that ol

sulbject, that her pretty looks were the only links that

to her. And her face was faded, her beauty gone

weeks! She was not the sort of woman to swerve

straight path with impunity; but if her lover had been

she might at least have forgotten in the bliss of that

was not faithful-he had wearied of her in two brief

ettyface and her tender heart were all the gifts she

^d and pleasant gifts, but not likely to long enchain a

-'Lrd Montalien's stamp. She was not clever-she

talk to him, could not amuse him, and he yawned in

three days after that ceremony in the Church of St

a:.X:

y the fatal spell of a fresher beauty had captivated him

end she loved best on earth; the friend who best loved

:taken him from her ! The sparkling beauty, the saucy,

d outspoken, graceful audacity of Paulina Lisle held

talien enthralled.

e ten days since he had been near Gilbert's Gardens-

dss, reary days. She had nothing to do, nothing to

a soul to speak to, only her own miserable, never.

icions for company. Until yesterday, when a friendly

indly eyes from home had looked upon her, and those

from Speckhaven had brought a breath of country

d to her dingy room. She had written last night in hel

to her husband; and now as the'rainy afternoon

we aited his coming.

turned from the glass, the rapid roll of wheels caught

.¢::  .- 11*








<pb n="250"/>
250 "rNOW I LIVE, AND NOW MY LIFE IS DOEt,

her eai. She darted to the window.  Thank God !t

thark God ! he had come-he was here at last! He spi

from the cab, bade the driver wait, and a mighty double k

a second after made the house shake. Mrs. Howe cam

the door in person. She knew that imperious knock well,

was almost as glad to hear it again as her lodger. Two w

rent was due, and "Mrs. Brown," her lodger, never seem

have any money, and -spent her time in tears and lonelin

It dawned upon the landlady's mind that all was not right,

that the sooner she got rid of her the better.

"Which a man that muffles himself up to that degree

you never see no more of him than two heyes and a nose, 

better than he ought to be, and must have something to. h

I declare to you, mum, Mrs. Brown, if she is Mrs. Brown,.

been lodging with me nigh upon seven weeks, and he a-co

and a-going all that' time, and I never once, since the firstni

had a good look at his face. A tall and 'andsome man as 

I see; but 'andsome is as 'andsome does, and a millingt

swell he is, I know, and no more plain Mr. Brown than y

or me."

She admitted him now, dropping a courtesy, and scann.

him curiously. But the passage was dark at all times, do

dark now, and the tall form of "Mr. Brown" brushed pt

her, and dashed up the stairs and into her lodger's room. : ii

With a cry of joy, a sob not to be suppressed, she flung 

self into his arms.

"Frank ! oh, Frank! you have come at last! I th

you were never going to come again."             :

" You took devilish good care not to let me do that! W

do you mean, madame, by writing to me?     Did I 

expressly forbid you ever to write, or come near mylo

ings?" 

He turned the key in the door, breaking angrily free fr

her encircling arms, flung himself into the easy chair she

placed for him before the fire and looked at her with a da

angry glance. 

She stretched out her hands to him, shrinking away like

thild who has been struck a blow.             , i

"Forgive me, Frank; I meant no harm. I was so lon

oh, so lonely; and it is ten days since-"'

Her voice broke, in spite of her. She covered her face,

her suppressed sobbing filled the room.

"Ok, Lord !" groaned her visitor, ' here it is again, b

- ::  f








<pb n="251"/>
IVE, AND NOW MY LIFE IS DONE!A 251

conds in the house ! Tears and scenes, reproachas 

ays the same ! And you complain that I don't

ee you."

l ed the poker, and gave the fire a vicious dig. He

ln his felt hat on the floor beside him, and his thin,

/i was set in an angry scowl. He looked a very different

he suave and courteous gentleman who had bent.

cair of Paulina Lisle at the theatre only the night

ry different from the ardent lover who had wooed

en's fresh face down among the clover-fields and fir

Montalien.

allowed her sobs by a great effort, and coming timidl)

Iesdown beside him.

'tbe hard on me, Frank," she pleaded; "I don't

reproach you; but I am so much alone, and I have

o o, and no one to speak to, and I get thinking of'

get low-spirited. Won't you tell me, Frank, why you

ed away so long ?"

oked at her with hard, cruel eyes.

Ie have grown tired of coming ! Will that do, Mrs.

still looking at her, searchingly, pitilessly, not once 

/ gfrom the gaze of the large, horror-struck eyes.

h ave not improved in my absence, at all events," he

h a short laugh. " You are actually growing old and

jBeauty is fleeting'-certainly in your case. If you

Wed like this down at Speckhaven, I don't think-well, I

nk I should ever have given you the trouble of coming

*own. Pray, what have you been doing since I saw you 

ing, her voice seeming hoarse and unnatural. "Only

of you."

unprofitable way -of spending your time. And now

have sent for me, will you have the kindness to inform

t you want ?"

k, you ask that question ?"

e.ry natural question, I think. And in the first place,

tell me how you discovered my address at al ?"

ose up :from her kneeling position, stung to the quick by

lence, more even of his tone and look than his words.

no tears now; she felt cold as death, and her shrink

.a:met his steadily at last.

* I\;Xf 








<pb n="252"/>
252 "NOW I LIVE, ANP NOW MY LiFE IS D             oN

"I had the right to send for you, my lord-to gc. to yo

chose. I am your wife !"

He listened with a smile, his head lying against the ba

the chair-a smile of insufferable insolence.  :::

" My wife ! " he repeated. " Well, yes, of course, we

to the Church of St. Ethelfrida together. But, my dear 

ilet me give one piece of advice-don't y( a presume on t

tie ceremony. Don't you write to me again, and don't

me until I give you leave. Perhaps you did not hear my

tion-let me repeat it-where did you find out my addre

"Your brother told me."                    - 

"My brother !" 

He started at the words, and then, for the first time, his

fell upon the roses on the table. He sprang to his feet. !

"My brother has been here !" he cried.

"He has."

She answered him quietly. Her heart felt cold and stia

her breast; but she had no intention of disturbing him '

"scenes or tears" now.         '

He strode toward her, grasping her wrist until the mark

his cruel fingers remained-his face white to the very lip

was his way when really moved.                   :

"And you dared do it! You dared, after all I said, b

him here ! Guy, of all men ! You dared tell him-"  -

"I told him nothing. My lord, will you let me go? 0 i

hurt me !"                  .:

He dropped his hold, looking down at her with a danger

light in his pale-blue eyes. 

" How came he here ? You must have brought him, or

never would have found you out. Tell me the truth, I co

mand you."

She met his angry gaze with a calm steadiness, quite nw

his experience of her. 

"He came with me the first night. You remember he a

elled up with me from Speckhaven. He was very kind; he ;

always kind. I don't know whether he suspected our secret

not. I know he advised me to go back while there was

time."                            :-?:

"I wish to God you had taken his advice !"     --

" Yes," she answered, still very quietly, "it is a pity. 

we won't speak of that, since it is rather late in the day ni,

It was late that night when we reached London; it wa

strange to me; and I was afraid; and I asked him to come

me here."








<pb n="253"/>
1-/ LIVE, AND NOW   IfY LIFE IS DONE " 253

ssure tightened on her wrist again; he drew his

a momnlent hard.

i  After all yovur promises- after all I told you-

him here ! "

l gt him here; but I told him nothing, and I never

lo him since until yesterday."

a s here yesterday?"

*' Frank, do you know thty think at home I fed

-that I am-not a wife."

- happen to be quite aware of that fact; and what is

ean they shall continue to think so. Hear me out, if

^ and don't interrupt. Do you suppose I am going

! prospects, by acknowledging my marriage with you?

story, forsooth, for Belgravia, that Lord Montalien has

s bailiff's daughter !"

Montalien should have thought of that seven weeks

it. No need for you to remind me what a fool I

n And what brought my precious younger brother

day ?"

dhip. Only that. Mr. Guy was always the kindest

i the noblest of gentlemen. He thought of me-he

me those flowers from Montalien," her eyes lighting,

te he fancied they would remind me of home."

leman seized the roses and flung them into the fire.

started forward with a cry; if he had struck her he

dy have done a more brutal thing.

F)ce-! "he said, with an oath. "Go on! What brought

if Did you dare to tell him that I-"

dhim nothing-nothing, Godhelp me ! I have kept

et, Lord Montalien; at the price of my own good

-have broken my mother's heart, bowed my father's

rrow and shame, giving up the home where I was

friends who cared for me, for you; and this-this is

Idher arm upon the mantel, and bowed her face upon

iA  the dark heart of the man beside her there was

t nor remorse.

you swear to me my brother knows nothing-that you

tld him?"

e not told him," she reiterated, and did not lift her

asshe emade the reply. 

eand began pacing to and fro up and down the








<pb n="254"/>
254 "NOW I LIVE, AND NOW MY LIFE IS DO

room. Ha wanted to shake her off, to have done with h

good; to get her out of the country even, and to do t

it wise to goad her to despair and desperation ? IIe  u

rid of her-that was the one inevitable thing to be done 

to get rid of her quietly, without scandal or exposure, she

still think herself his wife. The time to tell her the trh

not yet come. He must get rid of her, and at once; and

ness here would do more than harshness or recriminaton, 

came over and laid his hand upon her shoulder. 

"Forgive me, Alice," he said, "and forget my unkind w

You know, as well as I do, that I love you as dearly as e

that I did not mean them; but I am out of sorts and 

temper to-day. I have a thousand things to worry and ai

me of which you cannot dream; and it did startle me to ki

Guy was here. I am sorry I destroyed your flowers. I

send you a handsome bouquet to-morrow. Come, looi

and say we are friends again." 

She lifted her head slowly and looked at him. Even he,.

to the core, harder than iron, shifted from the night of set

despair in those haggard eyes. 

" Do what you will, say what you will, Frank, I can ne

be other than your friend."

Her voice was broken and low, no tinge of color came to

wvhite face as he stooped and kissed her.

She knew the end had come-her heart never beat withj

while she lived again.                    -

"That is my own little Alice! And now, to prevent a: B

etition of such visits, you must leave this lodging at once."

"Yes."

"This very evening I will engage another, and to-morr

will send a cab for you and your belongings. Early to-mo

evening you will be quite ready to go ?"

"Yes."                                       -

"And as it can't be any particular pleasure to me o ;I

moving you about from one London lodging to another, oI

of detection, what do you say to going down to the countr

even out of England for a little. You would be better and

pier, I am sure. You are used to a country life, and I w-

come to see you just as often. What do you say?"   B

"I have nothing to say. I will do whatever you please.-

"That is settled, then."

He was delighted with her easy acquiescence. No 

would be simpler than to send her out of the country altog

and for good.








<pb n="255"/>
LIVE, AND NOW MY LIFE IS DONE."           5 25"

ow you will leave here, and within the week you

e pleasant country home, either in or out ot

ere you will remain until it is in my power to pro.

0 Wthe world as my wife. You hear, Alice ? "

'she answered, wearily. "Frank !" she looked up

^  nly, "is it true that Paulina Lisle is in London?'

d you that among his other news, I suppose ? "

~ ,- He told me, too, that you were her lover, or that

!you'a lie ! I visit at the house of Sir Vane Char-

;isee Miss Lisle, of course."  He spoke carelessly

t inl his heart he recorded.a vow to add this to the

hatred he already owed his younger brother. " I

pak to you of her. Why did you write and tell her

ement and intended marriage ? After all my in-

o secrecy and your promises. Was it well done,

no harm. I did not tell her who I was going to

rOu knew she would suspect. You knew she was

geatly I always admired you; but I overlook it,

t and all the rest-and look forward to the day when

m you to the world as my lawful wife. And now,

To-morrow afternoon, at this time, I will visit you at

ing."

touched her forehead in another traitor kiss, and

or opened and closed, and he was gone. Gone!

sitting there alone before the fire, knew her fate-,

heart that he lied to her-that he would never pro-

ashis wife-'that hope was at an end, that her life

i-She touched no food, she had no sleep that night.

ning to the beating rain, to the complaining wind,

r as they tolled, in a sort of dull stupor of misery.

ed him, she loved him still, and this was the end.

came early next morning for "Mrs. Brown."

aving the previous day his lordship had paid the

nd told her of her lodger's departure.  And now,

IrkNovember morning, she watched her drive away

h regret.

oked like death itself as she bade me good-by," Mrs,

fterward; "it went to my heart only to see her."

lodging to which the cabman drove her wats in onn

re streets leading from the Strand to thb river-








<pb n="256"/>
256 "NOW I LIVE, AND NOW MY LIFE IS DC!

dingier, poorer, closer,' than that which she Lad left. i

scarcely noticed how squalid it was, scarcely noticed ho!

terably wretched she herself looked. 

"What does it matter," she thought, turning away f

glass, "since there is no one in the world to care ? " 

And then she lay down, and the dull, gnawing, ceasele

at her heart seemed somehow to go, and in its place her!.

girlhood came back. , The dark, wretched room, the f

light faded away, once more the green fields of Monr

rich with golden corn, the meadows sweet with the sI

new-mown hay, the voice of her mother, the waving r

golden summer sky, all came back to her; * and 

Earlscourt's eyes looked love, and his voice spoke so

sweetly, and his strong arm encircled her waist; and h1

closed, and with the smile of a happy child on her face, :

as eep. 

She slept for hours. The afternoon wore on-the roa

great city, of the busy Strand, were unheard-even the op

)f the door, and the entrance of the man of whom she dre

failed to arouse her.                           '

He looked at her, as she slept, without one feeling of

for the heart he had broken, for the life he had blighted

had tired of her, and he must remove her out of the ci

that he might marry Paulina Lisle. Nothing remained no

that.

While he stood irresolute whether or no to awaken her,

was a tap at the door, and. the landlady, with a startledi

looked in.                     - 

" If you please, sir, and asking your pardon for disturb

you and your good lady, would you come, upstairs just i

ment ? The third-floor-front's a-dying and a-dying hard

he says he can't go until he has made his confession. :

ain't a soul in the house to go for the parson or doctori

daren't leave him alone. Would you be so good, kind g

man, as to step up to his room while I run for the n

clergyman?" 

The "kind gentleman" addressed stared at her haug

imazement at her presumptuous request. What wa

"third-floqr-front" to him, dying though its inmate mig

that he should trouble himself in the matter. 

"He says he has a confession to make about some ve0

lady he knew once, and about a great crimee he h-ped t

iit nearly twenty years ago. He can't die, he says, n

-XH








<pb n="257"/>
fVE, AND NOW lAY LIFE IS DONE!" 237

Ad it. Maybe it's only his raving, but lie says the

>:was Miss Olivia Lyndith."

talien swung round, amazed, interested at once.

Olivia Lyndith," he muttered. "Lady Charteris 

the deuce does this mean? Lead the way, my good

TU go up, and hear what your third-floor-front has te

wed her up the dark, winding stairs, and into tle

room, where, on a wretched truckle-bed, a gaunt,

form was stretched. Tlere was no fire in the little

the sickly foggy daylight hardly found its way through

d, dirty glass of its one window.

is-a kind gentleman, as says he will stay with you,

e landlady said soothingly. "Now do keep quiet

soul, and I'll run round for Mr. Spearman."

ed a chair by the bedside, and was hurrying away,

k man raised himself on his elbow, and called after

pen and ink and paper, Mrs. Young. He must write

ild give it to her if she be alive. I can't die, I can't

story untold. I'm sorry I ever did it. I see her face

d white; oh, Lord ! so still and white-sleeping and

ght and day forever. You'll write it down, sir; you

a gentleman, and you'll find her, and give it to her, if

Promise me that?"

red up in Lord Montalien's face with hollow, wild

n't know of whom you're talking, my good fellow," his

answered coolly. " Who is she?"

nty years ago her name was Miss Olivia Lyndith. She

L Sir Vane Charteris, baronet. You're a gentleman-

Byou have heard of Sir Vane Charteris ?"  His hollow

i1e ll of burning eagerness as he asked the question.

, yes, I have heard of Sir Vane Charteris."

d Lady Charteris ?"

dLady Charteris."

e alive? Tell me that-is Lady Charteris alive, and

y Charteris is alive certainly, but not quite well. She

some great trouble in her past life, which she has never

to this day."

:ick man wrung his hands in a paroxysm of anguish.

lw it. -I know it ! and I did it ! I wish I had dropped

''-__--' f:0- '








<pb n="258"/>
258 "NOW I LIVE, AND NOW MY LIFE IS D{l

dead before I ever consented! and now I am ding,

face haunts me night and day. But she's alive, and it:

late yet. Perhaps he's alive too."           :

"Who?"                                       4

: Her husband-him that she loved so dearly."

" You mean Sir Vane Charteris, I presume ?"

"No, no, no! She hated him! I mean the other-I

husband-her real husband-him that she ran away

Robert Lisle."

"Robert Lisle is alive adtd well."          i

The dying man uttered & cry-a shrill, wordless cr

light.                                          :

"Thank God ! thank God ! then it's not too late! wI

he ? Can you tell me that ? Not in England?"     I   B

"Not in England, of course, since he is a criminal a

ble to the law. Out in America." 

"He is no criminal. It was me that did it-me 1 AA

Geoffrey Lyndith paid me. for doing it. I wish my right.

had dropped off when I lifted it against him ! ' But I'PI-ti

all, and you'll write it down, and Robert Lisle will come-

and perhaps God will forgive me. Do you think He wilt

confess all-all !" 

"Well-let us hope so," replied his lordship, rather out

depth. "Who are you, to begin with ?"   -

He drew-the paper toward him, took up the penan

pared to write. He was full of curiosity and interest. .:

revelation of villany was this he was about to hear? i 

"I'm James Porter, and I was valet to Mr. Geoffrey g

dith twenty years ago. Will you promise, on your honorl

gentleman, to give this paper you are going to write into

ands of Lady Charteris, and no other, when I am dead?! 

~ t "I promise. Goon." 

The sick man clenched the bedclothes, and began at

with feverish rapidity: 

"I told you I was Mr. Geoffrey Lyndith's valet twenty

ago. It's nigheron five-and-twenty since I first entered hi

vice, and a very good place it was. He was a stern man, h 1

to have his own way, but he was free with his money, ~

kin enough master.. When I had been with him wel

four years, Robert Lisle came as secretary and companio

I can see him now ! "-the sick man's eyes lookeddre

before him, as he spoke. "A tall, well-made young ma

the handsomest, I think, I ever saw. There -were a








<pb n="259"/>
?::LITE, AND NOW MY LIFE IS DONE I" 259

en, and baronets, and lords, used to visit Lyldith

Sep;tember and Christmas, but there wasn't one

lords and all, looked half as lordly, to my mind,

H. Ie was cleverer than master, and wrote his

leaders for our county paper, and lettelr , and all

ter set no end of store by him, until he gu, to hate

to them he hated, he was the very devil! 

'niece came home from school: and a rare I eauty

sixteen, with big black eyes and yellow hair-the

uty you don't often see. She was brought home

school to live in the house with a young man as

as clever as this Mr. Lisle. And we in the ser- 

H Just saw how it would be from the first. But mas-

sir it's wonderful how blind the smartest people be

things; these sort of things particularly-master he

Amle. They were a-courting from the first day, and

Wt see what was going on under his very nose. I

h'em in the pleasant moonlight nights walking up

Lvunder the trees; and time and again it was on

i y tongue to give Mr. Lyndith a hint. But I was

company with a young woman-the upper house-

ws, and she wouldn't hear tell of it. All the women

e were half in love with this Robert Lisle; his good

his gentlemanlike ways, and his pleasant voice

^ -  al down somehow. 'And,' says Lucy,' our mas-

ugh and big enough to look after his own niece,

o0r playing the spy on her you get your wages.

it out soon enough.'

k Miss Olivia went to Scotland on a visit, and

fter-I think it was-Mr. Lisle followed her. And

ftomne: 'Mind, James, Miss Olivia and Mr. Lisle

ed in Scotland as sure as I'm talking to you. And

ebe tearing mad, when he finds it out ?"

e, sir, this Mr. Lisle, though he looked and spoke,

h edication of a real gentleman, was only the son o

frmer. 

F   sir,Lucy was right-they did get married in Scot

H ae home, not together, but following each other

And to this day I remember what happy, ha ppy

two had, how miss danced about the house like

adher' laugh was the prettiest, sweetest music 1

. il. And Mr. Lisle didn't say much or laugh much,

rway; but somehow, he looked taller, and nobler,








<pb n="260"/>
260 "NOW I LIV?, AND NOW MY LIFE         S

and handsomer than ever, and his pleasant eyes seeme

for very joy whenever they looked at you. And miss

hard not to be sent back to school, but to stay at the '

court,' as she called it; and her uncle, who was fond :

his way, consented. And for four months more they ;

together, and he neither saw nor guessed a word of w

one else in the house knew perfectly. 

"But it couldn't go on so forever; he found it out.

He never said a word; that wasn't his sort; he justl

his niece away from Staffordshire without a word to a

And when he came back alone, still pleasant and

sent for me, and asked me if I would like to earn five 

pounds?

"You may guess what my answer was. I was alway

of'money, and I wanted to marry Lucy, and set up a;l

when I'd saved money enough. I would have done a

deal for half or quarter the money; but I did refuse 'a

when he told me what he wanted me to do. He mai

take my book oath never to speak of what passed betw

while I lived, and I took it. I never broke that oath ti

but I can't-oh, good Lord !-I can't die with my wicke

untold ! 

"He told me Robert Lisle had married his niece i

land, and that Sir Vane Charteris, to whom she. had b¢i

gaged since she was fourteen, would hold him responsie

Scotch marriage was no marriage, he said, but the law cO

prove that without the public exposure of his niece, an

Sir Vane would never hear of. Robert Lisle must ji

got quietly out of the country for good and all, and Mis

married to the baronet as if nothing had happened;

was to help him to do it.

"That night he would place, in my presence and in X

a sum of money and a quantity of valuable jewels in- t

safe in his library, leaving them in Mr. Lisle's ca

going away himself as if for a few days' absence. And

he was gone, he would write a letter, as if coming froA

Olivia, asking her husband to come to her at once.  ie

go for certain, and take his portmanteau with him., An

he wanted me to do, and would pay me five hundred

to do, was to take the money and jewels out of the s

sew them up carefully in the lining of Mr. Lisle's port;

They would be found there, and the threat of trans

would make him fly the country. And he gave me t

cate key of the safe.

::~:!~ A








<pb n="261"/>
- LIVE, AND Nz)WMY LIFE IS DONE.t" 261

sir-i t'si a bad thing to tell--I did it. I took the five

ounds, and I sewed up the money and jewels in the

g gentleman's travelling-bag. It all turned cut as

f oreseen--he got the letter, he packed his clothes, and -

London, and he was taken there and searched, and

es found.

t I heard, he had left England. I got my five hun-

|ds--my wages of sin-and I left Mr. Iyndith's ser

married Lucy, and set up the public-house, But I

pered. Luck went against me from the first. The

ill-gotten; it was blood-money-and everything

g. I couldn't forget what I had done. It haunted

had committed a murder, by day and night. 1 took

i drown thought, but I couldn't drown it. I knew I

-two innocent people miserable for life. And two

i-our marriage Lucy died; and then I got quite des-

the money went, and went; and at last I was

ight. And from that day I have been a drunken

ndX now II'm dying here, and I couldn't die with it on

f  IHave you got it all down-all--all ?"

h himself once more on his elbow, looking more

anized corpse than a living being.

lied Lord Montalien. "Are you able to sign thir

ive me the pen."

opened on the word, and Mrs. Young, the land-

with an elderly man. a clergyman.

time to witness this man's signature," remarked his

ily. "He is dying, he says," addressing the clergy.

d4 has made a deposition which I have taken down.

st witness his signature, and affix your own ? 

ne. Lord Montalien folded up the paper, and

wishes, my poor fellow, shall be carried out to the

e lady for whom it is designed is known to me, and

ei: t at once. Set your mind at rest about that."

ed the room, the precious paper in the breast.

s coat, his eyes shining with a green, cat-like

sPaulina Lisle is the elder daughter'of Lady Char.

inerits in law my lady's for tune of six thousand a

tion to her father's fortune. Yes, yes! 'If I had

the resolution of marrying her, willing o: unwilling

s:-0000: 40: -, 








<pb n="262"/>
262   "N'OW I LIVE, AND NOW MY LIFE IS

I would make it now. Why, she will be one of 

heiresses in the United Kingdom ! Whether you lie

you shall be my wife, my peerless Paulina !"

And then a vision rose before him of Paulina as he 

her last night-shining like a fairy, in pink silk, and tulle

and,dewy rose-buds in her golden hair-a vision w

recollection seemed to light up the dingy lodging-

Barton Street, Strand.

"And nrw for the other," he thought, opening Alic

-alas! poor Alice! "What an inconceivable ass

made of myself about this milk-and-water, insipid, we

entity ! But she shall be disposed of as surely and '~

Geoffrey Lyndith disposed of Robert Lisle." 

She sat shivering before the smouldering fire as he i

and rose up without a word as he approached.

The dull daylight was fast fading now, but in the glow

fire he could see the dead whiteness of her face; such

trast to that other face-fresh, smiling, rose-crowned 

"Awake, Alice?" he said, kindly. " It is two hours

first came, and you were asleep on the lounge yonder

would not disturb you. I have been sitting since -

wretched sick man, upstairs."

She looked and. listened in pale amaze. Frank Ea

sitting two hours with a sick pauper ! 

" I trust I see you in better spirits than yesterday," h

on. " How do you like your new lodgings ?".     -

"I have not thought about it. They are very well."

Her spiritless voice, her spiritless attitude, told more 

than words the story of her crushed heart.    ;I

You will remain here quietly for the present; and if I

not be able to come to you as often as you-as I myseif

like, you must promise me to be patient-not to write:

again. You promise this, Alice?"               : 

"I promise."

"Of course, I don't like to see you unhappy or so.

that; but, unfortunately, in our position, it is inevita

have made a tremendous sacrifice for you. Don't be le

¢rous. Make this sacrifice for me. Wait until I gi-

eave to speak. You understand, Alice ?"

"I understand.": ii

She Answered him as an automaton might, never Ioo

from the fading fire.

"And you will obey? "

|                                 0;~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~:-:~i~








<pb n="263"/>
AT BRIGHTON.                  263

l   account must you admit my brcther or Stedlman, oi

Dpeople we know. Go out as little as possible, and

7 do go out, wear a thick veil. In a few weeks, at

w   find you a pleasant country home, where you will

peace and comfort, until I can bring you forward as-

Montalien ! You pledge yourself to all this, Alice,

will try not to feel lonely and low-spirited? "

d her eyes to his face for the second time since his

-such hopeless, hopeless eyes.

i try," she answered, in a voice more mournful than

n, good-by, Alice. Keep up your spirits, and don t be

-ged if I shouldn't be here again for a couple of weeks.

e that I will come as soon as I can. Good-by."

d-by."  She said it as mechanically as the rest, not

l1 Hie put on his hat, opened the door, turned, came

ptooped and kissed her.. For the last, the only time, a

4 compassion touched his heart of stone.

y poor little Alice !" he said; " good-by."

then he was gone. Back to that bright other world--

oto the velvet-hung, wax-lit world, where lovely Paulina

ne a quep ! And Alice stood where he had left her,

Stirring nor moving for hours and hours. An outcast

home, from parents, from friends, from love-alone for.

d ever.

<0-  0    CHAPTER V.

: t000AT BRIGHTON.

N  the day succeeding this memorable second of

November, Sir Vane Charteris took his family to

:Brighton to spend the remainder of the autumn. He

had hired a large furnished house on the East Cliff.

tuation was charming-the broad, bright sea spread away

y until it melted into the broad bright sky. On very

you saw the bold coast of Dieppe from the windows.

..;ft 0 0 X :P








<pb n="264"/>
264                 AT BRIGHTON.              '-

and the Chain Pier glimmering in the frosty Nove-

shine below the Cliff.                          i

Miss Lisle, for whose benefit the removal had chie

enjoyed Brighton amazingly. In the first place, there 

sea, and Paulina loved the sea, pulsing forever thro

still chill air, there were long canters over the golden

dcwns, until the young lady's eyes shone like diam

the usually pale cheeks like August roses. 

There were the pleasant sunny afternoons, when in t

ravishing of Parisian toilets she loitered along the !

listening to the band, and the airy, gallant nothings ot

officers quartered at the Brighton Barracks. She drov

Dike, in the loveliest little turn-out, with cream-color

steppers, for which her guardian had given a most f

;price at Tattersall's, handling the ribbons like "Four-i

Fossbrook" himself, to the admiration of all beholdersi

was the chief aim for all the lorgnettes at the pret

theatre; and she went night after night to the Pavilion

Patti was now enchanting the Brighton world.  She

through the whole course of Brighton amusements--

dancing, promenading, theatre-going-and she never:

weary; her bright eyes never dimmed nor her' smiles

She was the reigning beauty and belle ere she had'

week in the place, counting her admirers by the doze

flirting, I am afraid, in the most unconscionable manner

on rainy days there were heaps of new music to practise,

of new novels to read; and for only two years' stud

Lisle's playing and singing were really a marvel; her

some very enthusiastic admirers protesting, equal to tt

Patti herself!   -

And so Miss Lisle was fairly launched upon the su

of society, for which she had been made. There'was o

drawback to all this blissful enjoyment-Lord Morntali

ogre, who persisted in escorting them everywhere, on

the companion of her gallops over the downs, her driv

walks, and hanging on the back of-her chair at the thea|

the evening long. He was at the baronet's house b.

and day; he dined invariably with the family whenev

dined at home, and half worried Paulina into a fever 

teal and oppression of his devotion. People began g

their names together.                         :

Montalien was a shrewd fellow-always liked money,

was going in fox Miss Lisle. Deuced deep fellow, a:

V  ~S








<pb n="265"/>
i    AT BRZGHTON.                  265

~l bit like the Earlscourts- a s:;abby beggar, too, at

Has a pity so glorious a girl should be flung away

cad!

se of the second week Miss Lisle herself. rebelled.

en trying for days back to throw off the yoke, but

ere was a quiet power and determination about his

/t bent most people to his resolute will. But this

of eighteen had a will of her own, quite as strong

she chose to assert it. She had disliked Lord

lways; she simply detested him now. His eyes,

en bent upon her, revolted her, the cold touch of

riade her shudder with aversion; he stifled her

obeside her at the piano. He was fast becomiing

ggr of her life. She could not eradicate from her

_:belief that he was the man, who, under pretence of

htad lured the friend she loved away from her home.

-r of late the sickening conviction that it had been

,had dawned upon her. She felt sure that he,

Character and subtle wiles, was the villain, and she

- accordingly. And Paulina Lisle was wlat Dr.

Qsld have liked, a "good hater."

e the death's-head at the Egyptian banquets," she

]"s. Galbraith bitterly; "always present and always

y pleasure. Why does he make pretence of stopping

-Hotel? Why doesn't he fetch his belongings, and

s abode at once in this house ?  He is like one's

r 0one's poodle, following forever, no matter where

!     .~ :'Can't he see he is not wanted?"

:ear, what language !" exclaimed Mrs. Galbraith.

ship's attentions are most flattering to you.  It is

- igh to be seen he is quite infatuated; and it would

I  nat, yes, a splendid match for you. His income is

en thousand a year, and the title one of the oldest in

>t object to the title or the income," replied Miss

~ h ¢andor; "the man I abhor!"        ,

-,Paulina! Such strong language "

pt young-lady-like, I know; but my feelings are strong,

raith, and 'my manners have not the repose which

cast of Vere de Vere.' When I feel strongly, I

ak strongly; and I detest, abhor, and hate Francis

-: Lord Montalien! There !"

Paulina never really looked so pretty as when in-a








<pb n="266"/>
266                 A T  RIGHTON. 

pas'fn. Her cheeks flushed up, her eyes sparkled,

face kindled. To the eyes of the man who had e i

heard, and stood screened by the curtained arch of 

way, she looked as a blue-eyed Cleopatra night w

Eastern blood was up. It was Lord Montalien; and

adage that listeners never hear any good of themse

never more fully verified.

"You surprise me, Paulina-you shock me ! Pr

ears but mine hear such language from your lips. Y ii

of Lord Montalisn is most unjust; he is a model y

in every respect." 

'Yes, I know," retorted the wilful beauty, with a'

"that's one reason why I detest him. I can't beaw

young men. His virtues are superhuman, I ackno

and-I should smother in the same house with hirni

model young men, who possess all the cardinal v-ir

wardly, are always villains at bottom."

" Paulina, I really can't listen to this ! I repeat, 

excellent, an exemplary young man. He is the best o

lords, and his name heads every subscription list fo

munificent sums."

Every published subscription list, certainly ! And 

read somewhere, ' Let not your left hand know what yo

hand giveth.' His name heads those lists for munificefi

and I saw him raise his horsewhip to a poor wretch y

who asked him for a shilling. Lord Montalien has

thousand a year, and he is a miser. If he warns me at

wants my eighty thousand pounds to add to his store. i

seem to be a ifend of his, Mrs. Galbraith, suppose y

him a hint to spare me his company for the future. Th,

I see of him the more I dislile him." 

¢CYou are more than unjust, Miss Lisle; you are und

I thought you were above repeating such cruel calmsl

these behind his back."

" I will say them to his face, if you prefer it! I wili

test, if he does not cease dogging me as he does. 

ness have people to couple our names? I would die

would marry him ! You call me unjust. I tell youL

ately,' I am not. I have reason to hate him-- knowl

man who lured poor Alice Warren from her home."  i

"Paulina ! that person's name again !" said Mrs. G

with austerity. " Did I not tell you it was indelicate

even to allude to her ?'                     'X

á   0 - \  ~S








<pb n="267"/>
V       7G.T A7 BRIGHTON.            267

_^^^:^^ou tola -ne, Mrs. Galbraith," the girl answered, with

/^^|Bi~h. "You do your duty by me in every respect

B      y:^en unfortunate, through no fault of hers; she is ini

_: ~poverty, perhaps, and it is indelicate in her oldest

ention her name ! Poor little Alice !"  *

no fault of hers ! I don't understand you. The

hers, and she must bear the penalty. You persisted

sing for her-let that suffice. She is a lost creature,

B e you should blush to mention. And, for the rest,

ks of her in connection with his lordship-the un-

ng woman fled from home with his disreputable

Iother.'

!' Paulina's eyes flashed fire. "They travelled up

n together; a coincidence-nothing more.  Guy

t affirmed to Alice's father that he was not the part.

R flight, and Mathew Warren believes him. 'So do I

CW Captain Villiers."

4;Viliers!"

; he was one of the men stopping in the house at the

dhe is here, you know. Yesterday on the pier I

! you asked him ?" 

t faint, Mrs. Galbraith. Yes, I had the shocking au

o ask him if he could throw any light on the subject-

d Lieutenant Earlscourt to be the man with whom

And he said no, emphatically no. They all admired

Sir Harry Gordon, Lord Montalien, and Guy-Guy,

all; Guy, in the way of courtship, never."

s he told you also whom he did suspect ?"

h men don't tell of each other; he did not. But unless

self came before me, and told me Lord Montalien was

'I would not believe it. Now you know why I dislike

is conduct to his brother, too, is abominable. Three

week Guy was arrested for debt, and taken to some

place; a 'sponging-house,' Captain Villiers called it'

:once did Lord Montalien, with his fifteen thousand

4-year, come forward to aid him. No, he left it to his

ide aunt. Who could like such a-man as that ? Why

he pay his brother's debts, as an only brother should? "

l tlk like a child, Paulina. Guy Earlscourt deserves

our pityv nor his brother's help. He is one of the fast.

treckless young men of his day, possessed of every

heaen, I believe--"

,-:i- - 








<pb n="268"/>
268                AT BRIGHTON. 

. That will do, Mrs. Galbraith! Who is calltmn

absent now ? With all his vices, I believe he is far t

man of the two. He used to have a heart, at lea

Montalien, like the goddess Minerva, was born withouti

conveni t appendage. And now," pulling out her w

with her brightest smile, "if we have done quarreli

pose we go for .a drive ?"

Quarrels like this were of no rare occurrence betwe

Galbraith and her charge. Mrs. Galbraith had the st

idea of what a young lady should be-low-voiced, cal

-a gentle nonentity, who did what she was told, Ilke

child; who had no ideas of her own whatever, but too

as she did her pocket-money, from the hands of her gu

Paulina was as unlike this ideal as can well be im 

her pretty head was full of ideas-new, startling, hete

and her pretty lips gave those ideas utterance unhe$s

She was saucy, wayward, capricious, with strong likes e

likes; as rebellious a young person of eighteen as ev^

gered a chaperone. Perhaps it was her sparkling or i

so discomfiting to Mrs. Galbraith, that drew such cro'

admirers around her. She was bewitching, she was fasci

she was a Circe, the spell of whose eyesand smile bron

best men in Brighton to her side and feet.

áI wish I could see Mr. Earlscourt," she thought, as 

back in the barouche; "I would ask him about Ali

went up with her to London, and he may know some

will never give up-never rest until I find her."  i

Miss Lisle had her wish that very night. As she, It

guardian's arm, made her way, near midnight, thru

crowded assembly rooms, she saw, standing talking to 9

Villiiis, Guy Earlscourt. 

An eager light of pleasure and recognition came 1

fac-e. He was a spendthrift, a gambler-she had he

wvs over head and ears in debt; social outlawry th

hinm; the world spoke bitterly of him; his excellr

brother hated him; and for all this the girl's impetuou

ous heart went out toward him. It was childish, per

his  ery misdeeds threw a halo of romance around h.

was Monte Christo, Mephistopheles, Don Giovanni 

was so very, very handsome, poor fellow, and he had

noble air-there was not another man in the room wh

to distinguished as he. 

She remembered him as she had seen him jast, with








<pb n="269"/>
AT BPRIGHTO                    269

up his dark face as he bowed good-by. The

of that Italian face was a trifle dimmed now-- -

et after balls, and absinthe before breakfast ,till tell

," as Captain Villiers said to her:; he seemed thin

aid the great, luminous, pathetic brown eyes looked  -

ith a tired light. Withal, he was dressed in the peri

taste-a knot of Russian violets in his button-hole---

than one pair of bright eyes beside Paulina's turned 

with shy admiration as he stood there in that attitude 

grace.

iGuy! there she is, by Jove and your brother ih

as usual. The Lisle, I mean-prettiest thing the

s on. She rides better, waltzes better, talks better, 

better than any girl I know; and she has eighty

ari d your brother is making play there in a way that

ronm for lesser mortals. Look at her! Loveliest

rooms-isn't she?"

d lazily. He had come expressly down to Brighton 

ok at her; but the rooms were warm, and not ever.

tyof Brighton was he prepared to excite himself

with languid admiration, at the exquisite face,

: of higaze,.and drooping.a little under it.

s'he said, at last; "you're right, Villiers.  She is

-always was though, I remember-and thorough-

princess. See how disdainfully she glances at Monti !

nshow, I'm certain; and I'm glad of it. .It would be'

e to throw such a girl as that away on Frank."

ose you go in and win, yourself, Guy. You could,

She talks of you, and remembers you, and pities

your misfortunes, -as she terms it. Eighty thousand is

Your figure; and then it would be a pleasure to cut out 

/'other."  ,,

el, yes," Guy said, stroking his black mustache; "if

gcould make me enter the list, it would be that; but

k I shall tdd fortune-hunting fo my other enormi-

'yet. Miss Lisle deserves a better fate, poor little girl,

;1 a victim to either of us."

iso looking this way," the other said, eagerly. " Cone,

, let us go and ask her to dance !"

t! you, too, George, one of her slaves? No; the

don't dance. . Not even Miss Lisle's attractions can

e: to the madness of waltzing, with the thermoinete

t height. I don't know that I shall trouble Misi








<pb n="270"/>
270                    AT BRIGHTON. 

,isle at all-not worth while, as I return to town ^

morrow."

So Captain Villiers went up alone and wrote his

'Miss Lisle's tablets; and if that young lady wondere

at Guy's neglect, her face did not show it.   She danl

Villiers-with  nearly every man who asked her, sa

except Lord Montalien; and more than once her eyes.j

the tall form of Guy Earlscourt as he moved in his slow

ful way through the warm rooms.

'"Why does he not speak to me?" she wondered.

unkind of him ! I am    determined to speak to him, 

before the evening ends.     He must tell me somet

Alice."

She went into the music-room      presently, on the^

Captain Villiers, and sat down to sing.  The rumor th

Lisle was about to sihg was enough to insure an au

She glanced saucily over her shoulder as the apartment

and saw, leaning against a column near the doorway, Li

ant Earlscourt, and a sudden inspiration seized her,

song she had sung two years ago at Montalien Priory, W

bent over her, broke like a bird's trill from her lips.

" Ah ! County Guy, the hour is nigh,  '

The sun has left the lea,

The orange-flower perfumes the bower,

The breeze is on the sea..

The lark whose lay has trilled all day,  V

Sits hushed, his partner nigh; 

Breeze, bird, and flower confess the hour,-

But where is County Guy?            '

" The village maid steals through the shade,  i

Her lover's suit to hear;

To beauty shy, by lattice high, 

Sings high-born cavalier.           ' V

The star of love, all stars above, - 

Now reigns o'er earth and sky, 

And high and low his influence knis  :-

But where is County-Guy ?"9  . ,    : .

He had drawn near involuntarily-be wa'sstandi

beside her when she arose from. the piano, and she h

her hand to him at once with her most radiant, her me

smile. 

"But where is County Guy?      I thoaght you wou

ber the old song even if you have forgotten poor      il

Earlscourt, won't you say 'how do you do' to Polly 

Guy Earlscourt was no stoic       He bent above t-

band, and murmured his thanks, at her gracious rem








<pb n="271"/>
mu 4':AT BRIGHTON.                      271

-scarcely hoped for so great an honor," he said,

the 0 hundreds of new friends, of adorers, who surround

<of Brighton. You must pardon my not coming for

ner, and claiming recognition-it was my very greal

KI assure you."

#first time I ever heard you credited with the virtue,"

Paulina, taking his arm. She was at her brightest

e had had what she so dearly loved-her own way.4

any other virtue, I fear. Doesn't Mrs. Gaibraith do

and tell you what a monster I am ?"

albraith does her duty, and tells me what a monster

t But I have a great deal of courage-thanks to my

iing; and I'm not afraid of monsters.  Mr. Earls-

I have been wanting to see you very much, to speak to

na subject, the one trouble of my life, and I can'

og this crowd. Will you take me somewhere wherf

talk undisturbed ?"

perfect innocence, and the nearness of the subject to,

at gave her courage, verging upon boldness, perhaps.

did not' mean to be bold, and she went with him out

e balcony-deserted by all save themselves. He had

~to the cloak-room, and got her wrap-a voluminous

y of soft blue woollen stuff, white silk and swan's-down-

pped it reverently about her. The night was mild as

, the great stars burned in the purple night sky, the

rk sea lay tranquilly beneath, the music frorl the ball-

came faint and far off. The memory of that night, and

Cogirl by his side, remained with Guy Earlscourt through

e after years-the sweet, earnest young face, the large,

os eyes, the trailing golden hair, bound back with pearls

Uoses, and the tall, graceful figure, draped in its soft blue

el. It haunted him for weary years of exile with nameless

u know what I want to talk to you about, I suppose,

ialscourt ?" she began, impulsively. "Where is Alice

heblue, earnest eyes were curiously watching him.  4 a;'

?    No, guilt never looked back at her as he looked.

aIwish I knew, Miss Lisle. I don't, I assure you. I art

idour poor little friend has come to grief."

Mr. Earlscourt, you know that some people say-say,'

edrooped a little, " that she fled with you."

knowit. It is not true. We were vp to town toge4the

r' 








<pb n="272"/>
^~272,        AT BRIGHTON.

-that was the first I knew of her flight, and sLe as

see her safe to her destination. It was night, and 

afraid-alone in London."

"And you did?" breathlessly. 

"I did. I went with her to the place, a lodging in 

ham Court Road, and left her in charge of the landlady.

was nine weeks ago."                            i

"And you have never seen her since."         :

"Yes, once; nearly a fortnight ago. Upon my retk

Germany, I went to the place a second time. Shew

there-only the pallid shadow of the blooming Alice yo.

But she told me nothing, and I asked no questions. 

known in the house by the name of Mrs. Brown."

" I will go to London to-morrow and find her," cried i

ous Paulina, "Oh, Mr. Earlscourt, I felt sure you co

me something. I am so glad, so thankful for this !"

"Miss Lisle, I am sorry to dash your hopes, but it:

late. She is gone" i"

"Gone!"                                 .   - -

'The following day I returned again. I pitied he--

much, Miss Lisle. Her wan, wretched face, her tears, 

me miserable. I went back, and she was gone. The g

man, the servant said, bad called after I had left, and

Brown looked dreadful when she went away, and he Pa

landlady, and told her Mrs. Brown was about to leave L

Next mining a cab came for her and took her and her 

away. I could learn no more-the servant knew noth

her destination."                               :¢ 

Paulina's face looked very-blank.

"Oh, Mr. Earlscourt, tell me who this man is-this baq

man, who has lured her away from her home-who pro!

faithfully to marry her, and make her happy ? You su

you must suspect-tell me who it is !"  - 

"Pardon me, Miss Lisle; not even to you may I

my suspicions.

" It is your brother-I know it is-he always admired

years ago, when he saw her first, he was struck by her

he denies it; but I have vowed to discover the truth,

shall" 

Her handsome lips.set themselves in a resolute lini

blue eyes flashed in the starlight through her passionate

"You are a true friend, Miss Lisle, and they say wms

not know the meaning of the word friendship for each 








<pb n="273"/>
'  ;r 0  -  AT BRIGZTON.                   273

Alice like a sister. Those I have on e liked 1 like

let them do what they will."

ir friends are fortunate. people, Miss Lisle. You should

nto the list; it would be a splendid opportunity of

H   your charity. I don't deserve a friend, I am quite

ti I think it would be pleasant to have one."

n your friend," she answered, quietly. 

!at t in spite of all the atrocious things Frank, Sir Vane,

albaith and the world must have told you of such a

Jeep as myself ?" with his rare smile.

/ispite of all. If one deserts one's friends because they

rtunate, I would not give much for friendship."

fortf.nate ! " he'snliled again. "That is a mild word to

io such a ne'er-do-well as I am. Still, I thank you, Miss

I will not soon forget your kind indulgence."

glanced at him, looking very haughty and handsome in

tm light. Then her head drooped-she began playing

isly with her tassels. He was in debt; she had more

: than she knew what to do with; she felt a great com-

for him stirring in her heart; if he would only let her

Earlscourt," she faltered, "they-say-you are in

--vwords coming slowly and painfully. "If I am your

, will you not let me-oh, don't be hurt-don't be

d, please-but won't you let me help you ? I have s  |

?io'ney. I don't want it, and it would make me so happy

u would-2

B made a sudden, swift motion that stopped her.

t a word more, Miss Lisle ! From my soul I am grate-

,y, but you must see it is impossible. Believe me, I

ot readily forget your generosity of this night, unworthy

as I am."

e was more moved than he cared to show.

kshrank away a little, feeling pain, pity, embarrassment in

esence.

'am unworthy of your compassion-remember that, Mis 

:All they have told you of me is true. Whatever has

tme is merited. I have wrought my own ruin. And

d is very near. 'Facilis descensus Averni I' And I am

;bottom of the pit. Well, the descent at least has been

t, and when oblivion comes there is nothing to do but

e Waters close over my head; to go out to the exile I

ihly earned; to accept my fate and sink from sight,

12*








<pb n="274"/>
"74   Ijv WVHICH MISS LJSLE IS DISPOSED. OF

and when the finale comes-a shot in a gambling heiW

likely-to cover my face and die with dignity. Am I B

you with a sermon? and you shiver, while I selfishly ke

here in the cold. Don't waste your pity on me, Miss

1 don't deserve it; let me take you back to the ball-roo

She was shivering, but not with cold, and she was ve,

in the glaring gaslight when she re-entered the warm-n

lie resigned her with a low. bow to her next partner.

tears were hardly dry on her long lashes yet as she was w

away in the redowa, tears not all, perhaps, for Alice Warr

Five minutes after Lieutenant Earlscourt quitted the.

By the first train next morning he quitted Brighton, c

with him the memory of the sweet, iiapassionedace Cl

which the stars had shone.

CHAPTER VI.

IN WHICH MISS LISLE IS DISPOSED OF.

ISS LISLE was destined to have still another 

tete that memorable night. The redowa oer

sent her partner for an ice-only a pretext to ge

of him, however. The place was stiflingly war

seemed to her now; the dances had been interminablei

commonplace nothings of the young officer insufferably s.t

She passed along unobserved, as she fancied, to the ha

wholly deserted music-room, and throwing herself into ai

by the window, looked moodily out at the coming dawn. 

The stars had set; faint streaks of gray in the east 

tokened the dawn of ano-ther morning. The ball was brea

up already.

Mrs. Galbraith was looking for her, no Jeubt; but she

thought of that long-suffering chaperone. Her heart Wa

of a great pity for the man who had gone-sentimental

undeserved, you will say; but she was only eighteen, a

was so very handsome. Had Mr. Earlscourt been the h

possessor of a pug nose and dull gray eyes, he might ha1

to his ruin without causing Miss Lisle a second thought,

.   thought, b 't








<pb n="275"/>
1  WHICH MISS LISLE IS DISPOSED OF.       275

face was simply perfect, and the large, brown eyes

in their dark, dreamy lustre, although their owner

_     Cobemusing on the odds for the Derby, or whether the bailiffs

t pounce upon him the instant he returned to London.

e sat there lost in thought, a voice at her elbow spoke .

e been searching for you everywhere, my dear Miss

I_ have come to reproach you-you have treated me

ciless cruelty all night."

looked around angrily at the sound of the voice she. de-

mnost. Was she never to be rid of this man ?

_     oldl  Mbontalien gives himself a great deal of unnecessary

e3,";, she answered, in her iciest voice, and ignoring the re.

altogether.

iss Lisle, you have danced with every man in the rooms,

eve, but myself. What have I done ? " -

othing whatever. Like Caesar's wife, my Lord Monta.

above reproach."

w bitterly you say that! Miss Lisle, do you hate me ?"

,sLisle was silent, playing with her fan.

ill not endure this !" he cried, stung into real or feigned-

.   You treat me like a dog, and I-I would die for

ia raised her fan to hide a dismal yawn.

xtremely heroic of you, my lord. I couldn't think of put-

ou to any such inconvenience."'

this my brother's doing ? I saw you and Guy together

Bteibalcony."

-'   h ! you did ! I did not know you had done us the hondr

tching us !

I!-beg your pardon, Miss Lisle," his lordship said, wA

t  "You might have spared me that gratuitous affront.

not watch you-you went out together openly enough for

the music-room to see, if they chose. What has Guy

saying to my discredit ?"

?My lord, you do your brother scarcely justice when you

that question. Guy Earlscourt is no coward to stab in

lhas a warm friend in you, it would seem." 

He has," she answered, briefly.

hen, with all his madness, with all his miserable reckless.'

he is to be envied. You give him your friendship, and

ut me out. Again I ask, Miss Lisle, what have I done? 

t ea   have the right to know that !"

Ffff0 








<pb n="276"/>
276   IN WHIC.7 MISS LISI.E IS DISPOSED d

"And again I answer, Lord Montalien," replied :

struggling with another yawn-" nothing! Your' conti

every phase of life is exemplary. Will that satisfy -

hear Mrs. Galbraith bleating after her lambkin in the i

and must go."

"Wait one moment!" his lordship impetuously ex1

-" only one instant! I can bear this suspense no long

must speak to-night! Paulina, I love you! Will yo

wife?" 

He bent above her, his, eyes glowing, his thin, sal

flushed. The excitement of the chase had carried him

her very disdain, hardly concealed, spurred him  on

knew perfectly what her answer would be-yet he spoke

She rose up and looked at him, neither surprised nor  B

rassed; then she turned away.

"You honor me by your preference," she said, in her *

voice. "At the same time, I do not think you expect

say anything but ' no !"'

She moved a step away, but he came before her, his

folded, that pale glow in his eyes still.      ~

"Miss Lisle, I am to understand you reject me?"  :-

She bowed her head.                         : i

"You do not love me ?" 

" I do not love you."

"But, Paulina, pause-think. I offer you one ofthe

titles in England; and my position and income are such

prevent the most malicious from calling me a fortune

And I love you to distraction- I would serve for you as

served for Rachel. I will give you time, only do not

utterly reject me."                     -        ::~.

His voice broke, he turned away; his acting was

but it was acting, and a faint, cynical smile curved the

perfect lips.

"My lord," she said, and her sweet, clear voice rang.

and distinct, "let us understand each other. You do

me, whatever your motive in asking me to be your wife

feelings in regard to you I have not striven to concea

fore you spoke to me you knew perfectly what my !

would be. I believe you to be, in spite of everyth

have said, the betrayer of Alice Warren-I feel it-I k

as surely as we stand here. Let there be an end of tii

then, at once and forever--cease to persecute me ith

tions as unwelcome as they are useless."

* 0 X f f R-








<pb n="277"/>
1   WHICH MISS LISLE IS DISPOSED OF.        2/7

d fairly roused him, fairly angered him, as s.le meant tc

isopen enmity was better than his hypocritical devotion.

,e care " he said, under his breath, as he always spoke

ally moved; "even you may go too far, Paulina.

as I love you, even from you I will not endure insult.

nothing of Alice Warren or her miserable story. IMl)

; of whom you speak so tenderly, is the man with whonm

oiTrd, will you let me pass ? I repeat I hear Mrs. Gal-

Volice."

utterly and forever reject me ?"

tterly and forever reject you !"

ill nothing move you-the devotion of a life ? Think

B I adore you-I offer you such a position as may never

id you again. You are as ambitious as you are beau.

. Think once more before you refuse to become Lady

lien."

f  I thought for a hundred years it would not make one

of difference. You are right; I am ambitious; and to

of Lady Montalien I only object, because you offer it.

plain enough ? Will you let me pass ?"

~ looked at her with a sneering smile, his arms still folded

Ts his chest.

Guy stood in my place, you mean, and made you the

ofir, your answer would be very different."

mean that, if you like. I would a thousand times sooner

y your brother, ruined as he is this hour, than you, with

spotless name and immaculate character. Let me pass,

amand you, Lord Montalien !"

r eyes were flashing now-every nerve tingled at his

h, at his insulting tone.

?ass, Miss Lisle," he said; -" I forgive and overlook your

y, and will still venture to hope on. If you knew me

: you would know I am not a man easily turned from any

eon which I have set my heart, and my heart is set very

gy on winning and wedding you. Will you take my arm

e dressing-room ? You will not ? Ah, well, you are ex-;

ow. The day may come when I will repeat my offer,

you will listen more graciously."

:e day will never come," she re'torted, in a blaze of defi.

f   How dare you address such insolent words to nle,

Monttalien ? You are less than man; I will never speak

!word to you again as long as I live !"

iVn  f 0 








<pb n="278"/>
2;'8    IN WHICH MISS LISLE IS DISPOS I-D lF.

He only smiled.                                i

"A child's threat, my peerless Paulina."

But she had swept away like an outraged young ernpr

eyes flashing fire, her whole form instinct with anger and

"A child's threat," she thought, setting her white, small

" He shall see whether or no I can keep a woman's vow^.

He stood at the carriage door when she reached it as t

nothing had happened, and courteously held out his ha

assist her to enter. Her eyes flashed their fire upon hiz!

she rejected the help proffered, and sank back among

wraps in the remotest corner. Mrs. Galbraith followed.

Sir Vane, and, to her unspeakable disgust, Lord Montalie

He was completely himself again-no trace of the st

scene in the music-room showed on his placid face. He

cussed the ball with Mrs. Galbraith, his brother's unlooke

appearance there with Sir Vane, and once or twice le

smilingly forward to addrcs a remark to the sullen bea

the corner. Dead silence followed those remarks-Miss L

could keep her word as well as he. "She would never si

to him again,- she had said in her passion; it would seerit

.      ,:'to:keep he :ord.                        *X 

-:Y^     pallid dawn was already overspreading the sky'w

they reached the East Cliff. His lordship followed themi

the house. Miss Lisle and Mrs. Galbraith went at once

their respective apartments, and Sir Vane, yawning very mi

looked well disposed to follow; but his lordship laid his :l

familiarly on his shoulder, and detained him. 

" Rather an unseasonable hour, I know," he said, bla-

"but could I have a word with you .in private, Sir Vane, b

you retire?"

The baronet looked at him in surprise, and led the way

ward his study. A fire burned in the grate, two 'easy 

were placed before it, a pair of waxlights burned on thet  i

tel. By their light the baronet saw that his lordship look

widely awake, as little sleepy, as though it had been high o

He flung himself impatiently into one of the arm-chairs, 

pulled out his watch.             :               '

"Half-past five, Montalien," he said; "and I'm infer

sleepy. Look sharp about it, will you, or I shall be as fa

A church before you are half through."            t

" I have no such fear, my dear Sir Vane ; you will not 

sleep until you have heard every word, I am quite s'lre.:

you guess, in the least, what it i3 I wish to say ? " 

:  id0 -0 !0S0








<pb n="279"/>
,P WICH MISS LISLE IS DISPOSED OF.         271

no [Edipus, but I may venture to surmise. it is iome

Out my ward."

isery, Sir Vane."

|oticed she cut you dead all night, and in' the carriage

H home. Have you and she had a quarrel ? She's the

pwn temper, I believe, when her blood's up."

t right in every respect, Sir Vane. We have quarrelled,

has the devirs own temper. Now who do you suppose

erits that unhappy disposition from ? Not her mother,

-Lady Charteris, it seems to me, was the gefmest of

beings."              .            ,

baronet rose from his chair-his dark face turning

at do you mean ?" he asked. "What has the name of

harteris to do with Miss Lisle ?"

* down, Sir Vane; pray don't excite yourself. I merely

uina must inherit her temper and headstrong disposition

~ obertdLisle, Lady Charteris being the most tractable of

wthe most yielding of women."

rd Montalien, what am I to understand-"2

t I know all," his lordship interrupted, tersely. "That

tharteris-nay, give her her rightful nalne--Mrs. Rob-

L, is Paulina's mother !"

aronet sank dowirin his seat, livid with amazement

stertion.

what right," he demanded hoarsely, "do you dare make

uation ?"

(the right of knowledge, by the right of truth, Paulina

'i the elder daughter and heiress of the lady the world

,your wife. Thinks, only, for she has never fairly one

really been that. Robert Lisle is her husband. Pau-

ifis her daughter and heiress, as I said, and your

raused. Sir Vane sprang from his chair once more, a

ilof fury in either eye.

i'u dare!" he cried, "I will throttle you where you

ien I will not dare," returned Lord Montalien, with his

that was like oil thrown upon fire. "Sit down, Sir

it .down, and don't you lose your temper, as well as

-rd. It is only a weak man's folly-a wise one never

imself to get angry. Sit down. and let us talk this

quietly and clearly if we cap. I knew you would be








<pb n="280"/>
280   ZN tWHICH MISS LISLE IS DISPOSED .'

interested; aad even at half-past five in the morningl w

fall asleep."           I                       f

The baronet sank back in his chair, literally trembli

rage and terror. He had thought his secret so saf

Charteris shut up in a mad-house, Robert Lisle in ex

Duke Mason afraid to speak, bound by promise never tol

it. And here, in the hour when he thought himself Sf

last man alive he would have suspected of knowing it,

up, aware of the whole truth !

"This has taken you by surprise, Sir Vane," continu

smooth tones of his lordship, "and yet I have known

some time. It is no clever guess-work, no supposition, 

haps you may think. I happen to know what I am sa

happen to be able to prove it, if necessary. Carry your:

back twenty years ago or so to the lifetime of Mr. G

Lyndith, and try if you can recollect a very useful valet !

service, by name James Porter." 

The baronet gave one inarticulate gasp at the n me. ;

"Ah! I see you do remember. Perhaps you thoug

man dead. Well, he is dead now, and the deposition he 0

in his dying hours is in my possession at present. I only:

der a clever man, such as I take the late Mr. Lyndith to;

been, should be so weak as to intrust this kind of secret -

servant. Believe me, we should do these sort of things

selves, Sir Vane, or leave them undone. The lower cla

you will find, as a rule, are troubled with nervousness

science, I think they call it-and sooner or later make a 

breast of the whole affair. Porter did. By the merest act

-one of those accidents that rule the lives of all of u

came upon him in his dying hours, and took down his ded

tion. I have that document safe. I wonder what R

Lisle or-your wife-let us call her your wife-would not 

for it?  You comprehend now, Sir Vane, that your sec

your secret no longer ?" 

"What do you want?" the baronet asked, in the-

'hoarse voice.

"I want to marry Paulina Lisle."                :

"And to claim the fortune of Lady Charteris ?"  ;:

"No, Sir Vane; if I did I should not ask your aid. I'

ise to resign all claim upon Lady Charteris' estate, to hand

to you Porter's confession, on condition that you compel

ina to marry me."'' 

" Compel!"








<pb n="281"/>
IWHICHI MISS.LISLE IS DISPOSED C F.      281

lpel--nothing but compulsion will ever. make her do 

^ehates me, and makes no secret of her hatred. I have

eart on winning her-I will move heaven and e tth to

d I will look to you to aid me." 

' lord, this is the nineteenth century. Young girls

forced into marrying men they hate, even by their

B Vane Charteris, it was the nineteenth century when

ILyndith was forced by her guardian to marry a man

ed! What was done sixteen years ago can be done

edark blood rose up over the baronet's face. It was

nt before he could command his rage sufficiently to

hat was different-she had a motive, and her uncle kept

solitary confinement until she was ready to consent to

er uncle, I repeat, was a clever man. Emulate his ex-

my dear baronet. Do as he did-try foul means if

not answer. Solitary confinement will have the same

e effect upon the daughter it had upon the mother.

ist your place, 'The Firs'-solitary enough and dreary

for any prison, Mrs. Galbraith says. Take her down

Pkep her there until she yields." 

r Montalien, it cannot be done. She has the obstinacy

deune, and the cunning of the demon. We might keep

t up there for months, and she would not yield; and

would the world say?"

Wat will the world say when I discover Lady Charteris'

place, and give her the papers I hold ? What will the

wsay when the conspiracy of the late Geoffrey Lyndith

to light ?" 

conspiracy in which I had no part."

:Montalien smiled grimly.

obert Lisle was in the church upon the day of your mar.

qand you saw him face to face. Six o'clock."

paused until the last chime vibrated, and then arose.

I wll ndt detain you from your needful rest a moment lon-

VSane.- You will think over this matter, and will do as I

t I am sure. Bring all the influence you and your sister

Fs to bear upon this wilful girl; let fair means be tried

patience ceases to be a virtue.  Then take her .to

Firs.' 1 will go with you; night and day I shall plead

-j  vf  .   90








<pb n="282"/>
282   IN WHICH MISS LISLE 'IS DISPOSE       iJ

my suit, until, as constant dropping wears a stone, shi

at length" 

The baronet arose, too. The daylight stealing^'

the curtains and struggling with the waxlights, fell palei

pale faces. 

'Lord Montalien, why do you wish so strongly to:

this girl?"                                   :.

"Rather a delicate question. Because I lcve her, of;<

You don't believe that. Well, here's another reason for

I want to marry her because I want to marry her. She,

me, she scorns me ! Let her ! I shall tame that pri

bring her to her knees, humble her to the dust. I love

admire her, and I hate her altogether. I am determi

marry her in spite of fate, in spite of herself. Sir Vane 

teris, I wish you good-morning !"

"Mrs. Galbraith, who is to take us to the concert to-n

Miss Lisle looked up from Le Follet to ask this quest

was the evening succeeding the ball. Dinner was ove

for a wonder, Lord Montalien had not dined at the East'

The cosey Brighton drawing-room was a pretty picture, wi

silken hangings, ruby-hued; its Axminster carpet, its

engravings, its hot-house flowers, its glowing coal-fire at

softly abundant gaslights. Outside the wintry stars shone fi

in the deep blue, and the wintry wind whistled shrilly up:

the dark, wide sea. 

The belle of Brighton, nestling in a low dormouse befo'

fire-for she loved warmth like a tropical bird-in the ful

of the leaping light, looked fresh as a rose, and quite as :

Mrs. Galbraith, shrouded in Chantilly lace, and reading,

laid down her high-church novel, and Miss Maud Charte

the piano, ceased singing to hear the answer.  ; ::

"Yesterday morning," pursued the heiress, "it was de

we were to go with Sir Vane. Two hours ago Sir Vani,

by the express train for London. Now, who is to take/

the concert ?" 

The concert of which the young lady spoke was a con

more than usual interest for her. Her love for music amou

to a passion, and to-night the Signor Carlo Friellson-

make his first appearance. Her heart had been set upon gr

as the lady in Chantilly lace very well knew.

' Lord Montalien, of course," she said, in her smo6t

voice: "I expect him every moment; and really, it i at

eight, and quite time to dress."'               -

.~ ib








<pb n="283"/>
ZN- WIICF   MISS LISL2 IS DISPOSED OF.      283

Lisle's eyes fell once more upon the pages of Z;e  illet,

.is Lisle's lips set themselves in that resolute line that

albraith very well knew meant " breakers ahead."

11lina, dear, you heard me ?" in her most dulcet tones.

, ring for Paulina's maid. It is time to dress 'br the

There will be such a crush, that it is best to be early."

n't trouble yourself, Maud," said Paulina, quietly; "I

ot go, Paulina' ?"

ma laid down Le Follet, and looked across at her cha.

with steady blue eyes.

shall not go, Mrs. Galbraith. More-I will never go

e again with Lord Montalien. If he had come here to

-day, I should have left the table. It is quite out of my

-f  to forbid him the house, or Sir Vane's box at the theatre,

from picking him up whenever we go out to drive, but

is in my power to do I will. It shall be no fault oi

f people couple our names together. I told Lord Mon-

ilast night pretty plainly what I thought of him-now I

. Do not let my whims make any difference in your

:I You and Maud are both dying to go to the debut of

Mw Mario. Go, by all means-I shall not !"

then she went back to Le Follet. All Mrs. Galbraith 7

say was of no avail. Miss Lisle's ultimatum had been

en, all the eloquence of men and angels would not have

her.

rd :Montalien called, and Mrs. Galbraith and Maud went.

wtened, with his calm smile, to the story of Paulina's head-

~ caprice.

s -the queen pleases," he said with a shrug; "a little

de will do her no harm. In half an hour she will be fran-

at she has not come."

uld she? The instant the carriage drove away Paulina

up, flung Le Follet across the room, and rang a peal

er maid that nearly broke down the bell.

ick, Jane," she cried; "dress me in two, minutes, anld

me as pretty as ever you can."

eyes were dancing now. It was little, wild, mischievous

y Mason once more. 

e was a weil-trahned English lady's-maid, and nothing

rthe canopy of heaven ever surprised her. She did dress

mistress in ten minutes, and to perfection. Paulina-

at herself in the glass, and saw that the flowing pink silk,

m: 








<pb n="284"/>
284   IN WHICH MISS LISLE IS DISPOSED OF./

and the long trailing cluster of lilies in her golden h

exquisite. Diamond drops sparkled in h6r ears, softi

veiled the snow-white bust and arms. Her fan of I

rose-silk, her bouquet of lilies and blush roses lay side 

She looked like a lily herself-tall, slim, fair. 

"Now my opera cloak. Quick, Jane."          '

Jane flung it over her shoulders, and the hood over hei

Miss Lisle drew on her gloves, gathered up her sh

silken train, and swept out of the house with that dan

in her eyes, that provoking smile on her lips. 

She tripped down the front steps and along the lamp-liti

for a few yards. Then she rang the bell of a large hous

w-s admitted by a footman.                     'i

"Is Mrs. Atcherly at home?" she asked.    a

"What! Paulina !" exclaimed a lady, in the act of crm

the hall, in full evening dress-"here! alone! and'a

hour ! I thought you were going to the concert ? "

"So I am, dear Mrs. Atcherly, if you will take me ? t i

not miss it for a kingdom. You are all ready, I see--how'

nate I am not to be too late." 

"But, my love-Mrs. Galbraith-'" 

"Mrs. Galbraith has gone, and Maud and Lord Mo

I'll tell you all about it as we go along. Please don't let:

too late." 

Mrs. Colonel Atcherly, a stately matron, her daughte

her husband, descended to the carriage. On the way P

whispered the story of her insubordination into the elder 

ear.

" You know how I detest Lord Montalien, Mrs. Atch

couldn't go with him, and I should die-yes, I shotdk

missed hearing the Signor Friellson. What will they say

they see me?"

"That youhare-brad hat you are a hare-brained dasel. What a c

Galbraith will read you to-morrow!" iX:

They reached the pavilion. The curtain had fallen

the first act as the Atcherly party swept along to their box

Vane's was nearly opposite, and the glasses of Lord Mon

and the baronet's sister fell together upon wicked Paulinali

"Good Heavens!" Mrs. Galbraith gasped, "can  b 

my eyes !"

Lord Montalien burst out laughing. Though the jcke

against him, yet Mrs. Galbraith's face of horror was no

'resisted.

' a!im








<pb n="285"/>
H  I WHICH MISS LISLE IS DISPOSED OF.     2:85   *

S:Paulina !" cried the lady. "Lord Mcnrtalien, is it  v

: you ian laugh ?"

g one thousand pardons," the peer said, still laughing.

hB  est joke of the season! And, egad ! she is more

t than ever I saw her ! '

has the grace at least not to look this way. How dare

so oultrageous a thing ! I will never forgive her."

W;ie lorgnettes in the house turned to the Atcherly box-

~ !Q the great heiress-many more to the noble and lovel)

i Captain Villiers left his seat in the stalls and joined her

til the curtain fell upon the last act an animated flirta

s kept up. Then Miss Lisle flung her bouquet to the

sfutenor, and took the Guardsman's arm to the carriage.

Atcherly," she said laughingly, "your goodness em.

s me to ask still another favor. Will you keep me all

Ti Perhaps, if Mrs. 6albraith sleeps on her wrath, it will

s heavily upon me to-morrow."

S Lisle did not return home all night. Next morning Sil 

eturned, and was informed of the rebellious and unheard-

ct of his ward. 

ebaronet's anger was scarcely less than that of his sister.

w:eflIat once for her; and no death's-head ever looked

'grim than he as he led her home.

And now, Miss Lisle," he asked sternly, "may I demand  S

xplanation of this disgraceful conduct ?" 

ihsgraceful, Sir Vane ! I don't quite see that; I went to' .`

cncert because I wanted to go to the concert, and I did-V-

gt with Miss Galbraith because Lord Montalien was her :

r I hope that is satisfactory!"  , 

t is not satisfactory, I repeat it; your conduct has beer 

racefil."

PaVane, you may use that word once too often. Neithet

or at any future time, shall Lord Montalien appear in

c with me."

lr Montalien has done you the honor to propose to you.

smy desire-my command, that you shall accept him."

Lisle smiled quietly and took a seat.

rMontalien has laid -a complaint against me, has he,

n'y guardian's power is to be brought to bear in his favor ?

Vane, take my advice and spare yourself a great deal of

ss rhetoric and breath. If Lord Montalien were the rulei 

he world, and my life depended on it, I would lay my head

^ t9 block sooner than Larry him ! I hope that is conchlu








<pb n="286"/>
286    TAN WHICH MISS LISLE IS DISDSPOSED OF

sive ! I will never step acioss his threshold, or sit at t

table with him. I will not go down to Montalien at CE

1 hope that is conclusive!"  á 

"Then hear me," cried her guardian, white with

"Until you do speak to him, sit at the same table wit

and consent to marry him, you shall remain in your'

watched. The escapade of last night' shall not occur:

Solitary confinement, perhaps, will teach you obedience

go !"

Miss Lisle rose at once. He had expected an outb

indignant protest and passion, but who was to judge this

She got up with a provoking smile on her face, and ,;

straight out of the room. In the doorway she paused. s

"I have only one request to make," she said, still wi H

provoking smile; "please don't feed me on bread and v

I shouldn't like to grow any thinner, and do be kind tol

little Pandore [her poodle]. For the rest, Sir Vane, I hear

to obey."

She went up to her rooms. She had three on the s

southern side-bedroom, dressing-room, and  sitting

She glanced around. Heaps of books and magazines

everywhere, heaps of Berlin wool, and bead-work, heae

music, and a piano. She rang the bell, and when her

came she peeped out through a crevice in the door. 

"Jane," she said with solemnity, " I'm a prisoner here,

to prevent the possibility of my escape I am going to lock

self in ! You will fetch me my meals, and when you wanty

thing, Jane, you will rap, you know, and tell me through

key-hole."                                       f

Sir Vane had followed her and heard every word of this w 

sical speech.

"What is to be done with such a girl as that?" the br

demanded of his sister; "she is afraid of nohing-impri

ment-solitude-nothing, I say. Hear her now !"  :

Miss Lisle was seated at her piano, and her high, sweet

:ng echoed through the house.

"Paulina Lisle is dangerous," Mrs. Galbraith said with !

phasis; " that girl is capable of anything when filly arous

Mrs. Galbraith was right. She and her brother were sp

to learn of what Paulina Lisle was capable ! 








<pb n="287"/>
"I   A ^' NEW  WAY TO PAY OLD DEB7SS.'       287

. \:       CHAPTER VII.

"A NEW WAY TO PAY OLD DEBTS."

XT was the twentieth of December.

Francis, Lord Montalien, rose from the luxniiUs |

dinner in his bachelor apartments, prepared by a first.

rate French artist, and walked into his reception-

Lord Montalien's lodgings, on the sunny side of St.

street, were rather more luxurious, if possible, than the

ments of a young duchess. Miser he might be, as Paul-

Lsle had called him, but certainly not where his own coin.

:tnd gratification were concerned. Velvet-piled carpets,

ntine bronzes, richest hangings, a profusion of hot-house

es in the windows and on the tables, frescoed medallions

wrs and fruits on the walls, costly furniture, in white and

books, pictures, bronzes, vases, cabinets, everything to

y the eye, that wealth could purchase, was here. Rudedy

4blazed on every hearth, wax-lights burned softly in all the

s, and outside the December snow drifted in a white wil-

ess, and the December wind wildly blew.

lordship was dressed in deep mourning, but in his gleam-

eyes, and over his whole face, there glowed an exultant 

of joy and triumph. He had been drinking more deeply

-B was his wont, for he was most abstemious, and his thin,

ace was flushed, and a perpetual smile hovered exultantly

t his lips.

Everything triumphs with me," he cried; " everything!

eln Paulina is my wife I shall have nothing left to wish for !

ens ! how I love that girl! Her beauty, and her devilish

e, and pluck, and obstinacy, have bewitched my senses.

eve I would marry her if she had not one farthing. I shall

in my love as I have prospered in my hate ! Ah ! my

ant Guy Earlscourt, how is it with you now "

e paced up and down the exquisite room, that diabolical

e of exultation still wreathing his thin, sinister lips. He

ut come from a funeral a few hours before, the funeral of

rich grandiunt, Miss Earlscourt. After the funeral the will

been read in the lawyer's office, the will that, to the utter

e of ;everybody,-save the lawyer and legatee, jeft every








<pb n="288"/>
288     "A NEBW WAY TO PAY' OLD A.      k'TS." 

shilling she possessed to her elser nephew, Lord M

Guy had been cut off, without even a guinea to buy- a

ing ring, "for his evil courses," the will pointedly-

shameful courses, which, for the first time, had brought 

upon the name of Earlscourt.

In that hour of triumph the elder brother had cast." 

oi himself, one glance of triumph at the disinherited f

Guy stood perfectly calm-it was his death-warrant he

read, but not a muscle moved, his handsome face looked

renely, as coolly indifferent as though he had-half a m

so at his banker's. And Lord Montalien had set his tee

an inward oath-he could not conquer him-in the hour

downfall he rose above him still. 

"Curse him!" he hissed; "I always hated him fC

d--d patrician beauty and languor, his air nolei 

women call it, and his insufferable insolence, and I ha

tnore now, in his utter downfall, than I ever did before. -'

lie were here, that I might for once throw off the mask, ar

him so."

The master he served seemed inclined to let him hal

way in this as in all other things. The wish had scarcely

shape, when the door was flung open, and his groom o

chambers announced "Mr. Earlscourt." 

Lord Montalien paused in his walk, and-crossing over

chimney-piece, leaned his arm upon it, and looked full l

brother, that exultant, Satanic smile bright yet on his face

had this last desire, as he had had all others; the

hated, and whom he had helped to ruin, stood before-h

the dark hour of his life.

Guy came slowly forward, and stood directly opposite to

at the other end of the mantel. He too wore mournin

face was very grave, very haggard, very pale. Dark <c

suirounded his eyes, but that noble air, which his bro

hated, had not left him. He looked handsomer, noblerj

in his utter downfall, beyond all comparisor, than the we

the well-reputed Lord of Montalien. And Francis Ear

saw it and knew it.

" Well, Guy," he began slowly, "and so the worst has 

Have you visited me to congratulate me, or to ask myyf

thy for your own great misfortune ? Who would have ti

Miss Earlscourt would have had the heart to disinheritl

vorite ? "                        ..

The mocking tone, the exultant look, were indescri








<pb n="289"/>
"l A NEW WAY TO PAY OLD LEBTS1."         289

ifted his dark eyes, and looked steadily across at him.

ust have been a tremendous blow," the elder contin-

t was- your last hope. Perhaps, though, it is not your

pe; perhaps you have come to me to help you in your

ftneed."

,^Frank," Guy said quietly; "I have fallen very low,

misfortunes, or evil courses, which you will, have not

:turned my brain. I have never asked you for a farthing

d I never will." 

, yet, you remember after our father's death, I told you

to me in your hour of need, and I would assist you.

wpere your father's favorite, Guy; you are the son of the

he loved; he left you all he had to leave. I wonder how

ld feel if he saw you now ?"              '

will leave his name out of the discussion, if you please.

neither now nor at any past time I ever troubled youm

or your brotherly affection, you're hitting a man when

wn nis in very bad taste, to say the least of it. I have

ecome here to-night for sympathy nor money. I know

nucgh of either I would get or deserve to get. Shall I tell

h Iy I have come ?"

all means-to say farewell, perhaps on the eve of your

I      -ng exile. What place of refuge have you chosen; Alge-

ustralia, New Zealand, America?   I should really like

~ ,did not come to say farewell. I came to speak to you

-ice Warren."

elder brother started at the unexpecod sound of that

e.Not once had he seen her since the night he had vis-

in Barton Street.

ie Warren," he said, with an oath; " what has Alice

to do with it? Do you expect me to look after your

mistresses when you are gone ?"

xpect nothing of you-nothing-how often must I re-

it? And Alice Warren is no mistress of mine-of any

SI believe in my soul. Whatever she is, you are the

nldrel who has led her astray, under promise of marriage.

e out, my lord; I have come to be heard, and will. If

ve one spark of manhood left, you will atone in some

!r the great wrong you have done an innocent girl. You

ft leave the fresh face you wooed down in Lincolnshire

d to the disgrace of London gaslight."

hall Do precisely as I please in this, as in all other

,>a   >0 








<pb n="290"/>
290     "A NEW    WAY TO PAY OLD nttEaP.

things. It is refreshing, really, to hear you, of all

defender of female innocence, of soiled doves, sute

Warren."

"At least no innocent girl's ruin lies at my door,:

betrayal. I repeat, if you have one-spark of manhood 

will atone for the wrong-you have done her." 

"As how?" with his sneering smile; "by a real m

make the bailiff's daughter my Lady Montalien ? 

when you had the pleasure of seeing the lady last, a

commissioned you to come here and plead her case? B"'

"I saw her two hours ago, and she commissioned -

nothing of the sort. I was walking along the Strand W

Stedman, and we came face to face with poor Alice.  i

not have known her-she has become such a wrethed i

of herself. If ever a heart was broken, I believe her$

By Heaven, Frank, it is a cruel shame-if you had m

her in cold blood you could not be more guilty than yo-

The sneering smile never left the other's face, thou

pallid with suppressed passion. He took up his cigar-

lit a Manilla, though his hands shook as he did it.  I

" And she told you, no doubt, a piteous story of my 

and my baseness-or is all this accusation but the -

your own lively brain "   _ 

" She told me nothing; she is true to you, fase as y

been to her. We scarcely exchanged words-she se

have something to say to Stednan, and I walked oft, 

them. It is of no use your wearing a mask with me.i:

Alice Warren came uip to London last September, poo

ulous child, it was to become your wife."       .

"You are right!" exclaimed Lord Montalien si

"and I will throw off the mask with you, my virtue-

younger brother! In that other land to which your

tunes are driving you, you might, with pleasure to youi

profit to your hearers, turn Methodist parson-the rmi 

to suit you amazingly. I shall deal with Alice Warren

as I please, and for marriage, I shall marry Paulina isl

"Poor Paulina," Guy said bitterly. "May Heaven 

fiom such a fate !"

You believe in Heaven ? At least it has not dea&

kindly by you. I shall marry Paulina Lisle and her  l

and it wvill be the delightful occupation of my life to bars:

high spirit while you are breaking stones on the roads 

in Australia. For Alice Warren, she will fare none tj








<pb n="291"/>
* '2A  NEW   WAY TO PAY OLD DEBTS."

dvocacy. Let is speak of yourself-I really feel an

n your fate, though you may not believe it. You have

_      your papers to sell, I suppose? You are not mad

totry and remain in England ? 

_^ owed his head in assent, and turned to go.

iy do not be in such haste-I have not half finished what

to say to you. Have you chosen as yet the place of

lawry ? "

place of my outlawry is a matter that in no way con-

ytrue; and what does it signify-America, Australia,

it is all the same. But don't you feel a curiosity to

hw you came to be disinherited ? Most men would, I

ia:nd you were such a favorite with old Mss Earlscourt,

I all women, young and old, indeed."

rough your brotherly kindness, Frank, no doubt."

uite right-through my brotherly kindness. But for me

: ould to-day be heir to our lamented maiden aunt's large

t   able i to snap your fingers in the faces of the Jews, and

ulina Lisle yourself, if you desired it. She was ready

ive you, seventy times seven, to pay your debts to the

-fthe chapter, and leave you all when she died-but for

butfor me! Shall I tell you, Guy, how I didit ?"

i'you please." s

means of the girl whose case you have come here to

by means of Alice Warren. Your gambling, your drink-

ir mad extravagance in every way, she was prepared to

and condone, but not the luring from home, under pre-

r of marriage, and ruin of a young and virtuous girl, whose

-1 his life had loved and served you and yours! I went

two weeks ago, my brilliant, careless Guy, and I told her

trI made her believe this, the only thing that could have

?.Myou; and that night she tore up the will that left you all

~hear-all !-and made me her heir!"

t:paused. Satan himself triumphing over a lost soul, 

inot have looked more diabolically exultant. For Guy,

ed, his elbow on the marble mantel, his calm, pale face

, his eyes fixed steadfastly on his only brother's face.

uf did this," he said, slowly. "I know you always hated

wt Idid not-no, I did not think, base as I know you to

you were capable of this. Frank," with a sudden

e o tone, "will you tell me why you have hated me ? I

een a worthless fellow, but I never injured you."

?   0 A. \=  S'V0f f An.  0  of  -  '  0;








<pb n="292"/>
292     "A NEW WAY TO PAY OLD DEBTS.          1 

"'Did you not?" Lord Montalien ground out, th

oath. "Why, curse you, I believe I have hated yi

your cradle ! You were the Isaac, I the Ishmael; y

petted, the caressed, the admired-I the unlicked cub, 

loved son of an unloved mother! I have hated yun f:

beauty which women have so admired, for the talents aT

complishments that have rendered you a favorite with

and I swore to have revenge-and I have had it. You

liant life is over; you are a beggar; you go forth to exil

outlawry and disgrace-to starve or work in a foreign I

And the title, and the wealth, and the good repute are n

Has more got to be said ? I will marry Paulina Lisle :

the next London season, and Alice Warren may go, as

have gone, to perdition. Mr. Guy Earlscourt, permit m

wish you good-night!" i "

He rang the bell.

" Show Mr. Earlscourt o t  he door," he said to these

"and admit him here no more !" .

He could not forbear this last insult. With one lo

look not soon to be forgotten-Guy went forth, never to

that threshold again. 

"And now for Berkeley Square and Paulina!" excla

Lord Montalien, taking up his great-coat. " We will see

frame of mind that obstinate little beauty is in to-night!" I.

But he was not to go yet. The door opened once 

and the groom of the chambers appeared, with a dist

countenance.

"My lord, there is a young person here who says she -

see you. I have remonstrated-"                 :

He stopped aghast. The young person had had thean

ity to follow him, and stood now upon the threshold. It)

Alice !

" That will do, Robinson; I will see this woman I G 6i

The groom of the chambers vanished, closing the doori

him, and dropping the heavy curtain of crimson cloh

effectually shut in every sound; and Alice, wan as a spirit

ered with snow, with wild eyes and ghastly face, stood

Lord Montalien in all his splendor. His face was lit

black with rage. He hated her, he loathed her, he had

den her in the most emphatic manner ever to write to

intrude upon him, and she had had the audacity to fo

way here !

"How dare you !" he said, under his breath, as he:








<pb n="293"/>
:. "A NEW WAY TO PAY OLD DEBTS."           293

'when his passion was greatest-"how dare you come

was trembling with cold. She was miserably clad and

ed, but he offered her no chair, did not bid her approach

fire.  She remained standing near the door, her face,

By corpse-like, turned upon him.

Why have you come here?" he thundered. "Speak at

why have you dared to come here? " 

have come for justice, Lord Montalien. I am your wife, 

you leave me to starve ! I am your wife, and an outcast

home and friends! Frank ! Frank !"-her voice rising

i shrill cry-" I have not seen you for six weeks-I had to

e here-I should have gone mad or died if I had not

'It is a pity you did not !" he brutally answered. "Go

and die-the sooner the better; but don't come torment-

with the sight of your miserable, white face."

eclasped both hands over her heart and staggered as

ugh he had given her a blow; her lips moved, but no sound

e- forth.

yIWhat do you mean by coming here for justice, as you call

he went on. "Justice means money, I suppose. Well

e are ten guineas-take them, and pay your bill, and be-

=   $he rallied again; after an effort or two words came from

rashen lips: 

"HI came for justice, and I must have it-I am your wife-

r lawful, wedded wife-why, then, are you trying to marry

Lisle ? "

He strode a step towards her, then stopped.

": Who has told you this? " he cried with suppressed fury.

:l Mr. Stedman. I met him to-day-he told me you were

ged to marry Paulina Lisle, and would marry her. Frank,

must not, shall not be! I'can bear a great deal, but not

I love Paulina; she shall never be ruined as I have

fen. You shall own me before the world as what I am-

rlawful wife, or I will go to her and tell her all."

There was that in her face, in her eyes, in her tone, a firm-

ss,a resolution, he had never seen there before. The crushed

- had turned; he knew she meant what she had said.

;i You will do this !" he exclaimed, hoarsely.

,;p I wear I will ! My heart is broken, my life ruined-that

past hope-you hate me, and wish to cast me off. But she

4-'  ::0 








<pb n="294"/>
294     "A  REW WI:AY TO PAYV OLDf D       S

shall be saved--my good name shall be saved. Unlei

this year ends, you promise to proclaim me As yow

will go to Paulina Lisle and tell her all."  .-. 

"Then go !' he burst forth, in his fury; "go-wend

ling, miserable fool! My wife! Why, you idiot, y

never been that for one hour, for one second. The :

married us was no clergyman, but a worthless, drun

grant, who entered, into the plot with Stedman and  4

wife! Faugh! I was mad enough, but never half mad

to do that I Now you know the truth at last-no m

wife than any street-walker in London. Go to your

Mr. Stedman, and he will indorse my words."

There was a chair near her-she grasped it to keep

falling, and in the height of his mad fury he had to shift

from the gaze of the large, horror-struck eyes.  I

"Not his, wife !" she whispered ; "not his wife !" : 1\:

"Not my wife,I swear it! I did not mean to tell yOp

I had got you quietly out of the country, but as wellei

later. And mark you-if you go near Paulina Lisle-

--kill you!"                                 - \

The last words came hissing through his set teeth. ;' 

"Not his wife," she repeated once more, in a sortof

per; "not his wife !"                    -     --

She turned blindly toward the door, groping like one ii

dark. He lifted the curtain, and opened it for her.  . -'i

" Get a cab, and go home," he said. "I will call upo

in a day or two, and see what can be done. I will pr

you, have no fear of that. Here is the money-go

quietly and wait until I come." 

She did not seem to hear or heed him. She never n

the money he offered. She went forward in the same:

way, the servant looking at her curiously, and passed fr

luxurious wealth and light of those costly rooms to the b:

drifting snow-storm without. 

"So much the better," muttered his lordship; "if she

in the storm it will save me a world of trouble. Ha H^

nine ! The devil's in it, if I cannot go to Paulina now I

The devil was in it-he was apt to be, horns and hof-

all in the same room with Francis, Lord Montaien,  13

his wraps were on, the door was flung open for the thir

and Mr. Stedman announced.                      - :

"Didn't expect to see me, old boy !" his visitor said,

gering in with easy familiarity. "Going out, too, t call








<pb n="295"/>
,   N      EW  WA Y TO PA Y OLD DEBTS."  295

Paulina, no doubt. Well, I won't detain you many

s  So let us sit down and be comfortable. What a

~crib you have here, Frank, and what a lucky fellow you

l1 Miss Earlscourt's money left to you, instead of that

nate beggar, Guy. And now the rich Miss Lisle is

to marry you, they say.. It's better to be born lucky

, but when a man's both lucky and rich, what an'en-

. mortal he is! Ah ! the world's a see-saw, and some o |

ipand some of us go down! How comfortable this coal.

;such a night-the very dickens of a night, I can tell you.

e by, who do you think I met out there just now in the

e looked cunningly at Lord Montalien, but Lord Monta

not speak. His face was set in an angry frown. 

Tat poor, little, unfortunate Alice of yours. I put her in

she didn't seem to know where she was going, and paid

er to take her home. I believe, in my soul, she would

perished before morning."

wish to Heaven she had and you with her," burst out the

d peer. "What the deuce brings you here, Stedman ?

tyou see I'm going out ? "

Now, that is inhospitable," murmured Mr. Stedman, re-

huly; "and to such a friend as I have been to you, too.

you tell me I had a claim upon your gratitude you

ever forget when I chose to call upon'you? The time

I leave England, in three days, to seek my fortune

Australia; and I have called upon you to-nighlt, Lord

qalien, for a check for three thousand pounds."

rd Montalien laughed scornfully.

Three thousand demons, perhaps !" he said.

No, my lord, one of them I find quite enough to deal with

ne. I want three thousand pounds, and I mean to have

I quit this room !"

FYou are mad or drunk-which ?"

"meither, most noble lord.  Your secret is worth the

secret ? " with a scornful stare. 

Tat Alce Warren, the bailiff's daughter, is your lawfu,

ed wife!" 

r Stedman looked 'up at him with an exultant smile ot

t Ale Waren, whom ten mitntes ago you turned

 








<pb n="296"/>
29 '6"A NEW WAY TO FAY OLD DEBTS'

from your doors to perish in the snow, is your lawfuIl

wife. as fast as the Archbishop of Canterbury's licens

clergyman of the Church of England can make her!-

your secret, my lord ! You thought I would be your ca

run my head in a noose to oblige you-do your dirty o:

take a 'thank you' for my pains. That was your mi

You are as tightly married to Alice Warren as though thd

mony had been performed under the roof of St. George's

over Square.  You can prove my words if you like,

enough-Alice Warren is Lady Montalien."

The two men looked at each other, and Lord Montalien

he spoke the truth. In the wax-light his face was deadly

"Stedman," he said, " why have you done this ? "  ;}

"To wipe out an old debt of six years' standing, my,

You know to what I refer-to Fanny Dashon. You thou

had forgotten, didn't you ?-that was your little mistake. )

debt was cleanly wiped out on the night you married th

liff's daughter. Now will you give me your check for

thousand pounds or not?" 

"And if I do not?" '?

"If not I will go straight from this room to Paulina 

and tell her the whole story. To obtain information of;

friend she will give me at least one thousand, and my rev

will be worth the other two. I think, of the two cou

really should prefer it."                     ->

Lord Montalien, without a word, opened his check-l

and wrote an order for three thousand pounds.   -i

"What surety have I," he said, "that'you will not stille

Miss Lisle when I have given you this?"        -~i

"My promise, my lord, which I will keep. Give me

check, and I swear to leave England, and keep your secre

violate to the end of my life."              - 

Without a word his lordship passed him the slip of pa

Mr. Stedman folded it up with a satisfied smile.  ^

"Thanks, my lord, and farewell  I will detain you

longer."

He took his hat and approached the door. Then he tm

round for a second, and looked at Lord Montalien sta

like a statue.

"My lord," he said, "it wasn't her fault. Don't be

hard on her when I am gone."                  -ii

"Good-night, Mr. Stedman," his lordship answered,

"I know what I owe her, and how to deal with her." jXi

^~~~~~~~                       - '  f :;  .0.-.'-X








<pb n="297"/>
" CAMILLA'S HUSBAND."               297

then he was alone. Alone ? No ! Unseen tempters,

spirits, filled the room. He threw off his overcoat, and

ud up and down. Hour after hour struck-it was long

midnight, and still he never paused in that ceaseless walk.

after hour wore by-morning dawned, white and cold, over

don-firelight and waxlight had flickered and died away.

nid with the morning, Lord Montalien knew how he meant

al with Alice.

CHAPTER VIII.

"CAMILLA'S HUSBAND."

IR VANE CHARTERIS and his family had been

back two days in the house in Berkeley Square. The

Christmas festivities at Montalien had been postponed

_   indefinitely, all through the headstrong disobedience

that wilful girl, Paulina Lisle.

I-will never go to Montalien Priory of my own will," she

;"and if you take me by force, I will run away and seek

ge with Duke Mason, an hour after we get there."

eXH- er devilish determination I never saw equalled in old or

u!ng '" Sir Vane said to the last day of his life.

And indeed there was truth in the forcible remark. She had

Pt her rooms, to the surprise of everybody, for a fortnight at

hton-having her meals sent up to her, not seeing a soul

tiher maid Jane. The weather had been dismal throughout,

^ with plenty of new books and new music, Paulina could

feel very lonely. The Brighton world began at last to ask

nmany questions about its bright favorite, that at length Sir

ie sent up his own man, with a polite request, that Miss

gslewold join them that day at dinner. Miss Lisle's promnpt

^Snwer was characteristic:

=fT4ell Sir Vane Charteris, Brownson, with my compliments,

tI have stayed a prisoner here for two weeks to please 4im

Fol shall now stay two more to please myself! "

Wixth which- the door closed emphatically in Brownson's be

lere~d face. And Miss Lisle would have been as good at








<pb n="298"/>
298             CAMiLLLZAS HUSBAND." . 

her word had not the baronet whisked his whole family

.own.

London was deserted now by their world, but Mrs. A

Paulina's friend, had a country-seat at Twickenham :;

the 22d of December was to give a grand ball, to be p^

* by private theatricals ; and to these theatricals and to t

Paulina had promised faithfully to go.           II

But Sir Vane-ruled it otherwise.             .

"If Mrs. Atcherly should happen to call," he said t

sister, "tell her Paulina is indisposed, and unable to al

If she thought she was to be taken to 'The Firs,' she'

throw herself upon the Atcherlys' protection, as soon as

and the old colonel is a very Don Quixote about women.

Mrs. Atcherly did call on the twenty-first, and was to

Mrs. Galbraith's smoothest way, poor Paulina would a

able to attend-the child had been indisposed since a fr

before they left Brighton.

Was the list of Miss Lisle's enormities never to be 

The drawing-room door opened as Mrs. Galbraith spo

the young lady herself walked in, her cheeks glowing, hW

sparkling, the very impersonation of excellent heat

spirits. 

"Not so indisposed, Mrs. Galbraith, that she cannoti

an old friend, And, dear Mrs. Atcherly, I will go to 

ham to-morrow night if I have to walk there !'" '.

"I am so glad. Remember, Mrs. Galbraith," rising.:

"we shall assuredly expect you and Miss Lisle." 

Mrs. Galbraith turned passionately to Miss Lisle the .in

her visitor had quitted the house.

Miss Lisle lifted one hand, with a haughty gestus 

stilled the rising tempest. 

"Mrs. Galbraith," she said, in a voice that rang, "e

of this! I am no child to be whipped and put to bed, us

'see fit-no poor, timid, spiritless creature, to be tyr

over by you, or your brother ! I shall go to Twickenh

morrow night as surely as to-morrow night comes."  ' -

She swept out of the room superbly. As she pase

library-the door ajar-she was suddenly checked by hi

her own name from the hated lips of Lord Montalien.  I 

"Does Paulina know yet you are going to take her to i

Firs' for the winter?" he asked.

"Not yet.' I tell you, Montalien, the determined

that girl is past belief! She is capable of anything. 








<pb n="299"/>
i   . '"CsAMILLAS HUSBAND.'               299

i her destination until we are fairly started-Eleanor

cae some story to satisfy her. Once at 'The Firs' 1

fetar. It will be all our own way then-the house is

ely and desolate as a tomb; and I will take care she

o pass the gates. You will be with her day and night

ou cannot make her consent to marry you. before spring,

hen-'

Whe shall consent, by fair means or foul. She shall only

' The Firs' as my wife." 

l erose as he spoke, and Paulina flitted away.

hter own rooms, she sank down white and cold. What

Ne plot was this they were concocting against her ? They

Sgoing to imprison her at 'The Firs' for months and

that dreary house Mrs. Galbrah ever spoke of with

dder. And Lord Montalien was to be her constant corn

, and by fair means or foul, she was only to leave it his

: Her heart grew sick within her. Her own will might

, but that of those two men was stronger. Impris-

here-friendless-how could she hope to outwit them?

will never go to 'The Firs'," she cried, clenching her lit.

s frantically; "I will die first! "

should she do? She was-for the first time in her

jife-horribly afraid. What should she do ? Tell Mrs.

y, and ask her to help protect her? Sir Vane was her

i, and what was mnore natural than that he should

oe to spend the winter with his family down at his place in

Her friends could not, dare not, help her. Should

run away and earn her own living? Alas! she had only

-o three shillings in the wide world, and a London detec-

ud find and bring her back in two days. And Sir Vane

epae of anything-he might take out a writ of lunacy

sther, and shut her up in a mad-house, as he had done

0feOh; what-what should she do? She spent a day

~ nigh t, and another day, almost maddened by doubt and

': -How she hated and abhorred these two men ! By the

e evening of the twenty-second came, she had wrought

fup to a pitch of excitement that made her ready for any.

.: Yes, anything under the canopy of heaven to escape

that threatened her. Something must be done to-

te thought, as she dressed herself for Mrs. Atcherly's

3hae had not the least idea what, but something must be

t-avert ier fate. Never, never, never! would she go

':Thie Firs."








<pb n="300"/>
300)           "CAMILLA'S HUSBANVD."          /X     X

She was ,hinking this as her maid dressed her-thi

as they drove rapidly through the cold, moonlit nightt

it as she entered Mrs. Atcherly's pleasant rooms, fil

pleasant people. She was looking beautiful in a dress o

blue moire, with diamonds sparkling in her gold hair

marble throat and arms. She was pale as marble hers

there was a feverish fire in her eyes that told of the 

within.

Sir Vane, Lord Montalien, even Maud, attended this;:

to witness the theatricals. Bills printed on white satin.

passed around. The play was "Camilla's Husband." %

milla" by Miss Atcherly, and the young artist, who is the,

of the piece, by Guy Earlscourt.

" His last appearance on any stage," laughed his brot

Sir Vane, "before he goes forth into the outer darkness

seen and heard of no more. He was always a sort of pe

those people. He has sold out, you know, and must 

England within the week, or the Jews will be down upon

and all his brilliancy, and all his beauty, will be wasted si

ness on the desert air of a debtor's prison." 

"How you do hate your brother," Sir Vane thought; '-

you do not possess even the common decency to conceal

Perhaps many of those who read this have seen the

called " Camilla's Husband."  A young lady, persecuted

tyrannical guardian, makes her escape, and asks the first

she meets to marry her. 

The first man is a strolling artist, who consents, marries

receives a purse of gold, is told he is never to see or seek

again, and she disappears. Of course it ends, as it o

end, in the artist saving her life, and eventually winmg

love and herself. 

The curtain arose and the play began. 

Miss Atcherly, beautifully dressed,. and for an am

young actress speaking loud enough to be heard by th:

three rows of auditors, at least, is received with applause. 

Mr. Earlscourt, as the lucky artist, looking wondeK'

handsome in a suit of black velvet and gold-appropriate'

tume for a penniless painter-speaks so that everybody7

hear his deep tenor tones, and comes forwaid to the.'

lights, trilling a song. Nature had given him every re

for a first-rate actor; a darkly splendid face, a tall, coint

ing form, a deep, rich voice, and perfectly natural action. i

professional actor could have played better than he; his 

( :i   l:;l

-: 4'.0'








<pb n="301"/>
" CAMILLA'S HUSBAND."             31

warmed up the others in their parts, and gave Miss A tch

courage to find her voice. Scores there remembered, for

- after, how he looked that night-the last night, as they

ght, forever of his old life. It was all over; the crash had

ae his brilliant Bohemian existence was at an end forever.

fiwry-exile-disgrace was his portion, and he stood before

n, looking handsomer than ever, and acting as though he

dnot a care in the world.

ulina Lisle sat watching the progress of the play, led away

the great trouble of her life in its interest. How well he

di she thought, how magnificently he looked! How like

milla's" fate was to her own ! Oh ! if she could but cut

Gordian knot of her difficulties by asking somebody to

y her too ! The hour that made her a wife, made her a

woman, out of the power of Sir Vane and Lord Montalien,

d her fortune her own ! She did not waiato be married-

was not a whit in love with any man alive, but if she couldi

a man who would consent to leave her, in her wedding

r, as this artist left Camilla-why then. But where was

find such a man ? There were half a dozen men in that

room who would be only too glad to end her difficulties

r her by marrying her, but not one of those selfish creatures,

e knew, would resign her forever in the hour that made her

i wife. It was only on the stage such noble-minded bride-

Iooms were to be found. No, that way there was no hope.

yet, if it had been possible, what a triumph it would be

the men she hated !

It was the last scene of the last act. "Camilla" is hope-

ssly in love with her artist, and that moment is drawing near

hen she shall fling herself into his arms and declare that

^ IHap~py am I, since you are Camilla's husband."

-1Huy was playing superbly; and when, in the last moment,

e opens his arms, and his wife falls into them, the whole house

t forth into a tumult of applause, in the midst of which

te curtain fell, and the play was over.

l';How well he acted," a voice near Paulina said, as a young

ficer of the Guards arose with a militaiy friend, "for a man

iretrievably ruined. His debts are enormous; and his cld aunt

died, and left all to that cad of an elder brother. What

pity the days of Faust and Mephistopheles are over ! Guy

tarlscourt would sell his soul to the Evil Ope, I verily believe,

*ithout -a moment's hesitation, for twenty thousand pounds I

ie :must leave England in a day or two, and forever.'

m   .-    :  X     :'  '               :      :








<pb n="302"/>
302            "CAMILLA'S ZIUSBAAD"'           X

The speaker passed on, but his light-spoken words ha

heard and heeded. In that instant, as she listened, it A

upon Paulina like a lightning gleam. Guy Earlscourtl

man-the man to marry, and save her. The man to t

her fortune and leave her forever. 

Are there not moments in our lives when the sanes

are mad for the time?  It was one of those monmeia

Paulina. She must have been mad, her brain was ha

with thinking, her danger was so great and so imme

witnessing this play had wrought her up to the last pitch 

citement. Think of this when you condemn her-are h

at her! 

She never excused herself, in after days, when the fre

this time had passed-she never looked back to this night

out turning sick at heart with shame and horror of hersef

She leaned against a slender pilaster; the room, the;

the faces swimming before her. Her eyes were fixed wit

intensity of insanity upon the face of Guy Earlscourt

rounded by all the women in the rooms, receiving their

pliments and congratulations, with his usual negligent, C

grace. All her liking, all her friendship for him, all her

vanished. He was hardly a man, only the instrument, the

iomaton, who was to save her for a certain, stipulated prii

He tuirned laughingly away at last from his admirers, and

her. How strangely, how wildly she looked! The    i

pallor of her face, the burning brightness of her eyes, wha

it mean-was she ill? He approached-the spell of t

fevered eyes drawing him to her.         S 

"What is it? " he asked. 

She caught his arm. 

'' I want you," she said, in a breathless sort of way. 

me out of this room." 

Wondering, amazed, curious, he drew her hand with

arm, and led her through several rooms to a sort of smal,

lit boudoir. He was the friend of the house, and he kad

well. A clouded light, like moonlight, filled this small l

flowers made the air heavy with perfume. He dropped 

vet curtain over the doorway, and turned to her. 

"Now?" he said. Something uncommon was com'i

knew not what.

She looked at him; the burning light in her eyes -

frightened him. Was she in the first stage of a brain fe

"You are going to leave England? " she asked abu

u areC go. to                        00.S-








<pb n="303"/>
"l    '" CAMILLS. HUSBAND."               303

three days."

here ? "

new world. I am going to seek my fortune in Awer

ou will never return to England-never, never!"

er in all probability."

Iaef what can it matter to you ! It will make your fate

orse, and it will save me. You shall have half my fortune

you hear-forty thousand pounds-if you will swear to

the ecret, and never to come back, never to come near

eer let the world know I married you."

words burst from her wildly-incoherently.

e looked at her in blank amaze. Was Miss Lisle going

ih, you don't understand," she cried. "I am like the

in that play-I am not mad, though they will drive me

in the end. I tell you they are going to make me marry

-:4 Montalien, and I hate him! I hate him! I will kill my.

light began to dawn upon Guy. By some subtle instinct

derstood her at once.

hey-meaning Sir Vane Charteris and Mrs. Galbraith, I

ose-are going to make you marry Lord Montalien ?"

"Yes. You know 'The Firs'-that desolate, abandoned

nor-house, on the Essex coast? They are going to im-

-me there until I consent. They will do with me as was

> with my mother, compel me to marry a man I abhor.

re is only one way of escape."

d that is to marry some one else."

was entering into the spirit of the thing now. Mad es-.

of all sorts had been the delight of his life. What

better than to finish his career in England by the mad-

escapade of all. He understood her as few men would

- ,done, and pitied her intensely in this hour of her despera-

'l Miss Lisle," he said, "will you marry me?"'

had spoken the words for her ! She gave a sort of gasp

r iPtense relief.

I wEll-if you consent to my conditions."

t- are they ?

l Th>at you accept half my fortune, and in the npentof ow

leave me forever."








<pb n="304"/>
304            CCAMILLA'S HUSBAND."       --

" The first is easy enough-the second-well, nct so pl

Still, to oblige a lady in distress-"'         ' 

There was a small Bible bound in gold and pearl, on t

ble. She snatched it up and held it open to him.

"Swear," she cried; "swear, by all you hold sacred

to imolest me, never to claim any right as my husband, 

:ome what may, to betray my secret, to leave me at the ch

door. Swear !"

He took the book without a second's hesitation, and cou

it with his lips. 

"I swear !" he said.

She drew a long breath of relief. The cold dew w  stan

in great drops on her white face. She sank down in a chai

hid her face in her hands, with a dry, choking sob. The ye

man stood and looked at her with a feeling of intense pity0

"Poor child !" he said very softly; "it is hard on you. 

/ now-whefi is it to be ? " 

"They mean to start for 'The Firs,' by the earliest train,

Christmas eve. Once there, all is lost."           :

'CThen we must be beforehand with them. Gad! whi

triumph it will be over Frank !"  He laughed as he spok

ruined, and exiled, Guy Earlscourt could still laugh. "Let

see. Will you be married in a church in this city, Miss Li

at day-dawn, Christmas eve?" 

"Not in a church! such a marriage in a church would s

a mockery-a sacrilege-anywhere else."

"Then, by Jove! I have it! What do you say to aI

riage before a registrar? You walk into an office, very 

like any other office, and you see an official, very much like 

other official, and a few words are said, a little signing, 

countersigning, and the thing is over. A marriage befor

registrar between the hours of eight and twelve in the foren

with open doors, in the presence of two witnesses, etc., ,

Nothing can be more simple, and you will leave the offict

legally married in the eye of the law (what you want, I take,

as though a dean and chapter had done the business. T;

will have to be a little fibbing about your age; I will arr

that. Will that suit you?"

Perfectly. My maid will accompany me, and I will go}

rectly home when the ceremony is over, and tell them 

that I am out of their power at last, If you will call atI

house, a couple of hours later, Sir Vane shall pay over t :

the sum I have promised." 

:\0.2X








<pb n="305"/>
. "CAMILLA'S HUSBAND."                305

Esmiled slightly.

~ :shall call, Miss Lisle. And now as to the hour  We

btSe -very early, in order to be beforehand with them. Say

leen eight and nine? Can you be ready so early?"

could be ready at midnight' to save myself from your

ir  At eight o'clock, I and my maid will steal from the

e, and meet you wherever you say."

Myfciab shall be in waiting at the corner. The coachman

d for the other witness. Is your maid to be trusted ? "

think so when-well paid."

And you will not change your mind-you will not fail ? "

would not have had her fail for worlds now. The ro-

e, the piquancy of the adventure, fired his imagination.

-e future, in that hour, he never thought; just at present it

da capital, practical joke.

Am I likely to fail?" she cried, bitterly. "Mr. Earls.

'it," turning to him with sudden passion, "I wonder what.

hink of me !" 

understand you !" he answered respectfully. " Desper-

ses require desperate remedies. Against two such men

ord Montalien and Sir Vane Charteris you stand no chance.

marriage with me will save you at least from a marriage

him, and you may trust me to keep my oath."

e turned from him in a tumult of contending emotion,

-ong which, drawing back had no part, and almost ran against

. Gáalbraith, entering the room in.search of her.

hat lady's angry eyes looked from one to the other. Was

a love-scene she had disturbed ?

Have you no regard for your good name, Paulina," she de-

_ded, drawing her away, "that you hold private interviews

th at most disreputable young man? I think it is time we

e going home."

lina laughed-a wild, reckless laugh.

think so too, Mrs. Galbraith. I want to go home."

rs. Galbraith gazed at her in real alarm. She looked any-

ng but sane or safe at that moment.

'" You shall go home, Paulina," she answered, soothingly.

here while I go in search of my brother."

T- hours later, Paulina Lisle was safely back in the quiet

h   own room,-standing pledged to become the wife of-Guy

lscourt on the morning of Christmas eve, by the maddest

ever woman contracted.

a~aD0.:  .0  :               .    S








<pb n="306"/>
306 ^o6        0ON CHRISTMAS 'A VAF_

CHAPTER IX-

ON CHRISTMAS. EVE.        -

YVER the fire, in her dingy lodgings, on thie

ceding Christmas eve, a bloodless, attenua

of a miserable woman crouched. It was

Alice so changed, that her own mother,

any chance entered, would have failed to recognize be

with every vestige of beauty, of youth, of health, 

uitterly miserable a woman as the dull London light f

It was snowing without, and was very cold. She h

a little shawl around her, and crouched with her 

stretched to the blaze. The few articles of summer:

she had brought from home, in September last, we

had yet.

September last ! only four short months ! Heaven1   B

'ifetime ! what an eternity of misery it looked to her i 

How she had reached home that night, after she

James Street, she never knew. Some one put her::

and when, after a day and a night of stupid, painless t

awoke to consciousness, she found herself again il

poor room, and the landlady's face looking half-coi/

ately, half-impatiently at her.          :

"It was my luck to have my lodgers always a-falliig

my hands, and a-dying with their bills ulnpaid, like tH

-upstairs; and it does make a person hard, I confei

Young afterward owned, with remorse.  .     .

And -then memory and consciousness slowly came

she recollected all. She was not Frank's wife-she

lost creature they thought her at home, and Frank wa

tr arry Paulina. No; he should never do that. . :he

fet anger. or sorrow, or even pain now; beyonad

oint suffering ceases to be suffering, and becomes if'

[esthetic. She had reached that point-she was past

eare, past help. She would find out Paulina, tell er

save her from a like fate, and- die.        :

Some such thoughts were in her mind as she cr

ering over the fire. The wintry twilight was fast filling

with its creeping darkness, when the door sudde








<pb n="307"/>
|  -r :  ON CHRISTMAS EVE.        307

I t a word of warning, Lord Montalien stood before

nad ever thought to see him again in this world. She

with a low, strange cry.

lice, Frank! Frank come to beg your pardon for

houghtless words he spoke the other night. Frank

b to tell you he loves you, and to ask you to forgive

the said."

re is no need. I am not your wife," she answered, in

d11 way. "I had rather you had not come. I only

^ see Paalina, and die in peace."

want to see Paulina? And why?"

tll her all-to save her from you, Frank! Poor

A- She used to be so bright, so happy, you know, always

and singing; it would be a pity to break. her heart.

broken; but then it doesn't so much matter about me."

he same slow, dull voice-the same mournful apathy;

X  ed on the fire, her hands outstretched.

nt live long, Frank, to trouble anybody; but I shall

h g enough to tell Paulina. She will be sorry for me, I

she used to be fond of Alice. They used to call us the

p  ttiest girls in Speckhaven-only think of that, Frank !

nk if they could see me now "

lghed-a low, faint laugh, that might have curdled her

blood. He bent down and looked at her closely-

set and stern, though his voice, when he spoke, was

into gentleness. Had her trouble turned her brain ?

wi:l tell her I am not your wife, and she will go down

andtell father and mother when I am dead, and perhaps

-yill try and forgive me. I've not been a very bad

'am inot afraid to die. It will be such rest-such rest!"

drew a long, tired sigh, andleaned her head on her

-:Then suddenly she looked up in his face.

!y "  :she said, in a voice of indescribable pathos,

tdid you treat me so ? I loved you, and I trusted you,

t oght I was your wife ! "

tight have moved a heart of stone; he had no heart,

i- stone, to be moved.

You foolish child," he said, with a slight laugh, "you are

my only wife, as truly as ever you thought it. I)o

ay believe the angry words I said to you the other

'-ily Alice i I was angry, I own-I did not want you

r   f 0








<pb n="308"/>
308             ON CHRISTMAS EVE.         :

to come to my lodgings, and I spoke to you in mri

had no right to speak. You are my wife, and I ~t

t ake you to Miss Lisle, if you wish it."

She rose up, her breath coming in quick, short gt

"Frank ! you will! Oh! for Heaven's sake, do

ne now ! I couldn't bear it ! "

"I am not deceiving you-I am telling you the t

are my wife, and you shall leave this miserable hoi

once. Early to-morrow morning I will come for 

will take you first to Paulina, and from her straight

Montalien. Your Christmas shall be a happy one ye

She took a step forward, staggered into his ai0ms'

< there, so still, so cold, that he thought her fainting. H

too from her clasp with a shudder, and placed here

back in her chair.

"Compose yourself, Alice !" he said, looking ai

her. " Can you be ready as early as eight o'clock, or

fore it, to-morrow morning ?" 

"Whenever you come for me, Frank, I can be read

bless God ! bless God! and I never thought to see y

mny darling."

She believed him implicitly. Weakly credulous, y

Ah, well, wiser and stronger-minded women thanti

country-girl are apt to be that, where they love. >

neither wise nor strong in body or mind-he was. -

earthly hope of salvation. When the dark, bitter wa

closing fast over our heads are we greatly to be bla

do grasp' at straws ?

"And now, Alice, as I am pressed for time," he sar

ing out his watch, " I will leave you. Here is some ni

pay your bill-tell the landlady you are going home:

country with your husband, and be quite ready be

to-morrow morning, when I shall call for you." 

He left her hurriedly with the words. And Alice alo 

down and bowed her face upon her hands, and thanke

who may know how fervently, how gratefully. for her.

liverance? She prayed for him, too-for him that

might bless and make him happy, and render her as

wife as he deserved. Innocent prayers, that might, 

and blight his guilty soul.

And morning dawned-the morning of Christ

Thousands of happy people awoke in the great cit

each other "Merry Christmas," but I doubt if amo








<pb n="309"/>
'.   0   ON CHRISTMAS EVE.                3

-wa.s one happier than this poor creature, An her bleak

g waiting for the coming of her idol. She paid the land.

repeated her ready-made story, dressed herself in the

ydawn, and stood by the window watching. It was snow-

t--the wind blew cold and shrill, and her garments were

redly thin.  The landlady pityingly made some such

k to her. But Alice only laughed.

Shall feel no cold, Mrs. Young; and I shall soon be be.

feeling cold, or ill, or lonely, any more."

e had uttered a prophecy-poor Alice. As the hopeful

passed her lips a one-horse vehicle drove up to the door,

B ?he saw Frank, muffled beyond any recognition but her

fitting therein.

iegavTe a little cry of delight.

&od-by, Mrs. Young," she said; "and thank you for

(kindness when I was ill."

ran down stairs and out of the house. The man leaned

.rd and helped her up beside him. And then the whirling

iness of snow shut them from Mrs. Young's sight.

did not speak one word. The wind and the snow were

g in their faces, rendering speech impossible.  The

ing light was still dull and pale-the city clocks were only

Weight as they quitted the Strand. He drove across one

e bridges, and out to some dismal waste ground in the

rhood of Battersea, a remote and forgotten tract, as

d lonely, and forsaken as an African desert. And here

e first time he spoke:

ere is something the matter with the horse," he said;

must get out."

Sprang out himself and gave her his hand to descend.

* were close upon some deserted brick-fields, and he

-a motion for her to follow him.

me out of the storm," he said; "there is a place of

;'near"

- eened strangely familiar with the desolate locality. He

4to a sort of dry ravine, so hidden away among rubbish

debris of the forsaken brick-yards as to render entering

n impossibility. She shrunk away in almost nameless

aank!" she cried, in a frightened voice. "I can't go

is.hideous place. Oh, my God, Frank! what are you

tckejyour lie /-you fool-you babbler ! ' he answered








<pb n="310"/>
'"A    i. -ON CHRISTMAS Er.A. - r

flieMibl-vaoie between-his cletched-

d utter one word, one cry, there caMi:.

;  Mlice fell like a stone at his feet. 

e was a pause of a second. Had d

-d^IoUS ? No; by a mighty effort she half

i'.'ped her arms around his knees.

: "' Frank I" she whispered, " Frank I" and

devotion'looked out of her glazing eyes. 

'.llEd me-and I loved you so-I-loo

Jd, *have mercy on me-and forgive-.-" '

~%.e. fell down with the sentence nnin

.H;ie knew she was dead. He dragged I t1

ibe darkest depth of the cavern, piled up the 

4!waste bricks again. Thousands of people

tract and never notice this frightful plae

'   d then he was out again in the light ofda

it whirling around him, and his horse

rddue'iactly as he had left him.

'18e. glanced around. No living soul, fait o

?--i-'. He' looked at his watch-a quarter .

"     'dfast at ten at the house of Sir Van:

r    to accompany the family to aEse,: 

o spare, for all that.

~,--   klaped in and drove away-drove 

i- of city life began to surge around him

his speed, and at half-past nh^i

8ipss in his own luxurious, firelit rooms, 

-te' felt neither sorrow, nor remorse, nor 

.b    .al etacle in his way, and he had  i

;ias     merwost improbable that the boi

aid, the deed ever traced to

now to woo and win,  his oiW

_-h.ad set bis heart. Ther   ii

eeling in his mind as be 

-.     B    ,. me d.Weaw.          '    . ati~ =a

s.o       ; h wad.BO, agh-spirited Pa' 

MU^Amjp <ttG moced whih me, and s shall

-jlit  t      As d   d -b By.  1       -iweda 

6          -.          .-'^                    ^








<pb n="311"/>
.... os; GA,  _f     WAS BEAOR'o,   31,!

CHAPTER X.

IAD MARRIAGE NEVER WAS BWf     L"

_     *    -d 'nehsamber-window, very early in the mornbn of

_   _     o[^^* M'e stormy Christmas eve, looking out at d1

fast-falling snow, stood Paulina. Through

_  t*    lty, chill light her face shone marble-white, mar-

_.lips .were set in that hard line of iron resolution

i   r' at times, and her sombre blue eyes looked

.hj^er at the storm-drifts. The hour had come

L~-aewS the crowning recklessness of her iipulsve

-   defiant spirit that had long ago made her pas

_ ia the Haunted Grange, and go to the picnic in

.iniurred her forward still  During the day and the

-,+~  gone, she had not once thought of hesitating,

^k       To falter irresolutely n any course, whether

,was not like Paulina. Come weal, come woe:

i~:traight on now to the end.

>;king this as she stood there, her heart full of bit.

-diger against the two men who had driven her to

:re step.

-I~th had brought her home from Twickenhan, fill

;:   apprehension. What did that intteview in the

- -Guy mean i With any other man it would _ have

_vpos-   of marriage, but marriae   *    a rined

_,wi~ e  not to be connected together. During the

{-ti ihat had followed Paulina hadbeen ceaselessly

was no knowing what such a girl might do.

bad laughed sornfullat the surveillance.

~       ;~Iire you afraid of, Mrs. Galbraith?" she asked;

t/ away to America, or the antipodes, with Guy

_^.    {:_iHe hasn't asked me, though I should decidedly

'izft of life I have been leading lately" 

~_i^^ N   ~evening of the night preceding this snoy mor '

-s:poken to her maid for the first time. The girm

_^^   |Ircas .a well-trained English domestic, otheiwase a

only hearing to obey. This girl, however,

.lbe attached to her young mistress. With the

_ti~t .lNature'had given her, Paulina had been lavish

_v;=^^pacious, words, and the girl's heart was won. .








<pb n="312"/>
ji "s    CCr A MARJIAGBC NEVR WS

w      'ae," Miss Lisle said, "I want you to 

:ad more, I want you to promise, ox:

t to any human creature until I give 

J    ftightened-I am not going to ask you 

ay- to keep a secret. Are you willing to s

Jane's curiosity was roused, but still she h-

.- "'Of course, I don't ask you to do me 

:',fig" Miss Lisle went on. "What is done

'orld, I wonder ? You are engaged to a'

think you told me, and only waitingto s

."riiied. Do what I want to-day, and to-

three hundred pounds."              .: -

;.. All Jane's scruples gave way at this MD 

;S 6ity and cupidity combined were too much 

# oath her mistress dictated, and then.a

lM  to come.

|gJ  I am. going to be married to-morrow mo

i^fl went on. "A runaway match, 

_come with me and be one of the wi

~ect, though, you are bound by-oath n

a; living soul, unless some day, which isi

qtd release you fr romise."

Jie  pledged herself to obey-she was i,

^lBl~g ~woman, quite capable of keeping a se

--lath. And then Paulina had dismissed 

d as she was, to sleep. 

O Condemned criminals sleep on the night

Paulina slept now deeply, dreamless

: ,j shut out thought from the firsts-hei

Athe last hour she might falter and 

-'-3   fnative between this step and be

_-  e ishe kept repeating to

:ndw she drew forth her 

- .   qP? - teiof eight. At this veir

ifaoto- e tyr, Alice stood waiting for 

nterd the room, on the instant, wit

hiderselftqit the house.     '-

:a .There's nobody up yet, Miss PaIiub,

ow is the time, if you want 'o get ak

"; pardon, miss; but won't you change -

iadfigl bad luck to be married in b

laighed bitterly. "If If I  








<pb n="313"/>
A MAJRRIAGE NEVER WAS BEFORE" 313

_     d^l~ ^ ~be the fittest attire for my wedding. Put them

once."

R   o^ - g^^9n a dress of soft, noiseless black silk-the plainest

_i~Fo~ bbe The lady's-maid threw over her shoulders

^^^VHeHt mantle, with wide, flowing sleeves, placed on

a black hat, with a long black ostrich plume, and

^ -1~    a thick veil of black lace.

I finished her work, and regarded this sombre bride

a shudder.

^^:p^    poor servant," she thought, "and I wouldn't be

_l^^H   *at .suit for all Miss Lisle's great fortune."

^       Laminutes of eight," Paulina said; "now, then, Jane,

B.ked out of the room, down the stairs, along the front

naoiselessly opened the house door. The drifti

_|bitter wind blew in her face, and seemed beatingher

-~  a moment she did pause, turning sick and faint

,-ven i what was this she was about to do? Then

ima-ge of Lord Montalien rose before her-a vision

_-   yold house, down on the dreary Essex coast-and

JNotation was over. She never paused or stopped to

-the cab at the corer of the street," Jane said:

-   eld cab, and see, there is a gentleman waiting."

-in furred cap and overcoat pacing to and fro to

warm. He espied them the instant they appeared,

-'idly forward.

I_ 1:" he said.  "It is eight precisely, MissLisle; 

.  well'wrapped, the morning is bitter. Take my

iralng is dangerous.'

- s . with a gesture-linging to Jane.

iMr. Earlscourt; we will follow you."

_  *   te ~way to the cab, and held the door open for them

_ he  be closed it, and sprang up beside the driver,

with aciar.

_  l away m a corer of the cab, her veil held

_; W'~. r farce, her heart lying cold and leaden in her

_   quiet face betrayed none of her wonder at this

_        i   __m~e ~runaway mnatch, where the bride declined

's arm, and the bridegroom mounted up,

cabby in the snowstorm.

_^^fmj^7     rapidly along, city-ward, through interminable

eachd the rear of Temple Bar. Once

_    L~~~~~~








<pb n="314"/>
SUCNA MARRIAAGR       NAPtERA W"-S

looked at her watch; a quaterJ

still flying along at a tremendous pacoi

part of London was as utterly strange

c'rsisars' offices so few and far betw

y, that Mr. Earlscourt need come all

stopped abruptly at last, the cab

stood ready to help them out.

Tis is the place," he said, briefly; " aSoW

- He half lifted Paulina down, drew her

i;t  lea hb r up a flight of dark stairs, and'

. office, where a fire burned in a round

I,  t boy was sweeping.

. -:"Where is Mr. Markham?" Guy asked the i

mBeen called away sudden, sir. Left wr

-  maried, he would be back in ten 

ri  a seat and wait."

9Lm-,-e placed seats before the stove, staring

d in black and closely veiled. 

easee d  if I ever see such a bride," h

a funeral, I should say."

'       i..scourt placed Miss Lisle in a

to   f the stove.

M dlay is too bad," he said. " I

sa d he promised to be punchtua

-from the cold, Miss Lisle?  '-

was shivering even as he spoke, bt 

.dshrank from the sound of his voie,

b.    a "l" it[ a feeling of intolerable 'Am.

-     r - her-A 'woman who had asked hita

iS       " Iprofoua id silence fell upon  m  i

*a& to stare; the ca

P'cand    h ner-o i rc

jDg ' qtwt * *$9Ètof m    O.    . ' .      _

proi - ta  d

-3pfo~dt s- feoS         Ae edta_      ^    ^    ^    ^

AHB    ,--i^Ç A  7  __.^J|' È ^-t^'A A'S^^^^^^^^^^^

_^^I^-^ . *- JK  MUB       l *t      I jfn^^Z^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A      -^pS~T  '-. 'W .^Búu  -^ifc     :_ *'^^^^^^^^^^








<pb n="315"/>
-A MX#RR IzAGE vEVER WAS BEFORe." 315

it is almost nine. My lad, here's a crown foi

fetch him."

The door opened on the instant, and a livey

man came in.

waiting, sir?  Ah I" as Guy answered .impa

_^^a'rey sorry, but unavoidably detained. Now, then4

stapd up, and the witnesses approach, we'll de

fir you in a twinkling."

_,8    mBt.was throbbing with almost sickening rapidity now

so that she turned sick and faint once more. She

her for a second with a wild instinct of flight, but

Guy had led her forward-how firn, how res.

-'a n seemed 1-and she was standing before the legal

oi.ering, as she was told to answer, and hearing

;,'deep tones as in a dreamy swoon. She heard,

á, and far off, it seemed, the solemn words, "I pro-

man and wife," and then she was signing her

big book, and feeling rather than seeing the little

?!nan staring at her curiously, and knew that she was

Giuy Earlscourt I

!:ar placed a slip of paper in her hand.

-  trirage certificate, madame," he said, with a bow;

-- to offer my congratulations, Mrs. Earlscourt."

aj-s a chair near-she grasped it to keep from falling.

'the faces swam dizzily before her for a second, then

.i srt she mastered the deathly feeling, and stood

-Gi'was watching her; she shrank guiltily from his

;wa     very grave, but as perfectly cool and collected

_--.r  seen him in his most careless hours.

A_ -sopf the district were striking nine as they left the

_ber^    *tered tthe cab; and once again Guy mounted to

^      - _ | th1 e driver, to face the December blasts, amd

consoling cigar. As before, Paulina sat is

TdzingS the homeward drive.

_^^H     1tea' "rapid driving brought them to Berkele

i::1      / hCont of Sir Vane Charteris' mansion the cd

_g [:l^?Mxr. EarlsCourt assisted them to alight  Theb

addressed him for the first time.

Sir Vane Charteris, the moment I enter, wht

_ ^Hl^" eshe hurriedly said: "and if you will call,

a so, the other business of paying over the

^p d aswill be transacte&"

_ey anwered, briefly, "if I may see you fol

_-           A(e








<pb n="317"/>
'F    '   -A MARRIAGE NEVER WAS BEFORE." 317

in the hour that makes me his wife. Do you

I am going to let the world know my secret?

_ llt¤n ~I would have married Mr. Earlscoutt if he had

_ v   iL/msli in England?  He has sworn never to betray

_~     it ~our marriage, and he will keep his oath. In an

A^^^    i:be here, and you are to make over to him the half

F o   r~    orty thousand pounds. In two days he leaves

_l            -forever."

to quit the room-the bewildered baronet de.

n's sake, Paulina, wait I I don't understand-

_d.erstand.  Do; you mean to say this marriage

,,;age?    That Guy Earlscourt leaves you free

- s.?  That he goes from    England never-to re-

.you remain here ?"

y I You can't comprehend such generosity as that,

' YIo would act very differently under the circum-

;-    so would his immaculate brother, Lord Montalien.

/are true men. This marriage shall never be made

i-  keep the secret-my maid is sworn to secrecy, and

--   be Miss Lisle and your ward in the eyes of the

"H-  owever, you prefer it otherwise-then I shall take

H '-- you as you are to society-a guardian so base, so

--:fiat he drove his ward to the maddest step ever

Now choose 1";

-U   before him in her beauty and her pride, more

-ii^ht than he had ever seen her. He knew herwell

l-  ow she would, to the letter, keep her word. He

d isuddenly, and took her hand. "

-.seep your secret, Paulina," he said; "and I beg

me if I have been harsh. I have been driven to

^ ^     ;lnd!eed--I am in Lord Montalien's power, and he

_g;  d.* this. I will keep your secret-from him, from my.

_     s| th~e world. Let things go on as though this strange

never taken place; you are free to do in -all

_ii0E HwDI-I, in the eyes of society, your guardian still

_2?pa^fthe past; I can say no more. Paijina, will you

_ g    _~J~.fshe answered, bitterly, and gathering her nm le

the room.

;S^^1     4p ~to her own, threw off her wraps, feli on her

si, and b-ried her face in the satin coverlet

/     ~   ..*.Jimrs . though her heart was full; she only lay








<pb n="318"/>
^8.   C"SUCH A MARRIAGE NEVER WAS 

^.   ae tired, numbed, as though she n

N-o one disturbed her; the minutes went i

.   its life and bustle wore on. 'At half

ped at the door.

. w if you please, Miss Paulina, Sir Vane

-tB, and would you step down to the li

..oart is there."

[;- She-rose up slowly, painfully, and vent 

~bhim  she should go, but if he had only spared I

-- ir Vane admitted her, and locked the 

¦,tered. Another figure, taller, slighter,

are mantel staring moodily into the fire  At

dare to look.

.- "You told me, my dear," the baronet said in

'"'":    that Mr. Earlscourt was to accept ha

gere*-m tst be sdme mistake-he utterly refus

^Sh-e turned to him with startled eyes. Guy

W    l'That part of the compact was not in the 

È._e s  served you I am content. I can.

*   never come when you will regret or

- t   this morning's work. For the money,

I hae fallen very low; but Ifindth

-|'tban that to which I have sunk. To

-~ oner would be a degradation you must 

I leave England in two days forei

~   bitty; but if, at the other side of the'

-~   When my wrecked fortunes are

:ith honor, I wir return. That, toe

- at hm- -trembling-white to he-

s'rturn,/ she slowly repeated.  -

'-'-w  crsdit to myself-with my 

_ . i.-..edsyave nofiar; I 

owhfat may in the future, shall I

.       .-d'e  4ivite us, or we stand side 

i-  no difr ene.  If I have saved you f

,Ff satisfied-I aik no more. And now,-

ofotd times, say 'farewell, and good

/-    held out his hand, the smile that !/1t

oight on his face and in his eyes. -*'

-    er, nobler than any man she  i

renunciaion-his great 

A ::                            ., .. g~~~~~








<pb n="319"/>
IA. MARRIAGE NEVER WAS BEFOREB.       3I9

Bhimn-and in that moment she knew. that she loved

marnie&

him her hand-her proud head drooping in an

ne, of remorse, of pity, of tenderness. If her life

on it, she could not have spoken even the " good

asked. Her fingers, icy-cold, were clasped for a

wairm, firm grasp-one half-sad, half-siniling look

wn eyes, and then she had fled from the room.

parted-perhaps forever, and in the hour that she

she knew that she loved him with a love that would

She was his wife, but she would have died a thou.

rather than say, " Guy, don't go I" and she knew

y unavailing the words would have been, if she could

ed down her woman's pride and spoken them. It

d as fate that he should go. And so she had taken

in. the dark-taken it blindly-desperately, fo save

a worse fate. And the hour of her bridehood was

:of her widowhood-in the fullest sense of the words,

edded, Yet No Wife 

after the "Oneida" steamed down the Solent from 

bearing away to his long exile Guy Eardoot.

2.'

' ., .

.;








<pb n="320"/>
S        - PART FOURTH. 

gar.:.-I~~'  *                        '-,^i^^^^

_- -;-          CHAPTER L

B"*y                AFTER SIX YEARS.

-: was a hot night in Virgina. 

Up and down a long, bare-looking o

Tpaced restlessly, his hands crossed 

*-  ?-_-.-lbrow bent, his eyes fixed on the floor. á 

I-.'piv~ae  apartment of the officer commaading

~     -' stationed for the time at this outpost, a

-  .Colonel Hawksley, of the -th. -He was a"

:__an, this Colonel Hawksley, with a face- d

-  -.isat not a11 the bronze of foreign sumr

~--,   ity. He had dark, close-cropped, 

atW-.ny beard and mustache, and 

gmiP ni  sky without.  He was a 

_._       _ y_1  proportioned-a model 'i

_ng.- .  er than his years,

'^bifrown h          hair and the deep '  it

b it poiighed aloag his broad brow. ':

an.d don, up and down, Colonel Hawka

_fou.tful frown, for upward of an hour. 

ast~      is  he e muttered, half aloud; "

-  -I~   why is he here ?-if nothing, how- i

e.; The       hfmnight is fine; he s sfcinto ji

i'ver.: I have half a mind to send for in

.andak -"        .

-C::--








<pb n="321"/>
AFTER SIX YEARS.                   321

^^^^dpd to glance out at the night. The great, bright

_  *^ ^   s.s blazed in a cloudless sky, not a breath of air

R^^^*iBiot stillness-it was certainly quite fine enough for

9:q^ venture out. The colonel rang a hand-bll, with a

ision. An orderly appeared.

I_     -  ¡.the hospital, and request Lieutenant Earlscourt, if

to wait upon me here."

klldi~er touched his cap and withdrew.

_oHlonel glanced at a little package lying upon the table..

gold repeater, set with jewels, and hanging from the

_tp~  fld chain a locket of rare beauty and wuikmanship.

took up this locket, touched the spring, and looked

Ad earnestly at the face within. A beautiful and noble

>-a graceful, girlish throat-the photograph of Paulina

--.. is he to her ?-how comes he to wear her portrait?

-,. know ?--but of course he doesn't I It is strange-

'- somewhat. The circumstances were these: A battle

-Ken place five weeks before; and during the heat of the

iaent, Colonel Hawksley's attention had been attracted

in~mg officer of his own troop, whose cool courage and

"'-:- ting rendered him conspicuous even in that hour.

ttle had raged from early morning until dark, and. all

-!-', where the fire was hottest, and the blows fell thickest,

'-i  face and tall form of Lieutenant Guy Earlscourt had

iaenaost. And at last, as victory turned in their favor,

'.dezen tremendous blows aiumed at him at once had

him from his saddle. "Killed," the colonel thought,

passing pang of regret, beyond a doubt.

_  k>.ed like it when they carried his senseless form into

_  i   tal,-and among the list of "killed" returned after the

the name of "Lieutenant Guy Earlscourt."  But-he

died. Covered with wounds from head to foot, there

as it turned out, Qne of them mortal, not even very

D      -eweeks Lieutenant Earlscourt was able to quit his

_l-ak about, for a few moments at a time, in the bos

_       .4A~ y succeeding the battle, while he still lay senseless,

visied the hospital expressly to make inquiries

Y       ~.-.~'e. young man had fought so daringly, his cool

_e   o .remarkable, and sooething in,-  general

_ .  . -   :            he    .7-:








<pb n="322"/>
322              AFTER SIX YEARS.

air and manner marked him different from his comrades. He

lay terribly like death now, but the rare beauty of his face, that

had made him the pet of boudoirs in another land, that had

made scores of high-born beauties smile upon him, was un.

marred still. Whiter, colder than marble, he lay-the breath

scarce stirring his bloodless lips.

"Poor lad!" Colonel Hawksley said, looking down upon

him with real regret; "he fought like a lion yesterday. Who

is he, and where does he belong ?"

No one knew. Except his name, and that he had entered

the ranks as a private, there was simply nothing whatever

known of his story.

" Look here, colonel," the nurse said; " this belongs to him,

and should be taken care of until we see if the poor fellow re-

covers. His name is on it-engraved here on the case."

She handed him the gold watch and chain and locket

Either intentionally or by accident, she touched the spring in

handling it, and the locket flew open. And Colonel Hawksley,

with a startled exclamation, caught it up, and looked in amaze

upon his daughter's fair, proud face.

It was a vignette of Paulina Lisle beyond a doubt. He wore

one near his own heart, a later picture, in which the exquisite

face looked older, graver, less brightly smiling than in this--

but the same.

This stranger was an Englishman, then, and had known

Paulina.

He examined the watch closely. Beside his name it bore

the crest of a noble house-a mailed hand, and the motto,

"Semper Fidelis."

Colonel Hawksley's interest deepened to intense curiosity-

who was this young man who had entered the ranks of their

army as a common soldier, and who wore his daughter's picture

and the crest of an English nobleman?

" He looks like an Englishman, in spite of his olive skin and

jet-black hair and mustache. Heaven send him a speedy re-

covery, or I shall perish miserably of curiosity."

The colonel's prayer was heard-Lieutenant Earlscourt's

recovery was astonishing in its rapidity, considering his dozen

wounds. And on this night suspense was to be borne no

longer, and Colonel Hawksley had dispatched the orderly to

summon the invalid hero to his presence.

Fifteen minutes wore away. Then the orderly's knock came

to the door.








<pb n="323"/>
APT-R SIX YEARS.                 323

i," the colonel cried, flinging himself for the firs

mhair; and the door opened, and Lieutenant Earls

before him, with a nailitary salute.

for me, colonel ?"

sir. Come in and take a seat; you are unfit to

trust there has been no imprudence in your ventur.

night air "

|whatever, colonel, I am happy to say. My scratches

well healed-I shall 'be fit for service againin a

mel smiled-he liked the bold, soldierly spirit-he

look and manner of the man altogether.

y, I fear," he said, and indeed the lieutenant, with

a sling, and his dark face still terribly thin and blood-

'hardly look like it.

e been very anxious for your recovery, lieutenant-

idu't spare so brave a fellow, for one reason-that I

anxiously to ask you a few questions for another."

nded lieutenant listened in grave silence. He iad

ySat at the desire of his oficer, and the lamplight fel

his handsome, pallid face, while that of the elder man

te shadow. What does it matter now whether they

M     ue or the gray; they were both Englishmen, and

* t.. te cause with which their sympathies lay.

e a portion of your property in my possession ' con-

l0on.el Hawksley, "given in charge to me on tih day

battle. Permit me to return it to you, and to own

te. merest chance, I saw and recognized the face you

that iocet."

~ari.cou:t took his property. To be very much sur-

~ ~eanything would have been in direct opposition to al

f -his life.  His face betrayed none whatever now.

nized -it, did you? I shouldn't have thought that.

~M: .i. e face, colonel-is it not?"

Hawksley produced from an inner pocket a photo.

handed it to him.

this from England some three months ago. The

'_wear is younger, but the same."

Ziiascourt looked long and earnestly at this second pi

i aR. t he felt his calm face showing no siw n whatver.

six years older than when he had seen her lat,

in her stately womanhood even tba the bright'

.B       h bsm Baabrad lb dWL








<pb n="324"/>
S34-         ATERA StAx YARS.. 

He handd it back with a bow and smile.

"Years mar some of us; they but add to P_

crown of beauty. It's six years since I saw her, 

changed; but I should recognize that face an

not the kind of face one sees every day." 

His colonel watched him as he spoke-keenl

but his serene countenance kept his secrets, if he 

well.

"Mr. Earlscourt," he said, abruptly, " I am going 

seemingly a very impertinent question, which, 'of 

are at liberty to answer or not, as you choose. 

lina Lise to you?"

Guy smiled-perfectly unembarrassed.

"An acquaintance, colonel, whom I met in all a

dozen times in my life, who doesn't in the least n

have the audacity to wear her picture. I was guilty 

larcen--abstracted it from a friend's album on the e

departure from England. I admired Miss Lisle very

al men must who have the happiness of knowing a

fancied I could not bring with me to my exile a faire

-* the life I left. That is the histor of her 

locket."

With the infinite calm which nature apd habit

given him, he replaced the watch in his beltand 

for his companion to speak. 

: And this is all ?" Colonel Hawksley said. " I

might have been--"

A discarded lover? No, colonel, I never was

Lisle. with her great beauty, and her great fortunej-

gether above my humble reach-  One might s

some bright particular star, etc."

"Above your reach, and you wear the crebt i:

house "

"A whim, perhaps, like wearing Miss Lisle's

"'You are an REaglishman, at least."   -

Undoubtedly, colonel."

"May. I ask how many years since you first

country ? "

"Six years, precisely, next January." 

"I am afraid thy questions are intrusiv

-baps; but I am an Englishman myself and,

a singular interest in yop. You remind me-o

manner-of one whom I knew twenty-two   '*"

'-I ....-








<pb n="325"/>
* AFTER SIX YEARS.               3J

him-he was a man of rank-Lord Monta,

at looked at the speaker, suddenly, with a new

new intelligence in his glance; At the mention of

mamne all became clear. Why, the very name of

t have told him, taken in conhection with t 'I

of Paulinds pictite, this man was her father I

Tknew Lord Montalien?" Colonel Hawksley said

Iward. "Your face shows it, at least. You are 1ik*

ik.e. Was he anything to you?" 

_yesj he was my father."

father ? "

i-colonel. You were not aware, perhaps, our fimnil

lscourt ? My elder brother took the title upon our

and I-well, I may as well own it-I squandered

m-y and was obliged to fly from England six years

head and ears in debt. That is my story. I came

try to retrieve my fallen fortunes, as poor a man as

at the New York docks."

H  awksley listened, his eyes lit up, his face full of

d eager interest.

have you retrieved them ? "

'fpartly. I have managed in those six years to pa),

terhalf of my debts. I fancy it will be half a dozen

however, before I have sufficiently cleared off myI

to return." 

mean to return ? "

dly-as soon as I can"                         ,

I ask i what way you have succeeded in doing even

laghed.                                            e

qldriving, colonel. I was always a Bohemian-the

B ne, and I turned journalist, magazine writer, book'

that there is of the most literary. I believe I ham

to half the periodicals of America and Londoni

ly, by chance, have lit on the nom decplume of--'

etioued a name famous then, far more famous aow; ti

of fictional literature.                    --

I" Hawksley exclaimed; "are you the authot u;

d's     t" '   '               -  -' ff"

GiCW and Glidtert' 

ou1    d lohave realized a fortune from the Wale of








<pb n="326"/>
326              AFTER SIX YEARS.

those two works alone. Their popularity over here has been

something immense."

"They have paid tolerably well -if they had not I should

not have been able, as I have told you, to pay off the larger

portion of my debts. My extravagances in the past make my

very hair rise now. I'm a reformed character, colonel; there

was great room for improvement, too, I assure you. I pursued

my scribbling here in camp; it passes one's leisure hours, and

as far as remuneration goes, I find the pen decidedly 'mightier

than the sword.'"

"Mr. Earlscourt," the colonel said, "you are one of the

cleverest novelists of the day." Mr. Earlscourt bowed with

gravity. " You are destined to become a famous man, and I

am proud to have made your acquaintance. It was as your

father's ward, then, you first met my-Miss Lisle ?"

"Your daughter, colonel-the confidence may as well be

mutual. Of course, I know you are Robert Lisle."

" Ah, yes; I suppose my history is familiar to you from your

father."

" And from others. Were you not rather surprised, colonel,

when you discovered upon whom my father pitched as his

successor in your daughter's guardianship?  Now I should

imagine Sir Vane Charteris would be the last man alive you

would wish to place in power over Paulina."

A dark flush crept up over the pale bronze of the colonel's

face.

"And why ?" he asked.

"Shall I really answer that question, colonel? You see I

have had time to think since I came out here, and I have

managed to connect past events pretty clearly. I remember

my father telling your story at the dinner-table, and Lady

Charteris-poor Lady Charteris falling in a dead faint at the

mention of your name. I look back, and remember hearing

she was forced to marry Sir Vane. I know they were totally

estranged from each other, that the shadow of a life-long

sorrow lay upon her, and I knew she was your wife and

Paulina's mother."

Colonel Hawksley bowed his face on his hand. Even in the

shadow Guy could see how greatly he was moved.

"Why do you remain here ?" he asked. "Why have you

not long ago gone back and rescued her from a fate worse

than death. You mere her husband, not he; you had the

right. Why not have returned and claimed her long ago ?"








<pb n="327"/>
AF TER Siz YEARS.             . 327

knows! There have been times, of late years

thought myself the veriest coward and idiot to be

as was, to desert her to her tyrants. But I lay

charge which I could not disprove-and she

and I was made to believe loved him. And

have followed exposure, and-" --

r exposure than such misery as she has been made to

lonel Hawksley, do you know she is the inmate of

now ? "

the word dropped slowly, heavily from his pale lips,

aughter told you. I wonder you did not return to

when you first learned that Sir Vane Charteris had

her guardian." _

not know it for many months after. She wrote me

m-elling me of the change, and that she was satis.

I was in no way to trouble myself about her. Then

began, and I came here, and I shall remain until the

y should I return now-England holds nothing but

o  for me."

you no wish to see your daughter ?"

rwish. When she is some good man's wife I shall

to come across the ocean to visit me."

you no wish to clear the blot off your good name-

re the false charge brought against you by Geoarey

would be impossible after all those years."

t see that," Guy said, coolly; " mYwe diffiult thi

every day. London detectives are clever, and you

enough to pay them well for their work. Geoffrey

sidead-you are free to return if you will-if for no

atake, for that of your wife."

I  Hawksiey rose up passionately.

B P-you think I could bear to see her," he said, "like

.;   , ph good Heavens, the thought of her as.she is now

rivo^ me wild"

e, you mean. Well now, I am not so sure of that

very one is pot insane who is shut ui in a mad,

g man, what do you mean? "

this--hat whatever Lady. hartelis may be now,

no mae isane than you or I whe pl.ced the

.:- . .








<pb n="328"/>
328              AFTER SX YEARS 

" Geat Heave-. I"

'Sir Vane Charteris is a man capable of a veryi

deed-I am quite sure of that; and up to a few we

the fact of her madness was announced no one ever

doubting her ladyship's perfect sanity. They were 

for years and years before the birth of his only dau

lieve, but perfectly civil to one another. Lady

fainted, as I have told you, when my father related y

at the dinner-table, after his appointment as Paulina's

That night, it transpired, she fled from the Priory toI

in Speckhaven in which Duke Mason lived, and Sir

lowed and brought her back. It was a stormy nightl

lect, and whether from the wetting she received, or. he

mient, she was taken very ill. As soon as she was 

removed; Sir Vane took her up to town to place her

charge of the ablest physician. The next news we

that she had gone insane, and was placed in a private'

No one was permitted to visit her, not her owndaughter

but in spite of the baronet's care, the form of her lun

pired. She refused to acknowledge Sir Vane Chart

husband-said her rightful husband was alive and in a

land. - Now, think, .whether or no this statement was

ice of insanity."

"Great Heaven I my poor, heartbroken Olivia.-;

thought-if I thought this were true-" 

"'You would return. It is true I Does Lady

live ? "

"She does. Paulina mentioned her in her last l

had asked Sir Vane to allow her to visit her-little 

she is ier own mother." 

"And he refused, of course; and will go on re

end of the chapter. Poor lady I she needs some

to her deliverance, in the power of such a man as Vai

teris."

The-colonel paused abruptly in his walk, came 

lai his handpheavily on the younger man's shoulder. 

"Earlscourt," he said, "I will go back to 

speedily as may be, and you shall accompany me, E

in the task of recovering and reclaiming my wife--

grant we may not be too late."' 

"Amen I But it's out df the question that I

Those little floating bills, you know-and the J

down on a fellow like the wolves to the fol. I

, .7'

~~~~~~~~~.  >. g








<pb n="329"/>
-  AFTER SIX I EAS.              329

_'it ~-two more highly popular novels before I can

tes   of London."

me," Hawksley said, earnestly; " I ask it as a

_~Hg. your debts you will accept a loan from'me until

^^ iH/Dew novels are written. You will not object-I

_ler~onnal favor your comin. England will be like

to me after a score andmore years. You will

_ ^,     0iout his hand-Guy placed his therein.

colonel-thanks all the same for your kindness

_       :iv^lwith your permission, I'll retire-I don't feel quite

Samson, and--"

-_st slightly as he spoke-faint and giddy from weak.

:ient loss of blood. The colonel hastily poured out

i:wne and held it to his lips. 

-id not have brought you out-you will be the worse

'M}Xy servant shall accompany you to your quarters-

..- fit to walk over that distance alone. Good-night."

t, coloneL"

with the wounded lieutenant, crossed the moon.

.on' their way to the temporary hospital. And long

_   B, tE;arlscourt lay asleep, with his handsome head pil.

_     ibihls arm, a smile on his lips, dreaming of England and

_i^Bllotel Hawksley paced to and fro in his apartment,

_       - ^p cily of his wasted life and of the fate that had held

_ *e^'u wife he loved apart.

i   " he said, " my darling I and you always loved

were faithful-I know it now. And I--h,

*qy did I not brave all that those plotters could do,

~       :2~-you. Bat the day of reuibuion is at hd, and let

tad bbetwee u take cae I"

_ i








<pb n="330"/>
330          A BA Z    OP FIVE SEASON. 

CHAPTER II.

A BELLE OF FVE SEASONS

AULINA I"

There was no reply. The ladadessed

sorbed over a book.

"Paulina," rather louder, "it is almost.

quite time to drive. Do you hear?"

"Well, yes, I hear, Maud," and Paulina Lisle li

of serene, sapphire-hued eyes from her book; "but:

don't think I shall go. It is very pleasant here by thiS

chill May afternoon, and my book interests me, which 

than I can say for the Ride, or the Ring."

" What I" cried Maud Charteris, "not even whei

the first day of Lord Heatherland's return fromSot

you have not seen him for a fortnight. You are sure

him in the Park, and all I've got to say is, that I ho

Pmt engaged, I'll be a little more anxious to see m.

ththan t   But then, of course, it is an understood 

the beautifil Miss Lisle, the belle of London, has no h

don't suppose it is at all a necessary adjunct to a f

ess."

There was just the slightest tinge of envy in the tone

Maud Charteris, as she said theme last words. S.

never be a duchess, and she knew it  She was a small i

complexioned girl of one-and-twenty now, very pale and.

with eyes like sloes, and dead, black hair, and a lookl

Vane Charteris all over her wan, fretted face.

The eyes of Paulina Lisle fell suddenly and rested on

with something like a smothered sigh. 

"No heart, Maud I" she repeated slowly; "I s

think it would be better for half of us if that impossiblin.

occur, and we were born without heart, without

out conscience. Our past enormities would not then:

embitter our whole future lives."              -

Miss Charteris pulled out her watch impatiently.

"I didn't come here to talk metaphysics, Miss LiJ

Eleanor sent me to see if you were ready to dri-e..

in elegant carriage costume herself as she spoke .








<pb n="331"/>
4 BELLE OF FIVE SEASONS.              331

to say, Paulina, that a new book, no matter how

L  a stronger attraction to the reigning beauty of the

ia drive along the Lady's Mile, at the fashionable

i]rovely May day?  Don't tell me so, for I counddn'

perfectly true, nevertheless. My book is intensely

and the daily drive at the same hour, in the same

the same faces, acknowledging the same bows,

iaer five seasons-well, to speak mildly, rather mo

a your book, Paulina ?"

^    Southern Cross,' by the author of 'Paul Ruther.

' and ' Gold and Glitter,' the two best novels of the

emember. Even you, Maud, who never read any.

t the 'Court Circular' and the 'Morning Post,'

mber. They were' books of English society, and I

because they were so true to nature, to reality.

books of that class are the most wretched caricatures.

evidently, knows what he is writing about. They

fkn'g stones. Do you know, Paulina, the heroine of

wl   very like you 1"

me I Is that a compliment to me or Margaret

I wonder ?"

yEu. Paul Rutherford's wife was a bewitching creat.

I _am perfectly sure she was drawn from real -ife-

Miss Lisle."

l 9e. see," said Paulina with a smile; "as far as I can

she was an impulsive, headstrong, rebellious, pa.

woman, with good impulses, I grant, but spoiling every.

er reckless impetuosity. Yes, I suppose, that was

eia the past, Maud;" a flush rose for a moment over

palor of her face. " I shudder-I sicken when I

par y desperate deeds of the past. Good Heaven 

:  y wild, perfectly reckless little outlaw I was I"

t You never murdered any one like Lady Audley,

Or you never married a head-groom, or anything

tlsh deepened-deepened perceptibly on Miss Lisr'

ce dore what I can never forget nor forgive," she an

h.&'eW tons; "what will haunt me with grief; and

i  remorse my life long."  She was speaking more to








<pb n="332"/>
332         A'BELLE OF FIVE SEASONS.

her own thoughts than. to her companion now. 

knew me six years ago tell roe I have changed out of 

edge. I hope I have-I hope I have-in no way, li

character, thought or action, would I resemble the -

Lisle of six years ago." 

"Then you have a secret in your life, Paulina I 

mantic; and, if you'll believe me, I always thought so. -

fits of gloom, your abstraction, the change in you some

you know, I always fancied you were like the he

novel, and had gone through the loved-and-lost idea po

such a howling about. Do tell me, Paulina, who was

Paulina looked up and laughed-her own sweet laug

"My dear Maud, my prophetic soul tells me Mrs.

will be here in five minutes to scold us both. I su

should never be forgiven if I did not go-so, farewell,.

ling book, until by and by. One hour with you is

dozen in the Lady's Mile. What a farce itall is, M

everlasting routine of dressing, and driving, and d

all for-what ? We are like a flock of sheep jumping 

a hedge, and not one of us knowing why we follow our 

Life's a comedy, at best, and we the prettily-dressed,

painted actresses; and when the lights are out and 

over, I wonder what account we will be asked to give

and talents so spent. There, Maud, don't look so 

dear child. I will run away and dress and prose no 

Miss Charteris walked away to the door with a

sarcastic smile on her pale, thin lips.

"Does she ever talk to the Most Noble the. Ma

Heatherland like this, I wonder?" she said. " Does.

fess to him those heinous crimes and secrets of the 

her general weariness and disgust of life and rank and sI

" Lord Heatherland is a thousand times too good fbr

woman as I am-no one knows that better than I,

" But you don't care a fig for him all the same,

and, in spite of your fine romance and second-had'

mentality, you are marrying him for his rank and his

just as 1 or any of us in Vanity Fair would do. Pai

you're a-it's not a very elegant word, but exceedingy

sive-you're a humbug 1"

With which Maud Charteris quitted the room, and

was alone.

The half-sisters /still ignorant they were such) were:

ably attached to each other.                -.'-








<pb n="333"/>
>H  . A BELLE OF FIVE SE.ISONS.            333

with envy and bitterness in her heart ft r the other's

y, had yet a sort of liking and admiration that even

/e yielded Paulina.

at her, sitting there in a low chair before the fire, and

i Paulina Lisle has become at four-and-twenty I ,She

in her morning negligee of silver-gray, band of linen

Btoat and wrists, and the bronze brown hair, rippling

hpe perfect forehead, gathered in a shining coil at the

tthe stately, small head. She is tall, she is grandly pro

,every movement is inistinct with grace and majesty,

t, the arms, are* marble fair-she'is one of those ex-

women which all men think beautiful. The face and

Rotten Row went wild about, painters and sculptors

as a model, and poets might sing of-in its noble wo-

The golden-brown hair, the eyes of liquid, sapphire

S&e arched foot, and -the swaying grace of motion,

she.waltzed or walked, a skin delicate as the petals of

arose, and as devoid of color in repose, and a smile

avoice that even women who envied and disliked her

fbrced to allow had a charm. She had changed almost

knowledge in the past six years-the reckless, impetu-

if-willed girl of eighteen, had grown to be the most-wo-

iof women, the gentlest of gentlewomen. The lips.were

S .well as proud, the brilliant eyes had learned a softer,

, it may be, sadder light, the girl had been faulty, erring,

madness, the woman was perfect in her sweet thought

i, her unselfishness, her gentleness, her goodness to all.

tul and graceful lady she sits here, with softly brood,

and lips a little parted, even in repose, thinking very

, if not lovingly, of the man whom in three weeks she is

y-the Marquis of Heatherland, only son of the Duke

ronald. She would fain sit and wait for his coining

but Mrs. Galbraith has issued her .decree, and with the

T   . temper that has grown habitual to her cf late years, the

e of self she has learned to make, she rises with a low

'.d goes forth into that brilliant Maytime world, of which

.'.loe of the acknowledged queens.

ls taken three volumes to record half a dozen months of

i'e- the past half a dozen years may be rendered in as

eventfutChristmas, six years ago, to the great surprise of.

ihwas neither spent at "The Firs" nor at Monta,

ic, n  did Paulina become the wife of Lord Monta

:... ..








<pb n="334"/>
334         A BELLE OF FIVE SEASONS.

lien. Miss Lisle, by her own desire, had been taken to Fiance

instead, and spent the winter with one of her late school friends

Lord Montalien and her guardian had quarrelled, not loudly

nor violently, but the quarrel was none the less deep arJ

deadly.

"You can do your worst, my lord," Sir Vane had said, not

without dignity. "I have changed my mind-my ward shall

not be forced to marry you."

And Lord Montalien had gone away baffled, black with sup-

pressed fury and rage.

"If the day ever comes, Sir Vane Charteris," he had said,

"when I can repay you, trust me not to forget this debt."

And then he had gone abroad, and had not once returned to

England since.

Paulina's secret was kept. Neither Mrs. Galbraith nor Lord

Montalien dreamed of it. Jane married and settled in Wales,

and had kept her oath, and Miss Lisle had her freedom, and in

the eyes of the world was Sir Vane's ward still. She spent

that winter in France, and came back late in April to resume

her new life.

Her Grace the Duchess of Clanronald, a handsome, haughty

dowager of seventy-five, had taken a great fancy to the girl's

bright, fair face, and presented her; and the ' Morning Post' re-

corded Miss Lisle's diamonds and general splendor of appear-

ance, together with her most remarkable beauty. And then

followed her first brilliant London season; and those few who

had known her the preceding year saw and wondered a little

at the growing change in her.

Miss Lisle was a great success-men raved of her perfect face,

her perfect form, her rare fascination of manner, and women en-

vied and disliked her with a sincerity that was the highest compli-

ment they could pay her charms. She made scores of conquests

and had three brilliant offers that first season. She declined

them all in a way that left no hope. Women called her a co-

quette, a heartless coquette. Nature had made her beautiful, and

gifted her with that rare. subtle fascination of manner that is

even better than beauty. She could not fail to please, to at-

tract in spite of herself. Mrs. Galbraith cried out loudly that

it was a sin, a crime, to refuse such offers as Paulina gently

but resolutely refised. What did the girl expect? Did she

wish one of the royal princes to propose for her ? And Pau-

lina listened and smiled-a little sadly, a little wistfully, and

the blue eyes looked dreamily afar off, and Guy Earlscourt'9








<pb n="335"/>
A BELLE     OF FIVE SEASONS           335

came back to her from over the sea. Wheic he was,

4istamt land he had gone, she did not know; she only

_khtt, she loved him, and that she would rather die than

his face again. Her second, third, and fourth sea.

a repetition of the first. She grew more beautiful

Pas-stcpassing year, and more marble-hearted, said the

~  [. &She received more eligible offers than any other

of her time, and treated all alike. She had no heart

, or it was like her complexion, of marble. Women

to far her rivalry-men grew shy of offering their hearts

to this merciless "Refuser."  And away in America,

under an alien flag, there was one whose name she saw

intervals in the American papers Colonel Hawksley

.er3, a name that could make her heart throb, and her pale

-Ba flush as none of those men about her had ever done.

:!  the close of that fourth London season, the Duchess of

>Dronald carried Miss Lisle away to her distant Highland

to spend the autumn and winter. She liked Paulina,

a liking that grew stronger with each year. At Clanron

itsstle Miss Lisle encountered, that autumn, her grace's

- son, the Marquis of Heatherland. He had been absent

-_'  East for the past seven years, and had come home on a

~,J'visit to his mother before starting for Equinoctial Af-

-  He came home, a grave, weather-beaten man of seven-

.jl: y' , with every intention of leaving again in a week, and

;i  e Paulina Lisle, and his fate was fixed. He fell m love

'?'~'her, as scores of other men had done before him, and

ia    ia~l Africa and gorilla-hunting were forgotten.  He

. ::  sven-and-forty; he had never been in love in his life;

....n and society bored him; he was grave, silent, and not

_one, and he fell in love as men of seven-and-forty-your

wise, and reverend seigneurs-do faill in love at that ab-

without hope, and without reason. In three days

ution was patent to the whole house. The duchess

"   tif al-r..ed, and remonstrated after the fashion of mothers

..|as .tEesire of her life to see Heatherland married and

1Wid roving life but not to Paulina Lisle, much

.-.^-^._ -   7  f,.tuation on your part, Heatherland," she

....lIi^sity below you in rank. She passes in

. t. a'f t3te:  late Lord Montalien, and an orphan.

w"i=b   ; ihier fif her  is in America, in self-imposed exile;

f ...iread              kno*i where. I dq rwoa even know

fe       .              ...








<pb n="336"/>
336          XA BELLE OF FIE. SEASONS. 

that her parents were legally married. Of course I w.

breathe a word of this to any but you. I like the gi4.

sively; but she is, as I said, infinitely below you in 

station-not the sort of women the Dukes of Clanro

been accustomed to marry."

The marquis listened, with his slow, grave, thoughtful!

and answered quietly:

"Mother, if she were a crossing-sweeper or beggar, 

woman she is, I would marry her if she would accept 

is fixed as fate. She is the one woman of all women I

if she refuses me, I will never marry."

"Refuse you " her Grace exclaimed, in unutterable

"Miss Lisle has refused many offers, but she will not

you / There are not many women alive, I think, who

reject the Marquis of Heatherland."

Two days after that conversation the marquis propos

was rejected I

He was a man of few words. He took his rejection

etly as he took most things.

And this is final ?" he asked, slowly. "There is no

Miss Lisle ?"

"There is none," she answered. "I esteem you, I r

you highly, my lord, but I will never marry-never I "

There was that in her face that told him she meant it.- :

was infinite pain in it, too. It gave her no pleasure, 

her no triumph-these rejections. She felt like a che

an impostor; she felt shame-humiliation unutterable. 

wedded wife, and men constantly asking her to marry

It was part of her punishment, richly deserved but very 

She went up to her room after he left her, slowly, w

sick at heart. A packet of American papers, that sho

reached her two months before, lay on the table.. She

the packet with eagerness-there was mostly news of h,

there-very often mention of another name, quite as 

looked for. The papers were three months old, they g

details of a long and terrible battle, the lists of killed,

and missing. And almost heading the list of killed sh)eW

aame of Lieutenant Guy Earlscourt. 

Yes, there it was. Guy. Earlscourt-killed   '

Owar round her, a hot mist came between her ees-

paper. Killed! His image rose before her as 

him first eight years before-"beautiful 'wit r.i'

beauty," when she had danced with him under t he

~-. 4-








<pb n="337"/>
A BELLE OF FIVE SEASONS.             337

of Montalien, during that bright June day. As she had seen

him with the sunshine on his dark face, as he rode up to her

carriage to say good-by on the day she left Speckhaven for

school. As she had seen him last in the library of Sir Vane

Charteris' house, when he had refused the money she proffered,

and had gone forth penniless to his exile. Killed ! And then

the mist cleared away, and she forced herself to read. There

was a bi ief paragraph concerning him-very brief and eloquent.

IL; was an Englishman, and he had fought like a lion during

the whole day. And it had been newly discovered he was the

anonymous author of those two books which had created such a

sensation in the literary world, "Paul Rutherford's Wife " and

" Gold and Glitter."

The paper dropped from her hands, she sank down on her

knees and buried her pale face in them. Long before she arose

they were wet with her tears-tears that came fast and thick

from a stricken heart. She had loved him, and he was dead.

Miss Lisle left the Highland Castle abruptly enough next

day-no doubt because she had rejected Heatherland, every

one said. She looked so pale, so cold, so wretched, that the

duchess had not had the heart to be too severe upon her-the

young woman must be mad, simply that.

She went home-home to Speckhaven-to Duke, and passed

the winter as though she were once more " Polly Mason," and

all her wealth and grandeur but a dream. She was in trouble

-those faithful friends saw that, and asked no questions, only

too happy to have her with them once more. When April

came Sir Vane came with it, and took her back, and the world

saw no change in her. And for the first time for many years

the Marquis of Heatherland appeared in society-his old mad-

ness strong upon him still. He had no hope-but to look

upon her face-to hear her voice, were temptations too great

for him. They met once more, and how it came about need

not be told. He proposed again and this time was accepted.

She was proud, she was ambitious-she liked and esteemed

him highly.

" I will be your wife," she said simply. " Your faithful wife

I know, your loving wife I hope--in time."

He asked no more. He lifted the fair, small hand to his

lips gratefully, gladly, and she was betrothed to the Marquis of

Heatherland.

15








<pb n="338"/>
338         A BELLE OF FIVE SEASONS.

Mrs. Galbraith and her two young ladies came back from the

Park to dine and dress for a reception.

They had met Lord Heatherland, and shaken hands with

him, and he was to be at the reception also. The marriage

was to take place in three weeks; he had hurried everything

on and she had consented. Why should they wait? Even his

mother had come round and was willing now.

And she was to be a duchess. The title poor Duke had

given her long ago in jest was one day to be hers in reality.

The present duke had been bedridden for years, an old, old

man-she would not long be Marchioness of Heatherland.

"How strange it all seems," she thought, with a half-smile,

looking at her image in the glass. " I, little Polly Mason, to

be in three weeks' time Marchioness of Heatherland. It is al-

most like a fairy tale !"

She was looking beautiful to-night, her best, in a dress of blue

satin and point-lace overskirt, diamonds in her gold-brown hair,

and running like a river of light about the graceful throat. She

was looking beautiful, and an octogenarian minister, sprightly

as a schoolboy, came up to shake hands, and congratulate

her.

"I have been telling Heatherland what an unspeakably for-

tunate fellow he is ! I think he is as fully sensible of it, though,

as I am. If it were not for my eighty years and one wife al-

ready, Miss Lisle, Heatherland should not have had it all his

own way."

The Marquis of Heatherland was by her side. She blushed

and laughed with her own frank grace.

" I can imagine no age at which your excellency would not

be a dangerous rival,'' she said. The words had but just passed

her lips, and she was turning away, with the smile and blush .

still lingering, when she stopped suddenly.  Had the dead

arisen ? There, standing a few yards away, gazir g at her with

grave thoughtfulness, she saw, face to face-Guy EarlsctAut I








<pb n="339"/>
a LD ASUNDER                    339

CHAPTER III

HELD ASUNDER

1 UY EARLSCOURT I No myth, no illusion of the

senses, no shadow from the dead, but the living,

bieathing, vigorous man I Somewhat thinner, some-

what browner, somewhat worn and grave, as if he had

ught and suffered much in the span of the past six years,

=,i.t as surelyas sshe stood there looking at him- Guy Earls.

..cQurt 

.-  She did not cry out, she did not faint, though, for an instant,

t*he rooms, the lights, the faces, the flitting forms, swam giddily,

': and there was the surging roar of many waters in her ears. She

stood there stock still, her great eyes dilating, every drop of

.-blood leaving her face. Dimly, after an interval-of five sec-

onds, in reality-of five hours it seemed to her-the voice of

Lord Heatherlan, sounding faint and far-oft came to her

ear :.

u Paulina, you are ill-you are going to faint I For pity's

sake, sit down a moment while I go for a glass of water !"

She caught at the back of a chair he placed for her, and saw

him hurriedly disappear.

* Then, by a mighty effort, she collected her dazed senses, and

turned, still dizzily, tqcleave the room. -_ 

On the very instant of her recognition Guy Earlscourt had

turned slowly away and disappearedin an inner apartment.

She made her way-how, she never afterward knew, sick and

dizzy as she felt-out o the crowded rooms through an open

window, and, on .to t piazza. There she sank down, half-

crouchin.half-sitting, m her gay ball-dress, while the wind of

the cold May ighbt blew upon her uncovered head and death.

white face.     -

At first she could not even think. The suddenness of the

blow stunned her. She was painfully conscious of outer things

-of the great, burning midnight stars; of the distant wilder-

ress of lights; of the faint, sweet-sighing of the music; of the

chill blowing of the wind; and then those things all faded away,

and the present, and the past, and her whole future life lay bare

btifore her. A strange sort of calm that was almost apathy








<pb n="340"/>
340               HELD ASUNDER.

fell upon her, and she thought of herself and her strange situa,

ion as if she were thinking of another person.

The report of the American newspapel. had been untrue-a

mistake, no doubt. Guy Earlscourt, the man she had married

so strangely six years before, was here alive and well. What

feeling was it that stirred in her heart at that conviction ? Was

it pleasure ? Was it pain ? She thought-wondering at herself

that she could think of so trivial a thing-how handsome he

had looked a moment ago, standing gazing at her, with those

dark, thoughtful eyes! He had changed-grown graver and

older, more manly, more noble than in the past. He had re-

deemed that past, no doubt-paid off his debts, and returned

to England a fiee man. And he was the author, too, of those

hooks she had liked so-great books, whose praises the world

rang. Then this thread broke, and she came back to the pres-

tnt. She must break off, as best she might, her engagement

with the Marquis of Heatherland, and at once. A great pang

followed this. She was, as I have said, ambitious to wear a

ducal coronet. It had dazzled her; and now that dream of

glory must be resigned, and she must yield up all the hope of

her life. She Telt a vague sort of pity for the marquis, in a sis-

terly way, and putting love entirely out of the question, she had

liked him very much, and esteemed him very highly.

That he literally worshipped her she knew to be true-how

bitter the pang would be then when, without reason, without

excuse, she broke her pledged vow. And the " Morning Post"

had announced the approaching nuptials, and the guests were

bidden, and the bridal trousseau ready. The world would call

her a heartless jilt, an unprincipled flirt, her best friends would

despise her-Lord Heatherland and the duchess-the kind,

pioud, stately old duchess would hate her and scorn her, and

with reason. And through her own fault-b-er own mad, reck-

less folly of the past, this had all happened. With her own

hand she had wrought her fate.

And then those bitter fancies drifted away once more, and

Guy's face floated before her in the purple starlight. What

must he think of her-could any one's hatred equal his ? How

ttierly he must despise her-how he must curse his own folly

hi ever having sacrificed himself and his whole future life to

her. The world had always, at his worst, admired and caressed

hini, how much more now, with the past redeemedc with his

new and brilliant fame and success as an author. Why, had

he been free, he might have wooed and won the highest, the








<pb n="341"/>
HELD ASUNDER.                  341

lfirest in the land. And in his reckless generosity, he had

sacrificed every hope of home, of wife, of all man holds mnost

dear-for her.

Her cold hands clasped themselves over her pale face, her

brain ceased to think, a sort of stupor, partly of cold, was

creeping upon her, she crouched there in her laces and dia-

monds, as miserable a woman as the great city held. Oh,

Heaven ! to be able to retrieve the past-to recall the work of

that long-gone Christmas eve. How long she had been there

she never knew, probably not more than twenty minutes-an

eternity of suffering it seemed to her. In after years, when all

this terrible time was past and gone, she could never recall

those moments on the piazza without a shudder of the agony

she had felt then. She was intensely proud-the world had

held her so high, so spotless-and now the time had come

when she must descend from her pinnacle, and be known as

the wretched, unwomanly creature she was.

A hand was laid on her shoulder-a voice sounded in her

Julled ears.

" Paulina ! Good Heaven! what, are you here? Do you

know you will get your death ?"

She looked up-to his dying day he never forgot the dumb,

infinite misery of that first glance. It was the Marquis of

Heatherland's anxious face that bent above her.

" WhIat is it, Paulina ? " he cried; "are you mad to expose

yourself like this in the cold night air?"

She rose up slowly, shrinking from his touch, and feeling for

the first time, with a shiver, how cold it really was.

"I am not mad," she said, in a slow, dull voice, strangely

unlike the soft, musical tones that had been one of her chief

charms, "only miserable-the most miserable creature on

earth, I think. My lord, let me tell you now, while I have

courage-that I retract my promise-that I can never be your-

wife."

The words dropped spasmodically from her lips, with inter-

vals between. She did not look at him, her eyes staring

straight before her inco the blue bright night. He listened--

not understanding, bewildered, anxious, incredulous.

"Take back your promise-not be my wife !" he repeated

" What is the matter, Paulina ? Are you taking leave of your

eInses ?"

It sounds like it, I dare say," she answered with a heavy,

aeart-sick sigh; "lbut no, my senses such as they are or evei

.a








<pb n="342"/>
342              AHaLD ASUNDER.

were, remain. Oh, my lord, how can I make you unh

--what a base, base wretch I must seem to you. I cannot

you hear me, Lord Heatherland ? I cannot be your wife r/

"I hear you, Paulina," he -said, growing almost as white

herself, z, but I cannot understand. Will you be good eno

to explain ?"

He was a man of strong self-command, of powerful will.

folded his arms over his chest and waited to hear what sh h

to say, only the gray pallor of his face betokening in any

what he felt 

" I cannot. Think I have changed my mind, think I am!d

heartless coquette, think anything you will, only release 

Let the world think it is you who cast me off-I deserve i

and-and what does it matter? In a day or two I shall lea

England, and forever."

Her voice broke in with a hollow sob-if she could only di

she thought, and end it all.

"At least I have not deserved this, Paulina," the grave, sa

voice of the marquis broke in. " If you claim your promise

your promise is yours. But oh, Paulina I my bride-my wife

-it is hard-it is cruel-it is bitter as death." 

It was the first, the last, the only time she ever saw him o,

moved. She fell down on her knees before him and held up

her clasped hands.

"Forgive me I forgive me I" she cried; "you shall know  i

all, cost what it may-the wretch, the impostor I am. You;

thought you knew my whole history-that it was only my pride *

or my indifference that caused me to refuse so many offers before  ,,

I accepted you, and you honored me for it. Ah, my Godl 

how utterly unworthy I am cf your respect-of any good man's  -

-Paulina Lisle was, and is. Six years ago, my lord, I was

pledged by the strongest ties to a man who quitted England- 

forever as I thought. You remember the day I left Clanronald

so hastily-the day after that on which you first proposed 7 .

On that day I read the account of this man's death in a foreign

paper. I don't know that I loved him-I can't tell-at leas

the news of his death had power to move me as nothing else

had power to do. Then you know what followed. Next 

season we met again, and again you renewed your offer, and-, 

1 accepted. I did not love you, my lord-but I thought my. 

self free-and I knew it would be easy to love one so good, so

kind, in time. You deserved better than that, and my pride

aid amiition have received their rightful punishmnt. . :. 

:" '








<pb n="343"/>
HELD ASUNDER.                  343

,how shall I tel you ?-this very night I have dis.

d that the man I speak of-whom I thought dead-to

ties I could not brqak if I would, bind me-is alive and

Loidon I"

--The broken voice stopped-the pale, tortured face dropped

her hands. She still knelt before him-drooping-in a

nge, distorted attitude of pain. He had listened without a

rd, Twithout a movement, the dull pallor still blanching his

sarms still folded. When she ceased, all that was

great, that was noble in the man's nature was stirred. She hac

done him a wrong, perhaps, but she was the woman he loved,

and she knelt before him in her great trouble. He stooped

, and tried to raise her up.

"Not here, Paulinal not here," he said; "kneel only to

your Maker."

"'Yes, here, here!" she cried, wildly; "here on my knees

at your feet  Oh, my lord, you cannot forgive me-but you

-might pity me if you knew. what I suffer."

"I do' pity you," he answered, gravely, "from my souL

Rise, Miss Lisle-I command it 1"

She rose at once.

"And this is all?"

"This is alL"

"Let me try to understand it, if I can. You are bound 

promise to marry this man of whom you speak-you mean ta

marry him?"

- "Mylord, Iwillmarrynoone. Ihave told yoqI ean to

leave England and him forever in a day or two. Of ty own

free will I would never look npo his face again."

"Then you do not care fr -hi, ii man to whom you stand

pledged ?" with a thrill of new hoe in his tone.

Her face dr       he tmued it far away from him in the

starlight -

"Pailine, you! hear me. Do you or do you not care for

:" I-.if a't rid I do."

He paused at her answer. The hope that had arisen crushed

out in his faithful heart forever.

"You care for him," he said, after that pause; "and you

tell me in the same breath that you are going to fly from him,

that you will never be his wife. Miss Lisle, you have told me

part of your secret, but not all  Nay," as she was about to-

!peak, " tell me no more-I do not ask it.; I free you utterly








<pb n="344"/>
344               HELD ASUNDER. 

and entirely from this moment. The woman vwhose heart l

another man's is sacred from me. I would no more ask yo

knowing this, to marry me, than I would if you were already

wife. And I will try to be just, and forgive you, if I can. Yc

have done wrong, by your own showing, in not telling me t

at first, but you could not foresee what has happened. rh

secret you have confided to me shall be kept inviolable-ti

world shall be told you have rejected me, in justice to mysel

since you found you could not love me. No more needi

said, I think, and you have been here far too long alreadyi

Take my arm, Miss Lisle, and let me conduct you back to ti

house."

The dignity of the man rendered his request not to be dism.

puted. In all her life she had never admired him, never re-

spected him as she did at this instant. How generous, how

noble every one was-the marquis-Guy-while she-oh, 

words are weak to tell how utterly degraded she was in her:

own sight-how bitterly she despised herself. All her pride 

was crushed to the very earth. She took his arm, and in dead 

silence they walked back to the crowded rooms. What a 

mockery it all seemed! the music, the smiling faces, the bril- 

iant dresses, the lights, the roses, and those tortured human

hearts! They walked'through the midst of their friends, and 

no one noticed much change in either. Miss Lisle looked

very pale-paler than usual, but she never had much color, and :

her five seasons' experience had taught her not to wear her " 

heart on her sleeve. The marquis led her to a seat, stood  :;

silent for a moment, looking down upon her, then held out his 3i

hand.

' Paulina! " it was the last time that name ever passed his  2 

lips, "will you say good-by ?"

She lifted her eyes to his face-almost for the first time since

he had found her on the piazza. How pale he was-pale to 

the lips. 

"You are going away ?"

" I shall start for Africa to-morrow. I am such an old trav-

eller that I can pack up for the other end of the world at five

minutes' notice. And, as every one who goes to Central 

Africa does not invariably return, I should like you to say good-

by and good speed, before we part." 

They sounded almost like the last words Guy had spoken

to her when she had seen him last.

She laid her hand in that of Lord Heatherland but she did

not speak-she could not.








<pb n="345"/>
PHELD ASUNDER.                  345

"'Good-by," he iepeated.

ler uplifted eyes, full of speechless pain, answered him.

e close, warm pressure of her cold hand, and then the

ne she had pledged herself to marry had passed forever out

fher life.

If she could only go home-a wild desire to fly away from

this house and those people, and hide herself forever, came

upon her. Where was Mrs. Galbraith, where Maud, or Sir

Vane ?   She looked around, and for the second time was frozen

y the sight of Guy Earlscourt.

'-I He was approaching her, her old friend Mrs. Atcherly on

-Eis arm, Mrs. Atcherly chatting gayly and volubly as they

.i came up. Low as the words were spoken, Paulina's strained

ear heard them:

"To be married in three weeks' time, you know, to the

Marquis of Heatherland-by far the most brilliant match of the

I season. She is good enough and -beautiful enough to marry a

prince, I think. And do you know, Guy," laughingly, "I used

o fancy-to hope, only you were such a shocking wild boy,

that you and she-you understand? But Heatherland will

make her a much better husband than you ever would, or evei

will make any one, Master Guy."

"Mrs. Atcherly, don't be vituperative. I've turned over a

new leaf-several new leaves, -and whoever the lady is who has-

the honor and bliss of becoming Mrs. Earlscourt, she will be

blessed beyond her sex. For Miss Lisle I have had always the

profoundest and most hopeless admiration."

She heard the carelessly spoken words, and her heart hard-

ened and revolted against him. How dared he speak of her

in that light and flippant tone, when his coming here had bro

ken her heart, blighted her life ? Her eyes brightened, a faint

tinge of color came back into her face. She looked at him

straight-a hard, cold, steady glance.

"Paulina, my child," cried the gay voice of Mrs. Atcherly,

"hnere is a surprise for you, a resurrection from the dead-the

prodigal returned-a prodigal no longer. Guy, I don't think

there is any need of an introduction between you and Pau-

dlla."

"Not the least, I hope, Mrs. Atcherly," Guy answered, bow

ing low.

She had not offered him her hand; her face looked cold,

hard as stone; no smile of recognition passed over it. The

coldest, slightest, haughtiest bend of the head acknowledged

C:8:








<pb n="346"/>
346               HELD ASUNDER.

him. She spoke, and her voice sounded as hard and icy ad

her !lok.                                           :X

"It is a surprise. Months ago I read of Mr. Earlscourt's

death in an American paper. But, perhaps, it was another Gu i

Earlscourt." 

"No, I fancy not," Guy said coolly; "I was the man whose 1

obituary you read. It was rather a close thing, but good nurs  i

ing brought me safely through it, as you see."

He was not one whit dashed by her freezing hauteur-her re- '

pellent tone. He stood there before her the most coolly self i:.

possessed man in the room; heedless whether the Marquis of :

Heatherland's affianced bride smiled or frowned. She saw it ii

with silent, suppressed anger, unjust as it was strong. 

"When did you arrive ? " she asked. 

" Only this afternoon; and on the ground of old friendship '

ventured to intrude here to-night. Beside, I wished to see

you !"

She looked at him, her eyes flashing,. her lips quivering.

How dared he !

"To see me?" with a fine lady's stare of insolent wcnder;

"and what can Mr. Guy Earlscourt, after his six years' exile,

possibly have to say to me ?"

A-smile curled his mustached lips-a smile of amusement

at her look and tone.

"'Nothing whatever concerning himself-with all his pre.

sumption he does not presume so far as that. I came as the

messenger of another person, in whom I think even the future

Lady Heatherland may be interested."

Her fingers tore in half her costly lace handkerchief. This

storm of contending feelings within her was growing more than

she could bear.

" 1 know of no acquaintance of yours, Mr. Earlscourt, in

whom I take the slightest interest. I have no idea what you

can mean !"

"No," he said; and again the amused smile that half-mad

dened her played around his mouth; " not even Colonel Rob

eit Hawksley."

She barely repressed a cry.

"My father ! " she'exclaimed; "what of him ? "

"Ah ! I thought you would be interested," still smiling.

'Colonel lHawksley is here, Miss Lisle, and I am his messern

ger."

Paulina caught her breath; she arose and looked at Guy

flushed eager.








<pb n="347"/>
HELD ASUNDER.                   347

t:Here !" she cried, "here! my father ! at last! Oh, Mr.

alscourt, where is he-take me to him?     At once ! at

"Restrain yourself, Miss Lisle-at once would be impossi.

|ble. And his presence here must for a time be a dead secret.

DtAbove all, Sir Vane Charteris and his family are to be kept in

total ignorance. He bade me give you this-it explains every-

fthing, and tells you where to find him. Conceal it quickly-

ilere is Mrs. Galbraith."

: She thrust the letter he gave her into the folds of her dress,

i just in time to escape Mrs. Galbraith's keen, black eyes. As

6 on that other night, she came noiselessly upon them-this time

with a bland smile on her face.

"Ah, Mr. Earlscourt! so happy to welcome you back.

Such a surprise, Paulina, love, is it not ? and a celebrated au-

thor and hero and everything. Everybody is talking of you

and your books, I assure you.'

" Everybody does me too much honor, Mrs. Galbraith. Miss

Lisle, adieu."

He bowed with his old, negligent, courtly grace-his old,

careless smile, and sauntered away. Paulina looked, with an

inexplicable expression, after the tall, graceful form, and saw

the daughter of the house, Lady Edith Clive, flutter smilingly

up to him, with both hands outstretched in glad welcome. She

turned abruptly away, and looked no more.

"Mrs. Galbraith," she said, " I want to go home."

"Certainly, Paulina, love-but where is Lord Heather-

land?"'

"Gone long ago. Order the carriage at once; I am tired

and sick to death of it all."

Mrs. Galbraith looked at her in astonishment. What was

the matter ? Where and why had the Marquis of Heatherland

gone, and what meant all this unusual, angry impatience ?

Sir Vane came up at the moment, his florid face a shade or

two less florid than usual, and his small, black eyes looking

strangely startled.

"Paulina !" he exclaimed, in a half whisper, "do you know

who has come ?"

"Yes, I know."

"But, good Heaven, Paulina, what is to be done? You

showed me the paper that spoke of him as dead, and now

here he is back again. And there is Lord Heatherland. and

the settlements prepared, and the wedding-day named. Paur

ina, what is to be done ?"








<pb n="348"/>
348                  HELD ASUTDER.

"Go home, the first thing," with a hysterical laugh.  "Iei 

me alone, Sir Vane Charteris; I am  not fit to talk to you o!C

any one to-night." 

lie looked at her, and noticed, for the first time, the ghaitly2

pallor of her face, the dusky fire in her eyes.  He gave hei his

arm, without another word, and led her to the carriage.  On

the way home not a word was spoken.     Mrs. Galbraith sat in 

silent surprise, but asking no questions.  Maud lay back half  -

asleep-Sir Vane kept inwardly repeating: "What the deuce !

will she do ?"  And Paulina, in a corner of the carriage, sat 

white and cold, with only a dull, sickening sense of misery in :g

her heart.  Her father had come-was here! At any other'%

time those tidings would have driven her half wild with delight, 

but even this news had little power to move her now.

They reached home. She toiled wearily up the stairs to her

own luxurious apartments.  Her French maid, English Jane's 

successor, sat waiting for her young mistress, half asleep in a

chair.  Paulina dismissed her at once.

"You may go to bed, Odille-I shall not want you this 

morning."

The girl departed, yawning.   The moment she was gone

Paulina locked the doors, drew a chair close to the waxlights,

and took the letter Guy Earlscourt had given her from the cor-

sage of her dress. She knew that bold, manly i.qnd well; she

tore it impetuously open and read its brief contents:

"CHARING CROSS HOTEL,

"Tuesday, May xIth, I869.

'* MY PAULINA :-YOU see I have answered your prayer at last-1 am

here-here to redress the wrongs of the living or to avenge the dead-here,

after two-and-twenty years, to reclaim your mother-my wife.

"My young friend, Guy Earlscourt, has persuaded me, convinced me

that this-way lies my duty. He has urged me also to tell you all, and

claim your woman's wit and aid in my undertaking. The hour has come

when it is time for you to learn who your mother really is--that you have

been kept in ignorance so long, may have been a fatal mistake. My daugh-

ter, have you never suspected? You have met her, known her. Think 1

Shall 1 tell you her name at once ? Paulina, she whom you knew as Lady

Charteris was Olivia Lyndith, five-and-twenty years ago, Robert Lisle's

wife, and your mother."

The letter dropped from Paulina's hand, with a low, startled

cry. A   thousand things rushed on her memory to convince

her of the truth of her father's words. The night i-i Lynditb

Grange, where my lady had kissed and cried over her, the mid








<pb n="349"/>
l^:           UHELD ASUNDER.                     349

night visit to Duke's cottage, and, above all, a vague, intangi-

ble something that had always drawn her to the unhappy lady. 

jHow stupid, how blind she had been, not to guess the truth

"I never knew until a few months ago," the letter went on, "the ter 

rible fact that she was not insane when shut up in a mad-house. Mr. Earlsi 

tcourt told me. I have returned at the earliest possible moment, and I will

never rest until I have found, have reclaimed her. Heaven be merciful to

human error. I may be too late to save her, but I meant it for the best.

Y ou will come to me here-I long to see you, my darling-my Olivia's

chili.

;   You will ask for ' Mr. Hawksley,' and you will keep the fact of my

presence in England a dead secret. Do not, in anyway, show to Sir Vane

Charteris that you suspect or know the truth. We must be subtle as

serpents in dealing with a serpent. Mr. Earlscourt goes to the Countess

of Damar's ball to give you this to-night-to-morrow, at the earliest possi-

ble hour, I shall expect you here. Until I see you, my own dear child,

adieu."

She knew all at last-at last. The mystery that for the past

eight years had been the unfathomable mystery of her life was

solved.  Her mother was found.

The reading of the letter had calmed her.  She held it to

the lighted tapers and watched it burn to ashes.  Then she ex-

tinguished them.

The rosy dawn of the sweet May-day was lighting the east

already as she drew back the curtains of silk and lace and flung

wide the casements. The fresh, cool air blew in like a bene-

diction on her hot and throbbing head. What a night the past

night had been-how a few hours had changed her whole life !

A year seemed to have elapsed since yesterday-since yester- 

day, when she stood here with Lord Heatherland's ring on her 

finger and trills of song upon her lips. The flashing diamond

was gone now, only a plain circlet of gold on the third finger of

her left hand and the opal ring Duke had given her long ago

remained.  She was peculiar in many things-in this, that she

rarely wore jewels of any kind.  She looked now at that shin- 

ing wedding-ring-strange that she had always worn that, and

her thoughts reverted back to him, to herself.

"Why had he returned?" she thought, "and how will it

end?   He scorns and despises me-how can he do otherwise _

-what is my life to be, bound to him, and held apart from him

by that very tie of marriage ?  And I thought I zould have left

England and him forever, and now a new duty holds me here.

:                            :  ..  ,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~s








<pb n="350"/>
350               HELD ASUNDER.

Well, duty before any selfish interest of my own-I will remait

--I will help my father-my mother shall be found, and then- 

and then, the sooner I pass away from the world's ken and dii^

appear, the better. My life has been all a mistake, and m

own folly alone is to be blamed. I must remain here and play-

my part for the present, go into society, and bear the world's 

insolent wonder at my broken engagement-worse than that, :

meet him there, anl treat him as I treated him last night."

She laid her head against the cold glass with a long, tired l

sigh. What a travestied world it was--how little life seemed1

worth the living just then! The sun arose, another busy day ';

had begun for the great city, and Paulina Lisle, in her floating

satin and laces and diamonds, sat there pale and spiritless-;|

utterly worn out.

The breakfast-bell rang. She began slowly unclasping the V

jewels, unloosing her rich dress. Then she threw on a dress-

Ing-gown, and rang for her maid.

" Clear away those things, Odille, and fetch me a cup of tea 

here."

The girl, with the nimble fingers of her craft, put away the

ball-robe, and diamonds in their casket, and brought up Miss

Lisle's breakfast.

With an effort she swallowed a few mouthfuls, drank the tea,

and then pushed aside the scarcely tasted meal.

" Dress me for the street, Odille, and be quick. I am go-

ing for a walk. If Mrs. Galbraith inquires for me you can tell

her so."

Odille unbound the shining tresses, and built up her young

lady's chignon with practised rapidity. In fifteen minutes Miss

Lisle stood attired in a waiTig costume of quiet gray, a close

veil over her face. It was no unusual thing for Paulina to start

for a brisk morning walk, at the hour when all fashionable peo-

ple were asleep; and Odille was in no way surprised.

It was just eleven as she hailed a cab, and gave the order to

the driver:

"Charing Cross Hotel."

Her heart throbbed with almost sickening rapidity as the

hansom flew along the many streets.

At last, at last-in ten minutes she would be face to face

with her unseen father !








<pb n="351"/>
WORKING IN THE DARK.               351 

CHAPTER IV. 

gWORKING IN THE DARK. 

Size N his room at the Charing Cross Hotel, Robert Hlawks,

llley sat alone by the open window, smoking his meer-

~i!~^    schaum, and waiting for his daughter's coming with

that grave patience that long habit had made second

ar nature. 

!  Crowds passed to and fro on the pavement below, the bright

May sunshine gilding every face.

Very fresh those rose-and-white English faces looked in the

-clear light--how thoroughly English the women were, with their

bright bloom, their fair skin. He had seen hundreds of Amer-

ican women in Northern cities, with their delicate, wax-like

beauty, their Parisian dresses and their gay Parisian manners,

and had admired them from afar off, but here he felt as though

he had brothers and sisters and home. Why had he not

braved the worst and returned long ago? He wondered at

himself now as he looked back. Why had he not defied all

their treachery and baseness, and torn that day, at the very al 

tar, his wife from Sir Vane Charteris' arms? 

"Is it fate ? " he thought. " Is our path beaten for us at our

birth, and must we walk straight along willy-nilly to the ap-

pointed end? 'In a few moments I shall see my daughter-

mine-I who for nearly five-and-twenty years have been a

houseless, friendless, solitary man, and perhaps find her in spite

of her letters, in spite of all I have heard, cold and selfish and

worldly."

There was a tap at the door at the moment, and a waiter

entered.

"A lady to see Mr. Hawksley," he announced; and then a I

stately figure appeared close behind him, veiled and simply

dressed, but looking a "lady" from the crown of her head to

the sole of her foot.

The waiter disappeared, closing the door behind him.

Robert Hawksley arose, laying down his ripe-the lady

flung back her veil, and father and daughter stood face to face.

For the space of five seconds they stood in dead silence

looking at each other. She saw a man bronzed and weather

:~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~








<pb n="352"/>
352           WOReING    AM s-bEu DARK.

beaten, but handsomer and nobler it seemed to her than ani

other man she had eves known-save one. He saw a' beauti'

ful and graceful young lady, with soft, sapphire eyes, and gIld

bronze hair rippling low over that broad, white blow, with

sweet, sensitive lips, and a little curved, spirited chin.

They were strikingly alike, too-eyes, hair, features--th4: 

most casual observer might have told the relationship. 

He smiled-a smile of great content passed over Colonel i

Iawksley's bearded lips, and he came forward with both hands 

outstretched.

"Paulina ! my daughter!"

"My father!"

lie drew her to him and kissed the pure white brow, and the i

first meeting was over without scenes or exclamations. I sup-

pose it is only on the stage new-found relatives fling themselves

into each other's arms with ecstatic screams. In real life, when

we feel deeply, our actions and words are apt to be quiet and 

commonplace in exact proportion. 

She took the seat he offered her, away from the window, and :

waitedifor him to speak.

On all ordinary occasions Miss Lisle was never at a loss for

plenty to.say for herself, but just now her lips were quivering

and her heart was full, and no words came. He was the more 

composed and self-possessed of the two.

'' Earlscourt gave you my letter ?"                   I

She started with a sort of shock that that name should be

almost the first word from his lips.

<' What a surprise it must have been to you !"

"A very great-a very glad surprise. I can only regret you

did not tell me all long ago."

" What good would it have done ?"

"This! " her eyes firing up, " that Sir Vane Charteris should

never have shut my mother up in a mad-house. By some

means or other I would have rescued her long ago."

"Were you much surprised when you heard your mother's

name?" 

"No.   I think not, and yet I never suspected. How

strange-how strange it all is ! I never saw much of her, but

I liked her exceedingly.  And to think Sir Vane Charteris

knew that I was her daughter all those years."

" How has he treated you, Paulina--harshly ?"

Miss Lisle lifted her imperial head with a haughty gesture.

He dare not! I would endure harshness from no guaidiaa








<pb n="353"/>
WORKING IN THE DARK.               353

ive. In one instance only did he ever try to coerce me, and

affled him in that."

'Her face gloomedover as shespoke. Had not that instance

llw:ich she had baffled him embittered her whole life ?

'i'}e did? " her father said; "your letters never told me,-

aulina."

"i: "No," with a sigh; "of what use would it have been-you

Could not have helped me ? I fought my own battle and won.'

i"d ,, He wished you to marry some one he had chosen for you-

t for your fortune, no doubt ?"

H "He wished me to marry Lord Montalien. From what mo-

tive, I do not know. Lord Montalien, with fifteen thousand a

>year of his own, could scarcely wish to marry me for my for

tune."

"Lord Montalien! What! Guy's elder brother?"

" Mr. Earlscourt's elder brother."

Robert Hawksley looked at her searchingly. The proud,

pale face, very soft and sweet a moment since, had grown hard

and set at the'memory of that past time.

"And you would not ? You did not care for him ?"

"I not only did not care for him-one might get over that

-I hated him. I believed him to have wronged a friend I

loved very dearly-I would have died a thousand times sooner

than marry him."

He was watching her still-a grave smile upon his face.

"I wonder if that hatred extends to Guy ? I hope not, for

I have grown as fond of him as though he were my own son."

Her face flushed all over-a deep, painful, burning red.

" I have no reason to dislike Mr. Earlscourt," she answered,

the words coming with an effort; "he did me a great service

once-a service few men would have rendered."

" You must have been equally astonished and delighted when

he appeared so suddenly before you last night at the Countess

of Damar's ball."

" Very much surprised beyond a doubt, since I thought him

dead. Do you not know that his death was announced many

months ago in one of the American papers you sent me ? "

" I did not know it. And you really thought him dead until he

appeared like a ghost before you ? Not that Guy much resem-'

bles a ghost at present. It was as close a thing as ever I saw

-he had half a hundred wounds, and fought through the cam-

paign like a lion. It was while he lay sick in the h spital, al-

most to death, that I found your picture in a locket attached








<pb n="354"/>
354           WORKING IN THE DARK

to his watch-chain, and discovered that he knew you, and wad

a countryman."                                        :

That deep flush rose up once more on Paulina's fair face. 

"My picture !" she said. "How came he by that? I cer,:

tainly never gave it to him."

"He told me as much afterward-owned that he purloined 

it all a souvenir of England and you, to carry into his exile. 

Ah, he is 5a brave lad, and a gallant one. He saved my lifed'

once at thz risk of his own."

"Tell me about it-father."

Her voice was strangely soft and tremulous-her face drooped 

forward on her father's shoulder, something vague and sweet 

stirring in her heart. It was a theme Robert Hawksley liked 

well-the young man had grown as dear to him as a son. Hel

told her, while the moments went by, stories of his bravery, of

his generosity, of his genius, of his irreproachable life-of how 

nobly he had redeemed the past.

"I believe, at the worst, his greatest crimes were but the -

thoughtless follies of youth. Guy Earlscourt has the noblest :

nature of any man I know. He could not stoop to do a mean 

or dastardly thing. His comrades idolized him-his officers re-

spected him. I believe he is a true genius, and destined to 

miake a shining mark in the literature of his day."

An interval of silence followed-his daughter's face was still

hidden, but it was to hide the tears that were falling now.

And this was the man she thought capable of selling his man-

hood for her money-the man who had sacrificed his life to save

her from his brother !

" I don't see the need of our spending the first hours of our

meeting in talking altogether of Earlscourt-fine fellow though

he be. It strikes me I should like to hear something of your-

self."

She lifted her face, and laughed a little bitterly.

"A  most unprofitable subject. I am a fashionable lady,

wrapped up in dressing, dancing, driving-rather a striking con-

trast to the sort of life you have been speaking of."

"And engaged to the Marquis of Heatherland ?"

"No."

"No ? Why, I saw in the 'Morning Post'-"

"Very likely-still even the press is not infallible. Such an

engagement did exist, but it has ceased."

" It has ceased ! May I ask-since when ?"

She flinched a little under his grave, steady, kindly eyes.








<pb n="355"/>
it  .       KWORING IzN THE DARK.              355

Since last night."

Did you love Lord Heatherland, my daughter ? The world

aks well of him."

!." And he deserves all the world can say-he is one of the

esjt men I ever knew. But-I never loved him. I don't

Know that I ever loved any one-that I am capable of it. i

am hard and selfish, and worldly, and ambitious, and all evil

!tings-unworthy to be any good man's wife. I shall never

: marry--you need not look at me in that way--I mean it. My

engagement with Lord Heatherland has ceased-what I am

Inow I will go to my grave. When we find my mother-ah !

rwhy should we talk of anything but her ?-we three will leave

this London life, and all pertaining to it, and grow old, in peace,

somewhere out of the world."

Her voice gave way in a sort of sob. Not capable of loving

any one, when she knew that she loved Guy Earlscourt dearly-

dearly, and that she had loved him from the first-ay, in the

days when Allan Fane, the artist, had whiled away in her com-

pany that rosy summer eight years gone.

"Let us talk of my mother," she repeated. "What do you

;propose to do-how to find her ?"

" The most skilled detectives of Scotland Yak must do that.

Can you, living under the same roof with Sir Vane Charteris,

throw no light on the place of her concealment?"

"I am afraid not; and yet," Paulina said, thoughtfully,

"perhaps I can. I have repeatedly asked him, and so has

Maud-his own daughter, you know-to take us to see& her,

but his answer was invariably a refusal. It was no sight for

young girls, he said. Once Maud told me, in confidence, she

thought her mother was confined somewhere at Cheswick, in a

private asylum there. At least it is a clue-you might follow

it up."

"I will. If she is in England, it should not lie so hard to

find her. My poor Olivia ! what has she not suffered all her

life long ? Can anything in the future ever atone to her for

the past?" 

" Let us hope so, my father. If we can only find her, I am

quite sure we can make her happy. You are certain," hesita.

tingly, "Sir Vane Chaiteris cannot invalidate your marriage ?'

"Quite certain-it is beyond dispute. I shall set detectives

on the track at once, and remain quietly here to await events.

Can you come to see me often, Paulina, or will it inconveni

ence you too much ?"








<pb n="356"/>
3e 56         WORKING I' THE DARK.

"I shall come to see you every day at this hour: if you lik

1 am in every way my own mistress, free to come and go as;d

choose. And now, as it is close upon two o'clock, I think

had better return. They might possibly fall to wondering w

had become of me."                                   i

He led her to the door, and they parted with a hand-clasi

He was never demonstrative, and her relationship was new ar

yet to Paulina. 

As she drew her veil over her face and turned to descend

Mr. Earlscourt came sauntering up, looking very handsome in

his careless morning costume. He removed his hat, bowed izi

silence, and passed on into the apartment of his friend.  -

Miss Lisle reached home in time for luncheon. There were

always three or four droppers-in for that repast under the baro- s

net's hospitable roof, and Paulina found the subject under dis.-l

cussion to be the unexpected return of Guy Earlscourt.

"Lucky beggar ! always fell upon his feet, and writes books  i

and makes pots of money. Wish I could write books. All the

women throwing themselves at his head already-Lady Edith

Clive last night, and now you, Miss Charteris. Why couldn't-

the fellow stay where he was, and marry a Yankee ? Here's ,,

Miss Lisle-let's hear what she says. Miss Lisle, Miss Char-

teris says Earlscourt's the handsomest man in London. Your A.

taste is indisputable, what is your opinion ?"

"Really, Mr. Challis, I have not thought sufficiently upon 

the subject to form an opinion. One cannot decide so import- 

ant a question, and award the palm of masculine beauty all in -;

a moment."

"All in a moment!" exclaimed Maud.   "Why, Paulina,

you knew Guy ages ago, down in Lincolnshire, and when you 

first came out-or was it before you came out here in London ?  ;

And I'm sure, last night, you and he had quite an interesting 

conversation, to judge from your looks just before we left.

Mr. Challis says Lady Edith Clive made love to him for the

rest of the night."

" S she did," pursued Mr. Challis; "so the women always 

did, even when the fellow was going straight to the dogs. So

will you all-don't tell me-I know you. Earlscourt's clever, 

and deucedly good-looking, and the fashion, and may have his

pick and choice before the season ends. He ought to go in'

for the Lady Edith; her fortune is something immense."

"Yes," said Mrs. Ga.oraith, "he's very handsome, and 

clever, and fascinating, always was, and has just that sort of








<pb n="357"/>
'         [VWORKING IN THE DARK.             357

tItation which makes all romantic girls lose their heads at

ce. But, my dear girls, don't either of you ever be mad

ough to fall in love with a literary man. The wives of men

f genius are the most miserable creatures under the sun.

Pid you ever read the life of Hayden ? And if so, you com-

ssonated poor Mrs. Hayden, I hope. Look at Lady Byron,

ady Bulwer, hosts of them, always the same story-private

isery-public separation. The reason is plain enough. The

ffctions of your men of great talent are not centred on wife

d home, like those of commonplace men. The painted

canvas on their easel, the blotted manuscript in their desk, are

iearer and dearer to them than wife or child. Marry a man

without two ideas in his head, and his heart in the right place,

0and you will stand a better chance of happiness than with so

rilliant a literary meteor as Guy Earlscourt."

"Quite an eloquent speech, Aunt Eleanor," commented

Maud, "and true, no doubt-though where your experience of

;:men of genius comes from I don't know. Uncle Ralph was

':.never overburdened with brains, from all I've heard of him.

: 'And in spite of your warning, I think I should prefer a little

mild melancholy as the wife of Mr. Earlscourt, to the perfect

: bliss you speak of with a man 'who has not two ideas in his

;: head.'"  Her voice and face softened as she pronounced the

;-name with a lingering tenderness, and a faint flush rose up in

: her pale face. Evidently it was a case of love at first sight.

I0:--  Paulina's eyes flashed, and a resentful, jealous feeling came

inhto her heart. What right had Maud Charteris to talk of be-

! ing his wife ?

;  ' Earlscourt will have non'e of you," said the young gentle-

man, who had first appealed to Miss Lisle. "I met him at

Fane's studio this morning-Fane, the artist, you know.

Somebody chaffed him about the execution his beautiful eyes

and last book had wrought with Lady Edith-she has been

able to talk of nothing else since its publication. He laughed

at first, then grew serious. ' It is nothing, of course,' he said;

v   Lady Edith does me the honor to fancy my book, perhaps,

but I wish it to be understood I am not going to marry. I am

as much vowed to celibacy as though I wore the Templar's

Cross. I shall marry no one.' And by Jove ! he said it, you

: know, as though he meant it."

Paulina's face flushed-her heart throbbed violently. Oh,

what had she done !-what had she done ! "Yes," said Mrs

Galbraith; "Mr. Earlscourt is a very clever man, and a readei








<pb n="358"/>
358           WORKING IN THE DARK. 

of human nature. Such a declaration is all that is needed 

throw over him a halo of mystery and romance, and make him.

simply irresistible. You don't speak, Paulina-what are youn

thinking of?" 

"I am .hinking how exceedingly kind it is of Mr, Earlscourt 

to put us on our guard," Pauliha answered, with that bitterness

which was always in her tone wheh she spoke of Guy; "he i:

'such a dazzling light that we all, poor moths, must inevitably 

be scorched to death if he had not warned us away. I sup.

pose your hero is no more conceited than most men, Maud; he 

only shows it a little more plainly. Why not advertise at once

in the Times: 'The ladies of England are hereby warned not

to bestow their affections upon the undersigned, as he is quite

unable to reciprocate, and intends to make none of them 

happy by the offer of his heart and hand.' "

She arose as she spoke, angry at herself for the vehemence 

with which she had spoken..                          - 

"How you do hate him, Paulina, dear, don't you?" said :

Maud. " He never jilted you, did he? At Mrs. Atcherly's, :

for instance, six years ago, when you and he were surprised :j

together in the ante-room, and poor auntie here was so angry?" y

The random shot went straight home. Paulina turned a -

dead whiteness from brow to chin. She tried to reply, but her 

voice failed. The others looked at her in surprise. 

"He did jilt you then !" Maud would have liked to say, but

she was afraid. There was that when she was moved in Miss

Lisle's face that always awed Miss Charteris. There was a'

little, very awkward pause-then Sir Vane came in, and the

conversation turned' upon something else-Paulina quietly 

leaving the room.

Maud's suspicions were aroused; and from that hour she

determined to watch Paulina and Guy Earlscourt when they

met. They met night after night, and day after day now-and

jealousy had made the small, black eyes sharp-sighted. It was

love at first sight with poor Maud. The dusky splendor of

Guy's dark face, his tall, graceful figure-his reputation as a

hero out there in America-all had dazzled and won her.

Long ago-he had been fond of her-good to her-down at

Montalien-if there were nothing between Paulina and him,

surely she might hope.

Mr. Earlscourthad made up his mind not to reenter society

upon his return to London. He had learned how hollow and

empty it all was-he had learned a healthier kind of life in the








<pb n="359"/>
WORKING IN THE DARK.               35

six years. But he found himself quite a "lion,' the hero

e day; society sought him--crowds of invitations poured

on him from the highest in the land. Many were old

ds whom he could not well refuse. So he said to himself,

ashamed of his yielding; but was that solely the reason ?

rever he went he saw the proud, beautiful face of the girl

was his wife. His wife ! what a pang-half pain, half re-

e-it gave him ! He should not have taken advantage of

hour of madness, he thought, when she had besought him

sve her-when, carried away by the excitement of the pri-

theatricals, she had become his wife. It was blighting her

, he could see. She hated him, and took little pains to

eal it. -Night after night he left those gay assemblies

re she shone a queen by right divine of her peerless beauty

d grace, vowing, in his passion, never to return, and yet-

en to-morrow came, the temptation to look once more upon

perfect face, though colder than marble to him, was irre-

Istible, and he yielded. And she never dreamed, in the re-

glaotest way, how with his whole, strong heart, and for the first

|tme in his life, he was growing to love her. His face, the long

;raining of his life, kept his secret well. She saw him petted,

caressed, the brightest eyes, the sweetest lips in the land smil-

ing upon him, knew that he studiously avoided herself, was

yealm and courteous, and indifferent when they met, and knew

no more. Walls of pride, stronger than adamant, held those

iawo haughty spirits asunder-were likely so to hold them their

lives long.

X  Miss Lisle was almost as much an object of interest to so-

dciety just now as Guy himself. She had broken off her engage-

ment with the Marquis of Heatherland at the eleventh hour-

positively refusing the best match of the season-and a pro-

speetive duke. Lord Heatherland had gone abroad, but be-

fore his departure he had taken care to let the clubs and the

drawing-rooms of Belgravia know that it was by Miss Lisle's

own express desire the match had been broken.

"I admire her above all women, and I always shall," had

been his words. " It is the great misfortune of my life that she

tannot care for me strongly enough to be my wife."

. It created a profound sensation. People said very hard

tdings of Miss Lisle behind her back, called her a heartless jilt,

who woul end, no doubt, as she deserved, by being an old

maid. But they looked upon her with new interest, as a woman

capable of trampling under foot a ducal coronet; and the beau-

tiful heiress was more sought after than ever








<pb n="360"/>
36s           WORKING IN THE DARK.

Nearly a fortnight had passed. She visited her father cve 

day- bat her mother's hiding-place had not yet been disco

ered. She met Guy perpetually-day and night, and with th:

rest of the world saw the marked preference Lady Edith Cliv

showed him. They rarely spoke-a formal bow in passing was 

the only greeting they exchanged, but in her heart she knew

the was intensely jealous. He could not, would not, marry

the Lady Edith; her secret now and forever was safe; but whc

was to tell he might not learn to love her ? She grew restless

and miserable-the world began to say she was regretting the.

step she had taken with the marquis-that she was approaching

five-and-twenty, and growing quite faded andpassee. She was-

sick at heart-sick body and soul, longing unspeakably for the:

hour when her mother might be found, and she herself free to-

quit England and him forever.

It was close upon the last of the second week, that, making 

her morning visit to her father, she found him pacing up and 

down his hotel sitting-room-flushed, excited, anxious.

"You have found her ! " was Paulina's first cry as she looked

upon his face.

He had found her-or rather the detective in his employ had. -:

The private -asylum was at Cheswick-he held the address in

his hand-Lady Charteris was in tolerably good health, both !

mentally and bodily, and the medical superintendent had been ii.

expecting the baronet every day for the past three weeks to 

come and take his wife home. The asylum was a thoroughly f

respectable institution, and Lady Charteris, he had learned, was 

almost entirely restored, and ready at any moment to leave. 

"You must go to Cheswick at once, Paulina," her father 

said. "You will introduce yourself as the patient's daughter, 

sent by Sir Vane, to bring her home. Here is a note I have 

written-a pretty good imitation of his handwriting, I think, in 

which he says illness prevents his accompanying you.  You

must lose no time-I have arranged everything. When you af

quit the asylum, you will take the first train for Lincolnshire.

Go to your old friend, Duke Mason's-I will follow. On the 

way you can break to her the news of my arrival-prepare her

to meet me at the cottage. Once there, and with me, let Sir

Vane Charteris claim her if he dare !"

Paulina listened breathlessly-took the note, and entered the

cab her father called. 'Ten minutes, and she was speeding

along rapidly Cheswick-ward, fully prepared for the part she had

to play.








<pb n="361"/>
WORKING IN THE DARK.                361

e part was so easy, it -require I little duplicity to go thiough

Mit. Miss Lisle met the medical superintendent, and an-

ced herself as Lady Charteris's daughter. She gave him

r father's forged note-he read it as a matter of course--

Wd low before the stately, beautiful woman, and led her at

eto his patient. - Paulina's heart beat fast. How was she

tell her mother might not betray her in her first surprise ?

paused as the doctor was about to open the door.

tStop," she said; "my mother has not seen me for many

The shock may be too much for her. Do you go in,

tell her I am here, and let us meet quite alone."

' As you please, Miss Charteris," the polite superintendent

aid; "you can wait here."

1 He ushered her into a sunny apartment. She stood, her back

rned to the door, looking out of the window, trying to calm

per rapid heart-throbbing. She was not kept waiting long. In

:three minutes the door opened, she turned slowly round-

lbother and daughter stood alone together!

I?. Those six years of misery and imprisonment had done their

Ework upon the wife of Robert Lisle. Her face had blanched

i -to a dead waxen whiteness-her golden hair had turned to sil-

tr ter. The great black eyes looked out from the bloodless face

with a frightened, terrified appeal. She stood on the threshold

irresolute-trembling-she did not recognize this tall, Juno-like

young lady with the lovely face and large, pitying blue eyes.

I  "Are you?" she faltered; "no, you are not Maud." She

drew away, trembling violently all over. "I don't know you,"

she said; " did he send you here ?"

Paulina came over, put her strong young arms about her, and

looked down into that frightened face with a brave, loving

smile.

'3  I am not Maud," she whispered with a kiss; "I am Pau-

lina Lisle--mother-dear little, suffering mother. No. don't

cry out; you will spoil all. I have come to take you away, and

Sir Vane Charteris knows nothing about it. Don't wait to ask

questions now-and be calm-don't excite suspicion. I an.

going to take you away-the doctor thinks I am Sir Vane's

daughter-don't undeceive him. Go, get ready at.once-every

second is precious, and be calm-for all our sakes try and be

calm."

She was calmer than Paulina had hoped. Her eyes lit up-

hope flashed over her face. "I will," she answered firmly,

" wait for me here."








<pb n="362"/>
362           WO KING IN THE DARK.

She left the room-in ten minutes she was back, accon pi

nied oy the medical man.

"I can safely pronounce Lady Charteris perfectly restored, :

Miss Charteris," he said, blandly. "I told Sir Vane so, weeks s

ago, and have been expecting him daily. Amusement and'

change of air are all she requires now. And how about the,

luggage ?"

"You will wait until Sir Vane visits you in person," Pata

lina said quietly, drawing her mother's arm within her own. l

"He will probably be sufficiently restored by to-morrow."

They were at the door-she could hardly credit her own ;£:

success. The bland superintendent bowed low, as he bade-'

adieu to the baronet's beautiful daughter, and assisted my lady 

into the cab. The moment after, they were whirling away fai .

from the asylum, where for six long years this poor, pale woman i)

had been incarcerated.

Paulina leaned forward to give the driver his order, then, she 

turned and clasped again that weak, frail form in her arms.

"You look bewildered, darling mother-oh, how easy, how

natural the name comes ! It is sufficient to bewilder you, or !

me, the rapidity with which this has been managed. I know

all, you see-that you are my mother-everything. Who do 

you think has told me ?" She kissed again, with a smile, the

appealing face-" my father."

"Your-father !"

"And your husband-your only, your rightful husband,

mother-Robert Lisle."

She clasped her wasted hands-she tried once or twice 

before the words she wanted to say would quit her pallid lips:

"Robert-my Robert! he is alive still! " 

"Alive and well, dear mother; and-now try and bear good 

news as bravely as you have borne misfortune-coming home 

to claim you."

There was a faint, low cry; Paulina drew her closer to hei,

and kissed her again and again.

"Poor little mother! Yes-coming home to claim you.

You are his wife, you know-he has the right--that wicked

baronet, none. He is coming! mother! mother! think of

tWat /"

" Paulina," her mother said, with a sort of cry, " lie is here "

For all answer, Paulina held her closer.

"Tell me," Olivia said; " tell me, Paulina--I can bear to

tear such joyful news-Robert is here !"








<pb n="363"/>
WORKING IN THE DAR.           '    363

I" My father is here. Nothing can ever come between you

d him again."

liHer mother fell back, nearly fainting. Paulina caught both

Iads. and looked straight, almost sternly, into her eyes.

M: other, if you faint, I will never forgive you. You have a

urney to take-we are going down to Lincolnshire, to Duke

ason's. My father will follow by the next train. T77en I

geve you leave to faint, if you will insist upon it. Meantime I

t  going to fasten this veil over your face; there is no telling

honm we may meet at the station."

By one of the fatalities which rule our lives, and which we

frm chance, Sir Vane Charteris had chosen that very day to

reemove his unfortunate captive from the asylum to another

p:ison. She had been received in all good faith-she was in-

ane most likely for the time, and for weeks after her entrance

raved in delirium of a brain fever. Upon her recovery, she

ihad been at times wildly excited, demanding to be released,

crying out she was no wife of Sir Vane's, and never had been,

Ltthat her true husband had been in America. At other times

she would lapse into sullen despair and gloom, and pass whole

i days in speechless misery. So the first years had gone.

;,-Of late, however, even the people of the asylum became

convinced of her perfect sanity, and the physician had repeat-

edly urged the baronet to remove his wife-to take her abroad,

'/and give her amusement and change of air. Sir Vane had

delayed doing so to the last possible moment. At last a happy

thought struck him. He would fit up The Firs for her recep-

tion, employ a thoroughly unprincipled and trustworthy woman

to take care of her, and leave her to drag out the remainder of

'her wretched existence in the dreary desolation of that desolate

coast. It was bleak; sea-fogs and east winds were abundant,

the house was damp and draughty-death, no doubt, would

speedily rid him of a hated incumbrance. He longed intensely

for her death, and the sole reversion of her fortune to Maud-

the time was very near, he thought now.

He drove up to the asylum in a four-wheeled cab-he means

to take his wife straight to Essex. He-was admitted, and met

the doctor in the hall.

" What !" the superintendent exclaimed. "Sir Vane, sc

soon after his messenger? And your note said you were ill.

Yours has been a speedy recovery."

"What note? I don't understand you. I have come foi

nmy wife."                                        e

. ,      








<pb n="364"/>
364           WORKING IN THE DARK.

- " lVr wife/ My dear Sir Vane, of course you k.low yti y

wife has gone !"

"Gone!"   The baronet started back blankly. "Go

Do you mean dead?"                               i-.. .

"Heaven forbid ! Lady 'Charteris' health, consideil g a

things, is remarkably good, Is it.possible ?-but no, I  nn

have been duped. Here is your own note, demanding h

release."                                          B 

He handed the baronet the note Paulina had given him wi

an injured air. Sir Vane read it through, turning the hue

ashes, with mingled amaze and rage. 

"This note is a forgery.  I never wrote it-so poorl

forgery, too, that I am amazed any one could be stupid enoug

to be deceived by it who ever saw my hand. Do you mean

tell me, Dr. Harding, that Lady Charteris has left yoi

&s.ylum ?"

"Left an hour ago,"-replied the doctor, sullenly.

"With whom?"                                       B

"The bearer of that note."                       ~?:

"Who was the bearer of this note ? "

His thoughts flew to Lord Montalien--to Lord Montalien, whi

rever forgot nor forgave, and who fully meant to place the

paper he held in Olivia's hand, should he ever succeed i

finding her.

"A young lady-your daughter."

"My daughter! Impossible !"

" She announced herself as Lady Charteris's daughter-thl

same thing, I take it."

" Will you tell me what she was like ? I left my daughter'

Maud ill at home of a headache."

" She was tall, the finest figure and most classically beautiful

face I ever saw. She had dark-blue eyes, and gold-brown -

hair, and the manners of a lady in waiting."

"Paulina !" the baronet cried, under his breath; "the very:I

last person I should ever think of. Do you know which way;i

they drove upon leaving here, Harding ?"

' City-ward-I know no more. Do you really mean to tell I

me, Sir Vane, there is anything wrong about all this?" 

"Everything is wrong. It is an infernal plot. You have

been a fool, and I am a ruined man."

With that answer Sir Vane strode out of the house. Where 

could Paulina possibly have taken her mother ? How she had :X

found her he did not then-stop to inquire. He thought over X

: :_zq








<pb n="365"/>
WORKING IN THE DARK.               365

pople he knew in London; except the Xtcherlys, there

not a family whom he could imagine her taking the sick

to. A sudden, swift inspiration flashed upon him.

he'll take her to Lincolnshire, to her old home, of course.

- would never attempt to keep her in London. To think

girl has been plotting against me, for months, perhaps, and

ver suspected it.'"

e looked at his watch-an express train would leave in an

He gave the driver his order, and fell back in the cab

think. Not pleasant thoughts, by any means. If Paulina

ok her to Speckhaven, Lord Montalien, at present at the

ry, would hear of it at once, and hand over the paper

himplicated him for bigamy. His marriage could easily

proven illegal, Maud illegitimate, and the fortune he had

eeted so, go absolutely to Robert Lisle's daughter.

' Curse her !" he muttered; " why did I not poison her when

e was in my power?"

He reached the London terminus, and was about to make

nquiries concerning the passengers by the mail, which had left

-o hours before. Paulina's commanding beauty and peculiar

:grace could not fail to attract the attention of the officials, ever

at a crowded London railway-station. But the questions he

i-would have asked died upon his lips, as he approached the

ticket-office, for standing there, taking his ticket, was a man he

i knew well. A man he had not seen for close upon a quarter

?- of a century, but whom, in spite of flowing beard, of foreign

: bronze, of the slouched sombrero, he knew at once-Robert

aLisle /

f   He drew back among the crowd.     All was clear now.

:t Robert Lisle had come back, a rich man, no doubt, to claim

his wife, and expose the villany that held them apart so long.

Of what use was it to follow now-the game was up-Lord

'-Montalien's revenge was all that was needed for his exposure

and disgrace. And yet he determined to follow-to see the

play played out-to face his fate without flinching. He took

his ticket and his place in a different compartment from that

of Robert Lisle, and London was left behind like a smoky

dream.

Into the fresh country, where the young grass and cowslip

arere bright-into the rustic heart of Lincolnshire, the express

train flew. It was close upon six, and the afternoon sun was

slanting westward as they rushed into the Speckhaven station,

Still keeping out of sight, the baronet watched his rival








<pb n="366"/>
366            "PAULVA T7O ALICE."

Robert Lisle took a fly-the baronet took another--remaini

well in the rear. Duke Mason's house was the destination

the foremost, the other followed. Robert Lisle sprang out 

entered the little garden gate, with rapid steps approaching 

house. Sir Vane Charteris also dismounted, also entered 

garden, and approached.  The house door was open, 

heard a woman's shrill scream, his wife's voice he knew, and

hurried nearer, and stood looking in.

He saw a very striking picture.

Duke Mason and his sister stood apart-Paulina was in tl

middle of the floor, and standing near her was Robert Lisl,

and the woman who had been his wife in the eyes of the worlid

for so many years, lying still and senseless in his arms.  '

CHAPTER V.

"PAULINA TO ALICE." 

HE bold, evil spirit within the man rose with the sense4

of his utter'defeat. He set his teeth, and strode resoi'

lutely into their midst.

Paulina looked up and recognized him-growing 

very pale. Duke Mason took a step forward with a startle

exclamation. And Robert Lisle lifted his face, white from exx-

cess of feeling, and looked at him.

The two husbands of the one wife after a quarter of a cen-

tury were once more face to face!

The baronet took the initiative.

.., "What is the meaning of this ? " he demanded. "Who are V;

you, sir, who hold my wife ? Paulina Lisle, how dare you re- 

move Lady Charteris from the asylum where I placed her? "

Before Paulina could reply, her father interfered-quite 

gently.

"Mason, will you carry my wife upstairs ? Paulina, you will 

accompany Miss Mason, and endeavor to restore her. Foit

this man, Iwill answer his questions."

Paulina clasped her hands anxiously about his arm.

"You will not quarrel with him, father. He is not worth it, .:

Ibere will be no altercation-promise me that."








<pb n="367"/>
" PAULINA TO ALICE.                367"

J:He smiled gravely.

1' I promise, my dear; I have not the slightest intention of

steiing or quarrelling with Sir Vane Charteris. A stronger

wer than mine shall deal with him-the English law."

lie placed Olivia's fainting form in Duke's arms, and watched

and the two women quit the room. Sir Vane made a

ond noisy attempt to interfere.

"Lady Charteris shall not quit this room ! Mason, on your

you touch my wife ! "

Duke paid no heed. The baronet surveyed the six-foot,

werful-looking, soldierly figure before him, and wisely hesi-

zated before trying tb enforce his words by deeds. In a mo-

;nent they were alone.

"- Now then, Sir Vane Charteris," said Robert Lisle, folding

! his arms, and looking down at the small, pursy figure of the

t: aronet, "I will hear what you have to say. You asked me a

i moment ago who I was-I don't really think you ever needed

;to ask that question."

' "You are Robert Lisle, the yeoman's son, who twenty years

: ago inveigled a simple girl into a shaim marriage, who absconded

:with her uncle's money and jewels, and afterward fled to Amer-

Ica to escape transportation. You perceive I know you well."

' "I thought so. For the sham marriage, as you call it, it is a

'marriage that our English law holds binding. You, Sir Vane

Charteris are a bigamist with intent. Olivia Lisle never, for

pne instant, was your wife. You saw me in church on the

morning of that mockery of marriage. How will you answer

to a British jury for that? When Olivia discovered I was alive,

you shut her up in a mad-house for six years-how will you

answer a jury for that? As to the other absurd charge you

speak of, I was a fool-the greatest of fools, ever to let that

bugbear alarm me. Neither you now, nor Geoffrey Lyndith, if

.Xe were alive, could support that trumped-up accusation. For

the rest, I have worked as you did, in the dark-I have found

my wife, and I mean to keep her. The law shall judge be-

tween us of the legality of the first and second marriages. You

ai e free to act as you please, -in all respects, save intruding

here--yonder is the door-go-and never dare to degrade this

house by your presence again, unless you wish me to take the

law in my own hands. Did you ever hear of Judge Lynch,

Sir Vane ? I come from a land where he is well known. If

you ever cross yonder threshold-again, I'll strangle you as I

kwould a snake that crawled across my path. Now go !"

A:~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~








<pb n="368"/>
368            "PA ULINA TO ALICE." 

"IWill you wait one moment ?" said a voice in the doorwa

Both men turned round. All this time the house door h

stood open, and a third person, quite unlooked for, had wi.,

nessed the interview.

Lord Montalien had spent the past two years travelling tc

his health. He was passing the London season in the count

now, for the same reason-a chronic affection of the hear

Strolling by, taking his usual afternoon exercise, he had espiei

the two flies from the railway at Duke Mason's gate. He swi

the house door open-it might be Paulina; curiosity prompte

him to approach. He saw Sir Vane Charteris, guessed in a :

instant who his companion must be, and heard every word o

Robert Lisle's speech. At last the hour of his revenge ha<

come, at last he could pay off that debt now six years old. 

"Excuse me," his lordship said blandly, coming slowly in

"if I have inadvertently heard every word-Sir Vane Charteris,

I am exceedingly happy to see you on the present occasion ;l

you, sir," turning with a bow to the other, "are, I presumer

Mr. Robert Lisle." 

"I am, sir," was the stern response; "who are you ?"  '!:B

"Lord Montalien, very much at your service, and disposed,<

like my father before me, to do you a good turn. I owe Sib

Vane here a little grudge, and am inclined to wipe it off. Have

you any recollection in your past life of a man named Jamet.

Porter?" "

The American officer looked bewildered, and Sir Vane stood

with bent, black brows, and sullen ferocity, waiting for the end':[

"He was valet, five-and-twenty years ago, to Geoffrey Lyn- 

dith-perhaps that will aid your memory."              :

"I recollect," Lisle said brusquely; "what of him?"

"Only that he is dead; and upon his deathbed made a- i

deposition which I took down, and have in my possession at

present, duly witnessed. In that confession he gives the whole:-

nefarious plot by which you were driven out of England. It A

dears you in every respect. If you will do me the honor to :

call at the Priory this evening, I shall be happy to place therm:

document in your hands."

He looked with a diabolical smile at the baronet.  Sil Vane, 

livid with fear and fury, moved toward the door.

"Robert Lisle shall answer for his abduction and retention 

of my wife," he said, trying bravado to the last " for you and h

your miserable documents, Lord Montalien, I care nothing. 

The law shall judge between us."








<pb n="369"/>
|  "PAULINA TO ALICE."            369

,The law shall," Lisle said gravely. "I thank your lord.

I for this unexpected favor. My good name should have

cleared by my own efforts; but the confession of Porter

lr fies all that. I will call this evening at the Priory."

rd Montalien bowed, and turned to go.

Perhaps you will be good enough to mention this fact to

r dlaughter," he said. " I wished to make her my wife some

I s ago, and I am afraid she has never forgiven me for it.

may be induced to think somewhat less harshly of me

hen she learns this. May I also ask one question-did my

-ther return with you ?"

lHe did."

He is at present in London ?"

Ht'e is."

"A successful author-quite able to meet all his littl

ilities ?" 

Lisle nodded-somewhat impatiently.

Thanks," Lord Montalien said; "I shall riot detain you

longer. Permit me to congratulate you upon the recovery

of your wife and daughter, and to wish you every happiness in

the future."

?: He left the house. The smile faded from his lips, his sallow,

Iworn face darkened and grew bitter with hate and malignity.

'-  " All my plotting has been in vain, then," he thought. " Guy

I has returned-the past wiped out and forgotten-rich, famous,

I;:handsomer than ever, no doubt. And she always liked him-

!! always-I know it, and will marry him now. Why did she break

: off with Heatherland if not for love of him ? And one day this

; accursed heart-disease will carry me off, and he will reign in

i my stead at Montalien."

- His face was black with impotent hatred and rage. All had

- gone against him. The only woman he had ever wanted to

marry had refused him-he had speculated largely and invaria-

- bly lost. Ill-health had overtaken him-at thirty-three he was

an old, disappointed, soured man. He had grown nervous

with illness, and in the dark dead of night, the white face of

Alice Warren rose to haunt him and drive sleep from his pillow.

She lay unburied and unavenged, but retribution more dire

than any an earthly tribunal could inflict had come home to her

murderer.

Robert Lisle watched his retreating form from view, and

then ascended the stairs. His wife had recovered from her

swoon, and lay helpless and trembling on the couch where they

16*








<pb n="370"/>
370             "PAULINA TO ALICE."

had placed her. Robert alive! Robert back! After four-an4

twenty years of endless, infinite misery, Robert was to be he

again. The others rose as he entered. Paulina stooped all

kissed the wan, startled face, and the'long-severed husband and|¤

wife were together once more.

Proceedings were immediately instituted to prove the validity 

of the first, the invalidity of the second marriage. There waa&;

little difficulty in doing so. Robert Lisle's Scotch marriage was',

as binding as though the Archbishop of Canterbury had pio- 

nounced the benediction. The second marriage was a farce.

The suit and its results produced the profoundest sensation..

Every day new and interesting revelations came out about Miss 

Lisle. Now the mystery of her birth was cleared up. She:

was not an orphan, as half London had supposed, and on the

nrother's side, at least, her descent was irreproachable.  And  p

Sir Vane Charteris was a villain, who had fled to the Continent

to bury himself and his disgrace out of sight.

Mrs. Galbraith and Maud had become socially extinct down

at Essex. And Miss Lisle and her romantic father and mother -

held themselves sedulously aloof from wondering metropolitan 

society down in some cottage in Lincolnshire, where she had

been brought up. What a romance it was-equal to any of i

Mr. Earlfcourt's charming plots!

Immediately the suit was ended, Mr. Lisle and his wife (he -|

had discarded the name of Hawksley) were going abroad.

Mrs. Lisle's nervous system had been utterly shattered-years s

must pass of peace, of change, of happiness before she became  s

fully herself again. She grew pale and terrified when Robert 

left her side-she flew to him trembling and panting when he .

returned. She lived in constant dread of something tearing

her from him again-she shrank from strangers as only nervous

people can shrink. The sooRer she was taken abroad, away 

from the scene of her troubles, the better. It was evident, too, 

Paulina needed change. In those three weeks of waiting she 

had grown thin and pale as a shadow. All her old joyousness

had left her, she wandered silent and spiritless about the old  I

fami liar haunts. Lord Montalien never troubled her solitary  -

rambles now. The fiiends who loved her so well looked at 

her in wonder-it was so unlike Paulina-this pale, silent,

noiseless shadow-whose smile was as cold and fleeting as 

moonlight on snow. Her friend, Mrs. Atcherly, ran down once

in a while to see her old favorite, and retail for her benefit the  i

town gossip. Among her budget, Mr. Earlscourt had a nlew i:








<pb n="371"/>
l  "PA ULITA TO ALICE."          . 371

in press, and was engaged to be married, so evei ytody

to the Lady Edith Clive.

aulina turned her pale face far away as she listened. Mrs.

herly rattled on:

The Lady Edith makes no secret of her preference, and he ,

ertainly at Damar House perpetually. But do you know,

ina, I don't believe Guy's a bit in love with her, in spite

ier beauty. If he marries her it will be because she is the

st heiress of the day and an earl's daughter. I sometimes

y he has left his heart behind him in America, among

e lovely American women he talks of so much. He says

erican ladies are all pretty-absolutely without exception-

t a plain girl in the streets of.New York is as rare as a black

n. The world says he and Lady Edith will be married fob

ain next spring."

And then Mrs. Atcherly departed; and I greatly doubt

whether Miss Lisle's health or spirits were at all improved by

lively conversation. She longed with feverish, hidden im-

patience for the day of their departure to come. When Eng-

nd was left far behind she would be better, she thought. A

fever flush came into her cheeks sometimes, her lips looked

Sdry and parched-her glorious dower of perfect health, that foi

flour-and-twenty years had never failed her, was rapidly failing

her now. They spoke of physicians, and she laughed at them

'-she would be quite well again, she said, when they started on

7their travels-it was England afid the hot June weather that

: 4isagreed with her.

:i ?The last day came. Everything was settled-Mr. Lisle's

I: perpetual flying up and down by express trains; between Lon-

: iBon and Lincolnshire, was at an end. His legal business was

:': satisfactorily over. On to-morrow morning they would start

direct for Paris, making no delay in London.

A gentleman accompanied Mr. Lisle from town on this last

occasion-a gentleman, who, at his especial request, had ruh

down to see his wife.

"Where is Paulina! " her father asked.

Paulina was out as usual on one of her daily, aimless ram-

bles. It was a murky sort of day, with a light, damp fog cling-

ing to everything-a dark, gray sky, lying low over a bleak, wet

;earth. It was no weather for any one in delicate health to be

Abroad-but Paulina neither felt nor cared for the damp. It

suited her, this gloomy evening-it seemed somehow like her

cold, gray life. The last, lingering shadows of the dark daj

A.;~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~








<pb n="372"/>
372       * .   "PAULLNA TO 4LICBR."

were departing as she came slowly homeward. In body anif

mind, heart and brain, she was tired out as she drew near--h1

face paler than usual, her large eyes haggard, and sunken. A

man's tall figure leaned lightly against one of the gate á-osts 

she drew near. Her heart gave a great bound, and thea

seemed to cease its beating altogether. No need to lok

twice to recognize Guy Earlscourt. 

He saw her and opened the gate. Without lifting her eye

to his face, without speaking, she bowed, and would hav

passed on, but he stopped her. 

" Not one word, Paulina?" he said in a low voice of reproach

"and it is the last time we may ever meet. For the sake o

eight years ago, when we were friends, when little 'Polly' did

not hate me, say good-by ! "                          :

He held out his hand. Her heart smote her-she stopped,

confusedly-glanced up once into the dark, reproachful eyes ;

half turned away. 

Hate him / In that moment she knew, as she had never 

known before, that she loved him, with a passionate, deathless -

love, that would remain with her to her life's end.  - 

She gave him her cold fingers. His hand closed over themrn

-warm, strong, and firm-his eyes were reading her pale, -

averted face. 

"You-you came to say farewell to my mother," she fal:

tered.

"And to you, Paulina-I may call you so, may I not? ItI

is for the last time. I, too, leave England in a few days and

forever."

"Forever!" she echoed. A cold hand seemed to clutch

her heart-was Mrs. Atcherly right, after all, in her surmise ? :

She drew her hand suddenly and forcibly from his grasp.  :

"I shall return to America," he said quietly, "and there 

pass my life. As soon as my new book appears, I leave. You |

will be abroad then, and I could not go without saying good-by, >

and asking you to forgive me."                         -

"Forgive you! For what?" 

"For letting you sacrifice your life," he said, firmly, '"six 

years ago. I see, clearlj&.now, that I should have saved you,

but not in that way. You were mad that night-driven wild  i

by their persecution, the fear of imprisonment, and a marriage .-

with Francis. The play had excited you-you scarcely knew;

what you were loing, but I was sane enough, and I have never  -

firgiven myself, in all these years, for taking advantage of you, 

á~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~X       f':: 








<pb n="373"/>
" PAULINA TO ALICE."             37

essness and terrors, and making you my wife. You loved

Marquis of Heatherland, and he deserved it as few men do,

'[itit holds you apart. You hate me, you have not tried te

cal it, and, I dare say, I deserve it. But I shall not banish

.from England-my presence here shall be no barrier tc

return. Farewell, once more, and try to forgive me if

u can when 1 am gone.'

e lifted his hat, she heard the gate open and shut, heard

light, firm fall of his footstep on the road growing fainter

d fainter. The soft summer rain was falling and wetting her

ough-lights twinkled in the cottage windows, and Guy was

mne-forever !

-"' Paulina!" her father's voice called from the doorway,

ome in ! Do you not know it is raining ? "

: he was standing where Guy had left her, motionless. She

ted up now, staggered dizzily, and grasped something for

port. The next moment her father's strong arm encircled

" "You will get your death," he said; "you look like death

Jvdw. Did you see Earlscourt ?"

i' "Yes." The word dropped heavily and slowly from her lips.

I; He has gone."

H He looked at her keenly. But even in that hour, when a

prain bitterer than death was piercing her heart, her pride up-

theld her. The cold, set look that had grown habitual of late,

and warded off all questioning, came over her pale, proud face.

Her step grew firm; she entered the house, and none present

:saw anything more than usual in her look.

Tea was ready-Rosanna's best cream-cakes, and fruit pies,

and whitest rolls, in honor of the occasion. As they gathered

round the bright little lamp-lit table, a loud knock came to the

door.

;   "Who is this?" said Duke. "I thought Mr. Guy was our

li- ast visitor."

: He opened the door, and saw a middle-aged, sailor-like man,

:a total stranger, standing there in the rain.

"Does Miss Paulina Lisle live here ?" asked this nautical

visitor.

Duke nodded.

"And what may you want of Miss Lisle, my seafaring

friend ? " he asked.

Paulina heard, and approached the door, looking at the sea

ifan in profound surprise.








<pb n="374"/>
374             "PA ULINA TO ALICE." 

" You want me?" she inquired.

The sailor pulled off his hat, and scraped a nautical bow.

"I do, miss, if so be as you are the Miss Paulina Lisle whJ1

advertised in the Times, six years ago, about a Miss Alice Wati-

ren, missing. You offered a reward, you reck'lect, for news of

her, dead or alive." 

She gave a low cry, reached out, and drew the speaker in. 

"Come this way!" she cried. "I am the Paulina Lisle

who advertised, and I am still ready to give the reward. At

last I shall hear of Alice.'

She drew him into the kitchen-deserted now-placed a chai

for him, and stood herself breathless, expectant. 

"What do you know of her?" she exclaimed. "She waIs

my dearest friend, and I have never heard a word of her since-

that time. Is she alive or dead ?"

"Dead, miss !" the sailor said, solemnly. "_iMurdered/" 

She clasped her hands, and staggered back.

" Mfurdered !"  She whispered the word with ashen lips 

"Look here, miss," the man said; and after fumbling ai

moment, produced from an inner pocket a little parcel rolled

in many papers. He undid those slowly, one by one, and,   _

something golden glittered in the light. He handed it to her

It was a locket and chain. She gave a second low cry; she

recognized it at once. It had been her parting gift to Alice;

ere her departure for the French school. She touched they

spring-it flew open-there was her own picture, and a ringlets

of her golden hair, and on the reverse side-this inscription:

" Paulina to Alice-i86o." 

"You know that ere locket, miss ?" the sailor said. "Yes,.

I see you do. Well, I have had that these seven years come::

Christmas eve. On Christmas eve, I862, the young woman 

what wore that locket was foully murdered, and her body lies a

bleaching, for what I know, in the same spot still." 

She mastered her emotion by a powerful effort. For a mo- ?

nent she had grown sick and faint, and had been obliged to sit i

down. It passed away, and the white lips spoke: 

"Will you tell me all?  If tnis locket and these dreadful

facts have been in your possession for six years, how is it you -

only reveal them now ?" 

"Well, miss, I did wrcng, I suppose-I ought to have madei-

a. clean breast of it there and then, but, you see, I went to seaed

and once before, out in Bermuda, I got into a scrape by find 

ing a body that way, and nearly got lagged for a murder I

,..'!E-








<pb n="375"/>
"PAUTLINA TO ALICE."              375

B  t do. I don't know that I'd have told now, but it kiirn

inted me like, and gave me no rest; so for the past two

*   this I've been a-trying to find you out. A precious deal

*   uble it's been, I can tell you. This here's the way I

e by that locket."

I|nXd then the sailor told his story, Paulina listening white

still.

' fMy name's Bill Saunders, miss, which I was christened

Hliam James, and I follows the sea for a livin', as you may

1   for yourself  I'd been away on a year's voyage, and when

! ot home I started from Liverpool to see my old mother,

'at that time at Battersea-way. I stayed with the old

_nan nigh upon seven weeks, coming up to London off and

1 ,and signing articles Christmas week to sail for China in the

liden Pagoda,' on a three years' cruise. The ' Golden Pagoda'

to sail down the Thames about. noon, Christmas eve, and

ht and early in the morning, 1 slung my bundle over my

der, bid the old mother good-by, and started afoot for

4 don.

-  It was a tarnal stormy morning, miss, axin' your pardon

ir swearing, a-snowin' and a-blowin' like as if it was Canada

Stead of old England. I was used to snow-storms though,

:d trudged along never mndin', though along the waste fields,

dd marshes, and old brick-yards, it blew fit to take your head

It wasn't the sort of mornin' nor the time of day you

4wopuld look to see any one out a-drivin', and so when I see a

~drse and wagon a-comin' furious in the other direction, I stood

still behind a pile of rubbish, and made a telescope of my fist,

iand looked hard to see what the parties was like.

!' "They was a man and a woman-I could just make out

.hat, and no more; both was so muffled up and so white with

.Ho^w. While I looked, the wagon stopped sudden like, the

:Ln jumped out and helped the woman after. This was an-

ther n ove I did not expect in such a place and in such a

?'tt.orm.

,^ S"'Something wrong with the turnout,' I says to myself, and

keeps well out o' sight and waits to see. The man looked all

" about, and then takes the woman round an old pile o' broken

bricks that hid them from sight. A minute after-it could not

i.ave been more--I hears the eport of a pistol; ard then I

knew for sartin what I had suspected when the mar first got

aout, that foul play was going on, and that I'd better keep still

;i I didn't want a second pistol ball through my own skull.

D,,/ A  .  








<pb n="376"/>
376              PA ULINA TO? ALICE" 

"I waited about two minutes. Mind well. I pulled out

watch, and looked So see the time, afeared I might be lat

for the sailin' of the 'Golden Pagoda.' It wanted just twen

minutes o' nine. I can swear to the very minute, for she'si

goc one to keep time, she is. As I put the watch back, I se

my cove a-comin' round the heap o' bricks, and taking a secox

look in every direction. If I kept out o' sight afore, you in

be sartin I was inwisable now. He looked at his watch, ther

jumped into his trap, and drove away as if old Nick (savi

your presence, miss) was scuddin' after him.       ´-

"I waited there until he was clear out of sight, then I mad

for the spot. Ahind the pile o' rubbish was a sort of hole, likl

a little cave, made, maybe, to hold tools, and that, when the

brick-fields was in use, and into this the body had been dragged

He had piled up in a hurry agin the entrance a heap o' loos

brick, and stones, and wood. You might pass the spot score

o' times, and never take notice. There was some blood upoa

the snow, but not much, and the mark of where he had dragged

her in; and away inside I could see, when I took down th

piled-up rubbish, a woman's figure lying on its face. 

'"Well, miss," the sailor went on, shifting away uneasily

from the gaze of the large, horror-struck eyes, "maybe I did

wrong, but I piled up the stuff agin as I found it, and madeup

my mind to say nothin' of what I'd heard and seen. Out if

Bermuda, as I said afore, I nearly got lagged for life, gettin

accused of a murder I didn't do. A burned child, they say,

dreads the fire-it was no business o' mine; I would just go ofxl

in the ' Golden Pagoda,' I thought, and let the young woman' r

friends and the London police find her at their leisure.  i

"I was turning to go away-it was nine now, and I had no;

time to spare-when somethin' a-shinin' in the snow caught my:|

eye. I stooped and picked it up. It was that there lockets

miss, bent a little, as you see, where it had been tramped Qn,

and the little chain broke off short, as if it had been dragged

from her neck. I put it in my pocket, and tramped away ts

London. That afternoon the 'Golden Pagoda' sailed, and mely

in her, and I've never set foot in England since, until thre:

weeks ago.                                         :

" But I couldn't forget what I saw that Christmas eve morne

ing--I couldn't forget it, miss. In my watch on deck o' nights

that there young woman used to come afore me, and I couldi

see her again lyin' dead on her face in that dismal spot where

nobody might ever find her. I couldn't forget it, and at las








<pb n="377"/>
"PA ULINA TO ALICE."               377

: sailed from Canton for England, I made uo mrn mind,

hat would, I'd make a clean breast of it; and tell the

estory.

vas sitting in a coffee-house in Liverpool the night 1

thinking how I had better begin the business, when I

across an old London paper, six years old, and there, as

idence had put it in my way, the very first thing my two

lt on was the advertisement offering a reward for any

of one Alice Warren, missing or dead. Now, on the

, I'd seen them words printed, 'PAULINA TO ALICE, I860,'

this here missing woman was an Alice too. That was all

to go by. Any news was to be brought to a law-firm a

on. I started for London next morning, and found out,

a sight of trouble, the law-firm. I showed 'em that adver-

nt. I axed 'em who put it in. They couldn't give me a

nanswer-they-badgered and bothered, and said I was to

Ithem anything I knew. I said I'd be blowed if I did!

brought them to their bearings, and they said it was a

nt of theirs, a young lady, Miss Paulina Lisle. When I

that name, ' Paulina,' I knew I was on the right track.

d 'em if they'd ever found this here Alice Warren, and they

no; nothin' had ever been heard or seen of her from that

to this. Then I told them I wanted to see Miss Paulina

le; that I'd something to say to her about this here business

might like to know; and at last, after a deal o' fussin, they

e me the directions here. Here I came; and there, miss,

the whole story. Alice Warren was murdered on Christmas

s, 1862, and her bones lies a-molderin' to this day, for what

Flknow, in that hole on Battersea Common."        '

-The sailor had finished his story. Paulina sat perfectly rigid,

hdilated eyes, listening to every word. She spoke now:

''And the man who murdered her-tell me what he was

"I didn't see his face, miss; he was that muffled up with

great scarf, twisted round the lower part of his face, and a fur

p, .with a peak pulled over his nose. He was tall and slim

i.; he wore a rough-looking great-coat, and I took him to

a gentleman. But I shouldn't know him again if I saw him."

K "' Tall and slim, and like a gentleman."  Paulina's thoughts

were of Lord Montalien. He was tall and slim and gentle.

'Faarly. But deeply, strongly as she felt on this subject, she

too just to make any rash accusations in so supreme ;an

5hour.








<pb n="378"/>
378             PA ULINA TO ALICE."

She rose up with an effort that was almost painful.  -

knew the truth at last. Alice had been murdered !-gen

loving Alice!-and for six long years had lain unburied a

unavenged. She felt giddy and sick, as she stood up, andl

was a moment before she could speak.              -

" I will call my father," she said. " Do you wait here. Y

must repeat your story to him. Something must be done, a

at once "

She opened the sitting-room door, and summoned both 

father and Duke. 

The two men looked at her in alarm-at her awfully corp

like face.

" Paulina, my dearest, what is the matter ?" exclaimed Ro

ert Lisle. "What has this man been telling you? Yol

friend is-"

"Murdered, father-foully murdered, six years ago-ly

unburied and unavenged! Think of that! This man 

repeat to you what he has said to me-the horrible story of

horrible murder." 

"Too horrible for your ears, my poor, overwrought chi

You look fit to die this moment. For pity's sake, go andli

down! Remember you start upon a journey to-morrow, 

just now you appear more fitted for a sick-bed than a lengt

journey. Go to your mother, Paulina."              ea

He kissed the death-like face tenderly, and led her from t

room. She obeyed with weary patience. Was she ill? ?

dull, heavy pain throbbed in both temples; her forehead seeme

encircled with an iron band; a hot mist dimmed her eyes. SN

had never been ill in her life; was she going to be ill now? "|

He left her in charge of her mother and Rosanna, and re-

turned to the kitchen. 

Mr. Bill Saunders, very much more at his ease, now that th

beautiful lady, with the marble, pale face was gone, repeate4

his story, almost word for word as he had told it to Paulina.

Duke listened, turning cold with pity and horror. Poor

little, pretty Alice ! So sweet ! so gentle !-beloved by all !-

and this had been her fate ! 

"1 shall lay this matter before the police at once, M

Li4le said. "You will accompany me to town to-morrow, m

man, and repeat your story before the proper authorities

most foul murder has been done, and must be brought to Ight

Mr. Saunders expressed his readiness, and took his depa I

ure. He was stopping over night at one of the inns in








<pb n="379"/>
,"PAULINA TO ALICE."              379

and would wait upon Mr. Lisle the first thing in the

aing.

a;lThis is a most shocking thing, Mason," he said; "and in

ina's present state of health there is no telling what effect

i news may have upon her. She seems to have been very

ngly attached to this unfortunate Alice Warren."

5 Very strongly," Duke apswered, moved himself more thaa

cared to show. "It is her nature to love with her whole 

t those whom she does love-and they were like sisters

rlittle Alice!"

: Who was the man with whom she eloped? Was it never

A6wn ?"

!' Never for certain."

It was suspected ?"

:1" It was."

W: ho was the man ?"

]  Duke hesitated. It had always been a story he had shruni

--now more than ever.

-:" Who was the man with whom she fled? " Lisle repeated.

: "The man to whom she fled I don't know. The man with

ilom she left Speckhaven was-Guy Earlscourt."

MA i Mason "

!- ' I can't help it," Duke said, doggedly. "Every one here

knows it. She left Speckhaven, and travelled up to London

iith Mr. Guy; and most people believe him guilty. I don't

I-I never did-no more does Mathew Warren or Paulina."

". ' Will you tell me all about it, Mason ?" Lisle said, gravely.

:ie was beginning to foresee the trouble in store for the young

Hnan he liked so strongly.

:N^ They sat together for over an hour. Duke, confining him.

Self to simple facts, told all he knew-the letter Paulina had

seived, the flight in company with Guy the succeeding even-

'img-of the revelation of Guy to Paulina at Brighton, which

she had repeated to Duke. Lisle listened, growing more and

* more grave.

:    E - "Earlscourt is not the man," he said, decidedly. " Guy is

simply incapable of luring any girl deliberately to her ruin,

however many and great his faults of the past. For the charge

FMf murder, in connection with him, it is of course utterly mon-

trous. But his leaving the place, and accompanying the girl

to London may place him in a very disagreeable position, until

the criminal is found. Were none of the other men stopping

it the Priory suspected at the time ?"








<pb n="380"/>
380            "PA ULINA TO ALICE.'                 i

"None.    That is"-Duke hesitated-" Paulina suspeci

Lord Montalien, but Paulina's suspicions were scarcely unpi

judiced. She always disliked his lordship. No one else e-

suspected him, and there never was the slightest proof agaii

him. He may have admired Alice, as they all did; but G

was the only one among them with whom people connedt

her flight. It is a most mysterious and shocking affair ali

gether. I almost wish this sailor, having kept his confessi

so long, had kept it forever."

The kitchen door opened, and Olivia Lisle looked in.  i

face had that anxious look it always wore when her husba

was out of her sight. 

"Are you here, Robert ? Ah ?" brightening as she sawhi,

" I thought, perhaps, you had gone out. Has that stran

man left ? What has he been saying to distress Paulina so ?

''Where is Paulina?" Robert Lisle asked, following h

back to the parlor. 

"Gone to her room-she would let neither Rosanna n

myself accompany her. She is altogether unfit to be left alon

She insists upon it though. What is the matter ? " 

Lisle told the story the sailor had repeated-his wife an

Rosanna listening greatly shocked.

" And Paulina loved this girl as a sister," her mother said

rising. " Robert, I must go to her."                :: 

But Paulina's door was locked. There was no response 

her mother's knock.

'Paulina, love, it is I-will you not let me in ?" Mrs. LisI

said, in a frightened voice. 

Still no reply. Terrified now beyond measure, Olivia's cal

brought the other three to her side. In five minutes Robe

Lisle's strong hands had forced the door. They entered, th

lamp burned upon the table, and Paulina was lying as she fia

evidently fallen, half across the bed.  She never stirred  i

their entrance.

"The child has fainted !" Rosanna cried, shrilly.

Her father lifted her up. No, she had not fainted-she a

lying in a sort of stupor, that rendered her deaf and bli

The last shock had finished the work Guy Earlscourt's sudd

apparition weeks before had begun-body and brain had giv

way. Before morning broke Paulina Lisle lay tossing in ti

wild delirium of brain fever. 








<pb n="381"/>
"FOR A WOMAIWS SAKE."              38

CHAPTER     VI.

"FOR A WOMAN'S SAKE."

OR the first time in her four-anl-twenty years of life,

Paulina lay ill-ill unto death.  The airy, upper

|   chamber in which little Polly Mason had slept her

brief, bright life away, was silent and darkened now.

jgreat London physician had been telegraphed for, and came,

. Rosanna, grim and gray in the green dusk, took her place

e bedside of her nursling.

e  great London doctor looked portentous, and shook his

Flushed, and delirious,, and restless, Paulina lay, talking

erently-or tossing in hot, unrefreshing sleep-very, very

Of course all further thought of departure was at an end

who was to tell that Paulina Lisle's first journey might not

to the tomb ?

nd the grief of the faithful hearts, who loved her so devot-

ly  who shall paint that?  They had to banish her mother

force from the sick-room-her self-command had all gone

S  t hose long, miserable years of asylum-life, and her uncon-

lable sobbing filled the place- she was utterly helpless and

lss  It needed but one word from the husband to make

dr yield.

i" You distress Rosanna-you may disturb Paulina-you will

Injure yourself-come, Olivia."

SHe was haggard and pale himself-his very life seemed

l und up now in his new-found wife and child-that death or

ger W should approach either, he had not dreamed. And

2eath and danger were here. But his life's training never

I-ied-his grave face told little of the bitter pain-the misera-

le dread within.

-:" You and I will go up to town, Mason," he said, "by the

tmpoonday train. Duty before all other things. If Paulina," he

¤aiused for a second, "were with us, she would listen to no

ieiay. The information you can give may be needed. You

li accompany me and this man Saunders."

':- "I will do whatever you think for the best, Mr. Lisle,'

<answered Duke, but his reluctance was visible; " but I don'X

-te-I don't like repeating this story. It places Mr. Guy in a

^- !'.  *':








<pb n="382"/>
382           "FOR A WOMAN'S SAKE." 

false position, makes him appear guilty, and he is as innoce

of any wrong against poor Alice as I am. It's a story I ha-

to tell any one-much less an official of the detective police

Lisle laid his hand heavily on the scene-painter's arm. 

"Mason," he said, impressively, " Guy Earlscourt is as ne

to me as a son-more, it has been one of the dearest desires

my heart, since I have known him, that he should become

son. That hope I have not yet resigned, and in order that 

character may be entirely freed from the slightest irputati,

of guilt, I wish this matter to be thoroughly investigated, al

his part in it made clear to the world. RHe has suffered alreai

too much in his reputation on this unhappy girl's acconi

The story of the flight, and the rest of it, is no secret; ever

man and woman in Speckhaven seems familiar with it. Bett

that the London police should hear it from your lips than list

to their garbled version. When the real criminal is found, GQ

will be free from blame; never before."

The three men went up to London by the noon trai

Alice's letter to Paulina, written the night before her flight, we

searched for, and discovered among her papers. It told litt

to them, but there was no knowing what it might not reveal ti

the practised eyes of a detective officer. They drove to Flee

Street, and were set down before the office of Inspector Burn-

ham, the detective, who had already discovered the hiding

place of Olivia.                                   ;:i

Mr. Burnham was at home-a wiry little man, in black

clothes, with a sallow face, compressed lips, and light, restles

eyes. Lisle introduced his two companions, and began witl

the matter in hand at once. 

Did Burnham remember the case of the missing girl, Alice

Warren, for the discovery of whom a large reward had beei

offered about six years ago ? 

Mr. Burnham shook his head. There were so many missing:

people, and so many rewards offered, that it was impossibl

for any one human mind to recall them. Had they a copy of

the advertisement ? he would probably recollect if he saw it. :i

The sailor had, The paper that had attracted his attentioi,

in Liverpool he still carried about with him.- He handed i

now to the detective.  Mr. Burnham recognized it at bi

glance.

' I remember," he said, "I remember. Case attracted c0n

siderable attention at the time. I was not concerned ilm i

Party missing never was found, or heard of,jvas she ? ' 








<pb n="383"/>
"FOR A WOMAN'SSAKE."               383

ever-up to the present. We think the clue is found

*   f We think the girl was murdered."

*    urdered/" Mr. Burnham pricked up his official ears at

reeable sound of that word. "Ah !" with professional

,' murdered, was she ? And how long ago, and how was

d how has it come to light ?"

11e your story, -Saunders," Mi. Lisle said. And Mr.

des, who was chewing tobacco, and spitting politely in a

, removed his quid and repeated his story of Christmas

1862.

Spector Burnham listened keenly, never for one second

g his light, sharp eyes off the sailor's stolid, sunburned face.

i  nl Christmas eve, I862, precisely at half-past eight, A.M."

IBurnham produced a dirty pocket-book, and a stumpy

l,which required to be sucked audibly before it would

its mark. "You're certain of the time, my man?"

ng with the stumpy pencil poised, and transfixing Bill

iders. " Precisely half-past eight when the shot was fired?

: can swear to this, if necessary ?"

efore the Lord Chief Justice, sir," responded Saunders,

dily. "My watch is a watch wot never goes wrong. It

twenty minutes to nine when that ere chap fired that ere

and it was just a quarter o' nine when he jumped in his

and drove away. At nine, sharp, I left the place myself;

sn't the sort o' pleasant spot to make a man linger."

Let me see the locket," the detective said.

obert Lisle handed it to him.

You recognized this locket at once ?" he inquired, examin-

:dosely the inscription and picture.

'My daughter recognized it; Mr. Mason, here, recognized

frt sight."

1i could swear to the locket," said Duke; ' I was with

Lisle when she purchased it, and ordered the inscription

e engraved. That is also her picture, and a tress of her

it is impossible to be mistaken."

Mr. Mason," said the detective, " will you be kind enough

1el me all you know of this girl's story. I recollect, quite

itctly now, the rumor that she ran away from home with

l e one-a gentleman much above her in station. I am

, am I not?"

" About the rumor ? Well, yes," Duke admitted, reluctantly,

dd run away."

Wi   lWth-"        ,

X ';: 








<pb n="384"/>
g384Aá "FOR A WOMAN'S SAKE."                    :

384

" 'he travelled up to London with Mr. Guy EarlscQ

Lieutenant EarIscourt, he was then, second son of Lord A

talien. But, mind you, she didn't run away with him." '

"No?" Mr. Burnham was taking notes again, sucking

stumpy pencil as if it had been a stick of candy, in the :t

vals. " She went up to London with him, but she didn'

away with him. Now, how was that ?"              i

"They met, by chance, at the station," answered Duke, 

much discomposed; "by the merest chance. She told hit

was going up to London-it was late in the evening, an

was afraid to travel alone; and she asked him to take ca

her."

"' Just so; very natural. She asked him to take care of

She had known Mr. Earlscourt a very long time, 1 suppose

" For two years, off and on."                 X

"She was a very pretty girl-this Alice Warren ? "

Very pretty, indeed."

"Did any one present on the occasion hear this conversa

passing between Miss Warren and Mr. Earlscourt at the 

tion ?"                                    "

"No one, that I am aware of."                   M

"Mr. Earlscourt saw her to her destination, then.

was her destination ? "                           i

"Some lodging-house, Tottenham Court Road-way. I f

the exact address. He took her there, and left her in ch

of the landlady."

"Ah !" Burnham said. "We must find that landlady. 

you know, Mr. Mason, if he ever saw her again?" ? "   B

'Yes, once. He told her friend, Miss Lisle, that sev

weeks after, he visited her at her lodgings, and that he f

her much changed-looking ill and unhappy. He went ag

next day, but in the meantime she had been removed. She

never been heard of since, until now."

"Humph!" Mr. Burnham said, with a thoughtful gr

"Did Miss Warren leave no word, no message, no farewel

anybody before quitting home "                   , ?

Lisle produced her note, and handed it to him. 

"She wrote this to my daughter on the night preceding

departure. You see she speaks of her marriage there, for cer

Mr. Burnham read the note attentively two or three ti

then placed itwith the locket in his desk.

" Miss Warren being a pretty girl, as you say, Mr. Ma

she had doubtless numbers of admirers both in her own st,








<pb n="385"/>
"FOR A WOMAN'S SAKE."               3g5

above her. The month was September. Were there many

~pflemen staying at Montalien Priory in September, I862 ?"

Tlhere were six," Duke answered, after a second's pause.

LQrd Montalien himself, his brother Guy, Mr. Allan Fane, the

Sir Harry Gordon, Captain Cecil Villiers, and a Mr.

stus Stedman. I remember all their names because there

so much talk at the time."

es; and were any of those gentlemen admirers of Miss

en ? Did they visit at her father's house ?"

They all visited there-except, perhaps, Mr. Allan Fane,

Kwas a married man, and out of the question."

The others all visited at the bailiffs house, then. Did sus-

n fall upon none of these ?-did Miss Warren evince no

tiality?  It must have been pretty clear which she liked

, and she was evidently very much in love with the man she

:away to marry ? "

~Duke he;itated. He knew Paulina's suspicions of Lord

talien, but they were only Paulina's suspicions-no one

red them. He had no right to repeat them.

i:No," he answered after that pause. "I never heard she

ed any particular partiality. They all went, and she was

asart to all. I know no more."

"And I'm very much obliged to you for telling what you do

|IQW, I'm sure," Inspector Burnham said, politely. " Now, if

ly had the addresses i  those gentlemen-you couldn't

sh me with them, I suppose ? "

No, Mr. Mason could not. Sir Harry Gordon and Captain

es were in the Guards, Mr. Allan Fane and Mr. Guy Earls-

were in London, and easily to be found when wanted.

dLord Montalien was down in Lincolnshire, at the Priory,

ery bad health.

r  urnham shut up his pocket-book, locked his desk, looked

hs watch, and got up.

'3Half-past four. I don't see anything to hinder our taking

dive out to Battersea-way, and having a look at this spot Mr.

ers tells us of. We'll dismiss the cabs some distance off,

~lgo on foot to the place."

e rang a bell, whispered a few words to a subordinate,

d prepared for the drive.

It's not likely the remains have ever been discovered, or

1d have heard of it. Curious how those things turn up. You

't see the man's face. you say ?" to Saunders.  "You

uldn t identify him again if you met, I suppose ?"

17








<pb n="386"/>
386           "' OOR A WOMAN'S SAKE." 

"In course not," answered Saunders; "I never see his s

He had a muffler, or a comforter, twisted up to .is nose,

it was snowin' like all creation. He was a tall, slim chad

see that, with the look of a gentleman, but I couldn't tell: 

again not if I ran slap agin him this minute." 

" Cabs waiting, sir," a voice called, and the men went ou

the street. Two cabs were'before the door, and in the fore

which Inspector Burnham entered, a man sat who had

official air, like the inspector himself. A large box was pla

on his knees.

"I'll go in this, with, my friend Timmins," Burnham

"You three gentlemen will take the four-wheeler."

He gave the word, and the cab started. In the secondi

riage the three men sat in profound silence-it was not a pl

ant errand they were going upon-to look at the spot wh

poor Alice Warren had been so foully murdered, and findi

that remained of her after six years.

The drive was not a very long one. As the bleak extent

waste ground came in view, bleak even this golden sumll

day, Inspector Burnham stopped the cab, and with his co

panion got out. That companion carried under his arm.i

box before spoken of, and in his left hand a light spade. -

occupants of the second carriage looked with some curiosity

these things, but no one asked any questions. 

"You are sure you will recognie the exact spot, Mr. Sa

ders ? " the policeman asked.                         I

" Sartin, sir," the seaman responded. "I've seen it, sleep

and waking,. every day and night since I was unlucky eno

to lay eyes on it first." 

He went on ahead, the two detectives following, and L;

and Duke bringing up the rear. The July afternoon was at

mellowest as they crossed the common-yellow sunshine eve

where, and a bright, blue heaven over all. Ten minutes' wa

ing, and the sailor stopped short.

"This here's the place, sir," he said to the detectiv'

"Thiings hasn't changed a mite since I was here six years  i

There's the old kiln, behind which I watched the man, and

here's the spot where I picked up the locket. Dig among 

nrbbish at the entrance, and you'll find all that's left of;t

there misfortunate young 'ooman."                   i

The place to which he pointed was a sort of excavation,

lowed out of the high, clayey embankment, the entrance ch

up with rubbish of every sort.                     7 

:    ,                             :;     -Jo~~~~~~~~?








<pb n="387"/>
'FOR A nWOMAN'S SAKE."            3i7

:Dig, Timmins," Inspector Burnham said sententiolFly, arnd

ng do Wvn his box.

immrins set to work. The dry rubbish came away easily

Hugh. Five minutes' work, and the entrance was cleared.

r. Burnham stooped and looked in. The hollow place was

te dark and quite dry-an earthy odor alone was percepti-

It was tolerably large, not high enough for a man to stand

glt in. It had evidently been made and used long ago for

purpose of holding tools.

Fetch along the lantern, Timmins," the detective said. " I

ght it might be dark," to Mr. Lisle, "and came provided.

you please, I'll trouble you to follow me in."

Timmins produced a small lantern from the box, lighted the

dle, and handed it to his superior officer. Inspector Burn-

went in at once, holding the light before him.

Lisle followed. The place was perfectly dry and of con-

able extent.

Three steps from the entrance, and what they sought was

und.

A human skull lay at the detective's feet, human bones lay

scattered, and dry, and fleshless, a mass of long, brown hair,

d torn fragments of a woman's dress.

"Look !" said Inspector Burnham.

He picked up the skull with perfect coolness, and passed it

o his companion.

. But Robert Lisle declined taking it by a motion. Death, in

s most horrible forms, had been familiar to him in his check.

lered career, soldiers he had seen mown down like corn before

.the sickle, but this was different.

fe A helpless woman, murdered in cold blood,-is, perhaps, of

a1 terrible and unnatural things the most terrible and unnat-

.ral. And this woman had been his beloved daughter's dear-

est friend.

: :" Timmins," Mr. Burnham said, setting down his light, and

:getting on his knees, "fetch us the box."

Tima ins groped his way in-the box was evidently brought

r the, purpose of removing the remains. Lisle watched the

detective and the sergeant, wondering at their professional cool.

ness. They gathered together everything-hair-bones--every

ishred of dress.

"Have we all?" asked the inspector, peering with his lJai

kern over the ground.

" I think so. No-not all; whats this?"

r'-0








<pb n="388"/>
388           "FOR A WOMAN'S SAXE'."

It was a tiny silken bag, with a string, as if it had been w

a'oout the neck. Something like paper crackled within. h

spector Burnham opened the little bag, and drew out a slip ol

paper. Was it a marriage certificate ? No, it was an addres

-the address of Lieutenant Guy Earlscourt, Piccadilly-th

address Guy had turned back to give Alice on the night of h

arrival at Gilbert's Gardens, when he had told her, if ever il

trouble or need, to send to him, and he would come to her. 

She had kept it always in grateful remembrance-poor Alic:

-of his kind words and looks. And now it had come- to beai

its silent witness against him. 

Nothing remained-the box and its ghastly contents were

taken out by Timmins. The three men once more stood ini

the bright sunlight, and the secret of that dark excavation was

its secret no longer.

Timmins shouldered the box and started back for his cab-a

the others following--silent, gloomy. All save Inspector Burn-

ham-his silence was the-silence of deep thought, not gloom

Here was a splendid case cropping up--a case that would create

an excitement throughout the length and breadth of England.

The Honorable Guy Earlscourt, the brother of Lord Monta

lien, the popular author, hunted down for murder, and by him,

Inspector Burnham. Why, if he could track the deed clearly

home to him, his reputation for life was made. 

He linked his arm in Duke's, who would much rather notf

and drew him a little behind.

"I have another question to ask you, Mr. Mason. Are youa

aware by what name this Miss Warren went in her lodgings

An assumed name, I'll wager." 

"It was an assumed name," answered Duke. "She was

known as Mrs. Brown." 

"And how do you happen to be aware of it? Oh," care.

lessly, " Mr. Earlscourt, no doubt, informed Miss Lisle ?" 

" He did."

"Mrs. Brown." The note-book and pencil came out again!

Tottenham Court Road, I think ? You don't remember, orX

perhaps, you never heard the name of the landlady ? It's es;

fential to find that woman, Mr. Mason." 

"I have heard the name, but I forget. It began with an A

.-llolmes, or Hayes, something of that kind." 

"But Miss Lisle will remember, no doubt " .

"Miss Lisle is ill of brain fever-she will remember nothin

Duke said, and relapsed into silence and gloom.








<pb n="389"/>
i    ,    "FOR A WOMAN'S SAKE."               389

'Mr. Burnham left Duke and approached Saunders.

I'"And where shall we find you, my man, when we want you?

oro are the most important personage in the matter just now,

d must give bonds by and by for your appearance when calledo

on. Do you return to Lincolnshire or remain in London ?'

} "I stays here," Saunders answered; "I ain't got no busi-

ess in Lincolnshire, and I mean to stay ashore until I see the

end of this here matter. When you wants me I'm on hand and

illin'."

He gave an address. Mr. Burnham took it down. Then

hey re-entered their respective cabs, and drove back to Lon.

It was very late when Mr. Lisle and Duke reached home.

aOlivia flew to her husband as she always did, whether his absence

was long or short, forgetting, in the rapture of his return, every-

ting else for the moment.

r!h Paulina was much the same-no better-no worse-knowing

:3 one-restless-parched with thirst-delirious always, calling

;-sleeping and waking-for " Alice, Alice !"

1  Inspector Burnham, of the Metropolitan Police, went to work

IA t once, and with a will, working up this extraordinary case;

! extraordinary only in that so distinguished a man as Guy Earls-

t court was the suspected criminal. He notified the coroner of

l the district, and placed the box and its dreadful contents under

his charge. And then he set to work to hunt up the lodging- 

t house in Tottenham Court Road, to which Mr. Earlscourt had

| brought Alice Warren.

li' Thg task was not difficult to a man of Mr. Burnham's skill

; ana experience. Mrs. Howe still resided at the same place,

t and in the same house, and remembered, very readily, when Mr.

sBurnham asked the question about the "Mrs. Brown" who six

' years before had been her lodger.

' "Which a nicer young persing, or one as gave less trouble.,

never set foot in this 'ouse since or before," said Mrs. Howe;

2.a" and from the day she left' to this minute, I've never heard tale

:. or tidings. And I do 'ope, sir, as 'ow the poor lady is well and

appy, which she certingly was neither when she left here."

"Neither well nor happy?  I'm sorry to hear that. Mr.

: Brown perhaps treated her unkindly ?"

"Brown!" cried Mrs. Howe, in shrill scorn; "no more

. Brown than I'm a Dutchman ! He was a millingtary swell, as I

i:always said it from the first, and always shall, and whether she

:  as his wife or not, he knows best. She thought she was, poou








<pb n="390"/>
390           "FOR A WOMAN'S SAKE." 1

dear, for a more hinnocenter creeter never came up fror to

country to go to her ruining and misery in London. He was

millingtary gent, and the very'andsomest I ever see, thcugh h.

nactions were the rewerse of 'andsome. Not but that he 

up the bill without a word-hasking for a receipt in that 'augh.

way of his--but he treated her shameful, poor soul, and left he

to worrit herself to a shadder, as she was when took away."

"A millingtary gent," repeated Mr. Burnham. "What wa

he like, Mrs. Howe ?"

"Tall and 'andsome, carrying his 'ead like that,"-Mrs. Howl

tlung up her own-" dark-complected, dark-heyed, black 'air

very glossy, curly, and black mostaches. I never 'ad a goo

look at his face, but once-the night he first brought her here

-he halways came muffled up hafterwards, but I see him a

plain now as I did that minute." 

" Is this anything like him ? " inquired Mr. Burnham quietly

He produced a photograph, and Mrs. Howe uttered a cry o

recognition.

"That's him ! that's him-Mrs. Brown's 'usband ! That's thei

very gent I mean-I could tell that picture anywhere ! "I  -*

Mr. Burnham replaced the photograph of Guy Earlscourt in I

his pocket.

" Now, Mrs. Howe," he said, " I'll tell you who I am. I'rA

Inspector Burnham, of the detective force." 

Mrs. Howe gave a gasp. " Don't be afraid; I'll not doyOff

any harm. This young woman, you knew as Mrs. Brown, is

missing-has been for some years back, and we want to find

her, that's all. What you've got to do is to tell me everything

you knew from the hour Mrs. Brown entered your house unfti

she left it."'

He produced the note-book, and gave the stumpy pencil ai

preparatory lick. 

Mrs. Howe, in mortal terror of a detective, began at the be-

ginning-the visit of Augustus Stedman to engage the rooms

for a "party from the country, a runaway-match, going to hb

married the day after her arrival."  " Which," said Mrs. Howet

" them were his own expressions." 

" You don't know this young man's name ?"

"No, Mrs. Howe had never heard it, and never set eyes ohn

him again, though he did call on the young lady next morning;

" Describe him."'

This was not so easy as describing Guy. Mr. Earls ourt

was a fac, once seen very easily remembered. Mrs. EIDW








<pb n="391"/>
"FOR A WOMAN'S SAKE."                  391

d a .good memory for faces, however, and hit off Mr. Stedmaa

etty well.

' We'll find him when we want him, I dare say," said the de.

tive, writing rapidly. "Go ahead, Mrs. Howe."

Mrs. Howe described the arrival of Guy and Alice about

dnight, and the appearance of both.

-Mr. Burnham produced a second portrait this time of Alice 

cured from Speckhaven.

Is this anything like her ?"

As like as like-that's Mrs. Brown, as I saw her first; as

eet and pretty a face as ever I set my heyes on. Not that

er good looks lasteQ long, poor thing."

"What was the gentleman's manner ?-affectionate, now, as

lover's might be ?"

"Well-yes," hesitating somewhat; "he seemed very careful

her and that, and called her ' Halice;' and when he said

od-by, and left the rocm, he ran back to her again. Yes, he

e'waas haffectionate, Mr. Burnham, sir."

- "Did you hear her address him by his Christian name ?"

F   The landlady shook her head.

"3 No, sir, she didn't in my 'earing; I should have remem-

bered it if she had. No, sir, she didn't. And then he went

Eaway, and she went up to bed. And the next afternoon, about

six o'clock I think it was, a cab drove up, and a gentleman

sgot out, and ran up the stairs. I went to the front window to

!.watch them going huff to be married, but I couldn't see his face.

|He nad a wide, black hat slouched down over his nose, and his

coat-collar, that turned up-there vas no getting a look at him.

tAnd it was after dark before they came back. And when he

.came after that, it was halways in a sort of disguise. Most of

Sthe times I was busy in the kitchen, and didn't see him at all

-when I did, I couldn't get another look at his face. He

generally came about dusk, too, and the passage is dark. No,

:sir, except the first night, I never got a look at Mrs. Brown's

!-usband's face."

;   Mrs. Howe had very little more real information to give Mr. 

:EBurnham. Would she try, and think-had not the tall, dark,'

m^ilitary young gentleman called afterward, unmuffled and un-

d lisguised?

-:: Mrs. Howe shook her nead. Not that she had ever seen 

but now Mr. Burnham spoke of :t she did remember-Sarah

hHaan (the girl) telling her of a visitor Mrs. Brown had had in

Oier absence, who called early, and on the first occasion brought








<pb n="392"/>
392           "POR A WOMAN'S SAA'E."' 

a bouquet of roses. She had been very busy at the tinle,;

paid but little attention. It was the very day before M

Brown left. Latei that same afternoon her husband had call

It might and it might not be him as had brought the ro'

She herself had let him in. It was dark and rainy, she remll(

bered, and he had a shawl wound about the lower part oft

face. He and Mrs. Brown had quarrelled--they had heard :

crying, and his voice raised as if in anger. He had paid 

bill himself in the passage, and informed her her lodger wok

leave next day. So she had, for the country son ewhere, s

had told Mrs. Howe on goin'; "and if ever any poor s

looked heart-broke," the landlady pathetically concluded, 

was Mrs. Brown, as she got into the cab and drove awa

From that day to this I've never set eyes or heard tell of he

but Sarah Hann, she told me next day, when I came hon

from market, how the tall, dark gent had been back again, ha

kin' for Mrs. Brown, and seemed upset like when told she wi

gone. "Which," concluded the landlady, "was like his 'eartle

tricks to deceive people, and made them think as 'ow he wasn

the party as took her away himself."                11

Mr. Burnham inquired for " Sarah Hann."  Mrs. Hoa

shook her head in a melancholy way. " Sarah Hann had bee

dead and gone these two years of a decline. She had no mo

to tell. To what she had told she was ready to take her a

davit in any court in London."

"And I'm very much obliged to you, Mrs. Howe," InspetJ

tor Burnham said, rising to depart, "for the pleasant mann

in which you have given your information. If we can only d

cover now whereabouts Mr. Brown took his wife when she le

Gilbert's Gardens, I think we shall have a very pretty litt

case worked up. Good-day to you, ma'am."            !

Two days later, and in his studio, with the slanting rays of tth

July sun streaming in upon the canvas, an old friend of ou

stands, busily painting. It is Allan Fane, the artist, whom, i

the press of others' affairs, we have quite lost sight of late-

The studio is a very small, very luxurious little room, sacreJjit

the artist himself, his most cherished pictures, and most in.

mate friends. There is a larger, outer atelier, where gentl

men congregate to smoke and talk, long-haired gentlenr

mostly, who didn't patronize barbers-the Brotherhood of i"

Brush.








<pb n="393"/>
"FOR A WOMAN'S SAKE."              393

Tlhe years that have been so fraught with events for other?

ve not passed without change over the head of Allan FIane,

e stands here to-day with the yellow sunshine on his face,

atly changed, greatly improved, from the effeminate, weally,

lent, and selfish young man, who, eight years ago, fell in

We with and deserted little Polly Mason. The fairer, sonle-

hat womanish beauty of his face remains, but his long, golden

ard, and the firmer curve of the lips, the graver light of the

es, tell now of strength, and power-ay, genius within. He

I  a celebrated man-he has won for himself fame and wealth,

d the Bond Street tailor has cause at last to be proud of his

on-a son, who has sense enough to be ashamed of his hum-

le origin no more.

A month after that October day on which he had met

aulina down in Speckhaven, after her return from France, his

ife had died abroad. Her fortune had gone with her-that

rtune for which he had so. weakly sold himself, and once

|more he was free. He tried, manfully enough, to repress the

eeling of relief and gladness that would arise-his wedded life

|had been unspeakably bitter, and eight months after their

union they had parted by mutual consent-and he was free-

Pd Paulina Lisle.

! He went back to his brush and easel, and worked as he had

Iever worked in his life before. The picture was his long-

Tdreamed of, long-talked of " Rosamond and Eleanor;" and he

painted his Rosamond from memory. All that winter he spent

:at Montalien Priory over this one painting, and in the spring

it went to the exhibition. On the chances of that picture his

hole future hung-if it failed, his ruin was complete. The

picture was a great, a wonderful success-crowds flocked daily

::to see it, the newspapers praised and abused it without bounds

''all London talked of it, a royal duke bought it at a fabulous

price-orders rushed in upon him, and the artist's fortune was

Mnade. The world had not seen Paulina Lisle then, but a lit-

tle later and people began to talk of the marvellous resem.

lance between Sir Vane Charteris's ward and the fair Ros-.

ihond, and to discover that Miss Lisle must have sat for the

oimginal.

The picture was a striking one.

? You saw a bleak stone hall, a red, rising moon through its

one wide open casement, rending its way up throughl piles of

-jaggered black clouds. Queen Eleanor stood, a wrathful,

miurderous woman, robed in heavy purple draperies, with bent,

W0' a                                                  _








<pb n="394"/>
394           "FOR A rWOAN'S SAKE."

black brows, and eyes of dusky fire, proffering the b .wl a-

dagger. Rosamond stood with the red light of the rising nIoii

upon her fair face and flowing golden hair-a form slender a

girlish, drawn up to its fullest height-the face white as deat!

the blue eyes flashing as blue eyes only flash, the whole feat

less face full of pride and defiant scorn. 

So, surely, never looked the fair, frail mistress of the kinj

confronted by the jealous wife, but so Allan Fane had chos

to paint her. The face shone out so vividly, so startlingl

life-like from the canvas, that you seemed to hear the scornfu

words of defiance with which she braved the infuriate queen.

Had Paulina Lisle ever really looked like that, people won,

dered? No; but in the twilight of-a summer day, Poll

Mason had, as she flung his ring at Allan Fane's feet, an

stood before him in her new-found womanhood, scorning him. i:

While life remained Allan Fane would never forget how she

looked, how she spoke then. 

IThe picture was a success, and his fortune made.

He did not go into society that year; he heard in silence of

her beauty and her triumphs; and the second season he met:l

her. The old love, stronger than ever, filled his heart  t

was famous now, and rapidly acquiring wealth, and he laid his

laurel crown very humbly at her feet. He loved her devotedly

-with a love that knew no change-would she be his wife ?

Her answer had been a refusal, a refusal that crushed out

every atom of hope. 

"The time for all that is past, Mr. Fane," she said quietlyr,

"I could not care for you now if I tried. Will you let me belt

your friend ? Your wifc 1 never can be. It is too late." 

Too late   The old dreary refrain. Once her love had

been within his grasp, and he had turned away from the gift,

and now it was too late ! IXe accepted his fate, with a brave,

patience that made her like him as nothing else could havel

done, and they had been'" friends," as she wished it, since. 5|

There are not many men who will remain the faithful friendi

of the woman who refuses them-Allan Fane was one.

Wisdom and generosity were coming to him with years 

vuffering.

He stands this July afternoon painting busily. He is n

tlone. On a Turkish divan, smoking a long, twisted pipe

stretched at full length, lies Guy Earlscourt. It is the last da-y

of his stay in England-by the latest train he departs for Live

pool, to sail to-morrow for New York, and his last hour he 

t                                       .0








<pb n="395"/>
"FOR A IVOIAN'S SAKE."              395

iding with his friend. A greyhound lies at his feet, and

ks up in his face with darkly loving eyes, as Guy pulls his

e.ears through his fingers.

There is silence in the little room-the artist works indus

usly, and Guy smokes and watches with dreamy eyes a

tre hangifig opposite. It is the fair head and graceful

at of a girl in her first youth-the lips wear a saucy smile,

sapphire eyes sparkle with laughing light, and follow you

rever you go. The picture is richly framed, and never

es that spot-it is a portrait of " Polly Mason."

;' What do you think of it, Guy?" the artist says, at length

thing the glance. "It is like her, I think, as-as we knew

r first."

It was almost the only time her name had passed his lips to

~uy. He dreamed not of the young author's secret, of course,

t he had seen them together, noted, with surprise, the

arked restraint and avqidance between them, and felt there

tst be a secret behind.

e" Very like," Guy answered; "so like that I can see that

irthday fete and her, as she stood dancingin the sunshine.

lan, I should like a copy of that picture to take with me-"

3  "To your second exile. You shall have it. I have already

rmised a copy to another old friend of hers, Duke Mason.

t a strangely checkered life hers has been-little Polly

ason-reject a Duke ! Guy, I wonder why she threw over

Heatherland?  It was not like Paulina."

: Before Guy could speak, the door opened, and Paulina

Li'sle's father stood before them. Guy sprang erect.

i- "1  dear colonel! You here ! I thought you had left Eng-

land a week ago. Nothing wrong, I hope ?"

- For Robert Lisle was very pale, very worn, and grave.

7i: Mrs. Lisle !-Paulina !" Guy exclaimed; "they are well,

colonel "

He still addressed him by the familiar title that had been his

when they first met.

:I- "Paulina is ill-very ill. I knew it was your last day in

aondon, and I called to tell you. Your people said I would

: find you here."

Allan Fane dropped his brush, and turned very pale. Guy

tened-what he felt, his dark face showing little.

}' " Very ill," he repeated, slowly; "how long ?"

~: '"She was taken ill on the night you left us. It is brain

,fer. 3Sh: had received a terrible shock-the revelation of the

g... .      \                        .       h   e 








<pb n="396"/>
396           "FOR A WOMAI    'S .SAAE."         '~

death of a dear. friend, and this, coupled wiin exposure to da

and previous ill-health, brought about this result. She has bel

delirious ever since-she is so still. What the end will-

Heaven only knows."                               '

IIe walked away to the window. Dead silence fell. It

broken by a tap at the door, and the entrance of a servant w

a card. 

"Inspector Burnham, of the Metropolitan Police," read M

Fane, aloud. "Who the deuce is Inspector Buinham, 

what does he want here ? "

Robert Lisle wheeled round from the window with a start

expression.

"He says his business is with Mr. Earlscourt, sir," the m

answered, "and is most pressing." 

Far.e looked doubtfully at his friend.

"I don't know what he wants," Guy said, answering th

look; "but I'll see him all the same, with your permissio

Fane."

Mr. Burnham appeared on the instant. He bowed respei

fully to Lisle and addressed Guy.

"I believe," Inspector Burnham began, politely, "IJ a

speaking to the Honorable Guy Earlscourt ?"

Guy nodded.

"' I have been informed, Mr. Earlscourt, that it is your i

tention to sail to-morrow for New York. Is it true ? "

" It is quite true," answered Guy. "May I ask, in tur

now my departure can possibly concern you ? "

In this way, Mr. Earlscourt-that it must be postponed.'"

"Indeed! And why?"

Mr. Burnham glanced at Mr. Lisle, who had grown eve

paler than upon his entrance, coughed apologetically, and dre

a step nearer.

"My business here is of a very unpleasant nature, but-

must be done."  He laid his hand suddenly and heavily up

Guy's shoulder. "Mr. Earlscourt, I arrest you on the char

of having caused, or been party to, the death of Alice Waarne

on the morning of Christmas eve, 1862. Mr. Guy Earlscou

sir, you must consider yourself my prisoner."    ':i

There was an exclamation from Allan Fane-a deepenim

the gray pa-lor upon Robert Lisle's face. For Guy, he sh

off the hand of the detective, and stood looking at him-on

one expression in his eyes, an expression of utter amaze. 

" Tle death of Alice Warren !" he exclaimed. "You in

to tell me that Alice Warren is dead 1"

a: .S








<pb n="397"/>
"FOR A WC7 MAN'S SAKE.4'             397

I "Alice Warren has been murdered," repeated Inspl ctol

gurnham; "foully murdered, on the morning of Chiistmas

geve, 1862.'

I "Murdered !" he repeated the horrible word, staring at the

ficer mechanically. " Great Heaven !"

:| His thoughts flew to his brother, and at the awful possibility

[that suggested itself his dark face blanched to the hue of ashes.

Alice Warren murdered. He remembered her as he had seen

her last, wretched and alone in a wild winter storm-he re.

mnembered the look his brother's face had worn a few hours

later when he had spoken of her. Who but 'Montaiien had an

interest in her death ? Every trace of color slowly faded from

4is face, leaving him white to the very lips. Inspector Burn-

ham saw the change--was it the consciousness of guilt, he.

S wondered ? Guy slowly recovered himself, and spoke:

' "Will you tell me, Mr. Burnham," he said, "what proofs

'you have that Alice Warren is dead at all, and why you have

cause to suspect me?"

Before the detective could speak, Robert Lisle came hastily

forward.

: "Allow me," he said. " I was about to tell you of this, Guy,

When Burnham entered. My share in bringing about this d6-

i naiment you must hear from my own lips."

And then he told the story of the sailor's arrival at the cot-

. tage, and the confession made to Paulina, which had ended in

'her dangerous illness; of his and Duke's visit the next day to

Jinspector Burnham, and of their discovery at Battersea.

" Inspector Burnham knew from us, Guy, that you were the

h companion of Alice Warren from Lincolnshire to London;

that you saw her afterward at her lodgings-facts we knew you

would have willingly, freely, told him yourself, had you been

ipresent. I never dreamed though that-"

K, Guy grasped his hand.

i.  " Say no more! You did quite right. My share in this un-

- happy girl's story the whole world is free to hear. But mur-

d^ered /  Good Heaven ! It seems too horrible! I cannot

7 realize it! When did you say ?"

;  '; On the morning of Christmas eve, I862, between the hours

f eight and nine. Of course this preposterous charge against

e- you will fall to the ground immediately. I only wonder at a

:,oman of Mr. Burnham's astuteness bringing it forward at all.

iY:ul will prove an alibi at once. Carry your mind back to

iChristmas eve, six years ago--the very time, was it not when








<pb n="398"/>
598           "FOR A WOMAN'S SAKE."

you left England? Try and recollect where and'with ^hu

you were on Christmas eve, between the hours of eigl.t. 

nine."

Robert Lisle laid his hand affectionately on the young iaB

shoulder, avd looked into his face; and the whole truth bu

upon Guy.

On Christmas eve, 1862, between the hours of eight and n'

his strange marriage had taken place !  '           ~

What singular fatality was this! A dark-red flush rose 

over his olive face, then faded slowly and entirely away. 

was very pale, but perfectly calm, as he Lurned to the dete

tive.

"Have you a cab, Mr. Burnham ? I am quite at your sE

vice. An absurd mistake this, colonel !" turning, with a smil

to Lisle, and holding out his hand, "which will postpone n

journey to New York. Farewell, for the present!  Let

hope a few days will set this ridiculous error right!"  L 

"But, good Heaven, Guy! " burst forth the artist, "you c

surely disprove this monstrous charge at once!  Make a

effort-you certainly must remember what you were doing, ad

with whom you were on Christmas eve at that hour."  i

"I remember very distinctly what I was doing, and wie

whom I was," Guy said, coolly. " I do not see fit, howevei

just at present, to take Mr. Burnham into my confidence. 

am quite ready to go with him at any moment."

"And when the time comes-in a few hours, or days-yo.

will prove an alibi, and overthrow this preposterous charge ?"'

Lisle demanded, in intense anxiety.

Guy looked at him with a smile-a smile that seemed to

have some strange, hidden meaning in its depth. 

" And-if I cannot prove an alibi-if I cannot, or will not, rI

veal where and with whom I was on that day and at that houri

will you believe me guilty, colonel ?"

"Never !" answered Robert Lisle, firmly. "But you 

not mean- this, Guy ? "

" I mean it. This charge must, and will, doubtless, fall t

the ground of itself; but, come what may, it is out of n

power to prove an alibi. Good-by, for the present ! The i

quest, no doubt, will set this disagreeable business all right."

He was gone before they could speak-Mr. Burnham'i

prisoner. He sat back in the carriage, his hand pressed ov

his eyes.

" Come what nmay Iwill keep my oath I"

' T. iA








<pb n="399"/>
THE VERDICT OF THE CORONER'S yURY.          399

remembered the words well, and to whom they were

e. Come what might, the secret of that Christmas eve

could, never would be revealed.

CHAPTER VII.

THE VERDICT OF THE CORONER'S JURY.

T was late in the evening of that same day-the day

of Guy Earlscourt's arrest. The prisoner was not

alone-Robert Lisle paced up and down the narrow

bounds of the apartment, looking much as a caged

might, with his powerful cavalry swing. He was speaking

patiently, almost angrily:

And you persist in refusing to tell where you were on the

ing of Christmas eve, between eight and nine. Guy, this

oly, this is madness ! 

bGuy looked at him with his peculiar, gentle smile, quite un-

ve>d, apparently, by his very unpleasant position. They had

n him a- room as comfortable as it is possible for any room

a London prison to be the last week of July. He had con-

ed the bed into an easy chair, and looked quite comfortable.

" My dear colonel, how often must I tell you, with every de-

to manifest my innocence, an alibi is the one thing it is

of my power to prove?    Between the hours of eight and

,on the morning of Christmas eve, I believe I was driving

t the streets of London in a cab, whose number I am to-

lignorant of. . It was the day of my departure, remember,

Id I had no end of business on hand. Don't distress your-

on my account, I beg; the chain of circumstantial evidence

Inspector Burnham has forged may seem very strong to

ector Burnham, even perhaps to a coroner's jury; but it

t stand the test of the grand jury. At the very worst,

tould the worst come, it will only be a committal to prison foi

months. A splendid opportunity for quiet meditation,

the writing of another popular-novel."

I isle frowned.

Prft-     








<pb n="400"/>
400   THE VERDICT OF THE CORONER'S JURY.' <

"An opportunity that will effectually blight your reputa

ruip your prospects for life."

" Hardly, I think. It will be disagreeable, not a doubt a

that-if I have a weakness it is for plenty of fresh air and 

gen, and those are luxuries hardly attainable in Newgat

;uppose, during the months of August and September.

my notoriety will scarcely waft across the Atlantic; and I'

there, you know, the hour I am released-and if it does--

if it does, what does it matter ? "

Lisle came over, and laid his hand on the younger man's a

"Guy," he said, " who is she ?"

"Colonel I" 

' Who is the woman who is at the bottom of this? Wh?

are you trying to screen ?" 

Guy laughed.

"So, colonel," he said, "you go in also for the cynical id

that there must be a woman at the bottom of all the troubles'-

mankind. I have told you the truth. I was driving about t

London streets in a hansom at that fateful hour on Christn

eve. Why won't you believe me ?"                    L

"I believe that you are trying to screen some one," L

answered resolutely. "I believe that some quixotic piece

foolish generosity will be your ruin. A man's first duties are

God and his country, the second to himself. You could tell,

you would, where, and with whom, you were between eight a

nine on that morning, but-you will not." '

The smile half faded from Guy's face-a look of streng

and deathless loyalty came into its place, and lit it with a nm

bility the elder man had never seen there before.

" I will not /" he repeated softly; "not if death were

penalty. Let us say no more ofi this matter, my friend---

that I can do for my safety shall be done, but an alibi I cain

prove-will not, if you like it better. Come what may, yo~r,

trust, will always believe me innocent ?"

"Always, to the end" 1i

He knew that further urging was vain-fidelity to some o

man or woman, the latter, mlost likely-had sealed Guy 

court's lips. 'He would no more have betrayed that trust :t

the Earlscourts of old, who had gone to the scaffold, woi

have saved their heads by the betrayal of their king.

The inquest began on the morrow. The news had sprei

already- an immense crowd had gathered. A celebiat

author, the b-other of a peer, was to be tried for the murder

a village girl. The sensatior was immense.








<pb n="401"/>
.T0lh VERDICT OF THE COROIVER'S 7URkY.       401

illiam Stunders, the seaman, was the first witness cllled;

William Saunders told his story to the coroner and his jury

a quiet simplicity and straightforwardness no cross-ques-

ng could shake. He swore positively to the day and the

r, to the very moment, almost, at which the deed had been

*e; and testified to his return with Mr. Lisle and the detec.

officer, and the finding of the remains.

he second witness was Robert Lisle, who narrated the ar-

, four days before, of the sailor, at his residence in Speck-

en-their visit to London and to Inspector Burnham next

ytheir going together to Battersea, and finding the skull

bones in the cave. Those remains there present being

ibited and identified by him, Mr. Lisle stood down.

Messrs. Burnham and Timmins were called upon, and gave

ir official evidence-identified the remains found at Bat-

-  rsea.

' The next witness (and at the sound of his name a buzz of

pectation and interest ran through the court-room) was

athew Warren. The crowd leaned forward to look at him

th eager interest. Hale and upright, white-haired and stern,

i old bailiff advanced and took his place.

Alice Warren was his daughter-his only daughter. She wa s

enty years and seven months old when she had left her home.

would be six years on the twenty-seventh of September next

ice he had seen her last. On the evening of the twenty

eVenth, without a word of warning or farewell, she had left her

lme, and had never written or returned since. He had made

o inquiries about her-had never tried to find her-would

ave discarded her had she attempted to return. Suitors?

es, she had had many suitors-more than he liked. Flighty

M-loose in her ways? No, not that he had ever noticed or

eard; she was generally thought a sensible girl, rather than

ottherwise. Yes, she had lovers in her own class of life--she

:wJas as good as engaged to -Peter Jenkins, of the Mill, not out

iand out, but they had been keeping company four years.

5Gentlemen?   Well, yes, there had been gentlemen, too; all

gthe gentlemen stopping at the Priory that year used to visit his 

,4ottage, except one. Who was the exception ? Why, Mr.

,Allan Fane, of course, who was a married man, and had no 

l:business running after young women. The rest were all un-

married ? Yes, he knew their names; knew them all. They

lw-ere Lord Montalien, his brother, Mr. Guy Earlscourt, Cap-

4|in Villiers and Sir Harry Gordon of the Guards, and a Mr








<pb n="402"/>
402   THE VERDICT OF THE CORONER'S YUKI. l .

Augustus Stedman. How.often did these gentlemen v sit

house? Well, he couldn't say for certain; his businessj 

him absent from home the best part of the day, and he wi

not have allowed their visits in the evening. His family a

retired, and the house was locked for the night at nine o'ct

He had seen them all at the cottage talking to his daught-

different times; couldn't say which came oftenest; they n

sta) ed long at a time. Yes; Mr. Guy had been there six ti

or more. Fifty times?  Couldn't affirm the number of ti

Not so often as that?  No, not so often as that. No;

any oftener than the others. Sometimes he came alone; s

times with the two offic*ls. The rest canle alone or toget

as they chose. It was the only year gentlemen had b

down at the Priory, but both Lord Montalien and Mr. Ea

court visited his family whenever there. Alice seemed to l

them both; she talked most of Mr. Guy, he thought. She

dark-brown hair, braided generally behind. (Hair showi

Yes; her hair looked like that, only darker and glossier; -t

looks faded and dirty. Didn't remember the clothes she wo

The locket ? Yes; she wore a locket around her neck, gi

her by Miss Paulina Lisle before going to France. It c

tained Miss Lisle's picture and hair, and "From Paulinma

Alice" engraven on the case. Yes; that was the lock

Couldn't swear positively to it. 

During his evidence Mathew Warren's rugged old face

kept its set sternness, not a tremor of the voice betokened 

it was of his own child he spoke. He stood down, and M

Warren was called to take his place.               :

She came, trembling and weeping. The heart of everyi

present was moved at the sight of the mother of the murder

girl. The coroner was very gentle and kindly in his inquir

Alice Warren was her daughter. She confirmed her husba

account of her flight and the date.                .

She had known all the gentlemen stopping at the Priory 

year-Mr. Allan Fane was the only one among them who 

not visit their cottage. For the others, some of them drop

in every day-for a drink of milk, for a rest out of the 

No, she could not tell which came oftenest. They all i

about alike. Mr. Guy came no moro than the others, 

often as Mr. Stedman and Lord Montalien, she tho

though she wouldn't swear to it. Sometimes he came .

sometimes with Captain Villiers and Gordon. Mr. Ste

always came alone; so did Iord Montalien. None of








<pb n="403"/>
- TH'E IERDICT OF TIlE CORONER'S JURY.         403

[¤stayed long, none bthem ever made love to her daughtei

lshe heard. She and Mr. Guy used to talk of Miss Lisle

tly, then in France, and Alice used to show him all Paulina's

rs. She never showed any preference for the society of any I

'above another, except maybe Mr. Stedman, whom she did

like. Had heard her say she did not like him, and used

ide upstairs occasionally when he came. Never hid from

of the others. Might have had a secret preference-used to

so, but could not tell for which. Was absent sometimes

ng walks-thought it might be with some of the gentlemen,

couldn't tell for certain. Had asked Alice, but her daugh-

only laughed, and had told her nothing. Had noticed the

t previous to her flight that she had returned later than

a from walking-notided something odd in her manner all

day. Had seen her when she left home in the evening-

ght she was going to Speckhaven for something, as she

en went, and had taken no notice. Alice had kissed her

re she left.

The witness here became so agitated that it was some time 

re she could go on. Knew what she wore very well--it

a dark-brown merino dress, a white-and-blue shawl, a black .

aw hat, trimmed with a blue ribbon, and a black-lace veil.

ehad a bag in her hand, and believed she must have taken

that bag a second dress, a blue-and-white plaid, her Sunday

t. Would know the latter again if she saw it. (Pieces of

ess shown.) Yes, (greatly agitated,) this was the same, faded

d dirty, but the same pattern and material. (Fragments of

awl produced, and identified immediately. Hair shown.) That

the color of her daughter's hair, but brighter, and that was its

ingth, and the way she wore it braided. (Identified the locket.

Fe note to Miss Lisle was shown.) Yes, that was her daughter's 

dwriting. Were there any distinguishing marks about her

ghter's teeth? she was asked by the coroner. Yes ; Alice

d very nice white teeth, but one of the front ones slightly

erlapped and was longer than the other, and the eye-tooth

n the right side had been extracted. (The skull was covered

a cloth, and the teeth exhibited.) Yes, those were like

lice's-there was the overlapping front tooth, there the eye.

oth extracted.

Mrs. Warren began to weep so wildly that she was pennittea

iX stand down.

IJohn Smith was next called. John Smith was a railway offi-

--a guard. On the evening of the 27th of September-he








<pb n="404"/>
404   THE VERDICT OF THi      CORONER'S YURY. X

remembered it very well, from tae talk afterward abou

young woman's flight-the only London passengers ',

Speckhaven had been Mr. Guy Earlscourt, the prisoner, i

young woman, who wore a veil over her face. When ohe

them first they were talking together on the platform. i

told Mr. Guy to look sharp, or words to that effect, as

train was about to start, and had heard him distinctly re

to the woman, " This way, Alice."  They had then enter

first-class carriage together. Knowing Mr. Guy, was c 

about the woman, and watched them when the train rea

London. It was about eleven at night then. They had

into a cab and driven away at once together. 

Mrs. Martha Howe was the next to enter the witness-

violently agitated and in tears. 1¦s. Howe was greatly)

dined to irrelevant matter, and was kept with difficulty to

point. Condensed, her evidence told dead against the]

oner.

"A gentleman, which Mrs. Howe did not know his nam

a tall, fair, genteel young man, had called early on the nil

:ng of September 27th, and engaged the two best rooms, wI

parlor and bedroom they were, for a party from the coun

coming up that night. Remembered the date, because.

always kept account of the days she let her lodgings.

party was a lady, he told her, coming up to be married-a l

away match. About twelve o'clock that night, a lady 

gentleman drove up inda cab, and the gentleman asked 

lady from the country wasn't expected. They came in. :

'lady wore a dark-brown merino dress, a blue-and-white sh

a black hat and veil. She was middle-sized, plump, and vi

pretty, with rosy cheeks, blue eyes, dark-brown hair, and abl

twenty years old. The gentleman was the prisoner, co

swear to it, knew him the minute she set eyes upon him. <;

stayed only a few minutes, ian down stairs, and then ran b

as if to say something more. Didn't hear-what was 

'Thinks she asked the young woman if that was the gentlevi

she was going to marry, but knows she wasn't told. Fair yo

man called next morning. Next evening at six o'clock a ,

drove up, and somse one entered the house. Ran up from

kitchen in time to see a man handing her lodger into the c

but no more. Didn't see his face. Gehtleman came b

with her, and remained in the house until next day, but 

never saw him. Every day, for two weeks, he came ev

evening, remaining until the following day, but always coni








<pb n="405"/>
THE VERDICT OF TArA CORONERS YURY.          405

aIte, and departing so early that she didn't see him. He

da latch-key, and let himself in. Her lodger called herself

Brown. She told her, her husband was a gentleman, andt

t she had run away from home. She wore a wedding-ring,

a locket and a chain round her neck. Yes, that was the

Kket. She had but two dresses, the brown merino, a blue.

Bdwhite plaid-very nice. She never got any new things

e at her house. Yes, this hair looked like Mrs. Brown's.

d noticed the irregularity of the teeth-those shown were

I  sely like. After the first fortnight, Mrs. Brown's husband's

its grew less and less frequent-he was absent for days to-

ther-when he did come he never remained more than an

ur or two. Mrs. Brown began to grow pale and thin, and

had oftein caught her crying. On two or three occasions

had caught sight of Mr. Brown, but he always had his face

uffled up, and his hat pulled over his eyes, so that she never

a good look at him. And he always came about dusk. It

ight be the same she saw the first night or it might not. The

eight and the shape were alike. She wouldn't swear either

a. Seldom heard him speak. On one occasion, some time

November, she thought, on her return from market one

Afternoon, her hired girl, Sarah Ann, had informed her that a

ll, dark, military gent bad been there to see Mrs. Brown, and

ad left her a bunch of roses. He stayed about an hour. The

Text afternoon, just at dark, Mr. Brown came. He and Mrs.

DTrown had a quarrel on that occasion-Mrs. Brown had cried,

Eand he had scolded. Had not listened-had not heard any-

thing that passed. Mr. Brown came out after half an hour,

called her to him in the passage, paid the bill, and told her

JMrs. Brown was going to leave next day. He was muffled

as usual, and the passage was so dark she could not have re-

gnized a feature had he been unmuffled. A cab had come,

|and Mrs. Brown had gone next morning. She cried when sh2

eft, and looked very pale and wretched. She had never seen

Eer nor Mr. Brown from that day to this."

EIllen Young was next called. Ellen Young was about

twenty-three years of age, and gave her evidence clearly and

intelligeuly. She was ,the daughter of Mrs. Sarah YXoung,

i Lodgingb-~use keeper, Barton Street, Strand. Her mother was

ivery ill-dying, she thought, and quite unable to give evidence.

i About sir years ago, come next November, a man had called

at Iheir house, and taken lodgings for a lady, a Mrs. Brown. 1

did not see him myself, either then, or at any other time, Excepf

& '  -                   *,                               ~








<pb n="406"/>
406   'HE ILERDICT OF THE CORONER'S 7Y.3UR

once, and should not know him again. Mother came 

the kitchen, and told me about it; she said he looked;

gentleman-did not describe him. Mrs. Brown came ner

--didn't remember what she wore-a dark dress, I think

was pale and sickly looking, but pretty.  She came 

The gentleman came again next day-mother told me w

came home from school, that another-odger had diedg

afternoon, and that Mrs. Brown's gentleman had staye

him; and written down a confession he had made. If    B

think he came any more until near Christmas-if he;

mother would have told me. I saw Mrs. Brown often d

that time. She seemed very miserable-had trouble o

mind, and cried nearly all the time. No one ever came t

her, and she hardly ever stirred out. One evening, itl.

Christmas week I know, I saw her dress herself and go-

It was near dark, and snowing hard. Two hours aftei'

came home in a cab, in a sort of faint or fit. The cabmaa

to carry her upstairs and lay her on the bed. He told m

and me a man had stopped him in St. James Street and pit

in, and told him where to drive her. She was very baD

two days, then she was well enough to get up. On the i

before Christmas eve, mother came down to the kitchen, w

I was picking raisins, and says: "Ellen, Mrs. Brown's ge

man has been and gone, and she's paid her bill at last, an

going to-morrow." I saw Mrs. Brown very early next day,'

she seemed happier and better than I had ever known

She said to Me:

"I'm going away, Ellen,-home to the country, and toi

friends.  My darling husband is coming for me at e

o'clock." It was snowing fast, and very cold, and motheri

her she was too poorly clad to face the storm. She

-aughed, and said she would soon be beyond feeling cold.. ?

wore a blue-and-white plaid summer dress, a blue-and-

summer shawl. Yes, those are fragments of both-I can si

to them. She had on a straw hat and aveil. At eight o'l

or a minute or two before it, a wagon for two persons dro

to the door. A man was sitting in it, with a muffler cove

all the lower part of his face, and a fur cap pulled away b

over his eyes. Mrs. Brown gave a cry of joy, andan oX

the room, and down to him at once. I saw him help he

and drive away. The clocks were striking eight as I went :

to the kitchen to help get breakfast. That is all I know. 

Miss Yourg identified the locket, the hair, the portio

0                           f-.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~;








<pb n="407"/>
"'fOW PRIDE BOWED AND          ELL."       407

.ss, and was the last witness but one called by the coroner

er mother was too ill to appear.

-Dr. Leonard Williams gave his medical testimony as to

e manner of death. He had examined the sKull and fcund a

cular aperture in the left temple. On measuring it, it proved

be five-sixteenths of an inch in diameter. It was his opin.

|   the circular aperture in the skull was made by a pistol ball

very small size. He had no doubt the person to whom that

ull belonged had been shot by a pistol bullet. A. shot fired

the skull at that place would cause instant death-the per-

nwould die from the shock or from hemorrhage. The men-

[geal artery had been entirely severed, so that if the woman

ad not been instantly killed by the shock she would very

peedily have died of hemorrhage.

HI The trial and all this evidence had occupied four days. The

oroner told the jury this was all the evidence he had to offer.

t was their duty to say who the party was whose remains had

been found; if she came to her death by foul means; and if so,

'by whose hand the deed was done.

The jury retired and were absent about an hour. Dead si-

ience reigned in the crowded court-room when they returned

Iand gave their verdict. It was:

S-: " That the remains found were those of Alice Warren, arid

!that she came to her death by a pistol shot fired by the hand

: of Guy Earlscourt, on the twenty-fourth of December, 1862."

'. The coroner then made out his warrant, committing 'Guy

t f:Earlscourt to prison for safe keeping until set free by due

c :ourse of law.

CHAPTER V!l.

" HOW PRIDE BOWED ANP    ELL. '

T was the afternoon of the twelty-first of August-the

day preceding that upon which Guy Earlscourt was to

appear at the preliminary examination before a police

magistrate, previous to his committal to stand his

'trial for the wilful murder of Alice Warren. Jt was a very

:warm day--an intensely warm day down among the cornfields

:-Id; . 








<pb n="408"/>
408      "uHOW PRIDE BOWED A       D FELL." 

and golden country meadows. blazing in ufferably hot hi

Iondon. The atmosphere of the prison-room was st

Guy's long limbs were stretched out upon th6 bed-he -l

his shirt sleeves, his collar loosened, almost painfully oppre

far air. He had spent nearly a month in prison, and lo

as he very well-might after the ordeal, pale, and wornr

thin  The sensation the whole affair had created was ai

lutely something unprecedented. Guy Earlscourt, the s

Guardsman, the wealthy and popular author, the brothert

Lord Montalien, to stand his trial for the murder of a peas

girl. The best Metropolitan society was thrilled-it was so

thing new under the sun, something to stir and excite e

their languid pulses. All his evil leeds of the past, fogo

in the sunshine of prosperity, were raked up again, stories .

afloat of him fit to make your hair rise-people racalled 

iinister expression. about his mouth, and the darkly evil gl

of his brown eyes. He had Italian blood in his veins, t

revengeful, murderous blood, from time immemorial, and    i

picture sold like wild-fire, and new editions of his books w

ordered as fast as they could be issued. If Mr. Earlscourt i

written a second " Hamlet" or " Childe Harold," he had ne

found himself so famous as now. He smiled in the solitude

his prison as he read and heard all this. It was the way of

world-he had expected nothing else-he knew   the puN

would be grievously disappointed, if he were not condemnm

It is not given to us every day to witness such a sensatio

romance of real life-a prospective peer and celebrated auth

is not every day sent to Newgate like a common felon. It ws

really wonderful how his friends fell off-a little melanchol

too, if Guy had not been a philosopher and reader of P&o

weak human nature. A few friends were faithful in the d

hour-the Atcherlys, Robert Lisle, Captain Villiers, Allan Fan

The Lady Edith Clive, too, sent him a note-a passiona

vehement, girlish outburst of hearty nature. She knew he wa~

innocent-tihough all the world believed in his guilt, she ne

would-never, never !

He smiled a little sadly as he read it, then, wanting a 

light half an hour after, I am afraid Lady Edith's note:i

twisted up to serve the. purpose. 

He was neither miserable nor indifferent to his danger .

his ruin. He saw clearly how strongly circumstances t

against him, and his own inability to clear himself. He r

with horror unutterable, that his brothcer was the guilty main .








<pb n="409"/>
I    "HOW PRIDE BOWED AND FELL." 

: Great Heaven! what a double-dyed villain he was, to lure

itway an innocent, trusting girl, and then, when weary of her,

foully murder her. He sickened when he thought of it. Lord

IMontalien had not been present at the inquest, but Guy knew he

lwas one of the new witnesses to be examined on the morrow.

l  Most faithful of all hisfriends and visitors had been Robert

Aisle. He had never missed a day. His father, had he been

ahlive, could scarcely have felt more bitter pain for Guy than he

did. His own private troubles were lessening-his daughter

long ago had been pronounced out of danger-had been able

|to sit up during the past nine days. But he could not leave

England while his young friend's fate remained undecided.

He was with him this sultry August afternoon, walking slowly

ito and fro, always his wont when deeply moved. They had

rbeen talking of indifferent things-of the new book Guy had

iAbegun in prison-he always avoided talking of his trial, if

possible, but Lisle's moody brow showed that his thoughts were

: of it now.

"I ask you once again, Guy, if you do not mean to throw

aside this mad reticence, and vindicate your innocence as you

can-as I know you can ? You have engaged excellent counsel,

but we don't want his eloquence-we do want a plain, straight-

forward statement of facts, as regards your doings on the morn-

ing of the twenty-fourth of December. When an accused man

refuses to account for his conduct with a strong prima-facie

case made out against him, the law is justified in believing that

his silence arises from guilty or sinister motives. The evidence

against you is purely circumstantial and erroneous, of course,

. but men have been hanged before now on purely circumstantial

and erroneous evidence."

"They won't hang me," said Guy, shaking up his pillows so

as to get the cool side out; " at least, I hope not. The evi-

dence, as I said before, that suffices for a coroner or a police

magistrate won't always stand the test of a grand jury. It will

be unpleasant to be committed to Newgate until the assizes,

but-well, the world is full of unpleasant things, and I suppose

I must come in for my share. An alibi I cannot prove-it is,

is I told you before, simply impossible. If I am cleared, it

must be by the breaking of this chain of evidence they have so

skilfully wrought against me-not by any revelation of my own.

Don't let us talk about it any more, dear Lisle; it's much too

hot to discuss unpleasant subjects. How are they all at Speck-

haven to-day?" '

18








<pb n="410"/>
410       "SHOW PRIDE BOWED AND FELL.*              I

c Much as usual."

"Miss Lisle continues steadily to improve, I trust ? "

some hesitation this.                               H

"Paulina does not improve," her father answered, gloom

"not, at least, as she should. The apathetic state of low 

its to which she fell a victim before her illness has seized u

her again. She does not rally because she is indifferent onw 

subject. The doctors can do nothing-they speak of hidd

trouble, something preying on her mind-advise change of sc

air, and climate-the old stereotyped medical formula. .

this trouble, if there be a hidden trouble, is a subject on w

nothing will induce her to speak." 

Guy's face was much graver now than when discussingj

own danger.

"You should follow their advice," he said. "You should t

her away. I suppose they will want you here to-morrow~

after that, why not start at once ? You can give bonds for yB

reappearance when needed again. Take her abroad, and

mediately-her health is much too precious to be trifled w

longer. She does not-I hope she does not know of my ffa

For the sake of past times, when we were good friends, I sho

not like her to know I am even suspected of the murder of -

friend. You have not told her ?"

" Most certainly not-all exciting topics are forbidden. A

strange to say, she has made no inquiries whatever on the su

ject of her dead friend since her recovery. The apathy t

holds her seems to blot out feeling and memory. She ne

reads, she sees no visitors, and we tell her nothing."

Guy drew a long breath-a breath of relief.

" I am glad of that-take her out of England in ignoran

if you can; and whatever happens keep her in ignorance. 

her never learn this, if it is in your power to prevent it.

could not quite bear that. I may tell you now," after a b

pause, " what I would not tell you out there in Virginia--I lo

Paulina with a love as devoted as it is hopeless. Alice War

was to her as a sister; I cannot endure that she should think

was suspected of her murder. Promise me, old friend," he

out his hand, "that you will do this, the greatest, perhaps t

last favor I shall ask. Promise !"

" I promise," Lisle answered, wringing the young man's han

"to keep her in ignorance while I can. Sooner or later 

must learn the truth in spite of me."

" Of course; but until the matter is quite decided keep

fi:0'








<pb n="411"/>
" HO W PRIDE BOWED AND FELL."            4

i total ignorance. Take her abroad, amuse her, let her egain

her health-she will recover none the quicker for knowing

this."

At ten o'clock next morning the prisoner was taken into

court. The crowd was unprecedented-many of those, who

_ had fled from London the second week of July, as though. it

were pest-stricken, had returned to witness the trial of Guy

Earlscourt. He bowed and smiled to the many faces he knew

as he took his place in the dock. Mr. Carson, a very able law-

yer, had been retained on the part of the prisoner, Mr. Hard-

ing to conduct the prosecution. Mr. Harding rose on behalf

of the Crown to address the bench and lay before them the facts

of the case. His address was lengthy, and told forcibly against

the prisoner. He summed up the evidence laid before the coro-

ner in an overwhelming mass, ard proceeded to summon the

witnesses. All the more important witnesses who had previ-

ously appeared were again summoned, and among the new ones

Mr. Allan Fane was first called.

Mr. Fane had very little light to throw upon the case one

way or another. Had seen prisoner in company with Miss War-

ren many times-both the September of her flight and othel

years during his summer visits to Montalien Priory. Had never

thought Mr. Earlscourt a lover of hers; had not known him to

pay any more attention to her than the other men did stopping

at the Priory. Knew that he went up to London one evening

late in September; could not remember the date. - Heard next

day Miss Warren was missing, and had gone with him. Was

surprised at the news; did not credit it. Believed Mr. Earls-

court's own statement that he had met her by accident at the

station. Was convinced the prisoner was quite incapable either

of deliberate seduction or murder. Knew his reputation had

not been stainless in the past, but his guilt had been the com-

mon follies of youth, never crimes.

A profound sensation ran through the court at the name of

.the next witness. It was Francis, Baron Montalien, the pris.

oner's brother.

He came forward, his face deathly pale, dressed in black, an

ominous blue circle surrounding his mouth and eyes, looking

unspeakably ill. He shrank away from the dock; his voice

when he spoke was almost inaudible from agitation-the natural

agitation of an upright man in seeing his only brother placed in

so dreadful a position.

Lord Montalien sworn.   The prisoner was his brother








<pb n="412"/>
412      "1HOW PRIDE BOWED AND FELL."                B

Had known Alice Warren off and on for many years. 

always had the highest respect for her personally, and for 

whole family. Had never heard her lightly spoken of. Visi

the cottage very often when passing-rarely went there s

posely. Had often met his brother there-and met him wa

ing with Miss Warren. Had frequently jested with him  i

his attentions to the bailiffs pretty daughter, but had ney

considered them serious. Was aware of his brother's intent

of going up to London on the evening of the 27th, but kn

nothing of the girl's flight until next day. Was surprised al

shocked when informed they had fled together. Came up '

town himself next day on purpose to remonstrate with i

brother, but did not succeed in seeing hin then, or for man

weeks after. Yes; another of his guests, Augustus Stedma

bad also left the Priory for London about the same time, o

the same day, or the day before his brother, could not reme

ber which. Mr. Stedman had not returned-was out in Au

tralia at present.  Sir Harry Gordon was in India.  Hi

brother, Mr. Fane, and Captain Villiers, were the only oth

friends staying with him that year. He had remained in Lon

don a week or more on the occasion of his coming up-theK

returned for a few days to Lincolnshire. Had never see-

Alice Warren after her flight. Yes; his brother had calle

before his departure for America upon him at his lodgings. I

was Christmas week, not Christmas eve-two or three day

before Christmas. They had talked of his departure and of

Miss Earlscourt's will, which had disinherited him. Had n

paid his brother's debts. Miss Earlscourt had done it. Ha:

often advised him for his good. Had spoken to him more tha

once on the subject of Alice Warren, but had always been re'

buffed.                                             -

Lord Montalien was cross-examined, and allowed to stand

down. His emotion had been very great. Profound sympaB

thy for his delicate health and deep sorrow was felt through

the court. His face was quite ghastly as he left the box, hi

hand was pressed convulsively in the region of his heart

Guy's dark eyes followed him, his handsome face set and stern;:

He had listened to his deliberate perjury; and if any doubt 6i

his guilt had lingered in his mind it was dispelled in that hour,2!

Captain Cecil Villiers came next, and the Guardsman, wit!

every wish to serve his friend, every belief in his innocence

did more to damn his case and hang him than all the re

Had known Alice Warren, and admired her-always admir








<pb n="413"/>
f; .     "HOW PRIDE BOWED AND FELL."             4

pretty girls, whether peasants or princesses. Was not aware

i of Guy Earlscourt being her lover-never had thought him

such. Had "chaffed" him on the subject of the flight olice or

| twice, and believed what had been told him, that the meeting

at the railway was merest chance. Mr. Earlscourt had re-

- mained at his lodgings for two days previous to his departure

5 from England. He had been absent on duty nearly all of the

23d of December-found the prisoner alone in his chamber

upon his return late at night. They had sat together smoking and

talking for a couple of hours-his friend seemed thoughtful

and out of spirits. Once, when talking of his past reckless

career, Guy had burst out laughing, and exclaimed: "Cecil,

old fellow, what would you say if I told you I was about to

close my mad career by the crowning madness of all to-mor-

row?"   Had laughed' again, and refused to say more-had.

taken his candle and gope to bed. Awakening next morning

about daylight, he had seen Guy in the room adjoining, dress-

ing himself by candle-light. Had called, and asked him what

the deuce he meant by getting up in the middle of the night ?

The prisoner had answered it was half-past seven o'clock, and

that he had a pressing engagement for eight. "There is a

lady in the case, Villiers," he said; " and ladies brook of no

delay." I fell asleep again, and did not awake until after nine.

My servant came with hot water, and I asked him what time

it was, and if Mr. Earlscourt had got back yet ? He said it

'was half-past nine, and Mr. Earlscourt had not returned.

Earlscourt came in while we were speaking, covered with snow.

He told us he had been riding outside in the snow-storm, and

was tremendously hungry. We breakfasted together.  He

made no further reference to his engagement of the morning.

At a little before eleven he left for the house of a friend-Sir

Vane Charteris-to bid the family good-by. Two hours later I

saw him depart by the noon train for Southampton.

While Captain Villiers was having all this reluctantly ex-

torted from him, a messenger had made his way to Mr. Carson,

and placed a note in his hand. It was ot some length and of

evident imnortance-the face of the lawyer flushed up with

surprise and delight as he read it. It was the middle of the

afternoon; the court must speedily adjourn.

Samuel Watters, the servant spoken of by Captain 'Villiers,

was the last witness for the prosecution called, and corrobora.

ted his master's statement concerning Mr. Earlscourt's actionsi

upon that moi ning, his'calling the cab for hin , the bon c bX 

departure and retrrn.








<pb n="414"/>
414       "HfOW PRIDE POWED AND FELL."           :-

With his evidence the case for the prosecution closed; li

then Mr. Carson arose with the pleasant prefatory remark t |

his address would be a brief one.                   .

He did not, he said, rise to assert that his client was gtt

less of this horrible crime laid to his charge-that was to

presumed until the evidence had proven him guilty. That t

evidence just heard had done so, he, Mr. Carson, denied. 

was, from first to last, circumstantial, and improbable in t

extreme. He could cite scores of occasions where innoel-

men had been condemned on far more conclusive circumsta

tial evidence than this, their innocence discovered only wh

too late. Mr. Earlscourt meets this unhappy girl at the st

tion, and accompanies her up to London. She is a strang

-in the great city for the first time-tired and frightened, at 

requests him, as a friend and protector in whom she place

every confidence, to see her safely M  her destination. H:

does so at once, using no disguise before the landlady, makii

no attempt at concealment.

On the occasion of hts second visit, some weeks later, he did

the same, going openly and in broad day. Is this the condue

of that other man, who visits his victim like the criminal he i'

disguised, and after dark ? What evidence has been offered

here to prove that my client and this disguised man are one?

and the same ?                                       :

Mr. Carson here grew eloquent, and showed distinctly the

weakness of this part of the evidence. That they were not

one and the same, he was clearly prepared to prove. Mr.

Earlscourt had left the lodgings of Captain Villiers at eigh-

o'clock, or .a little before, on the morning of the 24th of De-c

cember, 1862.

He had told Captain Villiers "there was a lady in thoe'

case."  He told him the truth; but that that lady was not

the murdered girl he was prepared to show the court-thaliba:

his client had been from a few minutes past eight un .. nine--

the time when the murder was committed at Battersea itP:

company of this lady and her maid, in the city of London 

A sense of loyalty to the lady had held his client silent, with

a noble generosity, at the peril of his own life. With a ger-

erosity equal to his own, that lady had now come forward to

triumphantly vindicate his honor and his innocence. Illness

had prevented her hearing of Mr. Earlscourt's arrest at ar.

earlier day-yesterday she had discovered it in her home nille

ai ay. To-day she was-HERE!             .

::;~K








<pb n="415"/>
~I        C'HOW PRIDE BOWED AND         ELL"        415

i, A murmur thrilled through the death-like silence of the

-crowded court. The face of the prisoner had flushed crimson

to the temples, then faded away, leaving him ghastly pale.

The door of the witness-box opened, and a lady stood there;

- robed in dark. silk, tall, elegant, veiled. Every creature in tihe

crowded court leaned breathlessly forward-you might have

: heard a feather fall. She lifted one gloved hand, and flung

: back her veil. The rays of the August sun streaming in

through the windows fell full upon her; a thrill, an irrepressible

murmur, ran through the court at sight of that queenly grace,

of that matchless loveliness. And four hundred eager eyes fell

and fixed on the proudly beautiful face of Paulina Lisle !

She was white as marble, white as death, as she faced the

bench. Once, and once only, she looked at the prisoner.

His face wore a strained, passionate look of appeal, as if

even then he would entreat her silence. A smile, the sweet-,

est, the gentlest, she had ever given him curved her lips-her

eyes lit up--the-old dauntless resolution was there in every

line of that perfect face. He dropped his own, and shaded

his eyes with his hand. Until he stood up free, he never

raised his head again.

Mr. Carson leaned forward, and blandly spoke.

To all the legal gentlemen present Miss Lisle was well known

by reputation, the celebrated London beauty, who only a few

weeks ago had refused to marry the Marquis of Heatherland.

And the beautiful, the wealthy heiress and belle, stood here in

a London police-court, to vindicate the innocence of a man

suspected of murder !

"Your name, madam, if you please ?"

She came a step forward. For an instant the blood rose up

bright in her pale face. Then, in that sweet, vibrating voice,

that had always been one'of her chief charms, she spoke: 

"I am called Paulina Lisle, but it is not my name. Wait;

when you have heard what I am here to say, you will un-

derstand."

;'here were scores present who knew her well, but with the

exception of two, not one of them understood what this meant.

Even her father stood confounded.

Not her name ?-what did she mean? As the thought

crossed his mind, as he looked at her wonderingly, the clear,

sweet tones of her voice again were heard, as she began hez

singular story.

Whpn Robeit Lisle told Guy Earlscourt of the strange state








<pb n="416"/>
416       "11/OW PRIDA BOIWED AND FELL'." 

of apathy into which his daughter had fallen in her cnvales. -

cencc, he had told him the simple truth.

Iier youth, her splendid vitality, had made her recovery rapid

enough while reason remained absent. The moment entire

consciousness of past and present things, the moment memory

and mind returned complete, her recovery had ceased. She

sank into a state very nearly resembling stupor-she rarely

smiled, she rarely spoke, she la y or sat, white and still, speech.

less, lifeless. She puzzled the doctors-by all laws of medicine

she should have recovered with double rapidity about the time

recovery stopped entirely. She distressed her friends beyond

measure-they saw her dying before their eyes, and had no clue

whatever to her hidden disease.

"She has something preying on her mind," the learned Lon-

don physician said, shaking his gray head, " and I cannot min-

ister to a mind diseased. Until she tells you what that hidden

trouble is, and you find a means of alleviating it, all my efforts

are vain."

They spoke to her gently, lovingly, soothingly, and she looked

at them blankly, and only answered with a tired sigh, and a lit-

tle impatient gesture: "Please let her alone. It worried her

to death to talk-there was nothing on her mind," flushing an;

grily, as she said it, and with all the old wilfulness. "Why

should they think so ? She was not very strong yet-that was

all." And then the pale lips closed in a line of weary pain, and

the heavy, melancholy light filled the blue eyes, and she looked 

away from them all-away and away over the wide ocean, that

she could see like a stripe of silver ribbon from her window.

Alice was dead-Guy was gone forever. Guy ! Guy I It was

the old burden-death toned now.

She had lost him forever; and with him heart and life seemed

to have gone. He was far off in wide America by this time, think-

ing her base, and cruel, and heartless, and all selfish and un-

womanly things, and he would never know how bitterly she had

repented, how dearly she loved him. Her life seemed ended-*

what was there left to recover and live for now ? She ha' gone

wrong from first to last-her pride, her rebellious, wilful spirit

had led her astray ever since she could remember, and now the

end had come.

If Paulina had been in her usual healthy state of mind and

body she could never have worked herself up to this morbid and

unwholesonme pitch, but all strength was gone, physically and

mentally and there seemed no power to rally. She sat by her

y~~~~~~~~~~~~~* 








<pb n="417"/>
,-     N'HOW PRIDE BOWED AND FEL."              417

qindow the livelong day, gazing out with blank, dull eyes at

that silver sea line, melting away into the blue, bright sky, her

listless hands lying idly in her lap. She saw no one but the

family-she shrank even from her old friend, Mrs. Atcherly,

- when that lady ran down to see her. She had lost all interest

' in her friend's murder. Alice was dead-what did it signify

e wh) had done the deed! ?-she knew who had done it, and he wr

:- Guy's brother, and it would not recall Alice to life hunting him

-. down. So the days and weeks went by and it was the last

week of August. 

That same blazing August afternoon preceding Guy's ex-

anination before the police-court, on which he had lain pant-

ing for air in his stifling prison-room, a woman drove up from

the railway to the cottage of Duke Mason. It was close upon

sunset, the golden light slanted across the rich uplands and

meadows, and the fresh breeze blew cool from the sea. The

womanr was admitted by Rosanna-a stranger to her, a stranger

in Speckhaven, a little woman, decently dressed and looking

like a respectable matron of Rosanna's own standing.

"Does Miss Paulina Lisle live here ? " this woman asked.

" Yes; Miss Paulina Lisle lived there;" and Rosanna looked

grim, and stern, as she made the answer.                 2

"Then I must see her, and at once. I have come here on a

matter of the greatest importance," the woman said, in visible

agitation.

"You cannot see her. She's beenilL She don't see no one,"

responded Miss Rosanna Mason..

"She will see me-she ms-t see me."

" Must, ma'am 1" Rosanna repeated, with her sternest glare

and most awful bass.

" She will see me, if you tell her who I am "-the woman's

agitation increasing with every word-" tell her it's Jane Seaver,

that was her maid six years ago. Oh, do tell her, please-it's

i matter of life or death. I've come all the way up from Wales 

where I live, on purpose to see Miss Lisle."

Will you not tell me what you want of her ?" Olivia's soft

vo'cessaid over the shoulder of Rosanna. 'f I am her mother.

Miss Lisle has been very ill-the slightest excitement is dan. 

gerous." 

Jane Seaver dropped a lady's-maid's courtesy.

"Begging your pardon- ma'am, I cannot tell any one but

Miss Paulina herself.  should like to ask you on: question

18 








<pb n="418"/>
418      "'NOW PRDE BO WED AND PAFt" 

though"--visibly embarrassed. "Does she know that

Mr. Earlscourt is being tried for his life for murder ?"  ~  i

"No," Olivia answered, in surprise; "she does not. -

keep all exciting topics from her. Is it of  a Ot you oexau

speak ? " 

The woman clasped her hands.

" For God s sake let me see her I Tellher I am here,

hkow she will see me. I tell you, ma'am, it is a matter of'

and death."

The woman's face told she spoke the truth.

Rosanna and Mrs. Lisle whispered together for a mom

then the latter turned to the stranger.

"Come in," she said quietly. "I shall tell my daughter 

are here, and what you say. Whether she sees you or

shall be for her to decide."

She ascended to Paulina's room, pale and uneasy.

could this woman mean ?

"I wish Robert were here I" she thought, as she opened' 

door-" or even Duke 1" 

A moment later and she reappeared.      .

" You are to go up," she said; " Miss Lisle will see yoo." 

The woman ascended, and was shown into the. young l

room.

Paulina rose up from her chair, with a started face.

" Jane I" she exclaimed--"you /" "

And the woman had caught both her hands and kissed the4

with a cry:

"Oh, Miss Paulina I Miss Paulina I"

Mrs. Lisle saw no more; she closed the door and went outI

Ten minutes passed-she had descended and joined Roanm -

below-when a cry rang through the house-a loud, terrible

scream. It was Paulina's voice. Both started andrushed ub  _

and broke into the room simultaneously. 

In the middle of the floor stood Paulina, ghastly pale, tb'

woman before her pale and trembling, clinging to her, and iai

ploring her to be calm.            .

Rosanna hurled her aside as you would brush a reptile.

'What have you done to her? What have you told

Paulira I Paulina I what is the matter ? "

' Miss Paulina, for the love of Heaven I" cried the w

ringing her hands.

Paulina turned, with eyes that flashed like lightning, 

her mother and Rosanna.

"Why have you kept it from me? Did you want me  1








<pb n="419"/>
HN W PRIDS BOnWWE D   JAD pTs LW       41j9

rr to my other crimes? Oh, great Heaven I to think

Fi'hat he should be lying in prison all those weeks-to think they

s hould be trying him for his life, and Ithe cause of it all I"

"Paulina," said her mother, in terror, "of whom are you '

speaking? Surely not of poor Guy Earlscourt ?"

"Of Guy Earlscourt-of Guy Earlscourt, whose curse I have

been from first to last. I bound him by oath, and he has kept

i it well-would have kept it to the scaffold I Why did you not

tell me? Did you want to make me a murderess?" 

She broke down in a passion of hysterical tears, coveringhet

face with her hands, and sobbing until her whole .form shook.

Jane clung to her, entreating her to be calm.

"They did not know, Miss Paulina-how should they?

And it is not too late yet-remember that. If you make your.

self ill you will be able to do him no good. For pity's sake,

Miss Paulina, don't I To-morrow, all will be set right."

She lifted her face; she caught Jane vehemently by the arm,

"To-morrow ? You are not deceiving me ? To-morrow I

can save him ?"

Before Jane could reply, the door below opened, and men's

voices were heard. It was Mr. Lisle and Duke returning from

London.

"Thank Heaven 1" Olivia cried. " Here is my husband I"

She ran down to him, as she always did, happy and fluttered

by his return, and in a few incoherent sentences told him what

had taken place.                                 -

Lisle listened very gravely.  The old uspidon that bad

, never entirely left him, that there was something between 'Guy

and Paulina, something secret and abnormal was eotfinred.

Did this woman know the secret which bound them, yet held

them apart?

He went up with his wife, and entered his daughter's room.

During the brief interval, Paulina bad calmed stngely,

She was walking up and down the room when her fathe

entered, her lips compressed, her eyes alight, her brows kait

in steady resolve. She came forward to her father at once.

"I- have something I want to say to you," sh began,

abruptly." Rosanna, will you take Mrs. Seaer down stair,

and be kind tc her--he has done me great service to-d

Mother please leave father with me "

They quitted the room. Paulina placed a chair for her

father, ar.d took a seat herself in the shade of the window-a  -

teins..








<pb n="420"/>
420     AU JBOW PRIDE BOtVED AND PZELL." 

"Papa I "-in the same abrupt way-" Mr. Earlscourt

prison, to be tried for the murder of Alice Warren?" 

"Yes, Paulina; I am sorry to say he is." Po

"Sorry to sayl  Surely, papa, you do not beleve

guilty ? "

"No, my daughter; but the evidence is very strong a

him. Poor Guy's position is a most distressing one. I 

of nothing that can save him from committal to-morrow b

clear alibi." 

" An alibi is proving his presence in some other place at

hour the murder was committed ?"

Lisle nodded assent.

"Alice was murdered-so this sailor swears-between 

hours of eight and nine, on Christmas eve, 1862, and cirt'

stances point to Mr. Earlscourt as the murderer?"

Her voice rang out clear and firm-unnaturally dear. 

face was set as stone.

Again Lisle nodded, watching her uneasily.

"Why does not Mr. Earlscourt prove an alibi  What

he say?" i

" Says it is out of his power-that he was driving about ia-

cab at that time, and never noticed the number. That is

he says. I believe. he is screening some one-some one wh

he thinks it dishonorable to betray.. A woman, in all pro

bility."  He looked art her keenly. She met that look, 

leaning forward laid her hand on his.

"You are right, father; and Iam that woman."

"You / Paulina I" his bronzed face turning white.

"I, father 1" in the same hard, steady tone; " and you 

imagine what his opinion of me must be, for having been 

lent thus long." 

"He knows the truth-that we have kept you in ign

And only this very day he begged me, as a last and g

favor, to take you out of England, still i ignorance of 1

fate."                                             -

"He did?" 

"He did" 'I

She turned her face from him, and there was dead

or a brief space. When she spoke again, her voice ft

for the first time.                              . 

"He is to be tried to-morrow, is he not ? Father, youB

take me up to London-I must prove his innocence. '  I-: .:

" Yo-can c o it?"








<pb n="421"/>
"HOW PP.IDE BOWED AND F        ."       421

"' I can do it. Between the hours of eight and nine, on

[  Christmas eve, 1862, Guy Earlscourt and I were together.

l Jane Seaver.'was with us; she can prove it, as well as I. Mr.

. Earlscourt is the noblest, the most loyal, the most generous of

men-it is my turn to do an act of simpld justice now. Please

leave me alone for a while. I shall trust you, my father, to

take me up to town in time to save him to-morrow."

"You may trust me, Paulina-Heaven bless my brave

-  daughter."

He kissed her tenderly, and quitted the room. And Paulina

was alone, and knew all. All he had suffered through her, all

his brave loyalty, his generosity, his noble fidelity. She mank

down-on her knees, and hid her face in her bands. How she

suffered-how she loved him in that hour was known only to

Heaven and herself.

Jane Seaver remained at the cottage all night-she was to

accompany Mr. Lisle and his daughter on the morrow. The 

- morrow found Paulina quite calm, very gentle, very sad. Her

pride had fallen from her as a mantle-she was going to save

Guy-she thought of nothing but that.

She stood in the witness-box-she had seen his pale, startled

face-all the infinite love and honor she felt for him shone

forth in her smile. The sea of eager human faces melted away

-she only knew Guy was.there, and that she was going to save

him. The silence in the court, as with a little legal help she

told her story, was something almost psinful

"I have known the Honorable Guy Erlcourt for the past

á eight years. We were always very good friends. The de

ceased was also my most intimate friend-that letter was writ.

ten to me-I gave her that locket. Mr. Earlscourt was never

her lover-never-I know it. On the night of December 22d,

x862, I met Mr. Earlscourt at a party at Twickenham. We

were alone together in a room for about half an hour. 1 was in

great trouble-my guardian was trying to force me into a mar-

riage with a gentleman I disliked very strongly. I was in his

1ower--until I came of age or married. He was to take me to

'ssex on the 24th, and imprison me in a country-house of his

until I consented. I told Mr. Earlscourt this--and he asked

me to marry him instead. He did it only to save me.' He was

going to leave England-our marriage would make no differ.

ence in his plans. I say again he only did it to save me.

When I married, my fortune became my own, and 1 was out of

gy guardian's power. I consented on conditions, that he

--








<pb n="422"/>
422      "HOW PRIDE BOWED AND FELL."

would keep our marriage a dead secret, that he would never

assert his claim as my husband under any circumstances. He

bound himself by oath to all I demanded, and said everything

should be ready for our marriage on Christmas eve. The hour

fixed was very early in the morning, because, about noon, my

guarlian meant to take me down to Essex. We vere to be mar.

ried before a registrar on Christmas eve; and he told me to

be ready at eight o'clock in the morning. I was. I told my

maid, and no one else. I bound her also by oath to keep the

matter a secret; I did not wish any one to know I was mar-

ried. At precisely eight o'clock, on the morning of Christmas

eve, my maid and I stole from the house. Mr. Earlscourt was

waiting for us at the corner of the street with a cab. Yes, it

was snowing hard. We drove to the registrar's office-we were

nearly a quarter of an hour getting there. Mr. Earlscourt rode

on the box outside with the cabman in the snow. When we

reached the office we found no one but a boy; the registrar was

absent. We waited half an hour before he came. I know the

time. I kept looking at my watch every five minutes. It was

a quarter of nine when he arrived. WFe were married. Here

is the certificate. My maid and I re-entered the cab. Mr.

Earlscourt mounted beside the cabman again. It was twenty

minutes past nine, precisely, when we reached Berkeley Square.

Mr. Earlscourt bade me good-morning, said he would return

about eleven to bid me good-by, and left me. He did come at

the hour appointed-he bade me farewell. I wished him to

take a sum of money, but he refused. I swear that during the

whole of that hour, from eight to nine, on Christmas eve, 1862,

Mr. Earlscourt was in my company. I decline entering into

my motives, or speaking any further of myself. I have told

you where Mr. Earlscourt was during the time the murder was

committed. I am Mr. Earlscourt's wife-yes."  The thrill

that ran through Guy's heart even at that moment at the

words! "A wife cannot give evidence for or against a hus-

band, you say ? Very well, my maid is here to corroborate my

testimony, if mine will not do."

It had taken upward of an hour for the speaker to tell her

story--she had grown faint and giddy before it was done. She

reeled with the last words-she looked like death, and as per

mission was given her to stand down, she had to grasp the rails

to keep from falling. A second later, she was in her father's

arm;-s-lifeless and cold. For the first time in her life, Paulina

had fainted entirely away.








<pb n="423"/>
;RETARtUTZONfM.               43,

Jane Seaver was called to the stand, and gae her evidencet-

with a clearness and precision that carried conviction to every

h earer. It vindicated Guy completely. She swore positively  

to the time-at the hour when the murder had been corn..

mitted-Mr. Earlscourt had been every instant with her and

her mistress. No cross-exraination could shake or alter her.

Guy was free I 

Bore she had ceased undergoing a rigid cross-examination -

there was a sudden bustle near the door. A man was breath.

lessly forcing his way in, by sheer force of strength and elbows

His eyes fell on Lord Montalien-Lord Montalien, with an

xspression on his face not good to see, standing stock still

since Paulina had entered.

The new-comer whispered a fip  words to a policeman  .

"Don't let Lord Montalien leave the court," and still kept el.

bowing his way forward. As Jane Seaver descended, he

mounted to the stand, removed his hat, showing a pale and agi

tated face as he turned it to the bench.

"I demand to be sworn I I have important evidence to give

in this case. My name is Augustus Stedman."

CHAPTER IX.

RILrB'tBuj iON.

Tthis second startling interruption of the ordinary

course of things there was a general moyement and'

murmur throughout the court. Then dead silence,

and in that silence every eye fixed upon the tall, pale

young man in the witness-box, who had been sworn, and was

rapidly and incoherently giving his evidence. 

The court itself had been so startled and excited during tbe

past hour or two that any little informality in Mr. Stedman's

evidence-was overlooked, and the bench leaned forward and to

listen, almost aa profoundly interested as the silent crowd.

And Lord Montalien 1 The eyes of Inspector Bnlrhamn were

upon him, the hand of Inspector Burnham ready to fall heavily 

upor his shoulder at a second's notice. I hope nobody will-

tiink any the worse of this zealous officer if I say he was bittrl








<pb n="424"/>
4S24               RETRIBUTION. 

disappointed and disgusted at the change affairs had

He had spared no pains in this case, put forth his best 

in fereting out proof of the Honorable Guy Earlscourts

had made sure of fame, and a rapid rise in his professionW

conaequence, and lo I at the eleventh hour-a young lady  "_

forward and proves an alibi, and knocks all his hopes in  

head. It was clear, however, a murder had been co.

and the murderer must be found if in England. It was 

satisfaction to'suspect Lord Montalien, if not his brother, i

he stood near, eying him narrowly, as a cat its prey.

At the sight of the new-comer's face, at the sound of 

name, a grayish pallor had crept slowly over his lordship's 

from brow to chin. The game -was up I Among all -

chances that might bring detection home to him, he had nev

given a thought to Stedman's return.

He had thought him safe in Australia for life, and yonder I

stood, speaking the words that told his life away. There 

a singing in his ears, a mist before his eyes, for a moment 

sharp, sudden pain in his left side. He had reason to dre

those swift. keen pangs-his medical men looked grave whe.

he spoke of them, and warned him to avoid agitation of-af

kinds. He made no attempt whatever to leave the court,

fascination he was powerless to control chained him to the

where he stood. His life, perhaps, depended on his escape-

now, but he stood there listening as greedily as the most un.

concerned spectator.

" I have been absent in Australia six years this coming DI

cenber," were the first words he heard Stedman speak cleartyi'

" I only touched English ground yesterday. I took up a pa

anti the first thing my eyes rested on was the arrest and trial 

the Honorable Guy Earlscourt, for the murder of Alice Warrnei

I was utterly confounded at first-then, without loss of-time,41

hastened to London to be present at the examination todai

My first visit before coming here was to Mrs. Young's lodging

house, Strand. It seemed incomprehensible to me how

could confound him with the man who placed Alice Warren ii/>

her charge. I found her very ill, but quite conscious; and ;-

when I explained to her how an innocent man's life might rel-a

on her identification, she resolved to come here, at all haza  s;

at once. She is outside in the cab now, and ready to app t:

when my evidence is concluded.                  ....- -

"Six years ago the third of next ninth, I was one of a f

of men down for the shooting season at Montalii.en 








<pb n="425"/>
RETRIBUTION.                  425

knew the deceased, Alice Warren. I knew hei very well. I

admired her good looks, like the rest, and paid iler attentions

when she would let me, but she rather disliked and avoided me.

Mr. Earlscourt was one of us, and sometimes visited the cot-

tage in a friendly way. He was no lover of the girl's. I know

it. How? Because I know who her accelted lover was. It

was our host, Lord Montalicn-Mr. Earlscourt's elder brother.

On the evening of the twenty-sixth of September, I found Lord

Montalien alone in the library, walking about in deep t.ought.

He took me into his confidence. After making me give a

promise of profound secrecy, he unfolded his plans. ' Le was

infatuatedly in love with the bailiff's daughter, and his passion

was returned, but Miss Warren had fixed principles in virtue,

and self-respect, religion, and all that, and would not listen to

a word without the wedding-ring. He could not marry her,

and he could not lose her. What was to be done ? Why this:

with my friendly help Alice was to go off privately to Iondon

-he was to follow next day on the quiet. I was to find some

one able and willing to play parson, and a mock marriage was

to satisfy every doubt, every scruple. It was a nefarious plot.

Tam not squeamish, but it sickened even me. I had no rea-

son to like Lord Montalien-he had done me an injury years

before, which I had neither forgotten nor forgiven, and though

we seemed outwardly friends, I had sworn revenge upon the

first opportunity. Here was the opportunity. I promised all

he demanded, and left for London early next morning to ar-

range preliminaries. Miss Warren had been spoken to by his

lordship, and had consented to the secret marriage. I believe

she loved him devotedly, she had no thought of doubt or de-

ception. His lordship mentioned to me, as an excellent joke,

that his brother Guy had told him he was going up to town

that evening, and he had instructed Alice, if she met him at

the station, to beg his protection during the journey. In all

innocence, the girl obeyed, in all friendliness and good-nature,

Guy saw her safely to her destination. I know from her own

lips that he knew nothing of her object, that he strongly sus-

pected, and urged her to turn back while there was yet time.

That she positively refused, and that it was at her entreaty he

went with her that first night to Mrs. Howe's lodgings, Totten-

ham Court Road. When I left Lord Montalicn, 1 had a plan

cf vengeance in my head. I liked and pitied the poor girl. I

had an ol I grudge, as I said before, to wipe out against himl

I went to an acquaintance of mine, newly ordained, and curate








<pb n="426"/>
426                RETRIBUTION.

of the Church of St. Ethelfrida, in the city, and told him the

v-hole ,tory. I told him, by performing the marriage c remiony,

he would be preventing a great crime. He consented to per.

f'Nrm it. The needful license was procured, Lord Montalien

arrived the follcwing day, and about six o'clock in the evening

the marriage rite was over, I, ancd an old woman, being the

witnesses. I saw no more of Alice until the night previous to

my departure from England. I had spoken of her to his lord-

ship on several occasions, but he was always impatient and in-

tolerant of the subject-told me she was well, and that it was

necessar'y for me to know no more. Once he swore that he

had been a fool, that he had been sick to death of her in a

week, and that he wanted to get her out of London if he could.

She was beginning to be a horrible nuisance, as such women

always were. He admitted on this occasion that he had re-

moved her fiom Gilbert's Gardens. He said that contempti-

ble spy, his brother, had been to see her, that she had written

to him, and made a devil of a scene. I knew Guy Earlscourt

was considered the companion of her flight. I never contra-

dicted the rumor.

"On the night preceding my departure for Australia, Mr.

Earlscourt and I dined together at the Guards' Club, and then

set out for a saunter, although the night was stormy. It was

the 20th of December, I think. On our way along the Strand

we saw a woman hurrying through the storm. ' The gas-light

shone full upon her as she passed us, and we both knew Alice.

It was quite as much as I could do to recognize her-she

looked so ill, so wretched, so poorly clad. She stopped at

sight of us, and said she wanted to speak to me. Mr. Earls-

court passed on. She asked me, in a wild sort of way, if I

knew where ' Frank' was, meaning Lord Montalien. He had

not been to see her for many weeks; she was dying of want

and misery, and she had heard he was in Iondon, and paying

attention to a young lady of wealth and position. Was this

true ? I told her it was; that nlmor said he was on the verge 

of marr:age with the young lady in question: that I considered

her shanmefully ill-used, and that she should go at once to his

lodgings in St. James Street and demand the acknowledgment

of her rights. She went with me. I took her to Lord Monta-

lien's lodgings, and waited outside while she went in. I meant

to call upon him afterward i iyself on a little matter of my own.

She was gone about half an hour, then came out alone. She

seemed to have received some horrible shock; she staggered








<pb n="427"/>
RE lRI tTION.                 427

and fell as she touched the pavement. 'Il called a cab and

placed her in it, gave the man her address, (she had told me

previously,) and told him to place her in the landlady's care.

When I went back, and was admitted to an interview with his

lordship, he seemed greatly disturbed and angry. I told him. 1

had met Alice in the street and sent her home. He swore

.iver it, and wished we had both perished in the storm. I tole

him I was on the eve of sailing for Australia, and asked him

for three thousand pounds. He laughed at me. 1 told him

his secret was worth that. He asked what secret. That Alice

Warren, the bailiffs daughter, was his lawful wedded wife, I an-

swered. He refused to believe at first. 1 speedily convinced

him, however, and referred him to the clergyman who had mar-

ried him. If he did not give me the sum 1 demanded, I would

go instantly to the young lady he was trying to marry, and tell

her all. That thought brought him to terms. He gave me a

check for the money, and I gave him my promise to still keep

the matter secret. The expression of his face made me uneasy.

1 stopped in the doorway, and asked him not to be hard on

her, Alice; that she was not to blame. His answer was, 'I

know w7hat I owe her, and how to deal with her.' Next day 1

left England. My return now is purely accidental. Nothing con-

nected with this story brought me back. Alice Warren was the

lawful wedded wife of Francis, Lord Montalien. The Registrar

of the Church of St. Ethelfrida will confirm my statement."

Mr. Stedman was allowed to stand down, and Mrs. Young

summoned. She was carried in and placed upon a chair, be-

ing unable to stand. Her evidence was drawn from her gently,

and the examination made as brief as possible, in consideration

of her weak state. She couldn't remember dates, but she

thought it was late in the month of November that a gentle-

man came and took her two-pair-back for a lady, a Mrs.

Brown. " No," surveying Guy from head to foot; "not a bit

like him; fairer, and not so good-looking. Would know him

again, she was certain, if she saw him. Mrs. Brown came next

day; a poor, pale, sickly young creature, with nothing to say,

and a broken-hearted look like. She suspected something

wrong from the first, but did not inquire. She was a poor

woman, and glad to let her lodgings without asking too many

questions. The gentleman came next day, and stayed over an

hour with a sick man upstairs. AVhen he was gone she asked

Mrs. Brown if that was any relation. She answered he was

lier husband. After that first visit he never entered the house








<pb n="428"/>
428                RE TRIB UTION

but once again, and that was the day before Christmas eve.

That afternoon she let him in herself. Mrs. Brown was better

then, alnd able to sit ul. Had been ill from the night the cab.

man fetched her back; remembered it very well. She had

watched when he went away. He did not stay over half an

hour. Mirs. 1Brown came out of her room when he was gone

with a sort of joyful look, and paid her bill out of half a dozen

sovereigns, and told her her husband was coming eaily next

morning to take her away for good. ' I am going home, Mrs.

Young,' she says; 'to my dear, dear home, down in lincoln-

shire, and my husband is going to acknowledge our marriage

at last. He is much above me in rank, and could not do it

any sooner. He is coming for me to-morrow morning at eight

o'clock.'  I never saw any one so changed and happy.

She told me next morning she hadn't slept a wink all night

for joy. She could eat no breakfast, and she was dressed at

half-past seven and waiting for him. Me and my daughter

were on the watch, too. A few minutes before eight, I think

it was, a man drove up to the door. He was muffled up to

that degree from the storm that his face could not be seen, but

I knew him by his shape and his long, fair hair. ' Frank

Frank !' I heard Mrs. Brown say, in a joyful sort of way, under

her breath; and then she bid me good-by and ran down to

him. He helped her up beside him and drove away. I have

,never seen either of them since. I am sure she called him 

Frank; can swear to it. I am certain I should know him

again. Iook and tell you if I see him? Very well. That's

not him," pointing to Guy; "not a bit like him."

She gazed slowly all around the court. A hundred eyes wertn

turned breathlessly on Lord Montalien. He stood stock-still,

spell-bound, never moving. Her eyes fell upon him at last.

She uttered a cry, half rose up, one flickering finger pointed

straight at him.

';That's him ! That's the man Mrs. Brown called her hus-

band! the man who brought her to my place, who took her

away at eight o'clock on Christmas eve morning, six years ago.

That's him. That's him I

The breathless silence of the court was broken by a hoase,

aigry, surging murmur, like the dull roar of the sea. The ex-

citement of the day had attained its climax. And still Lord

Montalien stood, in a strange sort of apathetic trance, looking

quietly about him, as though some one else, not he, were the

centre and aim of all those angiy eyes








<pb n="429"/>
RETRIBUTION.                   429

(ruy Earlscourt was dismissed-a warrant was madeo (tnt on

tIh  spot for the arrest of Lord Montalien. The heavy hand

ot inslcctor Burnham fell with grim satisfaction upon his

sho.i'der, and still he never roused. A numbness was over

his mInd. his brain felt paralyzed, a bluish pallor lay fixedly on

his face, his eyes looked straight before him at notning, with a

sightleEs stare. They led him from the court-room. He went

passively. Once he looked back. He saw hiE brother, stUP

roundea crv an eager throng shaking hands and congratulating

him. Theli glance met.

He turned away-he had looked his last on the face of the

brother he nao nated all his life.

He was taken to the room Guy had yesterday occupied, and

left alone. It wts almost dark, the summer twilight lingered

softly in the street- but tle prison-room was full of shadows.

Still the sense or Mis awful situation did not come. He felt

tired, his head seemed sleepy, that dull pain still in the region

of his heart. He lay down. dressed as he was, upon the bed,

and almost instantly rell itro a heavy sleep. It was more like

stupor than sleep ; and, atter somie hours, disturbed dreams

broke it. A black and ternble river lay before him, heaving

under a black and storny s'y. On the other side a golden

land shone; and on that oppo.;-ite shore he saw Alice. Not as

he had seen her, once beautiful and bright, and happy, but

ghastly pale and with the blood streaming from a fi ightful

wound in the left temple. She was on her knees as she had

fallen where he had killed her, her hands were clasped, the

words she had faltered in her death agony she was trying to

speak again:

"Oh, (;od have mercy on me-and-forgive-" she could

never finish the prayer. If she could, it seemed to him he

might have crossed the roaring river, and reached that golden

other shore in safety. But the words died on her lips-the

black, bitter waters were ingulfing him, and with a cry of pain

and terror he awoke.

He sat up in bed, the perspiration standing heavy on hi,

brow. And thought and memory returned with an awful pang !

lie sat up in the lonely prison darkness, and heard a distant

clock tolling one.

He sat up, and thought of Guy free, and himself here, Guy

was the husband of Paulina, and /le was the murderer of Alice.

Guy would inherit the title and estates, his children and Paulina's

would grow up amid the green beauty of Moutalien, and he-








<pb n="430"/>
430" SEMPER FIDEL .."

A vision of a gray dawn rose before him-of a gaping, eager

crowd-of a scaffold, ghastly in the chill light-of a condemned

man, led forth to die. He fell down on the bed with a second

cry-a cry of anguish and despair, and lay still.

Next morning, when the jailer brought in his breakfast, he

wa:; surprised to find his prisoner still asleep. He placed the

brc.kefast noiselessly down, and stole out. At ten o'clock a

gentleman called to see Lord Montalien. He was a eve'l-

known and eminent physician, one of those whom his lordship

had lately consulted. He looked very grave as the jailer lee

him to the prisoner's room, and told how he had found him

asleep when he brought in his breakfast.

"Asleep! Are you sure he was only asleep?" the doctor

asked.

"Well, I thought so, sir," the man answered surprised. " I

did not examine, of course."

They entered together. Lord Montalien lay in the same

position, rigid and still. The doctor approached the bed, bent

down, listened as if 4or his breathing, placed his hand upon the

region of his heart, felt the pulse, and stood upright. He was

very pale.

' It is as I suspected," he said gravely; " I knew it would kill

him. My friend, your prisoner has got his discharge."

" Good God, sir !" the jailer cried, horror-struck; "do you

mean-"

'I mean that he is dead T"

It was true. Friendless and alone in the dismal prison-room,

the dark spirit of Alice Warren's murderer had gone forth to

answer for its crimes.'

CHAPTER X

" SEMPER FIDELIS."

Y the last train leaving London for Lincolnshire, Guy

Earlscourt  reached Speckhaven. What new hope was

it, sweet and strong, that flushed his dark face and lit

into fire the dreamy glow of his southern eyes ? For

the first time--the very first, the thought, the hoye, had entered








<pb n="431"/>
' SEMPEI  FIDELIS."             431

his mind, that, perhaps, after a:., in spite of all, he had a place

in the heart of Paulina.

It was not that she had appeared and told her trying story

in court to save him; she would have saved in like manner any

man in England, endangered through act of hers, at all hosts tc

herself. It was not that. It was the look, the smile she had

given him, such a look as she had never bestowed upon hint

since that moonlit night long ago, when they had stood together

on the balcony at Brighton.

It was very late when re reached the town-too late to

think of presenting himself at the cottage. He went to the

" Montalien Arms " for the night, but, I am afraid, Mr. Earls-

court slept even less than he had done on the eve of his trial

for murder.

At the earliest possible hour next morning, he was at the

cottage.  It was a glorious August day, and smoking his

morning cigar, in Rosanna's little flower garden, quite alone,

he saw Robert Lisle. The elder man advanced toward him

with a cordial smile and an outstretched hand.

"Welcome again to Speckhaven! I had no time to con.

gratulate you yesterday, and-I knew, of course, you would be

here. I have heard all. How does he bear his arrest ? " 

" I have not heard. I had not the nerve to visit him-he

would not wish it, I know. And, besides, my first duty was

here. Paulina-how-" he stopped abruptly with the question

unfinished. What must Paulina's father think of him?

" Paulina is well-far better and calmer than I dared to hope.

Instead of injuring, yesterday's excitement has seemed to help

her. The consciousness, I suppose, of a painful duty, per-

formed bravely, must always bring its own consolation."

"And you know ? She has told you-"

"All-everything ! You did her a great service, Guy-with

a brave self-abnegation and generosity few men in your posi.

tion would have shown. I, her father, thank you."

Guy looked at him almost incredulously. That he could view

it in this light he had never dared to dream.

"What! " he cried, " for taking advantage of her innocence

and helplessness, and binding her for life to an outcast, an out

aw ? Have you forgotten that, but for me, Paulina would now

be Marchioness of Heatherland ?" 

." I forget nothing-that you must have been as blind as s

bat ever since your return from America, among the zest."

"What do you mean ? "

f








<pb n="432"/>
432              "SEMPER FIDELIS.'-

Mr. Lisle smiled provokingly.

"Go ask Miss Lisle-I beg her pardon and yo-.rs-Mis   :

Earlscourt. Don't stand there staring in that stLpid wav. If

she does not regret having missed marrying the Marquis of

Heatherland, I should think you, after the confession you made

me the other day in prison, would not."

"And she does not regret it?" cried Guy, breathlessly.

" For Heaven's sake, Lisle-"

"Mr. Earlscourt, will you permit me to finish my cigar in

peace ? If there is one thing that I detest more than another

it is being badgered in this way over my after-breakfast smoke.

My daughter is in the parlor yonder-you know the way. Any

questions of this delicate nature that you have to propound put

them to her-don't annoy me. Go !"

lie waved his hand authoritatively, and turned his back

upon his questioner. Guy started impetuously forward-im-

petuosity was not one of his most striking traits, but his heart

was throbbing at this instant, as perhaps that well-trained organ

had never throbbed before. He was in the parlor and in the 

presence of Paulina-how, Miss Rosanna Mason might tell in

after days, he never could.

She was quite alone-she'rose up at his abrupt entrance.

"Paulina "

"Guy i"

The names broke so naturally from both their lips, that it

would have been the veriest mockery to repress them. Both

her hands were in his, and he was speaking rapidly, incoherently.

"I have come to thank you-I have not words to thank

you, for your unheard-of generosity of yesterday. I have not È

deserved it, but my gratitude is none the less, Paulina-you are 

the bravest, the noblest woman on earth !"

"Oh, hush ! " she cried, shrinking away with a look of pain.

"I noble! I brave! I have been selfish and a coward from

first to last. Such words of praise seem like a bitter mockery 

from your lips, of all men !"

"They are true-true as Heaven. I have fancied, in the 

past, that you hated me-I gave you reason, I know, but, in i

tlhe hour when I thought you abhorred me most, I never failed

to do you justice. It was my rightful punishment-that you, so

gentle, so sweet to all the rest of the world, should hate me."

" Hate you ! " she withdrew her hands from him, and sank

back in her seat. "Oh, blind ! blind ! blind ! "  He was bend- -

ing above her.-flushed, eager-moved as she had never seen 








<pb n="433"/>
*" SEMPER FIDELIS"              433

him-as no living man or woman had ever seen Guy Earls-

court, pouring forth his words in a torrent.

"Have I been blind ! Can you care for me, after all, Pau,

lina? I have been unworthy, but since the hour that made me

your husband, I have never done that which would have been

an insult to your memory. I have striven to lead a better and

purer life. Your memory and my great love for you have been

my redemption. I have striven to redeem my name and

honor, striven to wash out the vice and vileness of the past.

T'hough all those years I have had no hope, no thought, that

you could ever care for me. Even now, if you say but the

-word, I go and leave you in peace forever; but, oh, Paulina,

if you knew how I love you-how bitterer than death sucn

parting will be-"-

His voice broke down in a great passion of tenderness and

despair at even the. thought. Then the hands that had been

withdrawn clasped his own once more of their own accord,

and the sweet, clear voice spoke bravely, though trembling as

it spoke:

"Guy, six years ago, I forgot my womanhood, and asked

you to marry me. I ask a greater boon now-I ask you to

love me and stay-with me."

"Paulina!" with a breathless cry of wonder and great joy;

" do I hear you aright ? Do you not hate me, then, after all ?"

" Hate you ! " she looked at him, with something between a

laugh and a sob. "Oh, Guy! I have loved you all my life !"

And then, as Guy Earlscourt held her to his heart in a rap-

ture too intense for words, he knew that the woman he had

wedded six years ago was his WIFE at last I

Before the sun set that August day, the ceremony performed

oefore the London registrar was repeated by the rector of

Speckhaven, in Duke Mason's little parlor. The bride would

have it so. She shrank then, and will to the last day of her life,

from the memory of that terrible time; and very quietly the

ceremony was re-performed, and church, as well as State, made

her Guy Earlscourt's wife.

Nay, Guy Earlscourt no more. Ten minutes aftr the ben-

edietion had been pronounced, there stood before them a legal-

--loking gentleman, in soleimn black, who took Guy aside, and

whispered in his ear the news of his brother's death in prison.

19








<pb n="434"/>
434             "SEMPER FIDELIS."

It gave him a pang-the thought of how he had died; but

there was not a creature on earth to really regret the dead

man. And so, in the very hour of her marriage, Paulina was

Lady Montalien. They quitted England at once, and went

abroad for their honeymoon.

London was ringing with their strangely romantic story. It

would be as well to keep quietly out of sight until the nine

days' wonder was ended. Their love was only intensified a

hundredfold by all they had suffered-by their long years of

estrangement and separation.

"And if I had spoken that night at Brighton," Guy asked

her once, " what would your answer have been ? You remem-

ber that night, when you offered to pay my debts ? If I had

said, 'Miss Lisle, do me the favor to take me, as well as my

debts,' what would your answer have been ? "

"Yes, and thank you, sir, for asking," Paulina replied, with

some of her old sauciness. "I remember very well, Lord

Montalien. No need to remind me of my follies. Oh, Guy !

how stupid the cleverest of you men are about these things.

Anybody but you could have seen that I loved you best when

I hated you most-no, I don't mean that-you needn't laugh,

sir-"

But I think Guy understood her-no one could realize his

own blindness and stupidity more than he did.

Mr. and Mrs. Lisle went to Lyndith Court, in Staffordshire,

where the first happy months of their clandestine marriage had

been spent. On the way Olivia passed near The Firs, and

sent a loving, motherly letter to Maud. She could not enter

a house owned by Sir Vane Charteris, but her mother's heart

yearned for her child, even though not the child of her love.

" Come to me, Maud," she said. " Come to your mother, who

loves you, my darling. The past has been bitter for us both; 

we will try to make you as happy in the future, even as I am

happy. In my husband you will find the tenderest of fathers.

Come to me at once." And poor Maud had gone-wan and

hollow-eyed, and wretched-looking. Her father's wrong-doing

had fallen bitterly upon her-she shrank from his memory-,

she never saw or wished to see him again. They took her with

them to Lyndith Court, and in Robert Lisle Maud indeed

tfund the. tenderest of fathers. And Mrs. Galbraith, after her

brief return to that bright world she loved so dearly, found her.

self condemned to spend the last' of her days in the dismal

damp and dreariness of T'e Firs.








<pb n="435"/>
"SEMPER FIDELIS."                435

Of Sir Vane Charteris, I may here say that he was robbed

And murdered ty Italian banditti, little better than a year later.

Like the late Lord Montalien, there was not a soul alive to re-

gret or grieve for him when he was dead.

Down in Lincolnshire there was loneliness and loss for the

second time in this second going of Paulina. She was happy 

and at peace-there was consolation in that, but the faithful

hearts of Duke and Rosanna missed and cried out for their

nursling always. In the parlor, over the mantel, there hung a

crayon head-a present from that eminent artist, Allan Fane,

R.A.-in which "Polly" at sixteen smiled saucily down on

tnem wherever they turned. Before this picture Duke sat and

smoked by the hour-to gaze at it was his one delight. For

Rosanna, years and rheumatism were doing their fatal work;

her household duties were getting too many for her. For days

together she was laid up now, and her brother had spoken more

than once of employing a servant. But this idea Rosanna

scouted with scorn.

"' Don't talk to me of servants-lazy, dirty, thievish abomina-

tion ! I'll have no servants in my house. I know what Iwi//

have. Duke, do you know what day this is ? "

It was a gusty afternoon in early November. As usual,

Duke sat smoking and gazing dreamily at Polly's portrait. It

was characteristic of the power Paulina held over the men who

loved her once, that no other woman ever usurped her place in

their hearts. What was true of Duke Mason, the scene-painter,

was true of the most noble, the Marquis of Heatherland, of

Allan Fane, the artist, and Guy Earlscourt, the author. Where 

she had once reigned, she reigned forever. Duke looked up

with a start.

" What day, Rosanna ? Of course I do. It s Wednesday,

to be sure."

" Pooh ! I don't mean the day of the week. It's the sev-

enth of November, and your birthday. Duke Mason, have you

any idea how old you are ?"

The stern severity of this question rather startled Duke.

Surely now, Rosanna couldn't be unjust enough to take a man

to task for getting on in years ?

"How old I am?" Duke had to think a minute. "Yes,

.Rosanna, I--I'm afraid I must be forty-nine."

'" Forty-nine," repeated Rosanna, in a still more cruel voice;

" ad may I ask, if it isn't high time at forty-nine to think of

settling respectably in life, and getting married ? Don't gapo








<pb n="436"/>
4.36              SEMPER FZDELIS."

like an idiot in that way-you're none too young, are you?. I 

won't have a slattern of a servant about the house, and some

one must come to take charge of it and you. You want a wife.

Go and get married."

"But-good gracious, Rosanna," Duke began, aghast.

"Go--and-get-married !" reiterated Rosanna; "not a   .

word now-do as I tell you I While I was able to look after

you it was all very well, but I'm getting fit for nothing with this

rheumatism. Go and get married ! Go and marry Elizabeth 

Knapp!"

If Rosanna had said, "go and marry one of the Royal Prin-

cesses," the probabilities are Duke would have put on a clean

shirt, gone up to Buckingham Palace, and made the attempt at

least. He did rebel faintly now; he didn't want to be married'

-least of all to Elizabeth Knapp. Miss Knapp was a very

worthy young woman, of some seven-and-thirty summers, a

model housekeeper, cook, washer, ironer, and plain sewer, but 

she was also, plain in feature-uncommonly plain, indeed, as

frequently seems to be the case with your exemplary unmarried

women of thirty-seven.

Long had Miss Knapp secretly sighed for Duke, as Rosanna

very well knew, though he did not. She had revolved the mat-

ter-somebody must come and do the housekeeping, iron 

Duke's shirts, cook his dinners and teas, and darn his stockings.

Elizabeth fitted the situation better than any one person Ros-

anna knew-she was easy-tempered, too, and properly in awe s

of her (Rosanna). Yes, Duke must marry Elizabeth Knapp !

Six weeks lat"r, there came to Florence a package from 

England for Lord and Lady Montalien. When opened it wa i

found to contain several slices of bride-cake, of the bride's owt

making, and a letter from Duke, very subdued and humble iu -

tone. He was married. He had married Elizabeth Knapp-

her ladyship would recollect her; and he and Elizabeth sent

their love and duty. Also Rosanna sent hers, and was con-

fined to bed with rheumatism in both legs, and he was their

obedient servant, Duke Mason.

Lady Montalien actually cried over this letter, the first teat 

she had shed since Guy had come back to her.

"Dear old Duke!" she said, with a sob, that ended, in the

light of Guy's provoking smile, in a hysterical laugh; "it is a

shame! He was too good to be married! How can you have

the heart to look like that, sir, when my heart is breaking. It's 

all Rosanna's doings, and I wish she had let him alone I I lov








<pb n="437"/>
" SEMPER FIDELIS."              437

Duke, and I never wanted to see him married. I know he'll

be miserable !"

She loved Duke ! Ay, but not one whit, not one thousandth

part as Duke loved her. He married Elizabeth Knapp, and

brought her home, and was gentle and patient, and yielding to

her always, as he had been to his sister, and I am sincerely glad

to say, that he was not miserable. But the happiest hours were

the hours he spent before that crayon head, his pipe in his mouth, a

wistful, far-off look.in his pale-blue eyes, and his thoughts back,

back years ago into the golden time of his life with " Polly."

He was the most faithful of husbands, and Elizabeth had no

cause to complain, but in her heart of hearts she was bitterly

jealous of that picture. She could have taken it down and put

it in the fire with the greatest pleasure. Duke never suspected,

but Mrs. Mason had her household skeleton, and hid it away

as all such skeletons are hidden. Of Lady Montalien herself,

beautiful and gracious, she never thought or dreamed of being

jealous, but of Polly Mason's picture she was, and will be to

the last day of her life.

And miles away, in Allan Fane's studio, another picture of

that same smiling girlish face hangs. He is wealthy and fam-

ous now-he and Lady Montalien meet often in society, and

are very sincere friends. His best wishes are for her and Guy's

happiness, but he never goes to Montalien, and he has no

thought of remarrying. No one in this lower world will ever

be to him again quite what-"Polly" was in that lovely June,

nine years ago. He will marry again some day, no doubt, but

I think Mrs. Fane, number two, will have quite as good reason

to. be jealous of a picture alMrs. Duke Mason.

Winter, spring, summer passed, and when September lay

bright on the green glades and waving trees of Montalien Pri-

ory, Lord and Lady Montalien came hoime. Not altogether

as they went, for a Swiss nurse accompanies them, and there

is a dark-eyed baby in long robes, whom they call " Robert,"

and who is the heir of Montalien.

The following spring, when the London season opened, they 

returned to town, and took their place in that brilliant London

world once more. They were the attraction of the season-

ais fame, her beauty, and their romantic story formed the

theme of every tongue. Paulina had her enemies--she was too

beautiful not to have, but she was too perfectly happy either to

know or care. She and her husband love each other, with a

great and perfect love, rarely seen.








<pb n="438"/>
438               " SEMPER FIDELIS."

She was shining one night, as she ever shone, the star and

queen of a splendid ball, at which royalty was present. A

prince, with ribbons and orders over his rich uniform, ap-

proached and listened to a group of ladies discussing Lady

Montalien.

"Ambitious, reckless, and a coquette " he repeated, with

a smile; "perhaps so. I do not know-I have been abserl

from  England, and never saw Lady Montalien until to-night,

But this I do know, that never knight or baron of all his noLU

race brought home to Montalien a lovelier bride than Gu;

Earlicourt.'

THE EIM1

1 1  '   *,  *            '    '~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~








