PREFACE.	If, in these records of a life which was held in the chains of rankling secrecy, there is too much of shadow: and too little of the smiling day, remember that the clouded life was dear to her who writes these pages; and if the pen lingers too fondly, too ardently, as oft it may, on her whose sorrows were sublime, because sublimely hidden from the eyes of love, remember with pity the Southern heart which drank deeply of icy woes, and had to learn the hard lesson of patience.TUE AUTHOR.BEAUTIFUL RIENZI.CHAPTER I.WHAT I FIND IN MY NEW EXISTENCE." At first it seemed a little speck,And then it seemed a mist;It moved, and moved, and took at last	A certain shape, I wist,"-COLERmGE,Since my earliest childhood, I, Ivanilla Rienzi, had livedwith my grandmother, in Italy, who had claimed me becease I bore her name. I was the second daughter of her younger son, and would inherit her property. My father early in life had left his native land, gone to America, and literally carved for himself a fortune as master sculptor and. architect in New York. Here he had married a sweet, gentle wife, and made his home; here his two daughters had been born, and from here, fourteen veers ago, I, the youngest, then a tiny imp of four years, little red eyes and blurred, had been trotted down to a great puffing steamer, by the side of a stately grandrnarnma, who called me "Poverina mia," (my poor little one) and bade me kiss manima good-by, for I was going away to a pretty home among grapes and oleanders. But I did not care for these visionary glories, but began to cry when I saw a pale, sad. face which was the dearest on earth to me, and fastened my little fists like crabs in her beautiful hair, for then IaKiL'TJFUL RIXYZI.	ii lv preseil to her soft bosoni, then borne, ¥ ¥iiugillg wildly, to a certain cot, where I fell fast asleep,'I so missed a 154 si0 lit of the rnotherling.Years of clnlr2hoo were spent under the sunny skies of I had grown to love my grandparent with all the,: of uiv if art. My studies were all under private¥ ¥ition: my world lay in my grandparent and our lovely		ni" by the Venetian waters. All fervor, romance, spots-1 awaited the hand which should open the				life to me.			,iiue-tlie hand of death.			beloved grandtaamma slowly, calmly faded, and at¥			-,one time my mother, whom I could scarce remember,			cut from her bleak American home to revive in themilder Venice. She it was who stayed me in my greataffliction, closed the aged one's eyes, and presided by thedying bed with gentle cheer. Sh'o it was who first directedMy s.ck heart to the home across the sea, and to the un-known sister who waited to welcome me,And so my good uncle, Signor Andrea Rimizi, who ina bachelor and a great man in Venice, took care of Tutand brought me away from loved Italia and my invalniotlier to Liverpool, where he put me on board a stcame',and under the care of a lea:ncd doctor of something, whowas a philosopher and afraid of women, and so shipped mefor lily new home,Behold me then at the wharf in New York, sitting von'impatiently in the ladies' saloon of the steamship Awaiting for some one to come and claim me.Other ladies had pat on their prettiest drive . anddonned their sweetest smiles, and had goneaw ¥s	it hinshiand5. fathers, brothers, and guardians, only 	ah;istv liar d-hs ke to friends who had been niadi in the twowees at sea, and who would be forgotten ill two weeksmore.And as I frowned at Ivanilla in the mirror, a figure stoodin the door-way of the saloon looki n Sr at lii e' and as tiledoor swased tb and fro she held it open with one archedhand, while a smile half of doubt and wistfulness dawnedon her has,And her face was beautiful as a dream, her eves blue asthe riptdiug waters of the ltroiisi Iii ara\ iii irV clinhiTrBRA UTIFUL RIENZLher charms in their affluence were scarce of this bat-likeworld, where dusky wrong clouds all things.Is this-yes, it must be ha!" said the lady, tremulously.Heavens!' cried I, '' are you my sister, Isolina?"	Her arms were round me by this time; she was embracing me; my head dropped on her bosom-she was mine. All this loveliness, this grace was mine; this yielding bosom was swelling for me, the tic of blood bound us togethermy Sister!"	I clung to the exquisite vision and wept with joy as I inwardly resolved to deserve the love of so peerless a being; and while I was looking up at my sister's perfect face, the father came in, grand as a Roman emperor-dark, kingly, soulful-and folded his swarthy, sun-ripened child in his arms, as the sweeter vision had done before; and we all laughed and wept together, though we were but strangers.	We gayly recovered Professor Eustacio from a trance of philosophy at the open hatchway of the luggage-hold, and took him home with us in a rattling carriage winch passed through scenes strange to eyes accustomed to the creeping waters and gondolas of the water-city; and my happy father led me by the hand up through a square garden into the tall mansion, where the dark polished door was thrown open and I was ushered into a hall of lofty magiufiecncc, where a low-toned waiter bowed and welcomed Miss Iv anilla "home."	And who so radiant and sprightly as this new companion of mine, when she had taken me up into her own pretty dressing-room, and ensconced me in a deep downy tippingchair, which swayed mc gently back and forth with a dreamlike motion. Flow she laughed and fondled me when I made known at last the thoughts that were in my burning soul.	Isolina," I murmured, timidly ; '' you are the loveliest being I ever saw. You are so much fresher and fairer than grandmother henri, though she was fair in my eyes-and even Signor Frinli, who was forty-eight, and very handsome, and a divine nmsic-master, seems gross beside you. You must be the Queen of Beauty in this city, and have many to adore you. Will you care for my love too ? I am eighteen, you know, and not a child, and I think my heart never was so moved as it has been by you. Will you lot me love you, my sister ?"Oh, you darling-yes!"10 	BJL4 TJTJFITL RIXYZI.t t row me butshe came without diem and knelt before me, with her brighteves rai ,ed. thorough sisters," she said, softly. " We	Ce !nstlt. steae other aswe love and trust no oneii I,t love and 1 IL		t 	our hearts."weBcantifUl One' "lmurmured, "each thought of my111 Shall lie i 0111 -each wish of your heart, my pi a ciIi same Is it not so		YAwl ,		fIr with ; richly carmine cheek, she clasped	I,		heart	thrilled with a nameless emotion,	- 		intensity was all unknown by me.	di he dvi' of October. 1862. I arrived at my new home, and commenced life in New TI ork.	I soon was introduced to my sister s gay friends, an found she was the belle or her circle ; none 8,0 regal, none so lovely is she. At hall and concert, reunion 0] dine, she reig'ned supreme, by right of her intellectual powers anmatchless loveliness. . .	They called her " The Beautiful Thenzi, and my head was almost turned with triumph. I worshiped her with the fanatical enthusiasm of a devotee, and more deeply as the days went on, and often miy father laughed and said that [soliu was iuy first love. She' may have been. With secret exultation I watched the uniform firuiness with which she checked the devotion of her many admirers, the serene sin, pbeitv with which she passed through adulations, as if uneonseous of them, and brought her deepest tenderness to me.Theshimmering dusk was mine to creep close to niy sisteriod drink in iigr soft perfectioils, like fondest lover, and in v Ithese sweet rhooght hours I learned to pointer something.	Though her eyes were clear and open as 1111 infIllit's, to my vivid glances, though her lips restemd'l with the icide 1 tughtu oi the gentle igh to 10% III iii moods Isoioahoies 1 felt as if her heart were hidden from me. as if her thooghts were not always explained L inc or her moods translatable.	Why those flushes, sweet and strange, sweeping over tier tender face when silence fell between ns ? Why those wistful ighs, which lighted that bosom soft as evgnet-down. even in the andst of my Merriest fantasies of' talk :' Mv bands might clasp hers on frillgly_ii1 ov - Iifl! ii, 1,1r	BEAUTIFUL RTP-VZl.	11smiling lips spoke not but by caresses ; the fire glanced out and rouged the tender cheek and brought - the amber hair into flame-like halos, and she looked like some gorgeous fire-spirit, and like the spirit, her sc 1 was beyond my reach.	Yet I was loving her more and more; my heart of passion was surging to its depths. I shall love that bright vision with its fair face of supreme beauty and its halo of fire-bronzed hair, forever! These days with my beautiful sister were the happiest of my life.*	*	*	*	*	* 	*	On the last day of October we sat together at the window of the drawing-room, looking down into the busy street.	Her arm was around me, and I was leaning against her chair.	As gayly I spoke to her, the hand I toyed with elosect vehemently; she bent forward, and her face was hidden from me, but her dainty ear flamed up a sudden scarlet.	Ah, Ltd" I cried, with sportive triumph, '' who thus moves my beautiful lady's heart? Is the conqueror coming?"	She turned as I jested. I had thought her animated by joy, but this seemed no joy. Her blue eyes were dark and stern, her brow inflexible; the flush was not of pleasure, but of anger.	"My sweet one!" I exclaimed, "what has grieved you? Tell me, my sister."	She did not answer. She drew me forward and kissed my brow. It was a hasty, eager kiss; then she advanced to the door as if to fly, and shrank back when her hand was on the lock. The door opened; a name was announced hr the servant, which I failed to catch, and a gentleman entered.	Dazzled by the glory of the clouds I had been watching, I could not discern at first the visitor's face. I saw him seize her hand and bend to kiss it. I saw her draw it from him, and tower before him a moment in inflexible silence; then she turned to me, and the golden sunlight fell on her face, which was troubled and distressed."I beg your pardon!" exclaimed the gentleman, in a		12		BEA UyjU1t'						I the presence, of		low, musical voice.			" I was not aware 0	a'				her lady."		" d Jsolina.				Mv sister lvanilla-Mr. Cecil BeaUmont, said On the instant a small, strong hand was clasping tonic,		pair of fiery , red-brown eyes leaped into mine. I raised IiY		my cc to a face winch was pale, and fierce, an'1 resolute, despite		its boyish youthfulness. And as- Tread what was expic&ec(		in the restless face, I saw behind its mystic beauty a git a		sorrow in the past, or in the future, which threw a cmli		weight upon nix soul.			"Is this the foreign sister? They cay sue is a goddess of		romance; all heart, tiers e, sympathies. What thin will		your sympathy do for tae? Behold me, a poor wretch.F		who live5 on his wits-ay, an author-and an exile, in a		loud of enmity, condemned to win bread from hands which			ped to dig his father's grave.		Behold me, a victim to		it		Queen of Beauty, kneeling to alieart of ice. Conic 110W,				yoo pity me?"				Mr. BeaumontF' broke in my sister's voice, so coldly			'I with $uch scorn that I scarce could believe I heard my				i-hearted Isolina.			I lo turned to her and took a quick stop toward her wh				hunger, wild and yearning, in his eves that onc				tiles pot discern the reason of his beIn there,				Shall I go away?" I whispered to my' sister.				tic bowed her head, though I hoped she would			it was he, the		lips. caught my band as I iasso				Plead for me	ho Whispered, once more transfix ig ni		~-~h those fiery, red-brown eyes.			I shivered and retreated, m heart tl'rot I		The deepening sunset smote hiv J't				3 ing with dienmuc.		room with glory.			I turned of	:r s lace, and tilled ti		mid '10,1(1 in the hall alone.				ii o the door, glided			Darkness filled that face and'mu: t e i.t Ir.iv ho	loom when next 1 loofi,BEAUTIFUL RIENZI. 	13CHAPTER IT.I CHASE A PHANTOM, AND FAIL TO FIND IT.It speaks of storm and tempest;Wild horror and despair;And its numbers chill the life-blood,For the dirge of DEATH la there!"-Axow.	I got my hat and paced up and down the gravel walk before the house. The evening was chilly, and the beds of purple petunias and black pansies were bathed in a white hoarfrost, the forerunner of that winter I could. not remember.	I drew my scarf yet tighter round my shoulders, though I felt no cold; my blood was burning, my cheeks fevered with the strange prophetic dread which had. come upon me; dismay was at my heart.	An hour passed by-to me a long and anxious one; the sun sank like a rocket, in an inflamed haze, behind the houses; 1 looked up fixedly now at the drawing-room windows where broad gleams of firelight spurted out between the curtains; I went to the stone parapet by the garden gate and looked longingly down the street for my father; I was lonely, thus shut out from my sister by a stranger. I was terrified, and crept back to the door.At the foot of the steps I met Mr. Cecil Beaumont.	Au! the dark eyed lady!" lie said, laying his hand lightly on mine. 'Do you know that I have never heard your voice yet? Come-you are going to befriend me""	Signor, what can I do for you? I would willingly make you less wretched if 1 had the power."\Vhy do you think I'm wretched, my little one?"	"Your eyes-alas! there is a tragedy of woe in them; I shudder with grief as I behold them."	''It has not come yet," he answered, with a hollow laugh; ''but it is coming. She, 'The Beautiful Ilicnzi,' will share it-do you hear ?-if this little hand of yours does not try to ward it back!"	His wild, desperate face became pale; 1, recoiled and looked at him in terror.14	IrkLitT,IPUL RIE\ZL\Vhat can I do, Mr. Beaumont?" I exclaimed.You can be my advocate; she loves you, and will Its.toil. toil. You can see that no interloper comes between us-andii lien they do, apprise 1115,"Be a spy. sir?"Pshaw s spy on your own sister, Miss Ivan illa? I hatapos,ible-tse eidsrs hide nothing from each other.	Or from their lovers? Instruct mae: 1 have not 'antI your American usages."	You refuse, then, to plead for the hapless refugee laugh at the agony of a heart sensith c as onr own, a writhing beneath sorrows of whni'hi scorned love is the eron niog one. You torn from your eoonlr nian and refmi' to help lsimsi ?"''My conntryman? I never turn from an Italian,My mother is an Italian, and I inherit all her fire-	with bitt little of the bravery of IM, Yirdii diii 	I cal:	bear poverty, exile, and toil, my frlrnd,				I	;:;, ; hear	to lose the heart I love so wildly.,,		"Perhaps she loves another, 'sir'		lie flung away my hand; his face net i A			a ,	'un	lie put his hand to his heart, as if I Shad				.1	In	eyed me desperately.			Ihave	i;of					"1 (10 -"lot think DIV Sl	fmen	s:tm: 	jwaters of my Jeohina's cool, amid ifvon nitist be content to ride	., lilaige is pan ted there,tine knight ehotild, If no lvi'		tug ito quest lens, as a		cIi i'igrlite.,t colors; I viii he YOU" fl ieul paint I Ii t		i mere I It	g	He caught nmy hand an kissed it .		it.			i ge was in his face' its hard, .1; tl.		. wn l ron s	and it spoke but of sweet trod orslier,ste look wit"	fixed upon 'lie a wistful eratttt5t ci isess; those Inelti.	treachery. ' ie t,,` too Silt,			I will dare to eb	pleader as yet,, lady,' eisa hope, then, with					so re'	friend, or I shall not anw noted gently		Quickly he vanished		er, ? niyselfd'	the gathering gloonm back		i5 jilt the street		The rol,v flrehih 		to the house	somber light,	; alone -file il t'e	BEA UT!FU.L I?IENZL	15tail and slender, was sharply defined by the flickering jets as she stood on the hearth wit 11 her back to me. There was something in her attitude which struck me with an undefined feeling of disaster. My heart began to flutter-I ran in, and stood side by side with her, looking up into her face.	That face, in which I gazed, was pale and perplexed; wonder, or terror, or remorse, had contracted the arching brows until they met in two depressed curves; her dark eves, questioning, affrighted, fixed themselves upon the crumbling embers, as if to read a dreaded destiny: her bosom heaved with coming tears, as yet restrained.	''What grieves you so?" I whispered ardently. "My darling, tell your sister everything."	She turned and clasped me to her heart with a long, shuddering sigh."What shall I tell you, Ivanilla?" she murmured.	Your whole heart-everything. Why has the coming of Cecil Beaumont affrighted you? Who has stolen the love away that the poor young Southerner covets?"	She listened to me in dread silence- she scarcely breathed-her pulse seemed suspended. Again that shuddering sigh rent her bosom; but she did not speak. I threw back my head and looked at her, and she turned her face away.	"Alas! you hide your heart from Ivanilla!" I moaned. "You have thoughts which you never told to me! Tell me-tell me, my beautiful-you have a lover?"	''No!" she cried, in a tone which startled me. Her sadness had vanished-her face vibrated into an iucoutrollable smile, sudden and strange; she met my gaze, flushed, and vailed my eyes with her velvet palm a moment. When she released me, she was calm again; that rapture, or agitation, had passed away, and I was shut out after all."Who is Cecil Beaumont?" I asked, after a long pause.	"He is a gentleman from Virginia-a clever author, they say. You appeared much delighted with that book,Veronice "-that was his."lie has a grand genius, then. Pity you could not lovesuch a soul! And he does adore you!""I am very, very sorry to be forced to believe that!" saidmy sister, gravely.11 But why? His character is not-2'10, 	rsnTJFLL RIJLVZL	IF' character is blameless Tea, so far as human eyeI nd'e lie is a most exemplary person, and a pattern2 filial affection, they say. He supports his mother by hiswritings. Oh, ins. . .	'Fins last exclamation seemed wrung from liei in sudden dLrese' she sighed head, and wearily.	Slow long have 105 knon n the Sontlierner: I :ieke I ''I made his aeqnamtanee last SWIM" r It Nn.it Ale ansa crud, in a sin king voice. lie led Pint hwf~ crated from pri5on, lie was captured lvi iii a coin an c if federates seine tines in on tie before an d bron g lit iii N lie wa5 the em of a wealthy Virgnna planter, Ii lii 11111 inself at the head of a regiment when me war eon mused. and fell in one of the first battles. 'I 'lie Liii tat ton Wa' burned, and the estate deetroc ed; Mrs. itelinin?? it forn'd to fly and hide midi her slaves in the swain is, with ('mi a prow ton A sinai I rein nant of Colonel ban Mom en in piny gat h crc 1 round his son, and ('sell I eei iii' 1 ii 7 ci guerrilla and a seonrge to our men., a lienerer OJfi set in itoccurred, At length swamp-fever carried 7!! it I tin 4heal, and tim rest were captured in the t 'tile is am in inSwamp, the skeletons of themselves. Most of t lain wontexchanged; hot there was no one to take in tercat in von n" Bstn ni ont or his mother: they were Sent ort h and :t la liberated. Young Cecil Caine to Sararosa an invalid. 'intlthere he met me. and without "In v d Ca on In %- tartthe slightest, Tya-became too ni 11-W h miae lied c	notvery faiw of hill-he is treati it re- .	t is	young lads who was I 5ry kind D i	ci ni s in	and in ft-"Non. her fa tlic- was ""V01,1101, I n		kThai nlv by It sr influence tile vonn		Iof hu Pusni.		illerated, ! Ilesoffg~)t 	hand, alld-	teivetal lore scarcely merits cc ei retn i;		thud, her ti ia n-	\%h,tt, is he so false as ti t"could help loving yen, f5iina'		e'n'hti mcii: " 'UI t whogrand!"		on tee so isauutifuj :iad'	She ennled rather sadl5Miss Meredith 'sent , and t'ea tiled:Sweeter creature I thJufi	winter it New Yorka acm friend of In him; and ne cc met Site bet',it it is for me to be h . You can nndli 't II iscat the inconstant	cans ofand I fondly hoperj	gLa1 lick	to Iler.		a'ar	Once a1-.			'a LI		It	BELl UTJFUL RIEIVZL	17away, and she would never be pained by knowing of it. ''And this is all the reason of your distress? You love no one else?" I exclaimed, with eager interest.Again that flash of mysterious agitation crossed her face. Who put such a thought in your brain?" she returned, sadly. I have 110 other love-you must believe rue, Ivanilla."I (lid believe her; a new thought occurred to me.	Perhaps she loved the poor young refugee in her secret heart, but sternly crushed the feeling for the sake of her friend. And if so, what a heart my beautiful sister had! Ahi, what a grand soul!	I admired her more than ever--I contemplated her inflexible sense of honor-I glowed with enthusiasm.But meantime she had told me nothing.	There was a masked ball that night, and our father would have us go-in character, too, as lie was never tired of showing the contrast between his two daughters.	There moved '' The Beautiful liieuzi," pale, serene as a star, in the velvet and diamonds, the lace miles and pointed diadem of Mary, the lovely Queen of Seots. here skimmed the little swarthy Italian peasant, in her short petticoat, velvet bodice, and basket of grapes on her ann; a very Mo-F	wins of laughter, as an Edinburgh fishwife. with a crab at her back, jostled her and shouted, '' Caller-on!" There were Turks and Dervishes, Chinese, Monks, Quakers, Indians, Sultans, Stars, Nights, Mornings, Peacucks, Birds of Paradise, Ravens, oven Mount Vesuvins-which was represented by a lady in a pointed dross with flame-colored feathers in her bead.	Minerva took me under her charge-a friend of my sister, and a great favorite of mine, because of her wit and sprightliness-one Miss Belle Cranstown, who shall hereafter be more fully set forth in this story; and under her wing 1 had a most exhaustive time, laughing at her sallies and being introduced to some fierce-looking Moors who were scouring the room for their Desdemonas.	Once the beauteous Mary Stuart passed me with a loving smil and roy merry friend Belle burst into a laugh at the Scottish queen's companion, a resolute-looking lady, with a furious ruff and long, stiff bodice.''Brave Queen Bess!" she jibed, " twist the cousin roundyour finger. Thuat' sister Lou, my clear, and I overheard ar		jst telling the Pope i' the1ym7r there that tile hsdyled the character very well.Uneen Elizabeth-I sha'n't say which.'	I was still looking with proud eyes at ray lovely si	'flee calm perfections in her stately costu me were aheolu I 'ft	77] in p. when suddenly she so u ng round from her I :n!,s -	mpanion and razed with a slowly deepening finch of wildI ciii is at a Ii div-wreathed pillar, beside wh icli a figure n ding a i th folded arms. A in ask shielded the face,no iding plume of Napoleon's hat east a siadowmask, but the figure, clad (Y la, the victorious conrjin'ii tall and princely in its proportions, and there SI''-ii forlorn grandeur in the atri tn sIc that s: 'e'e t 11101, 911 my lively friend's next remarks:But one a lone one 'mid the thu n',Seemed reckless all of dance or eengtas Mrs. llemans says. What a gathering of	cle-ment! And what a coincidence: The Queen of Scot mcii-lug to speak to poor Bony in the Island of St. Helena!	lIntwho is he? That envious mask hides all]"	Who was he? I could not tell. My sister had sh imm forward ss it]1 eye' sparkling and hands ontstrctc eager, ti'emnlons joy."It is--En rely it ""is[, be MY, victor!" she m,111111""figure 'Voice. ,	s!nfted: my heart sank at the low, sn p ' -	Bto tol1g, in), quee,15 at ,,ethvell then? well tarries I		Your Iithought		(re-hetts I tnsonic one else. You s "- k	u ac . ill	thought i	the taunt, and do not heed it	bill	I iui dcr:even my respect, when he del		s. Cecil Bean 11(011 t fort,		His exile bowed his I	it, taunts"advanced, leaving my ac ij ?llen?e: closer and ('loser I lOs-iI was now beside nis'sister ion in the midst of a gron rNapoleon hewed to tb'''m I clasped her hand warmly.'in ltanin.beiidillg t?wardettle pleader?" lie rnnrwured :	clooer,	' -"fli l5enp coldly, she dresy my handA dcc iron: 	't 1'1 0 peasant beauty's basket1BEAUTIFUL RIENZI. 	19-one smile to lighten my weary banishment," said the fallen conqueror, lightly. "Will my countrywoinau refuse?" lie added, in a lower tone.I offered him my basket, and whispered with reproach:	Signor, you did not tell me of your broken troth when you asked me to plead for yon. Go back to your true loveleave her not for ambition or inconstancy."	Then I wheeled round and went away with Isolina. We did not stay long after that; the peerless face of the Scottish pieen was grave, her eyes searching and weary; ere long we came to our father and asked him to take us home. (Javahors unnumbered thronged round its in the vestibule; one small, strong hand caught lime and pressed it before the carriage door was shut, and I found a slip of paper in my palm, on which I quietly read:"Be my friend, Ivanhlla, or I cannot answer for my doom."Once more the night came on; the storm shrieked fiercely.	"Heaven save the poor mariner!" said my father, who came home early to keep his lonely daughter company.	At five o'clock it was almost dark; you would have thought there were a thousand fairies in the air, had you dared to put your head out. The very house was rocking in the storm.	"Keep papa company while I dress for dinner," said Isolina, with her watch for the fiftieth time in her hand.	She left the drawing-room and went up stairs. I did not like her manner-it had startled me-it was so unnatural./ I took up my harp and laid it away again. I could not play -I could not keep my father company. I slipped out and went up stairs.	My sister was standing at the window; Sophie, the maid, was taking hair brushes out of a dressing-case to commence her work.	11 I would like to dress as usual with you; I couldn't wait with papa," I began.	She turned round and came toward me, and smoothed my cheek fondly with her hand.	"How-how pale you are, dearest! how cold your hand is! Why have you stood by that window so long? the storm has affrighted you!"A tornado of rain and sleet drowned my voice; she'21 )			BKI i/TIFf L RJE'CZI.	toward the ui clcIced with an intent gaze owai	IIc'd.			"Bill I've-1 the	I	It is go to lily terrible!" room Lle; do't wait forii	join you at dinner. Sophie, dress Miss san ii'My darling, are von ill?" I cried. "No,' she turned her troubled face away: "I don't ccv well, that is true, but I shall he all right in an loif I am not disturbed."	We shall not ciitnrb von. Sophie, conic into my and dress nec there; my sister is going to steel)."The girl gathered lip my dress and toilet re'jo I I'we shut the dressing-room door behind its, and aijie * to my pretty bedroom, where our noise would not It' heard.	My heart was chill and heavy; I felt clint out and held ( aloof, though my own hand bad (lone it. Shall I do your heir now. miss?"	"Wait, we have an hour yet, and I can dress in ten millrates. Don't molestThe girl lingered about, waiting my mood: she took hersea mg, and stirred up the the.'Shall I light the Ps now, Niss Ivanilla?"I had remonstrated with Is lot a for s i tiil in i at ho win -dowlookmg at the storm, but I was there myself, and weep.	' I told you not tot- O~fW, all( die coal-fin bmmrntql drowsily,pIne m di 55 dicanlc fixed oi'i the i till of on the n nub1; in a stone -id side of the gate Ih*ki.m.t.ml like Ishrubs to the ga 	SOman gliding down betwet.n tI or garmsnf, al'ot.	am oh the liii ccl cane Well''	0 rae, but her ligur1 battle d resol n tely agai list (hiIs \varf are he	\*utoo sleuther and delicate	it steno Parapet, and ' it up and wltnIed aga	u'ng are liutil there IC ield on there Wit Ii I.'T11111j Ifl 1r thenWas a lull, while tIme 5toi*ntki1			SIc Opened p	dewi1 flis 5tr fi . gate antI lcd: t"lou, out 1 tile Storm' il efengeIBEAUTIFUL RTENZL 	21coming night, alone in the city streets! Great Heaven, this was Isolina!	I dropped the curtain and went to my sister's bedroom door: it was locked. I knocked once, twice. I thought there was a rustle within, and my breath thickened. o, it wac but the hail rattling on her window.	I entered the dressing-room, it was empty and dark. I crept hack to my room, shaking and sobbing, and threw myself on the floor to weep; the storm, without, was but a summer zephyr to the storm within my heart.	I now saw that she had a life apart from me-that I knew nothing of the girl I called my sister, and loved so fondly. She had her experiences which I must not share, which her father, who doted on her, must not know. Perhaps some niysterions ruin would come and swallow her up, and leave us bereft of her forever!	J'11011 I pictured her purity, her goodness. Oh! we must not leave our loved one. I sprang up and hurried on a long cloak, resolved in my frenzy, to pierce the mystery. I looked my door, sped down stairs, slipped open the front door and ran out into the storm.	Ah! what a shrieking blast! These pitiless arrows of forked sleet, how would she survive them? In the heart of a resistloss delnge of rain and wind. I was swept down the gravel walk to the gate; like her I clung to the stone parapet; as she had done, I waited for a lull, to open the gate and be whirled down the street. I would run with the speed of the wind and overtake her and bring her home, or weep until she let me go with her.	But when I turned my sad, half blinded eyes upon the home I was leaving, the clear ring of the first dinner-bell smote my ear. Was it possible? An hour gone by already? I could not overtake her now-she had been an hour in the storm. Were my eyes dazzled with the wind, or did I see a light pouring from the window of the locked bedroom? The heavy gate clanged from my passive hand-1 gazed wildly up. A shadow was moving back and forward before the window, and now a blaze of light was visible from the dressing-room which I had left in darkness.Was I in a miraculous dream?I flew back to the house, stole up stairs, and gained myroom. Sophie was knocking at my door and standing in the dark.ri 14J i'iIEXZL	"Go, Sophie-I am here," I said in a sinking voice: t he	ripest had almost choked me. 	-.Oh miss, lye been knocking. and knochina.Very well, I am here now. You call go an a Sop tie.intend to dress nn self." ' 	I"Miss, there's not five minutes rite Iici'ir- hi!rug ago."Go. Sophie."I stood aside to let her pass, fearing she nitcit' Iitt wet clothes. When she was half cay down slit's I imlocked toy door, dung off my dripping cloak, and lit the)Iv hands wore shaking with cold and terror. I coolscarcely unbind my heavy black hair; sleet was among Icoils, glistening and rippiing down my neck. I stood iifore the mirror in a trance of bewilderment, looking at nt self.Heavens! was that wild vision Ivanilla? I scarcely knethat white, scared face, these horrid lurid eves.	'Miss Is a, its two minutes past six, and din ncr is served said Sopine from the door,	She came in, and I felt her looking at my back and i m dark rippling hair. I heard her gasp wit Ii wo ii d or hi she made 11o remark. I turned round and she "us ted a aiSue was looking at my face.		1	g	Dress my hair, Sophie," I niurninred: ''andit'svon must sgir		ee nothing_nothing, you understand	a 101beneath my feetbe p,ude,tl~lfor me before the fire, and pit a footstoolMiss, let me cI locked her scffinypi1, wind" She whispered.Iso. Yea cdlv child," I -aid' cc and Ian lied.	deception.				ut toy hing i Wig a ghastly		All the while she	frame a question,		art.,				M19" niy hair I was trying to bat in Valli,		Then I heard the d' -.	robe lrmishpastden scarlet,	my door,	ffelt	cold		that 'Isolinaw I cried.at ice airu	answered So	I		nc catching her breathBEAUTIFUL RIEXZT. 	23	She came toward me with my slippers in her hand, but I sprang to the doer, and rushed down to join my sister.	The silken robe had vanished. I fell with force against the butler in the lower hall, and jingled all his glasses together.	I beg your pardon, Marks. Is my sister in the diningroom"Just gone in, missy. My! be you ill, Miss Ivanilla?"	lie looked agape in my face, and I had to pass in, with the wild expression still nusubdned, to avoid him.	lsolina presided in our mother's place. Her head was turned from the doer. She was speaking in a low, composed voice to my father. The hand which held the glass of wine toward my father was steady as ever, her tone serene and soft.	Could this be the mad phantom whom I saw fighting with the storm?	I slid into my place and watched her. I forget to eat -to move. I was waiting for these blue eyes to show themselves.Iva-are you well, child?"	My father's voice gave me a great start. It seemed to come from a hundred miles away, and pierce my ear. The blue eyes were lifted at last with a quick alarm. My sister looked across at me in wonder, and those eyes were quite steady and tearless.	See how excessively pale she is, Isolina-geed gracious l"	Then they both rose with one accord. I saw them advancing. I shrieked and tried to evade the sudden blackness, and then-I knew no moreCHAPTER III.IN WHICH I FIND THE DISADVANTAGE OF NOT BEINGCLAIRVOYANT."But there sings on a sudden a passionate cry,There is some one dying or dead "-Txxsysos.In the midst of my wonder I had fainted.When I recovered I was in my sister's arms in my ownbedroom, my father bending over rne,with anxiety depictedBEA UTII1FUL RJEIvZT.o every lineament, and I was almost suffocated with the"Poor little eeleg¡e. pet 1 Are you bettor nor?" asked myI her.What was it, dear?" said my father, tenderly.I don't know; I ant not sick," I said, raising myself too lily sister.	She was holding my head on her arm, her eountena ii' was c"11111 and mild. but a curious flush was OIL one cli wii Ic the other was quito pale.- . -	Rest a while. You shall not go down static toil ig]io murmured, kindly, "I am going to sit will,iouhi' re"	Our father stood for a while looking at its iii rueful silence then went away and left us together.	What have you been doing, Ira?'' she wlusperel. ''Sc ph ie tells me your cloak, which she has hung in the ward robe, is drenched. 'those slight boots on your feet are wc and cold as lead. Where have you been. sisterY'To hear her ask that question I burst into a paroxysm 0tears.	Flow can you ask?" I sobbed. " You who were out ii the storm too. Where were peso on this wild nightYen oiust be mad, lye," said my sister. liii ski lv. W h' such a thiug? You must et rid of the 'erv idof it.,,eaione: audIIwettoe4iithatt window out, in lie streetft. sister darling! I will be v' - 	nr ii a tiger. -id fu I secret."	e, on l t,11 tue tillsShare my danger;" heme. "Oh, you poor	,ed more ti herself than		tell me," I ielploreto inpartAin I not, fi YoTU trials i"o, t,		811011141 Vol] fear			~Vels NOU 80 4%,otediv?	t to b(' Y`er trilstedfrien(I"',gently I-01-sed herselfI too, t"Orgh I was %veak	dfron) 111'e' and I-ose, and I rose	lolding her berope le., 17,7V in my anxiety to keep		Xou must for et	.story n,- site 'd -u,,t you ever -		on nit said, this saIIV olle it) tile	0tc- '- Peace of, ti15 ftn tutu 'our niernory. n ", Ivanilla, forget	BEA UTIF(TL RIEXZI.	25your suspicions until I bid them live. Will von promise me	Mv head sank between my hands-my tears flowed from a heart that was rent with disappointment as I saidI will promise what, on wish."	Then she melted into love again-sweetly, tenderly she nursed me; and as I lay on the sofa watching her slender, willowy figure, I began to ask myself:Could it really have been she whom I saw	She was moving about like a person in a dream; that fixed carmine stain had never gone out of her cheekotherwise she was alarmingly pale and apathetic ; her low, even tones might have been spoken by one who had. been mesmerized, for all the feeling that was betrayed in them.	Such calmness could only be the result of some great nervous excitement.	I saw all this for some time with crawling horror; but there was a something in her manner which kept me dumb, and my own heavy head began to absorb my attention.	I thought that long evening would never end; my father came up two or three times, Sophie hovered about with anxious eyes, Isolina bent over me and bathed my temples, and seemed to fill the wild chaos around me. They all were full of cares for me, and no one looked at my sister, or saw the ghastly composure that I saw between the spells of fitful slumbers.	But when all the house had retired for time night and absolute quiet was reigning, I then being intensely wakeful, a crisis came which showed mine had been no feverdream.	Suddenly in the sighing midnight rose a bitter cry, so wild, so despairing-oh, so abandoned.	I dragged myself from my bed into the outer hall, my limbs heavy as lead, and crawled to my sister's door.These cries-these moaning sobs were Isohina's.	"Lot me come to you-let me come, sister," I prayed, but the door was locked. I feebly shook it, but strength failed me and my head swain round."	'' Oh, let me bear your grief with you, my darling," I wailed; but these awful cries ceased not.I sank in a heap on the cold, marble floor, and all power
BEAU yiEUL EIEXZL	t me for a while. When again I was able to rise, the sobsi;id (lied to an awful sil"Ge-		come, was passed, and that torn heart hadass its grief alone.	hh confined me to my bedI had an indisposition W iu	cold attended by sn rtnight, having contracted a heavy One day T was sitting by the dressing-room tic it' &deep idiot rockin-chair a convalescent, with a 5ii ii ned ronn d Me,' and my empty medicine is ti ii'aal-esnttle, the kindest of doctors having annosi is i t is It need not he refilled.Two i oong ladies had just finished a inornhsig call of ct)Icrrsit 1daiion. naisiel v, N ice (Iransto an, the q is ot dam EngI is sovereign, and her pretty sister Belle, the goddess ; an Sophie was ushering them down stairs.	The elder lads, who, by the way, seemed of a very prii and gossiping dipo,ition had informed its diet N i'. moiat had brought out a new novel, iris eli irsss t ski isg tI fashionable circles by stoma ; that it evident iv hail inosleli its heroine on a certain well -known beantv of 'sirs twit circi	Could we guess who noar? It was tell' times more weit and exciting even then ' Veronia,' and eert ainlv threw halo ssf romance oser the heroine winch nnglir extend in real life. Was it possible ire hail not ascii it? (toe woti have ihonght the first eyes that looked on it won Id ha been-nsa em mmd. Get it. N isi Ii an dl a an d jnd ge if vi never saw peple lats Beshvi.i a, and her love-erauetl Ftt this Nisadow.As soon as the ladies bad gone, I tnnssd s:igsrhv to Isoli,a c tin g aons e and ignant protest from her, is the stilt itt	a se new hook; instead. howea er she risi ii -to wo. jeer by takiag op a book of poems ansYShe svas on bet gaard for be - i i Icare which the Wat fartn -h e w tue ontwtjrd e)Ilf,11elll(,llt JjI,ght91l]It I sUW 110tjj;il,~,	TaCe	't		waS (,aj)JI Jilld'OY		10119 and a,.6he,j up]lelcl the gilded bo"	I it tan		hat e		lavid	_t eur~~e		v o Of		hgrzlce ; It	hands wIlic		)eIt Ivere idi v c, jas' littleALt last I	~ , , pe( 	the dii6k	J		What I it , 3 111 v jallgt~lvested of,		Curious	hJO, l1eVQ ' 1, noticed that hall	isis is (be Uss	eienin	onUs rnsg, wit Ii which I ns			ii sen we sat together in theBEAUTIFUL RIENZI. 	27	rawing-room ; a broad, exquisitely chased band with two hands clasped to hide a ruby heart:, which once I had played with until a spring suddenly was touched and a plain golden hoop was revealed from underneath.This ring she had never explained to me ; she had onceold me that it was not the gift of a lover, and I had askedo more.	The ring 110 longer sparkled on her hand ; the gift which was not from a lover was gone; I could not say that I had seen it since that night of the storm.	Had she given it hack in that secret walk ? Was some tie broken which that double ring had represented? Had it anything to do with the man whose red-brown eyes were a prophecy of eonnn g tragedy?	Oh, dull eyes of mortals! Why can they not pierce the vail of circumstances, and warn the heart from woe?This hook is too sad for you, Iva. I will read another."	Oh, let me share it-were it ten times as sad, let me stiffer too."	I started at my own words and recalled myself ; she was speaking of the poem, I of the Secret. She rose and put away the book. I saw that she understood me, by the sad and furtive look she east upon me, and I blamed my inadvertence when she kissed me so mournfully.	Youth is the season of elasticity; I soon become strong and well again, and, with health, my spirits flung off much of their depression.	It was a considerable time before my blind eyes were opened to another change in my sister-a change which, like the rest, seemed invisible to all else.	She no longer beamed with loving affection toward our father; her sportive tenderness was all gene; she sat before him with downcast eyes-she watched hint with furtive perplexity and sorrow in her sweet face. I have seen her shrink from his paternal caresses, with dismay unspeakable in her manner.	This change, of all, was most incomprehensible; a secret mildew scorned withering the very roots of our family hove, and I alone was doonwd to see the changes which to others were invisible-a golf was widening between our bright Isohina and us-hands were dragging her into darkness, and I bound by a promise to keep silence, alone saw the threatening ruin.SEA I'TTFIJL BIEYZI	,thoat a week after tap illness, Isolina came with a let t a nich, with a very indignailt face, she gave to inc to rca it was from Washington, a ritten in a pretty, gi rush hat nd signed "Lillia Meredith,' and these were the content	"Mx Heir, DEAREST FricND: I base fallen into trouble, and on 1,11(,w one one whom I mold fly to scalier than yaw I was to ha, St to married last week to me dear Cecil, but to my ,d.irin iii I ni"rtiI "'lion he his asked flee flaw to be postponed, svlneli I It i o'ci'ingly Heisted, until his pleasure. lie is unaccountably chat'", lilaindeed, I have, reason to believe he has fallen in love WithIa'in New, York, and tired of poor Little, from whet h, ha' I' I ii. Ino frightened about it, and come to on to know is hat I !I. 111 d	'01,1 500 find out if my suspicions are Correct aml lilt iii,-: I is en go to her and beg her not to fake nix Cecil frost stir. 1)1,1 s's v, it] his last hook? Hasn't he genius, ' rh? But his heroic lIesl	va I am so jr alone of her riot one whit like poor hill, site, A there's a queer little spirit flits in at the end of if. i'I,'', ,.tran say, a gentleman who was hero the other cloy, coo, isv sari IN. Ilk, so foreign, sister. Isanulla. Such a mystic- ~o emanation of fervor and fidelity, who bring., 1-i, Ii, iv a as' I her Ml IIn 'ethic like a good fairy. I riled over the],		k atil sat ii s ii	nights to read it; t soc so proud of mx Cecil, hut [lint I -cite will not turn him from his Lilly- Writ' it '			* io, do.	dotting Isolina, and toll me what to thin]	("Tit¥',' ''York next week; perhaps you will see hoot	If 	willgood word for me?	Los inglv liii tile ina ,!r' snMEl,KbITflThis most girlish Opistle being dulv rezi(l, I hsanoI'j it baa	She was qnite calm 'S really loved Cecil Beoangont 50]ilehitlt'o I illiligiIlesl._sfrdl)	What are YOU 110ing to do."" p	this if h rI am politp' to invite, Miss Mere I'ter a itli no." she anew ered with	lure to spend he	tIcs in her eyes: ''and i am ping tue tutu in	vttt. Inb me While she CPt with her. 	lie eilll;iot perso.o ace hlwi\(r lhgan.hip w1"Itt if he ith 	;0ot love her ally lOluucrin toy adO Ileai'1 ' f remembereth (ci'hl'- ii s':tslcsl. falter-	ill', hack the'he.lct	loves you	ll'eJieflite trust so much. ~%Ott	dear doter take	Ciy-lIt5 lilto If ]vo 'truth,"		Olaf to- )our love	ti-ott s'lt:tttutel,	(Hi!	j mpoeii ole		s ta 	_\l ('cci lit Ii the		Sn,- tue;,,',1 ashy n ir--		- liMe'		Ishe looked on me *oItBEAUTIFUL BIENZL 	29sternly. I turned away in dismay and prayed that she would not spurn me.	Don't look so distressed, clear!" she said. " You surely don't expect me to love him when I can't love him. Your anxiety on his account does your heart credit. but, my pet, it is ridiculous. lie must marry Lillia Mc'reilith. "Rut if he will not?"She laughed a] most hysterically.	11 Then he can keep on crying for the moon," was he reply; and she sat down resolutely to her writing-desk.	In a few minutes she had handed me the note she had rapidly penned. and bent over the desk to dash off an address, while I read it.	"DEAR LILY }'nowan:--Make your arrangements and come immedi-ately to me. I wish you to be prepared to spend the winter with us.'l'he change will be beneficial to your health-besides other reasonstouching upon your happiness. The contents of your letter I shalldiscuss when we meet. 		Your sincere friend,"I. Riaan"	1 gave back the letter with a deep sigh. T could not help my apprehensions from becoming visible; besides I sympathized with the poor son] who had loved my sister so passionately, and I did not feel half so much for the fiancee. Women never do.	What if, after all, Miss Meredith fails to rebind him?" I asked.	She turned around with the sealed letter in her hand, and met my clouded looks. I cannot describe the sorrow, the remorse, the resolution in my sister's face. She pressed her hand hard upon her breast, and the very soul whose hidden face I longed to see, seemed trembling on her lips.	''Promise to have no secret plots against me in favor of any one!" she cried. " Promise to obey my directions in all that pertains to me!""I will obey you now and always!" I sobbed.	Thanks!" she murmured, softly. Then she restrained herself, and went down stairs to dispatch her letter.	On that day, a gentleman who was the principal of a certain musical club Which I shall designate as the " (iiybe]le Society," called upon my sister and me to prefer a petition.	The members of the society, which consisted of several of the most talented ladies and gentlemen in_the city, wereSEA (7IflT RIENZ1.1] behalf of the soldiersi1'out to hold all aniatetir concert ohe battle of- who were crowded into the hospital atA ,4uugtoil without the means to cling to their shattere s. The concert would realize, it was hoped, enough Id another hospital. and eammand the services of pin's us and nurses. Would the two young ladies, Ali j ma Rican and her sister, who, it was well known, we, 9 accomplished musicians, object to render their services at such a short notice, and sin" some little mccc onCthe occasion?'What date have you fixed for the concert?" asked myThe twenty-ninth of November."And this is the 1911. We should have ten days forIf my sister is agreed, we shall be most happyto be of use, Professor Emerson,What does my sister say?" said the professor, turn-I' g his pleasant smile upon me; "is site Yankee enough atri to brave discomfort for the sake of the gallant fellowii braved death?'She's courageous for auvihiug, if she thinks it's right,I my sister, with a fond, proud suiile.The 'end of it was, that I slipped my hand into Jsohna'saud said in a shy voice that I would do whatever she did; and Professor guiereoni went away delighted, promising to scud us our parts imusediately, that we might commence in ci tu t practice.It arrived two hours later-ft mammoth roll of music,and a printed circular of directions, which informed us how far frotu a siuecnre our part was to be.1 declared it an impositiou, when I found nsyself andnov harp iutroduced again and again, and declared thatould fulfill hut my promise, s'hich was to sin "one song," thereby presenting an utter eoutrasthto my	is plunged iuto her allotted part with almost fierce I tv, and from the hour in winch the music arrived,td herself to iuastcnug it. For three days I scarcelyher.Ii the fourth day a geutIem called with a note fromlessor Emerson, which laugh	he delivered. ItsI' 1'rt wa' tl0t Mc,	Ernest Liudhur,t ha I been ap.	'Ir	ThEA UTIFUL ILIENZL	31of which Miss [vanilla had the air, and with her kind permission he would sing the duet with her once or twice before rehearsal.	I have been introduced to Miss Ivanilla Rienzi before, under widely different auspices," said the gentleman with a smile of keeii amnsenient at my embarrassed looks-'' has the Italian peasant forgotten that she was presen ed to her spiritual fat hor at Mrs. 1esmar's assembly ?"1 lifted my eves and looked at him attentively.	Are yen-were you the Pope?" I asked, with sudden recognition; '' did Miss Cranstown introduce you to inc its Pie Nono?"	consider myself deeply flattered to be again recognized in such different guise,"' replied the gentleman, in a low voice.	I ani afraid en will be shocked,'' T said, thrilling with a new and subtle ecstasy, which I feared my very voice would betray; '' I am afraid you will wish you had to sing duets with some one else, when I confess that I was meditating a revolt against niy part of the programme, and in consequence have not practiced a note.'lIe arched his handsome eyebrows in pathetic horror.You are not going to persist in this rebellion? lie claimed. with a ring of disappointment in his tonesAre you to be Den C lovanni?" I asked.I would have been, were von Zerlina."	Then I shall be Zerlina. Come; here is the piece; you commence."	We turned to my harp, and began our first duet together.By the time my new friend had taken his departure, Iwas almost as enthusiastic about the sueeesss of the Cybeile Society's concert as Isolina.CHAPTER IV.TOO FOND BY HALF.Demetrins-" Oh, why rebuke you him that loves you so? Lay breathso bitter to your bitter fee."	MmsuaxMra-NIaHT's DhELM.	The ten days of preparation passed quickly away, and the evening preceding the umornentons 29th found us returning32 	BEAUTIFUL R1E1I ZI.¥ first rehearsal, delighted with the promisejie manager had predicted. dressing-tab~T- 11s; the, j(,t tel. SoI)jli(! ~),-a~lc to isolina, the card to Ille.		name, "Cecil Beau	ft,rued to the girl.this card left for me, oplsieMiss ha, and he has been wailing v i t -	von to conic back half an limit.			81 all I go, Isohiun?" I asked, timidly.		She looked up from Ilerletter with a rather S(",: .		"Poor ho chic excliinnd, "yes, co. Ii in hi.	i -		cc him forf the bliss which to-morrow bring .	I'			writes that she is c(nning oil the 29th.	1t him in a fitting frame of mind."			T don't think I can," I Cried, despnrniglv.But I went down stairs, nevertheless, and rein tn iv ad-mitted myself into the drawing-room.Indeed II was not glad to see Cecil Jheanniotit. SIowJI advanced until I stood close beside Ii ni before he untie Inc. and, in a voice of cold constraint, I bade him goods C III lug."lie started, and I iirned toward me."I could almost despise myself for coming here, butsaid von would be lily friend, and 1 have been building ii-'nyour friendship," lie said, in a low, husk-v tone.11 is useIess_oh, it ia useless" I cried. with a ciuhienloilotteais	'Jhavetredand I have tailtil."\ hat doestuat uiean?"Jie exelanlild calcliiui lily 11am],eu ehiifiisg it between his palms. ''1)1 Cu Sill Ii Vi allot IleIfI ealnlOt tell," I sobbed; 'but this I fear, lIly ftjlIIII,I oor 	that she doic i iot love Viuhe does in It lute nieshc, does II (It love IC PhI'	lie ri-lcd, aitli a wild smile "I feel quit" ctliiiiied-i1tiiuito pl*ej)aI-e his Milld f',)T- tj~,,'1-trothea? I felt it to be aCh a 	fai've I ia ill jej, IV",1~-' Ulbjout' ("'Y all(! alinolstIoflteni1itiioi1 as I illiUdill01 hptro55 ou'noi S'U had hotter -			ii Very ill iii 11)11' lad v,' I said,	H	(Sty		c)t ask	Is to go hack t, her¥		''n	ci	the cnuu, 1/; 1		ptlu1'w	BEAUTIFUL RTEXZI	33likely that any man who loved your sister would show sanityin forgettiivr her for another?''	''You should remember the claims of that other," I pursued, grimly. '' I think on should put duty before inchnation. I know Miss Meredith loves you."	lie confronted me with a fierce determination in his eyes. His face seemed slowly hardening into stone.Begone with such heartless platitudes!" he hissed. " Icome to you with a famished soul, and von feed me with husks that your own eyes mock at! Girl, I swear-I swear to win Isolitia!"	You are a madman!" I uttered, drawing away from him. "Tell me what you are going to do?' I continued, feeling it hard to resist throwing off my sister's colors, and joining him in an attempt to carry her hunt in spite of herself.	I tnu going to end this wretched game !" he said, vehemen tly, ''and, my litcle friend, I have sworn to be the victor. I (10 not think von are displeased."No," I admitted, in a low, excited tone, completely car-ried away with his mystical power by this time; '' 1 ibm It-l am almost sure she must love you, and it is only MissMeredith's claims which stand in the way"	A cold hand touched mine and drew me backward. My ister came between us, her eyes full of reproach, her lips jnivering.	What! plotting against me after your promise?" she aid, regarding me sadly. '' Oh, sister! I thought I could rust you."	The gentle tone cut me to the heart. I could not say one void in self-defense.	She turned to Cecil Beaumont, and fixedly met his pasioiiate gaze.	You will have it then F" she breathed. "You are deeranned to drive tile to extremity F"Yes, 'said Cecil Beaumont.']'bell you will have a final answer to-morrow,"'' May I fix the hour, Isolina?"Pshaw ! Well, as you please, sir."'L'o-morrow night after the concert is over, then."Too late. Come here before we leave the house."	I shall certainly conic here as you have asked, but as on have given me permission to name an hour for our inerview, it shall be after the concert.,',rArrjFl;L RIEIcZL¥ Very well,. r: BeaumoT1t.1 the tone in which tht woild be dididu to , 	Ofl my sister'S	:f colloquy we' conhl	Both we're deter-	the implacable defiance wich should t e?ul vet one must yield; dOf tile 11ll(		kTh in.1 slall wish von good eve" 1ll. thcnti,,	gentleman. bowing peofoiieidiv.he inclined her head.flood-night, little friend,"	lie took 111W hand, and obeying an irresistible iinpu iel1wiLl1 hiii to the door.	You dunk iry case hopeless," he muttered rapidly. nut \ ,)Lt need not. I have a hold on her which will mice her to liten. She will he glad to cling to 1110-see now if she is not."With these portentous words he. wrung my liaiid.it to his hot lips, and withdrew.I lame back to Isolina and flung my aims round h r." You must reconsider the question." I cried, ilil\iouCiv,take him if you can-oh, do not rouse his desperate natureaiiv further. He says he has a hold on you, winch will forcevon to litcn,""A hold?" she repeated, incredulously, ''what hold has he--poor infatuated boy Less than the meanest soul that ever Sued for my favor-and yet more than 7/oil have, my dear	tie sister-closely knit as von are to me. more than heumis of, unhappy boy.	Peliaw! What am I savingi' Non-I believe. 	To-morrow will vol me of Cecil lie' aumont,	I promise V0i,'		- 11 Lilile. Meredith conies to-morro		onlyI	hten the e.toi in, lEsolma."IY sister sighed wearily and despondind	trier l tlIiJAlly"We.s all li, el. -		.4'	5	*I C tiVCfly4j0 				of l\ovenih rime in thronIo leaden lel earth	¥ wiut	¥ruigh the ilight, ,poll		¥ '		luii 1V,	Piety morsels Piled l	gum, iron-like streets theth heavy noise.	Own all through the pallid day.itc gariaiifl5	and loading the gaunt trees withI	the tumbling Cull' and		111:, 'u		toBEAUTIFUL RIENZ1. 	35jinglin bells; all New York was out a-sleighing; Broadway and Filth avenue were flashing gay with bright eqnipaesthe poorest streets assumed a holiday air. At twelve o'clock Mr. Lindhurst made his appearance in a fanciful looking sleuth, shaped much like a nautilus shell, with a downy heart of crimson velvet in which lie kindly invited me to nestle, and experience lily first sleigh- ride.	Delightedly I consented, and sat in dumb enjoyment as we dashed through the noiseless snow, and the myriad eq uipages; it was like a fairy scene to me, or a kaleidoscopic view of St. Petersburg, and I felt grand as a Russian Czarina.	Yet perfect as was my pleasure, it received a cheek, when on passing one of the principal hotels, I saw Cecil Beanmoitslowly descending the marble steps. lIe saw me at the same instant, and lifted his hat, with an ineffable smile of triumph, or daring, which sent my thoughts trooping ionic to my sister and her troubles.Take me home, Mr. Tindhnrst," I said, gravely.	What? and you have not been out an hour. A al see, the sun is just melting his way through that bank of clouds -the snow has stopped, and we are going to have a brilliant day. You will lose all the beauty of the scene if you go now, dear Miss Ivanilla."11 There are other days with sunshine."	Thanks for that gracious half-promise; I shall see that you keel) it with me. But are you tired or cold',"'	I am not tired and I am not cold, Mr. Lindhurst, and I never enjoyed anything half as much-but I would like to go home now to Isolina, who is alone."How you two love each other."He sped around a corner, and we went flying home.	As I went up stairs, Soplue met me with a piece of news which did not tend to relieve my mind.Miss Meredith had arrived.	When I entered the dressing-room, I found Isolina in earnest conversation with a fair, blonde young lady who had large blue eyes, a very pretty complexion, and a mass of light glossy hair gathered in a mass of coquettish tendrils upon her forehead. Portlier than these attractions, she had no claim to superiority above the average fashion-able lady, unless in the possession of a very winning, inno-cent manner, which made her appear even younger thanshe was.	BEAUTIFUL '?IE~Y;	111c, thatThe first glance in Lihiao could never riCa1 iflt	j' the inconstant lover.	"ivaiiW this is onr	ected visitor, Miss Meredith,'	I civ 51s'er. tnrnmg to 'lie.	hi of tears in IMiss Meredith's eyes had been 	now sheso net lung	i~ll	I"	Isoihia had been saying, in up and came to me, wiping them aWayair.		1', been	ii	Dear me, everything's hazy beforo me, e,- ow I In see you plainer, and wli;it a 1 cmiii o'a hare! The nine muses look nut of yell! I,''		'Ti iii illa-oh what would I not give to mire a Sister ot ac i'iddante like vonl Yen are just exactly like his iica-eripnen!-oli, dear! Isolina has been telting me the most.horrible tales of my poor wicked Cecil! Slia ii t we tell herill about it, Isolina?'Isniina having gravely consented, Tillia, witlinnt permit-ting ice to remove my wrappings, began instantly to confide.	You see I nnrsed Cecil when lie was a sick prisonericy father was governor of the prison, you know-awl I grew to adore In in, though lie was a Sontluern officer, and just as proud anti fierce as they generally ire: and for my s:ilce, when he was liberated ]ie settled himself in Washing i in and became en anther; nand thengh papa is very wealthy. ha never said anything against my ('cull. just because lie that my heart was set ott having him, I am so glad I am papa's only child and can do as like. But. oh! isn't it dreadful to think of-he has been cool to mc these months 1t'imt, and iscdnia tells me that she is the lad v for whom hi r, foisaken rile. Peer Isolina'. and wretc'lucil, wicked Cecil, wrtrirc her when she does net like him. No wonder she au distressed, ,beat it.	tie has been in New York hero, dangling after Isoli ii horrible not want him, anti writing me 'Me 0i5, imP a dozen lines in length, hn ill Listen to this one, which cant	V Do shill sort Iflood icc Lar3 h		prisn flower of '¡>' i.I give yea Lack no, no I X on shall n,'v'rU .I "iindgs of ansIi0	g¡nil,' lose, civ chill 'if0005, Me LO 0 txvu,ei,itmmt	F,i.	BRA UTTEUL JiIEXZ1.	37	Now. what in the world does he mean? I am frightened ;o death about it in fact, that is what brought me here so ;uddenly. I think he is catching a fever-I am sure he must e sick, poor fellowHere the young lady subsided into tears again, which she)et a lant lv wiped away, and resumed.-It it wasn't for this idea, I wouldn't have another word toar to him. not I. mdcccl! but 1 think it is just a sick whimu has got. and. when he sees me lie will forget it, and be cinder of me than ever, to make amends. So. when he 'ames here this evening, I am just going to be as kind as if iothing had. happened, anti I won't appear to know anl king al out his foolish peiichiant for Isolina."Ihiving thus arranged her plans to her satisfaction, Mi1t'i'editli dried her tears and ran to open her boxes that, wenight see her last new dresses.I could not but realize that this simple child was quiteintitted for such a man as Cecil Beaumont; his vehementepth of passions would annihilate her soft nature; she'mild never climb to his standard, she could not even oak up to his moral height, without becoming confused ud dizzy.And vet, if ever giant soul required a strong, calm spirito guide it into rectitude, his did.	Having displayed her wardrobe, and chattered herself nb better spirits, Miss Meredith, finding Isohina too grave or conversation, turned her little flatteries and caresses to ie, and dually conveyed me to her room. I sang for her nd related bits of Italian romance, and had succeeded in Musing her, when the short afternoon drew to a close.	My pretty companion, tied with her journey, had fallen sleep, curled up in the end of the sofa, and I was free to cek my sister, who had been alone in her dressing-room all he afternoon-not practicing once, but quite sPent. lie door of the room was ajar as I crossed the hull from liss Meredith's room, and the bright; gas-light revealed my isrer standing-a fain ihiar atti I nile for hr-with her back o the room, at the window. Her head was bent forward, uud I feared she was grieving, so with an eager foot I apu'oaelued her and fondly put my arm round her waist, inen Ii ng to comfort her if I could.She started violently, gasped, then turned. her face to me,	BEA U2JFUL BIEKZI.:"q		s if Iliad bee		ii' tifri 'ht written there, as plainly ad '		Li er worlihorrible vision from	" I mann U re(l, sootlilu Ole.	'Dail III, it is only	I ilow divined the calico 0Silo Ilad i letter in1hei imnj. inc to see the let tr. i v not W16 1	feelings hi j	Con	in 1 hidenters eves were jealon]y watching mine.Oil her arm my feelings Of devotion and fidelity beneath the shock of her distrust; my cur'	i uuet and t in ojed on her arm.P	it away" I whispered; "I wish to know nothingbut I have seen a name.'Slic folded u the letter, steadily regarding mc.What name did von see, JyanillafI.-Mrs. Victor .Joselyn."She turned her back to me, and looked out of the daWindow again."Well-" she said, in a strange, unnatural tone would you like to ask an thing about her?"I do i'a't want to know an\ thing about her that you anot inclined to tell," I rejoined. in a trenilt]inz voice.She is-or rather was-Coil nected with a friend of minethat is a]]," said Tsolina, after a pause; but it mattolittle now who she was-she is dead."I did not know what to say; I was unaceountabl%0liockecl,'' 5re YOU satisfied?" asked Isolina. turning an ashy whitmoe to me again. 11cr expression was so despairing that 11once more flung my arms ronnd her, and burst into tears.Lit me comfort yen I sobbed . cli, darhi ii . hit IflCLoi e me, Ivanilla-jheWs no one else to iovme:" wis orly anceer,lohta rou0eil herself from a trance of grief, and %%-cutI saw no that she mid been Writin iim on tile st.an winch site iroec1ed to Stilti"I ivii SOC lilted it irresolntvlv III ii looked at me.s tone	e tin mailed to-ni0lit," site said in nit liii'an	scarcely II1eIii it to \ 1 on mut would ]I('BEAUTIFUL RIENZJ. 	.19took at it? My darling. you may trust Tva."	She gave me the letter, with a sun it look of love, and I cut away, eager to serve her.half-way down stairs I met Sophie.	"Go up and help Miss Meredith r r for dinner: it is most six oclock."Yes. Miss Tva. There's the ge"	I cannot wait now, Sophie: I will be back in a nionient hear ihat yoa wish to say."Why did I not listen?	In the second hail I encountered Cecil Beanmont laying 's hat and gloves on the stand. lie met me with a jaunty r. His eyes were glittering-his small sharp teeth were irtering also; there was a curious expression about him of ei o' ' girded for the tight."	I tow do you (10 this evening, sir?" I uttered. hiding relic hi ter in the folds of my dress as I approached him. '\Vifll you walk into the drawing-room for one momenttioni,.	What does my little friend bring me to-night?" he ic,;nraed. seizing my hand. The ill-omened envelope rustled 'Iga ot my silken skirt.ha! does she send me a dismissal by letter?" lie cried.. '' Sir, this letter is not for you. Let me go."For whom then? For 'v.,/tom ?"II i'. eyes blazed with sudden apprehension. In an in-;tail he had drawn me into the drawing-room and shut theI' or whom?" lie repeated, in the same tone.	Sir, I decline to tell you. Let me pass." '' Did site write it, Isolina?"I I hesitated.rrliis is niost cowardly conduct," I retorted.See did write it then!"liithis time the letter was in his hand. The room beingjjpr lie deliberately drew me across to the tire, and bent overthe ,r Idress, his hand trembling too much with insane jeal-io allow him to read.ti ouster!" 1 cried, springing forward.I\ ith superloinian quickness I snatched it from him and shod it into the burning heart of the fire.The ill-fated missive curled and broke into yellow flames an instant.'21 )			BKI i/TIFf L RJE'CZI.	toward the ui clcIced with an intent gaze owai	IIc'd.			"Bill I've-1 the	I	It is go to lily terrible!" room Lle; do't wait forii	join you at dinner. Sophie, dress Miss san ii'My darling, are von ill?" I cried. "No,' she turned her troubled face away: "I don't ccv well, that is true, but I shall he all right in an loif I am not disturbed."	We shall not ciitnrb von. Sophie, conic into my and dress nec there; my sister is going to steel)."The girl gathered lip my dress and toilet re'jo I I'we shut the dressing-room door behind its, and aijie * to my pretty bedroom, where our noise would not It' heard.	My heart was chill and heavy; I felt clint out and held ( aloof, though my own hand bad (lone it. Shall I do your heir now. miss?"	"Wait, we have an hour yet, and I can dress in ten millrates. Don't molestThe girl lingered about, waiting my mood: she took hersea mg, and stirred up the the.'Shall I light the Ps now, Niss Ivanilla?"I had remonstrated with Is lot a for s i tiil in i at ho win -dowlookmg at the storm, but I was there myself, and weep.	' I told you not tot- O~fW, all( die coal-fin bmmrntql drowsily,pIne m di 55 dicanlc fixed oi'i the i till of on the n nub1; in a stone -id side of the gate Ih*ki.m.t.ml like Ishrubs to the ga 	SOman gliding down betwet.n tI or garmsnf, al'ot.	am oh the liii ccl cane Well''	0 rae, but her ligur1 battle d resol n tely agai list (hiIs \varf are he	\*utoo sleuther and delicate	it steno Parapet, and ' it up and wltnIed aga	u'ng are liutil there IC ield on there Wit Ii I.'T11111j Ifl 1r thenWas a lull, while tIme 5toi*ntki1			SIc Opened p	dewi1 flis 5tr fi . gate antI lcd: t"lou, out 1 tile Storm' il efengeIlIEN AN	LUll EstTl1u.E BODY	I	A : 	/10BODY. IV FIAT IS THE Coö s/A/F firFor she has tint her lover dear, Her lover dear, the cause of sorrow'."Bes:'. i' II managed to convey Miss Meredith in safety d//-	the dining-room where my father sat waiting. Sour: y badinage took place between him and the you d v. (luring which I sat with my ear strained to catch the mid of my sister's voice, almost oblivious to what was (,-o g Oil beside me. And while my tortured fancy was picturing the scene ;pair and sorrow which was being enacted within tilL' om overhead, [sauna quietly tripped in and took her place the table. ''Who have you got up stairs, my dear?" asked papa.	Mr. Cecil Beaumont is amusing himself until Miss Lillia read to accompany him to the concert."	What-me" The young lady's face beamed with delight. but she kept r eyes demurely upon her plate, and papa was none the mi.	hadn't I better go and see him when dinner is over?" iispered the girl, iii a flutter of excitement. '' Bettor dress for the concert, and try the potency of thatso si:k and chatelaine," I responded, gayly.11 Oh, yes, indeed, I had better look my very best, when I Ike my appearance. Poor, dear Cecil:" She could eat nothing, arid laughed and talked almost sterically, until we were released from the table, when she is in a fever of haste to get her evening toilet over. She was, indeed, a lovely creature when thus equipped d as I looked at her, I began to think it quite possibleI at, her backsliding lover might prefer her smiles to my sis-'s scorn, and return to his allegiance, thus ending theihryo tragedy."Arid wtat are you going to wear?" asked the young'a'11 I'lL V1I flung her white opera-cloak round her pearThe saints defend me from a' treeall vliod 	T shall get behind my harp wh.iii (1110 iotiie to sing alone." . that liii ¥ntonic. Li	sail lily sister, entering a 	a, mit k time von were goiiw down to your cavalier.l)rtusedso soon! Oh. and v'7,at a magnificent cr'"' ru'"I lie. Isol i aa Look, Miss Ii a-are you not piTile Beautiful ltk,flzi:A)I turned aa d looked at my dear sister; and I prote- I I ii-aiIm loveliness struck through my heart with a ku,ii, v I' ,i'el '0i ia fondness.I oubl not but feel convinced that ('ccii Beauniont won retoro to his homage-to the pretty fioacee while sm blazed before him.hops Lillia was thinking the same; a shadow crossfl brows, and tears stole into her eyes.No wonder everybody goes crazy about you!" she sigh'dare, it must he rather a serious matter to have -utrations! Just think of the hearts you'll ho forcedbreak, before on are gray-haired!"	.1 lock of utter misery settled upon my sister's face; si 7 iisl unrolling her music, absently, while her deep, quenez e t-s fixed themselves upon the flickering coals witan expris-nun almost of fierce despair.	The stream of inward emotion was conquered in a m aunt: she turned almost sadly to us, and began criticism - I i-< Meredith's dress, with anxious care.	I am locased with your appearance," she said. " i\ saw you more becomingly attired. Now, go downealuniont, and try to make him forget his foolish ia¥III t must I say?" responded the girl, helplessly. 'clii enel to ue of his , darkest moods, I will he ts	¥ , ~-Jx' Ii curd to him. Oh, do conic with me." - .iiik lug hack. 2j look over this chorus," said Isolin'¥ 	ta, do you go"the little s\lu, oitb uol 1 want down together, and I dietthe loved of luir li	stuto into the draw inz-rooiu, whC	&e1,,	r'- ''It'd with--	BEA UTIFUL BIEXZI.	43	Oh, Cecil dear!-you have been ill that was it," said ie poor girl, bursting into tears at the first glance.Ah ! shall I bear you to the play-the tableau." he ex-aimed, in an excited manner. Shall you be witness.nd applaud the grand scene?"	The concert-yes!" replied Lillia, relapsing into deeper ann; '' I'll go anywhere with you, dear Cecil, that you	A smile curled the lips of the lover, but an imperative lance from me checked the wild sally winch was on his lie gazed at use strangely a moment, then took Miss I uredith s hand politely and seated her.I am glad to meet my lily-flower again." he murmured;I will she breathe some of her innocent balm on the worldmary heart of her Cecil? I have not touched so tender a and, nor met so kind a gaze, since last I looked uponHe watched him half incredulously through her tears,ii such phrases were a new thing from him, but a some-4thilL strange and terrifying to her in his haggard face soon aused her to cower closer to him, and again exclaim:You have been ill, Cecil-ell! how terrible you areoking!"	He looked down at her, a calm, thoughtful glance, such s a brother might have bestowed, and began explaining to et- the severity of his literary labor, and I. dubiously nough. slipped from the room and left them together.	Well, are they reconciled in good faiths?" inquired solina, anxiously. when I made my appearance.I related the meeting, and eagerly asked how she had anagc{l to bring him round to such a measure of subission.I informed him of a certain obstacle which debarredc from marrying him!" she replied, steadily, while he closed her piano and locked it, '' Having become onyinced that further hopes were impossible, lie himself roposed to return to Lillia, and signify his intentions by ccouipanying her to the concert this evening."And is it possible that he has given you up so calmly?"	" He cannot-or I calnot-remmmoye the obstacle; thereore he submitted to the inevitable."	At half-past seven we left the house with my father, who his night was radiant with pride and playful tenderness, astt	+Mr	and n. and took ilk il			t'l;iiwnl sleigi; had n Yet arc' ccl, 50 irewelcarlv I renieniber that yoiembe 1113	lit ivton h the crisp night air and brig + t o	Kell ito ift ilon g to tile clang of silver swig ii- n	III,,r4'aVlV cliatti ig to me, my sister sitting qn n iionles in the cornier, I with my eyes intenty fixed apon	r ci cOts. From the sanie hotel from which Iseeim Befill mont descending in the evening,ed'tn tiemnen in loose British cloaks such as 0010 then"steppingto a zleigh. drawii by larue NvIlite horse.Nii vii the eomnionplace vehicle with no Commonmterest, from the mere fact of its proceeding. fronhotel, and in the same direction as our own. The irant steed which was certainly bettor fed than ti m rility of its class, ran abreast with us for sonic rods,o a darted post and fell into line with a long stream ofa lives jast ahead of us, where the jingle of the bellsvIed with em' own.I Living watched this sleigh out of sight, I turned my 0 on to something else, and found by the inert ing0 I g that we were slowly "caring the hall in which the lie Society were to give the concert.I. a U no' of vehicles were waiting to deposit theirat1ie entrance doors, and a slow stream of thos+0 dv emptied were moving onward to give place.an adroit movement our coachman sneeeeded in do-v as on the carpeted pavement much in advance of0 Ilangli I lingered on the marble top step. withml hol	y fastened on me. and my father already5;111; Z t 	iland although I kept them1 iid looked for ray glove, +cied np m sian I on may		miffed tigares.	lailed to see again those\ 	alt all eXiinirition atrrs, aid before Ion'	my own foolishness, I joined thetimers, who, among in	oun(l ourselves amoni the per-I fiuttermg of robes were tailcmg, greeti	laughter,IS frimim tile indefitbothie	mg a few last instrnmI soIn aid I stood ha 1 lOteesor Emerson it, I"woali not be separated on tehThod together, hopin weplatform, and we a ere Coll.w	BEAUTIFUL BIENZL	45scieiitiouslv listening to the professor, when a group of our friends discovered us, swooped around us, carried off my sister from my grasp to hear something better worth listenin to than the professor's div dissertation, and I was left al most alone with a inLir of keen blue eyes beaming down upon inc.	Cheer up, Zerlina," said Mr. Lindhurst. extending his haini. Do not look so forsaken Miss Ttienzi. I will do my best to fill tile vacnniu, if von will allow inc."	Just as the signal was given for the singers to make their appearance on the platform, a hand was laid on myshoulder, and a voice whispered in my ear:Where is Isolina? Qniek!''The breath scorched my ear. I turned in affri(r it 111(1beheld Cecil Beau titon t.	Why, sir, what are you doing here? Where is Miss Mere I nh ?"	Oh, 1 see her. In time after all," he muttered, turning from me and pushing through the crowd.	Isdina was in effect coming toward him with all haste; but she (lid net see him; her eyes were resting on me; she was anxious to reach me, that we might enter the hail and. be together.	Not until she had almost touched him, was she aware of Mr. Beaninonts presence.	They met not five rods from me, and my ears, sharpened by extreme anxiety, drank in all that paused between them.'Cake my arm, Isolina."What-you P Where is Lillia?"	Curse Lihhia! I beg your pardon, but she's right enough. I implore you to take my arm-you can't crush in alone.''I prefer to crush in alone. Go back to Miss Mere-dith."	Isolina) look in my face and see if I can bear much more. Be wise and grant this trifling favor."	His red-brown eyes were flashing-his face dangerously white. No wonder she looked and gasped.	Poor wretched boy," she exclaimed; ''can I help it? I CIO not wish to give you pain, heaven knows."	Grant this favor then-such a more rag of mercy to throw me-your hand on my aria sixty seconds. See, youri jITUL JIE\46i ' haul is on Mr. Linihu ret's artil. t lilt difference it make to eu or of them? W elI, if you still refuse, I walk straight into Lillia Meredith's opera-box and re'c her forever." it decided it. Iselina, with angry, downcast eves, liniiiig chcek, stepped into the procession and walked lie I lit for iii. hei ])and tightly linked to Cecil Beau Inn. in] I followed closely, too much engrossed byo cii to lift iiiv eves to look around. in-taut we had taken our seats, the face of Beaumont ,went a wonderful change. cull not hut uspeet that lie was trying to give the imii i all a ho chose to notice, that he was the favored i of The Beautiful Rionzi," I trembled for poor i Meredith, and raised my eves to the reserved seats to	1 her.	I soon detected the blush-rose dress in a seat verya r ii		1 it form, and met the large, wistful eyes of the	viii	fixed upon me with a timid, dazed expression	ii H) ,I. 	them upon her lover, as if hoping to catchgli i font him.At hngth the business of the evening commenced,ci I hal no Inure time for observation. I have no inten-fl of PITS- tin,g to the reader the details of this concert,tehi tvc conducted with perfect skill and taste. I shall	cli hero and there on those parts winch immev pc tii ii to niv history, and to myself.As the moment approached that I was to sing my firstP. Santa Ceeelia how my lips trembled My hands grew Iinc e eeLs flamed, a suffocating weight of nervousnv heart.iv name was whispered by those around me, aely behiij ie gave me a gentle pus which sent me to myI Ui U nit 1 rs of " I) out he afraid," reached my cj na kingi.. cml Mr. Liiidhunst's calm eves rested on me with a ic-ing eunle which infused sonic courage into my half-ii mciii., Without daring to look up. 1 took my placea gat lv lietzzenetl harp. swept the strings with vtiiring limigil's which Created an intptotflptij pilude, rathermm of the oure as I saw by the Professor, 5 astonished looks,.11141 at lemI'rt Ii, with a des lerate effort Plunged into m' finite unconscious of anything but the defects whichnit lien ou ness can eud.ill tiC p rfoitn1 ccWa ga]lantl. applaud h the	BRA tT1FUL RIRXZL	47great, kindly throng, and the gentlemen cried " encore." thongh 1 was now burning with remorse that I had not merited their kindness more, and thinking to myself how my gifted master in Venice, who had formed all my notes wit ii artistic care, would have encored in a different mood ; but I I swept, a grateful courtesy and retired to my place.I had now leisure to look about, and 1 used my eves.	First they went a-trip to the dear father in the box, wn was clapping his bands louder than any of them, his cv a sparkling with pride and we telegraphed a smile to oti icr. Then I looked at Miss Meredith, and my sit faded.	SSho was bent across the front of the seat, her ivory tan pressed against her bosom until it bent, her soft face cold and hard, her eyes fastened, her lips satirically snnliug. Unutterably startled at such an expression, I directed my eyes also to the pair she watched so intently.	Mv sister sat some distance from me on her velvet chair near a piano, upon which shortly she was to perform. 11cr face was drooping, her face which was surely too bitterly reproachful to be turned to the public and Cecil Beaumont was bending his head close to hers, unchecked ; a musicsheet held up as a shield from other eyes, while he whispered ceaselessly. It was all interpreted but too well by wronged Lillia Meredith, mad now with jealousy and indignation.The concert proceeded; there were more songs by ladeswhose tones did not tremble as mine bad done. The orchestra played through an opera while we rested ourselves. Isolina and the professor performed their piano duet, which was wonderfully aomired. Time time came at last for Isolina and nut to sing a duet then much in vogue, though now soinetvhtit antiquated, '' Mira 0 orma,'' from "Don Giovanni.''	I stood with my sister in the empty area and watched her, while with a low, pathetic cadence, she fell into Bellini's sweet air, which strangely enough seemed to fall into a desolate chime with her life-opera. With what wistfulness she murmured the opening pnkvel'; how her tones deepened into vehemence: how her vehemence intensified to passion as she sano:Alt It, "'hall iv, I, who causel tlt :ingoish,ion deep bath been thy silent sorrow!"jlffUT BIEYZI.I was carried RW:IV he her dramatic genin5 and renderedpart ltd fearIes en ilinsiasm, anhil ass eyes fell on Ceciliiiiioitl. and t hen I knee 'lot What, I aisg.F here he stood, or rather cmnched behind a flag, watiiinv beautiful sister wiLls a reckless and almost diabolical Ins lips. W here was now the touching febrile pa-- of ti, at full-eyed Southern face? This was the told¥ Ii, 	a led.	from this blasting vision to take up my part 'the orchestra hushed their notes to a gentle wInsvoice. Irenu Wing as it was n uth other feelings, rose with \ ornia s passionate rejoinder:55 lion the heart is cold that should have cherished ro hope of joy it taleely gave 55 jI st Sb ia have ins lies? Rh! no, thou wouldet not! Ii only haven, alas! is bat the grave!"a': Led for Isolina's answering:"hear me, Norma! hear me, I implore thee!"I waited, and the echoes were dyin.\\ 'at has smitten Isolina? 	b	lie will eyes are fixed as if in a I weleiinigher hands clasped Do ance-her Iis a116('t tl!eiosehves OPOlu the bhsneh(	sudden horror de-;aid with a soft ohianlikeb:	ace: she shrinks back,the harp-eurius she sank	of her inn y robe acrossI are	at my fect, The effect was' el-CII-io.was a hnsh as of deatl bI lii cisc d is cepung and cries c t	the		£ 	( cal littonCHAPTEReu-rLEn AFTERi"leetoBehind thssootIlej	or"still'us1	thronk abut Igwo	thcte scd Sides	pen eile aBEAUTIFUL L'IEiVZL 	49ternation met me; yet some face that she had seen in that Wrong had affected her thus. Many gentlemen left their places and approached the platform to oiler assistance; over heir heads I gazed at two figures hurrying in the opposite direction to the entrance door; gentlemen in loose cloaks; but, what of that? My heart quaked, and-at what?	All this took but a moniont before any one could raise In y sister, Cecil Beaumont had crouched over her and lifted her in his slight, strong arms, with such a visible air of the right to do so, that every one stood back and allowed him a lee passage to the stage door, while I remained without the power to move, gazing after him at Isolina's pale face and dosed eyes.	Sonic words broke on my benumbed senses. Mr. Li a 1inrst was leading rue to a conch behind the piano.	" Compose yourself, mr dear Miss Ivanilla-do not look so terrified. Your sister will soon recover- she oily fainted with excitement. I think you are going to ic nit, too."I roused myself from my stony, stillness.	No, I am not going' to faint; I would like to go to Isolina."lie bent his head to catch my words; the singers hadadroitly covered the accident by a full-voiced chorus and my words were lost in a sea of song.	1 tore nw hands from my friend and escaped by the door through which I had last seen my sister disappear. I was iii the cold outer corridor leading by private passages to the dress in-rooms and main entrance. Whither should I direct my steps? I darted into the room behind the stage, and came out as quickly, two or three bandsmen were there repairing their bugles or eornopiens. I found the eloakiugroom but it was also empty of those I sought. I wrung my hands and begun to wish nn' sweet sister had been gifted with the features of a Mongolian. I saw a flight of stairs leading into an upper hall, and I rushed up these as a last resource only to find myself in a wide, dark hail, evidently a school-room. Bat there was a door at my right hand 'which was locked, and at this I took my stand, knocking vigorously.No one replied, so y heart went into my mouth withblood-curdling fears, tt c1thy step became audibleiitr1FU'1 erich, "I cleniaiid, an entrance-1 kno¡begall JI]per, i 1dhrongh a descending sealflt plead i igind Weeping f0efl10110W candle flashing in his hand, and a gray, stern fa ifrIntli rue.	\Vlio are von, coming at this time of mght, waking pe wit of their rest? What do you want'I want my sisters 0, miser have I wasted the preciotimoments after all? Sir, I am looking for my sister, wh eligi ug at the concert."	Vliat 10 1 know about her then \'t hy come to ni hr for her? I have a wife in there, young woman, an have wakened her up. Go away--I have nothing to d	Ii the people who conic into this building-1 have on! n Ink- them out at night-if they would ever go!"sir, I beg your pardon-"All right-find your way down stairs again."	The door was snapped shut in my face; Wringingliiiids, I turned awu v,	[fell against Mr. Lindhurst in the lower corridor and upped nv further search.Where have you been, Miss ivanilla? Your lather wuuuous to see you before he wont home."Has my father gone home?""Yes, With Miss Meredith: they were anxious to be WiArks RielizL'-\il Where isshe I}juutfoith p issionatelv, 141 onMr. Lou mont en - 1	I rnnl, gently.	nee9lier in all tile buildinc,	your sister home," said mybest for her to go homeShe " was 'lot able to Sldie:t' sing again, so itMr. Beatimorito,		rePeal"'t-1 felt myself arow pale1('r Mr. Lin 	tIT		~s anxioll~ eves.	For iiier sa-ke I C0111-i t '('(1 1"N'self '"(1 e0licealed njv enjotions. VilenNhis		I deloan(jed,	did		lutes ago. y	.	rtage_nlaI,5 for our father left word withella)' and ho dii InC the 'loll"' I, that they had all gone& i' Your (it, tie, released	I should take-	BEA UTIFUL RIE2ZL	51	Just then the professor came in from the platform, his ounteiianee wearing an anxious expression. When lie saw ic it brightened.	Oh! I a in glad to see you here, Miss ltienzi. 1 was fraid you had both vanished, and niy program me would ustain a severe abridgement. Come-everybody is looking ,avn their list iinpatieiitlv for ' La ci dareni. "	1 saw that it would be selfish of me to go, so I consented o return to my place; but it was with a wear sigh that 1 neountored again the blazing lights and bri1liant toilets.	Our duet of '' La ci daremn Ia mans," in which Mr. Lindmist was Don Giovanni and I Zerlina, was a marvelous sueess; we were encored again and again, until I felt my silly read ring with triumph, and a spirited thrill ran to the ends I my fingers.	I stood with unfaltering mien once more alone with my al p. and swept the chords with a delicate touch as I sang	The Blind Girl's Song to 11cr harp," which moved the adies, in their jewels and satins, to weep, while the gentle-on dropped their opera-glasses and sat immovable.And then, in my last, where as Dinorah I warbled forth	0, Tender Shadow!" lost in the enjoyment of the moment, harmed with so good-natured an audience, exhilarated by heir looks of delight, I almost forgot the cares which had ceighed down my spirits so long.	It was almost twelve o'clock before the warder of the vbelle Hall locked the doors on the last of us. I was very rears', and lay back among the furs in Mr. Lindhurst's leigh, looking at the radiant moonlight which bathed each ilent roof with his blue-white tintings.	Overworked, Queen of Song?" laughed my escort, bendug down to look in my face.No: I am thinking of my success-I am proud of it."lIe smiled as he regarded me.	Am I vain to say so?" I asked. "I do not think my anitv has been fed. My master spent years in my tuition, sud I at niy best cannot do him credit. And then, to think that those who listened to us to-night-connoisseurs they certainly were-should be pleased with me! Yes, Iam proud!"11 So am 1." softly spoke my friend. Then lie sighed as lie spoke again: So our ' icarsals are over," lie said, pensively. " I	aO	UNlvE,sBEAUTIFUL RIENZLlab5 of being taught how t-	han III) longer the dc1 		Don Giovanni's wooinb I iiiliiii liv iii little Cier."	$	t those deep blue eyes sparklingmis niv deligni to be 		-lv sweet smile to the thoughtto call r		1ances. When I had sI		l1i"iItiiiedin the presence of such 111>11 a		as A vas unable to withstaid, I would lightly cliiti gni V 71)0(111 to hide my throbbing heart,		tI hat does that gla ice mean?" eaclainied Mr. Liii dIi arbt, meeting my aim ring smile with flush i eagerness.	I)ue my little queen retain her snbjlut icr iuuuc inorMY rjueenly reply was a laughing nod.jested he, 'that answer is more thou rovd-itis gull-like, Alexander affected the celestial nod of theiruilsI cannot conquer the world," I replied. gnvlv, "but IShoal] much rather conquer-"	My eyes finished theNIlteulce: 1 dlowed him to press my fingers; I defiantlyIn red him on. While thus I toyed with my aw-nking heart,a ccci sound awoke the sleeping silence of the vast city; adna	to twelve. It was mid-chit, as a solemn old bell in a church near was informingAs t}e last stroke died away, my smiling lips locked-they chilled into colorless marble, and my hart sank witha throe of deathly terror,I gasped, "something dreadful has hap-\\ iitwh'- excMimed any friend, grow-ma pale its liechild my mysterious agitation 	-	I: ulxiunsly 5npportd me and chafed in:,	butII you feel better now'?" asked my fricI	terror was n571 o- V 'A'-il,(" huzull- 1 was nil 1 -$ - 	1)111 cg to	Wliai liis caused tb i witn arxicty to be at home. frienI again chafing my ]Saierie paroxy ?" whispered my Yesl that is what any nr'ict lIi'oi*-riens Visitation '/y Jcau person would call such it wuiild account for it Lv Pre b,i0 paroxysm" and they	Uuhiety,	&'$1	I'		id	I3EA UTJFUL RIKVZI.	53I am not hysterical,'' I said, very quietly; ''but I amin xious about Isolina. Perhaps she is worse."	Mr. Lind hurst gave the driver a word, and in an instant we were dashing through the remaining streets which separated me from my ho tile. Five minutes had not elapsed before I was bidding my escort good-n:g1it at my father's door. I thought the servant who admitted me looked very much bewildered; lie held the door open after I had elitei'ed en i1 1 tim med round and asked him the reason. ''Oh, nothing, miss," he replied, solacing himself with a lastgl:rtice down to the gate before he clcsed himself in. I Proceeded ste:idilv to mv sister's dressing-room. It was empty. \Velt, it was late and she had been ill, of course she was in be 1.	Sophie came out of my room, amid looked at me with a surprised face, but said nothing while she removed my wrappings.	'' Well, are you not going to speak?" I demanded, irritably. '' Is Miss llienzi well or ill; is she in bed"-She dropped my muff and kept gazing at	I made animpatient gesture, my fears growing elatnoromis.	aLa. mu iss! isn't 1\1 iss Isolina with you""I hastily looked behind, itud at each side. o, truly. MissIsolina was not with me! My face whitened.What are you saving, Sophie? My sister came home anhour ago with 111V fattier, did she not?"Law k alive, miss!" was all the response.	Fool !" I raved; 'have you nothing but gaping wonder for me? Where is she? Are you sure she is not down stairs with papa, or in Miss Merediti's room with her?"	Indeed, Miss lva, she's not in the house. White, he's waiting at the door to let her in; her and you, miss, together."	And my father-good Heaven! has my father lost sight of her, too? Sophie, you will cease to gaze at me so! Am 1 an apparition? Who told you she was coming home with inc	"The master, Miss Ivanilhit, He said Miss Isohirta had been sick and gone out to come home, but the air revived her, and she went back to the conceit."\ho told him that? It was false!" 11 cried, becomingdistracted with consternation.		'		bflTJJ'UL TtJEiZL¥	i withOUt ceremOuy, andI rn to Ms.s Mere irlis root"1	ii 111-it she had nit retired.	ua" l burst, forth.	'I	What ('all have happened	a 	and wheti I arrive, It)tsite Wls home two )10111,q c r absent still! , here CtfllEItile iP(it.l with a ringing\\berc call she bet repeated repea ei	Don't volt know. jjjdwraVe]Y. '' tell me if , the love of Heaven!" is. Where id you see herIt is rather bard to ask me that question," che returned,It another taunting laugh; ''but I will lu~f 	III tilein v betrothed."' I said, swallowing my feelings,	flow uam I to explain. Such treachery is hevoticl my power to explain. You, as well as I, saw him eari'y her aviv ill his arms: .nd have you not seen her since?" Xot I, my dear Miss Ivanilla; nor will you for a while, I fancy. Do not sit up to-night., I beg. They have given us all the P ip eloped !"Impossible!" I exclaimed, indignantly. "My sisterdid not love. him. She would never elope with Cecil Beau-11101	So she informed von and me, my clear," said Miss Meredith, bitterly; "hut you see we have been duped. The!rvtitioti worked very well, and she has got hint safe!', Meredith, I command you to cease these asper-oil tiv cieter's integrity," I exelaine 	" Von do notk ow a title Of what site has su ffem'ed for Volt--ill, "rt e.Ru I forbear to quarrel. You will not reliev my anxietyI a ill relieve YOU of my preseitee"	-if terbme id clutched me Passionately; her roke, out,luvdid	-i:ired hi	ldssd the %,)Il not tell me how completely she hitid in--to	it is her faIIL or ilot shaking me.	" Whether von	von her sister, as thy oie 	from me! Noo. IIt'll that, Twill never	ibage for her when she comes	uuth it on she has in al e Iliemb for tile wrong and the\\ tb all bet' beauty t tale ar.	Let her beware.when her beauty will be only a 	the time may come	1enio	nd	talentsBEAUTIFUL 1d'FSZ1- 	55turned to her own destruction. Then, perhaps, she'll beorrv for the trick she played me!"	lie ceased with set teeth, and pushed me from the door; a furious, implacable foe, no more a gentle girl.	I went away without a word. 1 was stunned; blow after1	\V Was descending 011 iIle; iii	sick, [iii through the silent house as I should have done at¥ ii . to my fattier.lie was pacing up and down, a frown on his face such asI had never seen there before.Have you come home alone, then?" he asked, turningon inc. " White says your sister was not with von.'	I flung myself into his arms. The last straw broke the camels back. The terror and grief which had so long been accumulating burst forth at last in a torrent of tears.	Mv father soothed and caressed nie; Ins brief paternal sternness vanished before my distress; he implored me to explain what was grieving me.Tell tue how it came that you lost sight of Isohna."I sobbed after a while:	14 I have not seen her since she was carried out of the hail insensible."W hat? Has she disappeared?"	'' Father, did you trust her with that madman, Beam n1ont?"	I can tell you nothing about her, my child, except that I hastened out of the hail as soon as she gave way; I would have got round to the dressing-room sooner, where I imagined young Beaumont had taken her. but Miss Meredith, who had been acting like a possessed creature before. that, and had hissed in a most derisive an clii nseem ly manner when the accident happened, delayed me by going into something that looked very like a eonvoision lit. By the time I got her dragged out with me and wrapped up, a manager cattle to me and said that Beau mont had just drivc-n off with your sister-if I hastened, I could overtake them, and put her in my sleigh, as Beaumont's was uncovered. I hurried Miss Meredith in and dashed off, but did not overtake them. When I came to our gate out there, a boy, who was waiting on the sidewalk, said he had been tald to stand there and inform me that Miss Riensi, feeling quite revived, had decided to go back to the hall and fulfill	her pad. I kCd hill, who Vpoke	71man who was 'I ri vine a l1al¥ in an olwllAnd that is ] J	g sea him a ji snot fr t £ ji	very ox trao rd in any vieihematter, which i	b 	miled in Soieiy-siuely}1a	not lone anything clandevtnie exact case, as it stood between	J told ins fuhu the 'ii i		ti-tj to Iler friend. Tile crisis had liot	ich1ss is to foce ti e sib of In i ti ingu to], s fioniI was resolved to keep iii sisters secret history lockedv or host in iii cii she released my tongue.Au'] In von lease me to in [en that lie has forcibly taken a ira y ?" ejaculated my fist h or, sttn'ti ng tip ' By II .iven his isan outrage that I will take good care to Where's the young man's address? You don't know? ltire There! don5t erg, little one-go to bed and sleep. tie as white as a ghiost. I'll see to this bnsiness-never fear!' - lie went with me op the long, desolate stains, kissed it voids' in my own little bedroom, and went awa'. I wtiti:htng him from the window in the shining nioonlipl vs 'r tint a ith a servant by his side walk rapidly clown ii.vi Foci.A .1 that was a night! I watched by the window nntil my,heavy eyes grew horning and blind. I flitted to and fro in	a s echoing room n ntil my watch ticked me into a frenzy.	to I dIlia's door, and, grown hoot ble by misery, i m -ii	adow me to be with her, hot the girl's moodton (Or tian mine, and she stoutly nefnsed.eo tug, I ret time? to	v room II"'	a ts' If	a toy	LEA UTIFUJA RJENZL	57CHAPTER VII.THERE IS NO GRIEF LIKE THE GRIEF THAT DOES NOTSPEAK.He is dead and gone, lady,He is dead and gone;At his head a grass green turf,At his heels a StoDe. "- -HAMLET."Break, thou deep vase of chilling tears,That grief hath shaken into frost.' '-TENNYsoN.	A presence was with me in my fathomless slumber; it brought inc up from the circles of oblivion, until a sense of returning existence began to enter my dormant brain. Slowly though, for my wear' bead seemed clasped by bands of iron; but at last the Presence betiding over me became a reality; I opened my eyes with a confused terror.	Was that my father's face? It was gray and distorted to my unsteady vision-surely ten years had passed since I fell asleep.	11 Father!" I cried, springing up all at once; "what have you come to tell me?"	11 Poor little girl," whispered he, compassionately, '' I scarcely liked to waken you, you were sleeping so soundly. Oh, my (laughter!"	He took me in his arms, and suddenly a great deep sob rent his frame. I said nothing, but I clung to him and waited.	11 Something dreadful has happened," he gasped, after a while; ''Cecil Beaumont was found-was found dead last night at twelve o'clock beneath a bridge, tea miles on the-road!-"Dual, father!"	And they mv-" here he broke down and wept such tears as would kill a woman-tears that came with throes of agony and strong wrenches of the laboring chest while he rocked with me to and fro; 'they say there has been foul play-that Isolina-my girl that could not harm a living thing-oh, my God! I cannot believe it!"He was weipti)-I could not.	Where soc ' I i5kd. nicCl1R,d :	c n, in	She (alit be found, this in c eeipe1.	I need	ho fuiid the body		lieljdess"the!-t look for- her, 1%-a!~' lie sal , J)olliccn of just ice are after her-if she is alive, I ....ins. father''v w,i0ilkjngabontitiitfile 1EXClmfhlge. lie groaned.ohere and ti crc and everywhere, all isigh t long, trytrace them young Lindhurst was with me until five. Jr was lie who cattle to me an hour ago andI tile merchants had a queer story among t I ens on	1	i:Uige: some parties coming in from reelv s Mills where		c accident occurred, brought the news. The voting man'scii her has applied 10 have her arrested; a band of detec-In (5 went out this uuloiniug to see Mrs. Beaumont and hearthe jiurticuulars. Strange, isn't it. that the body was foundnot half a mile from Mrs Besninont's honse? 'What couldyour sister want there."	Father, what are you going to do r" I whispered, In leeslv,	I will try to find my poor girl; I shall not leave her to ii nied sown by the law. Oh, my child! my pride! I a sappy when my eyes fell on lien-never fd her loved child as I loved that girl, Oh, my darling, conic back to0 r poor old father-don't be afraid of hin 1"I eh ." I said, reverently kissing his hand, "comfort	do thought of her innocence, This nnsforN N Si iv Iusayv, but Heve will bring it all right again,onna was quite guiltless of aiy wron lions be-to	( oinfo \oilrseif dear futlserlileIwas epwakin Ihad' been debating with my-hct of me eiter' in	¡1'g silence longer on	olvent of (dicil	mo ements ever since(ire was a chance	Beaulliolit, and of thj	I reasoned that as longlight upon the sul-isequcut 	confidence throwing1, 1 to us, it was my duty to en s, Which might restore1I)V father.	COI1IO-iHulcat what I knew toIiv:irdl Praying, therefore that	tioy	w	"happhlessofthisllijs----".		- 't Wnliltl '		I	re-BEAUTIFUL EIEXZI. 	59stored, I poured into my father's ears the strange events which for some time had caused me so much anxiety.	TIe listened with fixed attention, and unutterable surprise, then rose in agitation and pain.	I cannot understand one move in this extraordinary game," he cried, "but this I am convinced of-your sister has become the victim of some infernal eouspiraoy!"	I scarcely took in his words; he went away more ghastly pale than before, and trod heavily clown stairs to his room, and left me alone again.	My watch had run down, so I could not tell the time; but I knew the clay must be far advanced, and I changed my dress, and flitted to Miss Meredith's chamber-door with a passing wonder why I had not been visited by any of the servants yet. At my first tap the door was opened, and I beheld Miss Meredith in traveling costume, her hat on the dressing-table, and a tray, containing time remains of her breakfast, on a stand before the cheerfully blazing fire.	11 Cone in, Miss Rieazi," she said, politely; ' I am gind to find you well enough. to rise. I have been awaiting you some time."	She placed a chair for me, upon which I thankfully sat down, for a sort of vertigo had seized me while crossing the corridor, and I was quite dizzy.	You see," she continued, sitting down and taking her coffee-cup in her hand; " I aims on the eve of returning home. My visit to New York has been shorter than I ciiticipated, but I shall remember it wish the deepest constancy. I am glad to have this opportunity of thanking you, Miss Ivauilla Iiienzi, for your kindness, arid bidding, you farewell."	You have not heard," I returned, in a husky, uicitam voice, ''of the terrible calamity that has happent. When you know the extent of our trouble, you will feel t this stricken family, and accept my sympathy in your grief."	I have heard everything," said the young lady, list Hg down her empty cup. "Your housemaid told tile tvh:t half the city knows by this ti rae-that Cecil Beau mont's dead body had been found dashed to pieces at the bottom of a stream! I ant sorry for you, Mim ltienzi-I ant sorry that your sister turns out to be a mnnlei'ess / It is even worse than if site had lured him from Erie for lovc_-J'iithere he grew white n:1 I'bitt	only lured hiur	intentions, Miss Rienzi; sIt, k'ep ou in ignolaur OL111 intend to have your sister arw	rankl tfl t'Oil hat	ii be found and brough¥	- 	dollar T)pays for A.rttce, if iirs irst		our intentions into execu.	rte in putting'to	)ouded	" Airs. Beaumont, his motiror. ha¥ }sfore von. There is a warrant against her already.-And is the very solace of rereuge to be en ci tile.d the oirj. rdiiroL tnriouslv. Her hard crneIt rail itoin in v frozen sth per; I cvi n studied I her i r her vi ad ic-11(011, and wondered that pry first impressions of heric. I an so false,I Intro nothing against you, Miss Rienzi, ' she said,glancing at mc, a-' she rose to look out of the wiiidot':but von tunA acknowledge that I have been basely treatedby roii' sister: and I have a perfect right to join in !lie eftoit to avenge nix deed hover. There-_I see the (!nn is Waiting to take ]ne to the station, Good-by, Miss Rienzi; 1 am tnt ly sorry for you_I don't think you could help it."Sire reached out her cold hand to nrc, and I ]ooln Ithor on fec Ii ng ccnntenanee wistfully. I felt that it was notrun to let her go thus; yet I had Qjll~ygejl(;v - 01' to Oppose anvOling. 1`0 StrOllo-th. to incet the]" you ~Vijl not Y6,a%vaY, Inv friend ~11 I appe:,led. 8ee low desolate I an,~. Stay an'd Comfort me.	She may be 1. too, dear one; and if sire is, you would Irever for ive your hard feelings."I e tore hr hand away from me, and well t downStarr where her boxes appeared to have preceded her, andI've mifluts [ Irearif tire entrance door clintspiritlessy to the dressing_1.o011 and sat down be-1n hand ,	GbS 	there with ilseongOh, my dear nrj " cried }ioulllI rot have got up_r10 1 fol)tstool, and put 111) 1 feet	U5ua timid girl. 'You"'bat is the tiure Sophe	You look dreadful."	About Lii dye Mics hyou h.'ui't go dowir to		at Ill run or a bit of breakfast.pa	nut ironiC, ann Iii great table, all 	Your		es,' I assented- '		"P nice an			UlrpQce T our	BEA UTTFUL RIENZI.	61	Without preface or warning the girl flung herself on her nees beside me, and buried her face in her apron.	"I don't believe it," she sobbed violently. "I don't bejove a word against dear, sweet Miss Isolina. Oh, Miss [va, darling, don't look so terribly quiet -hasn't you cried xiiy ?"	' No," I sighed, "tears are denied to me; my heart is o stupefied yet. But I, too, know that my sister has done no wrong, and I thank you for your trust, my girl."	Sophie went out of the room with loud sobs, and I sat quietly looking into the fire and waiting for her return with my breakfast. But when it came, although I assured myself it was my duty to eat, I could not. My thirst was burning, and lay throat seemed to crack whenever I attempted to speak, yet I could not force down Sophie's cup of tea, though fragrant as art could render it. I could not endure the girl's anxious eyes, so I left the tray and went down into the still drawing-room.	I restlessly wandered around the luxurious apartment; I xead poetry and hummed an air which Isoliua had often -sung to me in the twilight hours. As the day wore to its close I grew wild with terror at my calmness and strove by every art to melt the fount of sorrow. Presently the door opened and Soplue came in through the gloom.	"Miss Iva, where are yen F" she whispered ; the master ms come home and wants you downstairs to eat something. [ic's here waiting, miss."	I went out to the lighted hall and slipped my hot hand ato his.	14 Papa," I said, gently; " you have left me a long time done. Did von hear of her?"	He did not answer but to draw my hand within his arm with a spasmodic grip ; then he made rue go down to the dining-room where dinner was laid as usual, only that my s'istor's chair was set to the wall, and her place empty. My father did not place me at the table ; lie put my chillea form into a great easy-chair beside the flue, and brought a glass of wine to me, which I drank obediently ; then lie made me eat, which I did with difficulty, for the ball in my throat almost choked me but I was eager to give no trouble, so I managed it. After eating a "brief meal himself, which I pityiugl5r remarked was almost as small as mine, he left the table and took me up stairs again, The-twaSt	BEA pyiFLi' R]±(flw%ngrOOI0 was flow brightlY lit, the'	;e at by tios merry,	ekhng fire, and fUll l0	)jaziiig tire on.seating bead upon his breabt, and l(issed sne WON'-11,.	have had a sad day o I rear, poor litti if,tie said, " and tudeed lam a liitie ad aid for a on-ym r aike a 1:1CC.	¥ 1 ion r\ itCh, fathe1_l00 We'' Please tell n c a oii ha' e Ut doing. You Irnow while you hay u bce kork iog I have been waiting.'	I have very little to reward	onr Waiting with." hsighed : '1115 work has been to little purpose. Vow' sisis 5tilI i,diaorered and all dews seem lost. 1 have beto Creel VP Mills, anlI paw tile-tile body at Mrs. Beaumoflhouse there was an inquest		and a verdict wasturned of ' ealll by violeilt mealls.' 1 have been ablemake nothing. of that trallge story yell told me of yoistrr vi'itilg sotlme persoli at night, and writillg to unknopeople. It Maven e\.er restores her to us we may hearCxl) anIlliOli from her own nloUtll : but my belief is that aembroiled in sonic wretched plot.""And ivliat more ?" I cried, feverishly ; " did younothing more? Is that 013 ou have to tell"	lull nothing aior&, my poor darling, except to write,your ulotlier. Keep up courage until she comes; you'llao lonely when there are two of you."I raised my head and looked at him, and trembled fromlI ad to foot. I felt it coming the long delayed storm 01gnef. I nought of my mother's anguish wllen that mes-sage Am old reach her: it seemed s if the fiat had goneforth with that message ; that our grief was to he real: myeve fell upon the pile of hooks and music, and pretty orna-ijielit which her hands had worked, and which were to be1alt 1i.\ tV tOO'.	lt ,uue to me in a blhiding flash, that my darling would come no more to me that she was lost and ilead to me, and dead to IIIV family forever.A wild dirieL broke from rue, I clasped my hands 011toy heart, and the pent tears poured forth ill a t rretllmy frame was racked and shaken with the teull ol. griel and horror tihlod my heart, and,At last my sorrow had begun, seemed to find no honndBEAUTIFUL RIENZL 	63CHAPTER VIII."I LOCK THE CASKET WI-lINT HELD THE GEM.11 Courage, poor heart of stone! I will not ask thee why Thou eanet not understand That thou art left forever alone."-TENuvsoN.	The next day I, by my father's directions, searched hei hamber for any possible clew of her late movements.	Carefully, though with ceaseless tears, I examined every )aper which came in my way, and found nothing which ould have the slightest bearing on the mysterious question.	few penciled sketches of woodland scenery were wrapped n silver paper, and hidden deep down in a drawer; a rithered rose, once white, now sore and crumbling intohintlv incensed dust, was clasped within a gold-enameledusket, in the same drawer, but what of these?	Her little rosewood desk was locked, with the key lying in top, and with a feeling of shrinking reluctance, I opened t. There were many letters, which I glanced at and re)laced. Most of them had been written by my own hand )efore I joined my unknown sister; a good many were the ieouharly artless and innocent effusions of Miss Meredithhere were several from Miss Belle Cranstown relating to )enevolent projects in which she and my sister had been uterested; finally there were several proposals of marriage rom different gentlemen, some of whom I had already ieard of, others with whose names I was unacquainted.	I wrote their names down on a slip of paper and resolved o ask my father about them.	Just as I was closing the desk I noticed a small gold mob, about the size of a pin's bead, in one of the eompartnents. I applied myself to ith examination, and presently uoeeeded in opening a secret drawer in which I found the nissing double-ring. I held it in the palm of my hand, movng and twisting it until the slender hoop which lined it beawe detached. It was only a gold ring without chasing or irnament, but this very circumstance raised a curious train f speculations in my mind, which engrossed me for several	BE. I UTfPt64	lv et erred hi the inside ofminutes until I sudden		¥, July 16th, 1862" IInirilet the graven initialsI found sonIc accurate feotliold la, t? Who and vi it w	I. .1.," cud where had on' sister been on the sixtei thJuly. last sill	\\ ore these the initials of the erthe'douhle riug	Long I stood revolting those slight proofs of semi oar 'paled events O liii mind; vague speculation was tie on l result. I ri h I the doable-ri rig in its secret dri,ir c a lo, ti the de-k. tIc -i dumb reminders of her overthrew my onforo	J flung mvelf oil the floor and wept until mvery beioir seeuied wept awaythin I rose, dccii down the blinds, closed the curtainsiii'keii the door, arid came away.If( ur'eforrhr no toot should cross the threshold, no emake r'omnrron jrr'opert of thi deserted chamber, until (LA e that the shadow passed away from us, and toy lost ci c lame home.	I related with minute care all that 1 had found to ny father. and lie listened attentively.The case amounts to this/The said, when I had iii-relied	l"alioa received a ring on the sixteenth of last July friar -arn person whose initials are 'I. J.'-which she has iv err Pace on her hand, until, as you believe, the night on which she went out in the rain--storm secretly. We ,,III a ike very little of this, Ira, except that ilrohnbly lieewe 6 coma attachment last summer with a persoll ti I -I Il	lie in ra I i ii,, 'cried, and at the time she removed the r1 liZ. that it e 1A ritust have ended I cannot see that either that ("fell nitanee or her strange ,])Sen.(, from the house that storniy night are connected in any N my with her present rhna1rp.ar noce, None of the names wlnh you have writtenWonas' aj)j,jij'!:jlIts for 110" haild cojnjjjenec~1vith tile illitials.'-wid 1 knew of them all.I do not think we canunravel the ins tery_1ierf1	my dear, we on ght not totry until your poor' sister is restored to us. I have 'Or	feetfar In. all' I 5110w you have the seine, in my kind, geedli'riiua's urotes,'But. father, her mvsl erions gri OfrPhnt if she had no-m ie, In were wihri C her away 10 deetroy here"I did think at first of secret censieracias but that is---'BEAUTIFUL RJEEZI	rdly likely. We are in America, not in lawless Itu ,plied my father, with a faint smile.11 This war--what if some parties, for political purpre her from the bosom of her family, in order-" -	"Isolina occupied too quiet a position, my dear. W rould ever dream of forcing away a private gentleman aughter as a spy or anything else? Your surmises ar rild, my child."	This was but the beginning of many such conversationTow often we sat together detailing the simple history e. he lost girl, and trying vainly to dip beneath the transarent scanning of the past for deeper meaning!Time slowly stretched between us and that tragic night.	The dreadful death of young Beaumont gradually ceased ut of men's months; the interest connected with it passed way, and the unhappy fugitive was forgotten. Even he bereaved lady, Mrs. Beaumont, had ceased her efforts o apprehend her, and had left the country.	Sad news came from Venice, which deepened the gloom in- lonely hearts. My mother had been so dangerously ml hat the physicians had forbidden the disastrous letter to 1 howed her, until she was strong enough to bear it. Slmas now convalescent, but could not at present be bit, cued with any anxiety. The time of her return was po oned for an indefinite period.There was one more sorrow which cast its shadow o N,(,Miss Meredith, as soon as Mrs. Beaumont had witi [rawn her detectives from the search for the presumed mm [cress, had employed another staff, whose zeal and cnere vere quickened by many a secret gift and bribes to a la): mount.	The cruelty, the heartlessness, and the injustice of ti ourse was very hard to bear, but we bore it silently.	I had one friend whom Heaven sent me in my de fflietion, who came with generous sympathy, while oth ;azed from afar upon our sorrow; who identified hims rith its when such connection shed no luster on his naumv rho was kind-hearted and true in our darkest days mumiliation, and this faithful friend was Ernest Lindhiir	Ah! noble spirit that kept my sick heart from death, I :iss thy hands in love and gratitude!And so the bat-like wings of time heavily flapped over no.BRA UJIFLA !17, 1.bore in the murky shadows	onward, and month	away into the past	-leave these dim shades of Cimmerlan darkness ii-lie,	eth of the dead chills me-I come	to the second a¥	Secret Vendetta," which was s!'0 I )v 	handCHAPTER IX.JO3IrORT OTHERS, AND GOD (DY! oltT ME,"My life has crept so long on a broken wingThro' cells of madness, haunts of honor so I fear,That I come to be grateful at last for a lAth' thioc VTENNYSON.Four mouths passed away; my first remembered experiour of frost and snow; also, my probation of great sorrow On the fifth of April, I, by the Providence of Heaven,went to visit a district in Jersey City, which had been letmy charge by Miss Belle Cranstown, then absent tosome weeks in the country. I may here explain that a sclots' of young ladies had been formed for the purpose	hiring the families of the soldiers who had been disable in the war, and supplying their wants as fur as means woult permit.Miss Cranstown having been called away by the sieknes'of an au tit or cousin-I cannot remember which-I supplied her place, and as my own district required my presxe only tsyo clays in the week, I went over on WednesdaV the jersey City ferry, and found niv way up Montgomyr	street to an oboxcro lane, where, cldse beside a large reErIc }exildiug. with grated windows-as my inezooratulumk informed me-I found the address of my filet p:itittiLIt was a tall, wooden tenemeut_house, with Lrawliug Loon' en every floor, and gradually deepening poverty tixone eliruhed heavenward' but I Vas not afraid tthe groups of rough-looking men, who were grinl]v ell-	lug the cousleruatiou of their employer at their stri&e for yher wages, and the gnawing of thdir own stomachs, as¥y leaned against the greasy walls, with their hairy aMV'land their feet unshod 	-'FIle\ learued to look for the "Soldiers' Friends" with tat-vol hats raised, and rough lax Pc	¥	+ 'hoar the	ear fir tixe Ole	BEA UTIFLIL BIEHZL	07	I ascended four flights of narrow wooden stairs and knocked at a door on the right hand. A young woman of very girlish aspect opened the door, whose sad face broke into a smile of joy when her eyes lit upon my badge.	Come in-come in, miss," she said, eagerly; ''I'm sure I'm so glad to see you. He'll be at rest now."	She placed a chair for me, and bent over a high bed in a erner, where a young man lay with his eyes closed.Charlie! Charlie!"I'm not, sleeping, Lnee, my girl," said a quiet voiee.	Cheer up, then; bore's a Soldiers' Friend come to You."	The man raised himself slowly and looked at rue. He h a thin, cadaverous face, which would have been delicat! bleached if he were a gentleman, but was brown with witers winds and exposure, for lie was only a dying soldier. What strength he had-and it was very little now-seemed to flood into his eyes at sight of me; they were hollow and dim with sickness, but the added hope and joy made the face a brave and pleasant one, despite the coming conqueror.	"I-Tow kind of you! I was afraid 1 would have to go without seeing any of you; did No. 10 send you to me, miss, just in the nick of time as I was praying for ye?"	No. 10 has had to go away to the countr, but she sent one in her place; and as of course she knew' you wouldn't care as much for a stranger as for her whom you learned to trust, she gave me a recommendation, which I will give you just as it came from her mouth. ' Tell Charlie Harrison that I send you in preference to twenty-seven ladies whom I might ask, because you know how to feel compassion.' There! will that do for a character?"	"Plenty-plenty for me," he responded, softly. His eyes looked wistfully at me as if to draw me nearer; ho lii ted Ins head to look at the other empty chair beside him, and I new saw that the poor fellow was utterly helpless, having lost both his arms. It was a log, with a soul in it.	I obeyed his unspoken wish, and seated myself close by his pillow, while tears of sympathy obscured for a moment his face.	''Now, ain't it kind in heaven to send such deliverers to a poor chap like rue, whose days of working are gone forever," he looked at himself apologeticallv, '' and who can only live and eat, and spend money? I often think nowN	JiJiii t 71/ RI I. R/L2	- been as well for that jioti I/lu a: rI thurthat 0 ititlil line		I jtoil Hospitals instead of ni,ikni	if I had liet in the \ ni g here to fall into a decline andbelieve to l end, and	11ffs and take the roof dl iivi	ui Charlie!" cried the poor ao'iii.R creature. 5tt I OilI¥i,;~ pillow and bnrving her taco in his neck. With a hind. ig sib; "oh, don't talk so-don't leave me, my on i	I lit Ii! hush, wife dear! we've been very kappa in I hi, 1 1 a tome, even though t was you that worked, and nil¥ nit was th lazy grub in the leaf. Ill be happier when Fly) cannosioned to join the Blessed Army. Iney love, that-1ient iii last furlough here with you. Hnsh, how, see, thehi lv. Heaven bless her, is distressed; and we are wasting lieI itie. Ilon, now, my girl, while I speak to her."fien I could get back DIV COMPOSUre, WhiCli ill h-ITH	`i , 11 iCh ill f I IT t 11 ii as 5onieirliat shaken, I put the mone) a hn'h I had brooglit in the savings-batik I found on the mantel-piece, and drew II lily gloves., as I asked if he would like any letters written.	I ii as not mistaken; the wife we]it back to the one window nih to her slipper-binding; the sick man beckoned me tc bend closer, that lie snglit whisper to am."It's about her, Lucy, that I'm so anxions," he sail:	who'll take care of her when I'm done for. Heaven knows Sit's been used to comforts end kindness all her life, and how shell manage to battle all alone I caiCt a-hear to think nit t. She has a brother-or had--hut tliongli I've never aiil o to her, I'm afraid poor Len Itosecraft 'tkiioi'ked TinWe've not heard from hum since last year-he- a soldier Of the Potomac, miss-when he wrote Csshieti Loce got about the middle of Xovenila-r that as slightly wounded, not lapped like me-only laitiud and as he wasn't -110 nse till he	was hi't icr lie illeme of absence and was eons inn to the New Yorkv he to, Isib miiMd near us; and lie hi ad a good hit ofiier 	as tie was going to share with Ijuc, (she's hi 15wrote tit;'	id mighty kind lie was to lien); well	I, !i1isQ, liy nevei n he here by tile last of the month,/ maybe lie ehannei	e never seen hill, vet! She thinksa lii cot svell ho	mind, anti staid' to be en handi rd, and why would believe it.	Len was a man of	at he write again if so? Now,BEAUTIFUL RIENZI.miss, I want to tell you my, ideas of this here business; bei 1 lown, miss, please-do you remember an awful railway ae3ideat that smashed the ears on the 29th of _November?"	1 shook my head, while a cold chill ran through me at mention of that fateful day to me and mine.	Well there was, miss, Dot far from the city; and I emit help hoping poor Leander wasn't on that train, a-coming home wounded and helpless to his sister, to be killed at the last. I haven't said nothing about that to Lucy, of course; I wouldn't; she's got enough to drag her down, poor girl; but it worrits me. 1 want you to get Len Roseeraft hunted up when Yin taken off; for that girl's not in a state to he left without kith or kin in the world, and him and me was dl she had. I'll tell you all I can about him, to guide you.'	Here he entered into the description of the man's age, appearance, trade before he enlisted, and other details, all of which I carefully wrote down in my writing-ease, to be laid before the society. Then lie designated a small box on the mantel-piece, which I placed before him.	Look over the things in it," lie said, ''and you'll find the letter; it's addressed to Mrs. C. harrison, and his photograph is in the bottom of the box; a tall chap-yes, that's him, just as lie looked, eleven months ago, standing up as Lucy's groomsman. Now, clear miss, if you'll take them two things away with you, and try to find Len, I'll di. easierit's hard to have that poor little girl of mine all alone in the world, just when she should be looked after-oh, poor Luee"	He turned his head away, and subdued the large tears before he proceeded further.	"She never had much hard work to do; she lived with her brother on his snug little farm a little out of Newark, and when I married her, it just turned out that I stole her away from comfort to sit down to starvation, for I was drafted off to the war, and three months after Len was drafted too, and the little farm was rented out, for Luec wouldn't go back to it alone. But as I was telling you, he was mighty fond of Luoe, so he sold the bit of land, awl it was half of the money lie was bringing home to her,whiel would have been something for my poor mite, when sickness came. It's never conic to hand, howsomever, and good, kind Leander is lost."111"C7, R1RNZ¥ " id as soothingly as IN. r for her, wiis \'ohi	eii no v;t	after the avidows, and see cOocould; "tile Fneuds' look loos a	will personally look af teai lie jwusion comes to the!n.brother can ho found, and if we arefl5;!scftfluifinduag 1dm, our society will provide feadill to her wantsTile poor fellow Thanked me with his swimming eyes.	ICs o bid gone from mi' mini aen, not worry any more. Madam"-he dropped his 'voice to a wbnsper-'-" there's enough money in that savings bank to bury me: it has been kindly given from time to time by the Soldiers' Friends."	" I)oji*t save that-it was for food and medicine," I replied, ''and don't trouble about the other; it will all be at tended to."Heaven bless your tender face, miss," was the grateful,rep] have nothing loft to wish for. And will you bepleased to give Friend No. 10 my very best respects and grateful thinks for her great kindness to me and my wife ever since she found, us out-if she don't come herself in 0 nio	I pronised, and the wasted face sank back with a sstis fbi e';pressiou. Then I read some holy words of peace to him, nil took clown the illuminated text which Miss Cranstown had hung on the foot of his bed, replacing it by a new one: and after that I was ready to go.	ili'laiu, will you let inc kiss your hand?" said the v'eiug soldier; ''I haven't a grip left."	I bent over hum with tear-bedewed eves, and gave the poor boon. Then I went ever to the winow to give a few words of comfort to the wife. Poor young creature, slow le.srs is c-ui dropping one by one on her hands, as they deftly flew over the dainty satin slipper.Lucy expressed her gratitude and thanks for the thudsaid the (ililiors Friends had supplied, but I no longer	iv her flying fingers, or listened with undivided attention.I4ooki u" down through what viea' tlus fan .1 '	the high narrow windows, to seemy s'yes enconmteel oicoyed from their, elevated positionlm"une, and far hash . roofs and chimney of gloomywail, HF IF H , 'saIled court, where women were - -- n 1. tre,s in dark blue gowns.	BRA UTInIL nI&YL	71	"What are the women doing?" I asked, in the first 5ause."Oh, poor things I they're having their afternoon air-"What are they?"	"They belong o the big house just next door, miss; it's s private house for mad people, I believe."For mad people?"	"Yes, miss-for them as can afford to pay for being mad ii. private. There's many a person down there in that ourt, miss, 1 dare say, whose friends think they're having their seasons in Paris or London, or some o' them fashiontHe places."Are these all mad people, Mrs. Harrison?"	"Yes, miss; the ones in serge is mad-the ones in brown is the matrons. Poor souls! 1 often pities them, boxed up there."	I bade Charlie Harrison and his wife good-by, and found myself going down the long, steep flights of stairs.The men, lounging in idle groups, saluted me as before;the women stopped their noisy chattering across entries, and dropped smiling courtesies. Miss Cranstown had other patients in this house, whose small rooms were reeking with soap and water and gay with sand, waiting her arrival, but I passed them unheeded and returned the expectant looks of their inmates with an unconscious stare.	Without, seemingly, the help of my physical powers, I found myself out upon the street and knocking at the door of the house with the grated windows.A man in livery soon appeared. -I wish to see the superintendent of this establishment."Which of them, ma'am?" hesitated the man.	I began to see that I must he cautions. I pondered an instant."Either," I answered; "I have no preference."	I was ushered into a comfortable apartment looking out upon the street, but close barred like the upper windows. I sat like a stone until the man came back.	"Dr. Oaks is engaged particularly, and Mr. Warrick out. Will you be pleased to write your business at that des and leave an address?"- " Impossible-I must be attended to immediately. 0;Iof tIre matrons will do; bring one to Jilt' '1 rititt bie o tine.(lure more I was alone, 50roelybreatlungmY conciousness all submerged in one thought.	in two minutes the man returned; there was an apologetu Smile on his face.	"I urn sorry to say that all the matrons are particularli engaged, too, madam. The fact i, it is against the vu Ic fot visitors to he received into this establishment; all husrues, however urgent. is conducted by letter. You had better iv rite a note. madam, and I will carry it to the doctor."	That wont do.'' I said, rising; the matrons are walk tug with the patients in the court'---he gazed at hOC ill sur l'- and I returned a look of cool determination-" se a it 11011 taking any of them from their dirties, I will, if yoit 1rl'ie. he eonidrreted to the court-yard where they are."As lie still hesitated, evidently taken by surprise, I ad,aneed rcsol rrtely with the half-formed intention of passingbill).My wild expression in this instance stood my friend. Evi-dently thinking I was insane iuysolf, lie started back, closedthe door, and rushed down a flight of stairs, probably tostttitruoti a keeper. I determined to risk all in one boldmove, so I softly reopened the door, watched the man's hand on the iron balustrade until it had disappeared, then lightly followed him, keeping my garments out of sight.l1 was unlocking a door at the end of a long corridor.rh the upper half grated; I lurked behind in 'angle untilhe let pas'ed through, then rushed after him. I was a see-l116 loll late, however_the door closed with	pri I l Ithillleft nrc inside, gazing through the bars.I saw what I came to see, however.A tile If women passed on the damp ue iho. trot tortfeet front Ire; round they came, some It nurl - ill stirtlfl0ve ron - two by two, with hands claspd before themiii litls apathy, The Women in brown kept tillililler circle, urarelring round with watchful eyes and stern )Well; and here and there a poor soul was sharply repninianlled, whose hands were Pinioned and whose eyes glared front side to side, as her lips babbled with ceaseless euerlrvBitt one anlonrg this Corunshke crew crept gently on, wttiitread lll\5rrett and hands Meekly folded together on Irer lireast an (l of them all her flee as u liP et rI Ii snidest,II	BEAUTIFUL RIESM 	73khe rough serge gown was wrapped about a form once fairylike with gnice and health: hut the coarse garment had dragged it into a stooping figure with a hollow chest; the brow a hair was shorn, yet shone in fiat rings like amber oir-elet' round the pallid brew; the long, slender neck was bend-in meekly and bearing its yoke without demur; the littlefeel flitted wearily over the cold flagstones. Nearer it came-this apparition.	She li'fted her eyes slowly--they filled with wonder and joy- then she gilded out of the ranks and fell upon the ground outside the bars.	And this woman in the blue serge gown. whose eornpnn iou waited for her with pointed finger and ghastly mirththis woman, with the faded face and hollow, stooping form -great Heaven she ices my sister!I	CHAPTER X.TAKING UP THE DETECTIVE BUSINESS."Help, master help! here's a fish hangs in the net, likeA poor man's right in the law; 'twill hardly come watt'	The man in livery, with a matron by his side, was hurrying toward us. I stretched iii) arms through the iron bars and seized my sister's hand. Conic what would, I would hold her now.	- Why-what business have you here, madam?" cried the ivoiian, angrily. '' See, now, what you've clone to this pafoot, and the rest will be as had. Come--get up, and rno e along; no tricks, nowS he put her firm hand on my sister's shoulder, and f u -eitdy dragged her out of my reach; not before I had felt asudden pressure Upon my palm from my sister's fingers.")h. be prudent," she breathed, almost inaudibly, Withr eyes on the ground.	I gazed eagerly after her, as she feebly rose, assisted the uatrou, and was allowed to sit on a wooden bench ru Ding along the high wall. I prayed Elect in my heart grant me patience and wisdom to know what to do.	''Strangers are never allowed here," said the matron, opeuiug the door with a key at her girdle. and dashing down an iron shutter over the bars. ''And, Hobeou, I eau tellaiiL11FUL RJEXZLut this you stupid fool!" she continued,74You, you II ht at a	'ii livers', who was now beside us,turning sharply to thema(iam, and state your business above."	totii& i ulent, malin,- no demonstration when my Jsohna was again hidden from iie, but followed silently the woman bark to the room I had left.Now, uia'ani." she said, grimly, ''as brief as you can, ifsi ulei.se flu v time is precious."¥ I wish to uuderstand what this establishment is, and what its rules are,' I responded, in as quiet a tone as I could S5 tile.	This is a strictly private house. Madam, for insane belies whose fuuihies wish to conceal the calamity. As for the rules, one of the most stringent is that no visitor is al lowed to see the patients, except by written order of the parties who placed them here. I'm sorry that you saw fij to break the rules, madam. I suppose you will not take al van mace of the knowledge you have picked up to go and make mischief."The half cajoling, half-threatening manner of the womanaroiNed my particular attention, I began to understand cthat thus establishment might not be always conducted on h1rii p1es of time strictest honesty, and tins knowledge made Ut iiunj]v cautious.	I emil take advantage of nothing, if my business is at. tended to iii a satisfactory manner," I said. ' I would ike to knew if a patient's family can come and reclaim her,	they think she has enjoyed the advantaes of thislntIe 'wig enough 		-the Every patient is sent here for a certain term," returned ifterwi ion, warily; "for five, ten, or even twenty years; inil i. i teen are returned to the persons who sent diem,v uheoe renewect, W e never change these rules."upon	iposumig ttheallelves		he person who sent them took the righttieni, What		suit uont consulting	the family of the pa-		all hate no resnonsil Tttroil , rising; ''all hnsin"I my in the matter" said the ma-,m tone by letter. We O sending or returning patientsCuitiotus soil no one ever never rep receive any per ....,	cemnmuniwho does not lirinc, "n orilo¡? ers an inmate of this house	here,'	r	mom the person who placed herBEAUTIFUL JIIEYZL 	75	I thought carefully for a moment if I could go safely furher, and decided to trust no longer to my own wisdom.	Thank you," I said, also rising, ''I am satisfied with rolli report. 1 shall communicate with Doctor Oaks tonorrow."	It was five o'clock when I reached home. '' Go," I said o \e son, the coachman, ''as fast as you can fly to my ather's office, and tell him to conic home." He sped withN vii).	I watched him run into the street, hail a passing	mU, and rattle off in a cloud of dust out of sight. I did nut	udole in my feelings, but sat still as a mouse, and calm as	stole, in my father's room, thinking over the course we hoa Ed pursue. Yet, by some means, all the servants seemed m know something had happened, and they whispered in the halls, and passed in and out on various pretenses, and gazed at me with eager, expectant glances.	Eu less than fifteen minutes the same cab drew up with a violent jerk at the gate, and my father hastily entered. At sight of him I felt my face growing hot with excitement; I was afraid my composure would give way, and so indeed it dud, for I could not restrain myself from rushing out to the door and throwing myself trembling with the joyful tidiogs into his arms.	What is it, dearest?" faltered my father. '' I was afraid it was bad news-now I am almost afraid the ncsvs is loo good. Come in here and tell me."	We re-entered my father's room and shut the door. I was cairn again, although my voi'e was tremulous.	" I saw some one whom we both love, papa-some one who has been-who has been lost."''Go on, Jvanilla."	I would like you to go with me and fetch her home."P" He ceased his rapid walk and faced me.Where is she?"	She is well, father, quite well; but some one has put her into a place for insane people in Jersey City."Is she mad?	Heavens, no! that at least I am sure of. Who ever put her there did so very wickedly. But I will tell you the whole story.'	I sat down, and in a few rapid words recun uted my adrentures. He listened anxiously.	aLA t ii, I L ,jLS L76	I am afraid we shill md it hard to get her out of their clutches, said my father. "It is clear to me from what you say that the whole concern is a swindle, where any one call be safely kept out of the way by pa) ing well. The surest way of recovering her, would be to pay Dr. Oaks a Vi it this evening in eonipaiiy with a couple of detectives.	But father,.' exclahned. turning pale. do you forget that a warl'a it is already issued for the murderer of young Bean non t? Are you willing to have our poor Isolina torn from ii' at the instant of our reunion, to undergo a 1dh tri;ilr	lentil] lit 1 gazing at each other for some minutes. I Cannot even fain tI v portray the repugnance and consternaion wit iii we hot 1 felt as we contemplated )III- poor Isoboa's let_itioti I perfectly stanch in our convictions of her ii noian i. at that moment we both regarded the arm of the law with an vtlung but friendly feelings.flansom her, father," I said, " take any peaceableionrse to make theta give her up quietly, and let its takeher privately home, until we can go safely somewhere forthe snionter with her. She is not strong enough for anytrouble jti t now,''	'' I will certainly keep her out of the reach of any raee;l]y Warrant." said my father, firmly, "until we have	)IN' own explanations, and gathered proofs of her inie ice. We will go this very hour for her, and try, by either I hreats or bribery to get her out of their hands, before they have time to remove her out of our reach."they will not look for any eommunictitiots before to	80	" I said, '' So we will take them unawares if we go to-night."	\Ve toilferred together some minutes longer, at the cud of which Ne],on was dipatelied for a enrrjae and 1 wentto g:uhie sonic needful articles of clothing for my sister wInk lily father filled his Pocket book with bills, in case of tiled, -It irasa few minutes to six when we left the house anddrove sa if ily down to th5 Jersey City ferry.	If all else fails,' eoutiuneil my father sadly, " I shall be ohhige to put the matter in the hands of the police e%eti at the risk of seeing the poor girl conveyed from the-e to the Prison"i 1 tot Iii] Itin-	BEAUTIFUL F TRXZL	71hi we are satisfied that neither money nor threats ha 0any effect. If, as you suspect, it is really a dishonest es tabinlniieut, I may manage to give them some trouble; you know I saw most of their patients, and if any of them	c been unlawfully concealed there like our Isolina, I caneahlv rouse the fear of the proprietors." 		-	While we conferred, we had crossed the ferry, and were new entering the narrow lane from Montgomery street, when after a few directions to Nelson, we alighted, and 1cm ing the carnage a few blocks off, threaded our way through the tortuous windings to the red brick building.	To ray father's peremptory knock, the same man in livery appeared. lie started hack in consternation when he beheld me, and gave a quick glance at my father, which seemed rather to deepen his discomfort. Seen in the indistinct light of dusk, with his tall figure, and dark, stern face, he might be very properly taken for a person of anthority-the Inspector of Police, at least; by a man, who had evidently often watched for such visitors before.I must see Doctor Oaks," said my father.	Away sped the man, with the alacrity of alarm, bay ing us on the outer door step. After a protracted absence, (luring which a close cal) drove tip and stationed itself at the door, he came back.	Come in," he said, trying to affect urbanity, and throwing wide the door; ''Dr. Oaks will be most happ\ ------" here he caught sight of the cab, and remained wildly staring. " Walk in here," he said, recovering himself, and eagerly ushering us into the room that I had before entered. We did so, but no sooner had lie withdrawn, than I followed him and stood at the entrance door within the shadow, listening with strained ears to his first words to the cabman. TIe ran out and now stood on the muddy pavement, telegraphing his arms excitedly.	Drive on-drive on!" he exclaimed, angrily, "what makes you draw up here when you see persons at the door? Get off', out of this, and don't conic back for half on hour, perhaps we sha'n't get the party moved to-night."	The cabman smote his lean horses into motion, and the servant slowly re-entered the hail where I waited.	'' Take care, Tlobson," I uttered, in a voice of warning, "that this house doesn't get itself into trouble. You had	tiLl! jilti' IJAL'78bet let ,eai Jail cab home, When it conies 11010 agani. io iiei&r	Mail ant. '' said the roan, who was in truth very inalarnit 1. 'it's not ray blame-I have got nothing to '1 ofobe) -arid I hope nobody'll take the trouble to get mi . :tto	¥ ' ion need hope nothing of the kind," I returned, ''unless von make yourself of service to us. See that no iii mateof rums house is removed without our knowledge, within thenext hour.'The roan promised with a profusion of assurances thatlie woo Id do his best to warn us, and hearing steps, I shippedhark to nit father, I had ,jot succeeded in wit ispering a ft it words to him, when the heavy tread approached us and a I argo. po nij tons individual entered, with a hen igm i ly bald head 'Old-rimmed double eye-glass astride his nose, and a half frightened expression on his broad, flesht' face. The ]ntattt, however, that his eyes lit on his visitor's, the expres<ion changed to severe grandeur arid lie seated himself With a porten tons clearing of his throat.	Doctor Oaks-at your service," lie said, sonorously, while the stan t chair' creaked beneath his cni mu i natiug weight; "there is some mistake here, I fancy-I was given to understand that a person-that a person, sir, who was entitled to gain admission, waited to see me, Who may you be. sir?"	'A Person who has been sent bore," said my father, looking at toe, "to inquire into some eircnmstanaes connected chili that house	"IndeedindcediiY repeated the doctor, tapping with his large fingers on the arm of his chair, and evidently hassling himself a to the snasker's probable tint hority,	To tell the truth," coiltinimed my father, in tile same qimmet tone, " a young lady who has for some time been iJiiimig ft tint her friends has been traced to this establish_ niemit I have ao desire to bring this establishment aturesemit under lhie tnrveplan of the law; lint I would lid-to attend to this lady '8 request"Ilk' 'inked at me in the sani mariner as before, and Itim rued boldly to the lingo sopermnteiidemt whose rubicund mo sl ig ]i thy streaked with fear or anger."The patient whom safl' wahkim in the earn this af-	L0'I'miuomi ic my cl0t5 r utho \	dd01.1, J toot iltoothn ago,"BEAUTIFUL 1?IENZI. 	79said, steadily. "I will claim her quietly, and say nothg of what I have become acquainted with in the house, if ou deliver her to this gentleman and me immediately."	My listener's double eye-glass glared up and down my )erson with an air of awful majesty-anger prevailing over ear.	"This house is conducted on strictly honorable prin-iples! I would have you know, madam, that no patientver cntercd these walls who was not pronounced incurablynsauo by two physicians! We never admitted any onewho was not made over to us by bond and seal of theiraatural or lawful guardians! Madam, I defy you to pro-duce one proof that can impeach our integrity. Othersmay have made mistakes, or sought to defraud us by pnt-tiug under our charge ladies over whom they had no legalauthority. We have not the responsibility of that. Weare not, y		for other people's frauds! Abductedindeed!"	He folded his arms magnificently and regarded me with virtuous indignation.	"Very good, doctor," said my father. "You have left a loop-hole of escape for yourself. We shall not look into your manifestations of integrity, but take the young lady who has been fraudulently pawned upon you and go."	What is the name? I shall look in my books if she is here," said the superintendent, still puzzling himself over my father's real character, and half-dubiously coming to the point.	"Nay," said my father, smiling, " more than likely she has been entered here under a false name. Better ask nothing about it. The less you meddle in the circumstances the safer for you. You are not, as you say, punishable for other people's frauds."	Then how am I to know which patient this lady claims as a sister?" queried the doctor.	"Any of the matrons will tell you which of the patients rushed to the grated door upon seeing me," I interposed.	And now, before you produce the lady," remarked my father, "I would ask you a few questions. Who sent her here as a lunatic?"	"Sir, I am a man of honor!" exclaimed the doctor, flying into a passion, and betraying his knowledge of what patient we had come to claim; 'and having given my promiseK-	:riPUL ItIESZL		f y patrons, I claim the right1 kps:CT;t l1 gentleman, sir, would ask me tit l		-tort the necessary informatiot	I shall be orry to extort mures said air lu.,to[* Oaks- by public me0.1-cat liul a very visible eftcct on the broad pin c	ii ieriiteudent. its hangill g cheeks hecamui,yo1i s" ample lips pursued out with the di nib ex.liii of feeling's of the very liveliest order.	I cure you five minutes to remember the oircttnistances, ilbd civ father, sternly.	ir - i--I am ready to do my utmost to oblige. burst. oct the good doctor, retreafiug iuto his big shell with al Most undignified haste; ''but upon my honor, I knoss very little about it. The. lady was sent here on the first day of December in a carrage with one servant, who delivered a letter, saying that Miss White would be made (cur charge until sent for; and meantime, her first rear's pay. itioni accompanied [let'. We wrote out her indentures and rotc rued them with the man, who drove away, and left her in our charge!"Ant, why ¥did you not demand proper proof of theirto doposit any lady with you?" exclaimed my father.	Wii this honest dealing? Arid what guarantee have you that her lee for next year will lie paid? And if not what will become of her? She will be, cherished here on the touuiorr of her last year's fee, I suppose? Or perhaps heriii ralde insanity will about this tin te prove fatal cried the doctor, turning very pale. I assure You that such a thing never occurred and this is an altoget"' nnl)reeedented case. Still, we have attended to theon a nit the most devoted care, and loaded her with kind, coOn account of her very fragile health. She has had tci-v I; i'host sir the lughest order-yes, I may say theIt shall eert - lope that will be taken into account."chat-alter of the ainiy he taken into account, sir, and therite holy's hiealthiatteridanee ofon	most strictly examined into, ifMy dear voon 1 	have been tampered with."znixioiy to ni	tto,exclaimed Dr. Oaks turning	Itiiclcoly when she re-cell sister was in a state of settled me!-	Ir(M) ci sot tening of the brain, U5I believe site is suffering	Which will Ultimately develop	BRA UT1FUL RIENZI.	41to hypochondria. We tried all that skill could do, but I )nfcss in this case we have failed. Madam, 1 am only derous of restoring her to her friends since she is beyond our iii!; so I will give immediate orders that she be prepared accompany you."The doughty superintendent rose and violently rang a dl; suppressed fury and mortification had turned his obese cc hne and convnlsed. His double eye-glass covered my they with a suspicious and glassy scowl.The man in livery appeared at the door.	11 Order Matron No. 6 to gather Miss White's wardrobe gether and prepare her for a Journey immediately."	"She's all ready, sir, and the cab is at the door," said the an, with a side glance quick as light toward me.	11 Fool!" muttered the man of honor, darting a rnalevont scowl at his retainer. " You must be making a miske," he added, for the gencrid benefit; "I will see to this ysc liE."	He hurried out, pushing his man like stubble from his itli; but Mr. Hohsou, whose eye was firmly fixed upon the rain chance, soon crept back again.	"They've been waiting for you to get out of the way for m last twenty minutes," he said, in a rasping whisper; Mr. Warriek has sat with his top-coat on till he is blisned with heat, and the patient-she won't be the better for is temper."	11 Where did they intend to convey her?" asked my thcr.	11 To a country institootion!" said the man, with a grin.	When the city gets too hot to hold any of the incurables,hey prescribe country air for 'em, and when they getihisked off there, they're not found again, you better ho-	You are a sensible fellow," said my father, tossing himtwenty-dollar bill	"Take that, and if you see anything	oing on that doesn't strike your notions of propriety in,ouction with Miss White, conic and tell me.	Off now."Ti	man disappeared with a knowing nod, and in five	niuntcs we heard the wheels of a carriage leave the door.	Ve were becoming every instant more distrustful, when	Doctor Oaks re-entered the room, his heavy brows bearing)vidc ice of a recent explosion.	-	"1 egret to say thitt Miss White is unfit to travel to-I		lie said. with a succeSSiOfl of cows. The e	tet'ieiit which she experienced to-day has left her in a vejweak state. I will undertake to have her all ready for herfriends to-morrow morning. Madam, for her sake, will yetagree to this?"	11 No" answered my father for me, rising and lookir restlutelY at the doctor full in the face. We shall eith l:tve this house with the lady we demand, or I shall for	u to answer for every dishonest dealing which has takor j,lacc since your private asylum was formed."	Gently-gently, my dear sirl" exclaimed Doctor Oaks, urning yellow with alarm "there's no necessity in the world for such violent measures-and of course I do not, fern' tliens, even if you put them into execution. However, it shall be as you wish-the young person shall be dcliv. crud up."Tie departed with great alacrity, leaving us breathingmore freely, in the hope that she was still within our reach.	The usan in livery came and lit a small gasolier in the hall. and then pleasantly grinning, whispered a few remarks to us.There's been the greatest rumpus! Mr. Warriek is	and determined not to give in. He's for pttiag ()it oft, and then making tracks, bag and baggage, through the night; but Oaks, who's the awfnllest coward ever dared to be a rogue, won't have it so. I guess, though, the doctor nil clvi you the girl all right now."	Ii- irul suddenly disappeared as a distant sound became air ilIc, and we were left once more alone.	Some nsinutes expired in silent attention. w'hen my ears caught the sound of feet approaching; not heavy and ponderous footsteps, but such as set my heart boating tunsnltuously. I gazed down the long stone corridor and saw twowomen approaching-one in a Mile serge gown, the otherits brown,	Site Caine, white and cager-faceT; her hands outstretched, her eves straining, bet- heart out-leaping her haggard feet; she ante at last, my lost cute, cud fell upon my hreast. oh, Heaven he thanked for this joy l I wiped away1. 1		her rnohiag tears, and wi' l convulsive em-hrwords of incoherent Jon.BEAUTIFUL ETENZI. 	83'IM darling! my poor one! have we got you at last? ye we got you at last?"Then 1 remembered my father, hut lie was taking no no	of its, and listening to what the matron was saying in. hall.	We couldn't get the lady's things gathered at such short iee" she was saying, "so Doctor Oaks says he will be w to see you to-morrow, and answer to the best of	ability any questions you may wish to ask, and the 'drohe will be ready by that time. Also, Doctor Oaks es that the young lady and you will exeftse him coming you this evening, as a patient requires his particular care t at present."	Toll Doctor Oaks to be ready to meet me by twelve lock to-morrow," answered my father, gravely; "and he kind as to dispatch some one to the corner of the lane for arriage which is waiting there."Vir, iiobson made himself visible at this, and civilly ofed to do us that service. While he was gone, my father fered himself to look toward his child for the first time, )ugh secretly, lest the curious n]atron might discover the .otions which rose to his face, and guess at his relation-p to the patient. Ah! who could crush back the rising ir, who looked at that pallid, wasted creature, in her isoe dress?In a few minutes the carriage arrived, and in the next uute I had led isolina out from under the roof of Doctor bk's private asylum, and seen her safely seated in the back it, with the wrappings we had brought placed upon her; tithe bonnet and shawl which the asylum provided, thrown¥ the door step of that institution."My good fellow," said thy father to Ilobson, who offleisly held the carriage door for him, "here's another testionial to your worth," lie handed him a twenty dollar bill, md take my advice-don't let me catch you waiter here on y next descent upon the worthy establishment. Drive on, ach man."Nelson, whose soft, melodious whistling had subsided ±0 dead silence at the appearance of ins lost mistress, )w planted the hat, which in his surprise he had snatched f, hack on his head, sprang to his seat, gave a triuniiant chirp to his horses, muid. di-ove the tIc hmw;eiri v) / ILOO-Ii,t cihilA iid at I;it lflV father was free to	lin his 11111". and hil her fear and gels	110 more. She ,hi ,,,W,, leaning on ii. heart as she hod nestled, a hapliii 'Py iii ft nt; site oi]d creep into her place there, and tiIii Iii ill I,(, in wIll] toe that had riven her from lii ni, al d11ev er:lir/lin emil1'1 he softer one shadow to conic hetwehis darluig girl awl hini.	Look up-look up, my preeiOns one, he was winsper. jug: " chum 't t remhie any more, you are safe now, yeic' in v.-)or old father's arms, and he will keep you safe, III,,-Ito t die only I eenshled the more, and clung with her cot,))III(' hands to we, never speaking, never liftuig her luddei face.	''(flit her time-let her feel that she is safe," I whit. IW red	So it, silence we whirled through the crowded streets, aul 111.1 nl it lice home in the lamplight.We led her op the garden path ant id scented imyacinthi,	il. with oar eves filled with tears, bade her joyous weicollie.You've conic back to your father's roof, my darling,I 11 avon grant elm at you may be safe and happy here!"'lie servants gathered round with mane a noisy Limn of joy and consternation quickly following; Sophiespasmodically dropping torrents of tears hovered with long -eves, a nit did what my father and I loft undone. in ocr H' ilh'ition; and at last the dear wanderer was left ii .1 Ii . aione, and we were free to hear that hidden story of lice woe,	Awl now it struck me how silent she had been since fint we '-lasped her; how strangelNIP' ssive and subdued, and neilI saw that the proud, free spirit evermore had fled that the tire, tie el/enionce of old was cold and lifeless, that tie lnhl.'im oal was heavy with tIme horrors it had seen.	l slib now, niy heloi ed child," said me father, teuderlfi 'P' into our ears the strange events wlicli have kept yea1mm tie, and Ihiced on in that frightful place, and trust nie to liii tile hrntal ofienders and pnnish them,"ho' hiriel as dud as death: her teeth chattered; she('veil liii ii n it Ii tee or eli e shrank back front h ho.moaned casting hersi 1 in to my aramiI	-not to omake moo dje:mi	flEA UTJFLTL RJFSZL	85	Tlie'i'e, my darling, there!" cried my poor father, with e i s upon his cheek, '' don't eye me that way; I'll let U In SJ poor girl."S(-),, o laid her down and soothed her fears, and she log net, looking at me.might I ask-was this our Isolina? Mi, DOW I felt	w I tad yearned for my Beautiful; how my heart had ang I) her bright vision-how fond memory had painted e, II radiant sister; now that my eyes watched this tst'J ngnre in the blue serge gown. And envious reeolotiti east up ill pathetic contrast, a brilliant picture ofPh Beautiful Itienzi" as last she stood in this room,be in richness, her cheeks like the heart of a Languedocse, ,shen the sunset gleams most redly through the leaves,w c os filled with beauty's rays, her form replete with inn¥ rest gifts.A with that fairy dream! Let it not touch the griefrio a gray of this picture; gone is the tender grace of at :y, vauished the brightness, the joy!Ti shadow has spread dim wings above the sunny head id ached the bloom with death; the hand of Ruth has ,en busy; the unholy spell has been flung!And vet-this dear wreck-she looks at me with silent,tifed ig tenderness; she will not speak, but her mute,an(,(- speaks for her and knits my sobbing heart to hers.renl ed as she is, silent, mysterious, changed, I claspor i' my arms, and cry, with grateful soul uplifted: 7/tank Ileareit site is home agent!"I	CHAPTER XI.CONSPIRACY TO CHEAT THE GALLOWS."Oh! breaking heart that will not break,		Oh! pale, pale face, so sweet and meek,	Thou sinilest, but thou dost not speak,What wantest thou? whom dost thou seek?"TENNYSON,And now our duty lay plain before us.	Seeing that isolina Rieuzi was in her proper senses,hough a little inclined to melancholy madness; further-nore, seeing that she either would not or could not throwtIll ugh ci liar diare in the events it hcli led to (lkmtinitilits violent death, it behooved my father to mortiftthe weakness of his fle'sh' and display the same metal .that wiwlel of justice. who condemned his own son to death,111 141 	veil the spec to ale.	But liv father was no Brntus; and had he been, I fear hi1 hi -it! would have been severely hampered by my out-against this glutting of the sword of justice.	'l'l,erefore. ill our mutual tend er_beartedness, we deter. innad as tar nid as long as circumstances would permit to K1 die proscribed individual concealed in her own homs,	I lie too hungry teeth of the law until she could gathsr up a measure of treuith to survive its shaking.	We adnred our J'ew' servants to keep discreet silence oil the subject of her return; and let me say here for the honor of American reticence and fidelity, that as far as I could judge. they never betrayed the confidence we reposed in tlieiii.	We had her apartment exclusively on the third story, and it consisted of her own bedroom and dressing-room, which were adjoining each other, and quite out of the way of casual visitors. These rooms were guardedly locked, and Slit a intl I attended to her wants exclusively.	It lain hoped to be permitted to nurse our poor enfeebled girl for a time unharassed by the painful and harrowing steps which would inevitably be taken, as soon as she ,lionld he discovered by Miss Mrediths's detectives.	For we found that she was shattered in health and iii -ur- to a pi liable degree. Her whole frame seemed tohate butt crushed by some jarring shock; her constitutionwas almost destroyed; and her nerves were so paimifnlly weak that the slighitest' inci(lent was sufficient to startle her almost into ti trait zv of terror.	Bait ulnlJ I proudly watched over my invalid sister, others had tot been idle,(pin my father, repairing oil the following day to Jersey('itv to keep tile appointment he had made with Dr. Oaks, for 'thie purpose of forcing the truth out of him concerning the person who had pot lsolina into his charge, hey, presto! the scene was cinolged as completely as a juggler's trick. The large brhk house Was silent and empty ; the brass knocker woke d nud cohn.s when lie plied it a large p1; rn	liii-	titnonuleed that " This house to let,BEAUTIFUL RJEKZL 	57sited any gentleman's pleasure who had a use for the ted windows.)r, Oaks and his compeer with their prey and their rmnlons had doubtless withdrawn into discreet retirent nr a time, or flourished in some distant city safe from	p'ruuit of inquisitive relatives and meddlesome deteees,	o. :Ail my sister could tell us her story, all extraneous ove seemed unattainable ; and we gathered in ourer	and centered them on her.Dli,	was sad to mark the changes which these fourmt had wrought in her.Lot dv she ever had been, and ever would be, oven should ars ci ep one by one upon her and dull youth's freshness, t now in her weakness, and gentle, uncomplaining lanuxoly, there was almost a light and sweetness too holy be borne by eyes of love.So ogrossed was I with my poor sister, that I suffered a ek to pass before I resumed my visits to the soldiers' mili' s which had been so abruptly broken off.	ug carried the letter and photograph which had been truer ad to me, to our superintendent, and held a conRation with my comrades on the matter, it was resolved send an agent to the Potomac, where the company in hic young Ilosecraft had been, still was stationed, and ivh gathered all available information from that point, ti him as faithfully as possible to his present quarters.H g set in train the arrangements for carrying out an ,n's wishes, I next directed my steps to the ferry, to aisb ny visiting in Miss Cranstown's district. I found mndont work awaiting me, and many objects of interest; it none so sad as that which encountered my eves, on runng up at last to tell poor Charlie Harris -011 what I had inn.There he lay dead, in his poor coffin of painted deal, his ad lice smoothed at last from lines of pain and white, ice the fever flush was gone forever. There be lay, calm id inovcless, though the girl for whom his last hours had en so heavy, was weeping and moaning beside lim; there lv with the fixed smile on his violet lips, with the fixed did sealed to the hollow cheek. The young soldier had ne to join a host whose victories have crowned them eachTi&IL ?IF( Ii i[JZta king: whose captain showed them how to fight, and ha to d:.N" more pain and weariness, no more care for Chad e Ic has won his commission and gone away. T'-h- the von ng widow under my especial charge,anI ft r vonifortahly boarded in a safe family, where	I 1Iv her trade and he under no fear that she would Ii' nieless.	There I left her, until we should see if Leandor flosecra -111(l he fonnd.1 rook great care to go out as much as I had done before i lie event which had happened in our fannly ; to Iret1unt every scene which it might he supposed I wosli fnc1ircnt; to he a constant and always to be depended npst vftiror and servant in nay society; and to keep lip exactly the sante dcnseaasor of quiet grief, which I had observed be fore nay sister was found. This was scarcely feigned; ray grief was only one degree less now in the daily centemphs. non of my bloved one's sufferings.	Mr. Lindhaurst came as usual, and in his kind, thoughitfil way strove to fling rays of sunshine across my gloomy nath, Bill, touch its I learned to love him and depend upon hiar, I iliocd this page of ray heart even from him, and locked ic secret return within the limits of our own house.	I found her on the 5th day of April, and we nursed her quietly and without apparent danger for nearly four weeks. during which time we could not see that she gained curtis ci rcngtli; and, what was even more painful, notwitlistaral'	a the ceasciess and tender love which we both lavished upon her,, she still remained sunk in the profoundest nnelaa' chiolv,Ditv after day found all our efforts futile to kindle a spatof lilst in that darkened heart. The father, whose deep.lender soul was yearning over his child, only seemedthsrouv iiddtticaal shadow over her whenever be appeal-H,It heeanre h1eartrcadiag to me to watch the sad. gentle t'at'of mv sifter grow hard and despairing, whenever calf:trlse's foot sounded on the stairs, lie would wart for U1to mutlipek the door, and steal in with a basket of rarest fmil in his hand, and a smuile on his dear, tender face; and i woirhi he:Will my U05, taste tb a graucv Sec how- large aflhiUe,s ci 	IRidesBEAUTIFUL RIENZL 	89su'	5 Will my own darling tell her old father how she ? Let me see those downcast eyes, if they are clear11 i)t!"&n oh! to see her turn away in anguished coldness, ile o tears dropped down her cheeks, and her quivering s kept that stern and unending silence!)n the second of May a letter came from my long-absent )th which threw my father and me into such a transport dc; hit as we had. not known in many a long day. It ore 1 ns that she had recovered from her long andsth		e malady; that she knew all the calamities whichd f	,on upon ns, and had resolved to join us immediatelyd	&p us to hear our sorrows; that she trusted inav		that our Isolina's fate should be made known to		'lid not despair; that she would bring faith andpc th her, to cheer us, and that together we should ice u its source the plot which had driven one of our imber from us.TI' is letter, so strong and healthful in its tone, infused w ii a into us; it spoke of hope, and bade us look beyond e present darkness; it seemed to prophesy a happier era.Ruin and tell your sister the joyful news," was mythee's first thought. '' Tell her that she'll soon have a other to make her well-that will rouse her."	I' hastened up stairs with the letter fluttering in my sad: my face was beaming with happiness; my whole sing was transposed with joy; I was the impersonificaon or hope; 1 was the "hearer of good news from a far milt, e.	In tins state of mind I let myself into the sunless room, here alone my silent sister sat, a book unopened by her do, hcr dark, melancholy eyes resting on vacancy.My darling!" I exclaimed, placing myself before her,I have such good news to tell you!"	She turned her spectral face and gazed at me in wonder, s if the light and life which I had brought with me were lazzlhi-ig her dim sight.	11 Papa sent me up with a message," I continued, in a tonef subdued eagerness. '' lIe said 'tell her that her motherS	corning to make her well,' and she is-she is, my dar-ing; she will be here in a few weeks; she says so in herettec" 	-Strange, indeed, was the effect of my glad tidings.		ril almost a15Mv r- I ' fa,	aradually became	her hands, afi	Sire'tertel with a look of horror.rose. loukine it rile vid1y. 1.Mv mother?" she gasped.	'c," i 3swered. abashed and adr'rghted	our dear	r who ha' been desperately ill for months; she h 'ii ig borne. Oh, sister, I thought this would make you glad!"	lei- face relaxed and vibrated with a flood of emotion; flit- i nrne'I away and flung herself down, weeping bitterly.itt-re n";Is no joy in these tears; it was hitter, hitter grief:I 'oil nm, I "aid gently, ''it is m am nra. Surely youwill not grieve when you understand that she is coming honre to leave us no more. We shall all he borne, then, dear, and von will he in the midst. safe from harm.No. no, no!" she moaned; "I shall go away:"'I'll(, last ray of pleasure vanished from my heart, leavingme pale arid cold as she had been.	Sister, what can you mean?" I cried; "go away? Where would you go away from mamma? Alas, pesr sister, what are you saying? No one can love you like a mother!"	For-hoar!'' she muttered, with a shudder-" let me forget, if I call. Yes!" she exclaimed, raising her face from her hands with a wild light flashing in her eye; ''let ne forget her, if I can-let memory die, if it will!"(Hi what did these wild words mean? I dared not ask.	'I' me I nrhid veins were throhibino' in her throat like dark 'orihs her breath was coming hi hrort, choking gasps. I t-,'nlml only take her hands in mine.. and hold them tenderly, ninth the 'sad paroxysm had lessened in violmrce, their I yentnred to approach the subject by bringing in another. These words of hereabout going away land alarmed nrc; I would s!, 'iv her how impossible it was, and instill it in her mind,	a !mmnt if ever the crazy idea came to her again she would rehnmnjoi5h1 it.	lsohnnra," I commenced, caotionsy " I am afraid yea Hurst feel very doll here in these two rooms, with the top of the house fur' exercise, do von not?"her attention was arrested, and she qnestioned me withher sweet sad c es, mutely, as if to know what I was driving at-	Have	e	'ni" T eontinlied. "how we have keptt.BElA U7J1"UL EIILYZL 	01u h den from strangers, and these doors locked ever sincea 	e home?"," she answered, in a rapid whisper, " but bolts andrs	nothing to her when she chooses to come."10, sister, who?"She pulled her hands from me, and covered her face.Never mind my ravings," she said, in a low voice ; " Ii in sane, you know-a monomaniac."itouseuse! You are not to flunk so, Isolina ; it is notae.Oaks and Mr. \Varriek pronounced me so beforeey	utitted me into their asylum."o rogues. They were paid to conceal you from yourmi. Isolina, and I have no doubt they were paid by some ret to pronounce you insane. Ali, I wish you could tell e who sent you there."I allowed my excitement to carry me too far, and regretted 0 oi-ds as soon as they were said.She recoiled from me, and fell to trembling.Have I said anything?" she whispered, brokenly.Oh, darling Isolina," I exclaimed, bursting into tearsdistress, as I felt that her confidence was beyond my skill win, " why do you hold aloof from us thus? You know tat 'ae would sacrifice anything to give you happiness or ive you from danger. Oh, why will you not let us help	She wrung her hands, and with large tears flowing down or 5lO cheeks, eyed me sorrowfully."I am breaking your heart, dearest," she said, bendingwarci me ; '' Let me go away, and forget me."	No," I ejaculated, alarmed beyond measure to find that ais insane fancy still clung to her. If you go away, from his house they will arrest you, and put you in prison.'''dliv?"	TIed f done wrong? I trembled at my own imprudence, ut seut on.	"N o one can find out the cause of-of Mr. Beaumo it',; leath, and they suspect-they have dared to suspect-- -It seemed to strike her in a flash.11 That I murdered him-ins?" she cried. '' Oh, peerJeeP; and 1 would have gladly (lied to save him."	I gazed at her vehemently. In my unskillful hands the ;eeret indeed -had slipped from my reach, but this I had92	ii s. this blessed assurance to set wirI-i i'i lvi ioIfl 1II .10	uoteestt	such an assertion from her, but PerN,t that we requneijcr he might tell us sufficient tImps liii ,hetile 'iit" n swuhled grasp of the law.e hc'i from	f'ither who was anxiously waltn1	the issue if MY news, and told him au that had transpired,CHAPTER 2ULTWO MESSENGERS AT THE POOR."Softly! she is lying	With her lips apart;Gently! she is dyingOf a broken heart." ANON.I was siftino alone in my father's room, anxiously waitingIi is appearance.	At this moment he was with my sister,venturing to probe liar mensory gently ; and I. chafing andtreonihiong, misdoubted the result snore and more as theminutes flew by.	It was almost an hour before lie returned to me, and I eta liv his face that he had failed.	I have no influence with her," he sighed, throwing hsmself or; 'on a sofa in an attitude of deep dejection; -,she recoils from the subject, and from us all, I think. And, uiio fair nnat ely, I have thrown her into a state of dangerous ex-Shall I go to her?" I exclaimed, rising.No:C oloes a-lot Nvisil to 's 	to sendh	ee vou; slie told 111C,her up itlilne, and not to allow ha to go-she wished rest. lo prefer a ¡ervant to you, lierhttle sister, who should slsancab rbuigltt of her breast! It hurts nue, little Iva, letYou VI, 	faithful t0 her.I ,lni't ft't'l it, father" I said, with would-be calmness,You know she is sn'k, and has slrano'e fences."Oils' he ha rst oat. 1, yi n his quit en rig bairdiii I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .,, ion orhono I leave encircled in one arniui, ruth no' Ii ''-- ' . .boost I/er 'I' an anrehiet when you were httit to sluni. t rltinlbh0, toassion so wide apart now'? An	lou	.	she could e''' no 'n	n her fatheri	BRA UTiFUJ RIENZL	93[e row 1110 close and groaned on my shoulder. He at last that icy wail which had risen up and shut hill[nothing but his blind unsuspicion could have madeblind so long. Grieving mutely for him, with noth-but silence for comfort, I softly kissed his brow.'1 will tell you the substance of our interview," he said, stering his emotion after a time. "As you may suppose, vas a long time before I saw my way clear to conic to point. At last, when she appeared to be quite calm I reasonable, I asked her if she would answer a few sstions which it was necessary for me to ask her. She tautly got up with much alarm in her manner, and cried It she would answer nothing. I tenderly asked her the son, and got no answer. But dearest, I said, it is abutely necessary that you explain what led to young Beannts death. Your life is in danger, unless you confide some one the circumstances, so thathcy may be used your benefit."'' '1 cannot tell on anything,' she said, huskily.	You must,' I repeated, with firmness, ' I cannot leave 5 room until I understand your position.'F 	turned as pale as death, and eyed me strangely.' ho killed Cecil Beaumont?' I proceeded.o one,' was the answer.YThat?-was it an accident?' I cried, 'were you withm, and was it an accident?'"She began to weep and moan, 'poor Cecil! poor Cecil?'But answer me,' I urged.')V fiat?-you demand an explanation?' she exclaimed,ruin: with sudden excitement on me.I wished to know for your own sake, my child,' I ui-ered soothingly.-"Tins colloquy lasted for some time, but in spite of herebleress, her excitement, and her weakness, I gained)thiflg from her. At last I relinquished that question,id tool; up another. 	-	?lell urn what secret you have, which You hide from Le, not receive my counsel.'	A strange, bitter sirnle crossed her lips, but she was )cceh loss. I attempted to draw her to my arms, in order win, by love and pity, her confessions, but she recoiled em mc with a shriek.11 ' (to away!' she cried, 'don't touch sue!'bowel hI	steppe'1. overconie by his own re r	in Iris hands: silver hairs were ghtcning amen	locks arid these added dignity to ins sorrow. j	and knelt beside him, and we mingled one	icr.	tie repnlsed me completely, he continued, sterjjj7 ocring his emotion. and retired to her chamber Ii rue. ''I could not believe that she actually sliunref and I followed to the door, for one more appeal¥ I i na my darling girl,' I said, scarcely able to keep thta from 0 rinranning me, 'come to your old lathed and tell him who has tampered with your happinest; he fixed on me it look of sudden and wild reproach, was yost,' she exclaimed, ',and this is retribution What do you mean, dearest?I asked, gently.Hie became as white as a slab of marble, and clasped0cc hands together.I cannot speak,' she whispered. ' and if you commandI will go away and never return.'I	saw I Fiat she was in earnest, and I urged her noonger. She threw herself on the bed and turned her headfrom me as a signal that she wished to be alone. I yearned for one word from her to show that her heart was net rr:renated from me, as her words implied, and I bent fondly over her. I have been guilty of many error's.' I said, 'but never ire which could bring woe to wife or child. Kiss me int ,)ken that love is Trot lost between us., She only buried face in the Pillow and waved inc away, while a fit of ding seized her,You are ill,' I exclaimed, 'shall I send for your sisterNo-I want rest,' site said, choking with lir einotidllc ophie conic to noel'1 was forced to go, worse than unsuccessful, arid that 'I0th, father, what dreadful plot against her life and Or rocs thh must ho:" I sighedhad riot eollfcrr,A the door.1 filef~ looked ill 0" fIvO minutes longer when SoplliO'I wish you would conic 11P-stairs," she said, looking ni then.'5 scroetg the matter with Miss Rienizi."iv loon ' rid roy father, starting to his feet; "is slitNBEAUTIFUL RIELTZL 	95Sir I wish--I'm afraid, we must have the doctor," shee asked no more questions but dashed into the hall, id his hat, and left the house, while with flying speed I lied my sister's chamber.Lie was still lying on her bed, and her eyes were closed, i a strange filmy appearance, and her whole face was a d white. There was something bound across her mouth di looked like a scarlet handkerchief, and Sophie came pushed me away, and approached the bed with a white in her hand.What's that?" I whispered, my scared eyes fixing on scarlet stains on the snow of the pillows, ''and oh, Cs that.""he scarlet handkerchief was ensangnined with my sisblood; it oozed in a dark fringe upon the towel di lay upon her bosom; it trickled in little pools upon sheets,A blood vessel burst!" said Sophie, attempting concealt no longer;", put your hand upon her breast heref it heats; I am afraid she is going. She kept her face ed in the pillows and I was here a good while before I v she was choking in her heart's blood."Sophie, what shall we do? Tear away that crimson i, it will suffocate her. Oh, Sophie, she will die, heanybody comes, and I don't know what to do!"was quite useless; I fell on the floor, shaking with terand the faithful girl who was collected through it all, what she could alone.ofore I dared to lift my face again, hasty feet approached, my father came in, followed impetuously by our faintoetor, who with one stride was at the bedside, with Is and eves busy, while a stream of rapid directions isfrom his month. And my father, with one rapt look us Lina, came and lifted me up and held nie in hisS.Don't sink, little daughter," lie muttered, hoarsely,i, Heaven! don't leave me alone. Look at her, sli'sao a few hours Dr. Graves was ready to depart; the On. of blood had been stopped, the swoon overcome, and patient was in a slumber. With the devotion of a lover	iT waited on him in the outer f7 her, and list ijptttten. as the voice of all oracle. te' to a most cxtraordinat'y condition," he said, look. avely at my, anxious father, ,some deep, mental g¥ i as occasioned ft is final rupture, and t lie state of en which she is in, confirms the idea of mental rat an Jell liv distress having brought her so low. Where' te has been. Mr. fitenzi, site has been most cruelly tan. red with. It is a wonder her mind is not gone. I fi'r a predisposition to mania, and under the present presuitiii wi 11 sit cci nib to it.What cats we do to lighten the pressure,doctor? 81t1.tt or will live its no clew to her sufferings."	There's little can be done in that case, but do whtsl lit Call. Keep her quiet, cheer and animate her mind;¥n nil every distressing theme; when she can be moved, baitin out of this to some quiet spot in the country to'tinge of air and scene; give her what she wants-anvthiag,i you know of it, and then, perhaps, she may five forears. But I tell von honestly, Mr. Ilienzi, don't hope litmuch, site may ho spared long or short, but mark you-,Ite's got her death blow. Now confide to me the circuastttttccs under which you found her, that I may have scatetiie}tt to the maladjof her mind." 	-1,NFY fI immediately cornplied with his request, he 10 1irli'down stairs, and acquainted him with evcrtlung, at I u't'ned in return the most cordial svnapathv from the goof ii ilttctor who had been a family frscnth for years.'l'iten lie went away-one more repository of our strange 'i-itQnictly we put the house in order for its new misfor-lie; we made our preparations to wait for the victory 01	nt ("aft in that secret chamber; wo ctdtnlv prepared to to the un lion of nursing upon ourselves. m v father, SopltLI. ttttd still to meet the world's wtttchfnf eves, reveaLiii it	father and I were to sit up each a 1 toutedJut: Sojdn0 to take the charge through the day, 5¥ ¥ mi alit follow our usual dud ics, atd divert sttspiciottItoh i ttdc-il little ltopc of britigitig her through. butvt-il with heaven s mercy aurl Dr. Graves skill litOur best.	tiller thin- itrraug015 my father commenced do tit',,t ttigltt at h-e' ohtI,,IN		1, tt :I,	the Will,BEAUTIPUJJ RIEXZT. 	97eafef oily closed with shutters, the -night-lamp ho 'iiow. I retired early that I might he ready to take nil	at three o'clock, and after starting awake feverishlyar three times to listen for a signal that "somethingoccurred, 1 at length fell into a heavy slumber which d until the daylight began to struggle in, when 1 rose in a and found I had overslept my watch an hour.flitted, to the locked door and lot myself in, and there myor sat by the dint night-lamp, pale of cheek and heavy-but vigilant as ever, as he counted his drops of mcdi-	and bent over the letter of minute instructions. The of gossamer could not he lighter than his touch on her e; nor the softest whisper of a woman, than the breathed ss as lie poured the diluted drops through her parted and fanned her brow.How is she?" I whispered.The same," was the answer.approached and found her still sunk in her dream-like ;hy.Why did you allow me to oversleep myself?" I asked. on look very worn and tired, my father, while I havei stealing an hour of your rest!"I am not fatigued," he said, looking tenderly at my sisI do not know how the night sped; it seemed short."Go now," I urged; "you most be ready to attend your e at the usual hour, you know." [e fain would have lingered, but at last he yielded to me¥ prepared to depart.	Study these directions well; I have found them of the y greatest use," he said; '' why, I followed its dictates to	moment, and I really think such pnnetuahity is a very at sup in the right direction!" My dear father, lie menied 'rith pride his skill as a sick-nurse!What bottle is thus?" I asked, lifting a large one up; ''it nof here last night." 'That is one the doctor brought-he was here at midlit, a od said she was not worse; he staid nearly an'lit is very kind to us, papa."	11 - (lead', he sympathizes with us in our sad position. w I shall go. One charge I would vehemently impress on i-our mind; let no imprndent noises disturb her--quiet her life."	cci coca' ccc a I Con atncndcurtly (hired to move, lest some aanforesi't ii i I] ii 'a is]* a rh' steelier, end spoil all I read good -I)[-. (sr,'pet1 ,haraetcrs esutil I could repeat' the directions tic,	I and ni,e eves wandered with all the t'et]essic5 nnfuaiti'nt nature from object to object in the room,,cerc waalortfolio, of rather large size. leaning ags1i,sauneol, behind a chair, out of which were exposed t15 'r of cc eral sheets of Bristol board. It had fallen 1(i. argcaiecst the chair: one of the crimson ribbons whichit is ass hreken oil', and the contents had slipped toward cad. Again and again nay eyes returned to this objc'c;, i a pertiacity which hecanae each time more disagree. ¥ I knees it was an old portfolio of my sister's, whsec"rati I had often carelessly looked over, and I suppsshad been looking at it lately, and left it there,\l ]a4 the sight of it became a sort of nervous torture,cci nay hack upon it, and looked at something else; hacci c Ic 'coos fancy reproduced it behind every chair in the I sprang up and cautiously lifted the chair aside,cc,'e'rroeued to push my enemy out of sight. As I lifted it a picture from the many which made the portfolio ashiecsv rustled out and fell at my feet.I put the. portfolio behind a urtain, picked up the paint-ing and scat down with a grotesque feeling as if fate had per-sist '1 in having her way, to look at what she had thr cat ii taco, It was but a tiny bit of painting in the center if cc Ici'ead sheet of paper. No tyro's hand land rested on chit 'ago; my sister's brash, fine though it was, had resetI lceawra those cold, sharp lights arid glooms so vividly epiCcc ncecclc scene,>hcadowy Shape in the distance, like that of a cotl ifs coca tel; cc heap of muffling foliage running down te- conrad and breaking oft in the center, where one lactcil'f ti'aiglatly lancing moonlight streamed down; ala liii'dc' thabi of the heavens, half-encircled by somber frs'two higares Bias standing erect, her laacds clasped to'her coantenance raised, with a glad, exultant, t5	P'cna'hca,,iaess to his and thais face, which was thus toachdiIold glorified with love's conqaaest, was Isoliaaa's And alitss as the eon( tneror? A tall flan Who bent over her withcoin ssq cpor tin g her, and one stroll e wla ite hi ci rail ha old hag '¡('hcped mid naacchl,r linnd5 icc tie* a a lice fih'flJiMA ITTIFUL RIBNZL 	99	never seen was fixed by her upward glancing eyes, into mn. almost wondering joy; and I studied it, even asvas studying my sister's.	was a pale, high-bred, rather spare face, whose broad 3head caught the silver intensity of the moonbeam, leavthe bending eyes and mouth in shadow; those down-dropeyes just touched the eyes of the woman, and seemed toir the depth of a thousand souls into the glance; they cxssed melancholy, yet pride, and the firm mouth had iething of a haughty curve, though now joy had swept ty every other feeling. For the rest, a slightly aquiline e, whose tense nostrils denoted more than all the rest, t sensitive pride, which lived though vailed in every tare; dark clustering hair, and a small, jetty niushe, which did not disguise the beauty of the short curvedmuch was the picture winch fate (so we call Providence) sisted in showing to me.Was it a portion of my sister's past life that 1 had seen? d hidden life which was sealed in a book of mystery fromThen who was this man who had told the "old, old and with such success? Was this ''I. J?" I should mw that face, if ever my eyes encountered it; and I should lc to meet that gracious, strong and true face, to the day my death.[Tad this man won her love, then left the flower to her?	put away the painting, for my father to see it, and re'ned to my patient, my thoughts full of this important covery. But when I looked at that white. moveless face the pillow, I felt how vain my plans and dreams were e to be for her.l'he hours crept on with me, I scarce knew how; the utternco gradually gave way to sounds in the street, soon To]-rod dv those in the house; steps fell on the stairs andlIe, and the usual cleansing operations were guardedlyue U rough. With a curious intuition of what each soundtoki'iod, I judged of the hours by the voices, without)kin"-, at the watch. Thus I inferred that it must be eight:loeh when I heard a startling peal of the door-bell, ande postman was at the door; but sounds followed whichsalad inc. and caused me to hover anxiously over Isolina,d she should be rudely wakened; strange voices and steps,with the most " eheregarci.1 -butting of 100] b	slife. At lÛi.t clre ceased,¥ -: k girl. for wliOlu t1 and more than an hourlouse was b¡ ret agtt 'sing in wi Lii her master's kv5y. ': e rbifld her, mid without coming to lo4¥ thoinvilid. busied herself in the dressing-room arrartg.:,jt1lispered, "come and see if you notice auyMiss Tva," said the girl, hurriedly.I still she staid. and when I rose and looked through or-wa v.1 saw her folding up some dresses and weepugdv though without sound.'V lit is the matter, my girl?" I exclaimed,U. don't-don't say nothing, miss!" she gasped; "iiI e. to say one word, I'd scream out and kill that poorIs my father all right, Sophie?"''Dli. yes, Miss Iva. dear, and he's up this hour, sodr¡akfast will soon he ready, and then I'm to take yourplace."It was nine o'clock when I unlocked the door to go dcvitairs. I closed it again with a start, and turned to Sophie,ni face whitening with a disagreeable shock which I hod got.There is a strange man standing at the door," I whia	Ilnsh-oh, Miss Ivanilla, don't!' returned the girl, rigrug her hands; '' don't ask rite a word-I can't spoil 1 it; aud if she heard on she'd die. Oh, Miss Ira doeIll", rell down to your father-run straight downI braced my nerves and reopened the. door, leaving Soltlt'tor it oil the inside. With downcast eves T pactel,ia ttu; err luau, clad in a dark-blue coat, who partrid, th u'tv' etitly at rue, I went step by step down ctrig 'or	ancwetaent, found two other mccci ii,,, 1,1 'd their head' of the entrance door , who leetLii rained rush arid ¡'sh at OTh.Ip.assed them with all 5''tall (I lug Oil the hearth-rag. dining room, where my fathaat her, who a"i' t 	-cider's doe : \t,'; d ies men in the pa-') and ata.,BEAUTIFUL RJJ?NZT. 	101'TI y are waiting to take your sister away, to answer the lnnrder of Cecil Bean.no a; " was, the stern reply.-	CHAPTER Xlii.AT OPEN DOORS P005 COME IN,"I was cut off from hope in that sad place.	Which yet to name my spirit loathes and fears;My father held his hand upon his face,	I, blinded with my tears,Still strove to speak; my voice was thick with sighsAs in a dream.' '--Taaarsoa.\Iy r0'il trembles, as I write these things. The black nirn of that time rushes ever me and fills my eyes with avatlug tears, Pity that woman's heart could ever breed di geanee, and pour it out so ruthlessly.Ph	officers were employed by Miss Meredith, and had	'ehing for five months for Miss Meredith's haplessend.,	They had been paid to watch the house which had;ene ri a hospitable roof over Miss Meredith's head; and,,so	es had at last discovered the fugitive.For me time they had suspected that something unusual a g g on in the house, and had set all their vigilance the uk of discovering what it was. They soon assured ms,es that we had a concealed visitor; but not uutil t niultt could thes' determine who the visitor was. They spku to watch Miss Rienzi's windows, and diseot ered the am 'f a lamp through the crack of the shutters, burning, niglt. They had seen Doctor Graves enter the house at duiy't,, and leave again at half-past one, and boldly intei'itiug him, they had asked who was ill in Mr. henri's use. The doctor wavered an instant, but almost irnmeitelvre covered his wits."I\' one," lie answered; " I have been having a rubber sre, il staid later than I intended; 'twas long whist."t' lb I-tienzi, Miss Ivanilla henri, Doctor Graves, audio?" ueried the detective.P u my!" was the prompt reply."HI you went there at twelve o'clock; does Mr. Rieuzi InnIlee long whist at twelve o'clock?"NT but he finishes it," said the good doctor, eudgeliiie'rains uleanwl?ile ''and--if you luot used your eve,'II as your curiosity, you would have seen somethingWell, Sir",Vu would have seen me go there before dinner-fl;,10 hour of ma first visit-and he called aw-a' alnm,ialely to attend a case, which diet nut release me untilin rime for my supper at Mr. Hicuzi's house."icy were staggered, but not convinced; however, n r was impenetrable, and they let him go with a.11 six o'clock in the morning, a young man, nes'hr,'ed like a druggist's clerk, with a bottle sealed upInto paper sticking out of his pocket, accosted the parlor. as she was down at the gate, cleaning the brasses.Here is the medicine for the young lady," lie said, hail.i' her the bottle. She took it immediately and went with11 to the house.Doctor Graves told me to ask how she was?" called outIlie Young man; "he said I was to take back an exact ac.I snot,""Her pa sat up with her till four o'clock, and she wasthe same way then. Miss Ivauilla is watching now, ando to ring if any change happened; but she hasn't rungVet,"YHaving obtained the information lie was in quest of, the011119 man, Who was in truth employed by the detectives,lnr1cued away, and Hester carried time bottle up stairs and i"llysrsd it to Sophie She, seeing written upon it, ,Totaken at S P. Si. " and all unaware of the grim joke,	Ii cli the /Q ss his en/see dee inipl ied, carefully laid it on the, H ,ll table to ha carried in at S o'clock.In h0lf an hour three detectives entered the house, aroici e warrant for Miss Hienzi's arrest.Fnfortnnatoly for that Prompt obedience which ought	to wait 11p"n the mandates of the law, another s"'it was juet w in waiting for the accused, and so a short'ne was required to decide which power might arrest lie'	I' or III, tel A mrael tile A nal of Death should roll up ,ti,I sitrehiueut writ and cey her acquitted none might enter the	'k e I eeL Ilk shadow east over her, to lay hasd of huntS5\s 'Ceneeco 1111,1 1 or.¥ 'Ieek i'05 cc ritten by Doctor Graves, and signed	BEA UTIFUL Bmwz1:	103an er physician who was called in, to the effect that ;s 1 nzi could not without loss of life be removed from re at present; and since nothing else could be done, w was served upon her where she lay, and men were ocred in the house to take charge of the prisoner until coJd be examined.	constable kept guard at my sister's door, and watched t no weapons or means of escape were carried in to the used; two more kept watch at the entrance door and the a gate, lest the family or the domestics should attempt m desperate treason, and they paced up and down the le garden, peering at every window, staring in the es of those who passed to and from the house; pry into the household arrangements, bullying the servants, Jug over the gate with their passing comrades, smktheir nauseous tobacco, and making the best of their m job.['hree days passed before my sister summoned strength nigh to speak; each feeble breath indrawn seemed desed as, a last; a film as frail as the night-fleece of a frost id, melts in the morning sun, was between her soul and home, a whisper in her ear might turn the balance treniag down into eternity.it' the fourth day she rallied; the feeble life threw up )righter flame, and hope looked in at our shadowy ir.The was able to murmur our names, to lift her hollow eyes mine in love, to faintly press the hand which gently ssed the lissome palm. She might live!	weLcomed my dear Isolina from the trance of death, Ii ar ious fears and sorrow.inc evening, my friend, Miss Belle Cranstowri came in,	wrth sympathy and horror.	The hid just arrived from the country, and heard of our slorte nes, and her tender heart was bursting with indiation at our sufferings.	' My poor dear," site sobbed, "it is too dreadful! can't ,se brutal men be sent away? Shame on the people that my don't mob them! It's too shameful this, for a Chrisa city F'	WI p don't feel it so much now," I said, gently; "and ay can't hurt us-yet."/ HI/L fliItiXZLitiiic violently at ens resignation, utfiIT hands.I hut s:n SO! " she cried; "how dare they suspect s¥ pure ladina Rietizi? oh. I could swear to her huts. PcI ire a ho edred courts."ices melted to tears liv my friend's generous disrres5,I poured out my crushed and sorrowful heart to her iiit 11)11 of all that led nec to find my sister, and the sub-nt events. Then remembering my desire to win froe1'ute information concerning [aclina's life at Saratogsneeding snntnier, I asked her if she would answeraestions. She readily complied.Von were with my sister at Saratoga all the time shethere!"'ire yen aware of any gentleman meeting her therename lead the initials 'I. J. ?"	Liter a protracted pause, Miss Cranstown shook her head.Can you remember where my sister was, and what sheI on the sixteenth day of July? Oh, try to remember!"¥\uain my friend pondered deeply, and at last looked ap.Yes, I can tell you exactly," she said; "poor Iselios	taken with a very severe 1eadaelue, and I nursed her ail y at the cottage, while mamma and the other girlswei¥t	down to the city shopping. She was on the sofa ill	ltaleomheh front parlor all day, and she slept with meeelStrange!" I mused; "what signification has file (late, onLilt ring titen?Will you allow me to show von a picture?" I con tinocilniug "I wish to know if you ever saw a certain lace all(!	I went to my father's room, and procured the psttP 'g lenin leis eahinet, which, returning, I handed to tat'ted.		Victor Joselyn!" she cried, In a tone of nstonishnieaced what a lniracolon, likeness	I rceieovg thee 		11,	Picture from herdownward on the table 		hands, and placed it	You will easily undetytaud. I	d. gravely	leoWanxjoim we are t¥	tot life. 0gRBEAUTIFUL RIENZL 	105may save her from this last, worst danger. So ho, then,friend is T7clor JosPf!/e/" 	-	I will answer you carefully," said Belle Cranstown; "butannot tell you much.	Mr. Joselyn is an English gentle-	n, who came o Saratoga about the time we did, aceoni-	iied b\ an elderly physician of the name of 1)r, Penil,er-i.	These gentlemen were introduced, to our party, and	ame the most intimate friends we had; but if Isolina was	)artlcnlar favorite of either of them it was of the doctor,to was an old bachelor.	Young Mr. Josclyn, as far as I	1 judge, paid no attention to any of our party. After some	tie they left Saratoga, and we all remarked that Teolina	we a ring which she had not worn before. My sister Louisa[lied her on the subject, and this was her answer:	-Mr.	selyn has a wife already-I hope you don't expect hi rn to	looking for another?' This answer surprised none of tie,	Mr. Joselvn's conduct had not been such as to warrant	.v remarks. Judge then of my surprise to see that picture!	is a spot in the field behind Mrs. Ilalcombes cottage,	iere a path ran down to a beautiful stream, and undou bt-	lv the man who acts the part of a lover is Mr. Victor	)selyn. as undoubtedly the lady's face is Isolina's! Theresome in	Iva, which, trust me, I do not think will	fleet upon either your sister's or the gentleman's honor.eliev- that, Iva!"'1 tank you," I murmured; ''you knew my sister well." hoth were silent, thinking.11 Dr. Pe.mherton " I mused; " where have I heard thatirne before?" Then memory took up the chain of thoughtid slowly traced it back to that fatal night on which Cecileau,iunt had snatched my sister's letter out of my handid r'ad the address, of which I had heard the syllables,Dr. Pew-"Wt, this the secret correspondent to whom Isolina senter k nra when in distress? Then memory went backward gall. id reproduced that letter on which the bright gasght ad rested, showing me a lady's name.Victor ,Tosel'n!"a I recalled my sister's words-her tears, and ht goll with a strange chill pervading my heart.	site was connected with a friend of mine. She is dead" Oh! what dark thoughts were rising in my heart I )o iou a nw the Satan-born pang's of the lust doubt in one	j70H. hI/-TThat painted story of given and accepted ic	in another land-that wife's death? av a ala this nagenerons fear! She was pure, any earn darling sister! This could not be the secret curse! Id all to my friend; and she solemnly declared her y. Jeolinas perfect innocence, s hatever appearance went -t her. Such faith kept my heart from sin king ntte; ei mv friend went away, T wrote down all that she lj no, anaftti t h en-n it Ii what poor sncccs!-T tried to napwv siter's life. It was an ellipsis--wild. ineolieremst; aoil: a paradox; it scented to give the lie to her pure char. or!	Loathing my involuntary thought I flung it away, and referred impenetrable mystery, until Heaven should sendto light.	At last the antlsorities announced that Miss Rienzi mast c ready for them, by a certain day; and good Dr. Graves I 'plied all his skill to strengthen her for the approachingordeal: and so well did he succeed that she was able to leavebed, and sit-poor shadow!-in an invalid chair, two,o vs before the time specified. Then the doctor-I do noter how-prepared her mind for what was coming; and soii and delicately did he fulfill the task that when I was nititted to join her she looked as calm and serene as ever, dOd even uplifted, if one could dare to trace such earthlyemotions in a face which seemed etherealized until it waslike a spirit's.Wit the day arrived in which she passed from her charnurn, leaning on the doctor's arm, and half carried by 'or lather, to where a carriage waited at the gate. snOi,nde,l hr a curious crowd, all anxious to see a woman-aced of nmrder take her first march on the road to sitsoats,I see lscr patient eyes raised to an father, and then aloft,a 5 rtatger Father whose arias cannot tremble as his		She smile a pale, pure ansile, like that la'avc Miaerlt	ever It ants upon a spear, and she meekly meets the- or, gloatig eyes of the mob. Then the carriage'orhd awas, and I staaad alone witla nay grief and nay dat'0 ledtiomalue heart..thoat Cs eetias my father canse home alone! She hqn1'ce-n indicted to stand her trial for nmrder, and 110w eta'	lodged in prison aa-h0	cho niuj nI	,',-, of liltBEA UTJFUL BIENZI.	107a close, cramped cell, whose iron bars were even stronger than Doctor Oaks'. Change of scene and air had been deemed necessary for her reeovery. Here was change of scene and air! Here were quiet and rest and soothing corn1janionship!	The trial was appointed to take place on the last day of May, and for the limil ed time before us my father strained every nerve to help the counsel who had been employed to defend his daughter in gathering what facts they could relating to the murder. It was a discouraging task, from the utter absence of friendly witnesses, or even an explanation from the prisoner as data to go upon. They had to work on, almost without a foothold for defense, and with the most telling testimony against them. And through it all, my sister kept inpenetrable silence on the subject, nor committed herself in the slightest to the astute and searching lawyer, who daily visited her. The firmness which she displayed, united to extreme bodily weakness, was amazing.	I need hardly say that I was with my sister every available hour in her cell to comfort and cheer her. She was very quiet and gentle, and seemed to like me to be there; but that peculiar look of resignation, touched with thankfulness, which I had seen in her face when first she heard she was arrested, still lingered there, as if she wanted to be sacrificed.	Once only she spoke of what was coming-one day when we were alone, and I had been wistfully seeking her conhidenco.	Bettor for us all if I perish," she said. I would rather die; but, little Ivaniila, if I go-remember, f shall tell post why?'	lIen weak baud pressing mine, her hollow eyes shedding looks of love upon me, made this promise strangely solemn to me.	It was while affairs were at this crisis that we received a telegram from may mother, announcing that she was at huhfax, and would 66 home in two days... JaRon SEEM''aware that he who rome ' U 4	What be coaches? The f' i ji li heado not so wont:" DANTE.oh nh teriuler arriveore the trial, the Eee	I, .on board.r.ae came sweeping up through the evening mists of thever and under the myriad stars. There was no Moo,,,o I rice ingot was dark, as any father arid I drove down tor.'et her at the wharf. I heard the loud snorting of the'aping steam and the rattling of the chains, as we droveloin behind a stream of cabs and hacks thither bound for','wildered travelers. We stepped a little to one side, undergreat fiery signal lamp, and my father went on bonducong vice throng, leaving me sitting in the carriage wait-ibis scene is indelibly impressed upon my memory.At first I regarded all this 	shifting panorama in the mass;there individually; gradually with concentrated interest.1 first my eves swept round the area, watching general''ets, and ending off with the object nearest me-ian Who leaned against the lamp-post. Anon, with a leapif the startled heart, I confined my distended eves to theIL JUl e nearest me, standing, as I have said, beneath theai lamp, and consequently in the very deepest shadow.I nib, a'ith flashing lights lead rumbled past with its H nrts-a happy, reunited family to judge by the I ,iof lialipt voices, and looking innilentri1lv at the sara1 idni: yet, one gleam of yellow light from 'the passing 1 fallen ore a face w'cll known.Heaven e: how I had thrilled at the prophetic woethese red-brown eyes. Had I not pictured that proLTSfai'e white and set? Ah, had I not mourned on a aj-c ldl held those shattered limbs?A ii ild prayer rose in my local t- a blazing I iwlit shotlike a rocket in Icry Veins; I steadily eyed tli figure. HOW	tIre niorky Pradnor Once Thor'c	I . ' ,i ,		'BEAUTIFUL RjE_yZj. 	109beckoned, but had no voice to call; then I sank back, and Leaning my head on my hands gazed wildly forth again.	It was dressed in a military cloak, a can with a golden band on its head, a sword trailing. Its hand, which was gloveless and seemed bones, covered with glisteniim skin hnng down listlessly, its bend drooped forward on itsbreaat.	Cecil!" I called, huskily. as in a dream; the sound reached him, for he raised his head, and I knew that the face in the dark was looking at me.	Suddenly the carriage moved off; I was dashed hack -i the seat, and Nelson drove rapidly down to the first gangway.	I clenched my hands together. Why had Fate stepped in and dashed so strange a sight from my ees? And then, almost instantly, incredulity attacked me.' Conld this indeed have been the mnrdered man? Sorely fancy had tricked me with a grotesque coincidence, I tore my thoughts from so mad a fantasy and shook off the delirious impression.	My mother was approaching the carriage door, leaning on lser happy husband's arm, and her eyes were directed in an eager gaze toward me, and the joy of seeing her swept away every other feeling, as I epraisg into her arms.	My child!" nuttered the sweet, low voice of lily infancy; "thank I Leaven that you are still left to us."	"Welcome, dearest mother," I sobbed; "welcome to our hearts!"	I clung to her sheltering bosom, and wept my lonely, tired heart light; for, ah, it was so sweet to see, after these long months of pain, the dear mother herself.	But I quickly recovered myself, and, ashamed of my selfabandonment, hurried her into the carriage, where we could pour forth our mental emotions.	It was a sweet, tender face, my mother's, with no regularity of outline, but meat delicacy of complexion, and that peculiar attractivcutss and self-possession of style wInch makes the American woniau second to the women of no other laud in expression; her brows level and slight, but gracious her lips fine in contour, though expressive of quiet flrnncss. and her eves--aIm, these were the beau tics of her face, and briht as in her fresher years; they v'uc large, blue eyes, clear as a transparent stream, and very nucBEAUTIFUL UIENZI. 	IllShe stopped and looked at my father in turn with mourn-terrified gaze:	Oil., husband Y' she cried, bursting into tears, "you re pore changed than she. There was not a white hair on your lead when I left you a year ago, and now you're an old maul Ph, Goiseppe, my (tear hoc, why did you let them keep me Irom yon so long?"And there was the greatest change of all to come. Oh,poor niother-heart, keep strong for love of o5!	As soon its we had brought her home, and waited on all her watts like fond. devoted slaves, my father led her to a private room and told her all- What she suffered, I never knew; courageous, bravo, and unselfish, site kept her anguish to herself and comforted him; her sweet lace was pale, but not mournful, when they joined me and she infused a warmth of sunshine into my heart, sweet to feel, whatever she suffered herself.	dope docks the pillow with lotus-wreaths and for the first night in months I slumbered sweetly. The dark cloud was vast as ever, but I scented to sec an edge of golden brightness curling the gloomy scroll.	But while I dressed in the sunny morning's rays with fl-' realistic sense of things as they are, and not as they appeared to be-which a calm night's rest and broad da\ light are sure to bring, the mysterious apparition of the past even iug presented itself to my imagination with a sudden and overpowering vividness, which smote, me into stillness in the midst of my dressing, that I might revise once more that brief moment of recognition,Could it indeed have been a trick of fancy?	''No," whispered intuition vobenauth ; ¥ be cheated hr no unbelief. You saw him!"	So powerful was this conviction ¥that I no longer felt ashamed of my credulity, but determined to mention the circumstance o my father, that he iaigbt sift the matter.	In this state of 01 md I went down stairs. It was early, but my mother was already up, and sitting by her open window.	Her band was supporting her cheek, she was in deep reverie and did not boar too enter. I was grieved to see that her beautiful eyes tvere dark and iris-circled, as if she had slept but little.Mother dear," f murmured. crouching h1 her kneeI		]IYI i lIE ZL112	She fond lv kissed me. and surveyed me with a lone	rsome sight to a mother's eyes," she ythat outdo. aud these bright, brave eyes, and It~ - ],)N c, to look atiiivinothenmnatt I confided the strange up.	Ii 1 lii he,d cii the wharf.	H	t	d a1 ii she might well be excused forifI acre ci-icet; hiit 5he iliii not öttt itii lit to combat toyehahie Pellet. Slit pondered 0- 1- the incident a longnit. tI cu she rose with a sigh, and stood. looking at asIi 1 roid il ed eyes.I reared r like to speak of wl]at may have no existence"die "aid; ' lint I have a strong impression that some Strangeoot h a 1 ccii formed to ruin the happiness of the family,Iegiuniug, first of all, by mining Isolina. If yoni p Beau.lilt were really alive, it seems very much like a concertedplot to cheat the authorities into condemning your sister as a en rainal, rIlbis shell certainly be told your father and Mr. Spenigle, and the affair sifted to the bottom. And niecetime, my child. lay down the ease which has been on year shoulders, and leave it to ins who are able to cope with ithe it your duty to soothe the unknown sorrows of your ha1iless si*ter, and we will do the rest.Mamma, what enemy have we-who would seek toharm us?'I do not know, Ivanihla."4*i frCH \pTlpIg -X V.ON TRIAL.-r- you called forili Irma out a world of men	maccent? What is my offense? e is the esl,ience that does accuse me?'KING i-ia H*ED III.C arefulft as my mot¡sh	to hero as tea had been prepared, it was *51.'il,less were great to ecu [online The ravages of grief aidhail lint seen her Since ie_they were stnpefving to one (xaberaut charms			e Oars of her girlish level neSs am1	ik	ill, but 011	1b0trayecl lihsle of her feeliug 10	CI theni will, tIc 1n rot-ui whirlBRA UTIRtTL BIRNZI,	usa mother can exhibit so nobly, and chose to act the part of comforter and nurse to the world-weary girl whose heart ached with a load which-ah, Heaven only estimated at its trite weight! My attention was strongly arrested by the cager, intense look with which Isolina watched my mother during the tirst day of her arrival.	I could not trace that strange constraint with which she treated my father in her bearing toward mamma; but yet her manner was unaccountable, 'i'horo was a gentle snhisissivcness and an humble affection, which blended with every look and feeble tone, as if an unforgiven wrong toward that gentle mother was burdening her soul.	But after a time all lesser interests were forgotten, and the day of her trial approached. It was extremely doubtful if she would stand the ordeal. Dr. Graves looked every letter of his name, but did his duty unceasingly, and visited the prison twice a day. My mother staid in the cell until the latest hour that visitors were allowed; my father elmost lived in Mr. Speingle's law office. From his anxious face, when he came home to his hasty meals. I feared that the case was getting onslowly. As for tae, these three days were alternations between despair and hope, and E was in a state of intermittent anxiety, painful to myself, and, 1 fear, intolerable to others.	On the evening before the dreaded day, Miss Uraustown came running in to see me, and to comfort me if she could.	She brought news which at another period would have caused me much sincere regret but in my present mood, scarcely attracted my attention at the time.	The fate of poor you ag ilosocraft has been ascertained almost to a certainty" she said. " He was traced on board the cars which ran off the track ten miles from New York on the twems tv-ninth of November, and though the body never was found, undoubtedly he -Perished in the debris, as be was in a weak and disabled state. Mrs. Harrison must be cared for. She has a beautiful little child, two weeks old, and we must keep time melancholy news from her until site is stronger."These tidings did not impress mc at the time; but aftermy friend left they occurred to me, and, I know not 11W.aronsed my keen interest., 1 coutsmplatcd the affairat	UErU I /I'l 1 111K \J1.Jig- hi;i riTlies. n I all things considered, determined lo tellii far icr that 1) hr.I ii -u and trod not surprised to find that the incident,'-1-' lvi iii the disappearance, aroused his most interim	lie questioned me closely; arid, late as it was, it Tic rh ii dont 11ie oeloelc, hurried off to catch Mr Hill,- sire he should leave his ofilee.ii, l,t>t of hiy da rrued softly, with rose-clouds of filmy r-1'areriev: arid as 1, with restless soul, watched at lily iio'nts. I hoped that even as this day had risen, so nsiglit un icrnt he raised freer tier night of sorrow.	Ui rri,iner and I rverc earls at the prison, and with tender care I arrayed civ poor sister for her first appearance asjirisericr at the bar:" She was very quiet and passionlessand seemed to look forward with no terror to her danger.	Doctor Graves arrived at ten o'clock and carefully examined his patient's capabilities. lie said that she was stronger to-day, arid " If she is kept quiet she will stand a trial, but if it goes against her-sire's gone:"Rather a doubtful situation for an invalid to be in!	At eleven o'clock, a cab arrived to convey the prisoner to the court, and almost at the same moment my father dashed up to tire prison arid entered the cell.	There was an expression alurost of exultation on his face, which was nevertijeless looking very care-worn with the recent labor he had been undergoing; and after fondly embracing Iso]iua and whispering a word or two of encouragemint, lie turned to sue arid drew lire into a corner.	" lIensemh" he said, "to answer plainly whatever ilnestir,ns clay be put to you by Isohna's counsel. You will hr called as a witness; keep all your presence of nund about you.,,lie cave me a few more instructions, winch I nnxionslyI Ueneri to, and did rue best to profit by.	The ('curt ll:r crirmnred. there was a drill hum of whis-		ny voices, which subsided all at once as the judge andlii' JIc'yun,.nn entered and took their seats with all tirei coup and cl-en nistaneo " of office.trial of Isolina Riouxi was the first case called.'l'luere was a movement arnon the crowd a straining ofeves, and risin-, from their SCdts as the acctmsed walkedslot; iv up tlct\veur tile the Officers Doctor Graves closely fol-BEAUTIFUL lUBELL 	115lowing, with a grim, professional face, which expressed rob times of disapprobation.	With a meek glance upon the ground, and secret hectic tineing all her veins, my sister, too lovely for the eye of scorn, was led up through the throng, and given a seat beside her counsel..	The trial commenced. The counsel for the prisoner and on behalf of the State, unrolled their briefs, with glances of quiet antagonism at each other. Anxiously, I read the face of the opposing lawyer, and strove to make an estimation of his capabilities. Mr. Speingle was an eminent lawyer, and had thrown the whole of his talent and interest nte my sister's ease.	The indictment was read, proceedings were speedily under way, and I sat with my hand tight clasped in my mother's, a breathless and anxious spectator.	At last witness number one, for the prosecution, was called, and a lady clothed in black came forward from a conspicuous seat, and placed herself in the witness-box, bowing with the air of an empress to the officer who held open the door.	She raised her crape vail, erected herself, and glanced haughtily ronnd, and I looked with wonder on the face of Lillia Meredith, yet so different from the simple and timid girl I had seen her, that 1 could not at first assure myself it was she. Her figure seemed expanded and was taller, fuller, and more assertive; bar face, which had been responsive to every simple emotion, was hardened into a scornful look of determination; her large blue eyes seemed unpleasantly bright, and too ranch like the cold.. glittering sparkles of a glacier. There was plenty of health, with headstrong spirit, to support all this show of resolution; care had not blanched or thinned her cheek; sorrow had not crept into her eyes. It was a heartless, selfish seal that looked out of those bold, handsome eyes open my sister, drooping hehind the prisoners bar.	She deposed that Isohna Rienri had left the ball of the P C5 belle Society at ten o'clock on the night of the twentyninth of November, in company with Mr. Cecil Beaniaont, and left a message for Mr. Riemzi that she had gone home in a sleic'b. That she bad not gene home, but had driven straight on with Mr. Beaumont, and had not been hear since, until her friends found her in a private asylum S¥				f' Will CC. Fiat Miss Ihenri		nil give no reason why she was there. 1.11 [lip la.		veil that Miss Ilicuzi had been with Cecil Bean fl1Oi¥		moment of his death, as they had been CCCII together			ness who wee jre5sa I die minutes or so before t]e	lent. That she, the deponent, had reasoi i to bout1, .			was an cm/1)1l against ce.',iiiuiont as he had displeased her oii the e euin of lI)I' she left the witness Lox, m unhappy sister turned I looked on her with such a long, sorrowful gaze, thatbe bird girl flushed to the brows, and queued, despite herI arroaneo.	Mr. Beutly, the counsel for the State, then went on with tie facts of the case where Miss Meredith left off.lie semi I hat on the night of the 29th of November, thelj,1, of Cecil Beaumont had been found, partly in and pay out of a half-frozen brook, just beneath a wooden bridge which lie had been pushed, as had been proved by tee	earace of t}ie bridge. The railing had been partly hroken down, and being old and decayed, had gi en way hiore the weight of the body which had been dashed againd it; furthermore, one panel of said railing had been found beneath the hotly of the deceased, thus proving 1earlv that lie had becn pusied o er advisably, and with inteiit to kill hini. A lady's lace sleeve had been found clenched iii thelieiid of the deceased; also, drifted down SOme dtance frontlift, body, a lady's handkerchief, on which was written Miss nellie,both the sleeve need the hiandkei',lnef were produced.hand kerchief I recognize}, bare sleeve I lied uIe1I: it was not like what lay sister had worn Oil the f the conceit; I rapidly whushered to my fathiir; iiiinhiujcatod to Mr. SPeingle, who nodded two orThe body," resumed Mr. Bontl "was discovereditiner,oit	Wh0 Was iio present, and would bp.rIly c,li.l upon t give his testiiaony_vhio upon dietly ran to th0 nearest house for zii d. , 1biugi,t ink wit 11 hi11 C min, Who assisted III i m to cdnre' IIi 0p his h0 Ltse, Thi5 ho use Ii iq)pelle( I to be Mre.th0 neothei 01 00, of ho Unfortrn.it ymnuig null	who hhhmatehled himi at	PI it liii' CBEAUTIFUL EfFETE 	117warrant to search for the person who had caused her son's death.Here Ohed Walsh was called, and duly-sworn.	Obed Walsh was a short, muscular fellow, with profusely tamied chEeks, restless, light-colored eyes, and lank hair , which fell like whitliered grass over his forehead and ears. Those ears, disdaining the hirsute covering, cropped out like two leathery hat wings, large, upright, and eager, Joining a strangely alert expression to the rough, shock head.	Being launched by the judicious promptings of Beutly, he deposed that, on the night of the 29th of November, he was walking on the -- Road, about nine miles from the city, trying to reach Greely's Mills before the public-house folks would all he in bed. At a few minutes before twelve he was overtaken by a sleigh, which, as he stood aside to allow it to pas, lie saw contained a lady and gentleman. They were talking so closely that they did not notice him, and the horse was rushing on of itself, for the reins were loosely slang over the gentleman's arm. Just as they passed him, the lady throw up her urns and cried, ''Yes! I was born to be your curse, and this night will prove it!" The gentleman caught her hands, but she snatched them assay and cried more fiercely, "Wait-wait! You won't seek to touch me in half an hour!"	With these ominous words the pair got beyond hearing. The peddler walked on for some fifteen minutes until ho came to the top of time hill lending down to Greely's Mills, when he heard a strange rumbling noise, coming front the wooden bridge, in time bottom of the valley, as he thought; it was like the rattling of stones and the crashing of wood, then there was a dull explosion that shook the ground. He began to run down the bill, for he did not know whether it was before or after him, and lie wanted to get straight into litnovor's public house, out of harm's way.	It took him a good while to get to the bridge, which he was lust eroisiu, when he noticed part of the rail broken away, and the snow disturbed in a very curious manner, as if there had been a struggle. He looked over the brink, cad was sure he saw something like a loan lying among the rocks and water in the brook. ILo ran down, and found that the gentleman whom he had seen twenty mmnutfore, still warns, lie dragged the body out of the iiIit 841 '1 ZFI'L J41EXZLtie fields to a house which lie saw half a asilt When he was about Fifty rods front tlt5 iw s nThtl nu cii ag tots aid hill) iv lie a lie stopped,ulrl ii list he had seen.\lli'vv said the watt('nut in, and [II slww you," said the Peddler; ''and''city yin a did it, Fill afraid, has cleared."$ W there a young girl?" he asked, startled like.1 cii the ped'U told him what he had heard as thett p,iSo(Jd hint. They rail on. until they reached the'v. and scrambled down the rocks together. No soonervi the aew-comer looked at the face of the body, than heiii:	liv Heaven! Ws just as I thought. it's young Master (yelP"	Then he said that he was a servant that belonged to the young gentleman's mother, and she lived in the house across the field. So they made a bier of hurdles, and can ned the body up to the doorstep, where the servant left it, while lie went to prepare the mother. Pretty soon he came out and helped the peddler in with the body, to a parlor where it was put on a sofa, and a lady came in and flung herself on the floor beside it.	The peddler went into the kitchen with the servant and they staid there about an hour, until Mrs. Beaumont came nut sod called the servant, and they talked together a long Ituite, and then the servant canto back, and asked the pedtIler if he would go to a magistrate who was about two attic' di't,nt, and make his deposition. and get men wttie tracks of the niurderess. lie got a sovereign front¥ cvii aitt, and set off though it was about one ocloek(H "se\ami neil by Mr. Spei ogle:You heard a strange rumbling noise, like the rattliuflies and the crashing of wood, followed by a dull ex-id	-il it that shock the gromid Was this o. in your(iiuion i:ausefi"ver (Ii' tiridge?' the young lady pushing the deceased'l'lie ivitnev5 looked at to counsel for the State. lv, k at ma, if you pleast and atuissver my questio0tIC."In; lintI	v.,pBRA UTIF1JTI 111K Nh. 	119Did you hear of any other eanse for such a peculiarSound?"	Yes, sir; the night train from------ran off the track on account of the snow, just above Greely's Mills. and the engine boiler burst. I board all about it, and saw 'it on my way to the magistrate's."	Very good. Now Mr. Walsh describe in what manner the body of the deceased was injured."	"I couldn't exactly say. It were dead enough though, for the face was as white as cotton, and the breath gone."	"The face, Walsh? the face, did you say?" repeated Mr. Speingle, slowly.	There was an audible murmur in the breatlileas ereyC. two or three men half rose up and sat down again."The face was as white as cotton," persisted Walt,stolidly, having tried to catch Mr. Bently's eyes and failed; that gentleman keeping an impenetrable and contemptuous neutrality during what he appeared to consider Mr. Speingle's trifling. "Except," added Walsh, "where a lot of blood crossed it from one temple."	11 Stand down for the present, Mr. Walsh," said the counsel for the prisoner. "If any of the jurymen who viewed the body of Cecil Beaumont are in this court, let them come forward," ho uttered in a loud voice.	Three men elbowed themselves eagerly forward. Mr. Speingle pointed to one of them.	I want that man to describe the appearance of the body upon which the inquest was held at Mrs. Beaumonts house."The man was sworn.	,"You viewed the body of course before you gave a verdict. Describe the face if you please."	"There weren't no face at all," said the man, a bluff eonnh'ymaan; ''he were smashed to pieces he were, and the clothes was all that held him together."	Here a shout interruption occurred. , Doctor Graves who sat close behind the prisoner rinsed his hand and enjonied silence: be then sent an officer to whisper soniethnig to the judge, and the prisoner was supported out of the court in a half-fainting condition,	"My mother rose and quietly followed her to a sindb antechamber, and the proceedings went on.,,"What sort or clothes were on the body?"I	-,	o/.1t J"120A ii evening dress such as the swellsWire they much saturated with blood so much as you would think, considering iuo it had got: asic I'm sure it's wonderful hcould have been turned, and twisted,and buttered '1was. by falling over a gully like Crag's Brook, a,g we all-which showed elearlyk to the subject," said Mr. Bently, impatiently.¥ I h'h i:owed clearly," repented the ex-Juryman, "thathave pied him mighty hard, and 'thrown reeksioto bug after him.Mr. Ben tly smiled maliciously.	Then there were loose rocks on the bridge and round the body ?" questioned Mr. Speiugle with much interest.	ot as I saw!' said the Countryman, scratching his head. "I was there the next day too, and looked all non id,"ft was Mr. Speingle's time to smile enjoyably.	"'I' lien that supposition is improbable, and we dismiss it with the natural question-' How could a young lady excavate rocks out of frozen ground to hurl over a bridge. auj leave no trace?' Witness, you may go. Now, gentlemea of the jury, bear in mind, the body which Walsh helpeh La pick sip from under the bridge had a white face, streaked with blood; the body upon which was held an inquest next day, 'had no face at all,' was held together by the clothes, yet these clothes were not stained with blood to the extent teat so many wounds warranted. Miss Ivanilla Iiienzi, ensue forward."Some one led flee to the witness-stand. for one instantlily senses whirled, until my father came forward andd sesas' me; then I was eani. and recovered from Eli\\ itli a feelheg of deep solemnity. I took the oath.Are you a Soldiers' Friend" began Mr. Speingixc n'ly,Didf all I.you on the fifth of April visit a sick soldier in J	('iv by name Charles IIarriaon:	Relate the subject of your interyicu."lIe is s very anxious to see his	hrotl i'	It v. 0 vcu'man nann,l i,ler liociseraft nIt 1 h.1BEAUTTh'UL RTE1YZL 	121the end of November; and Harrison gave me a letter which be had written and his photograph, to assist our society nfinding him"Did your society search for him?"Yes."With what success?"	He was traced to the ears which left for New York on the 29th 0± November, and ran off the track at Groelv's Mills. Undoubtedly he perished in the explosion."''is this the photograph Charles Harrison gave you?"A photograph was handed to me which I examined	" This is the same photograph." p " Is this the letter?"I scanned it oarofullv."Yes," I said again.	"Now," said Mr. Speingle, producing his pocket-hook, while the most thrilling silence prevailed, 'is this a photograph of the same person,. and is this strip of paper written by the same hand that wrote that letter? Look carefully, madam."	Again a photograph was put in my hands; it was touch defaced and twisted . but it was a fae-simile of the original one; then a strip of paper was submitted to my inspection. It was quite clean, though the ink was somewhat dim, and these were the words:"Loander Ifosooralt, Private, Newark Road, Jersey City."On the other side was printed:	C. C., No. 4827. To be worn round the neck over the shirt. In battle, under, Fight the good fight of faith."	It was an '' identifier," given by a certain benevolent association of Christian men. to enable them to trace dead soldier.,, and send their effects to their friends. In bewil-Idej7ed surprise 1. deposed to the genuineness of both these articles, and returned them.	"Tbispliotograp~, and this 'identifier,"' said.11r. Spein~gle,'and his voice rose clear and lend in the breathless silence,." was found in a lead box hung around the neck, and underthe shirt of the body which is buried in Cecil Bcaumont',sgrave. Coi)salerin,~ all that has tran6pired colleerning tlli,'~6trang() body, which one sa * A's was 11111tilate(l andsays was not, mav we not venture to Sa)! that Lean(ler R(-, craft, the nnssin soldier, has been found-'But here he was compelled to pause, while the ci tmI				00 ii Js J12-				to their consterloit 1011. I Alia Mered,		liii I' al		I at d owil again, po 11)(I eleetriv-t to 1 t r I eat (1 forward 01111 wttt ii g my Iitiid; I he (,()t[fai ar		Id thunderstruck	the pi dge sat f1for	1	t 	his knees the ,jiirvulen Coilferred			a in. s oiH I it I I Ii esti IoNic is, Mr. kpenialc waited Phikgiik- for silence though there was a deep excitement ineras.iIe1lle" shouted the clerk.A rapid hush fell on the convulsed throng-they wereIan! to lose one word.	)lav we not venture to say that the missing soldier hiss oven fitiind where Cecil Beaumont, if dead, should befoundi \t iiiess. stand up."I rose again and came forward.	This lace sleeve was found in the dead man's hand, upon svluoni the inquest was held in Mrs. Beau mon t'i house. Do you recognize this sleeve as belonging to the prisoner?"I took it in my hands; it was much soiled and torn; alsothere was a considerable portion of it covered with soot, 0ismoke grime.This is not the sleeve my sister wore that night," Isaid.Mr. Speingle took it from me and handed it to the jury-111011 on the bench.	Gentlemen, examine it mhautely," lie remarked. ''Now. MY man," turning to Mr. Walsh, who had taken refugenear Be ntly; " how was it you did not see that sleeve in theIvdloe0' the gentleman you picked it up from beneath theI didn't look for am thing," he said, snflenlu'.\on roluarkeu on the appearance of die place, I s111-hen	0 the d now_wasnt There plenty of soot and set,", avli, mid l,tae remains of a gipsy fire, burnt stick pe iiN		o, oil P,	'g 		but clean snow and clean water," said tile		smile, e	said _Njr. S,		yill his boots.sleeve Cailnot ]01\BEAUTIFUL BIENET. 	isaCrag's Brook, cannot have been caught by Cecil Bean mont's hand in his fall over the bridge, as it is covered with smoke,oily dirt, and blood. On the contrary, that sleeve must have been in the midst of the railway accident, where the explosion of the engine took place. I have no doubt that Leander Itoseeraft, when the catastrophe occurred, grasped the arm of the lady nearest him in the carriage, and brought with hirrr a part of the dress which remained in the death-dlutch of the poor, battered, mutilated body. I think we have proved, gentlemen of the jury, that Miss henri did not eorurjit murder on the body which was buried under the name of Cecil Beanmout. I propose now to show forth that she did not commit morrrder at all; that the body of the real Cecil Beanrmont was not dead, and that Miss I-henri has been foully conspired against, with intent to make the law punish her for a oriole she did not commit. I have to ask a few more questions of this witness, Madam, relate what you saw three nights ago on the wharf, as you were waiting the arrival of a passenger in the Enghsls steamer."	"And remember, madam, you are upon your oath," interposed Mr. Bently, getting up and facing me.	This interruption confused me; I commenced, but so tremulously that a murmur rose from all parts of the house, asSpeak out! Can't hear:""Take time-don't be afraid," said the judge, mildly.	"You were sitting alone in your father's carriage?" began Mr. Speiagle.	And while I waited a few minutes for papa and roamma---"Stop. stop!" cried Mr. Bentiy, in an irritating manner.at what hour? It seems to me that you and Brother"Peinlule are making it up between YOU."The lawyer's insolence brought book my courage.	''It was half-past eight when we drew up beneath the signal lamp," I said, steadily. ''and my father alighted andwont on board the steamer, leaving mr1e sitting in the carriage, while the driver occupied the box.'Ahl but 1 thought your friend, Speingle, said you werealone!"''Sir !" 1 exclaimed, flushing hanghtily, " how o'I121ant I 1¡ is' thus rudely interrupted:'	ii murmurs of applause ansivev0 f ' No, no:" an?el.!" screamed the clerk.was alone in the carriage. the coachman outside enx. when from the window I saw a mull standing he.I he ,P I have before mentioned; aIn ro'ai'g a bright light on his face, and I distinetj1'nuizel Mr. lleaument.I id silence followed this announcement, and evefli ever l3entl gazed into my face, speechless with surpriseui incredulity.I was too much startled at first to accost him," I COfl-tied in the unbroken hush, my voice low and even; and whilc I was shaking the carriage window, to lower 't aul attract his attention, the coach man, who of conins, was not cognizant of my wishes, saw his master and nile tress at a little distance, and drove down to tb ui. and thus I lost sight of him."	"And yon," Mr. Bontly laughed satirieubt-, "you tell this story on your oat h-yonr irrevocable, surul oath, befon' heaven and on that fnost Holy Bible?""Ido."oSo improbable! Why did-	filstodvF11	you not put t1le person ill"I did not even think of what I could do. I was tooanitated to do anything; I could not raise ray voice to steak."As Then of common sense," interposed Mr. Speingle.q ietly, I ask the gentlemefl of the jury if it would hen tn rIch for a young lady to descend from her carriage aiidabout for a consfalle on a erosi led wharf, 5111015 end-ft beholding the bodily appariti of a 5151511 whom sheveil to be dead 1"I think not," said a voice in the crowd,And deer non recovered front your anitttieii did ncr no attempt to discover von ghost? make icojul riesn0 fuss whateveri pncsued the undaunted lentAt this rnonlettt a enesseig0 e'ime in and handed a letti 1ill-to the judge, lie opened it, raised his eyebrows, read itnqihly looked at the livers ciii mu (I "I ' to 10 1scarcit Passed fnu¥ -ic's IllIB H4 UTTIFUL BJLWZL 	155bounded amazement ; the gentlemen on the bench were so engrossed they scarcely listened to the remainder of Beotly's cross-examination.	"The emotions which occupied me on meeting my mother, who had been absent a year, banished for th¡e first few minutes the impression which had been made upon me by seeing Cecil Beaumont, but while we repaseed the signal-lamp, and indeed all the way up the wharf, I looked out of the window, hoping to see him."And saw nothing at all like him?"	I did see a gentleman in the same costume whom at first I thought 1 might have mistuken for him; but my father, who knows him, sent a note to him, asking if he was beneath the lamp beside our carriage that night, and an answer was returned in the negative.""Come, now-what's the name of this gentleman?"Captain Rnthven Ansehn,"	"I would like very much if the learned gentlemen of the jury could see that letter."	'' I have the honor of gratifying the counsel for the prosecution," said Mr. Spoingle, blandly, taking a note from my father.Smiling, the judge rose and spoke	This trial has come to a very unexpected conclusion. A letter has been handed to me. -which at once acquits Miss Rienzi of murder or of intent to murder, in so far as it is written by the supposed victim lsimsell. I shall read the few words	"Sia:-I heard this honr that Miss isotma thenet P on trial for theinnrd,e,r of Cecil Beanmont, At once acquit her: she is perfectly inno-cent of any wrong toward him, He was not killed in his own mad impinto Crag's Brook, 11 this is insufficient to clear her name, the writercan give further proofs of the truth of his statement. Along wttti evi-dence that Ivanips Rienzt can give , eoneernha whet she saw at theAtlantic wharf, I think it is sufficient.	Cccii Bzsusioar.	A ringing cheer drowned the jndge's voice; Benny rolled up his brief and threw it into his hat; the jurymen stamped their feet like boys hearing of a holiday.	"Order!" bawled the ushers, and the trial ended in eonfe seon,My sister was now summoned to appear. She came inthis time leaning on our kind physicians arm, and a tijr	Jan	1 }i of sympathy swayed the mc she ste04¥	non before them, her pale face so SO1'ro\v-\vorn Oaf		lifted with its saintly patience to that of the jtidg: ssalliel		(Mid has a heard a fly buzzing in the most		nets, wli he the judge addressed the prisoner	I nanmnneh as it has been found that you were perfectly	at of invent to injure Cecil Beaumont. and t	at tetupted self -de4ru etion of his ow u free will, at 1¥ Ned and since it has been proved that he is alive¥ I tech this day and desirous of your acquittal, we us,thont formal consideration of the question. honorably aM(vie eq nit you of the crime laid to your charge."The ceetass trembling in the heart; of a thousand burstnon the air one moment my sisters white, seraphie faceamed on me a tide of joy and wonder, then she fell baskath a low sob, into the arms of the doctor.And with feet which trod on air, I followed hercarriage and thanked Heaven that she was saved 1thtCHAPTER XVLMY PHANTOM."Is it guns? my pulses beat-	What was it? a lying trick of the brain?	Yet I thought I saw her stand	A shadow there at my feet !"-Tfln%'TSON,	The house was noiseless: the crescent moon smiled in atmy half-closed window-blind, low clown in the mellow sky;	nilsicy, dreamy perfnnie of the	nigh t-hloomnhmg eereust	e mn fro	a Vase on the nointel my sistej"s faint	iNs sOon led from the west 3,001 1), 	she peacefullynibered, Sophie keeping watch. no disvnrhin thoughtsr;nsed no: I we5 foil of grntito for the mercies of toe	lay; exilaustioss load prepared Inc well for my pilow;	nick was wearing Slowly on,Atid vet I eunid not s1ehi v thglsts of thought	timid Inc wake NI no ever	oa nit hack to\Vh had come oversunijif	'he svn0IBEAUTIFUL ETE_YLL 	127of air disturbed me; yet my ears began to heat and strain themselves to catch some movement, and they scorned to enlarge until my nervous system was one immense tyropaflu ni	It came like the fall of gossamer--a ioorky shadow, nothiug more, and it grew toward the roiddle of my silent chamber. A gentle rush of a new atmosphere enveloped me, which told inc that oiy door was open.	But how could human hand have opened it and make no noise? My mind reasoned distinctly, and my body lay in a torpor of horror.	It came on, slowly, patiently, impalpably as an evening shadow creeping over sunny grass; it stole with a foot which might step on the golden lilies without bending thotr pensile stems, closer, closer; it loomed like a column of smoke before me, and stopped beside my bed.	What horror! flay defenseless-mv heart ceased to heat -I closed my eyes for the assassin's blow.	It came not, the stifling terror lifted, and I dared to look again.	The warning lunar ray shone upon the taco of a woman standing beside my table, with a long, colorless flask in her hand, which flashed like a bar of crystal. A tumbler of water, thinly diluted with sour wine, stood on the table; my night drink.	It was an Italian custom, which the sultry nights now coming in caused me to resume.	She raised the tumbler in her other hand, and poured from the flask into it a hair-like stream or liquid which fell soundless, then slipped the vial into her bosom, and bending low, replaced the tumbler on the marble table, whore the liquid it contained writhocl and foamed into white for some moments. When the hissing sound wns over she lifted her face to the shadowy sky, and the dreadful features stamped themselves into my heart; a face hoantiful and vengeful, whitened and corpse-like with passion's scorching flame, A face to remember.	"My oath is fulfilled!" she said, in words without a voice. Had she spoken? or had the words passed from her soul to mine? She loomed once more toward me between me and the light, a vapor gray and deadl. She swooped close, and shot that terrible face into mine;' I felt the lurid eves fixed upon me-all feeling loft the surface of my skin-I full noI128th was io to 10 	oped nobrvat ii,	ogh 	ibound eyes, and ho melted into tl	,lrket adowOt	i into the nest hoA I fc-t mc 0± hoi	ill ,IV bJ	hand and foot by tCti¥diuJ 0eeding of the woioail.flitted fron] the room by in\ isilsie derees, a ios11		1	ii ii) d reach] ed forward 1111(1 gra ped the door, a±I it immovable while the sib ouded higH]e glow into tItcr shadow. fnch b inch it closed, and I thought tout51(1 not hat to see it touch the lock.In the midst of my watching, impenetrable d.rk5s5led the room; the moon had gone down and the blackto or before dawn had commenced. A double terror fell oiliii that she would retaIn and destroy rue in the dark. A cold moisture oozed from my brow, my limbs became pan,,,. hi ZCJ, in torpor deepened into insensibility.	Wheni revived the darkness had given way to bright, lancing sunshine; the horse-flies were noisily lazing on the window.	I raised myself and looked round. All was as T had left it, even to a silk vail which I had thrown upon the back of a chair near the door. Would not a passing form hive brushed the light thing to the floor? My tumbler was -	actlv where I had placed it, within the very ring of		oh-rure which had fallen from it last night. Could		tO	hand have replaced it thus, with no light to guide?		Pt-		to feel my pulse to see if I were not in some	sirs till,	lhio coothong sounds of human life wei- ushieriiw in the Islorlilug; m mind became caliii. partly because of the ext istion of nov vsteni; I insensibly fell into a sleep sleep cIt was not distuyie,1 until late iii the f rclissoli.room,		Sophie. who was hnst1jn 015t	Ct elio tncevcd	soy diet sli with a\ 0 one eon 1(0 been	cepinsiisnnhlv, i\lis 	deli.111). here fixing rosinsl i'(11r hhilt u hour. and Volt Iic,	. rejijo know What time it i. 	-11 sit ijsv't		a1] lag 1 -Ic my scattered Ol]St 5.	~ , rill S,		lint Vour rn,		on elate for hreakfat by alc(lilt it I V011 dept			von wasn t to be ivslcsntd on 110 aOBEAUTIFUL BuBBLE. 	129"Yes, miss."ui night? Had she a good night P"	Yes, miss, she slept vers- nice and quiet, fhouh die's weak and spent like, which isn't to be wondered "at after yesterday. Yes, miss Eva, I sat up until six o'clock with Miss Isohoa.'Did nothing-did anything disturb you?"No, miss; was snvt1uug"	Oh, I don't know," I murmured, passing my hand over my confused brain, "Is my father quite well?"Yes, Miss is a, I think so."	''And mamma-why don't you mention her? Is anything the matter with mamma? Speak, Sophie"	''No, miss," said the girl. in a distressed tone. "I hope nothing's the matter with you, Miss Eva-now I look, you dent seem well or right like.	I hope not!" I exclaimed, glancing meehar ieallv at the tumbler upon the table. ''Did I drink the water out of that glass?"	I could scarcely speak from alarm; the tumbler was empty.	"I don't know, Miss its," said Sophie, looking anxiously at roe. ''What is the matter?"Was it you that emptied that tumbler, or I?"	The water looked clouded and warm-I threw it away, miss."	Thank Heaven I" I exclaimed , in the first impulse of gratitude. But second thoughts caine immediately. "I wish you had kept it, Sophie-it was valuable,' I cried.	11 I am very sorry, indeed, miss, if I did wrong; was it medicine?"	Yes," I said, with a hysterical laugh; "it was medicine. help ate to dress, Sophie; I have a headache."	Miss Ivanilla! Mv good nose! are you sick! Let me run dawn for your ioa or the doctor; he is with your pa in the library."	With a strong effort I mastered the weakness, and sat down trembhin for a few minutes.	"It's nothin; it is passing awa." I saidL'duish soy dressing and I shall go down myself;' I want Dr. Graves before lie goes away."	I regretted exeedinglv that the tumbler had been emptied. What had I to prove that my midnight visitor was oioi eI	£130ban a rreatioii of inghtmare? I Ii itch I he tiimljler sn4it anxiouslY' There was but one drop in the b51.in. winch ran round the crystal circle with the, dry, teal.1 k-i rapidity f qniek-Silver. i asked the girl if she aa shed it."-N,,, " she answered, "Ill get, you a clean tumblertotes."Non ir nilnilt I responded "I want this glass."	I carried it down stairs, but I was so weak and tremulon hat I rested three times on the way. It was with diffi. 'city that I could open the library door and lean against the n, all.My father and Dr. Graves were in close discussion;Speingle, the lawyer, was also there, attentively listening to the colloquy of the ether gentlemen.	Heavens!" ejaculated my father, catching sight of ate; "here's little Iva, as white as a ghost! What has happened child?,"	lie came to me and took my hand; I wits so awed and solemnized by the horror I had experienced, that the sight of so many friendly faces almost made me break down; bait I overcame my feelings, and came forward to the table, whore I put the tumbler down, and held my shaking hand out to each of the gentlemen.	"What's the matter?" said Dr. Graves, putting on his glasses and drawing me closer. "You've got a nervous headache, child, and your hand is as dry and hot-as an ember. Eli! What's this?" He bent his head and sniffed lonely two or three times in my face. '' Who's been giving a on chloroform, oh? Now w liatwhiat does this iocan? The child's neatly billed-she's drenched with 'liloroforna !"11111)"'1 tlet" exclaimed. "I ant not conscious iflivilig inhaled chloroform hnt I ann-oh, I nni dreadtellf-		-" Exactly," he aid, seating me on a sofa, where I was'hid to sink lila head on the cushions, "Anarst hieties"hpood to year constitution and you oppooil the ehile"0' foriR until a SUfficient ho antitv was hilt tiled to ottt' lower you, and you feel the effects this niorning ne' as na-sickness headache etc. Now, don't you? C011,niv dear, confess now-haven, t you boon tainpcrig the hioroforni bottle, for the to 'tla 1 to kr -Iii cthing?BEA LTTIflrL EIEYZI.	131				"No, indeed," I answered, in a tremulous voice; "hut			there is perhaps truth in your surmise for all that. Papa,			a very straugo thing happened last night. May I tell it to			you and these gentlemen jnst now?"				My father came near and sat beside me, and supported me			with his arm.¥				"Go on, my daughter," he said, not a little anxiously.				I related the whole of last night's experiences as faith-			fully and minutely as my stammering tongue and burning			thirst would allow me. The three gentlemen listened in			blank amazement.				"What-what in heaven's name would you call that?"			exclaimed my father, when I had finished. "An attempt			to poison a young girl in her own room?"				The lawyer seized a pen, and proceeded to commit my			story to paper, with many interspersed questions. The			doctor seized the tumbler and retired to the window with it.				"Now," said Mr. Speingle, throwing down his pen, -my			opinion is that you've got some wretched enemy or eon-			siurator, and he or she is at the bottom of all your troubles.			The attempt at-"				"Poison!" interposed Dr. Graves, turning round.				"At poison," repeated Mr. Speingle, "which was made			bat night on the person of your daughter, proves that the¥		animus is not directed against one member of your family.			but against both. My advice to you, sir, is to send v,)-or			family out of the city, to some safe place and put the whole			of this affair into the hands of the authorities. Your lives			are not safe at this rate."				'Safe!" responded the doctor, "safe "-they're not			worth an hour's purchase! That girl has been nearly stilled			with chloroform, and plied with poison to boot-rank		I	poison! This tumbler is lined with it-the very smell is:.k dea(ly. Get them out of this, sir, away to the country	with them, where ncbody'll know anything about them;	the other one will die on your hands if you don't:	While thus my unhappy father was being conjured on either side, my mother, vith somewhat of an anxious face, entered the room.The instant her eyes lit on me, she clasped her hands¥ - with an involnntary gasp of alarm.''Hew ill von lock!" she cried. "Indeed Sophie was' right. Good-morning, Mr. Speingle. Ah, doctor, I am132huve nit gone yet, I fear this is another pat,	1jindalll " nol the lawyer, ceremoniously pL		It \OU have an hour to spare, sloe: inlte it von would bestow it upon me,jtesiiiug to the lady-she is not dangerous h..ed. for which we thank Heaven, madam. iaoVIII' st tel it jfl said my mother, seating herself, with 6¥ V paler eli'eh.vi. r deliberately poured out a glass of wineis diulor on the buffet and made me drink it.a1 laek your memory, madam," began HIP Itwver,Ii)	iVslV. " and review each lady friend you vCr lad,ui nil mu if you are conscious of ever giving them canf slimily :sttaiut you. Any jealousy," he glanes 1 withfisit niile at my father, "or wrong? In short, do youhow if an v soul who could bear von hatred?"MY IIiot}ter sat reviewing her past life with an astoundalfoe, and then she shook her head decidedly.	Al ways bearing this in mind," continued the lawyer"lsten to the facts your daughter has just made known toIls.lie snatched up the sheet of paper on which he had beesWilting, and read nearly word for word the etor as I harilited it.	l'ils'r than ever grew my mother's face ; her eyes darlene il turned toward my fattier in anxious appeal; whea ti ide tt I ich he wom"an had used were repeated to hoer, she 3T(-(I Icr aiids and bent forward with a sudden revel' 'Ii on her foci.' which caused the lawyer to pause, and t fl eves ill )on her. v ();it h is fulfilled!	lit die-' that bring to your memory, madam? ¡ :iher Clillittlung?"IliSti'	she answered; "go on to the iiilulls nv lIU,hd" she looked again at him, "maaisle to snail 5010)0 nice who might have an oath to talCt'(	il I' Peiligle."'Ihe \(,r unfit on to the end, folded up the paperyt wi l ci it run Iii a il r"', d i		fingers	"Mvwas my mother's first excla'I' Ilti en' kileed me	' Oh, whatBEAUTIFUL B	135escape! Guiseppe," she lowered her voice to a whisper, remember Geinma Laucinetto. Could it be she?" My father started; the arm on which I leaned was withdrawn, and lie turned an incredulous, half-amused face onmy mother."Would she defer her revenge for twenty-yes, twenty-two years? No, no, my Maudshe has doustiss forgotten my name long' before tIns time, if she lives."Well I" broke in the lawyer's business-like voice.	It is not worth explaining," said my father, fleshing, and looking proudly at my mother. " This foolish wife of mine was recalling' a certain lady who intended to have stood in her place at my wedding, but for a reason, failed."	Perhaps my good friend, Dr. Graves, would like his little patient there to go and lie down, and get a nice quiet little nap," said Mr. Speiugle, looking significantly at the doctor.	" Let her stay," said my father, compressing his arm round me, in a close embrace. "I have nothing that I need hide from my little daughter. My wife was merely referring to a lady that I, while a very young man, in Florence, at the School of Arts, got engaged to. She was possessed of both wealth and beauty, but was unsuitable for me; and, therefore, as soon as I became aware of this, I released her from her engagement, and in the subsequent years of choosing a profession and coming to America, I confess I forgot bignorma Lancinetto's existence. Five years after we parted we met on our wedding day, when I was leading my wife here into the carriage for our tour, and the lady used some very hard expressions against me, which caused Mrs. Rienci a great deal of alarm for a while, particularly one threat which she made, in very passionate Italius, that ' She would give me cause to remember (lenima Laneinetto to the day of my death.' In an evil boor I translated the Christianlike promise to my young wife, and cost her many a wakeful night afterwaid, but the lady, not being as good as her promise for twenty-two years, II confess I have long ago lost faith in her word,"	"Gensina Laneinetto," said Mr. Speioglo, opening his sheet of 0 otes, and scribbling on the back. "Describe the lady as she was twenty-two years ago, Mr. Rienri. This is mni.portant testimony)'"Describe her? Oh, beautiful of course, as an angel!"(L RIEI .1if- ocnlarlv brown eyes, large.m fiithi-i ). hen tIlO lady WSS in ii cage, a inre of elioltl1h1g her), regularu featui5.- I !I.I			in them to upset all classic calmsbrunette complexion, waving bh	wl,j}i jest then was 1]entLthUY disheveled andLrd hr n-u rely spiteful iiige1'S medium height, .1t!"l.iTII Iv fii1I ige iijuiit__-age ]ust twenty-One.If sic hvut ,,.iie is forty-three 110W. Miss Ivan la des.1111. ito vousn von saw in your bedroom last nii	I cannot.'' I 'mid., with a shudder. ''It WS a very 1 lace. with great hollow caverns for e us, and level, ick brows, with an expression of strong vengeance; anddark itiitle muffled it all round, and hid the ilgure and all, bet a long white hand, which-ugh I" I broke off, eel hid my lice on my father's shoulier with a prolongel ml dci'.Very good, very good," said the lawyer, writing dcviimy words with gusto; 'more than one might have expected from you, my dear, und r such circumstances. Now, sir, we must find this WOUnI. That is move the first."But such chimerical idea,' -iid my father, still belllaughing. ''I don't believe it's the same woman at all.	as if a woman could keep rne to one idea fortwenty-two years, before she puts it into executioulI sitsv.( Itiseppe, do not laugh," breathed my isiothersciail¡ti woman as she would never forget."ii hr it is Mrs. Lensetts, or whatever you call her, re,iiarked Mr. Speirigle, doggedly, '' it beho0xt - the person who broke, into the house last night.\I t her f an attempted murder. I am sure Y5MOA	resposided my father, "we shall titby iiin.' 	0 ( iSCOVer h'erif we can even call lie	to Call	teietl Speingle, "I think we'll beloiir,& of vein: il;i Yasid by. I think we met her in itliit r'ir lii: present i 'Icr trial, onCe or twice. SupP¡5(ill her Airs, Eleaumont?"PW )lBEAUTIFUL BIENZL 	let	,,Not a bit of it, my dear sir. It's a well-known fact that young Beaumont had Italian blood in his veinc; hh father	a5 not Italian-he was a Virginian.-then his mother mu't have heeu Italian."But why fasten upon her at all?"	Because she did one fraud that we know of, She substituted Leaader Roseoraft's body for that of her own sea, at the inquest, and concealed the fact that he was not killed."	If you are finished with this voting lady," interrupted the doctor, feeling my pulse; "I'll take the iherty of sending her off to get some food: and with vonr Permission, Mr. Jticnzi, I will take this precious tumbler home with me and analyse it properly. Cheer up, Miss Lanilla. Nearly deadnever filled the church-yard. You'll live to he as old as Iam yet, never fear."	lie hurried me rather unceremoniously up star, and sent Sophie for my breakfast; then lie asked i-ny permission to examine my bedroom for a few moments.When he came back be was more abrnpt than ever.	That girl of yours is stupid, and you're all 4epid together!" lie exclaimed. ''What's in your nose-" be-, he turned to Sophie, who was just entering with the haobeon tray, "not to smell tli e most overpowering scea t of chloroform in Miss lyanilla's bedroom? It's been Poured on the very pillow she slept on!"Sophie stood the picture of cons lernatnn	"I did smell something very queer." she said at lait,'' 'hut Mus Ira said there was medicine in the tumbler of water which I poured away, and 1 thought iaaybe it was it.	"Child, 1 cannot' understand how you didn't detect it,"Said Doctor Graves, resuming the reproaches wlueh were ad-dressed to me. " You should always keep your sensesabout you. You did very well ahou sesilig, but if youhail smelt as well, it wuld have saved you all the lainyea have endured since she snide off, besiden perluipuassisting von to prevent her. escape. Girl, go and throaall the wiadoa's up in your mstress' room, and change thebed-linen. 		-	I could not understand either, how the puageuf smell which now bun"' so heavily about me, and laded every	breath, had not atraeted uiv ministered	-itTIJUL BIENZLo nt as are the perfumes, I shall never, to thedx; 0 iV death, approach the night-bloommg oerenscliii a return of all the horrors of that awful night, and 1 dccli. stealing over me, to remind me of fling episodes of my existence.I APTEII XVII.xi	yen FaiEYDSWITH A DIFFERENCE."I I lees thee, for thy lips are bland,	And bright the teisndahip of thine eye; An l m my thoughts with scarce a sigh.I take the pressure of thins hand. "----Tmnmysems.	sh:il s over two days with a somewhat hasty review, for. in troth, I was not competent for much, for that time, as f was morc than half an invalid and the doctor strictly forbade me to take any part in this arrangements of the family, or to excite myself in the slightest.	So I spent most of ixo time in my sister's room, where say slight illness had the effect of rousing her wonderfully into kind and loving cares for ass.'Pc tell the tmuth, I had been frightened almost to death,could net, for some time after the occurrence, raise my ts front the depression that weighed upon them.	was happy with my dear Isolina, however, and since her of as was capable of hearing much excitement, we"Or allah ed to subjects which were not of a calm and semi nature; and I "Vas happy to see that my presence a soiree of deep ploasnre to her, and that she clung to core clowiy than ever,marl little or the plans which were hem w made by my it, and our friends for our future movements. From ¥ time the burden of anxiety was taken from nsy .il'lors and borne by other hands, and I sank into the n which was host si'itod to me-that of nurse or oem-"lion to say holox ed sister.I was given to umsilerstand however, by say mother, who i sustain almost as sovora a shooVns 1 in hearing of adrentoro, that a vigorous search had been commenced III( would- I c issnecimi, under the directions of Mr. Spoin-	I. Mr. Lii.	with whom my father consulted aboutIBEAUTIFUL MEELL 	137a suitably retired country place for us to resort to, recommended a certain obscure village on the Atlantic chore, whose charms of scenery, bracing air anti retirement, he said, would fulfill our wishes admirably.	This place, which was designated Ranelagh. and which was so very obscure that my father said he had never heard of it, was the destination for which we purposed starting immediately.	On the morning of the day in which we intended to leave the city I went Out to arrange my business as '' Soldiers' Friend," and to leave my peer people in charge of No. 10, if she would undertake them. But Miss Oranstown net being at hems when I called, I left a message with the lady president for her, and went to see the leer young widow, Mrs. Harrisou, -ho had new set up a milliner's shop in a quiet little street, and. seemed to be prospering tolerably well.	I carried to her the photographs, letter, and identifier of her unfortunate brother, which she received with sad thankfulness. She had now snatained the double less of husband and brother, all who protected her. No wonder that her eyes streamed with tears as she bent ever her orphaned hey).	"And lie reminds sac of them both!" she sobbed. "lie has peer Lemnader's pretty curly head, and it sets se jaunty on his shoulders-just like him! 3ut oh he has his father's very eyes! My wee babe, you never saw your father -oh, no-ne!"	Mrs. Harrison told me that Mr. Speingle had come two days and talked with her for hours about her brother, asking the strangest questions. She also showed me two golden dollars, which the kind old gentleman had put in baby's hand, and, with tears of gratitude, said he had preansed to see that the child got a good education it he lived.	As I walked home (having some puichises to make I (lid net ride), I saw a handsome'carriage at the deer of a betel, and at the moment in which I passed, a lady tripped down the marble flight of steps, and for the time blocked my tarflier progress by her trailing skirts.	I drew back with flushing cheeks, when the lady, turning her head, dis&e'cd the haughty face of Lillia Mere-"I am surprised," she said, seeking at me from bead totI 'TJFUL RIENZLi urprised' that the sister of the cole-wi] h unprotected through the streets"',t;imtt it P which he sneered these words raisedjcli(1li like a s1ttii'k to touch-wood. -"lv SCOI'II oil the woulall u ho proves a false friend. Ilied. 'ryjJi fuiiilin in her face.Iuhiia lhenzi, then:" he said, with a laugh,n y,lir scorn and my eegeanee, which I mean 'clips 1itiCe uiay be satisfied.	ru PI said. turning pale with the effort to and iii t'sult, circu metances have proved in sister en t. i t 1 raw your persecution or this whole city xe'ritt Veer name."\inh do I' card" was the defiant retort, while her blue nthl]tttud with sparks of rage. " Site was the causev being tleertel this day, and for that I will be avenged. for it Now '-that is my creed."a (Pigs creed that-a savage religion. I pityIP .crve vent' pity for those who suffer by it."P I exclaimed, stung to the heart by her cm-	'i	Iaware how- yen mingle gall in my innocent sister'sui. She is brek n-hearted arid dying with the weight of	her l5oplC'i crimes; no mean vengeance of yours is needed		her iiuorn."	I n come ilrearlv. theii" she cried, exultingly; ''the [[Inc tvhieh I prophesied would come, when her beauty would a lnmori aid her talents turned to her own destruction!is diet tonie-['m sorry for you, and will prove it.I Will ]q-iv it.	I will drive on home, lest sonic of the lit-street recognize yon and prove trouble-	nih von shall tell vout' sister that Lillia Meredith isU Len, thou en she has a dons creed. Come iii."-	ni rued th silver handle of the carriage-door andi'd to suit, with a half-touched expression strugglingtin' I an her lilies upon her face,- I 11)"' It late seized the momentary softening in its faint- rthi. tnith struligthenetl it into Permanent contril ion by	wn guilt lemos, but I was trembling with indignation ' t the opportunity pass is hich might have saved so much::			i'neryour 'Pillity against my sister, IBEAUTIFUL RTh'AZL 	k,	"Good! a long adieu then." she returned shutting herself in. "iDrise to the station, coachman, "	The carriage whirled away, and I walked on, still trembling with apprehension and anger. I knew she had just the character to cling stubbornly and, pertinaciously to an idea until it was accomplished. Having chosen to consider Isolina as her enemy, no earthly power would turn the hitter Prejudice from its channel. Your women who '' never forget" are invariably patient, implacable, and tireless in their pursuit of vengeance.	When I reached home I found nty friend, Miss Belle Cranstown, in the drawing-room, seated before the piano, in a most extraordinary flow of spirits, alternately rattling (dl waltzes and sallies 6f wit to mamma. who was listening ((Lbpleased enjoyment; and there also, to my astonishment, satmy poor sister in a deep easy chair near the wiadnv, else listening to the aBa pod rida which eniattated from my lireli friend, with n sweet, gentle smile on her face: -which hat was so great a stranger there that I stood in the door-way watching it with quivering lip.'' Ah, there you are" cried \l ice Belle, whirling round,	and pray what are you looking so snrprtscd at? Ha! hi, don't you see we are giving the invalid a change of air to prepare her for Itanelngb ?"	Site skimmed over and gayly shook my hands, whispering the while:	Met Doctor Gruces in the city this ntern ig--- told nteyou were going away to-tiny_-polite enough to tell too tochatter like a magpie. if I Came up, and cheer von all up.Sure you need it, even you, poor little white he ghost! Thegay, my little gipsy- laaglt, and he gay-the worst isOver!"	Thus finishing, with an additional shake of nty bands, she brightly nodded her bead and resumed the piano-stool.	"And what is this I hear?" said the young lady, beginning to fly through the intricacies of an a-peggio opera iii C. by Beethoven, whuteh wafted me on the eing' of fondest me'norv to my Venetian home, where my dear' old grandmonies: and I need to sit in the evettings open the balcony listening to this lutes of time pusssistg cavalier' under the awnings of their gondolettes-ohi, those esemngs. In the oldfashioned hotsse above Rialto!--- What is this 1 hear?	Hydra-head was out to tea last night. and eu uuuu	in di-	S	0	BEAUTIFUL BTh&YZLtold tile iliaf the Qoeen of Ueart,,had vanquished one andit ri to celebrate the victory.dra-head "' ter I'll, t) en .lie iniddle of ber explained tile In, 	wast to he united to-' one--a lone one 'mid the throng '-_landhnrsV'	said Isoliua, holding nay hand fondly;'Xild so she iU ir will he as happy as a little queen. I am sure, withPra; U cried Miss Belle, catching my other hand in de" I'm triad Mrs. Crandy was right for once! yideals- von little gipsy, don't blush so charmingly. Look,-	ant! cit . is her-the pet, and may I kiss you, too-for yrat ilatiens?'	lou loik-absord, half-touching embrace being over, Miss a lie seat oil herbel I' at my mother's feet, leaving me still U it dlv held by Isolina.And so I have cause to bid you good-by, 'resumed theantic lady, with a siah, "yea dear old friend whom I have 'ar'" iv seen yet. J)e you know Ira, that I know Mrs. Rtenzi :far litter than her youngest daughter does?"''Indeed!"	"Ah, you ntay, leek jealous! I have enjoyed her friendtip ever since 1 wss an unfortunate little wretch of six, IL citing along every morning to school with a load of a as high as ntvself-alm, happy childhood! Your dear tialntna taped sip a street acquaintance with me on the htppy coca-jolt of my ranaing against her carriage in a hurry,ad breaking mc nose against tile front wheel, while myalms hew it al the carriage windows, for which I was treateda t ide home, a week at holidays, and a beautiful wax dollOtt tat nun friund.I dank tloak yen enjoyed Your first ride with me,1 achy ohserved tar mother. langtng,	''I can't say that it was hiiss nnailyed," admitted Belle.	1 h( here t was a little terrified by theshadow of say swelled	ass on the carriage curtain, and shod more tears thanatistles, AIm, rise,My Create, scaae o'er ace like a spell, onk I no again a child,'Ivanilla, what shall we do to bring back the light	IBEAUTIFUL RIRYZL	141to this pale shade? She looks as if she had hidden farewell to this world, and the spirit was gazing an adieu upon the juertal it loved before it'Faded back like a sunbeamInto the realms of light.'"Shall we call her Heaven's chastened?"	She folded my sister's hand within her own, and gazed with that tender, pleading look, until Isolina, gazing hack with brimming eyes, suddenly smiled a brilliant answer, and burst into tears.	"Oh, thanks, my friend," she murmured, "that comforts me. I will be Heavait's chastened."Lower drooped the lovely girl, and whispered of a balmwhich sometimes comes to broken hearts, until the world-weary invalid gazed raptly and almost joyfully apon liar. llop, long fled, stole back to her eyes; time despairing look gave way to the new tide of heavenly comfort which was khown to her; an eager, entranced expression was on her face all the time these whispered words of Christian coinfort fell from the lips of our gentle friend.	Why had I never tried such means of cheer? What had my eager, worldly striving done for her?	'Oh, sweet BelleCrenstown-gentle messenger, smooth be thy pathway to the Life which is for thee beyond.	11 Stay with us until vie start this afternoon," said my mother, when Miss Cranstown once mere turned to us, her eyes brighter than diamonds after their gentle tears.	"Wili I could, but alas!" she responded, with her usual vivacity; "seven pairs of eyes watch for me elsewhere.''Disappoint them," I suggested.	And bring my unlucky faults to the tips of seven volnable tongues? Impossible! I go to guard my character.""Don't go,-' pleaded my sister, earnestly.	Belle was pulling on scr gloves in a great bnmsry, but when she heard the mild remonstrance, she paused irresolutclv.	Well, I don't eare" she cried, throwing down her hat. "Belle, I devote thy name to the tongues of the mightysevona sacrifice to 'friendship. I left Louisa on Mrs. Las-mat's steps where we both were booked to spend tile day,and where I suppose they anxiously await my presencein their gossips--I to supply the facts-they to embellish-	PEA uq'IFtTL If IPJVZL142and tS'eftSC into tissues of _ahem! as Mrs. Lesmai', HortenHa. (horiana, Leonora. Man and Betty Lesmar, assisted11, (,au weave . such --,vebs as ondless as Penel-msi~tcr, L you give them time. I slia'n't aid them; I'll staylEasing titus expressed herself, Miss Belle picked up little lint from the floor, ilslaed her parasol. v ail, andrdease from under the piano, and followed iae up stairs. thor l]510.g pulled elf her gloves and shawl, Miss Belle, Ii me, dived into her pocket, and, after unfoldingo or three circulars and charitable cards of various kinds,last handed me a cut-out paragraph of a newspaper, wldch'he bade me read."The Lo,elsn Post says that a party of gentlemen, who had pens-	d into the deserts of Persia for scientific purposes, after undercog several strange advrrtnres, which are minutely described, left A ii iliad with a caravan of Calaite merchants, and reached the frontier in alito: from whence they made all haste to return to their insular Ii thesis, quits reconciled to pursue their experiments at home in fntire. The plsgas they report as raging through Astrahad; and they ii ci amazed to sueer a young English gentleman there, who was work. im.g heart and hand among the snutten wretches as a physician. [his adventurous Englishman is called Victor Joselyn, and is the only rep-	';	of an old English family, whose estates are in Somersetshire."	DO von know what I thought when I read that, this miioriingP' said Belle, When I had finished. ''I lhonoht, 'All will be well with Isolina if she loves so noble a maid' Why should we fear anything, Ira, my darling! Dry your tears. If Them en spares Victor Joselk n, we may trust him 'a itit our dear Isolista's happiness. Let its never grieve our hearts with a question which we do not understand. In-	as their friendship appears to its, .1 know it is right, So true a inanso braye and compassionstunt he the soul of honor,"r enthusiasm infected me. I dashed away the tears couty and grief, which first had sprang to nay eyes, and d alniret with adoring regards at the name of any unit hero,may [leaven spa" his life!" I aspirated,'ranstow echoed -In",, prayer with an embrace, and'o km It tho scrap of' I new that strange picture vexed and puzzled you,'wBEAUTIFUL BIELYZL 	143said the clear girl; "anti I brought you this to comfort you.	Then had a confidential little chat on subjects which lay particularly near my heart; and I listened with ahappv, glowing taco to praises of a certain friend of mine in wIioe excellence I took a very warm interest.	I believe my heart was almost recovered from the sick depression winch I had felt for two days, when we went down staira to lunch.	Miss Oranstown, with a flow of spirits which never flagged, and clever jokes innumerable, made herself wonderfully usefnl, assisted in the final packing of the various trunks, which were to be ready for the cabman at four o'clock.	Yet, when the final moment came, and my sister, fragile, pale, and lovely as a lily, stood in the door-way, where the snioky, city-grown foliage clambered up to touch her, and the languid flowers breathed faint incense, Belle broke down at last, and her sunny face grew pale with suppressed grief, while she bade my sister farewell; but her rushing tears were hidden from us all, as the dear, unselfish girl tied on her little hat, and quietly turned away, to trip modestly down the street and out of sight.	Mr. Ernest Lindhnrst met us at the railway station, and lingered as long as he might within the ear; then, with a shriek and a jolt, our train got into motion. My friend sprang upon the platform, and stood, with hat uplifted, and earnest regards, until we had glided a wav then, with a quicker motion, like a racer when the blood pulsates through his veins and he leaps to the sweep of the first beat, we were borne onward to the new scenes, arid left the old behind us.S	pi j, BIEJPfl141PTITR xg-iii.ILCEnLEA.This and the leavie greenalleys that there were. *	so fair with branches here and there,: a'it¥ seemed to a lyf without cooohie spread the arbour all about."JAMES leT, SCOTLAND.	Oiir	115 soon over; ma eagerly recurring query-at last answered by any father in	;.thrmative (who must have dislocated his neck to satisfy v curiosity), and the train rushed with a savage whoopinto a small covered station; the guard shouted in at the door, Hanelaoh!" anti we rose from our seats. III five minutes we were huddled together on a woodenplatform, my mother supporting Isoliua on her arm; Sophiecounted guard over a muffled cage containing my littlelioepoee from the Valley of Areso; a whimpering Neapolitanpup in her arms, of undoubted breed but stupid disposi-	tion-also mine; a valise on either side of her, and an tint-dangling' from her little finger; while my father res-	ccc our bargage from the incredulous vanguards, and Iuked ahont in vat a for signs of the villaue. 	At last wewere esiered Out of the station by one of a group of boys,	1 . 	nt was like the poet's dream:I had a, hat, which was not all a hat Part of the rho was gone;"	outing a slight hill, the hotel of Banelagh was igcuod to as and I beheld the villao'e.ahere was a broad '-1 ' 1 .c .. ' & ass-grown street, fe:ieed off appro-	t )tttiafi,,,	-iv	l;	pas for	broken lines" in geont-cbagei i legeoeral eve looked like zig-zag fencing;the'. oil, h0 some half a dozen houses on0U5' Cu Cozily bet .1ii trees. ' ulitu tail poplars or Balm ofc1 the horizon a deep, blue belt of ocean wavered with'SBEAUTIFUL RulöNZL	its	molly a heaving, comb-crested sparkle; to the right a seat-	9 settlement of brown farm-houses cozily nestled in thevalley; to the left a pyramid of wooded hills rose up,crowned with blue ether, and shut out the east winds.	± pretty spot was the ilanelagh village-surely peace and safety reigned here!	The hotel, by far the most pretentious edifice in the valley, was the nearest house to the station, and was enlivened by a flaming sign covering the whole of the second flat, which informed us that "Old Sol" was going to entertail, us. Three young men who were shoveling earth into a cart at the side of the road suddenly disappeared behind the house, and were immediately after transformed into three waiters in white aprons, who lounged out to the front balcony and watched us approaching.	The. "landlord, with a broad, rod, beaming face, and in a great hurry, cause across a hay-field, and ushered us with a flourish into the house, where a young woman pounced upon us, and led the ladies of us into a very small bedroom.	Sophie, after depositing my little company of pets on a table in the outer room, took off her things, tied on an apron from out of her pocket, and grimly beating out a hsrge oat before her, whose yellow eyes were glaring with greed at the birds, found her way to the kitchen to see about some food for Isoliua.	We immediately divested our invalid of her clothes, and made her lie down in the soft, dowtiy bed, which smelled of sweet clover and thyme, and was white as pure bleachbig on grass which never was besmohed, could make it.	She was too exhausted even to speak ; the journey had been great for her small stock of strength ; but she looked and smiled so placidly, that 1 could not but hope this sweet place would restore her in time, and we were, much comforted to see the wonderful appetite with which she ate the dainty little supper which Sophie brought in. Ton minutes afterward she Wits in a nrofouud slumber.	The sun was just CUP<piug behind. the lulls when we entered the eatiu-room where our dnner waited us, and where my father was seated, in conversation with the landlord.	<' Yes, sir," the man was saying, "I think it would just suit you it it's a house, to hire for the summer, you're after;S115 	OErJLITta RI,gNzr.'	A niet healthy place you want, ma'am?	I I un in noi a healtlnur place H ixt this New York. 1101' that same place; nor a prettier or more eel. I make hold to say, miss.- ' 1m whom does it belong?"	Well sir. it (lid belong (though it doesn't now-he's, '1 this three year). to Squire Grauvillo; but now aher of III, oums it, in Connecticut, and as lie don't want md live in it liin]self, be lets it out, do you H it'- mint waiting for you, en'."V r tt'tOJ. And to whom shall I apply?"	'lime house-agent lives just across the street, sir. Do(I see that house with the green shutters? that's Mr. Fern-vs. and he'll show you over Silverlea, whenever you like."	NIeerleH'	Yes. miss. that's the name old Squire Cranville, poor mu. ed i ed the place Oh, you'll like it, missy, it's quite j liar like, with lots of courts and courting places around,H. ha! Pu'd:ug me, miss, I like a joke with the younghs. You see there's lots of them white-barked trees onplace. and the sea conies in at the back quite beautifulii) sn (01 a calm clay, yon could count most a hundred shipsLI, once, way out on the Atlantic,"	Rush !" I ejaculated, having dawn ma' knife and fork.Your description is so charming that I will make my		;mke the house, whatever disadvantages there are and het,l;tnie You."At trbeh the jolly landlord laughed, deep down in his 'aeioas thorax, and departed.	\s soon as we had dined, ma' father hurried across thenet to dud the house agent, and my mother and I prepared'selves to ae.eompany them to Si1vrlea.It iris scarcely yet sunset, when my father returned with li. gooddmnnn red looking little mai by his side in whose ''ompamiy we started for our walk of half a mile throughi ll;te and out to the shore.	l'm'ettv indeed, was the road to Silverlea, with alternate	wheat md I \ e md son sometimes wastes of alderbushes,	there ;: pl"nrie k' stretches of samphires, and here and lmeehi lifted their white h oil of meadows, where herds ofaway to the nearest clump of jei		approach, and bounced	I recently we reached U 	00-		-	me shore road, and ascended a std-BRA UT[FUL RIESZL	tiden bluff, where fir-trees lined either side of the road, and the bread, lazy waves of the Atlantic rolled in upon the .low sand.This is Silverlea."	I saw a white cottage with three ponited gable:. a piazza running along one side and upheld by pillars of Corinthian sirepheitv. a ieranda on top of the piazza, with a delicate tracery or carved wood by way of parapet, and many a quaint panel of Gothic ornament interspersed.	A pointed bay-window in front, with Gothic pendants, imitated by the long, narrow winoows down the sides, which looked out on all sides to green retreats and shady terrace. A more delightfully incomprehensible, romantic lithe villa could scarcely be conceived: it looked at one point like a Spanish casino, with its verdant jalousies and trellised balconies, and I almost listened for the lute of the troubadour, and looked for the lovely Andalusian to appear, after her seclusion from the scorching sobairo. to drop her bouquet of orange blossoms into the bosom of her crnider.Oh, fattier!" I exclaimed, '' take this paradise.`	You will find it very nicely furnished," end Mr. Fernlay, knocking smartly a the doer. . Mr. Granville was a gentleman of taste, though a bachelor, and his brother not earing for these things, left the furniture just as it was for the use of the tenants. The housekeeper, who is a fixture here, keeps everything in exact order, as you will see, and is as peaceable a woman as ever breathed,"At this moment the door was opened 1w an old woman ina white Muslin cap and stiff gown, who dropped a low coo r -tesy to Mr. Fernlev and another to ns.	''How de do, Mrs. Holler? Some visitors I've broozlmt over to see the house; all the way from the city, too. The honsek-eeper, sir, I was telling you about.	Glad to see you, Mrs. Halter." said my father, walking in. " 1 think we shall be old friends pretty soon. Nice little place, eh. Mand 9"	We all marched snceessively into the various roonis,which were certainly furnished very prettily and tastefnlly, and kept in sdmnhalsle order by the housekeeper.	We wandered about ontil the silver moonbeams were sn ing through the m oveless trees; and to my mm' hon midi 1 1''light my father decided to rent Sis eric m r U I III--1.,111/2					b_LA rr1J'UL iIEYZJ.1	lIE t'cirvike beauty of the summer nightPER XIX.clrtcUMSC?'er creak' ct ni side.rECE 1 'a ard-kÛ watch and ward!-1 ENNYSON.nlrw all arrangements woro satisfactorily,i.			Lr. 11 li'ernIey for rent big Sil verlea, and wewcrc transported in Mr. Stanton's host wagon from the hotelmr new abode, which proved to be quite as lovely by dayat as it had appeared by night.My sister turned her wistful eyes from side to side, and wasted cheeks flushed faintly with pleasure. She drank	the exhilarating sea-breeze and mu rm nred softly, "I -Hell rest here!" at which my silly, credulous heart bounded111111 JOY.	With considerable pride, I conveyed isolina up stairs to ii a chamber which had been allotted to its, and which was glistening with pristine freshness from Mrs. Miller's careful hands. Daintily papered walls of white and silver pure l'eeec drapery, looped back from the windows by light silvera hark-green oarpet with clusters of white water-- - scattered ever- it; a low French bed with a canopy Oii	lace; an emerald-green vase with a silver adder twinedtd it, and filled with odorous fresh-plneked water-lilieshe mnantem: a eheval-glass in one corner, irhicli reflecteda the pretty combination of colors. Such was the littleii her assigned to Isolina and inc.	ov that she liked it, and I was pleased so I threw- open Ii nidon and drew her to look at the same view which t-nchan1 si me at night.	rl	to me; "I slndlrest in this lovel~ sPot for 	-5 at present she was so cxhansted by the short drive n uidmeet7the village in Mr. Stanton's wagon fhat she had to lietu		very li(Ill"Ailit myself	impatient nature , I determined		all 	the points of interest aboatBEAUTIFUL L'IERZJ. 	144Silverlea without loss of time, and so with this end in view i repaired to the kitchen to make the more intimate ac'quaintanee of the housekeeper; leaving my mother gently swaying herself in a reeking-chair in the pretty parlor be'fore the window, and my father enjoying himself lnxuriously in an arm-chair on the piazza, his eyes fixed complacently on his wife, his panama hat on the floor beside himand his hack against a leafy pillow-the picture of calm enj owneil t.	1 found the kitchen, a low, wide, yellow-painted roomwith three little square Windows., looking out 'upon a court,or hen-yard, as I supposed, from the quantity of featheredcreatures croaking and cackling in noisy enjoyment of somescattered grain. A brisk fire made of wood crackled uponthe stone hearth, and from the stone-oven alongside asavory steam was issuing through the corners of the irondoor, which assailed my hungry nostrils irresistibly.	"Ah, Mrs. Hailer, what a quaint-looking plaoeP' I cried, taking a delighted survey; "and how strange and aloe everything is!"	Site was busy brightening sundry dish-covers to add to the already long row on the yellow wall, and she laid one down to look round and laugh.	"I guess, miss, there's plenty of life in you and never a taste of the blocs! So you like my kitchen?"	''I am enchanted with it, Mrs. Hailer, Is that the bench that the young farmers sit on when they eussic courting in the evening'?"She laughed softly.''Little miss," said she, ''they ain't mario cc cc on -In' to Silvorlea nowadays. I don't lessee' a liar hey 	Uhave done if I was voting and frolicsome, but ago makes a difference, as I b'olieve, No, indeed, miss. There's not been a voting man inside this kitchen since old master died, except 'one voting gentleman-and he thought little enough of courting.,"	Didn't lie? Well I'll, coing to establish a new regime. I am going to fill those hall's will, youth and jollity-these pegs with wid e_atvakesthar be ools with ro stso beans!	''I'm thinking our chaps round anelagh would feel rather shy of such a city miss as you-front foreign parts to boot-so I've hoard,""I should hit the heels of my Achilles. Get anotherS1	I3Eit'2fL RIR-YZJ.		ther side of the porch, Mrs. llaler,	Well for the f pee tliei'c. How hungry I am!"	(dll0	What would o like, miss? Somedi ice sweet-milk fresh from butter-cups?'ii non of butter-cups?there ain't many butter-cups like my big black	¥ a -b% itself, signora! Better than the richest goblet I) ii ill( expressed froIri grapes grown on the sunniest Ia I of Veuviu,!Dii roil sac yes,' miss?'¥ \l o.,t decidedly. ni r friend. And may I have a tumbler¥ my sDter? Ah, think you you arc kind. But I shallpioi'e a little longer before I awake her. Where does this d to?"¥ In to the hack yard, where the kitchen-stuff is; and'ii her's the stable: and this court is for everything-chopci, feeling fowls, cleaning vegei aides, and all."Id kitchen-stuff fish, flesh, o" fowl-mineral, vegetable, nondescript, my dear Mrs. HaIler?"¥ Law sakes, I don't knoo ! only it's the grass and stuff,old the apple-sass. and MOM Would von like to see	cinckens? Just open the door of that' log-house and look into a half-ba 'mi it I he in," " Nhcidm of Diogenes! jtivonile philosophers! What little irey tongs! Oh, con pot! Von are the kin" of them, Will t or little broad hid and twinkling eyes!"I bars the only cli ieking out of a brood of tlnrteeu.a on like hop-Leer, mIds?"\erv likely I do. I never saw any."" Ot,: You shall have a drink 'of it this very day.iv. where was you raised, I wonder F'on hiopycst, you may be sure, my friend. Oh!o i0 c well! IS hat a heavy moss-crowil bucket; and('001 tne air is' when I pi it my head down!"I Don't full iii,	See-are yon fond	doo1d you like to make a tisty-tost of cow-II; no 77 s lots u ckthere' in the old orchard."well, and	evident relief,	left the vicinity 0into a little forest	nun the 'rass	upon an old uiaii who was rolling Yah a teevy stone roller, and so intently	BEA UTIFUL fl[EIVZL	51employed that he did not see use, though I stood close byhit t	.- All alike-all alike!" he muttered, driving at a stone which lay in his way. "Get over, will ye! Yes-'ill hemherself in spite of me, and run iiito devil knows whst serspe while I grub, grub, grub here-held This is roughground."Is that hard work?" I asked, wishing to apprise bins ofmy presence.'He turned round and stared in surprise at me.	"'Morning, miss. How long have you been here? Well not very hard, when it's not up hill. I didn't see you, miss, before this non-to, and you gave inc a bit of a start."	It was a queer old face into which I was looking, and I could not help feeling mysteriously impressed.	"I'm sorry it I startled you," I said, wren oling myself from a reverie; '' I was looking over this pretty hilverlea, and did not expect to see anybody."You are one of the new tenants then, miss?"" Yes; we arrived from New York yesterday."" You're not an American, miss.""how do you know, that?" I asked, laughing'.	He folded his arms on top of his roller, and gazed at me, with his chin down on his sleeves, with a kindly inteistness."Your tongue betrays you, miss. Ain't you Italian?"Yes, from Venice. I came last autumn."The man raised himself suddenly.' What's your name, young lady?" he exolai mod.	Rienzi-'-Ivanilla Iiienzi; my father is Gnisoppe Rionzi, the architect."	The dark, wild face grew dingy white; it showed such consternation and heavy anger, that I stood transfixed With surprise; a thousand fears, banished for a season by the peaceful scenes in which we had taken refuge, rushed back into my heart."Who are you, sir," I demanded.	The gardener at Silverlea, miss,' he aaawere'l, in a stifled voice,"Your name?" I continued, anxiously.	He affected not to hear me; picked up his roller and walked on,"What is your name?" I repeated, more imperatively.slowly keeping'step with him.152		SEA U77F'UL SIEXZLRalph Morecombe," he threw the name at me, as a dog	'nail at losina a bone.And have you eer heard of us befoin!Wluit makes you think such a thing, Miss Jvauilla	o one ever greeted a stranger, or a friend, as you greeted mm. You are an enemy-and why.I	sleadily escorted him along the grassy sweep. secretly]Iblin ntIi sick consternation but oittwardiv firm.Ic trudged on, dumb as a stone, until the last of the	was pressed doom then lie turned on me, a cold in his eves which well might make me tremble.Look hire, miss," lie said between his teeth; ''I,'t ad~on ivise on to run your neck into any noose that you at run it out of agalu-it's dangerous. Better seering, and say less!''I do not understand you, sir," I responded, "but I	rd find means to understand you, and have your position hare looked into; you will have to explain your threats."'Ha, ha! a foul's colt is soon shot! By-by, missy!"	I retreated hastily through the orchard, making no answer to his taunting words; in fact, too terrified to speak.	"II	Who is that man in the orchard ?" I asked impetuously of the housekeeper, as I entered the kitchen.	"A man in the orchard? Oh, I suppose you mean old Ralph the gardener,"Who is he?"il eli, he's just--he's just old Ralph, the gardener," Mrs. Bailer, with a puzzled look.Where dare lie come from?"':1 can't rightly tell you, miss ; from evervwheres. I dova; has mare like the Wandering Jew hail anvtlnug fm sure."What is his other name?"IortonMotly0 Moreeombo I believe. He's a Cl crap. Hope he didn't frighten von, nnss?"long has he been here. Mrs. I-Taller?"wintir he		last	nant; let me see All last	Oh, Mrs. hailer wh"Mrs. Riiir'wo d'	¥ 	last tenant?"right ; a piens oodh.i5'i from \rerm	t if I recollectqueer one" - 	n, if ever there was one; and yet a'IBEAUTIFUL RIENZI. 	153"Tell me how."" Well, miss. I'll tell you all about it-i1yjrs. 1Iallei'i'	I sprang aside with a scream. Ralph was at my elbow looking at the housekeeper with a lurid scowL"I have cut my hand-come and bind it up."	"Good lack:" muttered the old, woman; "whatever set the man to chopping tip his hands--jist when there's some nse for them!"	She hurried to a drawer and picked cut some linen rage, While, the gardener started out again, and waited in the court-yard, leaning against the well.	".1 hope it ain't had," said Mrs. lialler ; for I do hate idle men around, like pison."	I stood beside the sputLering oven and gazed intently through the whedow, as she followed the titan out.	Ralph still kept his hand thrust into his bosom, and impatiently elbowed her away when she eicteuded her bandage; then he began to speak with angry, threatening gestures, and from astonishment, Mrs. Hailer's face changed to something very like auger, and she gave her muslin frills an indignant toss and tinned to enter the kitchen; but the man clutched her by the shoulder, and with the sudden glare or a wild beast at the window, dragged her out of sight, and I ceased to hear even their voices.	I stood alone in the cheery kitchen, a cowering, discomfited pain in my heart. which robbed me of all courage.	In ten minutes Mrs. HaIler came in, and very, very quietly slipped about her work for some minutes, saying nothing, 11cr kindly old face was grave and pale; her hands trembled a little in spite of her." Was the cut very deep?" I asked :n covert scorn,	"Oh, no, miss-oh, no," also answered, with unnecessary earnestness	Will you please tell me the rest about Mrs. Ringwood, now?" I remarked, not daring to look up.A low sigh heaved Mrs Huller's bosom.	''There's nothing to tell; I hadn't ought to hare soul auvthiuo, my dear," she said, very quietly."Perhaps it is something which concerns ub. I pus-listed."No, nothing, miss. Please dent ark tnt :.Ui liinh i thatBRA ('TlFLL BIESRI.	There's a pitcher of milk for you and the a (1 ii a ai. and t unahlei'. Shall I early it in?"I fifl	them navself, Mrs. haIler. Thank you."I	evil)	tile lii nt, I hetook myself to the parlor.	e	di mu] ered in through the ban gn ig wreaths, as	¥ MY--- father lounged on the piazza with the same noted ease: ma' sweet sister reclined oil the little sofa ecu them. gazing with satisfied eyes into the heart of vernal glade'; I only carried gloom and fear in nayno, for the serpent had stolen into my paradise,ihhat's the matter with our little gipsY' cried my father, hig in at me. "has she got a fright cow nnikin?"	If I dii], I secured the milk;" I answered with' an atlit al gill etc. '' See, my sister, this is a spet'i men of milk-warranted pt ire from chalk and water."'ion look wears', sister," said Isolijia, looking tip into ale, depressed face, "let me fan you awhile, and lie on 'ia-the heat has been too inneh for yen."	Bath' I answered, tangling, "tie heat never makes me ±1. 1 never suffered heat when the sirocco blew most burnug l in Italy."lint there is something the matter," said my mother,seeng me clearly for the first time.A raven croaked at mc in the orchard." I answered,meetnIg her anzions regards with a snnhng look.	-in soon I found myself out on the piazza, behind ma' ether's chair.Come with me until I tell you something ." I mnrmnredslowly panel together to the end of the piazza, and over the pretty railing.Papa, we are not safe even at Silverlea " I henni; "the tao people who are here are in league against us."N owen>e. child! Why you poor little girl, von are >0 iiemon, and faiseifnl that f shall scion be alarmed on. That fright yen got at home was bad for 1on,Papa, li'ten toWe lire' not safe	a repeated, willi tearful earnestness.lll t see-_b- i	oureej a acre is a gardener here whom YouIV N B rs, ltinr'it-ood \5 With our enemies.	There	Nile' 5111' n'as loilnented nit n tins house last winter: I an']1i of gran dna amiini a''	in' (ne ones; there is a photo-- 	use na Venice, in the basket 011BEAUTIFUL RmvZf. 	155one of the statues within that drawing-room; does that look like mere accident	"My dear child, you perfectly astonish me! You seem to have plunged into the midst of conspiracies."I told mm the different causes of toy alarm.Yon are not alarmed without cause apparently", besaid. when I had finished; '' still there may be some nisapprehension. Perhaps the surly dog moeisst nothing; perlisps Mrs. Hailer, who really scents a most rcspectödde woman, was silent on the subject of Mrs. Rio gwoed front ether causes than those your terrors suggest. This madcr can he quickly sifted."	He went hack for his hat and let himself out to the guden, with the determination of at once confronting the gardener.	Disconsolately I drooped over the little gate, my face buried in my hands. This haunting terror had come back to me like Faust's Evil One, and was dragging me into horrors from which my fainting heart crawled hoathingly. All the brightness of Silverlea was hateful t0 toe; that dread face, with the passionate eyes for blood seemed lurking under every tree; it danced before me with mocking sneers on the pale, curled lips, and a voiceless whisper ruebed like a molten stream of lead into my brain which chanted;My oct/s is ft mljih/ed I"	A hand rested on my shoulder; I cowered down with a shriek of agony, and my excited brain almost turned.'My dear child, are you afraid of toe?"	It was my father, back again; grave enough by this time, but gazing pitifully down at me, and evidtatly amazed at soy agitation.	Be more calm. lyanilla," he said raisin,-- me and tenderly pressing me to hi,, bosom; "there is really no cause for such mortal terror; we may have enemies, but Heaven has saved us hitherto; ask Him to save us still, my daughster.""You are back very soon, papa."	"He has gone to the village to get something mcndvd at the blacksmith's, Mrs. lIallc/ tells me. Dear, I don't think We arc authorized in molesting the housekeeper; she is ti very conscientious person, ann I am sure would not wrong us. She has given me to understand that Morrcimhc warned her not to speak of Mrs. Ringwood, hcrc'msc it: tadyS.-FLit i/Fl L filK\ZT."is ill caine political intrigue. The truth is, I believe in r own heart she is a rebel spy, or some such thing, and we ye nothing to do with her intrigues. I Shad sound your ubear 3fireeonibe when he returns."But Ralph )ioreeombe did not return; day after day aol on, and the gar loner's place was still unoccupiedservants came down from the city, and located them.	es; a boy was hired, at first by the day, to do the garners work, then for a month, and no one came to dis. inc. him.After a week my father had to go to the city, summoned nec by Mr. Speingle. and we were left alone at Silverlea.Alone and unmolested, the most perfect peace and se-- lily reigned here. Time stole on, and tonclied my dis.a rhed heart with. balm; I began to breathe more freely asic days went on; my dark fears had proved groundless.	I became in a measure happy in oil], charming Sihverlea with iay behaved mother anl siter. It was joy itself to inc to lead Isalina daily to some farther point of interest in our sylvan retreat. ardlo comfort her shadowed life through Yat re's lovehiiesa,CHAPTER XX.r t wy "WOLF" ONCE MORE.''to our eye there is death,	ere is frost in Your breach,iesp where you are; you are foul with sin;voold sinink to the earth if you came in."TENNYSON-rtngel\ Intermingled with the tender life I lived withaist1 i', was the weary life J hid from her.I iiad a relcss spit which Mild not he laid wholly 'Sec see/Ire we seemed to be ; I was forever watching, ctiines placidly, semetinies feverishly, al/rays vigilantly.	Every even eveng when the heat of the da was over. code ont on horseback aeeompmijed by Nelson. Dr. Graves liiei been to see Isolina and Dr. Gras s had ordered that itn/lid he so, after studying 'lie sharply for some time.	Tlns exercise formed in me. a ha hit winch no one could3hlohly account for, nor could I account for it myself. NoitBEAUTIFUL I?IE-,Y7[.['7matter how fair the scenery was in the direction of Sinrle.v Sands or the Cat's head hills, I always shaped my course round the village road in time to meet the evening train from New York.	I watched every arrival with jealous eyes, and became as re, alar a visitor to the Ranelagh Station as the urchins who loafed under the butternut tree at the corner, with a persistence which seemed half insane.	Sometimes I was asbiuneci of this habit, when strangers stared curiously at me, but notwithstanding this, and owing to some inward promptings, I never broke my tryst with the evening train.	One evening, to my unutterable confusion, my eager watching was rewarded by seeing my lover alight from the car. The urchins all grouped and gazed cougratulatiugly at me, when the handsome gentleman banded his valise to Nelson, to ride home with, and walked slowly by my side, his hand on my saddle-bow,	It was very gratifying to have all the youths in Ifanelagh reloice that my long waiting was at last successful.	'Mr. Lindhurst had conic down to spend a day with us, having left his business with his clever young clerk '' to take a trip to Eden," as he flatteringly declared.	But I do not find my little Iva looking well," be said, regarding rue with far too close a scrutiny for my nervous face to bear unmoved; darling, how weary-boo' feverish you are! Why, love?"	I hid my groundless, womanish fears, for I was ashamed of them ; and I told him, gayly, be had brought the medicine. So we walked home by the beach, and the moon sailed up to smile blandly ujon us, and my imprisoned11,	alllea t swelled more freety for a space, in the lo~e of the rn,who was dearest to Inc.	His visit passed so quickly; the hours fled on winged feet, while he soothed and comforted us all, and ministered to my sister with the tenderness of a brother; I forgot to tremble with sick fears at every sudden sound, and clung to him with almost childish dependence.	Once more the Liri sank behind the hills, that mystic hour which oft has marked the lark events of this history; that borer whose approach called me from the most engrossing cumplovmeut to the watch.I bad beu playing to my sister and Ernest on the littlear8L4 UTTPUL JJIENZI.1	mo at the clock I started up, as affrightedla 'when the enchanted hour was striking.	I e\elaHn0¥		to-htht?" said Isoliua; "oh, need you go to-night?		(1011 PIe mIop to_morrow when Eiuest 1o not heie,,		ior " I iuatiered, al mot tragically, 'let me go.¥ 13 I von are weary with walking so long on she beach- afternoon. Dear Iymjila, I am sure you should notout to-night. If Dr. Graves saw you how lie would4ood the picture of dumb obstinacy, gazing from face IYou are determined to go?" said Ernest, in a lowMost!", i wlucpercd.Will you walk? It would be half an hour before theces were road r,"¥ Yes, yes; I 'will Avalk",A walk in the cool sea-breeze may do her good," saidifrac4, turning quietly to Isohna. '' I thank with you, it riding is too violent all exercise after her fatigue-sheci walk with me."I darted from the room and flung on my hat and scarf,I cacti og one fond, remorseful look on Isolina's wistful	face, I I urned away from the door, my escort by my side.	I led miiy lover the shortest way over the sands to "Pane-	Village; di Villago; the tide had crawled in and was full: I did not	ii my blind hurry I scrambled over rocks and clungroinblmo banks, which, were thus not the charmed0. would have been impassable barriers to mc. Ernest+	I owd, soaietaaies catching me hack fi'omn a whirling wave. H (,times ow ingi ag me over the slippery rocks. Coaversa-andor soda cironmstances was impossible.Pt lat we reached the road which led strai lut into theI aye, anil, panting with our wild scramble, Iwas glad to¥ on 0 \ eoiopani J!-'s arm.h'ov, toll me what all tIns means" said Mr. Lindlanrst.All what? 11mg 1 hear tile' shriek of the coming	You cannot walk so fact. I fool your heart like acihuicot for?" against my arm. Iva]ulla; what is this ex-hash	They arc connag round the curve of the hill-BEAUTIFUL 1?iE2c/j	1	w they cross the wooden bridge-in one-half minute they ,ill be here."How can you tell so well""Have I not watched? Come, come! We shall he late.oAV hom do von expect?"No one-any one. Come!"	1 was wild wiGs excitement. I dragged him close within the station and hung gasping on his arm.	My darling, what can be the matter?" murmured Ernest. '' I cle'i ft like to feel you tremble like this. I ant sore you are ill."	The boys umler the butternut-tree ceased imitating the shuck of the coining engine with their fingers to thus mouths, and began to chatter in would-be whispers.''She's got another chap with her to-night."Wonder where the horses have gone to?""Grass, likely. Who do you think she watches for?"	"Don't know: she's as regular hero as old Jehsou, the carrier, is at the post-office."These remarks were intensely audible to me, Whethrmy lover heard them or not, I could not tell; he wss look-mg anxiously down at me, and isot at all interested in any-thing else.	The evening train stopped; the few pas'mger steppod upon the platform and ran about clamoring for tiseir luggage.Few, indeed, there were to reward my curiosity.	Two farmers' wiles and a little girl dre-sed in calico who were each saddled with a blue-spotted handkerchief boadie, and a hand-basket, and all seenied glad to see their native lulls again. A city exquisite, of hlae aqenaOee. eiear in teeth , cane in hand, with colored glovus,	t he accurate shade of two dogs which slouched at his heelsus ho honored its with a profound stare, as he sauutered up to ''Old Sol."	There is no one else," said I, in a depressed voice. "Conic away.""Yes, m- love, the dew is falling, and my little girl istoo long under idlie, gladly hod me off the platform for, perhaps. ta (15rods. Ilce Lot's wife, I leoke( hack. and botanic traosthx 1.	"What has happened?" cried Ernest, seeing Toy rat face.F- if	BEAt V/PUB itJENZ-f.1)1)esntio1' out front the station. She	\ woman had	11-laid platThrm and dashed aside herilded Over the 1 One nioment the colorless face Was	d cto me. rape with a red glow of the vanished sun paintinglied 	scarlet 111)011, and streannllg into two flaring,have said 1 should know that face among a thonsandI looked upon it now.Good Heaven!" muttered Ernest, throwing his arm nd ice, 'how ghostly you ai'o Lcsii on me, and I like von home."Oh, dent let her see me," I moaned with chattering ii; 'keep between us-oh, conic a ivav."What, that lady? She cannot harm you! Don't beaid."	e hastened on a few paces, I elnigmg to his arm, and .ini) able to pick my steps. Oh, what cruel fate had ht cii' here to face ma cneiiv?let I rallied roy sen5es 11 ith a mighty effort.IV here is she., Ernest ?" I asked.	The lady who calve out of the station? She is ascending1' steps of the hotel, and a mais has jnst carried sonic lug-o into the hmise,"	I turned quickly. Ihe woman was facing on the topsteps of the balcony, a White hand shielding her eyes fromthe western I ight; again that fenial e form strne k 11 01.1.01. toagain I gasped convulsively, and nay face grewVe and hard,\\ hen we gained, the beach-road which led up to Sil-a, and when the village was quite h iddea behind the- roes. Ernest seated mc on a stone. by the road-side, andI before nb with nay hands gathered firmly in his.-	My love," he said, gravely, 'I cannot tell how I our 'go conduct through all lns walk has alarnied me.- You not explain it?"Oh, 'leaven! what shall I say ?" I cried, bursting into-, i ci ieal	"where shalll begin this dread fnl story`11, bristles with horror. That oim has found us. Alas,'M1 o! gil-what is this?" said my lover, pressingson is Mis. Beacujoit .1	ill his aj'fjj~.	-You cannot mean that that per-is hnn ' on his h' , a tom a oor father is in search of!b		11c55i speechless for a while; my self-niaSBEAUTIFUL RIP3zI,	l'rltory was all gone; prolonged anxiety had made me weak as a child. I was worn out with watching for danger.	\\Then I could speak I told him all; his face was pale and quiet when Iliad finished, lie caught me to his heart again and strained me tightly there."You will not leave to-night?" I moaned, piteously.	"No, my darling; no, no!" exclaimed my lover. "I could not leave you now."	11 And you will not leave us until she is arrested-don't protest. She will come, when the night is blackest, to poison us; she will come to-night!" I almost shrieked,	Hush, hush!" he whispered, ''I will guard you, my girl. Nothing shall enter Silvertea unchallenged to-night."	Tie hurried me home, and confusion arose at my coating. I was ill, and could not hide it, and the eyes of love divined my powerlessness. There were hurried consultations between my mother and Mr. Lindhurst, and messengers were sent to the village; but I was too ill to notice much.	I watched my sister with insane terror lest she should leave the room and fall into danger as the night advanced, and I implored her net to leave my side,	"Hush, my darling!" whispered Ernest, "see, your words terrify her-oh, take care!"	Then I became as urgent that Isolina should retire to bed as before I had been that she should remain; for I felt the effort to restrain my breath killing me, arid I knew that alarm for her might be fatal. Sophie cause and took ow sister away, and I beckoned the girl back to me and whispered, with streaming tears:	"Lock her door , Sophie; oh, lock the door and sleep beside her?' Arid then I hid my face in my hands with a shudder of renewed panic,for words my sister had used once its a thrill of terror came hack to nrc like a spell:	"Bolts and bars are nothing to her when she chooses to come."	TUs was the woman whom she feared; the woman who had slid like a vapor into nsy chamber, through bolts and bars. I felt it; I saw with a flash of conviction that the crisis which was to destroy its had come.	"She conies to fulfill her vow!" I exclaimed, writhing iii my lover's arms. I shrieked as if a hyena were rending nivitals, and for the third time in my life I fainted.After a strange inward experience I revived, and fouci15"		BAA uTIPIJE BIENZL- '	1	'nclia¡ Over nie. hours had passed it05flluiOl1t,andl was On nay mother's bed, she alone he'i'lieunnatural strain on my feelings had passed away;chic to hope for the best, instead of dwelling on the'Mamma I have been a child," I murmured; "forgive	Thank Heaven that you have recovered !" whispered my ruler, tremulously. ''I did not know the strain winchbeen on your mind all these weeks."Listen! What is that?" I exclaimed, sitting up.	Mr. Lindliurst, my love. Tie is pacing the hail to-night. hliall I open the door anti tell him that ins Iva is seared by He footsteps? Fyc, child! love must he very deaf, as well as	'No, no. I shall have to listen to it. Mamma, what has been done? The woman"Even while I spoke profound exhaustion closed my month;I sunk gently hack against my mother's arm and fell asleep.CHAPTER XXI.A TRIP IN THE RAIN.t iAssr, seeing a moose in his house, said: 'What art thou doing,mouse, in my house?' And the mouse, secretly smiling, replied:	nothing, icy friend; we do not want food from oil, only ic'1 ing.' '--Gaarx An-ruonoor,	When I awoke I was lying alone in my mother's bed, the road davli ht sInning on thy face, and "the sounds of Mrs. biller s kstehea. which was 'hear, remindin me heerfollycite nechhm'lo0 of human beings.was" nine o'clock; what a briduh of time stretched be-	t2 and the startling events of last night!,is1i,ued on me clothes and opened the door.seas busily sweeping down the steps with a hand-lo"' is my sister?" I asked.(ib are von usIva, deir, l miss, and better? Yes, you look bright,	err good ni' ¡lmua is sleeping vet; she (11 (111a		8n t, I'm afraid.	She was anxious ahO0tBEAUTIFUL Riffyzi, 	iciyou, and my nose would snore, though 1 tried ray very best not to let it.	"lam sorry for that, Sophie, but I don't think you can help it. Did you keep the door locked and deep on the sofa?"	"Yes, Miss lea; and Mr. Lindhurst he came twice to the doer and asked me if all was safe. Sore, miss, I don't know what the panic was for. Be there burglars round?"''I hope not, Sophie. Where is Mr. Lindliursti"	" In his room, now; he staid up all night, and your ma has made him go now and sleep."Where is mamma?""In the kitchen, I think, speaking to Mrs. ljaller,"	I went into the breakfast-room, and sat waiting for my mother to come in.	After all, what had 1 to fear? This was home, and who could invade these sacred walls unseen? Surely F had turned a Machiavelli, to question with dark suspicion the good faith of every living creature.	While these thoughts were occupying me, my mother entered and greeted me tenderly. There was a puzzled expression on her face which I did not fail to notice."Mamma:" I cried, "tell me what has happened."	"My dear, I am at a less what to think: you must have made some curious mistake last night. '['be truth is, the only lady who arrived at Stanton's last night is Mrs. Ringwood, the widow lady who staid here last winter. Nelson has made as many inquiries as he could in a private way, and it seems perfectly preposterous to molest such a person. She is an elderly, quiet, invalid lady, with gray hair, and she has quite a reputation for her charity. Mr. Stanton's people spoke of her almost with veneration. Site Isas been traveling for her health, and came here hoping to re-occupy Silverlea for the summer, quite unaware that it had been let to any one else. She is undecided yet whether to go away or try to find some house round Ranelagh which iron Id suit her, 'The probability is that she will stay at the hotel some days. Now, my dour, does it not scent ridiciulons for us to Proceed in any way against a lady of Mrs. Ilnigiroedreputed character?"	All this sounds very plausible niamma," I respond' I. gi'ayely, "and I confess that me convictions are stagger'i.One cannot be sure that a iace'soen once by the Ito 'testBEAUTIFUL RIENELmoonlight, and aandst the most abject terrors, would be recognizable agaili; still, I adhere to my suspicions that the ace I saw last night is the same. And now, to shake the ppareatlv strong positiOll of this Mrs. Ringwood. Why hashousekeeper been forbidden to speak to us of her? flowIniihl an irreproachable widow laity fear the gossip of an Id woman? You see. at the very outset, this lady conceals oioet hitig, which proves she is not what she seems."	ion Ii icon acutely; but I have been speaking to Mrs. I taller of I i. and from what she says. I think the poor lady	inc to b,amc. Mrs. Hailer is a well-meaning woman, alla will not break a premise he made to Ralph Morecombe, but she gave roe to understand that Mrs. Ttingwood's secret	late to some disgrace in the family-a soii who, perhaps, is 1oding the law-and she wished to keel) the circumstances join the boy's friends. My dear, we have no right to pry into any one's private affairs without good proof of their 'lenrity.'	How probable it is that the son is Cecil Beaumont," 1 sneered, still suspicious. " Oh, mamma, do not deceive yourself.	" I shall not," she answered; "but we must not be imprudent. We can do ootlnn without proof; what a mad course it would be to arrest a¡lady like Mrs. Ringwood on no r single accusation. No, no; we roost send for your furtier and his lawyer, and considt them; perhaps at this very moment they have discovered the real culprit who atnipted to poison yon."We shall go and call on this woman, then, mamma?"	If you wish, You can then judge more calmly it your 1 iioicns have any foundation- and I will sorely be able b tnt any hidden treachery, if she is, as on 'say	, 'not it she scents,'"I unma wrote a note to my father which Mr. Liii dhnrst innd to d0 liver, and ivieh we expected would bring him down by the morrow. with Mr. Speingle, to examine into the cause of our panic.tAVe agi,eea to jriv, IKT. Lindlit,,rst to jl-je station to catch he midday train, and from thence masniria and I were to call at the hotel and see the widow lady.	We left my sister in her chamber lit company with Sophie, 'rho v charged to allen no one to see her mistress on-ISEA UTTt'UJJ R[PJXZLtil our return, and at half-past eleven we drove away from Silverlea.	It was a dismal day; white sheets of drizzle were knrrifying landward over the black and leaden waves: sullen &onds lowered over the dripping trees, and sudden gusts se opt the small chill rain-drops upon the carriage windows.	My spirits sank in unison with the atmosphere, when the station tess reached, and Ernest held my lend, bidding me farewell. I burst into tears.	"I will go back with you-1 shall not leave you!" ho cxcia nod, i mptilsivelv.	No, no!" I answered, restraining myself; "1 am foolish. Farewell ! I ant not afraid. Adieu, my love."	'Fears dropping fast hid his beloved face from me. I turned my head to the carriage cushion, and my mother shut the dour. In two minutes Mr. Lhidhnr,t was rattling over the wooden bridge, and round the curve of the hill, and we were once more alone.	"Now, shall we visit Mrs. Ringwood?" said my mother, gently breaking in upon my grief. ''Do ou feel capahlei"	Indeed I (lid not; my courage had all' oozed away with the vanishing train."	"We cannot go alone," I said, imploringit. "Let ne get Mr. Fernley to go with us. He can mmmd ccc us, you know."	And so it was decided. Nelson drove tip the street and stopped at Mr. Femnley's cottage, which was directly opposite " Old Sol," and while he knocked at the door I gazed. at each window in turn which the hotel afforded, in hopes that the noise of the carriage might have attracted my incognito to the window.	But either the lady was deaf, or exempt from the weakness of her sex; I gazed in vain.	Presently a woman appeared at the door with a gravy spoon in her hand, and a half-peeled onion in the ether.''Is 1M m. Eernlev within?" asked mamma front her seat.	,,Not jest vet, ma'am." She cautiously poked her head out bctiveen two intermittent roof_torrents, and looked up and down street. " I ant looking for hint every niniute, ma'am,"What shall we do?' said my mother, turning to iiHad we not better ismtrodn'e '	Oh, no!" I cycle m'm '	-B P4 tT'uIP'UL JIIEI1ZLmounter without a protection; " let us wait for the }louse. nut."C new you'd better coniC in, nia am, said the womanfrom the door. I still urged my mother, and we alighted,'l':ike the horses down under cover of the station,"nil mamma to the eoachmau; "we mac not want y Oil	half an hour. We call walk across the street to the ii it ci.	We followed the woman into Mr. Pernlcys bachelor 1 in or.I [eve mt sin' idea how long your master may be ab-ashed nianuna.	No, niaam. I was in the kitchen when lie went oat inm'en an hour ago, and I wouldn't have knowbi, only I hear the door slam offer him, and seen his legs passing niv ci mdow. 'Now.' thinks I. where are yon off to?' Btt he'll be hack to dinner sure, ma'am-he never misses; and it s al irs vs punctual at half-past twelve. ft's-twenty-five minutes past twelve be our clock. Sit down, miss; I must go tutu my beefsteak,"	'11w woman hustled away, leaving us standing in attitudes of impatience and indecisionWe may as well be patient " said my mother, seatingherself; '' there is ttothinp hurrying us."I placed a chair close by the window and sat down. Someti it cc of silence passed 'by, during which I hue my eyes rein, 'it from window to window of the opposite 'build I found nothing to rivet my attention. listen F' I hissed, with upraised linger. '' What is'dv mother sprang to my side and looked out. ion nil see nothing. mother-the window is rushingii waler, and a batik of fog has tolled between its; lintDo you hear the creaking-that grit of wheels-atId of feet on their wooden balcony? 'heaven! why did rome here? Ah! I see an 'Outline through the no of obscurity; a carriage is at the door of the hotel." Heaven grant it may not he for Mrs. Ringwood!" ejaeit1 may mother, with real alarm,Matisma, a man. is drawing the horse close to the footsteps. Now he is 5preaditig a shawl over the seat. lnot see ni ore; the glass is deitse with stea in and tai UI have wiped the pane; now we can see better. rotlier.ItBEAUTIFUL J.ULWZL 	187mother! the lady is mounting into the carriage, The woman -,nine. Oh, mother, they have dashed off---we have lost her.call Nelson," said my mother, turning white	I rnshed to the door and looked down the street; already ]fail the carriage passed the station; it was flying up the road to Silverlea. I flew out heedless of the heavy rain, audi almost knocked a man down, who was stepping across the, wide ditch in front of tho house.	flahlo!" cried Mr. Feruley. "What's all the hurry formadam?"		- -	Oh, sir, who is that? What lady was that who drove away.",	What 11	lady? Mrs. Ringwood, who has kept in(,, withher all-"darted away, leaving mm staring with astonishment.	The station was full of loungers, to whom Nelson was displaying the perfection of his has.	'.' Out with the carriage, anti' dash up to Fernlcy's," I Muttered at his elbow, then sprang in.	Without a word lie mounted, whirled round the vehicle, and obeyed inc to the letter. Mr. Ferniey had just gained his own door stop, and he turned with a concerned expression of face to look at the arrival, At the same moment the door opened front within and my mother appeared.	''Good morning, Mr. Fernlcy," she said, calmly, shaking hands. "I was about to call on Mrs. Ringwood-has she gone?"	''How unfortunate. She had important business at hir1ey and had to go in spite of the weather. Can	Probably she will call at Silt-cnlea during our absence," cried my mother in an agitation which she could not conceal. '' MSe shall follow her. (bed-morning agani, sir.She took her scat, and -Nelson slammed-slint the door.	Home!" she said, flinging herself back, and the carriage moved off, leaving the bewildered house agent standing under the double stream of roof-drops, expostulating.	As soon as we had cleared the village, Nelson drove on at a rate which made the carriage windows rattle in their franies, and the trees rotate like dancing den islie.In two minutes we were at the gate of Silverlea, andIBE-4 UTTELTL RIEoYZLIlls face was glowing, and histOtS oponOd the dooi. mont had infected him.animated; ,oi110	or straight on? The little buggy	bnggy0tahcad down in the next hollow. I could catch pMinutes, ina'arn.",tnitht	then" said my mother, without a mc-Ititotion. 	"we must sec the lady in the carriage."-	d Sdverlea vanished from myJR XXII.JLn-GOOSE CHASE.	NJ nave von that tonone of. yours, anti set it. between your teeth o.oke known your true meanng. not to he rattled like a muffin-its 6611.`- --CABLYLE.A train loft Shirley Sands, at hall-past one, and from theittioto in which the carriage was flying it seemed as if the hula intended to elude us by catching the train; we had six miles to go, from the gate of Silvorlca; it was a quarter to 0110. now.	On, on! down into a hollow, whore the anile blast suddenly misted us, and howled over our heads in the upper -un-out; then out on the long sand beach, and through the	intrluig foam by a short cut, and up a long lull before we ainto in sight again of the pursued.	What are they doing?" cried my mother, dropping the runut window; "do they seem to see us, Nelson?"Don't know. ma'am; they keep too sung. Can't see-thing, ma'am, but a big, black umbrella, and the little to a-spanking it!"I o urged on the already excited bays, and slowly, imper-dly, we gained upon the buggy. 	-	She is without doubt trying to escape us!" ejaculated nit mother, after watching spcechhessIy and oh, horrors! t,he m be Stiecessful We are but a nub from Shirleyintoand it is twenty minutes past one. She has but toour very eyes!"' secure a ticket, and be away beforeig bands and gazed forth. g tuck of the coming train broke throughtBRA UTIPUL RIIeNZT	163the dense air in close proximity; not half a mile stretched between its and the station at Shirley Sands.	Quick. Nelson! Fete, fete!" I shrieked, tapping on the window.	Again he lashed the now infuriated horses, and we plunged madly through the deep, shirting sand.	still we gained upon them, but slowly--too slowly. One long bill to climb-the buggy was at the top; one long descent to the next valley, and Shirley would be reached.	The dripping horses broke into a reckless canter up the bill, and the fitful sheets of rain swept down-a dreary, desperate picture. We gained the summit; but our will-o'-thewisp had disappeared.	Down in the valley nestled a small, confused cluster of houses, some maple trees, an arch of in-coming ocean, a long station house, with a grime engine protruding, which emitted black volumes of smoke and puffs of shrieking steam.	Down we rushed recklessly, with a crunching of our wheels, like thunder on the rocky bill-side. Nelson's sharp eye marked the fresh wheel-tracks, and, without hesitation, he dashed into the station, where a confused mass of ccIneles were wedged together upon the narrow platform.	"No time to lose," he cried, banging open the door, ''train off in one minute. There's your titan behind that load of bay--don't see lady nowhere."	We alighted and followed Nelson through a throng of shouting guards, grumbling farmers, and backing vehicles, in safety to the other end of the open buildin, where the buggy 'tood, and the little brown horse, with' his nostrils dilatild and foam-flecked, hung his head and snorted ,it his feet.	Beside the carriage stood a man, clad in a rough dread-naught, and slouch bat.	His bands were thrust into his	pockets; his head was slightly bent forward, with a singu-larly crafty air: his eyes were peering from underneath theshaaow of his hat, luminous and startling; he was softly whistling, and watching our difficult approach with calm trinsnpli.Not until we were confronting him did I recognize l1;1! litItloreoombe, the runaway gardener."What, did you drive her he'd"back, " Reoeade, where is vrii I iiI- ' - -/BF-4 gDEUL RJENZLther,	"who is this person?"	silverlea-Ralph More-1;e ;e kind enoll."11 to direct me where to find Mrs. Ring.¥	ately, 11 1 should like to aj(I 111v mother, teniper,r before he train leaves Shirley Sands.	man slowly shifted his regards from my face, and red her with a slight wave of the hand toward his drip-rat,	if it's Mrs. Ringwood you want, she's"rock-out with it!" I hissed, impetuously.Not hero," lie concluded, turnuig to me with an nu-lI:aiit sparkle in he coal-black orbs.'' I implore you, patierroe, Ivanilla!' wlnsperod m mother,I rrrviu me back. ''Do von moan that she is not at Slur-v acls?" this to the sneering villain himself.I said that, ma'am," he responded.	Its false, then!" I stormed; ''she loft Stanton's Hotel irtli' you, and we have riot lost sight of yon since."	Miss lfienzi is mistaken. Mrs. Ringwood did leave Sr anton's Hotel with me. but-' here lie made a long, deli herato pause and stroked his long, grizzled beard, and eyed	with a gradually deepening smile, as the engine gave one last shriek and suddenly moved out of the station with its train of carriages. ''But," lie resumed. '' Mrs. Ringwood 'I'll not conic all the ava\' with me; I left her on the road. S rn to give you such a drive for nothinon"	lie moved off and began to mount into his buggy, but A rison stepped to the horse's head and grasped the reins."hot yet, mister," ho growled; "my iustrcss hasn't given u leave yet, us I've heard, Stop out, old chap."End step out he did, for Nelson had the. host of it with	excitable alum al rearing in his grasp and read v to dashwn upon the railway track, carriage and all wheneverI'erty slionid conic,	"All right,' said Moreoomio with a sinister satisfaction, nrc edled himself against the stall and folded his arnisF] I cart as long as the ladies like."crutrrffi0 15 Mrs. Ringwood?' asked her feclin~	Y's of	nat,()n;ray mother., firralyptea~e,		u 	, ~ tell me, if yO11Nif s~he went off ill the ears'Which have just left?"o, ni,N	a darn."YOU wretch, tell joe the truth!" cried I, trembling beIBEAUTIFUL JSJENZL	17tycen anger and the fear that we had in some way been oist. witted.	I-Ic stared at inc with a sunle of detestable insolence, hut said nothing.	My child, you will have to leave me with this man a fix minutes," said my mother, entreatiisgly. '' Your feelisi, are carrying you eyond prudence."What does he moan, then?'' I exclaimed, choking u itOapprehension. '' Where has ho put Mrs. Ringwood?"	The man stood immovable and unconceraed, with that intolerable smile on his face, and his features fixed. My anger rose beyoud all barriers of prudence; I darted close to mmand shook his arm, in the intensity of my indignation.	Villain 1" I ejaculated, '' you shall answer for the ensue, of your mistress, if she escapes-remember that!"Ills face slowly changed, and became absorbed.What crimes?" he asked, drawing back.	"Oh, you will ruin all!" breathed my mother, drawing me away.My passion cooled, and I sass' mt own imprudence.	"Mr. Morecombe, I ask you once more where your mistress is?" said my mother.'l You passed her on the road, madam."Explain yourself," said my mother, patiently.Mrs. Ringwood is at Silverla."A7 	-in the, dank taist out-	t Silverlea!" she grew whiter th~ side.I felt my flaming heart grow cold as the winter wind.	How can that ho?" I asked, in a low voice: ' did we not see you all the way from Ranelagh to tlsb, place?"	'' Not all the way, Miss Riensi; not when may mi,tte,s alighted at the Sh ortmea gate and walked up to see Mrs. Rienzi and her daughters, who nnfortmiately are not all at home. Oh, not all the way!"	This allusion to the state of affairs at Silverlea almost frenzied us with eoastorssatioa.	"Why did you not tell us this when you saw us pass the house?""A servant, madam, only obeys orders.""But apparently you have no business to do at Shirley."	"I have done the basiaes, said the crafty ilhain, Too-	-have off: "and now ma'am, if there's nothia else yen woollike to 'know about Mrs. Ringwood, I'll go uwl to her.I172 	EA UTIFUIJ RJEIYZL"Y n li ill unit until we have preceded you," I cried.lie did nd heed me' with a sudden spring forward herehed liii reins out el Nelsen's hand and led the horse1 1 f t lie building, muttering, as lie did so, words which Iii Id not bear.Just as his foot was on the step hc was laid flat on theindy road by one blow from our lusty coachman's fill,tie there, ye old scoundrel he snd, coolly securing the	,rse to an iron ring. Then ho led out our carnage, and hrlil the door open for us.Oh, Nelson!" exclaimed my mother, in steep distress, "I you had not touched him."	'' (ouldn't help it, ma'am," said Nelson, respectfully nuchinr his hat: " he called our Miss Ivanilla a viperous J714, cuss and he hanged to him; he may he thankful Iit twist his old whiribones into splinters."Co and see if he is hurt. Nelson."	Couldn't see it, nohow, mistress. Sorry to disobey ye, lint it's not for them varmin to he coddled.' Humph! the old coon is getting up, bad luck to him, and I must drive on."	He clambered into his seat and passed close by the prostrate man; lie was now on his knees. his hat a crushed mass under one knee; his long grizzled hair flowing down each cheek; his lips while and working with rage; his eyes glar-	;t W1il the terrible passion of a wolf before the spring. lie waved his arm,,, wildly as we passed, and shook his clutched fist.	All, accursed vipers! wretches! I will he revenged!" lie etiriescd, shrilly as a maniac, in Italian,Clipli Moreeoiube was an Italian.e were now dashing up the hill, from 'Shirley Sands,I ci 'cc sat side by side grasping each other's lizInds and1 long with a sense of a disastrous defeat.I ni:irkcd the slow recurring milestones in an agony ofNelson 	misery reduced us to silence,soniewliat	g000 progress, though the horses wereby the increased speed blown by the heavy roads; we soon became awarebi'inc pursued	The	ia we were taking out- turn inand clcser' if	Mo iC grit of the light wheels came closerterunned to do it. recom e could dash past us lie was de-e Ii ad reached a high i ! o, the road, built up trouiBJf A UTTh'IJL BIRVZJ,17,the encroaching sea, with a high water-bar of rockeither side: and here while I watched breathicish fr'ni tiwiodow, I saw more than once the beautiful l'ead of t} little brown horse, whose fiery nostrils were distended, and his eyes glowing with ambition to head us. Just where 1 Toad was narrowest, Nelson drew up square in the middle of it and stood up.''Look here, old chap," he cried, brandishing his wli p.	Ibis here stick's well loaded, and whenever the nose of that beast comes near enough I'll drop it like a stun In1w eon his eyes-so do as ye like."	Down he sat again and drove on deliberately; but though the road became wide enough to admit two abreast,Mrs. Ringwood's man. kept well to the rear for the rest ofthe way.The rain slowly abated, the wind moaned over the surg-ing tide and slowly veered to the west; at last the whitewalls of pretty Silverlea gleamed through its leafy covering, and the spent horses trotted up to the door.The shallow steps which led up irons terrace to hanginggarden, and every grand walk was rushing down its little stream of rain drops, like the silver tinkle of bells in a fairy revel; the flowers, fresh washed, and perfumed, raised themselves stiff and tall, with painted petals blooming joyously in the struggling sunlight.Never had Silverlea looked more lovely, more innocentand happy; it was the garden of Eden before the serpentblighted its glory. And now for the home we had leftsacred.	A strange hush pervaded the cottage, and this listening hush struck terror to my heart.Sophie came down the stairs; and there was that in herface which seemed to be asking forgiveness for a wrongcommitted.Whore is Miss Isolina?" asked m v mother."Indeed, ma'am and I couldn't help it!"' said the girlwith a courtesy; "there's a lady in the draw ing-roOnt and Aliss ICOJIna she 1could go to see her, and she's been there an hour and more'	ily mother instantly fumed to the room designatei, and entered. I could not follow yet; profound terror nailed no to the spot, while I listened for ouu1c outelV feuni then	fateful room. -None came; the low nun rn	caUgBEA 1TT[FL 11 RJE1\2l.ear; 1diie quietly drew off my hat and cloak; my vu cued Oil my hands, and I did ot dream of re ice them. \ies Iva, I hope you're not angry," said the girl; ' f l.u'r keep her when she would o down. saw Ralph Moreconibe fa5te1ung his horse before the and the dread of meeting mm aroused me from my 1 t]i a scarlet flush mounting to my cheeks, I enteredCIIAPTEII XXIII.s. ca :y G WOOD.Ha', 0 en child, fly 	*instant death threatens thee, and swift as light Will the stroke fail; the traitor's toils are laid; The poison in its gay glass sparkles bright!-TAsso.		And this is your oungest daughter?"		]			was a small, sinewy 11 and, which hid 1 mine, a hand	with long, clinging fingers which steal thilv seemed to	wreathe round jujus with a sudden pressure, which, despitemy glove, sent a thonstuiti shafts of mysterious flame	I cough my system, as if lire had been strucl between us; ittat tall figure in black which stood before me, with a	five le'nding downward in a gaze which I could not meet.	I bowed silenily, cud turned away. Mv mother was	Stationed near the window; Isolina sat within the arm of theIii, and by her side placed myself.NOW I could lift my eves to Mrs. Ringwood's face; sheis not looking at me. 'onld such a fac accompany such		if was mild and elderl; with some benign wrinkles 011	tile forehead, and around tile mouth' the lips were pale;	tile, hair banded how on either cheek. and as white as if				clime had bleached it; the eyes which could have	itid perhaps what all the rest denied, were protected by	blue olitic-glasses, and whether they were gray, blue, 01'	lurid bi'oayn like those of the midnight murderess I couldtot tell. In all points this lady Ilpola whom I was gazing seemedBEAUTIFUL RrE_NZf, 	1-15o quiet, orderly, and timid a Woman as any to he met with-ill	holy pale of church membership. I fine, though mywhole being was thrilling with one of those preternaturalfits of shuddering to is		I am subject, I coold not evento myseli say-This say-I his is she!	Ify obsorhing study was broken upon by my sister's strange caressing of my hand; she had drawn off my glove, and was now pressing my fingers in her own with almost insane eagerness.I turned and looked at her.	What horror-what fear was this? What strong repression on the rigid lips? What death-like pallor over the whole face?	Could that bland widow lady cause such dire emotions? Dark distrust blazed up in my heart in spite of all her seeming.	"Who is that woman?" I whispered, passionately; "tell me-fear nothing!" She only carried my hand to her lips. and gazed with furtive entreaty toward the sweetly smiling visitor, who at every movement, turned her face toward the cause, with a quickness which reminded me oddly of a bird of prey.	She had been speaking ever since I came in, but it was only the commonplace of ceremony which she uttered; nothbig could have been more polite, proper, or amiable than the phrases which she was mildly wading through. My to other answered by signs.	Did my ears deceive me, or did I indeed detect the slightest accent of a foreign language on the lady's tongue? Do ladies from Vermont pronounce with an Italian accent?	''I have spent a very pleasant afterncon with hiss Iheuzi," said Mrs. Ringwood. tnrnmng her bloc glasses toward the sofa; "I am charmed with such an acquaintanceship."	My sister started, and fixed her eyes on the face of the widow lady as if she was fascinated, then rose to her feet, and as suddenly sank back again, taking my hand and convnlsiyely pressing it.''I ai&i astonished to see how the time has slipped pa-t,7'Continued Mrs. Ringwood, with a, shade more of kinion in her voice than there seenied eee:incii ti: r Hthat it is almost three o'clock. \\ hv 	[iflown!"176		BEA TIFUL JIENZL	"I am sorry we have keptyOu Waiting e		g, saidlad b laud turned with a peculiarly determined inyie1117ler to I F ia as if she were silently demanding some¥	ThCCd girl again half rose, and with suddenice I directed a deli berate stare at the optic glasses, andlied her hack.Pardon rue," said my mother, sn d d cal I cooking then re. 'hut have we not met betorc, Mrs. li rugsrood ?dart pause followed this abrupt quest tori; then cameIn lv's reply, in a mild, bland voice.140 not know, [ am sore, dear Mrs. ltieuzi. Perhaps"it have been in Vermont",No. I have never been in Vermont?"I have lived all my life there nntil within the last fewo onths. My dear husband died" this with a deep sigh, home was home for me no niore."A delicate handkerchief with a deep black border wasloirriod to the pale lips, and received the sigh. The restof the, face looked for a subtle instant, as if a sneer had dis-ored it.Do you remember where we met before?"I said it in Italian, and walked slowly sip to the lady, un-til iuy foot was on the very bent of her dress. No humauhenig can conceive the secret terror with which l approachedher, and forced myself to speak to her; but I stood mycyonnd with clonchsed hands before her.For one instant her head was raised with a startled look;Jor features changed to doll gray, then a flash of dusky red:I onki have sworn those benign wrinkles were cunninglycdatcd with a pencil dipped in sepia: tli cv belied so oh the tigorish gilt of those white teeth: but the nextoient her regards wore turned to my mother with an airreistle appeal.What did the onng lady say?" site murmured' "I think eeni distressed"P v mother '0111d 1	have answered, but at that moment a1,1 n, an a sudden thonght seemed to strike her.cootI'llere, is tm bell br lnnclseon; allow' mo to remove yourcc have" Ringwood: you have fasted, I dare say, as longli7d1in ifto lebmont at my mother. What! ask hera of fr1eudsh ssuder our roof?"BEAUTBIUL JtIEYZL 	i_7"I will be glad to take a little refreshment tsaid Mrs. Ringwood, frankly; 'but I cannot iovvbonnet; I have overstaid my time beyond the mosttended call. J see my faithful creature out there waitingMy mother rang the bell and directed the luncheon trayto be brought in.,,Your servant, Morecombe, is an Italian?" she asked,quietly.Yes----yes, I believe so," minced the lady pleasantly" poor creatu re, lie is everything I believe, but a most de-voted soul:'	It was evident this lady did not intend to be unmasked; she was perfectly able to hold her own against two such foes.	Mrs. Haller came in, carrying a tray, which she set on the center-table ; then turned with a jespeetful courtesy, to leave the room.	Stay," cried Mrs. Ringwood, rising, and holding the old woman's wrinkled hand lightly with the fingers of her left hand " I did not ask you when I saw you before, how nig poor people are?"	I confess my suspicions seemed somewhat ridiculous as I listened to Mrs. Hailer's account of old Jobson, the carrier's, rheumatism, which had never come hack since that bottle of opodeldoc, and of Mrs. J)awscn's white suclling; and now the Hopper family all went to Snnday-sclscol, now, in the clothes she made for them ; and how the Widow Re rnolds missed her tracts and tea, with sundry other hits ofcharitable gossip which contrasted as incongruously alEcthe desperate character which I assigned to this worc;tIl.Meantime my mother busied herself in pouring wine itil!)four glasses and bearing them on the tray, while she moved a dish of cold foul to a smaller table in the windc' and leisurely commenced to carve it. As she did so she leveled one intense glance at me, tIivfl alnuost turned her back to the visitor and went on carvu' That glance said as plain as eyes could express ii" tI etc/if" Then, indeed I began to understand, and to admire Mother's sagacity. Mrs. Hailer at last left the moon!;Ringwood dew hear the table and sat down As she iiso her long vail fell forward hetwqcp me and the glasses otSBRA UTIFUL RIENZLne	Ii 011 I aStailt it was swept gracefully to one side,and the lady was sitting back in her chair with her handsfi id od ill lie], ]Np.//a/ she done it?		-	-	v cheeks blanched white my eyes glittered with ex-	went.TOiV to manage mv part.	rose and lifted the tray with the four glasses, npon it,	offered it to Mrs. ilingweod.*	Not ding but a glass of wine!" she said, smiling pleas->1w oneagi*d my eyes, but I was not ""Conscious that she	I lifted one glass' and slightly designated another, by rilcirig it with the glass she was lifting, while she turnedlw mystically hidden orbs toward [lie sofa.At that my sister clasped her hands and fell back gasp-	[ resolved to see the meaning of this signal. I carried lw tray to my sister. She shook her head and waved me Ivav wildly.	I lifted the marked glass and placed it on time mantelJ-_-e; the other two I carried to my mother.	he lifted one and set it beside her; I came back with the ray, and took the last glass in my hands.Now, all inn suspicions were centered in the markeda,-h fhad placed on the mantei-piece. I was think-hie	'ow nicely we had her in our power, if I could succeed owing that glass. Whilo thus 1 pondered, I raised myto may lip".X sudden shriek broke from my sister. 51w sprang with- c swiftness of light to my side, and dashed the vessel fromo hands,Oh, niother, mother too ])inch 1" she cried, and fell ato	11	feet among the fragments of lu-oleon gloss.and wave ofBRA CTIFUL liJEzJ.CHAPTER Xxiv.A NEW FACE AT TIlE DOOR,''Be near me when my light is low--		When the blood creeps, and the nerves prick	And tingle; and the heart is sick,		And all the wheels of being slow. "-Texxysoy,"Lock the door, mother " I Cried.	She had already sprang to do so, but the woman was as quick as she.	With a flash of her long hand, she swept my mother'e glass of wine oil the table. The next instant her lithe fingers were pressing down my rnotlnr'e upon the door handle.	Even in this supreme moment she was hiding behind her mask.	"Are you mad?" she exclaimed, regarding my mother steadily. "Your daughter requires vonr aid. Go to her, I will send for a doctor; would you seek to detam me?"	''The hand else pressed upon sank and released, My mother swayed aside, and the visitor vanished from the room.	"Mamma, are you mad?" I, too, cried. "Detain her! Will you let the assassin go?"Why did she not move?	My sister's heavy head was in my arms ; but I laid it on the wine-drenched floor, and darted after the woman.	What folly! Could my girls hand and infaot enmnng hope to conquer the bold plotter? They were	down to the gates of Silverlea, the man and hit	-and 110 wild commands of mine could reach themAlmost frenzied, I returned to chose iliad left.What ! both senseless-both smitten down!My mother was sitting on a chair, with her han! Sleedy pendant ; a bewildered expression on her face, smite was fast chancing to ncmeonscioUeness. ,	Mothero'¡ I shrieked, "do not give way. \e mu raise poor I solina from the floor. She will die here.BRA UTIPITL [?IflZI.	might as well have invoiced the helpless Flora at her Ic. Her eves turned upon me with Till coil seions, mourn.gaze; a weird flame began to burn in her cheeks.That unnatural loots informed me of the last calamity.I now remembered the peculiar manner in which themean had pressed dotrsi my mother's hand; also a jewel.telt I had seen on her right hand, which she often ad-ted. I remembered the horror of my sister as she toren.\ wet glove, after one of the stranger's hand-grasps, I gazed at my fingers.\V ere they hi// poisoned, and was I all that was left toI. It or of his dearly loved family? Two victims-and ItipC 1?Heaven, have pity on the wretch who escaped!I rent to my mother, and lifted her heavy hands.¥ It nich hand did she touch ?" I said, in trembling tones.11t ~~ mournful eyes lifted themselves to sue with a mightyifort. Her head fell hack as the lethargy attacked her.wi,', too, was unconscious.I kdl oil my knees beside her and seized her hands again.II eyes were dim with horror: but I dashed them clear oftears and ferocity. Now I could discern a tiny punctureon the back of the middle finger, with a faint-blue ringmmd it. I wild] v sucked it.(Jlamtny drops began to bedew her brow. The lethargydeveloped itself: My mother slumbered heavily.Also the roona is as in death-like silence. I alone seemedtig, Ileaveti has given tne life to save the others. I!)!]I-- try to do so.'nt out and called the servants.	away and send Nelson for a doctor!" I cried, when msekeper appeared.easpeil. and Is tood with her eyes fixed.Away!" I exclaimed; "and conae hack again in-citly,hii went, and Sophie rushed down stairs.Whit's the matter, miss? My good gracious-your' just dreafifal: and your faceLord!"IV heel its a sofa from the parlor-1 will help."But Io t' It me, dear Miss lye, who is sick?"It, Hall see. my girl-v011 shall see."hii< time I n as snakig her wheel out the sofa. 1 lesslv tit it; and altnost lifted it bodily into theBJfA UTIFUI. RThLSZL1-1room Mrs. Hailer hurried in, and the two women broke out in chorus at the sight they saw.	''Yes," I assented, almost smiling in my bitterness_'' it is rather dreadful, is it siot. Both poisoned, Mrs. hailerboth poisoned by the lady you call Mrs. Ringwood. Come, sophie-my mother first. Lay her on this couch; unfasten that collar, OW Mrs. hailer, my sister! Yes, I shall hold her head-I am quite strong for anything. So-now go and get what you can to prevent the effects of the poison; whoi poison I cannot say."	The old woman began in a quavering voice to pour out various recipes for counteracting poison, and I listened to her list of antidotes such as chalk and oil, milk, ironrust, vinegar, starch, white of egg, etc., with patient helplessness.	"Go and bring some one of those many nostrums, then,"I said, "You may blindly hit on the right one, Has Nel-son gone?""Yes," whispered she, in an awe-struck voice."Can he easily find the village doctor?"	"I told him where to go--a mile up the Cat's Head hill, on t'other side of Rauelagh. He went on horseback."	"He will not be back in time," I said, relinquishing my last hope with bitter fortitode; " they will be dead long before help can come to them, if my sister is not dead already!"	M'rs. Hailer began to weep, and hurried away for some of her medicine; Sophie, terrified into perfect silence, was beating my sister's cold hands, in the manner approved for a swooii.	Her bodice was nsilaeed, and her beautiful bosom lay still as a bank of snow, frozen by a north wind; she was not sleeping like my mother, and I thioughtshie was already (lead.	I came away without a word, and something turned my body cold like lead: my heart grew so stony that I no Ion grr felt the pangs of sorrow. I secretly, rose against that Creator who seemed to have devoted us to destruction; I ito longer strove against what seemed This merciless will; I' these victims die. Fate had marked them. With t01 fury in my heart, I left the house, and stepped out nito di garden.I fled from Silyerlea, and found myself no the roadS-2	EllA U'TJFUL EJEYZI.village. Mv wild thoughts began to shape themselves.would have the murderes arrested before she couldye I{arr lsgh. I would have revenge, and it should beL-eoug.l"aster and fasler I walked m hands den eked, my eyes and tearless. The afternoon sun was glimmering through- rows of trees, aud ou every, spear of grass hung a struig dri-unonds. All down the sandy road to Ranelagh a ere ks of purple violets and primroses, with a tear in everyii t. hut they breathed no comfort to me. A group ofppy-eyed children passed me on their way from the village-oool, and every voice sank to silence as I passed.Look at her;' look at her!' they cried, huddling to-tier.	She's lost her bonnet and shawl! She's one of the la. lies fm-mu Silverlea-let's go and help find 'em."	But I soon outstripped them in the search, and forgot to 'ark helniid at them,The village street was quiet and deserted as usual; but a.2 onp of strangers were standing at the foot of the hotel steps,and they all gazed at use with faces of concern or surprise,and said sometlnny to each other like what the children hadsaid; but I was impervious to external expressions, and walked tln'ong-h the midst of them, only seeing before me 015 rrreat purpose of vengeance. -	h[. Stanton was standing on the balcony talking to a nentlesoan; I caught him by the arm and pulled him aside LI tb middle of a sentence.- - l\ here is N rs, Ringwood?" \iy gracious. Miss Rienzi ! what's up?"- '\ here is Ms's. Rurigwood, sir?"- I'm amazed; do you krroy there's nothing on your-	Where slid you some from , for Heaven's sake?'shook his arm nritil he grew red with the violent n1-''ii.-, For the third time, I ask you, sir-where is Mrs. Ringnod ?''''Miss Rienzi, if it's a matter of importance, I'm sorry'-on," he exclaimed, with considerable feeling; "she's rndf an hour ago."I r,leed I can't tell you. t wish for your sake I hadIt was quite a sodden thing; she hired two of 057BEALTTTh'UL RIENZJ	153rooms for a week, then went to Shirley this forenoon ai 1 1sek her baggage off with her, without even an apology,hieb was strange for a lads like Mrs. Rinawooi took the three o'clock up-train to New York, and Innnos:will be in the city by siX."flid her man go too?"	"Yes; her man, their horse and wagon. My goodness! if I had only known Miss Riouzi it was so importaut__"Is there any means of sending a telegram to New York,.-Well, now, none nearer than an otlice at ShirlotSands."	,,Ha! six miles and a half from here. Too late, probelily. well, I must try. Give me a man to send to Shirley Sands."Anything in the world to oblige. Sammy! here Sam!"He went away vociferating,, and I was left alone to wait.Oh, impossible task! I paced about in smothered frenzy.	A gentleman on the balcony was eying me enrionsly; I went out to him and caught hold of his sleeve.Sir, are you a doctor."'No, I am not a doctor. I belong to the -C--- Rank.""Are any of these persons physicians?"	The persons designated were some dozen young men, Imabited in fishing and shooting blouses, still standing at the foot of the steps, and all gazing breathlessly at me.	"T	ladwishes to know if any of you gentlemen are physicians""'	Sorry to say I am riot," answered some; they all shook their heads.I turned my back on them, and re-entered the house.	Mr. Stanton was looking about in perturbation of unnd for ice.	"Oh, here you are. Sammy'11 be ready in two minutes -he's saddling the dapple mare, and auyliody can tell you hew she can put through it."A pen and paper, then, mv friend."	He, ashered me into a small ioon1 and placed the materiale before me. My two hands trembled as with ago e I clutched the pen, and dashed off in almost indistinguishable words the following:	Meet the six o'clock train from Ranslagh with an officer, anita' rest 'trne Rincwoi,d dressed in black; \vhmtc hair, bloc spec a torqueis ring; either on right band, or secreted about person.£'1 (CUT j?1E'iZIor. man with long, grizzled hair: dark eyes; slouch hat; name i Merseembe Brown horse, white feet; dark green buggy,n hinges. A murder has been attempted, results unknown	IVANILLA Ruoqzl"	This I addressed to my rather and sealed. I thrust my hind into my pocket. but found T had not my puree.I have no money, Mr. Slauton; lend me some',"Certainly, Miss Rienzi."	A grain he hurried off, and soon came hack with a couple rf notes, just as one of inc servants rode round to the front ('Ii a tall, sinewy roadster.	It is four o'clock now-, tell him he will win twenty dol. ]ars if he sends off the message before 1three-quarters of an lIolIr."stanton flung himself down stairs, and in one minutethe messenger was cantering off at his best pace.	Yew do tell me what's up,' said the good-natured landord, puffing up to me again. "Something extra musthave happened, for your coachman rode past here like the nibchief a spell ago."Ho was going for the doctor."	"Lord love you, how unfortniinte! I could have told him, if he stepped when I hollered to him, that Dr. Whitney had gone on his Thursday's circuit to Briarville, and won't be back to-night; he never is."Whore is Briarville?"''Full twelve miles off, t'other side of Cat's Head, miss." They are lost, then! If there was a chance, they have oat it"My dear Miss llienzi. who is ill?"All I have at home-and they must die like dogs, withhelpdarted out, determined to fly back to them.\I) dear young lady, wait till Mrs. Stanton gets a hem or ,on ,- cried the landlord, entreatingly.I (lid not heed him, hot advanced to the knot of yontlisthe gate; they parted in two groups, and left a passageFir me; I walked through the midst of them, lily mind onLinscictil of them.	There was a li'ht carriage before Mr. Fern lev's door; a Tall, white horse c-as pawing the hollow in the gionnd andliming his arching neck every moment to whinny impwit it lhro closed door,it		IMA UTIFUJ. R1E.yzi	185	i might have invoked Mr. Fernley's help in this hour ofextremity, but evidently he was engaged with a visitor,Fast, fast I sped down the gravelly road, the busy devilin my heart tempting	Li blaspheme. I was going tothat desolated home, which no prayers had sufficed to savefront destruction-"lilies Itiouzi! Miss RienziP'	i quickened my speed. I could not face mortal in this dark mood. Let me fly the presence of man.	Footsteps gained upon me; I suddenly dropped my pace, nd stood, determined to stiffer this interruption also.A hand was laid on my shoulder.	What in the world is this?" panted Mr. F'ernley; "what brought you out in this guise?"He had had a long chase, and was almost spent."What guise?"	"Good Heaven! something dreadful has happened, by the look of Your face! And you have no shawl nor hat on, do you know that?"	His words had some impression on me; I began to understand why Iliad attracted such universal attention."I forgot a lint," I stammered. "I will go home now."	"No, you won't. Come up to my house, and get a glass of wine, and a bonnet; you are as pale as death."He drew my hand upon his arm.	"No," I mnttered, peevishly; " I hail go home as I am. My mother and sister are dangerously ill-perhaps dead. I hoped to get a doctor, but have failed."	He stared at me for some time, confounded at my communication. Suddenly he dropped my hand and bege a running up the hill toward his own house again, as fast L he had come down.	I stood looking after him, almost as confounded as he had been, and saw an incomprehensible scene transacted.The carriage which I had seen at Fernley's door wasappearing on the brow of the bill when she stout form ofMr. Stanton loomed in sight, passing it excitedly, art'lwaving a large, dark shawl. The driver of the carrier'looked, round, and drew up, when a hurried consaliatl appeared to take place. While they parleyed. Mr. Fern' iomnsd them; and the conference became general. all bttrr highly excited, and pointing repeatedly down the litPresently the white horse began to wove down the lull	BErt UTIFtTL ISIENZI. 16 nil F,rnlui caine running ahead, and waving both his armsno'.	Stop-stop: were the words which eventually reached I	lhere's a gentlemanr -a gentleman who'll drivehome!' 		vouThe precession bore down upon me; the stout vanguard I left far au the loll, and was fain to seat himself Upon I ink, a id witness the proceedings. Mt. Fernley flung shawl round my shoulders, and stuck a very large l iu front. All right," lie gasped; "'here's a doctor." Hand her up here:" cried the stranger.I was half-lifted, hair-dragged, over the high wheel of a	hider, two-wheeled spider, and drawn across the driver's knees; and instantly the light vehicle was dashing toward wi verlea, at a rate which made the air swish across my face in a fierce gust.	Never a word spoke the gentleman; but one arm was ised tightly round my waist, to prevent me from being tilted over the wheels; and all his attention seemed absorbed in guiding his horse clear of the stones, the least one of winch might have sent the slender thing which we rode in, spinning over the bank."Where's the gate? That white one? Sole! sell, has-an	'l'lie stranger gently seated me on Ins narrow seat, vaulted ,it, and opened the gate. Now I hall an opportunity of looking at the doctor, whom Fate or Heaven had sent inc.	It was a grand face that; with eves as keen as an eagle's, ,ud hair like combed jet and silver, Was this a illage 'ocLor?Are You Doctor Whitney?" I asked, as he led the horserough.No. Who's Doctor Whitney?"	lie came and took my hand in his. Standing beside me, he was ,is tall even then as I, perched on the high seat; his gray eves, with the irp clear and black as a bird's, read my features intently.	Now, listen" little girl," he said, gravely. "I ails not such a stranger as on think I have come thousands of anles to serve this famulyoiir fauiilv; your closest inter'-in osui nh mine. No w, rust me as you wouldSEA I Tfi'irr. flfgyyj	-a friel tell too what calamity has befallen you; tell mc in a word.	A thrill of hope ran through my chilled heart' convulsively I pressed my lips to the hand which lipId mine in such kindly keeping; my woeful eyes gathered comfort in his face.Oh, will you indeed, befriend us?" I cried." Prove me, little girl; only prove me."We have all enemy." T breathed.. with abated breath, 1,aworrrau who has brought its nothing but ruin. She cc nrc here to-day nuder a false name, and. poisoned my mother and my sister. I alone escaped.'	Isolina?'' The stranger's eyes darkened with spirrehension.	Yes, Isolina. They were both inecnciui, u ii j the house.""This woman's name?""Mrs. Ringwood."IIah! I thought so! Viper!"His face was hard and bitter: he clenched Ii miiioften as I had done, when this viper's stung was sliarpuicil.	41 What were you doing down in the village bare-headed ?" he demanded, loading his horse up the lane.	"I hoped at first to arrest her before sire should leave the village, but she had escaped. I sent a telegram to my father, that she might he intercepted at the New Verb station",''Bight! you have your father's spirit, girl.	He stopped at the door; Sophie rnhre! out, her eyes swollen with weeping, and flung her arms about me.	Oh, Miss Iva, darling, whore have von been?"she orird 'I thought on had ran and drowned yourself!'How are they. Sophie?"	"Misses is sleeping so heavily! 'nih \i N. Ii no use-"Arid my sister?"Oh, Miss Iva, don't ak - Ii',,'\ iiThat's enough of nan-s." rutrr it'-' t -curve voice: "run, now. girl, and carry iii tb' nircrh'chest which you will find tinder the seat. eMig lab?. --Sue i.' 	-lie almost dragged me into the hall, flung hisSB_C,4 U'TIFt'I BIFEZI.188gloves on the stand, and went into the room which I pointed'There's no one here," he said, reappearing.Mrs. HaIler opened my mother *s bedroom door andIced along the hall; he instantly approached hot.I -liere. areY	the patients, ma'amHere, sir-both in one bed; moaned the old Woman,sing her hands.lie entered, and, like a spiritless child, I kept by hisMy mother's deep breathing filled the room; her facehail become very pale, and soniewl at drawn. My sisterI i beside her as stiff and moveless as a figure shaped 01The doctor went first to her, and bent over her for a fellnionient. An expression of profound dismay was on his countenance when he looked op again."Is this Iscdina?" he exclaimed. I assented.''I should not have known her," he muttered, almostshernly. ''Oh, poor girl!"11e examined her pulse, laid his ear on her heart, andfelt her temples; then he bent clown notil his face almosttouched her breathless lips. After this lie went round tomy mother,¥ In an instant he had seized her hand and was poring overit; it was now swollen and almost livid.How long has she been asleep?" lie asked.Nearly an honr and a half.""Hnniph! What's tlos? Poultice? slnff That's right,nm girl; pnt the medicine-chest down here, and he lecs for Now, iiss Ivanihla," he took my hand and led me toUs door. "Yon are to get out of this and m to your own ion], a herover that is, and do exactly what von're told, and tlnng else. Don't look so despairiiw, child: I'll tell youa hit of news to take away with vo. I can't find any traces of poison about your sister, aid it's not too late to your mother, though the danger is great. There! I ness t cat would fill these dry hiffle eve with tears; goaway now and cry, and then lie down	1011~i while."		aid rest yourself at0r11:; with gentle firmness hot still l clungfaith undOh, sir " I obb d "t, 1 	bet.e ,			d me who it is that has comeBEA UTIFUL EIENZJ.thousand of miles to befriend our poor doomed fanulme, that I may bless his name!"		. tell	Reserve your blessings, child," he responded	"ontil I have earned them by Heaven's help'	graveb,	believe intlefidelity of one who has long knownS 	your siste~'CHAPTER XXV,I	MY FRIEND."Itias, happy morn! rise holy mom!	Draw forth the cheerful day from night'0 Father! touch the east and lightThe light that shone when Hope, was horn!"TENNYSON.	I fell on my knees in my own room and Prayed as I ha(] never prayed before to that God who had sent Jie my heart's desire-a friend in need.	Mv dark cloud of unbelief fell from my soul in that ardent prayer of thanks and contrition. My spirit, chastened by long trial, turned to the suit at last, and all my life of vain struggling passed in review before me. I laid myself and my sorrows at the feet of the Christ who was na ring for my loved ones; I resolved to devote my life to Him. Sweet hope and trust filled my being then.; I wept with pore love; my soul, which had boon a rebellions and shuddering itomortal, exulted in its Saviour and feared no more.As thus I crouched by my bed, trembling with eXCeSS'ecstasy, Sophie came in, and to her I turned mmiv raptor'shining face, eager to impart my feast of consolation.Sdjohie," I whispered; "wep no pore. They a oHGod's hands; that takes away the bitterness. I are ready igive theut h if Providence wills it, or I will take one 1' t.and bless the Giver. Sophie, be resigned, and give fully.""Dear miss," said the girl, wiping her tears' away'."Prayed and prayed, but I don't see as my prayers can H''001 much now.- Howsomever , that strauge doctor hm me 0i, Miss Iva, to see if you are in year bed; lie says oo got to take a rest after what you suffered.' e shall obey whatever he says, I answered, riatug aIn/n t"J'rhui J?IhTi'ZI.and. Sophie, I leave yeLl to attend to Dr. Peintons directions. and to charge elson to do so too when. he iomos home. Dr. Peinhc1'tou has our interests at- very heart."W'lii!e the ghl unlaced my slight boots.'which were soaked nigh with the rain-water, into which T had heedlesslyF	ed. and through which my long garments had trailed,¥	oIl inc what had happened when we left the house in mirintig -with Mr. Lindhnrst.	You hadn't been gone an hour," said Sopino; "and I ii ink the rain was diii ing hardest when a Very gentle knock limos to the front door. Miss Isolina was sitting in the Il 11(l ow dicta looking out at the storm on the spa, and I was liii g alongside of her sewing, and keeping as good careif her as I could, as your poor, dear ma said, when of a sndi Mrs. Hailer comes up the stairs and says that Mrs.iii i gwood was in the drawing-room, called to see your ma, at I silica she wasn't at home, she'd like to see the young i-el. At that I spoke up, and said 1 knew that your ma, 01 11111 either, wouldn't like for Miss Tsoliua to trouble herto If with straugcis in their absence, and Mrs. Ringwood would jest have to trait, for I had git cii my bouuden word that out of this room she should not go; and Miss Jsoliua siv in her sweet way, which was alwaa s tinuking for other topic 'Toll Mrs. Ifiugwood just how it is with me; but n'Nuro her that 1would like ears much to see. her; and if she will wait a tow minutes niamms will oertaiidv be home; she only want to the station."Mrs. Railer said that ou--ht to (lo, alld veul (-low,, to thedv. litit by and by she couTies up a~ain -kviffi a card in her)Iand whieli had solne words written "oll to it and as soon asuiy dear young lath road them she just got as white as thatcut-tam and got up and said, . I nmut go.'	"Then I cried out again that my word was passed to takePare of liar, and out or this she should not go; but she didn'tarch answer, and the shimirwr;u little hauds of hors tram-hid a bad she could soarcels lsld on to the door-handle.IIiwseiaover, she irtauegcd t go down stairs with the cardin her baud, and wouldn't fake none of us for help.I was so toad at Mi", Hailer for carrying up the secondee<mge, that I up and told her the doctor lied specially foriii Miss Isoliua to have any worry, for her life, and' that (sir ma Would he crazy when she come to know; and MrsBEA UTJs'UL BIEMLILdier she looked as vexed as could he, aud said Mrs. wood was a fidgety old woman, always follering up othtrpeople about her charities, which was a hobby she rode todeath last winter; and I asked her what was on the card,which wasn't very polite of me, I mci sure; but I couldn'tsee how anything about sick beggars could have movedyour sweet sister so; and Mrs. Hailer said she couldut makecut a word of what was written down' that it looked likenibberish in a foreign language, but she expected Mrs. thug-	cod wanted money to clothe somebody's brats. And there tlsse sat and sat, with the door shut fight on them, till I couldn't sit nor stand with the fidgets. And then you conic home."	When the girl had concluded tire relation, she drew down the window blinds and left me to take the prescribed rest, which the doctor seemed to consider necessary,	She left me, with a brain intensely busy and my heart stirred to its depths; and predisposed for anytuig lint rest, though my limbs ached and I was faint from exhaustion.	I had been perhaps half an hour thus, horsing my head in the pillow and forcing my eves to remain shut, when the door was slowly opened and a stately form, which was not Sophie's, appeared on the threshold,	"Ilumpli!" said Dr. Pembortun, coming to iii v bedside: "you area good, obedient little girl-trying hard fo lie still, which nuder present circumstances is an art of heroism; but, of course, failing. Just what's to be expected-pulse rapid -head hot; suou/d fly through tue village like another Il-odiva. We'll set you lip in a few hour, though: glad to see that you've tucked yourself honestly into bed. food no shams" (glancing at the pile of garments on a churl"What's this?" lifting it up; ''a dripping' wet boot	you wicked child; Here-he good euoogh to swallow tIc-, Wand go to sleep."	He poured some drops out of a small bottle into a glass of water, which I drank obediently, then caught his sleeve Jest as lie was going away."Tell me one thinn, doctor-have you come too late	No, thank Heaven!" was the fervent response ; too late for either. I hope- I bisio'r lis Pus PP-si goiug to give me the un - child,''192 	,BEA UTIFUL RLENZL\id with these blessed tidings lie went away, gentlyh	it g the door behind him.P ten I awoke the niooniight was streaming in thronhe interstices of the blind: I was a long time lying there	fore I could recall all that had. happened; my memory tuid been too deeply swallowed up in the dreamless slumber, h at I heard the clock in the hall strike one, and at the aine tiin a foot approached my door and it was unlocked it sophie, who a'hded to may bedside.You're not asleep, Miss La ?"No, I have jnsr awoke. What news, Sophie?"	Oh, nns, we've much to be thankful for! 'Flat wonde' al man has saved them, dear heart. Miss lsolina, poor laiiili, is sleeping in the room next here; your ma is sleeping om resting, I don't know which, in her own bed. Miss, the all right."	My Soul seemed too small to hold the joy which these words brought me; 1 could not speak, but my heart could 'peak to heaven.	The doctor has sent me up to desire your presence," continued Sophie, who was softly weeping with thankfulness, "Dr. Whitney is there, and they want you."	So I rose and dressed myself in the brilliant moonlight with light fingers, which often clasped each other as my a tughts shaped heavenward.The two gentlemen were in the drawing-room. talkingin low, animated tones, and they both rose and. a proarliedl we with outstretched hands, and both gazed with deep attention at me.	Let me feel your pulse," said Dr. Pembcrten, seizing toy wrist between, his thumb amid fbi 'mr	"Put it your tongue " said the village doctor, who was an uudersizel, thin, auxons-looig individial, buttoned into a white linen coat with black buttons.	"Pish! 11o0 hing the matter with her but hunger!" said niv friend, good humeredly ; needn't examine her tongue for that Air ight agassi, hey ?"I thuk so, sir." 	-	Feel cIearheadcd? your eves are as bright as diamondsi how is the head?"Quite clear, I think Sir,!, I replied.And hungry ?"Y'a ill deel'" I responded earnestly ; indeed I isa5IBEA UTLEUT. RiEIczr.	5yoshing; nothing had crossed my lips, since a shout breakfast the clay before, with my mother.	The doctor wont to a tray which seemed to have been in waiting, and selected some viands which he brought and ordered me to oat.	You have got an hour's business," said Dr. Poniherton "and you must prepare yourself for it."	Re watched me with great relish, while I ate, and rubbed his hands with satisfaction.	"Upon my word, young lady," he exclaimed, " I wish all patients were. as obedient as you. Eat away, you poor little dear -theyve famished you."	When I had announced myself somewhat appeased, they gave me a note which was waiting on the table.	Feed the buds' first-then the mind;" observed my friend in his usual half-serious way; ''so there's 110 chance of this robbing you of that flue appetite. A boy brought it from Shirley Sands, or some such place, at ten o'clock of tin, night."It was a return telegram from my father, and it ran thus:	Met the six o'clock train, but saw no Mrs. Ringwood. Traceslost. Will join you first train. 		0. Rican'.'	My face fell when I read these tidings; she lsad again escaped ; she had another chance to commit her criusc.Without a word I handed it to Dr. Pcmbcrton.	"Missed her, has he?" cried the doctor, reading. ''Humphs! traces lest! fo, this uk Heaven. not while I'm here, I hope. Cheer tip, my little friend; I think I know where she is."He folded up the dispatch and returned it to me.''Miss Bleuzi," said Dr. Whitney, nervously, ''1 lois,,ivamted-_t}eat is, my professional brother here has tlusi vu'Me to wait, so that we may hear froni you the piirticulniu otthe incidents which happened yesterday. here an'slumber of fraomesits of "lass which your housekeci sr collected from this carpet (which I see is unfortunately stained with wine) and here is a glass of wine wInch I :imim told was on the' mantel-piece untouched, and whichanalysis, lily professional brother and I fliml to be 'imypure. The fragmonts of glass are coated with stryelniir"-the glass of wine is purl; new my dear lady, as perhi.t;" Your explanations may beef very great import! 'Ice 1 dctiI101 	BEAUTIFUL RIEIdZLU ave 11111 cli picascie in writing them down, and keeping the 'ite if so required.'The ceremonious little man here displayed before myi'iukiim eyes. the proofs of Mrs. Itt ugwood foul attenipt."It will 'soon be 0%-or;" said ma friend, encouragingly.	lost detail all that took place miring the wouians pres. vIi'O, so that Doctor Wlotney's report, being by an uniuten -red party may have some weight.told the cireumstaiioes as minutely as possible; the	ctleriieu both agreed that she had dropped the poison it to time two wine glasses at ±1] c tao oieu t when liar vail fell forward, and that the third glass which she had indicated, was unpoisoned, and intended for Isolina. U7i11 this division was made was an impenetrable ui ster ; it (lobed us all apparently. My friend Doctor Pemberton hazarded no solution,	Doctor Whitney related all that lie knew of the lady dur-ing liar stay at Silverloa; she had been from some time inDecember until April all inmate of the very house which allinscrutable Providence had led us to take refuge in; and forsonic dine a young gentleman had been with her, who wasrarely seen, and whose retirement it was whispered was inconsequence of some State crime, which had driven him outof society. Who he was no one could rightly ascertain.The housekeeper suspected him to be Mrs. Rill--wood's soil,cud a Southern spy, hut she was never encouraged by thewidow lad to ask any questions. 		-	At this point of the village doctor's story, I cried hastily: "Did you ever see the young uiau"I oid, but only once, and under rather peculiar cmeccstanoes,' he replied. "About six weeks after [.,to arrival of Mrs. Ruigweed I was passing the gate, when the mac Moreeomhe iutorcepled me and asked uie if I could 5C", a Patient without alarming the vihlam. I asked hill, what he meant, and he said:'here is some one up there badly in want of a doctorwho knows how to hold his tongue au'd use his brains.'	If there there is any one ill at Silverlea, I shall be happy to e of use, I answered, turu ing my horse's head: 'mid as Inot in the habit of Violating the confidence of myp. on , you have nothuig to fear."was prepared, I oou Loss, for the kind of patient to	i ioducod. The room was darkened, andIBRA UTTh'tTL RIRSZL193Mrs. Ringwood. whom I had seen sometimes in church o , sitting by the bed. My patient turned out to be a young luau in the last stages of weakness, who had just reached the crisis of a brain fever, and, though conscious, was so prostrated that recovery seemed impossible Some intense sinotion had evidently seized upon him with the return of memory, and produced a hemorrhage from the lungs, and he was fast bleeding to death. The circumstances were so ituseineut that 110 questions could be asked, and it wa only by the must extreme measures that I reduced the bleeding cud ahlei iateel his sufferhigs. No sooner was the dancer passed than Mrs. Ringwood dismissed me, paying me ba~id-St 	-omi-OF Olv, and pi sin,g to summon me if required. I was uol summoned, however, and after the caution I had received I was careful to keep my own counsel aheut tic widow lath's visitor."Describe the young man," I exclaimed,'' My clear voting- lady, it would be impemible for you to'The recognized your own father after such an lii, m. Idarosay you never saw a young fellow with a shaved Lead, and shut as white and blomhed as a piece. of dxcmed kid? The only objects in the face which looked like life were a pair of restless. large brown eves, tvlsich flashed cow and then with a very curious reddish glare, the like of which I never observed 'before. Can't accuuut for it, sir-can you? Could it be the effect of repeated light oil the retina, oriSOmfle unusual property' contained in the figment or coleriug matter? Very extraordinary eyes they wore. freeu whatever cause."¥ "Stay!" I cried, with upraised hand and breath cuucugthick and short; '' I)uetoi J'ornbertuu, lie has deacril,'l Cecil Beaumont's eves' This weniau_beyeud tile pussibil' ity of doubt-this Mrs. Biugwued is Mrs. Beaumont!"	I lilly add one thing' more : said Doctor Whitney, commencing to button his coat; "thto young uulu had adeep scar oil his left teuiplo, which was scarcely healed, and cue arui was in splinters, and bandaged up. Thelady gave me no explanation of these wounds; I Was allOt' clIn believe that lie-had been a soldier-probably a Suutltertt Isoldier."A ud now I must he off and catch the fag-cuth Of iii cnight's sleep, fm' indeed am a little shaken by the titleWhich that zealous young Juan Nelson made my old ui	'pIt 7i111, j;JEVZLI 	Pan er dl the wax from Briarsviile. I hope anything I\ e told you may he of use, and that this strange businessii4	Pray command ine, Aliss)c satisfact~yjjv settled.earl; ask your father to make use of me for any inforsna, m he may deem me in possession of. Sir. I leave the lies under able amid skillful hands; I have 110 fears for air utimate recovery, when the eminent Pesuhertoss is en pliv'ieian. I shall send the mdiii ue front ruv lal eraCV ill the morning, doctor. My dear young lady, good ight. I cannot help eotnpliusemmi ag you iuglmiv on the idress and presence of mind which yms have displayed 'cider the late trying circumstances. Your conduct does 0115' heart and intellect credit. (lood-night."The ceremonious old gentleman here howed himself out is room, and softly shut himself out of' the house.	Good fellow that," said Doctor Pemberton, sententiiuslv:" is alwa\ s ready to help another across the stream. Now, ' Ivtmnilla-'' I quite started at the en tlden change of manner, and at my own name oil his lips; his calm, gray (:yes were fixed with the intensity of deep thought on my face, "Now, Ivanilla, we have 'a conference before us, in winch we must use out, memories and reasoning powers to the utmost. You must tell me all that has happened in connection with your sister, since on came from Italy, and I shall compare it with the facts in' may possession. 1st first you would like to knew exactly how ssi' two patients are, would You not F'"1 have been longing to ask," T said.	"Knew it very wl C and ad mired file first patient littlegirt that I ever saw, with black eves. Be comforted, soychild; your mother is safe and in a 'healthful sleep. Fromtime symptoms of her seizure, Wlntssoy and I incline to theopinion that the poison administeredhv time pressure of thering nlsnt have been a deadly extract of the Egyptian	ipaver, which nmnst have been prepared with the mo5t infernal skill for the pnrpese. I should like to get that tnrqunis ring; I rather think it will prove to be n curiosity As to ]sell,,,, , the inseasihilily which alarmed von so In"' hwas only a protracted fainting fit, approaching 'to catalepsyin its strength, occasioned by the dreadful horror which has hi en in her mind, allied t6 the extreme weakness of herIs dt, Peer girl I wish I knew alt that is in that tortured heart, I'll scam rid. tls"ro 's rn ishms'k sinning against her!BEAUTIFUL 1lsLvzr.	But,	197	thanks be to a merciful Providence which nut tue here at the right time, she's better, and will he cluite revised in a few days."Mv little friend, I have relieved your anxiety to thehost o nay ability; now sit you there, and relieve nine.Tell me your side of Tsolina's history."	I began from the (lay on which C first beheld my sister inher matchless loveliness holding hack the door of the saloonand looking at me; I recounted every link of the drearyrecord, from gloom to gloom, of the slowly gathering sor-row; and with my heart kindled by his evident sympathyand deep emotion into burning vehemence, I recounted withpassion and tears the wrongs of me and mine unto tichitter end.	Then my friend clasped me to his breast in a sudden and! uncontrollable burst of tenderness-11	Noble, heroic girl F' he cried; "you have been fai hi 1 indeed to the sister yon profess to love, But you have sottoo much for that loyal little heart to remain unbroken. In the name of those whose lives are bound up in LoinRiensi, I thank you."	"Now tell me who you are, and what you have to with my sister's life?-a benefactor on mnd he!' I breathed'; resting trustingly upon the arm which was SIthrown around me.	But he smoothed my hair with	thoughtful hand and shookhis head slowly."Be content with what you kmmou of use," lie said; '' youknow enough for the heart to bear. When I .can hell) you,you shall know what knit Alphouse Penaherton's heart toyou."	When the dawn was stealing in, and the lamp burned with a wild and haggard gleam, our conference was end(,(-S.PE,4i'Y'IT'UL RIh]Zi.t 'LIAPTEIl XXVTLill DARLING_ATJ1LU.	bloom balls fled thy cheek, sister,\s Spring's earth blossoms die,Sod sadness bath o'rrslsadowcd now 'Thy once bright eye;Bill, look, on me the prints of grief still deeper lie. t'erstrell!"--Soonisn SONG.	[.1 ci' in t e in orui rig I was standing on the piazza, ii riuking in the sweet, cool breeze, and leaning against a Pillar, all draped in moltiflora vines, whose odorous roses strung toward me on the zephyr, filling my soul with delight.	I had been watching my mother slumber since dawn, while the doctor and our faithful Sophie refreshed themsolves with a rest; and now Mrs. haIler was in her chainher, while I stoic out for a few minutes into the golden sunshine.	I became aware of a presence near sue; I turned my head from side to side, and beheld a figure standing midway on the piazza, between the door and the steps.isolina! What imprudence!"	Yes, it was she. Her hands were clasped together; her eyes were fixed upon me wildly; she scented about to fly, but icr eet remained rooted in ass attitude to depart. A 'broad inn-Itoh was on her head and tied under her chin; a blackdk scarf seas round her shoulders, a satchel hanging on her nm.	'' Oh, my dear sister, where are you going? Go book to your bed; you should not be up. Come!"I advanced and seized her arm- the sentences castlein faltersug gasps; a sickening premonition was in my	"I am	going away," she said, turning her pale face fromme. , I would not wsllsugly have pained you by this scene,		I thought you were not here."(ruing away here-where, my own darling?"lily t uty to go-and my lips are sealed. It wouldBEAUTIFUL Rlrtgzj	have been better if you had not met me; it is so cruel to us	botli_th5."			Ifo, no, no!" T cried, throwing my arms around her.	"ion shall net go! Not another word Come in this	very instant. my dear, and never harbor so mad a tlsoueht	agaili. Where will You go. sister? Could you luive	father and mother Mid sister, to break their hearts foron		"Forbear!" she said, in a low, agonized voice: "my cross	will kill me if you add another stab to my heart. lvis, fare-	well!"			SJ				he strove to free herself, but J held her with both hands,		and would not be shaken oil.			11 Never!" I muttered: ''I will make the place resound		with my shrieks first: I will not let on go			''I isoploro you to have mercy we ftc, Ic aiiillal" she		breathed, tremblingly'; "I am not strong, and l pravea lie i -		yea to glee me enough strength to do this sacred duty. As		You love me, let mo go."¥		Will you see Dr. Pemberton first?" I sobbed.			No, no! He does not know?' -,he answered, piteously.			"Can you leave our dear niarnma, unweleonied hack¥		to life?" was niy next appeal; ''that wretch poisoned her,		leoli lie!"			"I know-I know.	My life 'hail be between this family		and danger in future.		t'ear that wretch no longer: she		and hers have wronged you cruelly; all p now."			Her face was frightfully pale, h'er breath struggled on her		lip, her hands grasped wildly at the air.			"If ever von loved poor hapless isoilna," she gasped once		more, "let her go and do her duty.			Ale. hour of sorrow! my arms dropped from about her: I		ceased to importune. Her du byI who was I. to interpose?			''Let us sneer hi heaven, she whispered; ''tell cur		saintly mother that I loved her truly, Trundle-little sis-		ter I ' cannot thank you for what you have done for In e.		Sweet darling-a long good-by. Oh, my own little Ira,		good-by."			She pressed	me in her arms, her tears broke forth; her		bosom 'welled tumultuously; bitter was the parting there.			"And our father-what for blue?" f said, remembering		how dear these words would ho 1' 1 I 1] art,"A prayer-and my to: lolli1FflL RJBNZLd	me from her, wildly, and turned away, down the stein.a dream I watched her let herself out at the gate; in a able dream I saw the distance widen between us; her o hat sometimes shone between the trees--she vanished from my view. The lovely scene was quiet and serene and lifeless!	I could not move hand or foot while this war of conflicting feelings, was going on, then suddenly, like the death-knell of tic condemned, came a long, chill whistle from the railway station. She would go away in the cars, and be lost to us forever. If I would. I could not recall her now.	I rushed like a maniac ansoug the whispering aspens, and flnag myself upon the dewy ground.	But this paroxysm of despair passed away at lest, and softer thoughts succeeded. Could I not trust the hand which supported me better than that? Would He allow our dearest and one best to come to harm?	Hours, had passed over my hoed of which I was unconsoous, and when I rose from mv hiding-place I was astonished at the height of time sun; it could not have been less than nine o'clock.	My mind was in a strange whirl of ecstasy and unnatural elevation; I had soared beyond the touch of earthly sorrows; I could almost exult at the magnitude of any sacrifices.	In this mood I returned to the house, and found that my absence had caused great anxict	Oh. Miss Iv, dcsr' said Sophie. who as usual was is eepug bitterly, "you hadn't ought to go away this way! And your clothes are wet with dew, and your h an ils so Isot Mhsy larlissg, I don't know how Iou'hl bear it-Dr. Pensherton says there's news for you. Go in there."went hito the parlor, and there, to nsy surprise, T foundmy mother. She was sitting in nit easy-chair, lser head leanlug against time cushion, her face wan and sorrowful. her eyes red witis weeping. She looked so frail mmd pitiful, with her sunsuit wrapper flowing round her small, elegant figa me, and one band sinootised in bandages, that I could have wept over the grief site suffered, when I was above feeluig MV omyis.ta i. mnth ii bet on a chair by his side.5r. "Pemnherton was swallowing a hasty and solitary break-BEAUTIFUL RTL'yz	201	"Yes, it's just what I thought, madam," cxcii med he, when I appeared; "she's been at some frenzy work. See that face! Have you been flying after your sister, Ivanilla? Come here! "	But I did not go to the good doctor ; I flew to my mother and laid my strange, light head upon her bosom.	"Mother, why should you mourn?" I exclaimed. " God is taking care of her. Give him whatever He asks forHe is wo1eoine-weleome--weleome 1 would give you, mother sweet, and father, and Ernest, if He said it, and live alone, and be happy."	But my rapture only inspired her with terror she turned to the doctor her beautiful, appealing ayes, and burst into tears.	Unnatural excitation of the nervous svsteoi," said the doctor, who by this time had soy hand in his; ''pulse flyill'. My little girl, why must yen always be at a crisis of feeling? You're too sensitive, and too ethereal; the wild Southern blood which is rushing through tlsase veins will wear you out if you don't learn our Northern philosophy. You must learn that this life is made up of disappointments, and expect them. Lay another fold of philosophy on your heart, child-it's slut callous enough."	He dropped my hand and turned suddenly away; his last words had sounded husky and forced; his philosophy seamed to fail him him just where it should hold out best.	"Do not be alarmed for me," 1 breathed, again, throwing my arms about ray mother; '' I sin resigned; our beloved Isolina has gone 'baeause it was her duty to go, and Heaven will comfort her, for she left her heart with us"	"Duty!" howled the doctor, in a rage, "the sorceress has bewitched her, and you. I think. Dnty"	But nothing could disturb my enraptured mood. I recounted to say mother every word which had passed becounted	my sister and me. the doctor listening most atten-tively.	"There!' he said, throwing ma a note, "that's what she loft us."Ion whom I	nun and loved as mother, blot me out ofyour memory no ; to ewmd o froio the reogeane' ''f ic'whom misery has madu red. I cannot tell yen what I have "Ikeep secret ---darling mother; respect my VOW. Do not plu-a,	RJL1lTTIFtL RIEYZL	I22ave in' o to hat I swear to he my duty, and though this parting	I	0 1JP l ii Cli time, ioeet me in eternib. Cherish my Ivanilla; oh,	¥	how can I meek your loyal little heart! Heaven's bleeeiiig on	se who mails my whole life happy; their prayers for the heavy	Ivs that come upon me. Farewell mother.I5oLINA."These incoherent, wild words bees od my eves withrs; I laid my head upon my mother's lap, and weptnot bitterly; it was for the grief of others; not for myii.Yes, cry-- cry, it'll do you good," said the doctor,¥ ' it'll cool your brain, poor girl. I don't like these costa-Tea, when one's friends are snatched away-not natnralthere must be a terrible rebound some time. Madam, don't chock her; she requires it."But, I dried ray tears and looked op. The doctor had fin-¥ Thed his breakfast, and was preparing to depart.	Where are you going, Dr. Pembcrton?" I asked, wistfully.To get CT-emma Laneinetto arrested!" was the startlingreply.	You will not-please do not attempt to pursue my sitter: she is doing a sacred duty, and we have no right to I-miner with her conscience."	Good Heaven, child!" he cried, "can you be so credulous? She has gone to sacrifice her Pfe, I'll lay nsy hand on it, to save yours. Conscience! You don't know the woman you have to deal with--you never saw the Laneinetto."An interruption here occurred to the good doctor's in-¥lignation; a gentleman on horseback appeared coming up 'lie lane.lIn an instant Dr, Pemberton was oil the piazza waving l'~ hat with every demonstration of joy which increased as the rider approached, told he ilashetow'mi his lint and rannot with his head uncovered, and received the horseman inarms, as he dismountedC oiseppe! met at last!!-,What who is tins?" said my father, whose pale and-o 'is face was seamed at ith haggard care.-Not know Alplionae? Little Alphonse, your old corn-ride?" cried the doctor, inipetoously, and vet we paddled inthe same brook, and band the same sonnet in Virgil for theRittJfI.'( L 11IE\',	2e3first twenty years of Our lives? And so you have forgotten your Dainoli?"What? Alphonse Pomberton_ujy college friend ?"	A look of joy lighted up my father's face; he grasped tile doctor's hand. and wrung it with a joyous laugh, aml leaned oil his shoulder fondly. ''Surely I'm dreannow, are s/CU my little Alphonse_t1e visionary and the genius" von a son of Anak ?"	And yet I know my Uniseppe," responded the other, o though his hair is as white as flax and his face thin andold. Come. I'm not here for nothing, my friend; I have something to toll you, which I have known for a year, about your daughter; and if I had dreamed then that she was a child of my Guiseppe, perhaps her fortune this dn might have been brighter."	And the mother and I, who were the beings of a later life, and bad no part in the love of that far off time, held each other's hands and looked on with wondering eyes.Bat very soon my father remembered his dear ones, andembraced us with solemn affeotion.	"I met Nelson going down to tile village, and he has told me all," he said, "and again I base to thank my friend," and he hold the doctor's hand wareilv, 'for saviug my wife from a cruel death. Door Mand! from what have you been delivered, Mand? Doctor Pemberton Was tile Closest friend of my boyhood-you have often board too mention Alphonse? This is he, give him a welcome, wife.'	"Not only a woloomo, but my deepest gratitude for what he has rdrotidy done for us,.,, slio answered, offering her band with a warm smile.	When no had all beoomo soniowbat oaluier, the doctor told my father all that had happened. and they retired to another room to arrange their plans together.What his mission was, precisely, I did not then know.	The interview between the two old friends lasted for more than an hour, then they issued forth in a fever to depart."Speingle has managed to get the most of Mrs. Beau-In history," said my father, hurriedly, and kissed us; ,,and my good friend,' Aiphonse, can supply what lie has failed to obtain. It is pretty clear tlmo whole life f	emma Lanuinetto, all but cite point. The precise nato" Of her power over isohina. If we manage to arrest her,1'JJEA UTIFUL RJEU\'ZI.1 leaven he praised. I have every assurance that we will'-at secret link will he forced from her, I hope.Pope for the best, chimed in the doctor, who was infolly recovered spirits. " I doni intend to come back ton-no, jilt f-will] onl the runaway Isolina! I'll cage	r, never on fear! And Ii a-if anybody conies here in IIIe absci icc asking for mc, give a spare corner to the old luctor's guest until lie ref nrns; will you?"And they each sprang to their places, and dashed offl o'a\ P c co the anxious ones they left behind.1IAPTER XXY11.THE NAN I MET ON THE SANDS.'A happy lover who has comeTo look on her that loves him well,Who lights and rings she gateway hell,And learns her gone and far from home."-TENNYSoN.	That was a long, sacred day, which my mother and I spent together when we were left alone. We communed with very full hearts after the terrible dangers from which we had escaped; and I poured some of the wonderful comfort with which I was supported into her willing ears, until even she smiled in renewed hope, and begau to lift her head, which had so sorely drooped in sorrow.	In the quiet evening I loitered through the dewy walks of lovely Silserlea down to the bit of sand which girt it in.	At first I thought only of my darling, who so often had walked these summer paths with me; my arm felt empty without, the touch of her hand; my ear was desolate without the rustle of her dress over the withered scrolls which fell from beech and aspen; and I wept when I stood on the bed of uhito sand whore she used to love to linger. And as I gazed over the chastened waters which glided softly in and seemed to walk warily after tile storm of yesterday, I felt it hard for awhile to say, ' TIn' will be done!"	Oh, it was hard; the old 'wounds bled afresh; my heart pleaded sore; but I did not move until I cenld say. "give her up to	and once more calmness came torue.Slowly I paced along, farther round the little cape1whiclc held my home, thinking the peace of earth atidJla'A 27tr L 1IE ye1,ocean	'then the sound of a step on the shell_strewn beach made me start and prepare to retreat.Some one	came round a sudden angle of rocks and faced jne, and all at once I stood still audgazed with deep attention. The moon came out with radiance from the golden haze, and shone on a face bronzed with oriental climes and grave with life's shadows, which seemed to hatchesu manly, though the years were indeed but few; but withal a face God-gifted with lion-like bravery and physical perfection, and ljkenes gifted with the bcanty of the soul.	The pedestrian bowed low, and removed his hat, upon thus suddenly encountering a lady, and gravely stood acute to let inc pass, supposing by my abrupt halt that he blocked the way; but instead of passing on, I still eyed him eagerly, with doubt and joy thrilling me into silence.	With a second reverence lower than the first, the straoger took a few steps onward.	"Can you pass me by?" I cried, impulsively; "yen are Victor Josciyn."	Tie turned again, and his bright, falcon-like glance swept my face in eager scrutiny.	I shall be happy to greet a friend, if this is one," he said, very softly.	Both my hands reached out to him, and locked themselves upon his arm in joyful welcome.	"And you don't know who the friend is?' I exclaimed, ardently; "does your heart tell you nothing-does it feel no Warmth,"	It feels wondering gratitude at this sweet welcome from a very lovely lady."	"There is only one can welcome you more warmly. 1 am Ivanilla Ificnzi,"" What! the little sister? her sister?"	"And your friend. Victor Jeselyu, and this is my liii I to urovc ft. Ten thousand welcomes to Silt crleal"	file took the baud and the whole body in his arms, and i Wept with joy upon his breast, whom for the first time I met this summer night.I give no solution of this subtle chord which drew us loanto heart, and overthrew all the obstacle [eli ti it I	lack of sympathy set up.	This man IrIS Lip	:' - I200	BK4 UT! PLTL RJEXZLri4er's heart: he was hers: I loved her so deeply that f fellonce nhi lily place, as die sister of her lie loved, and myU ci jolt 5iVOl) into this ibaaiiel, and ever afterward reiied there.	o lull eh for the man who stood by the clnniing sea, holdj:e 1110 clasped to his breast.Now," I murmured: "come home to Si] verlea."Not vet," said the stranger, tenderly; ''we mustJcic'and each other first; will you confer with me ait Ic	''Yes," I answered, with a serene smile; "T know so little of Victor J oselya that it is meet that he should explain himself a little, after so extraordinary a greeting," and I looked with fetid and ,-listening eyes into his face.	\\ e sloe l.t paced over the rippled sand, and with one accord turned aside to a ijn:et nook, whore some quartz rocks were strewn upon a flat sea rock.	fl ere he flung his ample cloak, and spread it daintily for a carpet, upon which he seated me; then he flung It woolf down beside, and raised to me a face whereon was depicted every noble though chastened attribute of beauty.	Who shall hegira ?" I asked, with playful fondness; ''lye are two strangers who know one mutual friend-shall we tt us of that friend? No!" I added, with a sudden sigh; 'not vet, the subject is a sad one."	" Not yet," echoed Victor Jeselyn, mournfully; "let us make each other's acquaintance first."	' May I ask you a few questions then? I know so lit do-""Ask me anything, dear child, as if you were my sister.'	'And ion will not deem me impertinent? I shall be cry swonal I fear, bnt I know so little. Au, well. I am not	tid of being mi,nnderstood by you, Victor Joscl a. In lie first place, then, I wish to understand the precise friendlip which has existed between my sister rind you? You lw e boon married, signor? Pardn me."	" Yes," said the strae ger, with a face of don ht and pain; 'it 1 thought Ito one knew it. Did she tell you?"She told me--once." said I. rather puzzled,-and I thinkci tiers knew it well. Now. wili you pardon nrc for what O Oie5 next? Your wife died?"'l'hore was a slight silence; my companion looked at nrcIBEA ITTIFtiL B tL'xzj,207as medusa's head had grown upon lay shoulders awl wagpetrifying ii im with horror.	n Al, wife died!" he repeated, icreiinloii,13, "Oh! Mias fsenilTa, can you tell me that so calmly? M v wife dead?"1 could not understand him; bdgan to feel embarraseed; my cheeks glowed a little: what Mistake was I makiugh'	'Let us begin again," I said, forcing a lsngh; '1 was asking you that question, and you retort by asking me one.I 'e ~J' ill be		andwade throught his h~bvrintn ot mi8cull-V 	pa Gent ,ceptions. I shall tell you all that I heard of ietor JoeIvn, I came from 1tdy nearly a year ago, and made nnaeqnaintanco for the first time since infancy. I soon sospeeted that her heart was pledged to 505110 one, lint she never spoke on the subject. She wore a ring-should 1 Il eon this, I wonder? Yes, I should tell Victor Joselyn ci crything!-she wore a double ring, and engravon on the inner hoop were the letters 'I. J. Have you two names, signor? Is Victor the only one?""My name is Victor Jeselyn, nothing else, Go on,"	"1 once round a water color painting of a scene near Saratoga, whore gee, sir, were holding my sister's hands, with a look which betokened love. I found out that the face was that of a Victor Joselvn, who had niade the acquaintance of sonic young lalies at Saratoga, ray sister among the rest."	I painted it." interposed my listener, with a sad smile; it was a sportive gift to my poor girl. Go on.	"My sister once had a letter in her hands, in which by accident I road the name, ' Mrs. Victor Josolyn.' T told my sister what I had seen, and she said that Mrs. Victor Josely n had been a friend ci hero, hut was dead. ""Did she say that?" he cried, with increashig agitation.Oh, false Isolinal"	"I do not understand! It is a Sphinx's riddle!" I ejaculated, almost weeping. "Arc yon not a widower, theuf""I never hoard until to-night that I was.And you have been married Then-then, sir, was 017sister in truth any friend of yours? Hate I misconstrued?'	"Von have not nnseonstrncd," lie answered. '' Isolina was my friend my clobest friend, I married once, and Isoliua was the woman whom I married."He caught me once more to his heart, and heat iJa205	11/2 it TIFL'L RIRIZI. 	j	upon civ shoulder with a sudden sob of grief. His strong	frame quivered, his heart throbbed in quick muffled beats	the utctuorv of that blissful day was rending him: the sacred	cm-min had been drawn too suddenly from that long vailed	ovterv.			Brother," I breathed solrnniy; ',whom God hath joined,	Ft ito nut n put asunder! You have a right to claim her	000 ci en other duG she is years. Ala, Victor, let me			'ott' 00 to a loyal sister's heart."		My blood glowed with sudden joy, though his strange	ninonueemeut had almost stunned me. Strange that 10d	not deemed that possible before.		F			She never told us-why was it a secret?" I whispered	presently. My friend resumed his place, and went on.			It was inc-all my fault!" he responded, sadly. "I	hound her-to silence for a silly scruple, and I have been	justly punished in losing her love. Never since the day of	our union has site suffered me to meet her; oh, Ivanilla she	implored that we might never meet again!"		''Why-why?" I exclaimed vehemently.		"Alas! I cannot tell, I have been led to believe she was	false to me, and loved another,"		"It was false!" I responded. "Ohs, Victor, what wrongsare we about to nnvail ?"			I see there is a world of explanations to be made on	both sides." he said. "Let me toll my story, dear Ivanilia,	then you shall tell me years; we shall then have a better	chance of understanding how, my darling wife was led toend me off, whom she so sweetly and solemnly vowed to	oliup to as her husband,"BEAUVITrUL RJEyx,CHAPTER xxvJ,"FOIL 0, 'TM LOVE! 'TI',? LOVE!"She half induced me in her armsShe pressed me with a meek embraceAnd bending back her head looked nAnd gazed upon my fare.'"I calmed her fears, and she was calm	And told her love with virgin pride,, And so I won try Geaevmrve,My bright and beanteons bride,"--_OcLEflpnE	The waters rolled in softly and the moon east her silvery rays around lip and in our cozy nook, where perfect si1ence reigned, \Tjotoi. Joeclyn told his story.	"My father was the only representative of a very old family in Somerset, and had an estate which from generation to generation had been added to and improved, until it was one of the finest to he seen between the Mendip and Quantock hills. I believe my father was the first ,Joselyn for centuries who had not been a prize farmer, sportsman, and jockey. lie was an Oxford roan, of high talents, a refined taste, and a passion for the fine arts. He traveled for years through the classic scenes of Greece and Italy, andmade pilgrimages to Palestine, in wliiels lie feasted his in-ordinate love of beauty, on everything which was rare and priceless.	The mansion of his ancestors was tern down, and a stately palace rose in its place, which soon became hued with eostW and beautiful mementoes of every land he had visited."So much for my father's character.	"I remonihor little of him; ho died when I was ten years of age, leavine- myself and a sister, two years my jnnim, completely orpand. My risother I could never reasenshemand her iamc had almvavsbecn shunned in our hoasesince I could recollect. My sister and, I ]ad been plunder the guardianship of ii faith	friend of m at;slanted Dr. Alphonse Pensbero0 who pus eli Cthan a father to us both until I becanu. U-.Possession of my fortune.21	LEJ17 21FlJL RJEK71	to that Isv, my, guardian, obeying a secret codicil of	Ii ire will, pt me in possession of the strangely hid-	IN, of my mother; and I found that the house,Ii a h I had alwat s considered untarnished, had its es-unlieoa blackened by a stain, which blurred my life for-r.	"During one of his visits to Italy, my father had seen I (one of the principal theaters of Rome a beautiful actress, o lose attractions were so extraordinary that he, obeying ails natural passion for obtaining what pleased his eye,almost without knowing who she was, laid his brilliant for-ire at her feet, arid to his joy was graciously accepted.	telIa' forsook the stage. married her English adorer, and o the lasting envy of some half a dozen others, was borne to the ancient palace oil the Lower Avon, in old Somerset. Upon more minutely studying his prize, my father found hit r to be the daughter of a patrician family of Florence, ii in in sonic moment of ill temper had fled from them and gone upon the stage. She had a ferocious temper, was an nilidet of the most daring type, and soon evinced the most perfect indifference to her husband, and the children which she bore hint.	"Before long my unfortunate father was glad to rove in di'tint countries more than ever; during which time his wife, as the lit seized her, would suddenly leave home and her two infant children to travel likewise to various places on mysterious missions. In this way, my father once ntet her hurrying through the streets of one of the cities ofhulled States, quite alone and unprotected, as he was	aging to a close a long tour which he had made through -North America. She never made the slightest explanation,	went home with my father, and remained a year. dur-ing which time lie did-not venture to leave her alone, asicr moods seemed niore desperate than before. A thirdchild was born, a (laughter', and when it was three weeksoil, mv wretched mother disappeared with it, and motheror child was never heard of since, despite the ,lost, carefulorrc;h. I was ]'our years old when this happened; niy sisterAlicia net more than two.S reh was the birthright that became mine i ith my	rtnne, it changed me from a gay, careless youth, into a lmnudliated broader, forever chafing over,my disgrace. ibecame niorbicIly alive to every whisper that my galled plldeCould corastflle into pity for lily r5f0rtnasc All herntifrrlBLAVITIestate and palace halls grow grew terrible to are: every pricelegeffi of art reminded rae of niy father's fatal love of tilebeanttfill, wb irdr had ruined the bettor of his, ntuoe. Mygentle and lovely sister trembled in my plesenee i cast arhill gloorai over icr, for which I loathel myself; yet whenI tried to be my old self the seosblarce was so unnaturalthat she grew more terrified than ever. At last I fell intolb health, and my dearest friend, Doctor Penaberton, or-dered Me to travel. I went the grand tour, treading in thevery footsteps of my father, arid came back as unhappy asever. More so; I was growing fast -*into a nrisantitrope.I became almost a monomaaaiac on the subject of my hour i I -ration. I qnrestionod everything. I began to nlonbt myown right to the name I bore. Doctor Pernbertort becamealarmed and once more ordered me away from a scene,which only plunged me in misery, this time ruuuntrmrcinr hisdetermination to accompany me. We came to Anrrcrica,four years after any unhappy grief had come to me, andafter wandering through even' State, North taint South, justas fancy led us, I at leer found what I was in search ci, self-forgetfulness. Obeying in idle caprice, I arrged any friendto visit Saratoga for 'a few days, that I arriglat study. with-out mixing in it, the wave of innshinnnist' which ill healthand 'the mode' sent tip fronrr the metropolis.	"The first time I saw leuhirra Iiienzi, she., in company with some other young ladies, was on horseback' they a'vanced toward nme'liko a whirlwind, passed, a arnhshred. s Ileft ore standing with my sketch-book in my hand, lost litastonishment. An old groo rrr, apparently their attcrth an. 5,ihnped after throne on an old nag,wlriuh 'barely sufficed to carry him half a mile behind them. As lie passed rule I accosted him.'What ladies are those who have passed?'	They are Mrs. Crarastown's party,' he reuhicd 'lire at the "Wood's Nosy,"'	"lIe rodo away inutrrediately; arid I returned to the Congress, where I had left Doctor Peanberton. He was 1rreparinrg for our departure.	Let its stay rrrrother' week,' I cried with more arrinultion than I had felt for years; 'I have seen a face"'Rot, rare' dear boy' exclaimed my frieunl: 'it was only	Yesterday you were sighing for a	We have been01-	fLEA UT[FU-L RIEXZT.12o three days alrea dv. What hind of face was it, and¥ r 'cc property?'It belonged to a lady who is of Mrs. Cranstown's parly,I they live at the "Wood's Nest."So ho a fair Republican has slain you with one of her cried Petaberton. ' Bravo! and success to her!'But it was not exactly as the doctor imagined; I ha I	n so deeply struck with the incomparable beauty ,,f I c ladyls face that [felt almost faint for sonic time after-	tail, but I had 110 thought of sislnng to claim it, I, the di 'graced-the humiliated! Still, a desire seized me tot't		nvas, that I might have	j" nsfer those Iovel.v features to cathe nes er changing likeness to charm away my embittered sltcnglds by the dumb eloquence of its mild and innocent eyes'	''1 think Doctor Pemberton toiled to bring about the ccnsusnruation of my wishes. In a very short time lie was able to tell me where the 'Wood's Nest' was, and the names of the five young ladies who formed Mrs. (Jranstown's party. In two days he introduced me in triumph to the chaperon herself, who was visiting some friends at the hotel where we staid, and we received a friendly invitation to accompany her then and there to the Wood's Nest, which was a cottage two miles out of the little town. I shall never, while this heart is fresh, forget the emotions which rnsbed over me when my unknown queen of all beauty was presented to me as 'Miss Isolina Rienzi,' and I held fer small magnetic hand in mine. Something which had been lost for years came back to me: once more my heart, which had been frozen gall, incited to the sweetness of home. What I hoped, I could not tell. Her pure, nudest eye' had revealed thenmscls es to me, and IIc ppy. How swiftly the six weeks passed away! My faithful friend forbore to remind me in the slightest of the flight of time, but rather fostered my new-found interest hi every act, lie became an invaluable chaperon and eonPliant on all occasions to the merry girls, and I believe they e''arcely eared to make up any little excursion or picnic \v ithont us,Tu this intercourse I rarely mingled, except on the out-'ki'ts, as it were. It was bliss enouIi for me to study theaweet, retiring loveliness of Icolina Iiicnzi, among the gay,eprighily, or sentimental dispositions of her companions.Isketched them all m groups, which allowed Own)BEJtTJJPL	213cri101 and praise to heir hearts' content; but I stole the lovely face of Isolina for m cawsas, hi all its moods and	with a secrecy which pezzled myself. j never jreamed of addressing her alone; nay, more, I seldomven-d to speak to her at all, though I was on terms of playful intimacy with all the rest. Yet there was a silent sympathy between us which seemed to require no xehicle of speech. but tlsrove on now and then a long, tender, yet proud gaze from her royal eyes, and sometimes the sudden ouehing of the hands.	But my dream was rudely broken. Letters reached us from England, with the startling intelligence that my sister Alicia had been sent home from her studies in London, seriously and her medical attendant apprehended the wer-t results; if I would see her alive, I must hasten hnso. When I received this letter, a stores of mixed griefs assailed me: all at once I felt the depth-the strength-the sweetness of my love for the 'Beautiful Rienzi.' I most let' her, and turn to my despair again. My gentle sister, whose affection might have saved me, was dying: the last scion of my blood was about to be snatched asi ay. Ivanilla, you can appreciate the sorrows of my position.	"In the midst of my despair, Doctor Pembertnn came to me, and his advice showed how his heart was interested in my happiness.	'Don't sit there with your head down. man,' he cried; 'throw trouble to the dogs. Go to sour lovely lady-I'll w irant there's one in tue ease, that makes you grip to America like this-and tell her right square up what you want. I don't think else's the girl to send you home to poor jibe uncomforted.'I was almost in a frenzy.	I have been in a dream. I exclaimed. 'I forgot my fainted name and my doubtful honor when I dared to lookupon Isolina Ricnzi. She would turn with loathing from the son of an actress, ss hose shshonor has swallowed up in its blackness, her miserable clsildrenl'	'She'll forgive all but tanits in you. Go and try her, urged Posnberton, warmly. ' Oh, nsan, what do you about woman?, -"I bad to leave Saratoga that evening, so there we-time for reflection. I went straight to the cottage, i.7-1! 41 ;JT(L RJENZLd in a whirl of re-awakened humiliation and grief. Mye of honor was so inflamed that I felt it to he ungenN-nay, dastardly-to seek to sully her by asking her to 10 my degradation.I determined to bid them all farewell and go with my ion unspoken. But fortune had another course open me. The ladies were all gone to some picnic or flower v. all but my treasure; and so I trod the well-known II the brook-side, which was shut in b\ alders and	hi wreaths of honeysuckle. There-just on the spot where once she and I had stood hand in hand for one sweet moment, while the other ladies flitted gayly up to the cottage from their flower-gardening-there stood my darling, weeping.	11 With one spring I was by her side; her sweet hands were in mine; my new-formed resolutions were flying to the four winds-my mind rudderless. I was blind with the rush of passion; but I managed to be gentle.What was the matter?'	" She was tired, lonely-had been shedding a few foolish tears-forget them.'	"I could wait to hear no more; a swift foreknowledge quivered through me with a joy which was so intense that darts of delicious agony shot through my heart. I clasped set in my arms.	Tell me that you were lonely for me,' I whispered, hoarsely.	"Her lovely head drooped to my breast; she trembled, and with scarcely conscious hands clung to me.	'Oh, Love! are you mine?' I breathed again; 'have I our heart?'	She shuddered vet more; stiddenlv she drew from my I ntis and stood a moment motionless, iif Ii drooping, pallid face; then she flew to me and flung her arms about me, and that averted countenance was raised, with modest, burning chicks and staring eyes, which poured one of those strange leeks. solenm and tender, into mine. Oh. the joy of that nininent! heaven seemed faint in comparison. She was in ne-this peerless IsOlina Bienzi, who,,, I had not dared to00-this was she, embracing me! I pressed my burning upon the thrilling lips, upon the meek and lo ing eyes na had answered me so generously, upon the pale brew situ scarlet, tingling cheeks.	liEd U'IJFUL IC1LbVZL	-you smile, Ivanilla. Ah, Heaven bios-iittefl'W fears-thank you, my little sister"	f these"Bat earth surged in at last. We ]'ad ieee¡5 must roll between its; I must leave this puex to part; being. who had crowned me with her love,was I?	This last thought stung me from my mad joy like 'in elder. I put her from me and leaned agaiust the tree ghastly with the rush of horror. Wretch that I was to For get my degradition!	What has grieved you? Tell me,, murmured my en_ Us companion, tremulously; ' you know I have a right to comfort you now.'	"Oh, sweet consoler! hew strong in her love, and vet how feeble she was-ataisding there, offering comfort to ;iss/	-Yon are an, Victor now,' she whispered, with a shy and quivering smile; 'lay half your grief oss me. Xli, can you net trust Isolina?'	"I know not bow, site. slid within mx arms again, and was pressed fiercely to my (lark heart, which leaped at the sweet touch, and conquered once more the honor I should have had. I should have kept my guilty secret mid given her back the liberty I had stolen from her it was selfish in sue, when I was sure of her woman's love for ma, to iilsst her sweet trust with such all ordeal. But when all was toldwhen she knew that the house efJoselvn had an ever-presenskeleton in its chair of state-that the stam upon is' escutcheon was whispered of and pitied by baser-bern chsuI,of yesterday's making; that. I, the heir of .Jeselyn, mightaenfronted at any mdsnent by her who was once my metliei', and lsissed from my patrimony with tile stignsa-Which leaves its victim nameless -when this story of pdhutnig clarkusse had been poured iido the ears of the innocent lady upon whom I had set my degrading seal, once more site tech my baud in hers and looked bravely hi my face.	What shall I do to prove 'that all this snakes no difference in niy love for V011.0 she cried, ardently."' Whit? Wonl you still share the fortunes of sachi -twretch?' I exclaimed, iuci'ednlonsly.	'-	er tb-v	'How can I prove that a woman s heart th	your fears would imply,' she said agaul.		"And now, Ivau ihia, I eonsmittsd a cruel wi e1k,	the Woman wlwin I loved, in taking advantage of		-II	I'VE \YTtif-ahnegatiots of her love to bind her indissolubly to my-If.You will scorn me, as I scorn myself, when you hear I repaid her generosity.11 'You see me now, perhaps at my best,' I replied, oomil; 'perhaps you would loathe me at my worst-aenclose, defamed, nameless outcast.'Never-never,' she returned, clasping her hands.	Prove it then, by binding yourself to me by a tie which no man can break,' I uttered, in a low, husky voice.She started, and became a little paler.	I will give you my vow to be constancy itself,' she murmured.	Vows are idle words, when remorse and contempt cease between.' I retnrttisd, impulsively. 'Nay, my Isolina; put yourself beyond the power of friends who would preach down your heart; be my wife this night, that I may claim you when I return.'She flushed to the brow, and stood away from me.	" 'Without father or mother to say, '' ITeaven bless you both!" without friends of either to approve? No, Victor.'	Then I flung myself on the ground at her feet, with the despair at my heart painting dark assurances. I entreated and urgei, remembering only my selfish fears, m1til site came to me and raised me from my abject frenzy.	'Never plead so to me, my Victor,' she said, leaning against me with a low sob; ' I will marry you, as you wish, and glory in my chains. The marriage vow can take the place of the customary engagement; each is sacred to use.'	I caught her rapturously its my arms and whispered cpid directions, to which site listened with a hidden face.To not let it he known,' she whispered, it would be	died so very, very imprudent of me-and I do not thitik - is, for I d love and trust hot one, and should neverarry another. Victor, this is only a soleosu betrothal.'	I read her sweet, girlish fears, and reassured her. The marriage should only be a betrothal, which hound us indissolubly, and no one should know of it except my friend Pctal,erton whom I could trust, and perhaps some one inthe cottage whose reserve could be relied upon. When I could return from England no should be married publicly.'Yes. yes;' said my treastsre, who was now quite radiant,and we shall tell papa and mamma and little Ivanilla allabout our foolish former marriage. But Victor.REAl i,FtTL Ji1E\j011, in the cottage can be a wit11c,"'s 110nes Miss Uransto all's old groom would run for a Policeman, and the lady's maid is net to be thought of, and our uhf housekeeper a ould tell all about it to Louisa, and Belle, and Blanche, and Fleauor, aud think she is recounting a love-match of twenty years back oh, no, love, not Mrs. Hidcombe,''We can easily get a second witness,'f exclaimed.But collie, darling and get your hat, we have not long.'	''' What? this very minute?' she said turning pale and carnation by turns,	"'I'll tell you,' I cried, heart-smitten at the sacrifice I demanded, 'you shall net have to leave the cottage. I will bring a elcrgynian, and nay friend, and he hero in an hour, Mrs. Ilaleolnbe shall receive our adieus for the ladies who are absent, and no gossip can be raised.'	" When I was twenty rods away, down the brook path. I turned hack with a new fear.'How old are you?' I gasped. 'Are you under age?',,She crimsoned between surprise and amazement.	Hew fortunale that you did not ask me ten days ago,' she said. 'I was twenty-mm on the fifth day of July. Four years younger than my iuqtusilive, Victor.'	This afforded me another sweet reason for clasping her in my arms. How did she knew my age-iriteh?	She had heard Dr. Pemherten mention the date of tue coming of age; could sise ever forger auytlsinv the i'eferol to me? No nothing-nothing, since she first met MY enI tore myself trom her a second I hue, buoyant andumialsant. As soon as I presented myself to Pemberlon, lie shook hands with me furiously ."'It was yes,' he cried, 'let TOO congratulate yen.'He stared at me when I told hint all,"'Very imprudent, very' he said; 'I weitldn't adviseyou to do the poor young flung such an iu estiet'-i I onlyfor the sake of her 'name. J once had a dear friend of that uamehe's dead long years ago, poor fellow; bitt this girl, Isohina, lye loved stranaely, just because of icr narite. Don't, my dear Victor, if "you can't trust to her heart, you needn't trust to the wedding-ring either."'It's no sacrifice for her,' I cried, rai:c1'lhug and what difference can it make? 	rIKA UTI Ft 11 RIEJVZL1 tnt soito,, cetitict be pawned upon her, should her friendsoitooie to frown npon me.'	I believe this last argument vanquished him; the idea of sue 0110 looking down the claims of a Joselyn, roused his t n4aut asitagon un; he was not enthusiastic like me, but he came, determined to prey cut my new-found happiness from being dashed from my lips.	We went to the Rev. Willard Melville, whose church it had attended during our two mouths' stay, and laid the feets of the ease before him, lie got us a license without difficulty, and prepared to acoonspany us. His wife, wontaulike, sympathized with the lonely young bride and begged to be allowed to go with us, and belier friend on the occasion. So we returned in a cab, to the cottage, with the necessary documents and the two witnesses.	11 The cottage parlor was empty, a Bible on the table, flowers on every stand. Mrs. Melville went up stairs and tapped at the closed door which shut in my darling. In a few minutes they came down, my love tremhling and clinging wistfully to her one female friend,	Oh! bow lovely she was! The simplest of white robes clad her bewitching form; a single white rose, like curdled pearls, nestled in her bosom, a meet emblem of her girlish purity of heart.	''In ten minutes site was bound to me, by the forms of the Presbvteriau Church, in a tie which no man could break. Mv fsiestd Pemherteu and Mrs. Melville signed their names as witnesses; they all wished the new-made bride joy and prosperity, and niy friend told her to write to him if any service could he given at his hands. Then they all drove away, and left me one hour to spend with Isoliua.Do you repent' I whispered, proudly.'Mo-oh, no,' she answered, while her timid heart flewto her eyes; 'not if you are satisfied.'"	I sat down, but not alone; my wife was clasped in my ruts; those los ely, tremulous lips would never be another's;	to heart beating so wildly, so timidly, was mine forever. What joy-and yet what cruel agony to recall the vanished iweetness flow.	"And yet I had to put aside these raptures, and make my hurried plans to render our enforced separation less painful. I made her promise to write me constantly, addressing her letters to Dr. Pcmberton Our little secret should be keptI	nunlil i could 'hi	i	openly 0im her. If u fur1I/I 77' L j rboa ole arose she was instantly to Sun mon me, and I would soy proper place as her husband.All this I proposed, to soothe the trembling flhisgivins0, uny dear girh the moment of Our partiu	Was drawii acne' and grief was swelling in her lovely boseun, She feareaseine dark inisfortn ne-we should never meet again-s0010hiag would come between us.'Nothing can, my own wife, but death!' I whisperedlYe both live, Ivanilla, but her foreboding has come top555.	At, last I had to go. I gazed once more into these lovegenie Oven, which heauted as if F{ean'en's eon4aney dnvelt wlllihn them; I messed in my anus a form which clung to o e with throbbing heart, and find. inn u inured werds'Irratlied for the last time the dear farewell to my wife. Mv gwd friend Pemberton rushed out at the last nnoment for inc and our parting was mercifully brief, Still I remenibened my beautiful bride, standing in the deer of the little cottage, pale, tearful, yet striving to smile lest my heart slanid break-her last word a heroic one." 'There is nothing to fear-I do not regn in.'	In a few nainn tea we were far apart. and I wns sfeamlnl toward New York. When I reached the city I jenrehar ii the wedding-ring, and had my wife's initials engrsved inside, with the (late on which 'the ring should reach her'July lGtla.' I had an old family ring of the Jehelyneunions piece of workmanship intended to conceal a ring side; tins I shipped tile ring into, and sent with my First tsr to my wife. It was (lilting nay page home to Raglan,eHint I soothed my bereaved heart, by painting that pieta-Of our love-scene behind line cottage, and	afce"wnu'din playful sport I sent to Isohna.	"I arrived home to find nay sister in a decline, and rayidl1 failing. The joy which she felt at my return prod IRI (I for a time a favorable effect; she rallied and seenned to throw off the disease, I was like civ old self; and she clung to inn with the most touching alleetion, I told her the seer settee of nay happiness; 'with what syrnpnnthy and woederin intnrest she listened; then when my din'hing s lettersto and e, breatbiugs of the purest and naost smIte I Lnnaey, bony nay geitle sister's tears of love fell no Ii ned to her passages which she might share.II :TIJ'UL RJEiVZT	'''Oil, if 1 might live to welcome home your noble IsoHna!' she. used to sigh. But it was not to be." The disease returned with fell power, and almost with,nt warning she passed away. On the 5th of November I buried her beside my father in the Joselyn vault.	"I was now alone; the last of my blood was beneath a marble slab; nothing bound me to my echoing halls but the grief which for a time prostrated me.	Dr. Pembcrton, ever faithful, reminded Die that happiness awaited me across the ocean; that my noble-hearted young bride would console me; and that it was ray duty to go at once and claim her.	The thouht of her devotion, which had expressed itself in every letter,' fired me with new hope. I would lake her to min, arms and reward her by a life of love for the noble sacriice which she had made for me. I quietly got ready and prepared to embark by the first steamer. The carriage was at the dour which was to convey me to the railway station, when a packet arrived by the Liverpool mail. It was from fly wife, inclosing the six letters which I had written her, and demanding in the most imploring language a divorce, assigning no reason, but on the contrary forbidding me to make any inquiries into reasons which were strong and fatal as death.	Such was the letter which came to me on the 14th of November,"CHAPTER XXTX.VICTOR JOSELYN's STORY-COVTrltjEp.	0, she is fallenInto a pit of ink! that the wild sea!h drops too fcw to wash her clean again, salt too little which may season give icr foul tarnished flesh!"Mucn ADO ABOUT NOTHING.J remained so lone' shut np With my wife's letter, thathut Dr. Peasbertor7came to the door.'We shall be late for the cars,' lie cried, 'what hasome over you, niv dear boy'"I opened the door, and with ghastly composure, waved110 hi, I felt as if Ishonld never speak again. I pointedII//il! /	e the letter, and dropped, like a lump of ]if01045 lao, Upon jot chair gam The contents had simply Stflnncd Joe ¥ as	J was insensible to wrath or grief. The doctor read it hod folded it lip carefully.	It's some infernal conspiracy!' lie eXcialnieci, and I all, not going to believe she ever Penned this letter until she says O with her own lips. She's not the girl to throw von ever treacherously. We'll see her face to face, and c\cau' this lip.'l'he passage from England, was like a heavy dream: it	me and left me in the same condition ill which I had left my home. On the 29th of IN ovemhcr, T, with niy friend, arrived in New York.	,,We had not left the steamer, when a young man whoa' acquaint alice I had made in Saratoga a few days before 1 left, accosted inc, and desired to peak with iii@. I told hint to call at Hotel in an hour. where I would he located.lie would not leave me but accompanied me to the hotel ina carriage. When we were alone, the ycnng man whose manner was very mysterious, locked the door, and slowly advanced, nntil lie was close before me.	"'Victor Jeselyn, you have come to this city for one who will send you back alone;' lie said in a low, coil eenti'atell voice; 'her heart has changed to you, and she sighs tofree.'	Who are you sir, that knows my private niovemci'ts and intentions so well'?' I demanded; 'ivho has ecinin isioned Cecil Bean mont to prouou ice my destiny?'"'I am Victor Jo'elyu's successor to the hand of Tar 'IBlench' he answered. xing' his burning eyes on mine.	Wretch!' I cried, striking him; 'take that for slander!'	"He stood motionless, though his face had withered to colorless marble.	Do von wish a proof of what I say?' he whispered. 'See, then. She has pron,i'ed to be mine to -night: there will be a concert; I am to ffi with her from the 'nni'ert. You shall go there; yon will see her enter the hail heainiig190n my arm' this will be proof that she has east yell off.Are yon satisfied?''No!' I shrieked; 'net nntil I tee list fire t¡ fiiudI"'You will rsquest an intervieiv, tile!' ',r-rLri -tA tTTFUL R1PLVZT.cue it roil may persecute her if you are unmanly enough, will ih from you, she loathes-fears Victor Joselyn.''fieuion!' I houtcd and felled mm to the floor.	He slowly rose, and stood once more before me, and gazed at me with folded arms.	'You have struck me twice; you have called me slanderer,' he uttered, in the same fiercely repressed voice, 'and vet this hand remains passive. Know you whom you have felled at your feet, Victor Joselyn? Your younger brother!'I turned from him in coo tempt.	I would stab you to the heart for the insolence von have given me,' he continued, bitterly; ' but the same blood flows in our veins-the blood of the actress, Victor Josclvn-the false wife-the false mother, who forsook her children to enslave anew other men'. and degrade other childreu-thc woman who lives this day, and if I choose to whisper the word, will confront you and claim the hemage of her firstborn. Ha ha! brother-let me shake your hand.'" I waved him from me, and groaned and fall.	When I recovered, the mocking vision had disappeared, and Dr. Pensherton was holding me in his arms.	" poured the sinister story into his ears, and for the first, time his faith was shaken in Isolina.	Put her from you, boy!' lie exclaimed, 'her heart has deceived yon and her; she is perfidious, or that young man would not have been sent to you.'	'I will net believe Isolina false without sure proof!' I said,	'We agreed that I should send a note to my wife, demaudnig an interview; that I should describe the contents cI the letter that I had received in England, and ask if sheJ written it; that I should demand the reasons of her de-;t0 for a separation, if such was the ease.A messenger was sent with the letter, and ordered toftliver it into the hand of Miss Rienri herself, and to v cut for an answer. He returned in an hour with a note,vritten, beyond all doubt, by the hand of my wife, and itiIu:Deep ewe if you nsnst loathe me if it will assist you to forgetl'JJICOI(l liljoct	it O1i, I renounce our sacred vows, I- , an 03 eeioe of the tWo of July. I have my reasonsin ur own bosom; attempt riot to unvan m secret	oneL'EA UflFpL RJE,ygj223spare of mere3 left in our hear! fororb	nor ma as lice	31,0 one, ieeeb forbear to see her; return to England and bye agile I,"Es cry word of this unnatural letter was di roatort cvi-derrie of the I rut h of Cecil Beaumont's boast' she was Ill-were t; her very initials, which were no longer those ofher husband, proved that she wished to he free.	Let us try one more oh anne,' said Pemberurri; 'arrd if ,hes a' false as I begin to think her, we'll off this very mgi t from cursed -New York . and lease mother anrl is iso lollow their own devices. We'll go to the concert-mon1 --sic can't forbid you a public hail, and we'll jnd go for otirrelve'.'"We drove at the hour appointed to the ('ehelie Concert-moon, and quietly took our places behind a pIllar where we coo ci see without being soon. [ was catching the grand entrance. expecting to See my wife enter as one of tine audience, when my friend violently plucked my sleeve. I looked upon the platform and beheld her whom I had come to clam as wife enter, loaning oil Cecil Beau, mont's arm, It hose of pleasure oil her face; magnificently dressed,double ring discarded, though she had fondly written to me once that it should lees er leave her ]land until her heart was cold in death.''Stunned and maddened, I sat and watched: her tread;-cry seemed complete. When she came forward to 'incyou a duet, Bean nmmet crept near, and methought his olug. triumphant it glance swept round the hall to finn 1muaa whour lie had supplanted; those lurid eyes-sothe haunting eves win rim sonuctinees pursued me f"or" nochildhood, and which were indeed tine eyes of my wretch-11mother-soeuned to sneer and laugh at ray calamity, andrrared ino with sadden frenzy. Heedless of my friend'srestrahring hand, I leaped fro- behind the pillar and stoodquhcri ug with fury before my faitlrlcss wife.She saw me, fury	with are effrighled shriek fell hackarid fainted, while you, her smeeahl. fnnrcignr looking eourpail-ion, gazed wildly from face to face for the cause of herferrer,	"The sight of the ueisen'able girl lying senseless at your feet, tore my heart with reneorse. With a heart turner! no steel I walked out of the house, arid nay anr'nionis friendkept close to lily heels.SLTTTFUL RIE2tZLlii aN air aid would (10 something desperate; he mistaken. I was never mere cairn; my ideas rangedeiuelves with precision; I felt composed as a frozen sea.	We entered our cab: at the moment a small Canadian leigir passed by us and dashed furiously on: it contained Cecil Beaumont and my wife; her head was upon his houlder, his arm was passed round her, exultation flashed over his face.	' 'This is the last act of the drama!' I said, pointing to them; 'there goes my wife and my successor to her votes!'	'Pursue them!' shouted Pcmberton; 'horsewhip the fellow!	'No,' I answered; 'that roan is beyond my vengeance; a wrathful Heaven has decreed that lie should be ray brother.'	11 1 here was a steamer about to leave for Boston that sane night. and in it I determined to take passage, mid leave the city of my humiliation. 1 no longer desired to confront my wife; I washed sirs hands of her, and resolved henceforth to leave her free.	The pang which rankled longest was the discovery that ",lie was not the pure, high-sorrlerl being I had worshiped; teat the transcendent virtues and the nobility of her morals had not been genuine; that the Isohina of tiny love was a heavenly crerrtion that had never existed.	" I wished to procure some sort of divorce, in order to leave her the more completely free, but Pemberton sternly opposed the measure, on account of the publicity which would cnsrre.	'She has net waited for a divorce,' lie said, bitterly; 'arid you are not bound to drag your horses into deeperrc, 0! rtil you have a lrrrrrclle to go by. When she hasiiel betrayed her marriage vows, then you shall suea divorce, and when free, unite yourself to a worthyOf your own land, and perpetuate the nanre of youroar.' 	t	'The name shall die with me!' I exclaimed, firmly; 'I II. u e wedded for the last trumP 	I"Irr due tirnre xc returned to Jeselyn Weld, but I only j	dd until mrry affairs were all woo rrd tip. I appointed l>croberfon gurrdiani of niv estate; urade my will, leaving Jre whole of the immense wealth which had made the Jose-Iso haughty, to niow medical coflum -: n sme,l ['ember-n as sole executor and manacer	Having thus deliberately et usyscif a'lrift from my native land, i wandered about, Soflsetiuies the guest f an Arab shiek, sometimes a dweller in the palace of the grand vizier.11 ]\Jy life was imperiled a hundred times, by the sand-storm of the desert; by hunger, thirst, 81111-str,ke, or the sword of the fierce native.Sometimes mv thoughts lingered sa'llr about my for-saken land-my desolate Weld; if I had hd a little sister waiting for my return, what strange treasures would 1 have gathered from the land of thirst and euuluiieAt length I went to Astrahad, hearing that the plaguewas raging through it, and as I had some knowl.'lge of 0b,-treatment of the disease, I honed to benefit - 'iii' line of thedevoted people who were dTing by hundreds. Fr the nexttwo months I was occupied happily in allsviati,4 the suf-ferings of my fellow-creatures, and I succeeded iii riirekingthe progress of the plague, six weeks earlier than had hap.petied in twenty years.	"The plague was quelled at Astraball, but it broke "it with fury at Saree, to which [immediately repaired.	11 I had not been at Saree more than a fortitirit. a caravan came into the city from Aetrahad wit hi Ma: medau boy who carried an English letter fir	11 Here it is, covered with grease and p a little Zend scrawling-to send it to Sat' And these are the contents:"'My DEAR VICTOR: - -Return jmiuediately. I'that a member of your family has been separate!you know who I mean, I am about to return ti A . . . . .truth of the suspicion. Shape your course directlti New lurkwill find a letter waiting for you in bet 1..'o N" n"rnnations in this, as it may not reach you. God pi' 1 tin"Yours, 	Awte5Z Pszsnt'	This letter startled me out	of my apathy. It L'like the peal which rends the thunderl'lQt my false -		the wild gweetIi ufnation, and brought back to nielife which was forever gone.That same tnght J left Saree with a compalit of i'kI ha l,	nerchaiits, and journeY",	)a b~.L.,ln' rested night or day t228 	BEAUTIFUL RrEXZLthe steamer which brought me to Boston, I was like a restless spirit nnshriven. When I reached New York 1 found a latter at the post-office from my frieud, telling me to come to a place called Ranelagh and inquire for the fannlv of my wife. I am to stay at lfanclagh until Doctor Pemnherton can join me, and tell me the secret conspiracy that has been made against m)t happiness.	''I asked at the village for the family of Rienzi, and was directed to Silver]".	"I am here, blindly obeying the directions of my mentor; he has brought me from the ends of the earth; from forgetfulness and resignation under my lonely lot, to Silvsrlea, What is to be the result?"CHAPTER XXX.A SHADOW UNDER MT STAR."You ask what is to be the result," I said, speaking forthe first time since my friend began his story; "and it is agreatriddle to me. Your history has filled me withwent. God seems to have brought us very nearunder one trial. I am bewildered. . Can ft be:1the woman who has attempted our ruin so pealalso the curse of the House of Joselvn? Let mequestion, Victor. What was 'Stefla's' maiden n"Qemnma Lanoinetto, of the House of Lancin ,1aFlorence; a haughty family, indeed."I clasped my hauilb in superstitions awe.She it is 'who has twice attempted my life, once at-tempted the life of mv mother. by a poisoned ring, andeast her mysterious cils so thickly round our haplessIscliua that she has fled from our mum and gone, 110 0111'knows whithor."	''You amaze me, Ivanifla! Can this he what Doctor Pemberton means? Can my wretched mother be the cause of the separation of my wiffromn me? But alas! I can never forget that Cecil Bean mont supplanted rime."	''Isolina has not been false," I replied, in a trembling voice; "whatever cause has led her to act so, I believe she loves you still, Oh, Victor' when you hear the true story of poor Cecil Beaumont von will not deem my sister in-'1cconsistent for io e of him! M brother Ithe bosom of a family which has haffliction shall but cement the hood of 101 	t. ed; your)ttwU Utkiss yon on the brow, my lOiWloved Victor Joselyn, NowI shall tell you my story, " 	re it totlehe, on Yours I knownot; I shall tell you all, and may God cottifert von,"*	C 	:5* 	SAgain the sun rose over Sill erlea,I was up first and paced the upper lialct:nv. in the lightof the rising sun, to commune with the God I felt to be my friend.Victor Josei1n was beneat Ii our roof; lieafter his long travel-slept peacefully amon:How lovely-how lovely was this Silt Ûrlea when bathed morning's rosiest light! Creator of tlu. matchless bee come down and fill this heart with patience, and how to hone!	SomethIng struck me lightly on the breast, and f the balcony floor. A ball of crumpled paper.	I gazed eagerly about, and down to the pillars hsnnth, but saw no one. I lifted the ball of paper and op,:. 11 IsoUna/" I muttered with a swoop of hope at iii c It was in my sister's writing, and began with in; name. I turned it to the orient clouds and real:	Isoliun prays Ivanilla hienzi to have no fear, I follow the messenger, that she may hear from her she faithfully what has torn her from her family. Come a and privately, if you would see for the last time yourloving-ever-remembering Isolina.	And she had appealed to nae; she wool'l see me more, and then we must meet no more on part Ii.Where was the messenger? [ was all impatience tothe call, Pea,' I forcot the caution; wherever my lost was, it would be safe for me.I leaned on the leafy parapets and gazed abroadeager, brightening eyes.	Come-1 am ready," I murmured, kissing the fluttet note.Still I saw nothing but the snowY shafts of tress andmire this mci-	dark waving hrench" HI "' ¥l eon¥j 	I must gosenger intoDIM If LU Lit RIEHZLe steamer which	brought me to Boston, I was like a rest-spirit nnshriven. 	When I reached New York I foundatter at the post-office from my friend, telling me to come	is place called Ranelagh and inqnire for the family of my a fe. I am to stay at Ranclagh until Doctor Pembertoa can join me, and tell me the secret conspiracy that has been made against nay happiness.	I asked at the village for the family of Rican, and was directed to Silverlea.	I am here, blindly obeying the directions of my mentor; he has brought me from tIie ends of the earth; from forgetfulness and resignation under my lonely lot, to Silvemlea. What i to be the result?"CHAPTER XXX.A SHADOW TJöWER MY STAR.	You ask what is to be the result," I said, speaking for the first time since my friend began his story; "and it is a greatriddle to me. Your history has filled me with astonishment. God seems to have brought us very near together, under one trial. I am bewildered. Can it be possible that the woman who has attempted our ruin so persistently is also the curse of the house of Joselyn? Let sue ask you one question, Victor. What was 'StelIn's' maiden name?"	"C-emma Lancinetto, of the House of Lancinetto, in Florence; a haughty family, indeed."I clasped my hands in superstitious awe.She it is who has twice attempted my life, once at-'opted the life of my mother, by a poisoned ring, and	bar mvsterioua coils so thickly round our hapless lina that she has fled from our arms and gone, no one 'WS whither,"You amaze me, Ivanilla! Can this be what Doctoramberton means? Can my wretched mother be the causeof the separation of my wife from me? But alas! lean neverforgot that Cecil Beanmont supplanted me."	'5lsolina has not been false," I replied, in a trembling voice' "whatever cause has led her to act so, I believe she loves yon still. Oh, Victor! when you hear the trne story of poor Cecil Beaumont yon wiif not deem my sister in-It	BEATT'l'rpp1 1IE.\z;129	expect me to trust to )'O U whom i k!i	my, without any proof of your good faith:"'		have no proof, if the letter 1 hroug	none.told her that you would not trust vooi'elf with me, and she said the letter I was the bearer of ivoull he snillient MissIvanilla, I have delivered my message, and I have been refused. I will go back to her and err so."	No, you shall not!" I exclaimed ''Tier letter shall sofficient. I will go."Why did Miss Rionzi hesitate so long?" returnedmail, fixing his wild Bohemian eyes searhuiiglv on me in	Was she waiting for the eyes to come wlnc'h wnuill i how many legs has she employed to give chase?"	"I employed none but the eyes of God Evade them if you can, Ralph Moreconihe."'' AhI I was looping that villain, X,ls',i, would lurkwithin reach of my hand," said the old Italian. 'Inchit;his fist and shaking it at Silvorlea in a sodden j'an'Xs nifury. ''How I would have gripped his varlet thr,.: How I would have hustled him over the rock into the hot trough he'd ever wallow in. He to smite me-the d'sg""I am ready to follow you," I said, in a niihl voice.He glanced at me less fiercely, then started at 11 Ypace along the beach toward the village, I following behind.	Presently we struck the road which leads and there, tied to a tree. I saw the brown hlll,~twii	aders have made 1-fhose acquaintance jny reI came to a determined stand.	Before I proceed farther, I most denianil that this is not a conspiracy to put me in the p Ringwood!" I exclaimed.	"Your sister wrote that letter. Won!" she have you to rush. into danger? I have no prof. inadani; 1 not wish you to conic. If yon are still afraid, I wi without you."	He deliberately climbed into the carmntee. took UI' reins, and turned into the lsighmoad. lIe seemed 'tready to drive off withoot inc.I allowed him to proceed until I cutS qnite itire be w	tll	leave me, then i called to him:"Come back.""Are you coming, then?"rrjJpuL BIEWZLYes."Without any proof that I do not intend to murder you,!l put your body into the first well?"Yes."	lie took my band and assisted me to the seat at his side. Instantly we dashed off at a rapid rate; through the dusty lane belund the village, and away into the country beyond, where fresh scenes gyrated in rapid succession before my watchful eyes.When shall we reach my sister?" I asked.	Madam will be able to -tell to a minute, when she is there," responded the man in his pure, cutting diction.	What do you mean, sir, by such discourtesy?" I retorted, with some indignation. "Answer me."	"To oblige Miss Rieuzi, I'll not quarrel with her, but to oblige myself, I'll not answer her."Your reasons, sir; I must have them."	"Very good; very well. The reason is that you and I may distigree any moment after you find out exactly where you are going; and in your anger you may post back to Banelagh by the ears a Crookie-Back, and set the village on our track, which you know would neither be keeping to your lady sister's injunctions nor endangering yourself."	"Your caution is admirable, sir. If I should never return to my parents, they will be unable to trace my fate. Be assured, however, that I will not be betrayed into danger without a struggle. I am not a coward."	'1 think You are not a coward," said the wild being at my side, flickering a sudden glance at me; "and I see you are a regular mastiff for those von love."	Tell me-tell me," I exclaimed, encouraged by the ±iudiy glance which the coal-black eyes had given; "is my,tor well? is she happy?"Ask the lady when you meet."After two hours' drive, we entered a small and smoky	ct1cment, where a ruinous wooden bridge spanned a nuddy inlet of the sea. This was Crookle-Back Bridge.	A train had just stopped, and we were only in time to lprocure tickets and secure our places, when we were clatter-g noisily toward New York.If oreoomhe, through his gipsy eyes, watched my every,reent with the vigilance of a lynx; neither approachedad (I sedrne during the two hours we were tossed to231gather.	\ ': r Stationcombo W1LS .11 %% an-c }I? iflg wutehf aft., Station, and More.MOM At last the guard shouted	about, but did not	Morecombe rose. \Va were tell lee ye Mills."the very spot where Mrs. Beaunioutmiles had from the city, athd tried to destroy himself, wlier	nyu] where Cecilburied. Was this 'Isolina's retreat? e young Rosecraft was	I followed niy companion out h 1crowd on the plat form, to the wide			a dusty place the	mills, where i could sleek to 110 one without hal'' seen'1 hen he went am! got his horse andrebarneted the amnial and drove UI)	- auding.Get in, lie said, holding the stef.	I silent! mounted, and w proceedet as afra, 1 know notlimu of the lotilitv I was only eonseoua of ever increasing wi (hles.s of scenery, and that we seemed to be cutting across the country. Soon all signs of civilization were left behind us; woods and rooks succeeded to cultivated fieldsand homesteads: the sun rose high ill. tile heavens, and thebusy air which was alive with the buzzing of inserts hecame close and stilling, and brooded thick under the inoyele branches.	All at once my nostrils hailed the welcome odor of woodsmoke.	I hooked eagerly over the wastes of fir forest for thechimney of a house. I aaw a light v 	bhie at a	distance; we soon reached tile clean'	f. 1	three	small conical but, formed of bark.		We were. ill it u]psv camp.		11 Muidani is white as a swamp-lily,' said haiPli		ore.	conihe, look in" at me "we 'Shall stop hereI allowed iiivelf to he assisted to the grO]1U0' was faint travalewith liii nger anti heat, but I would wuhlngi) haveteenty nals farthiti' rather than p surrounded us; someA crowd Of tt,vny ced C k lndr and flashing eyes, men and ivomneli. With long, 1.0001;1oitered s. Morerushed out from the tents, ctfl d ordered him to unharness conuhe coolly beckoned to one, anthe horse, and give him oats the; P of womand wat0r~ 	ela, this	Coins here," he shouted, to	g,,lady is your guest.	Where 15 the	she	had aquiline	A tall young woman caine	kin	and a dazzling	fwatures, melting black eyes, 0 1		-				IBAA UTIFUJ RIEHZL	lie a curious scarlet cloth cap was on her head; her tir hung straight and jetty down to the hem of her short clue cloth skirt, which was fancifully decorated with the wings of thousands of small rare birds; her feet were brown and bare and exquisitely delicate, yet sinewy, her bosom was covered by a scarlet jacket, covered with blue embroidery; strings of silver coins were on her neck and arms. This gay personage took me by the hand and polled me out of the hustling, whispering children.	"Welcome to Adynma's camp," she said, with great dignity.I turned a look of agony on my escort.	"Is this the end of my journey?" I gasped; "have you given me to a gang of gipsies?"	"No," said Morecornbe, with. an involuntary softening; "you were tired, and I stopped to give you rest. We have yet farther to go. By the blessed Saint Magdalen, that is true."	I suffered the woman to lead me into the largest camp of the three. There I was waved gracefully to a seat; then, as the queen retired, a beautiful elslld, clad in green silk, danced lightly towa.id me, and fanned me with abroad swamp leaf.	Presently the woman returned with a bowl in her hand which steamed with some savory stew which revived my sense of hunger most keenly.	Sinking on cue knee before me, she offered me a heavy silver spoon, and murmured with her dazzling smile:''Eat from Advnma's hand."	I gratefuby accepted the invitation, and began to eat some curious mixture of different kinds of flesh, garlic almonds, and pistachio nuts, highly flavored and not unpleasant. Had my appetite been fess keen, I should probably haverued from it in dismay.	"What place is this?" I asked, when my appetite was cuiewhat appeased."I do not know, lady," answered Adynma."Do you not live here?"	" Oh, no, lady. We are strangers; we have crossed the ,,ear river. We are wauderin,"	The great river? Niagara? You have come from unuada?"GentIQ lady, yes."It-233How far are we from New York"The woman showed her glitteringteeth,I am a child. I have yet to leini	It was useless to attesolit extract the gipsy queen. ! began to ask 1ai¡V' frommore rotiversatit with.		-	o waSweet lady. your brow bears a message which I cannot sail Aovnuia: :'let me read your destiny."	She took my hand in hers, but I fell asleep under the royal gaze. I insist have slept an hour,When I awoke, the woman was murmuring in my ear:Lady-lady, the messenger awaits you." 	- -	I opened my eyes and raised myself; thrararh the open door of the (s-ut I eonhl see Morecoosbe hajneesio his horse. the time had conic to resume our journey."Drink." sail the gi'sv, presenting me with a richly chasedsilver goblet of wine: ''the Cireassian blood is taint with-out the blood of the grape; noon's win is heavy when tiletongue is parched.'With a low bow I quaffed the wino, and rose from mycrimson couch.	Lads'. your destiny weeps," sahi the woman, nsonnfully. '' I have been reading it; my soul is troohhssl; a shaow sits nuder you]- star; lady-you will i050 a frsensi'''Conic, umadaut," said Moreeombe, appeisrlssg at toedoor. o11oweii the gipsy out: my heart was iiIed-vaguC aweand half lwhief followed her words- "I wonid lose a friend,`Perhaps niv sister. heaven forbid! 	-	Sore of i-hildren ran round me with out,ti etcFe hands, and shouted the osdy English word they seemed to know."	money! moneYLh a royal gesture of command;"the guest of your queen is sacred- them a few coins.Nevertheless, I turned and gave piod hostess fur her gemI expressed lily gravltn to md,f n she iarria-erous treatment, and seated myee	eoeejlatieiis that 1 soI was so deeply inamersed -	vhieh we passed. I waslonger watched the scones thi usaroused by Moreeombe.W1~e aluloA thel'e.e , 	nhtfeflb recalled ]low.	"What! at hasti" I was thou0	--	t -7,1	T, We have gone four miles since we left the gipsy camp.,e mile more."	At last Morecombe stopped unexpectedly and alighted to drag aside a fir-tree which appeared to have been uprooted, hut which in reality covered the entrance of a narrow path which meandered through the dense foliage. After replacing the tree, he led the horse up cautiously for some ten minutes, and finally stopped before what appeared to be a dismantled cottage.There was an air of dissolution over the whole place.	The gipsv-eamp was light and beauty and joy compared to this!	Morecombe silently lifted use to the ground, and turned away. At the same moment the cottage dour opened with an agonized creak.	A figure stood trembling on the door-sill, a figure that could come no farther, though its eager arms were outstretched, and its lovek, passionate face was bathed with the tears of joyful welcome.Come, come, come:" cried my darling. "I cannot movefor gratitude. Oh, friend, faithful and true!"And I bounded into my sister's arms.CHAPTER XXXI.THE TIES OF BLOOD,"God's mercy, maiden! Does it curd thy blood To say lam thy mother! What's the matter, That the dssttsnpered messenger of wet, The eaay-colored iris, rounds thins eye? Why' That you are my daughter."ALL'S WELL THAI ENDS WELL.	nil her to my heart; at first I could not speak. My wound themselves round her as if they would neversen.What can tear us apart new?" I thought."Calm yourself," murmured my sister. " Be brave, mytiling, and make the most of this merciful epportunitv."	11 Only tell me what to do?" I whispered. "I will be rave and patient, bntlwill never leave this place without	I	's-	tI		35Her beautiful face grew pale and despairing. She tookmV hand and siiddenlr led me in.'We were in a low, darkened room, hi which at first ICould distinguish nothing. Gradually the different objects	beneath my "ace. Two windows were covered with a heavY curtain. 'tIe1i effcctnall1 shut out the light. A thick heavy Persian carpet was spread on the singing and decayed hoer; a lug, black couch extended at one end of the narrow u'hauuul'er lucre was no other fnnaitnre.	The figure. substance, or shadow-1 scarce at first could tell, was gliding back and forward along the white wall, with a step as son ndless as the cloud which sweeps between the sun and the furrowing graTis. ftc I ci ds arc interwoven. and the pensile fingers clasp each other lice slender silver serpents; the face no more is sheonded, no more is lutist', it hides bet eatla no ci iou ug chsgniee. The eyes flash in the dark, and show their splendor. and their dread prophecy of ann the face is suaail and deadly, with pride umicomuqueralde in she dominant brow and e1nivering nostril. Oh. a beautiful face, all marred by the sparks of hell! The fair, round throat swells and heaves like the gorge of a serpent with the dumb fury that seems to possess the heart.	She passes to and fro with quick and dspsrate energy, heedless of those who look tipon her.	"This," said tim Sister tnridug her rUin, argelic face tom" this is the. secret cord that dra	me from on. Thisis my	ojlit'rn1y true mother; aisd she is sick, and in-sane, an" in d1osger for past eriine	and a daughter's do'yis to hI v to h or and 'l lard her."Ahi. sue! what dreary deceit 15Itis a dreary troth. ni v owas Is aoiii5.	I Li I liarsalit understand the ioiahi et LheSent for you. that you nn_ me. f.arrd that must go duty that God has ansiaway with what I longed to sa nnsiok5 but, whcis I caine here, I found Iser in this stetc, from past exeitenient. I dared to roil all risks, and induce her servant to co and fetch you. I nsicht have written, hot I have been we ak I could not live without a fareweTh and you, my darling, Iknew you would rather conic than read the 0otpoorings of a Iieiut of sorrow by the cold "led 1111T, of paper' And that which I have to sayb how could i whisper it without your hand clasped in mine?"IF1LJ'JENZL.			listened in passive and icy silence; I could not take			er nerds. That woman-that murderess her mother?			), then, was I? Who then, was Victor Joselyn?			eat Heaven! did she say her mother ?			ic maniac brought her walk to a sudden close by			chino, on the floor and beginning to wail and wring her			s.			Lost! lest! lest" she niunnured, hiding her face. '' Oh,			and alone, and unrevenged!"			Hush!" said Isolina, flying to her side, and bendingover, "not alone, niofher-yonr child is here. Take com-	fort. mother; 1 am here-I will not leave you!"		The woman rose, and laid herself upon the couch, and	dragmd my sister by the hands to sit beside her.		keep 'me, then,' she muttered, ''and don't lose me;	and avenge me on Oniseppe-cruel, false, Uniseppe Rienzi!"		"Hush:" breathed my sister again; "I am going to sing.	Listen."		Was there ever a stranger sight than this? My sister	lulling by tender love our murderess to sleep?		Silence came, but I marked it net. The low breathing	of the sleeping woman deepened, and at last my sister's light	hand clasped mine.			Conic now," she whispered, "and I will tell you all,	while she sleeps. Poor darling, you are very patient with	me."		She sat at the feet of the couch; I knelt on the mildewed	carpet at her feet, with my back to the woman whom yet I	fiercely loathed; my eyes wistfully raised to the woman who	ras aleut to di'elainithe tic of blood between us,"			My life was perfectly happy, and smooth, and natural,ntil last sunimer. I regarded myself as other girls regard	neniielves who have beloved parents and a happy hanie. Iiiew of no hidden destiny or plot. I felt myself what 1		emed to be' the love of kindred knit me to those whom I	believed my kindred. There was never an emotion of nay		a	heart which L lnd from them until I went with Mrs. Crane-		I	town last. sum nier to Saratoga. There I sinned for the first	J	time aganst my filial duty."			U		She paused; a slow flush rose to her pallid face; the tears	I	in silemit agony stole down her cheeks.		I			I know all," I whispered, bending my face to her lap;	I''do not tear your heart by this retrospection. Victor is at JPtLAUT1FLTL p, I	237Si1verle; he has told. nbride." 	is, he Waits there for his belovedAu, me say no flioreno bride-no love.	,sise exclaimed, wilcll "he hisin spite of all, though I uil\veO love him fever will1e calm, dearest, be cm r' iieet hrn on earth.""Sweet girl, YOU c 	S niereifid."there is a God. Yes. j	rn	ruin whileVictor ,ioSoIyii it is torture	rn Lee. its not speak ofyou km w all. your lieisrt will bleed that I ea. not, endure. When for me.	\ lien I retit rued from Sirthooght with joy, hid		'heart tinged ever			succeed-ing week almost. for me liub forward o every succeed-I had no t IIOII nh that the	claim secret marriage would 	1known for 111010 than a month or ti	not liethonglit to be recoloring, anti I expected Victor by each	'' But y an cc me home,, and the secret was still rnrcreaJed. How often 1 longed to confide to you the hidden sweetness of my life; but for the sake of coy hnebaiU I resolved to guard the secret, lct it might be. snisunderetood,	Do Von rcnicoihii the hrst dcv von ever saw Cecil Beaumont? That day broil glit the burien of my life.	I told you ht-fore that lie had. iradc my aequaiiltance at tr. tg:i: lie 1el paid mile attentions since then which 1. as the ivife of Victor Joeelsn, could not receive; I had alrenlv 1 kimussed him. and reminded bun of his l,etrotlied IV 110111 Ii, was wronging. HP was furiously eclons of Mr. josulvu. until I mu told him what iliad told Miss C ralieto mvii once, CIA Mr. - osehli wce already marriedfeared the ne niece of, his mad ;ealonsy. I thought 110had lit ii CIII d Miss Meredith, until the e ceiling in which he uji I I niore resel5 ted himself in the drawing- teen'.	\\ he,, YOU retired I 1ueked him gently to explain hispresence. 		-	You deceived ole 'lie biir out; You ,uTorfllC me that the En'1isI' lover was ,arriCd I have made inquiries and lint! you have deceived me,.I W115 both atlriglited and indigna1 ,ked.	' r again1 loW dare woo qnestiO0 my 	Be that as it may,	repeat that Victor joeelyn	WOr	s mci for you, I demand yhe is not to be mentioned again.		I-		. J,EYZf.	hat right you again return to me. I cannot, and will not 1 )ir von.'	11 tie cast himself at my feet with such passionate sorrow l]iat I was forced to weep. 1 tried to soothe him, but he iv:i' firm.	At last lie rose and expressed himself satisfied, and left mu. The next morning some letters came to us both: among them was a note for me winch overwhelmed me with consternation. It ran thus:	Isolina Eienzi will not refuse to meet at - natal, this evening, at five oeloek, a lady, who holds her pest history in her hands, and to save her froro further grief, would warn her of a danger which threat. ens her.'	'' This could only refer to my secret marriage with Victor Joselyn; what lady was this who seemed to know of it so well? And she had some danger that she would warn me of. I was terribly alarmed.	"ion remember the wild storm that day? At the hour appointed I stole out, hoping to escape detection, thoroughly frightened at the consequences of my imprudent secret, and determined to confide to tax father and seek his protection as soon as I returned, if danger indeed threatened my husband.	It was a furious night, but Iliad not far to go; there was a cab drawn up on the other side of the street, and when 1 had fought my way against the storm for some rods, it followed mc and stopped. The driver asked me if I wasI Miss Iticnzi, and if I was going to the - Hotel.	When I	yes, he said he had been sent for me, and opened theooor, 	1 entered, and was driven rapidly to the place.	instantly conducted into a private room, when a lath. un I had neior seen before, rose it my entrance, and p her arms round in e.I nave got ),on at last,' she cried, exultantly; 'do youo' that you are my child? Did you ever hear of Gem in' .nnetto? I am she, and [ am goin to claim you fromwretched Guiseppo Riemmzi1 ills child is in her grave g ago!''I dropped upon a conch when she released me, sicktb terror and asaazenient,	'Lady, I do not understand,' I cried. 'Who are you?I on not send for me, on some business connected withv history' Then she eagerly		289		slowly froze mthat was for the bri 1e5 into 	Poured into my ears a tale	0	I a, what anguishe Rienzis' She of Victor Jo;elsa'let		id the happy child	in Florence. and	hail been anot to you. his real was betrothed yotlug lady of high birthmy father. I blame himless to the one who g, but lie false, cruel, heartrusted him, lie let hnr to her remorse.She fled from her friends, and in mad secklesenees went on the st8gC. Her "ertius and beauty cap-Jvated an EDglish5elltl qll,til of fo I rtuno, Nv ho married her, This was VictOr0sei'vil"'. sire. She lived in England the years with herhusband, during which time she gave birta to three chil-dren.	She was intoned wretched; the quiet Janglhh life did not suit her ardent temperament: her husband did not understand her. She had net or rhen above the injury she bad rceei vml from Guiseppe Rienzi; she brooded on revenge, and only lived to execute it. She heeae unsettled; she must find her en riO V. or she would die." On tivin	from her friends in 1	she had lostSight of hint: sow she determined	'1 him out if hestill lived.	She began to travel about in mv husband's ab-sence, with this one idea: else vieiteul I	ssn In vain; no	one could tell where U niseppe Itienzi had gust: she visitedPadua, Rome, Naples but without success	t last some	one who had been traveling thrnsrgh Lee lJnited States	mentioned a fatuous architect that in hid met in Washing-ton. This was Gukeppe itienci,	abe viitchied her oppor-	tunity and went alone to Washing firmly intending torevenge herself now.	She soon ton sd her vietirn lie was	JUSt married to a beoutiffli Ainericlill lady, anti else raw thorn	conic out of their handsome house and pcoceed to entei' theCarriage	5h Was to bear them away on their weddingtour. This sight niadde111d the wretched Cells	she	dragged the bridegroom back from the carriage door, andaimed at him	frantic blow on the breast with a poisoneddagger.	It qnivered to pieces, leaving the hilt in her hand,	and her intended victim 5i5fi her hands, and lookedfixedly at her.	'Is this (fentinit LaTiCmettot cried the cruel man who had wrecked her happilless 'do I see she beauteous Gemnia in this guise? What if I were to delYs' you to that constable that 1 see watelithfl tie?'I240 	BEAUTIFUL EIENZL"Defeated and despairing, she writhed from his grasp.	"'f will give you cause to remember C-emma to the day of your death!' she exclaimed in her native language, and fled.	11 He made no attempt to pursue her; probably he did not care to con root her with his pale and innocent bride.	A5 she hurried wildly through the streets. she suddenly ezeonutered her husband. who ass on his way home from a	1 e asked her no questions: his lymphatic temperament being disturbed h no pangs of jealousy, and she retained home with him, broken in spirit, and doa bly humiliated by her failure,	' She lived at Joselyn 'Void a .year, and bore the third child; when it was three weeks old, an irresistible temptation seized her to forsake her wretched home and appease her erasing for revenge by another attempt on her enemy.	"In an evil hour she fled with the hapless infant, and arrived in Washington for the second time. Gniseppc Iftienzi was a father by this time; daily a beautiful child was carried in the arms of the nurse frons out of the stately mansion; poor Ccmma's heart turned with jealous hatred. She determined on a strange, half-insane revenge; the infants were about the same ago; she would steal the child of Gaiseppa Hienzi and put her own in its place. He should cherish a viper, which at the last, would sting him to the core; the infants were not dissimilar; their complexion and eyes were the same; they were both girls. The parents were absent on a journey. She succeeded in her purpose; the stole in at midnight, drugged the nurse, stole the laughter of the Thenzis and put her own in its place. She	ept hack to the hiding-place, and she says-ah, me! she -svs the child she brought away died in her arms. But,as! I fear the hand that sped the poisoned dagger, spedic infant life OIL its dark jcnriiey!Iva, you know now who Jscfina is!"	Once more she paused; the wild tale died to silence; but it danced in my brain with feet of fire.	"An infamous fantasy! I will not believe it!" I mat-tered, huskily. " TTnnatural_fonl attempt to tear youfrom us!"not straggle with the agonizing truth," said Isolina,bending with unutterable love over me; "I have struggledR t,'4 UTIFUL l?I/JyZrlong, but I had to take it t 	41struggle told on me. Al, it me at. L See how theIt cannot he true! I' You have our nioLliere eve- cried, with eudden exultation.Alicia .Joselv,i had bh _Ty0u are her childl"IsohIit, mon ruin liv.	cc and golden hair," replied	and his father ant! nine" Victor has ' she add d.t icribed her to me;forcing her mini to grasp the truft	strong voe, as iffair &tiijleioi 	no blue eyes and"But your expression -your smile is the mother's very	By sympathy and UiicOnsCiOue imitation. I t a lived a life,-time as a I ieu Cl. You know. Alas! I' -iii roomsfor doubt. She showed me the 'Bloody Spear' of the Incinettus on tier signet-ring. She says the same crest is in my flesh behind uiv right car. You see it`,I lifted the lu'trus band of hair, aul locke 1. 1 sow it.	" She tiescri lel p t ni inn telv the mode by wh tub I had been substituted for the true child; 1 coul I not but believe her. After this she instaiitl Pert front I\ asibuglon for fear of detection, and soon found herself hi North Carolina,the principal singer of an opera troupe. Ste engaged the attention of a Virginia planer. Ringwood Be 'iinuut. who, unaware that she was already a wife, proposed to her. Alas! she married him.	'She says that lie was happytho tie craving for ccvenue had' been saiisileel-tliat her high position, as the mistress of a tliOIiflfl1 slaves, suited her, Mr. Beau clout was gay III) scril 1iluus, and proud of her beauty. became the queen of fashion. Cecil wa. the only OfIi)cu. and she centered ill her atiectiOllu tlOil hi 'Some Ii was she delighted herself by planning shechild which the Ilteuzis believed tiesT OC 	tiled withthem t n ron gh the heart, but she her lot as yt to disturb it by suCh		devastated the	'I ecu tv years passed 	1 Beau mont, and rendered hervast pl ut cii on. killed Co 0	others to the scamps,homeless. She and her soi lie -'tv but were speedily cap-and strove to form a guerrilla	1irisofl After a	tnred, and taken North to	~,ttled himself	time they were Iiirated, and CJIS Tilotbor in lodgings-418 an auilior and lived with I i	h 	turned tOHwas III a )l.Ofo,i,,L) ,,elanoholy whol - 1 10e		i	(B	t TTPUL RTEYZI.8sliington, hot he did not confide anything to his mother. meantime having searched vainly through Washingfor her ancient foes, and failed to dod them, beganfear that she should never be able to reclaim her child, on it was that Cecil, becoming more arid more unhappy..ast besought his mother to accompany him on sometext to New York, as he did net wish to leave her alonewas determined to try his chance with me again, andtaps. having flattered himself with false hopes, lie at 'th told his mother that a lady had been the conic of his inclioly, but he hoped to win her. He came to me, and know the result; when he returned to his mother lie was in snch a state of mad grief that he raved of his sorrow. What was her horror, her consternation, at hearing that the lady was the eldest daughter of Guiseppe Riensi, the architect!¥ The mother was stunned; a grim fate seemed to havelight about the most awful results of her early unserupusness. Here was Cecil, the only human being who bore her love, almost insane over the rejection of her own daughter. She could not hear to tell him the facts of the case. She resolved to summon the daughter whom she had forsaken so long, to tell her of the story of her true parentage, that she might avoid these two men, Victor Joselyn and Cecil Beaumont, who were bound to her by the ties of blood. Alas! she had little mercy when she made me the wretched repository of her secret.	In my au o'nish I betrayed the real state of the case beceo Victor osoiyu and myself. I told her that she waslate; that he was my husband, wedded to me in all dnets.With afrantin effort at calmness, I besought her to spare or the knowledge that she had given to me, and I sworeicrote my life to her, if she would hide her existence :in him.	That, is good!' she replied. When illness overtakes no, as it often does, I should like my daughter to attend inn. I accept your terms; but I musl ask another promise nut you; bury the events of this night in your bosom; re-AI"" to the house of the Rionzis, and feign still to be their tightor until I send for you. I alit not ready for you yet.'o rioted and bewildered I proniinwj all she demanded.LTJFLL it1E1sz	And	n i -	to	'243	U,\Ot ro the difliculticer she, asked. - a' nIt,e to nn e, whatever " I agreed to almost everything,-	tisfactioii with the	and she expressed highthat I would be prudent and docile 	that she trusted me;	She embraced me at littlehome in a cab.	Heaven alone with warmth. I returnedof my soul; but I Was able to keep call a ci, and guard my se-	"Next day I made a packet of all Victor Joeelvn'e letters and burned his photograph, and eierytaing whirls reminded me of him. except a paint ng which he bed iio de of the he4 moment of our lives, and the white i'-e o i oh I by orn in my bosom on my weddino-dav."Then I wrote to Victor 'demanding c divorce, and re-turned his letters. I hoped that he, would not insist on a reason, but consider use ineoiistaiit or fickle; and my onerayer to Heaven was that we honld never meet face toace.	"The day that should reveal me to mm a, Vs rioter would have stretched nit' helpless at his feet. 01" I am still wild enough, mad enough to pray that Victor ,loselyn may never know that Isohi na is his sister. Let nm revile 'no, despise me ee to love me, and throw my memory to re wnid; but, oh: this last hopeless, infansons blow ia-i' lie be sparedCHAPTER ,XXVIT.-'			'ruE eliof"For my lii art was hot antAnd IOV life was fat of c		-	Aid the burden sat was s"5		surartow.Seemed greater wan I CuOd Eel It 3[oreeomThe door was opened goistlmi ni and a scale packet wasin; lie wore a look of apprehen5o¡s in his hand. , !C)N~ to Iohin ,the shadows"hthdom." he said, bowing he sun is low, and there areare long on tile grass; irsady 	and my habitation.'long miles between the Blank	that Miss ssnzi, is to" Do von mean that ) eseiisloi,na. 'Bid you not	leave thsis tonight?' exolaime	-BEA UTTh'UL EIMNZLpromise.nle that she should stay until to-morrow? Remem-ber the fatigue she has suffered, She is hungry, exhausted." Madam is in danger," he. said, glancing significantly at the figure sleeping on the couch.What is the packet-who brought it?"	It is for Mrs. Beaumont; a gipsy brought it. Miss Isoliua Joselvu, I must insist,! Miss Rienri, the carriage will be ready in half an hour."	He pushed the packet under his mistress' pillow, and stood imploringly wai tirig some reply.	11 She shall go ;n half an flour," said my sister, in a tone of agony.He bowed, and instantly retired.	"I will not leave you!" [ exclaimed, wildly, throwing my arms round her; "I shall stay until the danger comes; that danger is my father and Dr. Pemberton, I know well."	What madness," muttered the poor girl, trembling; "my word is pledged to this woman; I must fly from them; I must, I must!""And can you send your poor Ivanilla away so coldly?""Alas! my heart will break! Sweet child-sweet, sweetfriend, do not tempt nse; comfort me; sustain my weak, bleeding spirit, or it will sink beneath its burdens. Pity this torture between love and duty, and end it for me!""True-you are no longer ours; you have chosen yourmother; your choice is at least a contrast to the mother you forsake.""Cruel, cruel! I lose the last boon-your love.""IN ever!" I exclaimed, with passionate remorse; "go toyour duty, saintly, noble Isohina. May I be worthy to !eye so pure a being, and may our heaven of mercy supportI will not torture you with my selfish affection; .1 willway:'1 have yet more to tell," she murmured, restraining theour] ng emotions of her heart, and regaining her calm 4 exterior: "I should like you to know the whole	iis dreary history, that you may comfort in part, that love!! mother, whom also, I am obliged to forsake; Iold like you all to understand fully the motives of thisstep.Dear sister, I am histenin."And you do truly love thunhappy sister of your sym-BEAUTIFUL IIIERZL-,,It	Thanks, sweet 	245afTectioll." , gesserots girl; I mad not lose yourAfter that first internsconununicatlin With toe whatever, my mother. she held no I COJItI nit divine, she had ldrodl though, for what purpose ten miles front the city, and lived 0 g'nge at (dreely's mills, day I expected to he ennsrnon e1 tocss with her son. Each w like the prisoner condemned from my beloved ones; Istep on the Ilags is that of tile 	death, who thinks each	who con-les to lead	Ilim to the scaffold ~ the friglitfill pressure of anxiety, terrorslid hel I I g . I*	liore thall I Could bear; no ~~Ondor T(1) VSS VIC ~ W:1,", Itit I I g 111:11 IIY ilitn di;traCLi'l9 employments. Yoa remenier ticie 219th' of Nov(~mberl -Ah! ~ell mav pur ulieek blanoll, fateful, wretched Jav.1	Miss Mere,l hilt and you were in your room, I alone in mine, whet i a hey was 1 trongh t up stairs to nie with a note.	e stood by while I read it. Victor .joseivn and Dr. Feesberton had arrived in New York, and demanded an interview. r he lirutanient seemed falling to crush me; rather than meet them [ irould die. I sent hack the boy with an answer, reiterating my desire for a eepsratinn, iand ahsoIntely refusing an hiterriew. The afternoon was spent in a prostration of grief.	" At last my heart ltetraysd me; I resolved to tell the whole of the fear fal tde to my friend Pr. Pemborton, and entreat him to hit ci' pose between ms and the marl who thought he was nm lnisbaod. I felt that I was not able to fight m v hat i Ic d tic. I wrote the letter and sealed it Will' man v vast' r a oh hi istering tears. You know What became of t lie let Cer I in trusted to yen; Cecil Beanmo0t. still hopi ng, still i cnn'allt of time imps -;able tie of blood enatchcil it from viol i nd it was eoosamcd. Then I went down to Ii inn fall f le peratc courage thimgli the motner'e profit so bound toe baud and foot.	Von say von have a secret, power over - me, wli nh will make nih glad to accept you, I said. 'l hat is that posverf'I have learned, by hints which, my mother hit-- let athat site knows more about your pes Oti in this house than the world knows,' he answered signthtit .	"'Indeed! And has Mrs. Beaumont not expa sue refers to?' i returned, quiet y.24 	BEAUTIFUL BIEXZLsaved me the humiliation of listening to your unwelcome protestations.'	'She has explained nothing:' he cried; 'she would hide all from me, but I am too madly in love to let slip any stone by which I may build up my cause. If indeed you are a nameless child, wearing the honors of a true daughter, a whisper would drag you down from your high estate. That whisper shall never pass my lips if you put your hand iii mine and say, "I am tluno,	'Alas. Cecil, you have heard enough to blast your happiness, I sighed; "it is not I who am nameless-but I will say nothing. Take me to your mother's to-night, and you shall hear the other half of this story. I can keep silence no longer!' I muttered, clasping my hands and almost tear-iiig them.	The poor, hapless boy's sanguine nature instantly rose at this; he thought he saw signs of yielding.'You will come to Greely's Mills to-night?" he said.'Yes-to-night,' I returned, firmly.'' 'And this family?'	'I may never return to them. Hush! it is not to pee I would fly; I am done forever with love. Now, be wise, Cecil, and return to the lady who holds your troth; believe me, there is no hope of me	"At first he would not listen, but after some time his elation was such that he declared he would do anything to please me to-night, with the proviso that lie shosild please himself after he heard the story which I declared to be so fatal to his hopes." ' If, after I hear the story, I still ask you to be mine,will you consent?' he cried.I will consent.'	Then my Beautiful is won!' he said with a brilliant laugh. 'Sell'	me the little fiancee-I will overwhelm her with kiuduess-I will convey her to the concert, and be the most devoted of slaves-oayf/, ing you say is my Ian to-night.'"yheu I was able to present my wretched face to nfl'family, I left him playiug jauntily at the piano, and joined you.	What happened at the concert I can scarcely tell. I was cc.idemned to watch the terrible elation of a lover who Was under a f a% xuiseeueeptiou. 1 knew nothing of any247other face there until, while I was 5ngirg, I saw like aphantom before me the eonntenorc of my husband, white, angry, accusing-and I fainted.	I recovered to find myself en Cecil e arms, far away on s moonlit road, in a sleigh, which was dashing onward.	My strength was all gone: I ld longer bear his embraces and words of burning love and triumph, with fortitude, and vet I had no strength to repeli him.	I wept if) silence and misery. Until he, jealous madman! began to rail at Victor Joselyn, and accuse. me of still loving him.	'I'lien C in fatnatud boy recounted an interview which he had writ V ntor Joselvn. in which he boasted of my inconstancy; how he found that Victor had come to New York, I do' not know. I-Is told me .'hat strode the last blow to my e rid uranus.'' I poured forth, with the hisi	indignant inspro-dence of a woman, the it hole of Lisa 	or riory.11 The last word was reached. IV a s crossing a bridge.Re stood up arid r,asped niy hand, mlii then, blindingtears had hidden his face from ins. It me disturbed, andchiseled into a ennviils¡l stars of horror," ' That curls all, the"!' he mattered: 'good-by.'	" Instantly lie sprang from the sleigh so she frail bridge rail, for a nionsent lie waved his arms wildly, and then leaped down, with a frantic laugh, iota the shallow, rocky stream.Almost at the same instant, as if earth was convulsedwith the horror which I felt, a dull. tremulous explosion filled the in r. and the iraslung of rocks smote a thioiNand echoes; the horse, affrighted and nneestrainsd leaped madly on. arid I sank 5risking to lhs bottom of the sleigh. I was Whirled i rnpetuonsh on, until she horse fell down exhausted, arid covered svih loans and I was dashed with great violence out, on the ground, rho sleigh orertnrniog, arid seareldy hrn ising ins.At first I was stonoed, but aeon rallied and rose.could not tell where I was, the mad was not in sight, andthe wild, sreowoOvere' heath stretched round me.By the full light of the m000 I ran feebly back on the	track u hioh the sleigh had mh to	Wall-rid the bridge. I wan-end shouting for help,	deredo	i''	"'O-	V948 	BEAUTIFUL RIENZLuntil my own voice sounded vague like the voice in a dream. I slink I lay down and slept.	I awoke to find myself in a bed; toy mother's terrible face bending over me. My bead was bandaged; I was so weak that I could scarcely speak. The daylight was stream, ing in.	"'The bridge!* I Moaned. " Did you find him at the bridge?"	Hush!' she said. You are mad. You have killed your brother, and you are insane. I must scud you to an asylum!'	"My will was quite passive. I believed that I must be insane; to be shut up and treated like an irrational being was an idea which rather pleased me; I was dead to life now.	"Before the evening of that day I was an innate of Doctor Oaks' private asylum, and calmly awaited the development of the madness which I felt stealing over mo. All these weeks of imprisonment I was almost as imbecile as any of my companions; my intellect was dwarfed and petrified. Memory was mercifully erased from my catalogue of torments."	"Bnt when I suddenly saw the face of my sister, gazing at me through the bars, so full of love-so full of sorrow, my heart awoke with a fearful bound. The old, blessed life rushed hack to me in a blinding flash of recollection; joy sent the phantom of madness thrilling from my brain: I rushed to embrace my long-lost Ivanilla.	"These first days with you were very strange and sweet; my mind was yet weak, and I could not grasp at the ;:nrrews of my lot. Your love was enough to engage mytotion.But little by little I awoke from my long trance; Ired that I should never have returned to b ri's roof again; that I did dishonor to my motherinsult to toy sweet foster-mother, by remainIng: that,	ibly, I might bring danger on your heads by returuin 0' von.	"You remember the trial? I dared throw no light, upon it I almost hoped that I would be condemned, that the curse of my life might end. What was my astonishment cc bear that Cecil Beaumont was not dead! that my mother r,od deceived me,I-	JJEa UTIPUL liIEflg	\'ci	rerneniber	249ct12yea; and that youFt omi tot-oil Heave	1	1110 hip eel each daycleft file nearl tines.	Slav a niontli with you, butThen tile due ion dreaded me out arid Cattle to iIin	rmt? My mother found	1(111 )ror	her promise.01. Ii 10 Collie alict ICame to you,' she said:	o a daughter's duty whenfarewell for life and	wiejw time; hid the ILencieme own clii iti.' 	I m tenL to mine. I claim(live rue a week--three dovs' IDo not tear in e away it	- 	rantieally.V 1		"	nIomen 5 warning. '	-	You eec t nero: she exclaimed fyour	poor. ill-fated mother, whose life Whoited - you despise- . 1111 I will go to 'Victor Joe'slvn in? iii j oeelvn Wold; lie will not tirn his Mother ilill-ift.,	Spare hill,,' I gasped; 'let me take his place. I will go where you please, only do not go to hhn.'	" ' Von will conic to-day, then?' she replied; 'they have ?nt detectives on III y track, and they are gelug to accuse me of attempt trig to poison Ivanilla Bison-an infamous lie, my child; arid nil life will he sworn away to the very death if the,, can timid we. A sndady is approaching nie; I li:ive had it twice: tssiee when my perjnred lover forsook metwice w hirt the dead liody of Blend's child lay in my arms. I have heard that when this malady visits one the third time it bet, roes i nonrahle. It is coming! In twenty-four hours I will he hopelessly mad! Look at my eyes-my throat; toncli roy temples and wiy pulse. See if it is¥	not so?'	She daelie'l oil her bloc spectacles. I saw with horror the wild 'hoe of incipient madness to her eyes, and in the quick tinbhina of her throat and temples. Infinite eunipassion filled III, heart. I eonld scarcely forbear weeping.'Mother, is it	ditary?' I asked; 'I also was niad,ms :lsws	1/4:t 	bser9tfor the last three celltol'106,'shot up.'	i do"	If this overtakes yon, tell me i'	to o.T1t' I RIENZLhe then described exactly where we were to fly, andduties I was to perform. These details took a long'I have one question to ask.' I said, when she was,died. ' Why did you make me believe that my half-er, Cecil, was dead'le laughed a short, exultant laugh. \ e recall it ' exclaimed the unhappy woman Oh, sweet, and good to see. How it wrung (i-uiseppe'sineart.	How it whitened his hair. how it broke his stately presence, Oh, it was good.''	11 1 Come away, and let us never see him more,' I murinured, terrilied at her vehemence and weeping withhorror. 11 1 No, I would like to see Mrs. Rienzi. and her daughterfirst,' she answered, with an instant return of her quiet,natural manner. 'I have a small debt to pay them.'	"She spoke so mildly that I was deceived, and gladly consented to stay, that I might behold you for the last time, though I dared not bid you an open farewell.	'' She told me exactly the moment in which I was to slip from the room and steal down to wait on the road, for her.	"When she would say. I have spent a very pleasant forenoon with Miss Rienzi.' I was to rise and go out.	"We were to fly immediately to this place, which, being in the very heart of the forest, she said would defy detection,"After waiting until the first vigilance of the pursuitshould be over we were to leave the comitrv.She was still in the midst of her plans "when you arrived.I was suddenly made aware of some conceiTed motive hr all these plans of immediate flight, when I saw lilyher rapidly- slip a ring on her finger, just as you entered.'ester-mother only bowed at the door, and did not shake(Is; you, coming in after her, put your hand in the cx-d hand of the pretended Mrs. Ringwood; it darted		igh sue like a knife that the ring was poisoned when I	rkid the prolonged pressure. How relieved I was to findo mark On your hand, my poor darling. Your glove saved	'Every movement of mymothes' inspired me with terror.tic eady unsafe. When she said the words which wers the	resolved not to leave her with you, for j	she was jI251aIiLsIL,		:CdJoe	to disobey, htt her vennefnl	w her she 'e Some white , by intense watchfulness f wine, and she dared to iisis eis in 0 two of the glassespressiorl which glass i was to		te with a threatening cx-ta e.,	"It was too much' even [lie,me silent broke when von 111w-i o		spell which bound	lips. I dashed it to atoms and saved		glass to your		When 1 reltilveici I f toni	Pemberton with Imie: lie soothed		I found Dr.	lie would soon cii ire all ri¡'l - 		me, and saidn nappy and joined toVictor aeiimn.I can tell volt little more,	\V0k nuil outraged at heart, and hopeless, I took the cars to (reele' s Mill" and hired a horse and carriage to take me as far as mi gipsv eauip, when I pd the boy and got the ~ psy chief to take inc on his Pet horse to this miserable en.	" liens I found it, v poor mother in the first parox ansi of the disease. with no attendant hot Per faithful serene1 Morecombe, win se proper name is ltinalde Ittosesro, a sent itor of the Lancinetto fatitilv ill his life, and devotedly attached to its interests.0 Now. mv danhino. I have told oa all plainly and care-fully what me1wer naves etc front all I love to en.esile n'rble as death: munch I dared to see yoe eec more and n'Vote what would set your gnawing hopes at test, The time has conic that we must part.	You weep. mv sister tb, inish, ni sister! C on.e l't yourself. Never 'eep that yonr power wile overrnle'i 0 heaven.And how, receive my ]aet charger 1' 'ids for Victor d"I give this withered ro1e intoPitmtled iii the boomlyn; tell him it is the nnnvia'	dh	rieht to his nameof a wife who was never a suite, '- -has wrecked her happiness' '-en for a brother's ten	''I will he humble, and sue e	in heaven ourness, since mmt nrc has denied ,		and e eak lien:'. re, oswill he pure enough even for	-r -w set mother: she 	-"(i ive the last of DI), lose tO lo-"Pi,na Lanehiietto 5too pure to retain the offspring	c. sre the blessed neher to meet pose' Ieohna cli ye-i '		e more,weep, and wle i'' The hr neeo netB BA tTTIFUL RIEYZI.Tell him whom 1 have severed and loved as sire that I'-ive him for the wrong lie did my mother, and seek tou-given for the anguish his child has brought him.To you, beloved, faithful one, I leave a heart with love oh only flows unchecked to you. And because I prizedearly, deathlessly, oh, my little one. comfort Victor vu if you can. I shall not live long; thank Heaven, the hlv struggle will end at lest, and Twill be in bliss, watchfor von first.-. And rcmemher-remember, lvanilla, to you I say it, I'1 be at the pearly gates watching, praying for your en-r'tnce. All of you-oh, tell them, ci? of them!"CHAPTER XXXIII.TOO LATE."But, no, that look is not the last;	We yet may meet where seraphs dwell.Where love no more deplores the past,Nor breathes that withering word-farewell!"LoxerELLow.	The half-hour is past, madam," said Moreconibe, openin" the door.	My sister turned as pale as death: unconsciously her hands clasped round me and held me fast.	11 I cannot-will not leave you," I whispered, desperately. ''Let him drag us apart, if lie dares."	''Farewell, Ivanilla," she cried, lifting her countenance now with u smile of seraphic purity. ''I will meet you in heaven."	The small carriage was standing close to the door, with a fresh horse in haruess; the sun was, indeed, low behind he trees, and rough were the miles that stretched between h uie and use.In stupefied silence I took my seat, and dared but one,ckward glance at my beloved, "standing on the thresholdf the mildewed, crumbling dwelling. Her gentle lips tried	1uiver into a smile of comfort, but they failed; and the lily eyes were raised to heaven. as if they would carry my nones up there.- I will leave you at the g'ipsy camp," said Morecouibc,I	rimlfl "aitti i 'n r	253	nt, or let her insni	all night in Adynma's	Mill?; it's ttfteen miles Irons the	through to Greely's		%e had not gone two miles wiseand a large carriage, drawn 0 a Snout greeted our earscame between us and tile blitsi11 pair of blooded horses,tip stock-still.	g son. Moreeonjbe drew	A man, without a hat apron ran to meet us; 11110t her vaulted Snot the carriage, andbeanie Its.	the box, and was	Now 1 leaven he praised!" I cried with joy.	7 1in wonder and hope unspeakable on my fatle!Beattittont.What is Ivanilia doing herd" gasped my StiGI It art' ttu'en wi sit I sol tint. Oh, father, s'aye ccI ire is youron mistress" demanded Cecil I eattoto iii.	Morecoinhe sat upright, looking straight before himsilent, tin inovahi e its a Sphinx.Fellow, I shall not peak again."	Ralph's Ininsi secretly jerked the reins; like lightningthe horse rose on his hannehes and beat the air vito lilafore-hoofs, then caine down with a sidelong spring to theground; round caine the carriage on one wheel, andaway we dashed, site infuriated animal galloping in and cht ut pin p It is sawed toe ath, Down in the	dust I hail left my father's gray head, with nelplsss, ott:-i spread arms. 		-Stop, stop!'' I seroamsd, frantteahiy -On we spel past the trees, which scented to dance pastus lonely Will still: tile branches hung above us and shot inthe ltolltw I ,'at of tile horse's hoofs, , 	-Now I will stop." said Ralph, tornsng his dark, menless fate to tnt', ' It,,(, if s-on show these people a scm in¥		'	Cold omen	Do son teattutstress is, I trill shoot YOU ill CO	whirled ins oot CII	He t'ttitltt tto rontid the waist, an - oot tread dreta. the hank, and the Wheel" t:oed over my and the t'arritge vttttislted like a dream. trnth terror l!w	I got up and looked vaguely bon" ss' head swans dire. bewildered me; my limbs trsnsblt nit Unsteadily bath I fell against the hoary trsen and , C , tile dattsontn wtty I had left my dend I heard the	'twenty itontite ntitst have' --	-- 'they ,t'Pt	- ItrambleIiii4 	BEA UTIFUL BIEHZLiiey came upon the pale little figure standing in the road,tirout a hat; and again Cecil vaulted off the box.My friend, have you escaped from that rascal?" heaculated, seizing my baud; 'can you show us the way to ic house?"My father!" was all I could say.The carriage door opened, arid Dr. Peniberton put outhand.He's hero, and safe. In, ivauilla, and let its drive on."I was dragged in, and the carriage moved off with a rapidii iOtiOii.My father was sitting on the back seat with his headagainst the cushion, looking very pale.	Oh, papal" I murmured, throwing my arm around blur; ''are you hurt, papa? oh, papa, tell me!""No; a little stunned, that is all. Sit here, Iva. Wherewere yon?"	"Isolina sent for me this morning to come to her; she is in a cottage along bore, with-with that person, and that person is insane; they are going somewhere out of the country, unless you are in time to force them to stay. Isolina has been made to believe she is her daughter."	11 Cecil Beaumont has told us the story," broke in Dr. Pemberton; "she will have to prove that before we give the girl n.	They talked eagerly for some minutes, while I watched intently from the window; I was looking anxiously forsome lair Jinark to remind me how near we were to the fallen tree.	To my confusion, the place looked quite strange; I did not think I could ever have seen these crooked beeches before. I made them stop the carriage, and got out.We must find a fallen tree; which has been flung on entrance of the lane which leads to the cottage," 1 said;I fear we must have passed it.	Bean moist and the driver walked on, scanning carefully :i1tracks and woodpaths. Dr. Penibcrtou and 1 walked	1 was right; we had passed it some two hundred rods; ten nrrnntes was spent in flndin it.We shouted for the others, a and dragged the branchesaway, they had been so cunningly placed that the foliagepresented no contrast to the rest of the thickly matted under-growth. 	-The carriage came up and 	2S5wits so narrow that the d'iver ec took out' places; the pathtends; sometimes the wheels		ih5 horses by thethe close-advancing trees, But	with thflicrdty jam pact5u poure i out of tile earriave we camp at hot to tile hovel,	But I stood Silently without mt and eagor. told me all that nec he tolti. ' 0aZlug at on object which	I knew that that sweet fare wthe lifeless silemti'e' that w I on shmc no more out ofseer! fit to snatch our girl from 	late, and God had lis after allMv sisters black silk scarf ' 	-to where the deep wheel-marks S ils ti ailed tcf	oss the threshold sward. The cottage was empty cc, moles in the marshy	'' lvii, child, 110 one is there " said ray father, coming out tome, and Living his hand heavilyon my shoulder; ',they're	And then lie reeled, and was caught in the arms of his early friend. Doctor Peniberton,	" ok for what tracks you can)' said the doctor, lacing his patient on the grass. all(! anxiously bending over film; "never mind mu, but see abc at pu sin ug uucm	Young Bean inomit was coming out of the cot tags last; he lips curved into a line of bitter agony; his eyes all light and luminous tire, fixed eagerly or the ground.	"There!" lie said, pointing, they have taken that direction, and have tied over tile mountain	There was a faint track of wheels cit nag the heath at the back of the house. and following it a lets paces, a horse s foot-print became discernible, though the ground got more flinty arid the trees gradually opened: a cs' nares more,aiCecil Beaumont stooped and picked op a lady s gloss, ai	Istrode 1:0k to us. 	11Lend me a horse!' he said, pimionaely, "and i Iiovertake them,- they have takers a mountain track, which they (an pass alive, doabtlrss leads into some read lAlmost before lie hadfar off."	done 5ekhig the driver was	vesting one of the horses of its as			box upon	saddle, which he dragged fro in			i		vcnu¡ clan boiud	prick! In umsuttcrablc exwtcns51t5			lost sight of-	into his scat, arid sprang off, to		r	among, I 5'						my lap		I \Va 5256 	BEAUTIFUL RJENZI.while Doctor Pemberton strove to restore animation. How pale he was! how old and feeble-looking! alas! my father:	11 Gniscppe! nonsense, man, look up! all's not lost yetthey've only a few minutes start; fie, man!"	With a faint groan, my father raised himself, and looked up. The amber clouds were drifting overhead; the faint, milk-white stars of September were peeping down wanly in the sunset glare. How serenely nature ever smiles when the heart is bleeding most!	Poor Ivanilla!" he murmured, meeting my wistful .eyes; ''lost her mate! poor little birdling."	The doctor peremptorily insisted on my father entering the dismal cottage, and resting on the miserable conch where last I had seen our enemy reclining.	The curtains were torn down from the windows to admit the straggling rays of light, and sonic refreshments were brought in from the carriage, which Doctor Pemberton saw that we partook of; indeed, I was too weak and exhausted not to obey him gladly.And here we resolved to wait until the driver could bedispatched to the nearest inn, which was at least ten milesoff, for another horse.	While my thoughts were absorbed, the doctor called upon me to explain all that had occurred since his departure from Silverlea. Amid intense attention, I told them all."And so you know now, that poor Isohna had been mar-red to luckless young Jeselvn for more than a year! I hadhoped, when I posted on here from the old country, to heable to ferret out the cursed spell that kept them apart;alas! we found what it was too late, Guiseppe!"Tee late!" groaned my father.	And do yew believe that our Isolina is not ours?" I asped, looking from one to the ether.1 believe it," answered my father, covering his face withhands.	'And I believe it!" echoed the doctor; "she is strikingly I xc neat Alicia Jeselyn, her elder sister, was; the likeness 2 there,"	"Papa," I nlurinnred, "why do you believe it? Have con-"Was I what, m.y child?"	"Have yen any reason to tlnnk that there could have been an exchange?" I said.I57lillenon is exp'ailisd waieh I oraTedhut. (lit, II iCe coitl011, Ives, ~Inee 'lOlilla win all iii-has claimed her, I should		is'5t5d tile guilty svretels whoher!"	have Isrenenea the truth from	lleaiiinont Will Overtake thethe tudor. Irving to eprak iiopei?ct don t despair," saidThen ir be to tell I'll, what Ld fret induced hini	I received, three notitlie ace. as anonylnone litter Ell'-land. ivlntli claled that a lady named Isoliaa Jo hind hetcI nijn ret I 11 N. In N- itncrepreeev katioiw, and if I Ii' I fulfill lily irstinise of aiet nig her a hen is tree] lie, I wet tiP at alive proceed to Yin York, cvh ru he, the writer, plengt'tl Ill nisehf to meet ice, and ptA the facts of the case in my hands.	''I' pan my arrival it N CIV York, I found a letter I' Iii post-utile.' fur un 'lieu sing me to Wrexs like, a ens all in Marvlniitl.mi p1k' I tv loll iv hig my direction, I traveled Son iiand at the only inn of the place in qsseesioa found my expected.	In two hours a von en neasa setneth my' premiere, us whom I ret'tmsrli iced w itT 1 COil eterilatiou (evil Beau ieee svtto hash carried t11 II re. 3 cccliii, and A Paved himself to Victor's brt timer. I Ic soon dicaresed ins. It owevrr, cvii n he informed ate ' I I evdina'e tree f r, He had been take her that filial ial iii liv to this hoe so of his n-ether in the Of jiithiii'm" ltt'r to niarrv him there. whi n cliv nilvin Inni that chic was las half-si,tei, and already the ci Victor .Jocehvn.	"lie allowed Iser to explain all the eel anis cove, hifi miii by- sn,lden deepui', he at teniptewits only n to fill all 	h	self by lv'titing ncr a bridge. h 5		recovered he wiever, a ittl anii-li broken, and		- h Jay at tile ii- '		- ix lone sev	liCe niol or hence. For		I'eojoyl - ffed be	llf lioatil with hl.,	t,ey all'I vben'till fe	b his mother. IV] . len 1112				Nyll" In a 111J~'ll,IN ill,, at 	att"ll, C11, ~i I		I I hilli that	IiVell og I ailled Ili-; s(~11,4e' Sh(? to I	"ai		I that [lie, Rtell~lll		iitt' a stIll 1Y cane. an		r daegher	- 	-When they found she was	he was able to rise ti,-i On in tArtan Were	I A 1 tIle.Ins Ii258 	BRA UTIRUT BJ.EKZLdetermined to join the army, and lose his life as his fatherhad done.	"He passed through New York on his way South, and beheld Ivanilla Rianzi on the wharf of a European steamer. As he was unaware of the rumor which was circulated of his death, he merely gazed at her sadly, not daring to speak, after the misery his family had been to her.	'The same night lie set off secretly to the seat of war, and obtained command of a regiment. A few das afterward he was astounded, on reading the Now York papers, to see an account of the approaching trial of Miss Bienzi, with ample details of the story. He instantly wrote a note to the presiding judge, vindicating the young lady, and offering to appear, if such a course was necessary. Hot she was acquitted without such measures being required.	"Putting his narrative and my own experience of the character of Comma Lancinetto together, I determined to acquaint myself with her past history and plots. Before long 1 found that it was the family of my own old friend, C-uiseppc, who was being victimized, and 1 came to Banelagh jast in time to save Mrs. Bienxi's life from the machinations of the fair enemy who was presuming to claim poor Isolina as her daughter.	"Mad, is she? Then Heaven has sent upon her the just vengeance which He withheld from our too eager hands Bat that poor girl! Oh, why were we half an hour too late?"*	*	*	*	* 	*At midnight Cecil Beaumont galloped in, waking me up in a fitful slumber, my head on my father's pillow. The er strode in to the dreary cottage, and one glance at his it, uaggard face, told that lie had failed.They have escaped." lie said, with almost the tone of a- :ialist it was not fo this wretched hand to bring restiL4lau; the debt mast stand, and Isolina must he the victim. s! why was I born to curse those whom 1 loved too well?iianilia, I have lost you your sister."	You, Cecil? Oh. d not blame yourself," I sobbed,pressing his hand kindly. But the desperate look stilllurked in his eyes, his thin, hollow cheek, and brow oftvu,,;onate thsappoa tuient haunted me for years after-home through the night passed like a distin I	.. . 	259SO	:	i 	'thWl0tto la(~k 	h0 wheels of thoughtUUW'ii'ldV flh;icliinery: firi5 10 stroncrth to iris d stioli monitory SYmptoms of diseai's past excitement and prome. and evorvi in ii was ra Vole woighng heavily on still I Was sensible of on and,	dim	around 1115. 'P'Acourse, which often Occurred	,lOi	to oar hornewadiii m I net ness.	to us afterwg to ith 	iihI	I' and it	saw lights O,	shrill crie~ sonmhel eerily from near and far. Pwiihernm. the matter? Ass they calling us?" c-n laii.i	The carriage stopped, and ho thrust his head out of tie window.	' \% hats time commotion about?' hr asked of arming g]irv who ran up to the side of tile coach.	11 Barec, Ilaroc" Came shrilly to my sacs from this heiglitc beyond.	" Did s-on moot an old woman in a scarlet cloak an,[ black silk kerchief on her head?" asked. the yon"' m,in, eagerly.	' A gipsy? o" cried the driver from the box; one.	Baree is lost, then," said the fellow, moving away. And: again cams the piercing cries from sear and rocky rlilf:'' Baree Horse Baree "We drove on after this interruption, and reached buyer] ilit six oclock in the moriung.	'I' hero wits woo to the hopeful niotiser an I anxious yom v lnusiiausd. Ah, what a onp of angni'ti was that to plan'tht'ZtjPy dull. half-stnnf ed condition. I enA1111 Vol,	mother 8 woeful f-)a 1113' 1 '0oiilv wz~toh sadh" am W11, 	aild I did not	I' ,	'~y ords we- Of Ilo av'l"'Wl~A 'd to the stl,i,kell hiisband per. ("o110, gone WOiwhab Comfort,	S his them loop-stifle them for eve	B	onts hand, iYet it was he who first took T the ,lance of heav'ilooked into his bni nmg 0305 05synipari' .	'.	V ' 	fr"Let us do our duty to God and man, and trust to meet ourhapless sister in heaven."	And then his hand leaned kindly on Cecil's shoulder, and the brothers clung together heart and bean at last.	"I have wasted your life and hers," moaned the younger; 'Sand roe titution has been denied to my unworthy hands. Oh, Victor Joselyn, can you look on wretched Cecil so kindly ?"The wrong is forgotten, Cecil, and forgiven."	I will never find rest this side of the grave. Remorse shall haunt me night and day. I shall throw my life on my country's battle-field, and die in the midst of duty.	And, plead as we might, Cecil Beaumont went away, and the hollow, burning eves, and the spirit which had broken beneath the heat of wild youth's fire vexed us no more in our desolate moaning.CHAPTER XXXIV.THE HAND WHICH LIFTED THE CURTAIN.Love took up the glass of Time, and turned it in its glowinghands; 	-Every moment, lightly shaken, ran itself in golden sands."Tnosvsoa.	Link by link the chain of Time is woven, and it comes at last that lie fever dream is spoken of as a thing of the past, and ended forever.Victor Joselyn lives in his desolate Joselyn Wold, not.idess and desperate now, they say, though the great sor-a' of his life has left its everlasting mark; lie toils amouge down-trodden poor of his country, to win for them a'e human life from their oppressors.(cell Beaumont has won a name among his fathers	ontrymen for courage and intrepid zeal, winch resounds from every lip; and the young general has made glory his	ride, and tights with reckless bravery for his father's esuse, and to avenge his father's death,	The woman with her secret vendetta is heard of no more,, and two years have passed since Isolina trod the golden sands by the opal waters of sweet Silverlea with me.n'Lit tL '\',,me a day in the balmy month of September,that the P	t'eked at a cart, 	allthe city noise, but Just upon the 	'Ldoe course Of tune Iwo let-,, intress of the pretty establisloissict e who	in to lie ntis-the hacks Of the letters, whir1	51 nani	55 read onwas: "Mrs. Ernest Linclhurst" toe aolideriiigh. scanned,What Can they be," I eata a cc . 1oaurst "'is'gentleman, who was busied so ti e kahn 1511(11 ftBoth in ladies hat 'dwrlcing and one 0alike. Oh, Ernestl" 'The opened sheet fell from ov henri, this 'j::.fled to my heart, and surged there in a Posh which al-most burst it. My husband sprang to nir side, and puthis arm round me, and I Isaned aainst flint		('I'-	9eyes.	"Let me wait," I murmured. ''I dare not real yet. You read it ifroest, ant tell inc."He caught up the letter and peroserl it at atnos len	still leaned against hint, hot I become calmer: for I we-	-ing; I was saying, over and over agaio, its my soul:11 Thou Cod in heaven, prepare toe for this joyMy husband flmshie I the letter acid clasped tile ci'''Look up, my, darling," he, mid, getithnews. You inust take it bravely, dear, a'	-cited.""Tell me-tell me! Isolina---'	"Isolina is free to come home. She is u will soon be with us. Can on listen to air"Wait a while,"' I whispered again An's Hcould not bear it until I wept ones more 0) 4 .iS Litstrength.	--	-i 	e not wi"Ever l oreifnl Father," I prayed "' -joy and o-ratitnds Put Thy hand on MV 5)nt be blinded with excess of happinsta	Now. Ernest, I am calm.			w 'done in site world,an, no		Mw BELOVED IVAMLU	.-			poor mother died	and at liberty to come d¡1 may				w'eks, winch foullyyesterday, alter a short allures 0 'arrieil bur ott almost if'turned to disease of the bear t, anIa olon-lent.			__e(l to	yotir father;o"(				II It ave found a small 1-0ket it(hll'e~qolll I			". Which-t of confez;si"?)Perh	contents MaY 1)e	0- 	PS	am the	1"ll till"" ~~xml of thc 0017, 	w'thait the guilt on P 5it2( 	BEAUTIFUL IUEXZI.lies so cold and forlornly calm before me now weighed it down into the hopeless melancholy which has oppressed us since we lied from America She is gone now-oh, I weep when I date to ask whither? A desire to reveal something tortured her during the last hours of her life, but she could not speak. Will this attempt at the eleventh hour to render perhaps restitution weigh against her mountain of crimes?	"My life has been sorely tried. I thank the Lord that I found comfort from heaven; and I tried to do my duty as a doughter. Shall I return to the only home I ever loved? Shall I he the bearer of the packet for Guiseppe liienzi? Are the hearts of my dear ones still as warns and kind as when they had an Isolina?	"And when I dare to think freely of you all nay heart cries yes, a thousand times. I will fly to you from my loneliness and sorrow; if my poor changed face can bring you sunshine, you shall have it; if Gemma Laneiuetto's child can be nothing to you-but I have no fears, no doubts of your generous love. It will be sweet to depend on those whom I love and trust boundlessly. I will fold my weary wings in my childhood's home, and never leave it more. Peace at last, after long pain. heaven bless my little foster-sister, and her true-hearted Ernest. I have not lost sight of you, though cruelly hidden myself.Farewell until a speedy meeting. As soon as the re-mains of this poor mother is buried, look for IS0LIEA."	We did not express our emotions in very eloquent language, my husband and I, hut we knelt down side by side, and though our tongues were mute, our hearts were trailsjutable to One who now had deigned to answer many tearful praers. Aiol after this the great wave of joy swept more gently over us.	But it was hours after that we bethought ourselves of the second letter which had conic for Mrs. Ernest Lindhu rst, andwhich lay neglected anloug the tray of newspapers and peri-odicals.new-conic by; asid when surveyed the long, closely written sheets, and read the first sentene, I turned to the signature with incredulous surprise.Lillia Meredith," I ejaculated; ''what can she have to" Ret i and see," was Ernest's suggestion.And this was the letter t - leolina's cur mv"Mus. Lraynitun51._j Should not ies I lie to address YOUif it were not with the hope of rendarh, tardy re,titut&sn. Ilosv hard I have been_ivisat urns i have lout, those whom on loved, no one has known hot heaven anti 1,,N self. l not write to plead forgiveness. When You kill What I h.. got to say you will spurn me almost from Ill' ItlilidaflIotnanhoorl-hnt if even at this late boor 1 can tie Vim 'Nlice, I will carry a less remorseful heart in my bosonc. ; then, and judge of nay Merciless cruelty.	It i more than two years shire yoi lost your sdier, knew of your calamity, and had in my l5055'nslon then In' which might have san ed you all the a' .riiish will, has conic upon you since, bn in the wirki fury Which I felt against Isolina Riensi, 1 resolved to as ii nis -.i I keeping silence.	"When the trial was over I retoroed home to Wa'hiiitgt filled with rage and disappointment that it hail not. eeeded. For some time I resolved in vain a scheme he which to punish Isohina for her nnas oidahee share ill easilug Beaumont to desert me.	About a fortnight after sot rePro an old woman gipsy costume came to the door one day and raved tome. I went at first to order her off the door step as ii.-fused to go for the servants, bnt I soon found that slit u.something of importance to coinsnooirate, and oily feign to be a chiromancer. So I conveyed her to my Private chit her arid drank in eagerly all she had to say.	She said that she knew something that Mr. hliet whose daughter was acquitted of murder, outtlit to km but she was afraid to go to hill, in ease us might take i up for something she took away loud ago. I was an qnaiatance of the family; had been Mrs holiua's elm friend, she heard- would I as rite down what she was to divulge assd send. it to Gaiseppe Rienu. Site had sled a long way, forty miles and more, on lice old tottering feet, to tell e this for tlio love of jastlee and to ke'p harna from being done. Woold I see that Me. hisensi wwicheated out of his own?"I soothed her fears and said I was raail to listen toshe could tell me. as indeed I was, bat 01111 fi out Ill'the darkest vengeance-if j could get Isoiioa hliounpower I was happy. This is the story .n 1 dunes' P'P	The woman before me had been a child's nurse of respectable character apparently, and as such was employed by Mrs. Rienzi to attend her first child; the family were then living in this city, Washington, and it was twenty-two years from the time she was speaking.	The woman, who was known by the name of Mrs. Cartier had fallen into had ways, she said, and her recoinmendatons were from some people who only knew the best side of her character; in reality, she belonged to a gang of thieves, and had only entered the house of Mr. Rienzi in order to pilfer what she could. When the baby was a few weeks old, Mr. and Mrs. Rienzi were sent for in haste to sea Mrs. iiicnzi's mother, who lived at some distance, and was dangaronsly ill. Consequently the child was left in the care of Mrs. Cartier and an ol2 faithful housekeeper took charge the house. Dnring the absence of her master and mistress, the nnrse made her way into a cabinet and stole a large amount of gold plate and some costly jewels, which she carried off to the haunts of her gang, and. the articles were instantly snielted in fear of recognition. This system of robbery vent on with impunity for some time, until Mrs. Cartier received a sudden check.	"The baby was about a month old, and ail uncommonly healthy, active, little creature, when one night, the 3rd of August, the nurse thought she would secure two or three silk dresses which were hanging in Mrs. ltieuzi's wardrobe, in a room, just adjoining the nursery, as she had found a key w hieb htted it. The servants were all in bed, and the baby was quiet in the crib, so Mrs. Cartier hoped to slip cot with her bundle. and dispose of it without detection. As ce was folding up the dresses in the wardrobe, a shadow	ame between her and a ealirIle winch she left on the innwry table, and peaung through the crack of the half closed 000r, she saw, to her horror, a person in the room, bending over the child's crib. Tins person was a very handsome young lady, with a long black cloak reaching from her head to her feet, its mack hood framing in a very white face with large black eyes. This lady presently stood straight up, and the nurse saw that she carried something 'in her arms, under her cloak. She gazed fixedly at the wardrobe door, and suddenly made a step toward it.	111 an nugovernabie fit of fear lest she should be caught cC midst of her theft, the nurse darted out by another255door into ii	'. aod sped into her nv		en whichalso opened into the hail and nursery.		.ia I ii, doubtthat the visitor was some relative of 'the fated r win, hadarrived late, and name straight to the nureirv to see tb'baby; and in the hope that the garniei1t4 bail foldedthe wardrobe floor might escape the Ia Tv's eVes, she If 11114herself 111)011 her bed, determ'ned to feign drip should sir' be called.	Scarcely had she Placed her head upon the pillow than she became conscious if a very strotir odor winch at on'' attacked her senses with beninnhinv edoct, With great pn' ence of mind she tore tile pillow from beneath or hail a' I dropped it between her hod and the wall, with a titrilli' realization of sonic foul play being attempt . tel lay i tentiy listening for sounds. In a few nnna 'lie nursery door of her room was so Plc e pene 1, and the Ia' lv lame i with the shaded candle in her hand. The nnre''. back iv, to the front of the lied, and she sinialaed a heavy slainhi.' to which the lady listened for some tinsc, thin 'glided it with a scarcely perceptible laugi, nnrtoring sonic straiiforeign words.	"As soon as she was gone the nurse sprang, U in i'feeted fright, and ran into the nursery, linpi no In eon fr'" her. But she was gone. and the baby was wailing in crib in a very unusual manner. She knelt down to heli and found to her astonishment that the child wlui'li si had left a few minutes before perfectly heal'hy, was cold aice, and so dwindled and smell that she did not recognie her. At the same nuimentehe heard tb' well-known serrate of Baby Isolina away down in the loser bail, a scone wlnt was not repeated. Instantly divining that the abe Ii' been stolen and another had been put in its lace. snatched the wailing infant up, wrapped a ditiwl at' ui her shonlders, and ran steadily down it to the street. termined to recover her charge, lest she jIll 'I he blani-'l its abduction; and in the nivestigitidhi whs'h we' made, site knew sufficient wouid be brought lip her to condemn her to penal Sen linde.	"Filled with this idea she ran rapidly after the lad Was far down the street and as she 'an ccncs'tt'd afor recovering the child svit1s,' implicjltin l¥iesel,f sible. She hoped to ovcrii summon a constable if si266 	BRA UITIFUL RIE1YZT.ren, but before long she began to be afraid of adopting so open a course, lest the lady might knew of her past misdeeds and assume a power over her in consequence. So she thought she would try what stratagem would do.	They had plunged into an obscure, though perfectly quiet street, the nurse alisai s keeping in the darkest shadows, and at last the lade stopped at the door of a small brick two-story house and rang a hell. A slatternly girl appeared with a candle and let her in. To Cartier's delight she recognized a face which she had seen before. She Luauaged to attract the girl's attention, and beckoned to her. In a few rmisutes also reappeared at the door.	'What do you want?' she whispered, gruffly; 'I'm a respectable girl, earning a character, and don't waist to see one of ye.'	11 1 You're the girl that cleaned out young Walsiugham of hive hundred dollars,' whispered Mrs. Cartier, aren't ye, now?'"'What's that to you? I've give it up now, and am aim-ing my character. Go away, Cartier, that's a good un, and don't spile my chance.'You're quite happy here, then, and have all ye want,same as if ye was a lady born, as that face o' yours wouldmake one think?' asked the nurse, insidiously.'Quite happy?' echoed the girl, bitterly; 'yes, if slavisi',-,roIII gra morning till this hour of night, with a snis'able ten dollars a months and no soul to speak to, is happiness''Is that all ye get?' exclaimed the nurse. ' Come, now,'in not hero for not hiug. Somebody has had an eye on ye,	ye are hid in this out-o'-tho-way hole. Would ye like to hear how ye could aim not ten hut fifty dollars a mouth-york pat mere play?'To be sure I would.'Well then, let me in somewheres easy, where your;tress won't find me, Hush! don't wakesa tlsis baby!'	The girl eagerly led her up stairs to her own bedroom, locked the door an lit a candle,	Having gained adusittance to the house, Cartier was (,;,]ever enough to avail herself of her advantage. She first of all applied herself to raising the girl's cupidity by prom' nsug liberal 'pickings' if slse sonld Feturn to the gang whichshe had left some time Previously, in a faint attack of con-trition for her crimes, Having overcomne all her scruples,I	she fic	carrying whatever she rouidf		eave thua complete ascendenev ever her			Cc.					wilmilig	questions about the Idr whom' ai tier				a few careless' Her name was 1 r Job i site had let in.E119-land and taken apartments in	hit([ Collie from Eng-	went out every day, and seemel s ionai four davi ago. Shetemper.	All the boarder were Sueti mrs to have an aw (iiito none of them. She had 	c a aid of her, and she pokesickly, and it was bar idea a baby. (tV1Y	awl romaybe, was on the hunt for h l 1	that \IN. Jon'	have rleserted her,			her	ci a ho seetne'i			What do you think of this bahir?' saul the fl	throwing off her shawl and displayin' the t ''f th-	in, child.		The girl stared in snrprHe. then loot I I ehiid			ac	and uttered an exclamation.'' Sure as death, it's Mrs. Jiselvii's liihr I know hrby the hit of a cross behind the ear! G raeeu! woniali,came yen by her? You aren't a witch. sure?'	'Mrs. Joselyn made a mistake, in,l iirabbcd the i baby in a hurry,' said Cartier, signiheatithi. Now II. you in the way of getting your fortune Ii LI, if cc hto get back the child I was appohitel uart' for.want no fuss iuade about auythier I'll, cou'erlieh iii,may easily suppose from the nuni ocr i prinus I've 'heaii' I;so if we can get the each auge male pri rat i ly auth t lien 1), IT -the better for you and me. How came i lIlt mark tIt's not a cross, it's a lance,'Lance, cross, poker. or shovel, 	one to me, so's vonput me in the way to make mc furtuiie. She drew it with a sharp needle vcsrerday and wlu'n the bluish tilled ulascratch she rubbed black powder ou it. I hell the baby while she did it.'	Lord, non" ejaculated the other ,vuniali, ill a tie f awe. 'What do you tiduk it was for'Dunno. Maybe to keep the devil oil. Wishwarn mm of her tuiper, for	a	stunner, I can tBut look here, now, it's not for		site 	tuiia	scratched into the poor hut		'tNv'I my girl, to.'.	the black powiler was all 100 i5		U ,le Spe, :at it well _look at it toimprint it o11 your ii¥ 0 	BRA UTIFUL JWilNZLII into strange hands, and perhaps you of all on earth will the only witness that this child is a Joselyn." Mad thing, aif believe she's qsccsr1 But do tell, for gracious sake,w conic you by the child? I saw her carry it in past my¡1d' eyes.'	lii's. Cartier gave sonic half explanation, all the time carefully perusing the mark on the child's flesh. She resolved to make a duplicate mark on her little charge, if she recovered it, in order to mislead the strange lady should she rota vu to Mr llicuzFs house. She was strongly superstitious, and perhaps the; belief that this mark imparted a peculiar virtue to the wearer helped to influence her impulse.	has Mrs. 3 oselya any plunder, worth?" she asked, cunningly.	Lots o' jewels, cash, dresses, rare ones,' whispered the girl.	Well, you look here now. I'll take all the risk of this lark. ion make up your bundle and be ready, or stay here another day, just to shift the blame off yourself, and leave all your things open for to be searched. And if ye show me Mrs. Josell a's rooms, I'll slip in and take what I can find, and leave this here baby to its owner, and all you'll have to do is just to keep watch and give me a safe passage out. Then give warning, and jine us to-morrow night. The old place, you know.'"'All right, I'll not be in this mess there, but mind, Imust have my share of the plunder.'Half, as sure as I'm an honest woman.'Surer than that ma'am, it must be.'	'Little Toad! Well, then, sure as you're a horn cesuty.''Humph! I'll spoilt in the breeding then! Well, I'llst ye.	The two women stole clown to Mrs. Joselyn's room, and the nurse made her wiy safely in. The heavy breathing of the lady showed that she was asleep, and the roomwas very dark. The nurse coolly struck a match and dis-covered by its aid where the bed was. The infant whichhad been stolen, was lying just asleep in a cradle along-side, and holding the lighted match in its face its nurse madeout beyond a doubt that it was Mrs. Bienzi's child.	Hastily she lifted, without awakening it, and put the other child in its place, who began to wail piteously. Thet		ciiUAJLL llj,',,, 	269sleep	It 0Cdtcej "more heivjiwords. Mrs. Cartier took cc	v '11, I 	, I a fewmatch.	By the light of this h age ci ii if anotherdressing-table 000tainjno black focnd an open box on the in her pocket, then she eceved the k whirl! she shiNedwas carelessly displased on the table and looked eiabout the cash Which. had been naeotioocc]	this moment Baby isoihia began to strn"l,'pieratory to giving one of her imperative Screams, annurse darted out, and fiisng past her accomplice stifled thechild's cries until she reached the street. She ran everystop of the 'ray hack to Mr. Rieori'a house and reachedPerfectly miii iscoycreil, Sue did not dan' c 1 rii' ''Iitlo\\ n until she had scratched with a espear she had seen in the other, and riilit *d'd' lila 'Kpowder, at which the child screamed so violently that thehoosekeeper came rushing in foil of alarm. But Mrs. Car-tier allowed her to suspect nothing, and sell had t1 haloto sleep again.Mrs. ('artier had received such a fright, to iii this nii,h-nio'ht episode that she resolved to leave her situation, b-fore her employers came home, which she (lid a few dais subsequently, only waiting for another woman to take herSite carried the box o jewels ted chief oher gangretaining, bowes ci, the ag		was eu"raved the arnie i,!every gold niedalho		d and a uiedalltou linked to it,some house		The ' ' d of the i:erklace, and the oldwere all that reroairie		as proofs of the truth ef herwoman gave them tome if the joseIvns.story. The arms are u0050 irl two dave after her a	"Mrs. Carder aw tie that Mrs. '1 isrly n's chitare, and heard from hei lie teat u ei'uhug-' With abeen found		dead in its rianyand a blue ru.as black as if it v~`~ Tound its ueckl' se declare	little	jderjjj~ 1101%, It wasbody for lioUrs¡	bank	OW	hibaby, and when Cat at. she heard that Mit. It to I) with hhouse on sonic P"C"'Mild, and they did	tkinWlh1;.e(,nsjder&stark stark1 of tlii husiJiem.t	The, W 1, ,	i al drawn	Uneasiness ice1270 85L4( 1/ILL h1EtZi,rouble.	She left Washington as soon as possible, andlunged into evil ways in New York.	She sank very low, until her crimes had made her so	,veil known to the authorities that she fled from the States,	ml joined a gipsy gang with whom she had lived for the	¥'st ten rears, and gained some little tact in telling fortunes.	During their wanderings in New York State she had	become acquainted with some of the facts of Isohna Ui-enzVs trial.	Miss Rienzi was about to be torn from her	friends under a false plea; she managed to obtain a sight	of Mrs. Boanmont at (ircely's Mills, and instantly recog-nized her, despite the change in her appearance.	"For the sake of the beautiful babe whom she had dan-	dled in her arms, and nursed like a mother, she had taken	a long and perilous journey to Washington to put the facts	of that long committed transaction in my hands, who she	said was a close friend, and would be glad to save Miss]Eflenzi from trouble.	"With earnest and repeated injunctions that I should at	once lay this story before Mr. Rionzi, the old woman re-	ceived a small piece of money from me and went away.	And 1-wicked-revengeful-could not bring myself to	serve my poor friend so far, but waited seemingly to seewhat would happen.	Some three months afterward, the same old gipsywoman sought my presence again.	She was double with	rheumatism, foot-sore, famished, and distressed in mind.	She said she had been traveling night and day for four	weeks; that Miss [solina Itienzi had been claimed by Mrs,leaumont and was going to be taken away to Canada.	She	nod got hold of the information from the chief gipsy of the	nip, 'who was bribed by Ralph Morecombe to assist theme'espe.	She had soon the young Miss [henri going to	d her sister good-by, and she knew exactly how Miss	anilla would be hoodwinked, and she had conic here to	C	implore me in the name of justice to do something to re-r eturo the young lady to her family.	Surely I had notneyed her former	curses on me if I	ad not; the secret winch for her own safety she had kepto lone, was burning her heart up with remorse.	I reassured her once more with fair promises, but	What she had told roe filled me with vengeful exultation.	Isolina should be consigned to the companionship of suchaULJP271a wonton as Mrs, sieanmont. yes, lb	r pun-ishment.	The old woman went away, and was foe itti ill * field some miles out of town , dead by a brook--side her blistered feet in the water, her old scarlet cloak drawn over her face, dead from hunger and exhaustion.	I knew that I alone could right Jsoliua Itienzi, and set 1 hardened my heart and did nothing, I have kept hie secret, well-knowing the terrible wrong I was doing Victor Juselyn. I have kept it until it was criminal to keep it, until anguish had crept deep into your hapless family, and you mourned not only a sister lost. but a sister who was nothing to von, O se word of mine would have ccivyon long ago. 1 might have said ' Canada,' when yinwild surmises poirsted to every country beyond this bern -phere, but I triumphed in the sorrow of those who 1:11 wit-nesscd_ my humiliation. I gloried in having Cecil Beau-mont recklessly fighting off the sorrow which his mall passion had brought him, and-l did nothing.	" This has been the revenge 1 swore to you on my carriage step, and it has been a bitter one: mx head is in the dust with remorse; I can. never, never face you, nor smile again, while conscience holds up this fool wrong before me.	11 It is Miss Belle Cranetewis who reached my strong heart and awakened my conscience; for month.; site loss been a persevering brave friend, drawing me nearer and nearer to repentance, in spite of MY struggles. 'l'he link is broken at last. I have poured my guilty confections at her feet; this is the course she nouraged me to take. She says to fear nothing, that you would forgive. I lae won Inot ask it or expect it. I am not wortlis t' CU w on	in yonr presence' I have wronged you be owl fore.	-and shall mourn it to the dos of my death. Ilea'	tent 5nt. you from all evil. Your rei - '1L iUE.\71.IIAPTKR XXXV,DONXA BELLA.She is coming, my own, my sweet;	Were it ever so airy a tread,tty heart would hear her and heat,	Were it earth in an earthy bud. "-Tnoevsore,	The September sun was dipping into the rosy waters of ocean: he had loft a throne of " tnrqnois and aliaondine," upon which one tiny star was sitting, looking down to the iowiy and lovely earth.	A little family were gathered on the southern veranda, whore the ardent light came round in shafts and refractions softer than aught out of heaven, and touched the dangling creepers with fringes of gold and nestled among a bed ofI b, ~~ a r	petronias, gilding' all their velvet and diaphanous	petals into rarest fairy -y-cups, and seeking out the dusky King-oil the Blacks as it swung incense from its tiny censer.My father sat in his bamboo chair and broad panama,	th perhaps as bright a smile as that of other days, though e')ftencd now into a more beaming humility, as he passed one hand over the other in dreaming mood.	My mother stood by his side, her fair and gentle bands clasped contentedly on his shoulder, her face so mild, so exceedingly sweet and pale, raised slightly to the painted vault of heaven-the dear mother who had lmed more than us all, and borne most meekly.	Mv husband-kind, steadfast, worthy of his namepaced before them, pouring some of the over-present suit-lee of his own heart into theirs; and apart at the westerne, where the moan of the ocean smote our ears, stood	tor Joelyn and f-the only sister this world held for - lilt.	The Atlantic cable had done its work-a message had fslied from our joyful hearts to that lonely Josels uWoid.	hioh caused the master to leave Ins tltrnos of' grateful people and schemes of noble philanthropy to fly over to on sands of watery miles to meet the long-mourned Rose of his fatthfni heart.Iinto Silverlea winch was the parentnest ever	fin , id the Sweetest nest em brood camehome to; we were all gather eg in waiting for tine lug lostone, to tie Love's knot, and make the rosy baad role plete.But (lay after day had passed; friends he Poured in andgone away again; Victor had arrived, feverish ajid ineredu.ions, to watch once more 's ith spirit-sickening enc4iriie,:hearts were sinking, low prayers were steal1-yet she was not here. 	ig np to bean i	'Inree weeks since that day of jo\fnl tidingeael could have been here a fortnight ago-vagne fears win whispering in every heart: why did she tarry?The eves of love had stolen so often down these gras twalks, that they were dim and wavering, and bidden in patient hand, the eyes of hope took up the ssarh and irs blinded and dazzled all at once.	Yet it was only a simple garden-bat, bound with black ribbon, just such as had shone between those rows of ii trees two years ago. one still summer morn. It ennie steadily on, now disappearing behind the aspen shades, now gleaming nearer, a speck of white in a mass of dark green -no, it has stopped-where has it gone? Not back?	Poor soul l she is tired; she leans upon onr iron gate: bends her face on her crossed arms. If she were not-poor-looking-so lagging and foot-sore, I would say-An heart of mine, leap not so tumultuously! Can it lie ol can it be my slates'?One wild, glad cry! I am flying down to the dust ctraveler. I cannot wait to speak my joy; I ans going clasp my darling close, close, close! I am going to her in from the flinty road, and bring her home, an her in the arms of him whose wife Heaven gas e hr Oh, my heart, break not with joy!She lifted her pale, tearful face. Her celestial C)upon me, brio-lit. tender, brave as the daendess Mini who leans upon a spear; a slow, sweet smile broke ovc lips.	Come in!" I exclaimed,.. pushing open tine gate to -her; "don't stand out here,"Is this my welcome? my faithful sister," shesoftv.Xnd that reminded of -'n th r"Come!" 1 cried'>7		BRA U TEFUL R1ENZLe, not your brother-that has been proved-not your	her, clear IsolinaV'	What! and I have given him such sorrow! Does be	to meet me now 2"	White she grew as a Syrian lily. She drew back and hid hoc lace in her trembling hands.	l>'er lie was coming, her lord, her life, her fate. He was coining, and her heart was failing her, with overwhelming love. She would sink beneath this fierce delight; she would drink one glance from his shining eyes-one glance, and tile!	But he took her sweet hands kindly, gently; be spared her rushing agitation, and denied himself for her sake. lie vailed these passionate heart-throbs behind a calm voice, and bent a gentle, reassuring gaze upon her.	Do not fear me," he, murmured; "1 am your friend or your brother-until you wish to change the title."	''My husband!" she breathed, relinquishing herself to him, ''since you love me still-yours till I die!"	Reverently he took her to his breast; he did not even now overwhelm her with the passion which filled him; this frail, trembling form must he guarded kindly; it must be cherished for a while ore it could bear its burden of happiness.	We led her up between us to to the vine-wreathed veranda, where her own true, dear parents were standing, hand in hand, rooted with joy, only able to cling together and gaze, and gaze, and gaze upon their Isolina.	Ah! life is like a lattice window in the sunlight; light and shade-light and shade; bars of gold and bars of gloom, until the frail lattice is shattered, and the light flows in with no more shadows.	But hush these haunting whispers! What might not restored love do? What might not peace and rest do?	Little by little we gained from her the story of her last two years of exile; she told it once and never reverted to it again: her gentle spirit held aloof forever after from the dark and painful memory of another's crimes. She had found, in gathering together Mrs. Boanmont's few effects, after her death, an open packet addressed to the deceased, which she had recognized as that which Ralph Moreconibe had given to Mrs. Beaumont in the cottage in the forest. It was written by Barbara Cartier, the gipsy woman, and was a full account of Isohina Rienzi's real parentage, andIIIts 11 TJfljL R1L\ /	276an entreaty that the Italian lady wo		'	to her friends, for if she did		:'	Miss Rican		1 1	would 	informCiniseppe liienzi herself of the attensptel ibduction whichhad taken place so long ago.	The explanations were elided at last' she was fully erthroned in her rightful place, and could look from face to face of her kindred with thankfnl eves: she had a 'liii at upon us all-even upon Ernest, who waited upon he such brotherly assiduity. But heel gift of all, the milove of that true heaven-chastened heart, which w hholy purity and rightfulness!Ah! hold her in voor arms-this wasted. ethereal focus;fling chains as id chains of love avon nd sir, to hind from the spirit-land; come between her	i: '5'tinne wreaths, which wait her in the skis'-. Yolk Is' sher fondly; you have mourned her long: oh, keep herwings close pinioned -woo her hack to s :itls -LrIAPTER XXXVI.}v t- STORY OF 'I'll E0 Bat she, with sis'k ansi scoruful l's''	To her full height, her ,hst,'iv Still',sMy youth,' she said, 'was blasted NS ss1. ,'" isMy dear sister's little history, when from tino' i'she had been torn from is, wac a cciv monrnfs.iRalph Moreeomhee lead conic, like a nishing hid, in:.the cottage, flung the few articles of clothing and cal.-Off together, and carried the fugitives off without it Ill.--- warning. Tlsey escaped tln'oegli a road but lit:known across the hills to the nearest railway station, tookcars for Philadelphia, and proceeded by uninterrupted tnivi'Ito Canada, where they hurled t tense1 yes in a remote Fremu' isCanadian village, to which there was little positnlit)traeitlg them. Mrs. Beaunioust hsztl secmneth satisfied, as.signified leer intention of roll)	with only her daugis:'and Moreconshe to attend bet',Mereconebe was a trnstl prorector. lahoriug faithfUlly Itheir comfort, and beconno p ni:" .11 1 iii ri at taelieil to Uhapless young lady whom lie ' slavery. With d&il iescrea 'in -2. 7 (11 	BEAUTIFTL IUEYZLipiuinly a burden that was far too crashing for herli icr fiarne, and when she would. have failed throagli	ikuess and discouragement, he studied her wants, and - irdcd her from many a needless vigil with the capricious nd exacting lunatic.	In a few months the very slender stock winch Mrs. Beau-,oocut possessed was sis allowed up, and in order to gratify	extravagant whiuss of her who was formerly a 'roman	of In xurv, Isuliua opened a small school. Ths gentle forth odeof my nobler sister shone out.	The pale and tender face grow daily sweeter; her very presence seamed to calm the troubled air; the American school-mistress cause to be spoken of as a saint uncauonizcd, and the children all thought that the Madonna must be like Mlle. Lucille, as she was called, who was so good to her poor. afflicted mother, and so sweet to everybody.	And a day came when her cross was lifted at last. The wild, gloomy eyes had appealed to her for the last time, and the murmuring lips were still, and the word of confession which had tortured that trembling soul too late, was anspoken forever, and the worn child was free.	Ahl free to nestle home to hearts, which would close round her, and warm her chill life into fresh hopes-free to love unchecked, to taste the gifts whick God intended for her. She had expended the last of her scanty means in burying Mrs. Beaumont, and had but a few shillings to take her the long journey overland to New York. And now the old Italian, Moresao, signified that he would take her safely home to her friends; he would not have her without a protector, if she would take him to he her servant as her mother had done before her.	But Ralph was claimed by another Master. On the day following the funeral Isohina found the nurse Cartier's letter to Mrs. Beaumont carefully concealed in her dressingcase. which, in the first astonishment of reading. she brought to Ralph.. Ho recognized it as the packet which a gipsy coy from the camp had brought while Isohina was relating Ice circumstances which separated her houi her family. The boy had been sent by Baree with injunctions to deliver it into Morcaornba's hands for Mrs. Beaumont.	Such is the outline of Rieuzi's experiences. We never heard the full weight of that trial which had rested upon her front her own lips; another, after thus meeting, when-JC7J bL IlL ,/J 	-our dca:good old riest,	Sal in iei hr	H Hy Woid, anuns, came all the way g	log iii)	ri v for pious	which the French	¡¡i the	tnit Cniatiin valley inpurses of their soporPtit nestled to rehire good Catholictruly heroic, patient aul 1rou loin Ce heard howbeen to her reputed , am selt-antlerin,, our isohina haddar-ing infidelity had and mother, whose terrible te"ilter ilar-struck awe throtigh the villagw-4And here is the strange letter which holina oiwords:and addressed to my father) and which begati"MY vEYlierrrA.'-You, Uniseppe Rienzi. first woke my heart tisensation of passion. I was beautiful !it'd proud. offamily, and an heiress. I might have wed a ntarcn i4 but I loved you. II bat wore on flab! A student-an arti,t, with his bread to win-a sculptor without a chisel- visionary,with a respectable name (ball, again!), and a slender pittri-mouv when one older brother, Andrea, slionld h servel.''If 1 had put my foot upon yonr han,ls for steMonis-stones across the mire, 1 should hare honored you aim--your position; but I flung my wealth, and my i,eautv, antimy heart at your feet, and prayed you to deign to wear the trifles in our bosom. Who could iv itlistatot Gem ma tall imotto? You were dazzled, and I thought you loved ow. I loaded von with chains of passion-flowers, and thougi you were Inv captive; hot it was I who wore the chains of Iron and nt the flowers. 1 was the prisoner.'You came to me one day; your eyes were flashing likethe sun in his angry strength, and I tretnitlel.	They say Gniseppe, the 1)"-,				'.i.Donna (lemma's gold,' you said, 'asay You do, you will grant 'Tic a fai" 'And what is that?'					. I'Publicly give your wealth to iconic to rile a penniless bride. If	-		i	.3t&ndwhat an gnsiste0ry that would would be!' Iwho scoff at their temples: t0 Itoglory in my wealth,- and in shioist¥	it away!'		-I" I had unlocitcU tiits lurking-place '5 b.c IPLA P TJTL 'L nigwzi:You scoff at their temples, signora. What does thatn?' demanded my master.I laughed scornfully.	It means that there is no God on my earth!' I said. 'God? Who is he? An essence-a myth? You are my God,' I how to but one divinity!'	"You went away, and I laughed until my maid knelt at my feet, and implored me to be calm. I pictured how my passionate love would craze your young heart with joy wlreu alone.	The next day a letter from you was brought to my silken pillow. It was not a lover's frenzied prayer for pardon for your harshness; it was a demand to know what creed I professed.	"My creed was the shortest on earth: I was an infidel. I had always been. one. I believe I was born without a soul. Gayly I told you so, but added that my heart was more to you than a thousand souls. What calmness-what lack of worldly wisdom you displayed! You came to me loaded with the gifts I had lavished on you-the love-tokens, the honors-and flung them back to me.	" 'Henceforth, Guiseppe is bound no more to a woman without a Clod,' you said.	"My passion rose. I demanded-threatheued. You showed no fear, but sternly silenced inc. I to be threatened thus!	" I rose humiliated, overcome, terrified, and begged forgiveness, and you left me with my tears uudried. (lemma Laucinetto was forsaken by the obscure stripling whom she had proudly worn next her heart. I met the curled lip, the varied eye, the cynical smile when I ventured forth from my angry solitude. 'those who before had worshiped roy shadow shrugged their shoulders and crossed tlieiiisclves. I was branded as 'the woman without a soul.' and was fabled a Ken tsppc. All shunned me, but the lowest and most anrdsd of roy once countless throng of lovers. I found at the age of twenty-one that ray life was blasted. I stood, as it were, nuvaslcd before a hissing world, arid it execrated me.	"Then in my heart of hearts, I made my vendetta against (russeppe lticnzi, Oh, it was bitter, deep lasting!"hhall I detail my reckless life to you? No! You shallI	BEAUTIfUL if!, fr.	279know it if ever we meet t 'if ever' M' life,		that Bar isli	life, shall be an eternal secret until 'then.given"Go 10 Your grave with the pangs Geinnia i.ancinetto hasyou life. anu say, haughty ingrate, have I not promised¥	You had never seen Donna Gemma in herbeauty, would your hair have been so gray, your step 85 lagging on hfes thorny way? lee, I have spud my vendetta-my sweet, sweet vengeance!" 0-niseppe, these lines are for yell, when your victnriouenemy sleeps in her bed of earth,	- GEM MSuch was the singular letter which sm I my (mifrom the dead woman, and it cleared limit \i tri,rimblame but such as gilded his eliiracttr with new lamir i-.while it threw into the blackest shailee the unholy pa-	sions which had wagered a life-lung w				limo		-c heart	of dust,				CHAPTER XX\\ II.		A	Ii RIDE WITH A NO ELC ii			Ci- or belt to belt if crimasoll			()III. leagues of color stream)!i			'lii where in yonder ortenl r			$A hundred spirits wlmlii-r j'iL$	tm, sissY.For the last .i mire 1 open these imigei4, and inscribe theI Hn¡ -c5 ucs ol toe beloved memories.c I would not have that secret Vendetta uuspeil, fir -tblessirsw was hidden in the hand of hate. .	Come and look with rue once mite on	eP cr171 "-a last look, reader.She is a bride for hose! 	¥'of her second ne	r-	hand. It catches theglean iiig	her huslYtttd lie takes her hand-'t-sonic one neat Ii' heart until the cold hail'never nts0 holds ¡i t in his close, close clasp.to his lips.	_,m,1	I	li! --ns wY		Toe will sum	iiL-			-No-	Her pure face wistfully.BRA ITTJFT'L BIRYZI.If God will spare me." is the meek reply; "and I think will. I ought to comfort you before I go."Then we gather closer, and the summer sea booms in1 a louder ewe]].	There is Doctor Pemberton watching the bride's face with the constancy of a lover, and making private notes of approval or dissatisfaction. Until she need have no more watching. this faithful friend will guard her from every chilling wind with a tender solicitude only second to her husband.	There sits our father, and the gentle companion of his life, caln, smiling, thoughtful, after their long struggle; clinging the more closely to the Great Hand, which helped them since the Secret Vendetta was sped; trusting their loved ones all to Heaven, and fearing not much for future sorrows.	And here, with her bright face all sunny with the joy which others' joy ever brought to her, kneels sweet Belle Cranstown at niy feet-the cherished friend, adviser, and comforter of my Ernest and me.	The mask-laden flowers flaunt in the shifting air; a thicket of yellow roses scatter their petals before the feet of the passers-by.	Softly they walk-warily after life's fevered battle. The Star of hope is shining on them with a silver promise of days to come. They are looking into life's cup of sweetness, and, lo! it is not drained yet. They look into each other's saddened eyes, and find that love can have a resurrection; and so she gazes upon the thin, grave face with a gush of womanly tenderness and regret. She cannot speak for that past shame and sorrow, but she draws his head to her swelling bosom, and weeps upon it. God bless Cecil and Ldlia-they may be happy yet.	And I am happy to sink into a cipher when my brother \motor is hr. it is joy for me to see them joined at last.I nero will be paradise below when thus are united the noble and the good.	Come away. The shadows leave them, and the moon gleams in. Let us, too, leave them in their heaven of mestored love.*		*	*	*	*She sleeps beneath the daisies of her English home. AIp	BE1	2$1marble monunientholds hold her saintly iaemoryenme		i	find hearts	Let us not wee	sF ii)( holds tie rliii4gin'tI soul.hands have scattered roes done her work.	11cr gentle	they not hold the palm j;1 hem 10,19 s :;:r for others-mayGod gave her the one wish of her sweet and humblespisit-Ile lent her for a season to bless the home of bunshe loved, and he is grateful, and repined not that Ilktreasure went away to rest in heaven.She has vanished from his stately halls, and herbrows are crowned with bliss unspeakable. iii! 11i,followed her through these gates of "httHpoor, and the needy, and the oppressed eii hr i /sJoselyn in their grateful hearts, and call him a true noble-man.We do not mourn her dead. We hi v that she sits bythe gates of heaven waiting for us. I'm home She li0htthem ajar to watch over us. and shed her overbriininirig bliss upon us. And we see tins iii font angel wlriih she, left to comfort us-the orphan boy-thii heir of Joselyn Wnl'l. I[e nestles smiling in my arms, and lifts his inot ters blue, seraphic eves to rise. I weep, hut I am tilled with joy. I clasp him' closer, and pray that hn May also have her beautifnl spirit.	Brave, patient, meek ererdeiriia in iv, we shall not pert in heaven.	Close the curtains on memory's cell; Hhiit the lInt.'; I have recorded tire ciii ef Tire Seitiri S rr:rt ,."A DEBT 'COLLINS, will IreSRLECT Srssfl