<pb>
<!-- could not determine page number -->
These pages produced pretty good results. There is some garbling along the left edge of the page on the odd pages; however, it is minor. <pb n="3"/>
I CONFESSIONS OF
|        A WIFE
Ad1                I
HE night is wild and wet. It makes faces
at me when I go to the window, like a big
rgoyle; it has the dignity that belongs to
gliness and character. I 'm afraid I was born
'heathen for beauty's sake; for all the Christian
ere is in me - and that is scandalously little
-is kept busy going into sackcloth and doing
enance. for my esthetic sins. I have never
lved any person who was not beautiful. But
en I have never loved many people -Father,
d poor Ina.
- The wind starts a long way off to-night, and
irs and strengthens with a terrible deliberation.
the time it reaches you, nothing can with-
and it, and you don't care whether anything
or not. I feel as if I could open the window
iFA- ~~~~~3



<pb n="4"/>
4      CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
and let myself drop, sure that it would lift me
up and carry me, and I should n't in the least
mind where.     I dream of doing that often.
To-day I found something which pleased me.
It was in that old French book of Father's that
I read aloud in to keep up my accent. It was
about a princess in a shallop on a river--no,
I '11 copy it, rather; it seems to me worth while,
which is saying something, for most things do
not strike me that way. I wish I knew why.
The princess was a sea-princess, but she lived in an inland
country, and when the water-soul within her called, she had
only a river wherewith to satisfy it. So she floated out in her
shallop upon the river, nor would she let any person guide
the shallop, neither her men nor her maidens, but loved the
feel of the oar, and the deference of it to her own soft hands.
And she chose the hour that precedes and follows the setting
of the sun, for it was a fair hour, and the river was comely.
And drifting, she thought to row, and rowing, she thought
to drift; so, drifting and rowing, she had her will, for no
one gainsaid her. And she was a fair princess, though a
haughty, and many men crowned her in their hearts, but to
'..-none of them did she incline. And certain knights took
boats and sought to overtake her upon the river, for she
seemed to drift. But when they drew nearer to her, drift-
ing, they perceived that she was rowing, and, row they never
so sturdily, she did keep the shallop in advance of them, nor
did she concern herself with them, for she was a princess,
and she had the sea in her heart, while they were but knights,
and contented themselves with the river, having been born



<pb n="5"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE                         5
l with river-souls, in the river country.  And these wearied
her, so that she rowed the stronger for her disdain, and
/escaped them all, though now and then but by a shallop's
length.
Now it chanced that there appeared upon the river a new
/-oar, being the oar of a prince who did disguise himself, but
Icould not disguise his stroke; nor did he row like these
others, the knights who rowed upon the river for her sake
:who disdained them, and this the princess, being expert in
-such matters, perceived.  But the prince did not seek to
overtake the princess, whereat she marveled; and she glanced
l backward over the river, and observed him that he rowed
not to overtake her, but drifted at the leisure of his heart.
And every day, at the hour which precedes and follows
l   the setting of the sun, the prince drifted at the leisure of his
l heart.  Then did the leisure pass out of the heart of the
l princess, and she marveled exceedingly, both at herself and at
l him who did not overtake her.  And while she glanced, she
'drifted.  And it befell that on a certain day she glanced,
and behold, he was rowing steadily.   Then the princess
' bent to her oars, she being strong and beautiful, and so
" escaped him like the others, and he saw that she smiled as
she escaped.  But he rowed mightily, for he was a prince,
:and he gained upon her. And she perceived that he gained
upon her, and it did not suit her to be overtaken, for thus
.was her nature, and she followed her nature, for she was
princess, and it was permitted her.  And she smote the
water, and turned her shallop swiftly, and disappeared from
i: his sight, and from the sight of all those others whom he had
distanced upon the river. And the light fell, and the dusk
rose, and they twain, the escaped and the pursuing, the flee-
ing and the seeking, were alone on that part of the river.
For it is not a frequented part of the river.  And the prin-



<pb n="6"/>
6      CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
cess hid from him. And she believed him to have passed
by unwitting, so she stirred in her shallop to find her oars,
but lo! she had lost them. And she was adrift upon the
river, and it was dark. Now, while she sat there in per-
plexity, but mute, for she was royal, she heard the motion of
oars, as they had been muffled, and it was not easy to follow
the sound thereof, for it was a subtle stroke, although a
mighty. And she recognized the stroke, and she remem-
bered that she had lost her oars.
So the prince lifted her into his own shallop, and she, for
she was royal, gainsaid him not.
I have translated as I copied, and the mistakes
will speak for themselves, as mistakes always do.
Of course it is a version of Atalanta,- one of
those modern things that copy the antique with-
out a blush,- yet I rather like it. I never had
any patience with Atalanta.
I HAVE been pursued all day by a fragment that
I cannot mend or join, and I think it must have
come from some delicate Sevres cup or vase, of
the quality that breaks because it is so beautiful:
I never know why 't is I love thee so:
I do not think 't is that thine eyes for me
Grow bright as sudden sunshine on the sea.
It is thy face I see, and it befell
Thou wert, and I was, and I love thee well.



<pb n="7"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE       7
l man wrote that, I 'm sure, but he was different
men; and no woman could have written it,
;ugh she were like women. I must ask Father
.look it up for me. He is the most accurate
oter I ever knew, and I suppose I have his
/ tinct for quotation, without his accuracy. I
te etiquette, barbed-wire fences, kindergarten
bes, mathematics, politics, law, and dress-coats.
-like to wear golf-skirts, and not to give an
count of myself, and to run about the grounds
the dark, and to get into a ruby gown before
e fire and write like this when I come in. It
one of the nights when March slips into the
ms of May, and chills her to the heart. I
/now two things in this world that never, never
ire me and always rest me - I wonder if they
iways will ?  One is a sunset, and the other is
open wood fire.
/" Mr. Herwin has come in, and is reading to
ather; the thick ceiling, floor, and carpet break
/he insistence of his voice, and it blurs into a
rhythm, like the sound of waves. I don't alto-
lgether like his voice, and it's more agreeable
taken through a medium of fresco and Wilton
carpet. Robert Hazelton had a pleasant voice.
Poor Rob! But he was too short, and he is very
Oplain.
Oh, that wind! It roars like a' fierce, ele-



<pb n="8"/>
8     CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
mental, raging creature that does n't know what
it wants, but is destined to have it at any cost.
I can't help that feeling that if I opened the
window and just let myself out, tl, storm would
be kind to me, and I should be upborne, and
swept along safely, over the tops of trees, as I
am in my dreams (they are usually elms, and
very high, and I wonder why they are cultivated
trees, and wish they were pines and live-oaks,
but they always remain elms), and I think I
should never be carried too high, so as to get
frightened, or lost among clouds, and so dashed
down. I am sure I should stay, like a captive
balloon, at just about that height, within sight
of earth and houses and people, but well out of
their reach, and floating always, now wildly, now
gently, if it stormed or if it calmed, with the cold
freedom of the dead and the warm sentience of
the living. And I think-
Father_ is sure not to miss me; the secretary is
good for another hour at least. The next best
thing to jumping out of the window is to get
into the garden. The storm is growing glori-
ously worse. I believe I '11 go.
I WENT. Golf-skirt and waterproof and rubber
boots, wind in the face, rain on the head- I
went. Slapped on the cheek, smitten in the



<pb n="9"/>
NFESSIONS OF A       WIFE       g
h-beaten and storm-shaken, a fighter of
and of the gale, for the love of storms
e love of fighting, that was I. I seem
to have been a creature of the dark and
her, sprung of them, as the wet flowers
B ung of the earth, and the falling torrents
n of the clouds. I seem to myself to
n a thousandfold more myself out there.
wing-room girl in low dresses and trains,
g beside her father, doing the proper
aying what everybody says,-even the
o likes Strauss waltzes, and dances once
ile till morning,- looked out of the win-
this other girl, like distant relatives. The
; the garden disowned them, and did n't
raindrop what they thought of her. Oh,
n't care what anybody thought of me!
s the sense in being alive if you can't hurl
her people's thoughts and respect your
X I suppose, if it comes to that, it 's well
e your thoughts respectable. Truly, I
hink mine have ever been disreputable.
ltarna Trent! Out with it! Have they?
ro. I really don't think they have. I
wer for what they might be, if it stormed
nugh, and I 'd been to too many recep-
dI could n't get into rubber boots and
oof and run about gardens.
i    ~~~~~~. 



<pb n="10"/>
10   CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
When you come to think of it, what 's a
garden ? The walls are stone, and pretty high;
there are broken glass bottles all along the top,
to keep burglars out and the cat in; James
locks the iron gate at eleven; the shrubbery is
all trimmed like bushes that have just come from
the barber's; there is n't a weed to be seen, and
the paths are so narrow that I get my golf-skirt
wet. Why, if I were a man, I should be out-
side, in the clubs, the streets, the theaters,- God
knows where,- doing bohemian things, watching
people in the slums, going to queer places with
policemen, tramping up and down and watching
the colored lights on the long bridges, taking tre-
mendous walks out into the country, coming
home at any hour, with a latch-key, and wearing
a mackintosh -no, I should wear an oil-coat,
a long oil-coat, and a fisherman's sou'wester, and
I should go- I wonder where  and I should
do -I wonder what'?
But I am a girl; and I stay in the garden.
And that 's bad enough, for the other girls don't
care about gardens. I heard a woman tell an-
other woman one day that I was "very impru-
dent." She said I " went out evenings." I laughed
then, for I could afford to, and I did n't care what
she said. I don't feel so much like laughing now.
The worst thing I ever did in my life I've done
to-night within the last half-hour.



<pb n="11"/>
F NFESSIONS     OF A   WIFE      11
tglad that woman does n't know it.
1 e n't been outside of my father's garden,
And you know, Marna Trent, how much
/ spect your father's garden. In the first
it 's a garden, and in the next, it 's your
Ts.- I believe the storm-soul got me, as
ater-soul took Undine, when nobody ex-
"it.
be princess was a sea-princess, but she lived in
Wland country "-poor thing!   I always
ht I should like to go to school with a
cess, and be able to say "Poor thing!" to
for of c6urse they're nothing but other girls,
/ they can't wallow round among wet things
ibber boots and golf-skirts. Who would be
incess if she could be the daughter of an ex-
ernor, and live in a big, dull suburban place,
a garden seven acres across ?
. went out into the garden, I say, and it
med like the Last Day (I've always thought
uld come in a spring freshet), and nobody
me, for the servants were n't about, and the
tary was reading "The Life of Rufus
ate " to Father (Father always chooses some
those contemporary things); and I saw the
of Mr. Herwin's head as I crept by the
ary windows -he has rather a nice head, if
hair were n't too curly. I don't like curly
n, but straight ones, like Father. I stood on
2



<pb n="12"/>
12    CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
tiptoe and peeked in, but I kept a good way off.
Father looked very handsome and peaceful and
happy in his big leather chair- dear Father!
The secretary was reading dutifully. I believe
he does it to increase his income while he is
studying law, for one day I told him I could n't
bear lawyers, and he cultivated a grieved ex-
pression, which was not becoming, and I told
him so. I never have been able to get on with
Mr. Herwin. There's an Heir-to-the-Throne-in
Disguise manner about him which, in my opin- 
ion, the circumstances don't justify. I feel like
a panther stroked the wrong way every time I
see him. It 's two years, now, since he has been
around. I should think Father would get tired
to death of him, but he says he is "a brilliant
young man."
I wonder what he 'd say now? But I don't
see that there is any particular need of his know-
ing; I hate to worry Father. He 's always had
the most absurd confidence in me; it's perfectly
irrational, but pretty solid. It's like the garden
wall, with broken bottles on top. Who knows
what I should have done without it ? I hope I
should have drawn the line at eloping with the
coachman. An hour ago I had never done any-
thing very special that I would n't be willing to



<pb n="13"/>
NFESSIONS OF A       WIFE     13
:!father know. He might have seen any
e in this book; I 'd have given it to him
ed for it. I wonder if this is the way
eel when they have done some dreadful
ilike one person before the deed and an-
son after, and not able to convince any-
that it is n't the same person at all. I
:strangely, and a little seasick, as if I
got off a shipwreck.
tl out into the garden, and it stormed as
sies were breaking up and coming to
; the earth, and burying it under - you
iink they were ashamed to see it. And
4 dhad worked its temper into a hurricane,
but I loved it! I loved it! And I ran
Xin it, and I stiffened myself and fought
it, and turned and drew my waterproof-
,and fled before it; and I don't know
iliked the better, the battle or the flight,
i everything that such a storm as that
to you. My waterproof was drenched
1-got past the smoke-bush and the big
Xin the clump by the tree-house, and my
twas n't short enough: it hit the borders,
y sopped at me like sponges squeezed
d there was a hole in my rubber boots,
ld feel my feet squash in the wet. And
i~~~~ 



<pb n="14"/>
14    CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
the wilder it was, and the wetter, the happier I
felt. And I began to sing, for nobody could
hear me, it raved so out there among the trees.
I sang opera and ballads and queer things  all
the love-songs I ever knew, and that one I like
about the skipper's daughter and the mate:
". . .a man might sail to Hell in your companie."
" Why not to Heaven?" quo' she.
And pop! in the middle of them, something
dashed at me, and it was Job. I thought he was
shut up in the kitchen, for his feet were wet, and
he had a sore throat, and I 'd given him some
hot whisky; and I scolded him. But I must say
I appreciated it to have him take all that trouble
to find me   there 's no flatterer in this world
like your own dog. So I picked him up, and put
him under my waterproof in one of the dry spots.
" Job," I said, " you know better than this!"
Then the storm lifted up its voice, and spoke,
quite distinctly, so close to me that I jumped.
"And so do you," it said.
And there stood a man.
I jumped, but I did not scream -I have so
much consolation; but I have n't another atom.
He was very wet, but not so wet as I, and he
seemed to shed the storm from his mackintosh as



<pb n="15"/>
NFESSIONS OF A        WIFE      i1
/^:b^een impudence. He looked exceed-
'in the dark, and his soft felt hat was
/ _d   4down over his face in a disgraceful way.
ever noticed how square his shoulders
said I, " how did you get here "
y, I followed Job, of course," he said.
d you follow him back ?" I suggested
e asantly.
_t immediately- no."
T      James should come out by accident-
_imight, you know -he would shoot you
uurglar, as surely as you stand here. I
_ ,e," I said - " really, Mr. Herwin, I don't
at you are standing herefor."
yill explain to you if you like," answered
_ retary. He spoke so steadily, with that
0-the-Throne manner of his, that I found
_1:oFssible to endure it, and I said:
think you forget what is due to me. You
_     *itter go back and read ' Rufus Choate' to
her."
_    Mihat is unworthy of you," he answered me
quietly.
_    - course I knew it was, and that did n't
me feel any better. I let Job down, for
uirmed so under my waterproof, and in-
. on kissing Mr. Herwin, which I thought
A:



<pb n="16"/>
16 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
very unpleasant of him; so he ran around in
his bare feet and sore throat,-I mean Job
did,- and if he has pneumonia it will be Mr.
Herwin's fault, and I shall never forgive him,
never. By this time we had begun to walk up
and down, up and down, for it was pretty cold
standing still to be rained on so, and we splashed
across the garden, fighting the gale and running
from it,- first this, then that,--we two, I and a
man, just as I had done alone. Job splashed
after us, in his insufferably adorable, patient way,
only the paths were so narrow that Job had to
walk chiefly in the box border, which was wetter
than anything.
" You had better go into the house," the sec-
retary began.
"I 'm not ready to go into the house."
" You are getting very wet."
"That 's what I came out for."
"Sometime you '11 do this once too often."
"I have done it once too often, it seems."
"I meant, you risk pneumonia. It is intol-
erable."
" It is Job who has pneumonia, not I. Pick
him up, won't you ? Put him under your
mackintosh. He must be sopping. Thank you.
Why, thank you! I really did n't think -"
"Don't you really think that I would do any-
thing whatever that you asked me to ? "



<pb n="17"/>
LESSIONS OF A       WIFE      17
*r gave the subject any consideration,
he said, wheeling, "consider it now! "
t of rain swept down from the trees
eads, and drowned the words off his
eet light looked over the wall. I
he broken bottles glisten, and a faint
or flitted over that part of the garden
h ouse in the Porter apple-tree. Now,
use has a little thatched roof, and it
Soso wet in there, though it is only lat-
* sides, and sometimes I go in there
storms are particularly wet--for no-
d think what a difference there is in
e of them are quite dry.
t"' said the secretary. And he took
y hand as if he had been an iron man. 
* all he meant was to put me into the
ess there was till the torrent held up a
t when I found myself alone in that
:in the storm, in the dark, with that
ld have stabbed him with something,
id anything sharp about me. But I
left not to say so.
~always wanted a name for this tree-
l iegan; " now I 've got it."
e man said "Ararat !" before I got the
He I did n't suppose he was that kind of
d I began to feel quite comfortable



<pb n="18"/>
18   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
and to enjoy myself, and it is the scandalous and
sacred truth that I began not to want to go in.
And at that point, if anybody would believe it,
the secretary took it upon himself to make me
go in.
The storm had gone babbling down,- it had
got past the raving stage,-and he put out his
hand to help me down the tree-house steps, but
he did n't say anything at all, and I would rather
he had said anything. The street light looked
over the wall at us, and I felt as if it were a
policeman, while I climbed down from Ararat.
It is a very unbecoming light. I hope I did n't
look as ghastly as he did.
So I said, "You are hoarse, Mr. Herwin.
You have taken cold already," just as one says,
"Won't you have another lump of sugar ?" at
an afternoon tea. I admit that my remark was
the more exasperating, seeing that the man was
as dumb as a stuffed eagle. Then he opened his
mouth, and spake:
" You will come in now, Miss Marna, won't
you ? Your father might be worried."
Now he spoke in quite a proper tone, gently
and deferentially, as a man should, and I said
yes, I would go in; for I am quite willing to
please people when they speak to me properly.
So we came in, up the wet paths, between the



<pb n="19"/>
1   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           19
borders, and the rain had stopped. And
i. Herwin did not talk at all while we went
St the spiraea and smoke-bushes, but Job wrig-
d out from under his mackintosh and kissed
in the most unmitigated way. So we came
,i and the library lights fell out on us from the
endow where I had peeked in; and Father was
ieep in his big chair before the fire. And it
e over me like that! what a thing I'd done 
ancing about in a dark garden, in a storm,
bne in a tree-house with the secretary, and only
b to chaperon me. For I never have done
ch a thing before in my life. I never did any-
ing I should n't want the servants to know.
nd I wondered what Father would think. So
-pulled up my waterproof-hood over my bare,
ret head, to hide the scorching of my cheeks.
ut the man had the manners not to notice this.
e did something much worse, however. He
egan, in a personally conducted tone that I
bject to:
"Do you often go out this way in such
torms ?"
: Always."
"You might get one of those dangerous colds
people are having."
" I could n't get cold that way, any more than
an English sparrow."



<pb n="20"/>
20 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
"The next time you do it," said Mr. Herwin,
" I shall go, too. In fact," he said, " every time
you do it, I shall come out and bring you in."
"Very well," I said; "that would only make
it the more interesting."
The secretary looked at me with a kind of
proud motion of his head, for he saw that I
taunted him. I was sorry by then, and I would
have stopped him, but it was too late. Before
the library window, in the face of the porch light,
in the sight of my father, he told me how he felt
to me.
"Oh, what a pity!" I said -
If he had talked that way, if he had looked
that way, if I had known he felt that way, out
on Ararat, in the dark and wet, I should have
said something so insolent to him as no man
ever could forgive a woman for, not if she were
sorry till she died for having said it. But it was
not storming any more. And it seemed different
in the light and quiet, and with Father so near.
So I answered as I did. What could a girl do
more ? I 'm sure I was quite civil to the secre-
tary. I can't see any particular reason why he
should get up such an expression as he did.
And he dropped Job, too, and Job growled at
him - there 's positively no limit to that dog's
intelligence.



<pb n="21"/>
.CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE            21
; I said good night, but Mr. Herwin did not
r me. He lifted his hat, and stood bare-
d, and Job and I came, dripping, into the
hall.
w we are quite dry and happy. Job is
iup in his gray blanket that matches his
skye complexion, bundled before the fire.
s had another dose of whisky; I suspect
sgot a little too much. I have had a hot
*1and got out of everything and into some-
and now my ruby gown - especially the
t part of it--seems to me to understand
tter than anything in the world. The rain
ite stopped, but the wind sings down the
/'ey. It has that tune in its head, too, and
-to be humming it:
IA man might sail to Hell in your companie."
t never gets quite through, yomes to a
falls short of heaven, and spoils the sense.
ier is still asleep in the library. Maggie
tne and gone for the night. The house is
;ously still. Mr. Herwin did not come
I did n't know but he would.
. DEAR MR. HERWIN: I- hope I was not
to you the other evening. I was really



<pb n="22"/>
22 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
very wet and cross. I did not mean to be ugly,
you know, but I'm liable to break out that way.
It's a kind of attack I have at times: I growl,
like Job. I hope you quite understand that I
esteem you very highly, and that I am always
ready to be your friend, although I cannot be
what you ask.
"Most sincerely yours,
"MARNA TRENT."
"DEAR MR. HERWIN: I fail to see why I
should be snapped up in this way, as if I had
been in the habit of forcing an unwelcome cor-
respondence upon you. I must call your atten-
tion to the fact that you never received a note
from me before, and this, I beg you to observe,
is the last with which you will be annoyed. I
did not suppose my friendship was a matter of
so little consequence to people. For my own
part, I think friendship is much nicer than other
things. According to my experience, that is the
great point on which men and women differ. I
am, sir,
"Very truly yours,
"M. TRENT."
There are people so constituted that they must
express themselves at any proper or improper



<pb n="23"/>
FESSIONS OF A        WIFE      23
tI 'm afraid I 'm one of them. I admire
ge reserve, the elemental silence that one
out, in what I call the deaf-mute heroes
oines; but I can't imitate it, and whether
ove or beneath it, I perceive that I have n't
~eption to know.
e are four ways in which a woman can
her mind, if she does n't lavish her heart:
er, a girl friend, a lover, or a book will
r. None of these four outlets is open to
na!- Poor Ina! You sweet, dead, only
:ver truly cared for! Sometimes I won-
y mother's lovely ghost is a little jealous of
cause I can't remember her to love her
ed you. Pray tell her, Dear, if you get a
;in that wide world of yours and hers, that
never thought about her in all my life as
I have this spring. She seems to float
ime and about me, in the air, wherever I
ir.
ood many people have told me that I
H b be a writer, which only shows the mas-
orance of the average humah mind. It
mes seems to me as if I must carry "Re-
with thanks" written all over me, I have
ed that subject so thoroughly. I am told
ere are persons who have got manuscripts
venteen times, and have become famous



<pb n="24"/>
24    CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
at the eighteenth trial trip; but my pluck gave
out at four experiences with prose and two with
poetry, and I am done with a literary career for
this world.
There is a fifth method of self-preservation.
You can become your own author, publisher,
printer, binder, reader, critic, and public; and a
common blank-book, with a padlock if you
choose, is competent to carry your soul and the
secrets thereof, if you have any, or to convince
you that you have some, if you have n't, which
is substantially the same thing. I call mine
"The Accepted Manuscript."
It is a week to-night since I added anything to
the Accepted Manuscript, and I 've nothing but
copies of a couple of humiliating notes to fill the
gap. Since that evening when I went out into
the tree-house in the storm, the secretary has not
seen fit to speak to me at all. If I meet him at
the door, he lifts his hat, and if I go into the
library while he is reading to Father, he lifts his
eyes, and their expression is positively exasper-
ating. I never denied that Mr. Herwin was a
handsome man, and melancholy becomes him,
I 'm bound to admit. But he has that remote
air, as if I had been caught stabbing him, and
nobody knew it but himself and me, and he
would n't tell of me, lest I be held up to human



<pb n="25"/>
-CONFESSIONS OF A       WIFE      25
ration; it is a manner quite peculiar to Mr.
vWin. I don't pretend to know how the man
s it, but he contrives to make me feel as if I
committed high treason, as if I had got en-
led in a political plot against my own nature.
I wish Father would dismiss him and get an-
er secretary.
I told him so yesterday, for I got a chance
en we met in the hall, and I was going out to
ive in my dove-colored cloth, trying to open
chiffon sunshade that stuck. He opened it
me -he is quite a gentleman, even when I
Cn't choose to be quite a lady, and I will own
t no invariable lady ought to have said what
said to the secretary. And the aggravating
iing about it was that the secretary laughed--he
ughed outright, as if I had amused him more
an I could be expected to understand. He
dthe sunshade in his hand, and he held it over
y head, and he said: " What pretty nonsense! "
ut he looked at the white silk and chiffon, with
he sun shining through it. I was n't quite clear
hat he meant. I 'm not accustomed to have
Iy sunshades called nonsense, or my language
ither. I never heard of a governor's secretary
before who was impertinent to the governor's
laughter. I can't see that Senator Herwin's
h aving been an honest person, and dying poor,



<pb n="26"/>
26    CONFESSIONS OF A       WIFE
accounts for it. I have been told that Mrs. Her-
win was a Southern beauty, the extravagant
kind, and that she led her husband a life. I
never saw her, but I 'm sure the secretary re-
sembles his mother. He looks remarkably
handsome when he is insolent.
"MY DEAR MR. HERWIN: I have spent
twenty-four hours trying to decide whether to
put your note into the fire, return it unanswered,
or show it to myfather. It is really unpleasant
to receive such things. You put one in such a
brutal light! As if it were a girl's fault because
a man liked her. I don't wish to be ill-man-
nered; I 'd rather be barbarous: but you compel
me to say, sir, that I disapprove of your persis-
tence altogether. Pray, do you think I am
the kind of woman who can be browbeaten into
loving people? Perhaps you take me for the
other sort that waits to be coaxed. Learn that I
am neither.
"But believe me to be,
"Sincerely yours,
"MARNA TRENT.
"P.S. I told you that I esteemed you and
would be your friend. You refused my friend-
ship, and now you wonder that I decline your



<pb n="27"/>
CONFESSIONS       OF A WIFE        27
.love. It seems to me that a man ought to be
satisfied with what he can get, and not make
such large demands that nobody can possibly
meet them. If I were a man, and loved a woman
as much as all that, I would - well, I would do
.-.quite differently."
"DEAR MR. HERwIN: Certainly not. Why
should I tell you what I would do if I were a
K man $  I cannot see that the circumstances call
fbr it.                    Very truly,
"M. T.
"MY DEAR SIR: Your last note is disagreeable
: to me. I must beg you to forego any further cor-
respondence with me on this subject. It is one
on which it is, and will be forever, impossible for
us to agree.                M. TRENT."
"MY DEAR MR. HERWIN: The world is so
full of women! I read the other day that there
-are forty millions in this country. I think if you
rteally would exert yourself, you might manage
: to love some other one of them. And then you
.and I would both be quite happy. You are not
a dull man (I grant you that), but you don't
-seem to understand my point in the least. It is
m not that I have a highly developed aversion to
3.



<pb n="28"/>
28   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
you. It is that I do not wish to love any man-
not any man. Pray consider this as final. You
can be so agreeable when you are not troublesome.
"MARNA TRENT."
"DEAR FRIEND: Now you are quite reason-
able and possible. I never had any objections to
your friendship; it was you who objected to
mine. Since you are willing to meet me on that
basis at last, I find you interesting and valuable
to me; and I am perfectly willing to write to you
in this way once in a while, since you wish it,
though I prefer to mail anything I may feel like
saying to your address. I was sorry the day I left
a note in the second volume of' Rufus Choate,'
and I would rather you did not send things by
Maggie. There 's something about it I don't
just like. I never allowed my heroine to do it in
the novel I wrote. You never knew I wrote a
novel, did you ? I never told anybody before.
It is because we are friends that I tell you. That
is my idea of a friend - somebody you can say
things to. I am mistaken in you if you ask me
why I never published it. That's one thing I
like about you -you are not stupid. You are
one of the people who understand; and there are
not enough of them to go round, you know. I
never knew but one person who understood -



<pb n="29"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE      29
t was my girl friend, Ina. She died. Some-
es I think she died because she understood
much- everything and everybody. People
sted their hearts on her; they told her every-
ing, and went bankrupt in confidence as soon
they came near her.
- "Job and I are sitting in the library, and Fa-
,er has gone to bed. You have been gone half
hour. The June-beetles are butting their
ads against the screens on account of the
hts, and Job barks and bounces at them every
me they hit. The moths are out there, too,
inging to the wire netting, and flying about
ealthily- beautiful little beings, some of them,
ansparent as spirits, and as indifferent to fate as
en and women. How joyously they court
eath! To look at them one would think it
uite a privilege.
"I found the roses when you left, and the
ems, out in the hall on the hat-tree. You are
ery thoughtful and kind, and, to tell the truth,
-don't mind being remembered. I have never -
ad much of Edwin Arnold. I shall begin with
elong one about Radha and Krishna. I have
mrned the leaves a little. I must say I don't
ink Krishna was in the least worthy of a girl
e that. Why did she waste herself on such a
ilow?



<pb n="30"/>
30    CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
"So you liked my shade hat with the May-
flowers ? That is very nice of you. The disad-
vantage about a man friend is that his education
in millinery is defective, as a rule. I was quite
pleased that you knew it was a May-flower.
Father asked me if they were hollyhocks, and I
told him no, they were peonies.
"Faithfully your friend,
MARNA TRENT.
" P.S. I forgot to say yes, thank you; I will
drive with you on Sunday, if you wish."
OH, now you have spoiled it all! How could
you, how could you begin all over again, and be
disagreeable? Do you suppose I would have
walked in the garden with you, by moonlight,
by June moonlight, if I had n't trusted you ? I
don't trust people over again when they shake
my trust, either, not if I can help it. That is
one of my peculiarities. I have attacks of lu-
nacy,-idiocy, if you will,-but I swing back,
and come to 'my senses, and look at things with
a kind of composure which I don't wonder that
you did not count on. I don't think it is char-
acteristic of girls, as girls go, and I know that it
is not considered admirable or lovable by men.
But I cannot help that, and I don't want to help



<pb n="31"/>
N   FESSIONS OF A      WIFE      31
is more. I prefer to swing back and
, balance of power.
you did wrong to make love to me again,
[ had trusted you to make friendship. No,
be quite unable to play golf with you on
flay, and I shall not be at home on Sunday
'oon. I am going out to the cemetery to put
flowers on Ina's grave. And on Monday
r has invited an old friend of ours, Dr.
rt Hazelton, to dinner, so I shall be preen-
d all that evening, while you are reading to
er, and probably much later. And on Tues-
i I am going to a dance at the Curtises'.
ere is one thing I am convinced of: it is the
test mistake, both in life and in literature, to
pose that love is the difficult, the complicated
dng.  It is not love, it is friendship, which is
great problem  of civilized society. The
er is quite elemental beside it.
"M. T."
une the thirteenth.
I loved Mr. Herwin, of course I would not,
fact I perceive that I could not, make him so
iserable. I think he is the handsomest man,
hen he is unhappy, whom I ever knew in my
pfe. I like to be quite just to people. He has
e bewildering beauty of a pagan god (I mean,



<pb n="32"/>
32 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
of course, one of the good-looking gods), but he
has the exasperating sensitiveness of a modern
man. And then, he has the terrible persistence
of a savage. I think he would have been capa-
ble of dashing whole tribes to war for a woman,
and carrying her off on his shoulder, bound hand
and foot, to his own country, and whether she
loved him or hated him would n't have mattered
so much -he would have got the woman. It
must be very uncomfortable to be born with such
a frightful will.
But I do not love him. I have told him that
I do not love him. I have told him till I should
think he would be ashamed to hear it again.
But it seems only to make him worse and worse.
He has a kind of sublimated insolence such as I
never met in any other person, and when I scorn
him for it, I find that I admire him for it-
which is despicable in me, of course, and I know
it perfectly.
He had the arrogance to tell me to-day in so
many words that I did n't understand myself.
He said   but I will not write what he said.
The Accepted Manuscript rejects the quotation.
- Oh, if I could talk with Ina! My poor Ina!
- If I could only put my head on my mother's
lap a minute! It seems to me a lonely girl is
the loneliest being in all the world.



<pb n="33"/>
_  : CONFESSIONS OF A     WIFE      33
June the fourteenth.
T the date down. I put it down precisely,
-drive it into my memory like the nail that
_ l drove into living flesh ard bone and brain.
w that I have done it, I wonder that I am not
idead as Sisera.
ii have told a person to-night- I, being sane
_l  in my right mind, competent to sign a will,
-serve as a witness, or be treasurer of a charity
zaar -I, Marna Trent, have told a person
t I -
How long ago was it?   Forty-five minutes,
: my watch. We were in the drawing-room,
r Father had two governors and three senators
dinner, and he had them prisoners in the
ibrary, and the secretary was let off. So Job
vas lying on the flounce of my white swiss with
the May-flowers embroidered on it, and the lights
!'were a little low on account of the June-beetles,
and there was a moon, and our long lace curtain
- drifted in and out, and blew against me, and I
got twisted in it like a veil.
And the secretary said -  Then I said-
: He looked like that savage I wrote about-the
· one that flung all the tribes into war. If he had
- picked me up and jumped over the garden wall
with me, I should n't have been surprised in the
least. The terrible thing is that I should n't



<pb n="34"/>
34    CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
have much cared if he had. For the man did
look as glorious as a deity. But he had the
divine originality to tell me that I loved him.
And the veriest squaw in the latest great and
gory North American historical novel could n't
have acted worse than I did.
For I said I did.
As soon. as the words were out of me, I could
have killed myself. And when I saw the ex-
pression on his face, I could have killed him
(that is, I could have if, say, it had been the
fashion of my tribe). There never was a civil-
ized woman who had more of the "forest pri-
meval" in her than I, and never one who was
less suspected of it. I am thought to be quite
a proper person, like other well-bred girls; and
the curious thing is that the savage in me never
breaks out in improper ways, but only smolders,
and sharpens knives, and thinks things, and
hums war-cries under its breath -and carries
chiffon sunshades, and wears twelve-button
gloves and satin slippers or embroidered May-
flowers all the while. And nothing could prove
it so well as the fact that my hand and my brain
are writing this sentence, putting words together
decently and in order, while I have fled into a
pathless place and hidden from myself If he
were here this minute, searching my soul with



<pb n="35"/>
H  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           35
1 splendid eyes, that man could never find me.
nnot find myself. There is no trail.
All I know is that I got straight up, and went
IIIt of the drawing-room, and left him alone.
I    y school-girl might have done as silly a thing.
II;can't say that I take any particular comfort in
1e erecollection of the fact. But I am convinced
should do it again under the same circum-
ances.
For the lace curtain blew so, and fell over my
ead and face, and I stood up to push it away,
E  and he sprang to his feet, and his arms - and I
-dipped under them, as if we had been playing
ithat game that children call "Open the gates to
1 let the king come in "- and so I whirled about,
; and swung out, and I found I was free, and I
* ran.
I:    He has n't gone yet. It is perfectly still in
the drawing-room. That is his cigar on the
I  piazza. I wonder what he 's waiting for?
I PUT my head out of the window just now to
ask him, for it is very tiresome up here, and
cigar-smoke makes me nervous. So I leaned
* out a little way, and I said:
" What are you waiting for, Mr. Herwin ? "
" You."
"You '11 wait a good while, then."



<pb n="36"/>
36    CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
"Oh, no, I sha'n't."
"Sir, I find you insufferable."
"Dear, I find you adorable."
"Mr. Herwin, go home. I am not coming
down."
"Mama, come down. I am not going home."
"Then you will spend the night on the piazza.
What are you waiting for, anyway . "
" To take something."
"Call James. He has the keys of the wine-
cellar."
"Are you going to be insufferable "
"Well, I 'd rather be anything than adorable."
"But, you see, you can't help yourself."
"You '11 find I can .... What is it you are
waiting to take, Mr. Herwin "
"One of my rights."
"You have no rights, sir."
"Oh, yes, I have. . . . Mama, come down!"
"I might, if you spoke to me properly."
"Won't you come down - please ? "
"I am sorry to disappoint you. But I do not
please." And then I shut the window down.
But it is a pretty warm night, and I could n't
stand it as long as I thought I could. So I
opened the window after a while, as softly as a
moonbeam sliding around the edges of a leaf.
I did n't think anybody could hear me. That



<pb n="37"/>
: CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE            37,
has the ears of an intelligent Cherokee.
I shall not write down what he said. The
cepted Manuscript declines the publication
such language. So I answered, for I had to
something:
B " Where is Job, Mr. Herwin ?"
t On my lap."
" I must say I don't think much of his taste.
hat is he doing "
:" Kissing me."
" Oh, good gracious!" ..
So I shut the window down again, and I
ocked it, too. Pretty soon Job came up to my
Ioor and cried, and I let him in. But I did n't
o down. And I did n't open the window.
nd there is n't air enough in this room to fill
e lungs of a moth. And Job's tongue hangs
out of his mouth like a long, pink ribbon, he
pants so. It is ten o'clock.
iIT is half-past ten. I have opened the window
?far enough to tuck my silver hand-glass under
-the little one. By the pronounced absence of
nicotine from the atmosphere, I infer that the
secretary has given up a bad argument and gone
home.- I wonder, by the way, what kind of
home he has     It never occurred to me to
wonder, before. Some sort of chambers, I sup-



<pb n="38"/>
38 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
pose, among a lot of bachelors. I should think
he must be quite comfortable and happy.
The governors and the senators have gone,
too. I have kissed Father good night, and sent
Maggie away, for I could n't bear the sight of
her to-night, and had hard work not to tell her
so. And now Job and I are locked in. Job is
asleep in his basket bed by the window; and
when the June-beetles hit on the screen, he
growls in his dreams, for there never was any-
body so intelligent as Job; but when the moths
come, they are so beautiful and so stealthy, he
does not growl. As I write, they whirl and flit,
and retreat and advance, and yield and persist,
like half-embodied souls entangled in some
eternal game. That invisible barrier between
them and delight and death seems to tantalize
them beyond endurance.
It is eleven o'clock.
IT is half-past eleven. I have n't begun to un-
dress. I think there never was anything worse
than the weather to-night. I cannot get breath
enough to think. Job squirms about in his
basket, and sits up and begs like a china dog in
a country grocery. I think he wants a walk. I
believe I '11 slip out into the garden with him;
I 've done it before, as late as this. The moon



<pb n="39"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE      39
*as bright as an army with banners. There is
-mething martial and terrible about it -it
erms to move right over one, as if it had orders
prepare for a vast battle of the elements. I
lieve there '11 be a tremendous easterly storm
-morrow. I always know before the weather
reau does when an easterly is on the way.
Perhaps I may come to my senses out in the
rden.
pr is twelve o'clock - it is, to be precise, half-
ast twelve o'clock.
· I did come to my senses out in the garden-
or I lost them forever, and the terrible thing is
hat I cannot tell which.
For Job and I went out into the garden, and
Fhe world was as white as death, and as warm as
life, and we plunged into the night as if we
.,plunged into a bath of warmth and whiteness-
-and I ran faster than Job. The yellow June
lilies are out, and the purple' fleurs-de-lis; the
i white climber is in blossom on the tree-house,
and the other roses - oh, the roses! There was
such a scent of everything in one - a lily-honey-
iris-rose perfume -that I felt drowned in it, as
if I had been one flower trying to become an-
other, or doomed to become others still. It was
as quiet as paradise. I ran up the steps to



<pb n="40"/>
40    CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
Ararat, and Job stayed below to paw a toad.
The little white rose followed me all over the
lattice, and seemed to creep after me; it has a
golden heart, and such a scent as I cannot de-
scribe; it is the kind of sweetness that makes
you not want to talk about it. The electric
light in the street was out, for this suburb, being
of an economical turn of mind, never competes
with the moon. There was moon enough-
oh, there was enough, I think, for the whole
world! For, when that happened which did
happen, it seemed to me as if the whole world
were looking at me.
As I sat, quite by myself, in Ararat, behind
the vines, all flecked with leaf-shadows and
flower-shadows.(and thinking how pretty shadows
are on white dresses and on bare hands and a
little bit of your arm), I heard Job's tail hit the
foot of the tree-house steps. And as I looked,
it began to wag in the most unpardonable man-
ner. Then I knew what had happened, and my
heart leaped in my body like a live creature that
had been caught in a trap. My lips moved, but
they were as.dry as a dead, red maple-leaf; my
words refused me, and there could n't have been
a rose in the garden as red as my cheeks, for I
felt as if I could have died of fear and joy, and
of shame because I felt joy. There is something



<pb n="41"/>
F   CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE     41
rrible about joy. It does n't seem to mind
y of the other emotions.
"Do not be frightened," he said quite gently.
H It is only I."
- It was only he. It was only the only person
n the world who could have frightened me, out
here in Ararat in my father's garden, at more
tan half-past eleven by the June moon.
He came up the tree-house steps, tramping
steadily, and he made no more apology for his
behavior than the moon did, or the west wind,
which, by now, had begun to stir and rise.
"You intrude, Mr. Herwin," I said. "Since
you do, I must go into the house."
- "Presently," he said serenely. But I looked
lup into his eyes, and I saw that he was not
serene. And he stood between me and the tree-
house steps. And I said:
"Let me pass, sir!"
"In a minute, Mama."
"Let me pass this minute!"
"My beautiful!"
"You presume, Mr. Herwin, and take a
liberty."
"Perhaps I do. I beg your pardon. Go into
the house, if you will."
He stepped back. I moved to go down the
tree-house steps, but I tripped over something-
i..



<pb n="42"/>
42    CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
it was Job; for Job had forgotten his toad, and
he had come up into Ararat, wiggling and wag-
gling at the secretary, and he took my dress in
his teeth to shake it the way he does, and that
tripped me, and I fell.
I should have gone clear down the tree-house  1
steps, the whole length, but he caught me. And
when he had caught me he did not let me go.
"I will not take it," he said, between his teeth.
And he went as white as the moon. "You shall
give it to me."
"I will never give it to you! " I cried.
"What if I held you here until you did "
"I should hate and abhor you."
"You could n't hate me."
"When youspeak like that, I despise you."
"No, you don't; you love me."
"I wish you a very good evening, Mr.
Herwin."
"I wish you to be my wife, Miss Trent."
"I must decline the honor, sir."
"But I decline the declination .... You
love me!"
"Do you think it is proper - keeping a girl out
here at midnight, this way?"
"We will make it proper. We will tell the
whole world to-morrow morning. I will wake
your father up and tell him now, if you say so."



<pb n="43"/>
_ CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 43
I "I don't say anything-not anything, you
Iderstand."
"You have said everything, Dear," he answered
another tone, and he spoke so reverently and
solemnly that my spirit died within me, and I
t, suddenly and strangely, less like a girl in
ve than like a girl at prayer. And the tears
Iame to me, I don't know why, from some depth
n me that I had never known or felt in all my
Ilife; and they began to roll down my cheeks,
and I trembled, for I was more afraid of my own
^ tears than I was of him, or of his love.
Im  "God forgive me !" he said. " What have I
I done?   I have made you cry!" And he t6ok
my face between his hands.
Oh, Mother, Mother! My dead Mother!
The man took my face between his hands, and
l  he kissed me on the lips.-Mother, Mother,
:Mother !
IT is two o'clock. I cannot sleep. I am sitting
.up straight here in my night-dress. I think I
shall never sleep again. The night grows cruelly
bright and brighter all the time. I wish the
moon could be put out. I. feel as if my eyelids
had been burned off,-as if my eyes would never
feel any'softness or darkness again. I wonder if
there are people in the world who would not
4



<pb n="44"/>
44 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
feel as unhappy if they had committed a great
sin as I feel about that kiss ?
The music over at the Curtises' has but just
stopped. Somebody has been serenading one of
the Curtis girls--a college crowd, I think.
They sang a thing I do not know. But the
German words came over quite distinctly:
Er hat mich gekiisst.
My cheeks blaze till they smart and ache. I
feel as if the whole world knew. I feel as if the
climbing rose told, and the iris, the June lilies,
and even the poor gray toad that Job tormented;
as if every sweet, loving, gracious thing and every
little, common, unpopular thing in nature con-
spired against me; and as if the moon sided with
them, and the warm west wind drove them on.
And the moths-now I have it! It was the
moths. They who delight in dying, and die of
delight--they would be the first to tell of me.
They would see me led to delight and death,
and not be sorry for me at all. Nobody would
be sorry for me.
Er hat mich gekiisst.
And yet I do not wish or mean to marry this
man--nor any man; no, not any man. That
is my nature.



<pb n="45"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A          WIFE      45
Why has not my nature as much claim to
ecognition as his nature? I can't see that he
has a monopoly in natures. In.that Indian poem
Ewhich he sent me were some words. They keep
close behind my thoughts, as close as Job keeps
jto my shadow:
Thy heart has entered: let thy feet go too.
Give him the drink of amrit from thy lips.
But Radha was quite a dignified person. No-
body took any liberties with her. Krishna was
T bad enough, but he did not steal. That a man
should kiss you when you do not mean to be
his wife -it -is a dreadful thing. I can't think
of anything worse that could happen to a girl.
He has made me so unhappy that I never want
to see his face again.
I think I really shall ask Father to dismiss the
secretary.



<pb n="46"/>
ue te eII-f
Cune the twenty-fifth.
W      HERE shall I find a name for the thing
which has befallen me ?  It seems to me
as if there were no name for it in earth or heaven.
If I call it joy, I shrink away from the word;
and if I call it altogether fear, I know that I do
it a wrong: but if I call it hope, I find that my
fear pulls my hope down, as the drowning pulls
down his rescuer.
Yet I cannot deny that I am happy. I would
if I could, for I certainly am not comfortable.
Write it down, Marna Trent-fling it into black
and white, and let it stare you out of your sane
senses. See! How do you like the looks of it?
You have promised a man that you would be
his wife. rou have promised-- a - MAN - that
you would be his wife.
I have been trying to recall the exact lan-
guage: whether I did n't say that I would be
his employer's daughter, or possibly his consid-
erate friend, or even his dearest enemy, or almost
46



<pb n="47"/>
CONFESSIONS      OF A    WIFE     47
anything that might be mentioned, except that
one dreadful thing.  I am  afraid I did say
' wife." No; now I think of it, it was he who
Isaid that. All I said was "Yes," and, on the
whole, sometime, perhaps, I would; and all I
did was not to turn him out of the room after I
had said it. That is n't strictly true, either. It
I-was n't quite all I did. As for him, he did so
many things that I don't dare to think of them,
because, if I do, the Wilderness Girl in me
comes up, and I feel as if I could call out my
whole tribe and have them kill him on the spot
-I do indeed.
But the perfectly ridiculous thing about that
1 is that if I saw so much as a woodpecker nip-
ping at him, I should kill the woodpecker! And
: if I saw anybody really trying to do him any
harm, all the tomahawks of colonial history
would have to hit me first. I think I should
feel a positive ecstasy in a tomahawk that was
' meant for him.
This seems to me a pitiable state of mind for
a girl to be in. I don't respect it; really, I
don't. There 's a part of me that stands off and
looks on at myself, and keeps quite collected
and sane, and says, "What a lunatic that girl is!"
But the Wilderness Girl does n't mind the other
girl a bit, and this is what mortifies me so.



<pb n="48"/>
48   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
I don't think I will write any more to-night.
I'm ashamed to. I don't know what I might
say. I'm afraid the Accepted Manuscript would
reject me altogether if I should once let myself
go and offer it any such copy as comes pouring
upon this paper, hot and fast, like the drops of
my heart's blood. I '11 shut the book and go to
bed.
An hour later.
I CAN'T do it. I 've got as far as my hair and
my slippers - and my white gown (for it is such
a warm night, and no moon, just that sultry
darkness which smothers the breath out of you,
soul and body)-the gown with elbow-sleeves
and the Valenciennes yoke. It is rather pretty.
Nobody ever sees me in it but Maggie; only
once in a while when Father rings, and I run
down in a hurry. Maggie thinks it is becoming;
but Father asked me if I did n't take cold in it.
I 've always been fond of this gown. Some-
times I wish the sleeves were longer.
Now I think of it, I must have been out of my
right mind. I shall have to write and tell him
so. I wonder if it was n't a sunstroke  I was
out at noon, in the garden, rather long to-day.
They say people do such queer things after sun-



<pb n="49"/>
CONFESSIONS        OF A    WIFE     49
'strokes. Job had something like a sunstroke,
I 'm convinced. It was trying to find Job that
I got into the sun. He was up in the tree-house,
and it was hotter than anything; and he only
shook hands, he was so weak, and did n't kiss
me at all.
I DON'T see, in the least, why Mr. Herwin should
have felt called upon to make up for Job's
omission.
I HAD to give him sherbet, and put cracked ice
on the back of his neck  I mean Job's neck.
Job is much better. He is snoring in his basket,
with his four feet up in the air. I shingled him
to-day. He has kept his winter flannels on too
long, the poor dear thing. I'm afraid I have
neglected Job lately. I mean to devote myself
to him exclusively hereafter.
MR. HERWIN'S hair does curl beautifully, and it
is so much softer than one would have thought.
ITwo hours later.
IT is well on toward morning. I wish I had
been born one of those people who sleep when
things happen. I am writing on and on, in this
perfectly preposterous way. I am  likely to



<pb n="50"/>
50 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
drown myself in seaweed and shells, because I
am afraid to wade in and dare the ocean.
Plunge, Marna Trent! Admit it once for all.
You love this man so much-so much   there
is nothing you will not think, or feel, or do, or
be, for his dear sake. You will even be his wife,
because he wishes it. And what is there more
than that a girl could do for a man's sake ?
WHY do you have to write your soul, I wonder ?
Other people don't. They talk it, or they keep
it to themselves and don't express it at all.
Sometimes I suspect that is the best thing to do
with souls -lock them up. But I have n't got
that kind. Mine is a jack-in-the-box, and is
always pushing the lid and jumping up. Well,
if you 've got to write, stop writing to yourself,
and write to him, then. Sit down here, in your
pretty lace gown, alone in your own room, at
two o'clock in the morning, and tell this man
whose wife you have promised to be how you
feel about him now, at the very beginning of
everything. I don't believe you could do a bet-
ter thing. Come to think of it, he might rather
like it, on the whole.
"MY DEAR MR. HERWIN: It occurs to me
that a note from me, under the circumstances,



<pb n="51"/>
CONFESSIONS     OF A WIFE          51
I might be agreeable to you. But now that I am
' trying to write it, I am not sure that I have be-
gun it just right. I will send this as it stands,
i; and try again.     Faithfully yours,
"MARNA TRENT."
"MY DEAR FRIEND: I am not sleeping very
well to-night,- I 've been anxious about Job, on
account of his sunstroke,-and so I thought I
| would write a line to you, and put it in the first
volume of' Rufus Choate' to-morrow. It is very
I strange, but now I feel quite willing to put notes
. in' Rufus Choate,' and I sha'n't be troubled if
you send things by Maggie.
[.,i          'C! "Your affectionate
"MARNA TRENT."
"DEAR, what have we done ? Oh, what have
- we done   Why did you make me love you ?
I was quite happy before. All my days rose
and set in peaceful easts and wests -gray and
rose and sunlight colors. Now I am caught up
into a stormy sky, dashed with scarlet and purple
and fire, and swept along,- I don't know where,
I don't know why,- carried away from myself,
as I used to dream that I should be if I let my-
self out of the window, and did not fall, but
were taken up by the wind, and borne to the
?:



<pb n="52"/>
52    CONFESSIONS     OF A   WIFE
tops of the elms- never any higher, so as to be
dangerous, but whirled along over the heads of
people, out of everybody's reach.
"Now we are swept along together, you and
I, and I am out of everybody's reach,but yours.
And now that I and my dream are one, I am
afraid of my dream; and I am afraid of you.
Why did you love me    Why did you make
me, why did you let me, love you? For you
did --you'know you did: you made me do it.
I did n't want to love you. Have n't I entreated
you, by every look and word and tone these ten
weeks past, not to make me love you ? My
heart has been a beggar at your feet all the spring
and summer, praying to you not to let me love
you. You know it has. You are not a stupid
man. You knew I did n't mean to love you,
Dana Herwin; or, if you did n't know it, then I
take it back, and you are a stupid man, and you
deserve to be told so. Of course you know I
had to be decent and friendly, and I did n't keep
out of your way altogether. How could I ? If
I had n't been friendly with you, that would
have been telling. Nothing gives away the
secret of a girl's heart quicker than that - not to
dare to be friends with a man. She might as
well propose to him and done with it, I think.
Of course I had to treat you prettily.



<pb n="53"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE                53
"But I did n't want to love you this way-
not this way. I did n't want to marry you. I
inever thought of such a dreadful thing! And I
-wish you to understand, sir, that it is very dis-
-agreeable to me to think of it now. I will be
honest with you at the beginning of everything.
. If a woman is honest with herself and her love,
she must be honest with the man she loves.
And I tell you, sir,- for it is the truth, and I 've
got to tell you,- if I could unlove you I would
do it this minute, and stand by the consequences.
I believe I '11 try. If you don't have any more
notes from me, you will know I have succeeded.
:  "Yours,       M. T."
The light fell, and the dusk rose, and they twain, the escaped
and the pursuing, the fleeing and the seeking, were alone on
that part of the river. For it is not a frequented part of the
river. And the princess hid from him.
"I AM sorry if it does n't please you that I send
notes without beginnings.   I 've tried a good
many different ones, but they do not suit me.
Perhaps it is because I don't quite see ends.
How solemn a thing is a beginning without an
end! A    love that is never to have an end
seems to me more sacred to think of than a life
that is to have no end; because you can live



<pb n="54"/>
54    CONFESSIONS OF A       WIFE 
without loving, but you can't love without living,
and the moment life and love become one-
that is a terrible moment. I wrote long ago, in
something I have that nobody sees, that joy is
terrible. But you don't seem to think so, and
that is what perplexes me.
"I remember a book my mother gave me
when I was a little girl- I keep it now with
my Bible. It is called 'A Story Without an
End,' and is one of those old-time allegories
about the human soul. A Child who was always
spelled with a big C lived in a hut in a forest,
alone with the birds and the butterflies, the
flowers and the animals, and a little looking-
glass covered with cobwebs in which he tried to
see himself. And the bluebells were taller than
the Child, and delighted me.  There was a
chapter on Faith, and one on Aspiration, and
one on Love; and it seemed to me I understood
the chapter stories about Faith, and even about
Aspiration, but the one about Love I could not
understand, and it troubled me. I seemed to
sit down before it as the Child sat under the
bluebells that were taller than himself-with
his chin in his hands--this way. I '11 show
you next time we are in the drawing-room to-
gether. That is, if you won't disturb me; for
I tell you at the beginning, I can't bear to have



<pb n="55"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE             5
ychin touched. If you ever do that, I shall
ow that you wish to quarrel with me badly.
ou are quite mistaken that I have a dimple
ere. Nobody else ever told me so.   My
imple is in my left cheek. I consider it a kind
f embezzlement to create dimples where they
on't exist, and much worse to make them an
xcuse for doing things.
,' "Sir, you kissed my chin yesterday, when I
ad asked you not to. This is the reason I am
riting you without beginnings.  The blue-
ells are taller than I to-day, and you must
eave me alone with them in my forest. I shall
stay there till you have learned not to-
hy do you do things I ask you not to  I
don't love you for it-truly I don't. I suppose
/ome women would. But when a man chooses
a Wilderness Girl, he must not expect her to
iJe precisely like all the other girls, and, in my
ppinion, he should treat her accordingly. No,
/i am not ready yet to wear rings for people.
When I am, I'll let you know. Nor I don't
care what stone it is, as long as it is n't a dia-
jmond. I don't know how much I love you,-
:I admit that,-and I want you to understand
fhat you don't know, either. Perhaps it is not
o very much; who knows?   Perhaps a little
ore than that-I can't say. But I do know
,



<pb n="56"/>
56    CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
that I could not vulgarize my love for you- 
whether it be little, or much, or less-by mak-
ing myself prisoner to a commonplace solitaire.
"Why need I be a prisoner at all?  I'm sure
I can love you quite as much without rings.
"Lovingly and loyally,
"Yours,
"MARNA."
"I THINK, on the whole, if I 'd got to wear
any, I 'd like it to be a ruby; a small ruby,
deep at the heart, and fed by an aorta of blazing
color that you must take a little on trust, but
get glimpses of once in a while, if you know
how to treat the ruby and handle it just right.
Of course it must be a carmine ruby - not one
of those magenta things. I am not at all pre-
pared for any kind of rubies yet. Really, you
must not bother me and hurry me so. It makes
me a little fretful. I shall run off into my forest
if I am hurried, and then no man can find me -
not even you, sir.
"This evening you annoyed me. I think
once when you come, and once when you go, is
enough. I do, indeed."
" DEAR, you were very considerate and gentle
with me to-day, and I love you. I do love you.



<pb n="57"/>
'CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     57
ou will like it, if it will make you happy, I
wear your ring. You may put it on to-
ow evening. For truly I do wish to make
~;happy.                     MARNA.
P.S. Be patient with me. I know I make
a great deal of trouble, but indeed, indeed,
annot help it. It is my nature, I'm afraid.
what is nature'? It seems to me a trackless
e; a great tropical jungle where it is easy to
. lost on foot, or a vast space of ether where
5 possible to get lost on wings. After all, I
}rather young, though I don't feel as if I were,
Ino motherless girl does, I think,- and I don't
ays know the difference between my feet and
wings. All I know is that I love you. And
M5uby is love incarnate. Bind me to you with
ur ruby, my dear Love! Then I cannot get
:y if I would, and perhaps - who knows ' -
ps I would not if I could, for I am, and
: knows I want to be,
-"Your        MARNA."
'* MOTHER ?  My dear dead Mother out some-
in the wide summer night, I write a note
you. Did any girl ever write a letter to her
mother before?  Oh, I don't know, but,
er, I must! I am such a lonely girl! I



<pb n="58"/>
58    CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 
have nobody to speak to - I cannot talk to the
girls I know, and there is n't any older woman
who has ever shown a mother-heart to me that I
could care for, to turn to now. Mother, don't
forget me in your grand heaven! I never needed
you so much when I was a little crying baby on
your heart,- a little black-faced baby holding its
breath till it almost died because it could n't get
what it wanted, the way they tell me I used to
do,- I never needed you so much when I wore
pink socks and little crocheted sacks, as I do to-
day. I wonder if you remember about the socks
and the sacks, up there in your great silence ?
Have the angels driven baby-clothes out of your
heart ?  I don't believe it! Because I remem-
ber how much you littled me, before you died-
I don't see many mothers like you in these
grown-up days. Once, when you had been to 
Montreal with Father, and I had that typhoid
fever and so nearly died, and you came home,
and got to my bed without anybody's telling me,
and I thought it was the strange nurse, but some-
thing fell on my face, hot, fast,- drop after drop,
splashing down,- I thought: 'Nurses don't
cry over little girl patients,' and I looked, and
they were my mother's tears, and it was my
mother's face.
"Sacred mother's tears! Flow for me to-day.



<pb n="59"/>
: CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE      59
other's face! Lean down to mine a little,
Bfheaven, if you can.
Kiss me, Mother -if they will let you. I
itold him I would wear his ruby ring."
princess, for she was royal, gainsaid him not.
MY DEAR MR. HERWIN: I have worn it five
. I cannot stand it another minute. It
' to cut into my finger, and to eat my flesh
ire. I feel as if I were led, a prisoner. It
s to me like handcuffs. I don't,like it at
I really don't.
have taken it off, and, you see, it fell on
or. It has rolled away under the bureau.
has gone to try to find it. Probably he
it is a collar. I 'm sure I should n't blame
if he did. It strikes me, I must say, very
in that same light.
Pray don't feel at all hurt if I return it to
to-morrow. You won't, will you? Really,
't wish to be rude, or to hurt your feelings.
H isupposed it possible that you could try to
/rstand- but men are born so dull. I don't
why. I think God found his finest nature
ployed on the making of Adam, and so
lEve was sacrificed to its expression.
/i.



<pb n="60"/>
60    CONFESSIONS OF A       WIFE,
"I don't mean anything profane, either.
Truly, I think only the Being who created her
can possibly understand how a woman feels.
"Shall I send you back the ruby ?
"Your troubled
"WILDERNESS GIRL.
"P.S. Job has found the ring. He made a
ball of it, and rolled it all over the floor, before
I could stop him. Then he took it and shook
it, and dropped it in his bowl of water--the
wine-colored glass finger-bowl that I keep in my
room for him. So it is quite clean, and not
hurt a bit.
"P.P.S. It is a wonderful ruby. I admire
your taste in selecting it, even if I cannot wear
your ring. I don't think I ever saw a finer. It
has 'a heart as deep as life and as shy as love;
and the color is something so exquisite that I
could look at it all night."
Tuesday evening.
"DEAR, I am sorry. I was wrong and foolish,
like a pouting child. And I will wear it, after
all. When you took my ringless hand so gently,
and looked at it so sadly, and laid it down with-
out a word, I could have curled myself against
your heart, and put my arms about you, and



<pb n="61"/>
CONFESSIONS       OF A   WIFE      61
my lips to you of my own free will. No;
w I did n't. But I punish myself by tell-
B ou what I feel like doing, if that is any
ort to you. I never saw you look so glori-
:n my life. If ever I should marry you, sir,
11 spoil you, for I shall let you know what a
ome man you are. There 's something
; your hair--and the pose of your head.
.your eyes are like a revolving light in a
touse, I think: they darken and blaze, and
1 I miss a revolution, and they blaze and
en. I sometimes wish I could see your
th. The other way of getting acquainted
it does not seem quite judicial. Of course
rk mustache becomes you, but still it is a
like a mask or a domino, after all, is n't it 
e in a while it comes over me -like that!
at kind of man is in his mouth ? All I know
ght is that he is a man dear to me; so dear
)when I am with him I cannot let him know
=dear he is, and when I am away from him
jnot do anything but write him notes to try
A1 him.
That last of yours (by Maggie) was a lovely
pr. I suppose it is what people call a love-let-
iI wish I could send you anything like that.
took my breath away.   I felt smothered.
iI cannot write like that. No. My heart



<pb n="62"/>
62   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
steps back and waits for yours. I should like
you to write me on and on like that forever, and
I should like to answer you always far beyond
you, always stepping back a little--waiting for
you, on forever, till you overtook me.
"Perhaps, if I had my way, you never should
overtake me. I grant you that. But it is just
possible I might not be let to have my way;
and I recognize that, too.
"If you come into the tree-house to-morrow
evening, after Father is done with you, there
will be a moon-and Job - and perhaps a girl.
And you may put the ring where it belongs. 
"For I am
"Your penitent       1
"MARNA.
"P.S. That is, if I don't change my mind
by that time. I warn you, I 'm capable of it.'
"P.P.S. Job is too jealous for anything.
He positively sulks when I mention you by
name. I don't suppose you noticed how he
growled when you kissed my chin that evening.
I am glad you don't do it lately, for I think he
might snap at you and hurt you. He does n't
look formidable, I own, but that is the very kind
that does the most harm - in men and dogs."



<pb n="63"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE             63
Hou dearest! It was Eden in the tree-
.And I wear thy ruby ring.
"Thy
" MARNA.
P.S. Did you ever dream of such a moon
e wildest and dearest dream you ever had ?
ever did. It swam in a new heaven; and
- we were in a new earth; and every flower
e garden needed a new name. My heart
a Child (with a big C) sitting at the feet of
garden, as (you said) your love knelt down
Fine. Every flower was taller than I- the
ghty fleur-de-lis, and the tender white roses,
even the modest pansies, and the little, plain
dytuft, that looks like daily life and pleasant
ty - they all seemed to tower above me, like
flowers of a strange country of which I did
know the botany. Love, I think, is flora
Ihut a botany. You cannot name a feeling,
d classify it, when you love. It would escape
and you,
too late,
Under its solemn fillet see the scorn.
could not speak, out in the tree-house, as you
My lips trembled too much. And when
frs touched them, they did but tremble more.
i



<pb n="64"/>
64    CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
I was afraid I should cry-truly I was-all
the time.
' Alas! you are a man, and you cannot under-
stand what I mean. But the ruby understands.
That is the nature of a ruby: it knows every-
thing about love, and something about a woman.
"MARNA, Prisoner."
"MY DEAR JAILER: I heard a story to-day.
Senator Gray told it at lunch, and I meant
to tell you it this evening, but, somehow, I
did n't.
"A young medical student loved a girl, and
became betrothed to her. (I like that word
' betrothal,' as I told you. Father knew a great 
poet, once, who announced to his friends 'the
betrothal of my daughter.' Nobody ever spoke
of that girl as 'engaged' after that!)  So my
medical student loved a girl, and -no, on con-
sideration, he became engaged.
"You and I, if you please, are betrothed.
But I am sure the fine and stately word would
blush to own that man, though he loved the girl,
after his fashion, and she was a sweet, womanly
girl--I know about the family. And so he
went abroad to finish his studies on the Conti-
nent. There he dissected and experimented, and
went through the modern laboratories, and came
,                  .~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~;



<pb n="65"/>
l lNENFESSIONS OF A WIFE                   65
//I     [them and back to his own land, and went
I the girl.
nd when she asked him what was the mat-
I  IJ* d why he was so changed, and what gave
_f f   iyes that new, cold look, he said:
_tHj^Idn all my studies I have not found love. I
_i      ¢a dissected and experimented, and been
II Hpgh the laboratories. I have searched, and I
i *pot find anything that can be called love. I
III^^e dissected a great many brains and hearts, and
_^^   yve drawn conclusions. I have come across
e points in toxicology, and I have reason
believe I am on the track of a new method
_   ;| antisepsis - but I have not discovered
-i e.      I am  beginning to think that there
no such thing.  It cannot be proved.  My
alpel has never touched it.    My micro-
_     01pe has never seen it.  I am forced to the
_    ¢nclusion that it does not exist. It cannot be
oved.'
_    -, "'Very well,' said the girl; 'if you cannot
// rove the existence of love, I can.'
1, "'Prove it to me!' cried the young man,
_*~  nxiously, for he really liked the girl. ' I shall
e under obligations to you if you can convince
_ii:ne of the existence of love.'
"'You  will excuse me,' said the    girl.
Good-by.' So they shook hands, and he went
B.



<pb n="66"/>
66   CONFESSIONS      OF A   WIFE
back to his physiological laboratories, where he |
is experimenting and dissecting to this day.  1
"But the girl took a Sunday-school class and  a
joined the Associated Charities.
"I thought you would enjoy that story. Dear,
I thought I loved you when you said you liked
my looks by the moonlight, in my Mayflower
dress. But I love you more now than I did
then.
" It is the most curious thing -the moment
I am away from you I want to sit right down
and write a note to you. I am glad you feel
the same way. I have quite a pile of them, all
locked up, because Job chews them so. He
seems to know they are yours, and takes the
most violent aversion to them. One night he
tore that one to pieces-do you remember'?-
the one I told you I did n't just exactly like.
I don't mean, of course, that it was n't quite a
right letter. One reason I like you so much is
because you are such a gentleman. But, some-
how, it made me feel as if I wanted to go and
show it to my mother, and she is dead, and I
could n't do it. Job bit that note all up, so
I had to burn it; there was n't a legible word
left in it. Perhaps I am a little bit of a Puritan,
as you say. But I can't help it. I am born



<pb n="67"/>
NFESSIONS      OF A   WIFE     67
I|y. I like to be loved finely--if you
IHwhat I mean; and perhaps I like to be
quietly. I think you must know, because
H dy can be finer than you, or more quiet,
I|, when you feel like it. Sometimes I
there are two of you, and the other one is
g and masterful, and rides over things and
Ile and feelings, and has its own way at'any
. Forgive me, Dear; perhaps I should not
R jthese things. But you know there are two
_e also, and one girl stands off and judges
Iother girl - and sometimes looks on at you
/[if you were not mine, but belonged to some
r woman. I don't think I am as fond of a
/a6sterful, man, not just of his mere masterful-
Is', as most girls are. It does n't seem to con-
/jle me, or make me see things differently. If
/:: were up in a captive balloon together, over
/HIe tops of the elms, in an easterly storm, and
/Iau said, ' Come! We will free the balloon and
de on the storm,' I suppose there are girls who
uld put their arms about your neck and say,
VYes, if you wish it, we will ride on the storm.'
ut I should probably say:
_*| '"Dana, let 's keep our heads and go down.'
" Then, if you were good and went down, and
_ e came home safely-and I should be a little
int, and all tired out (for I think I should),



<pb n="68"/>
68   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
and you carried me into the house, and I saw
how noble you were, and strong, and grand, I
should-oh, my dear! I would make it up to you.
"Once you told me I was cold -to you. I
was sorry. But I did n't say anything. I only:
wished you had understood. I think I am writ- 
ing this note to try to make you understand.
"Your
"MARNA, Betrothed."
"Bar Harbor, yuly the twenty-fifth.
"MY DEAR AND DISTANT: Now, for the first
time in my life, I know what distance means.
I thought I knew, of course.  The curious
thing about inexperience is that it does not rec-
ognize its master in experience; perhaps, if it
did, it would cease to be inexperience. That re-
minds me that you told me once that I spelled
love with a small I instead of with. a large one
like most women, and that you slould never be
satisfied with mine until you had taught me to
read it with a capital L, and another word with
a capital M. I think you said it was the very
essence of loving, in a woman, to spell her feel-
ing properly-and that, as long as she did not,
she was still half unwon. I wonder how you
happen to think you know what is the essence
of loving in a woman ?
**Ii



<pb n="69"/>
*  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           69
1At least, I have got so far as this: I don't
br but I am beginning to spell Love with a
ital L. For it is the dreadful truth, Dana
gwin, that I miss you - I really do. I should
'have thought that I would at all; I mean,
like this -not to be uncomfortable, you
w, and to come so near being unhappy that
cease to be happy. I think - do you want
know what I think? And I feel- but you
not to know what I feel. In the morning,
en I wake, I turn and look at the sea, between
rs. Gray's pretty curtains (they are white and
er, with green seaweed over them), and I say:
1I that ocean and land are between us: sixteen
urs of it by boat, and over ten by train.' In the
ening, when the rest are canoeing, or chatting
piazzas, I like to get by myself. I make all
its of excuses to be alone-which is not nat-
al to me, I'd have you understand, for, though
:am a Wilderness Girl, I am a clannish girl; I
e my tribe, and I don't mope. And, when I
alone, there is the most humiliating monotony
my thoughts. First it is your hair - I see the
ay it curls; I look at all the straight-haired
en I meet, and wonder what kinds of women
ve them. Then your eyes- I see your eyes
shing and darkening, like that revolving light
spoke of, and missing a revolution, and dark-



<pb n="70"/>
70    CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 
ening again before they blaze. Then I try to 
make out how your mouth looks without me -
but I never see your mouth. Do you think I 
should love you as much if you shaved ?  Let
me believe that I should love you more! Then
your voice -but somehow your voice escapes 
me; and with it a part of you escapes me, too. 
I am a little confused when it comes to your '
voice. I only seem to get it reading 'Rufus 
Choate' to Father. Dear Father! I know you I
are good to him, for he has the most unreason- 
able habit of missing me; it is quite confirmed, 
and that is why I make so few trips. Thanks
to him, I never can be called a visiting young
lady.
" But he took a notion about my coming to
Senator Gray's. He said I looked - I think it
was 'transparent'- some preposterous word. I
suppose it comes of my feeling strange and
changed--exhilarated all the time. Yet that
seems too low a word. Call it exalted, rather.
There 's been a good deal written by poets and
other uncomfortable people that I begin to un-
derstand, while yet I know that I do not com-
prehend it. Now, the way they have of classify-
ing Love (with a capital, please observe, sir) as
if it were to be found at a first-class vintner's-that
perplexes me; for me it does not intoxicate.



<pb n="71"/>
! CONFESSIONS OF A          WIFE      71
d if you are disappointed, I am sorry. But
haps I am what Goethe called a Nature; if I
iyou will accept my Nature as you do every-
ng about me, faults and all, and not complain ?
u are generous and noble to me, Dana! I
ver knew how many faults I had until it befell
I that I wished to be a very superior girl for
ur sake. I never felt so sorry and ashamed
them as I have since I began to wish my soul
iperfect ruby,- like this of yours I wear,-
ep, deep down, pure fire, and flawless. I won-
do you like my tourmaline You never said
y much about it (and I could not, somehow,
k you). I know it is a reserved stone, not
king much. It seemed to me shy, like a be-
thed girl's heart; a stone that waits for some-
g, and has the beauty of that which is
expressed, although quite understood.
l !" I think I meant to say something quite dif-
ent a page back. I will look and see. Yes,
-was about wines. I suspect I was a little
aid to say it, and so strayed off to jewels, a
s fluent subject. My pen has stiffened up
it.
"Ah, yes, now I know; it was about the dif-
tence between exhilaration and exaltation-
ich seems to me the difference between different
ds of Love. And I believe I began to say:



<pb n="72"/>
72    CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
If Love is a wine, it is a communion wine,-- 
me,- and I taste it on my knees. 
"For I am,       Sacredly,
"YOUR MARNA."
"THOU strongest! What a ruby is thy love 
for me! My letters seem paler than tourmalins
beside yours. And yet - and yet I am not sure: 
I think they love you more than they show; but 
not more than I hoped you would see without 
the showing. Try to see! Try to understand
"Your
"WILDERNESS GIRL IN CHAINS." 
"MY DEAR BoY: I have just .got Father's let- 
ter agreeing to the West Sanchester plan. He
says you have closed the lease of the Dowe Cot- 
tage for him for August and September. He
asks me if I would like to have him invite you 
there for two weeks to stay with us. I am writ-
ing him by this mail. I said I would try to put
up with it. 
Mr. Herwin, will you be my father's guest
and mine, and the ocean's, for half the month of
August, at Sanchester '
" I hope we shall not quarrel. We never
were under the same roof for twenty-four hours. 



<pb n="73"/>
CONFESSIONS      OF A WIFE        73
/ knows?   I think it is preposterous, the
I' continue to miss you.
"I am        Your loving
" LONELINESS."
DANA dear, I 'm coming home. Really, I
ot stand it another day. Don't flatter your-
for I am convinced that I flatter you all that
/tcan bear without spoiling.
/ Mrs. Gray has been talking to me. She
more marriages are ruined by a woman's
iling a man than there are by a man's neglect-
a woman. I told her I failed to see how
/er event was at all possible. She said, 'My
r, you are like your mother.'
* Half the Wilderness Girl seems to be blotted
/t   of me by separation from you. I have
ed you too much. If I surprise you by being
civilized, after all, where shall we end?
r betrothal would become a tame and com-
nplace affair, and I know better than you do
much that would disappoint you.
' You write me such love-letters as I think no
an ever had. I am ashamed of my poor,
e things beside them. But, Dear, yours hush
i- like your lips on mine. And perhaps it is
use I feel so much that I can say so little.
"Your own            MARNA.
. :



<pb n="74"/>
74    CONFESSIONS OF A       WIFE 
"P.S. Job is gladder than anything to b?
coming home. I told him we were going, and
he has sat upon my trunk and begged ever since.i
Job totally disapproves of Bar Harbor. It' comr-
bines so much' wretchedness for him that I quite 
pity him. He never went on'a visit before, and
is n't at all accustomed to leash life. He has
chewed up five beautiful skye ribbon leashes
since we came. They are about all he eats, and 
he has grown quite thin. Then, Mrs. Gray is
one of the dogless people, and although she in- 
vited him, she is not accustomed to skye terriers
sleeping in her guest-rooms. I brought on his
basket, but I saw at once it would have to stand
in the sewing-room nights. I was so thankful it
was n't the stable that I was quite reconciled.
But Job never has been. The first night he 
howled till 2 A.M., and- don't you ever tell!-
I had to go and sneak him into my own bed to
keep him still. He curled in my neck and -
sobbed like a terrified baby. But the next night.
he only cried till twelve, and since then he has 
been a perfect guest. Nobody ever knew he bit
the Secretary of War on the heel because he 
danced with me once. And out of a gallantry
which, I admit, was rather fine in him, the e;
Secretary of War never told. He is a wid-
ower, you know, and has been visiting Mr. Gray.
yt



<pb n="75"/>
/  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           75
Mr. Gray thought it was the cat who car-
'the rat into the waste-paper basket in the
ay, and buried it in philanthropic petitions.
1P.P.S. The Secretary of War wished me
end you his congratulations. But he did
est that I ask you whether you were an ad-
te of vivisection, or expected to become so
t marriage.
l Job won't let him come within twenty feet
ie. And by to-morrow evening I shall be-
near to you '  We will begin with twenty
t, sir; and then -we '11 see-
--|     " Your foolish, too joyous
" MARNA."
Alugust the second.
AVE always said I would not come to San-
ster unless I could have the Dowe Cottage,
here we are. I have loved and envied it all
life; it is the one perfect situation on the
t Shore. I don't care a wild rose for any of
eother places about here. I wonder how
ay strangers visiting the Cape have seen this
se from the cars, and said, "Now, if I could
ye that !"
B The house is well enough, but it is n't the
use that I care for; it is the dream of shore



<pb n="76"/>
76   CONFESSIONS      OF A    WIFE
and sea that goes with it. The water is broken
into gentleness by the shape of the cove; it does
not rave, but sighs; the curve of the beach is as
delicate as a lady's lip; there is the something
too bewitching not to be elusive about the shapes
of the rocks and the foreground of old fishermen
and their old dories pushing off, and the nets; it
all seems to assume difference each time that you
look; and there is a weir here this summer. It
is going to be so beautiful that I perceive it will
turn my head. I waked at sunrise to-day and
ran to my window, and sat there for an hour,
drowned in the daybreak, drunken with beauty.
There is rose-color in my room, and sky-color in
the guest-room, and pearl tint in the little room
between where I am to put Maggie, and all the
rest of the cottage is green and white, or white
and green, absolutely nothing else. It makes
the house seem like one wave, tossed, I think,
into foam, except just here, up where I am, and
the foam has the colors of sunrise and sunset-
like that wave beyond the weir, living and dying
like a rainbow as I write.
I am so happy that I am afraid. It is as if I
were a wave--alive and strong this minute, 
but sure to be broken and spent the next. Hap-
piness is a tide: it carries you only a little
way at a time; but you have covered a vast
.x



<pb n="77"/>
CONFESSIONS       OF A    WIFE      77
be before you know that you are moving
i cannot think who wrote those lines that I
e always liked:
: By the law of the land and the ocean,
I summon the tide eternal
To flow for you and me ...
When shall the flood-tide be 
onder if misery is like this, too- a great ebb;
; going out slowly of joy, wave by wave, till
,f the sea is emptied and all the shore is dry.
! is it one shock and cataclysm of nature,
Eging over you at a crash--the tidal wave
xperience ?  It is hard for me to-day to be-
e that I can ever be unhappy; or, indeed,
any other young, live, loving girl in the
!d can be. I am so happy that I find I can-
tdo anything at all but sing or pray; but I
uld not tell any person that, not even Dana.
n't think he would understand. When I
, my song is half a prayer, and if I prayed,
prayer would be something like a song. It
es a strange medley - may the Lord forgive
! and I think He will.
Our Father who art in Heaven-
" Why not to Heaven ?" quo' she.
ii]



<pb n="78"/>
78    CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
Dana will be here in an hour. The 6:20o
train is just leaving town. He has been delayed
by his first law case. Job and I must dress at 
once, and go to the station to meet him. I think
I shall wear my white India; he seems to like
it. And then any of Job's ribbons will go with
it. I shall take the chiffon sunshade-- the one 
he called "such pretty nonsense."  I have the 
most preposterous affection for that sunshade.
There 's one thing that perplexes me, and as
long as he will never, never see the Accepted
Manuscript, I may as well say what it is just now
and here. There was once a Wilderness Girl I
knew.   What has become of her?      Where
shall I turn to find her?  Whither has she fled
from me ?  Is she melting out on the tide, wave
by wave?   Shall I lose her altogether in the
sea? 
1 A.M.
I DON'T know why I cannot sleep, for I am very
happy. Perhaps it is because I am so happy, or
perhaps it is being happy in so new a way that
keeps me staring out here at the sea, with the
gas low, and the curtains streaming straight out 
from the window in the strong southeasterly, the
way they do nights at the seaside and never any-
where else. They fill like sails, and the room
seems a ship. I write a little by the dim light,



<pb n="79"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     79
r I don't feel like turning it up,- and then
re a little, and then I write a little more.
Maggie, in her gray room, is sleeping stoutly.
4 beyond, in the sky-blue, sea-blue guest-room
It wonder if he is asleep, too?  To be to-
er in the same house, so near each other, is a
ge and solemn thing.
rather said to-night: "You are as thoughtful
e as a son."
Flather is very fond of him. And I--I love
so much that I begin to be afraid of him.
ish he were not quite so superb to look at.
fetimes I wish he were just a plain man, so
at I could stand off and get an impression of
/m that would have a certain value. He daz-
me. We all have our own forms of pagan-
, and worship them in secret, being but half
ristianized for their sakes. I think I have said
ore that my paganism is omnipotent beauty.
. . Thou glorious! Here alone in my rose-
ored room, nothing but this white paper being
tness, my soul turns to thee as if thou wert a
d upon a cloud. To thee I swerve. Some-
ng within me cries, "Worship!" I struggle
/ keep my feet.
Stay you the rather at mine.  When you
eeled to me this evening, I battled with my-
f, that you should not know how I longed to



<pb n="80"/>
80    CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE 
stretch down my hands and lift you up and drop
before you.  You called me all the goddess
names. And I, an adoring girl, accepted them.
Now Nature avenges herself upon me, here,
alone, with this mute white paper, in the sacred:
night; and I write, for you do not know it, and 
because you shall never know it- I write you a
note which you are never to see.
"My Love: I am yours utterly.
" Marna."
"MY DEAR DANA: It seems quite out of the 
course of nature not to write a letter to you
every day. I am too much in the habit of it to
stop too suddenly. So I send this line by Mag-
gie. I am a little tired this morning,-- I did not
sleep very well, for Job sniffed all about the room
for mice, and upset his pink finger-bowl on some
slippers and things of mine; he is n't at home 
yet in the Dowe Cottage,-and, if you don't 
mind, I won't see you till luncheon. Father 
will need you in a thousand ways, and you might 
call on the Curtis girls, if time hangs heavily. 
I 'm sure Minnie Curtis will be glad to see you.
She always was. And I shall get downstairs by 
degrees, perhaps by half-past twelve. 
"Yours affectionately,
"MARNA."
I



<pb n="81"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     81
is a week since he came to the Wave. (That
hat we have agreed to call this house,)  I
d to think I knew what it was to be happy.
ow I see that I had not studied the grammar
joy. Dana says:
:" You have not learned the alphabet yet.
ou play truant too often."
I " Why don't you keep me in school, then ? "
said. "That is your business."
He made me no answer at all, and that is what
kes me uncomfortable. When he speaks I
ow the worst. But when he only looks at
'I am afraid of him and of what is coming.
e has a terrible way of biding his time. I
ver know when he is done with a subject.
; There is something that never was on sea or
d about these days. I seem afloat, all the
e, between the ocean and the sky; and if my
t touch the earth, they spurn it, as if they
d wings, and I go whirling off and up. Now
: am  a creature of the air; height is my
ement; flight is the condition of being, and I
e. Then I am flung down swiftly, and find
yself a creature of the sea; the deeps are my
me; to be engulfed is the condition of being,
dI drown. There are moments when I am
sed and driven blindly, and traverse vast
paces of the under-sea, visit sunken wrecks, float



<pb n="82"/>
82    CONFESSIONS      OF A   WIFE
past buried treasure; and then I am hurled up 
and back, and thrown panting on the shore. 
Then I perceive that I am a weed upon a wave,
and whithersoever the wave wills, there am I
borne, and because I am a weed I do not buffet
the wave, but love it, and it driveth me, for it is 
a wave.
But I do not show these things that I perceive
to him.
For the princess hid from him.
Of flying or drowning we do not speak together.
And he calls me a truant of the heart. What 
paradise is betrothal! I would be his promised
wife forever. I do not think that Adam and 
Eve in Eden were married for a long time. And 
if they had never been married at all, Paradise
would have been eternal. There can be no
doubt of that.
August the twelfth.
A TERRIBLE thing has happened. Paradise is
lost. So soon, too soon, I am exiled from my
Eden; and each soul's Eden is its own. We
may exchange tastes, habits, characters even, in
this world: our Edens are untransferable; and
an angel with a frowning smile stands guard at
the gates of mine, already, to bar me out. That
frowning smile is the nature of a man. Dana
wishes me to marry him the first of October.



<pb n="83"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     83
August the thirteenth.
bSAID he had not done with the subject-
at day he looked at me and did not talk;
t I did not expect anything so formidable
this.
He has had an uncle die- that is the short of
; he went away for two days to the funeral.
hen he came back he brought a piece of dis-
l news and this preposterous proposition. It
ems that this uncle must needs go and leave
all the money he had. I don't fancy it is
uch--I would n't ask. But, whatever it is,
na feels at liberty to marry on it. With what
ere is of Mother's settled on me we should
ve enough without depending on Father,
seems; and Dana thinks I ought to love him
ough to be willing to live somehow, if not as
am used to living--and so on. I did not tell
m that I would be willing to live anyhow-
ldon't think that at all necessary. I did not
how    little I think about money, and
ings like that: he knows. I did not say that
Iould starve and be quite happy. I said that
did not wish to be married.
-*H^'.'~J August the fourteenth.
i says that does not make any difference. He
it has nothing to do with the subject.



<pb n="84"/>
84    CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE 
August the fifteenth.
I HAVE told him that if he wants to be married
in October he must find some other girl to marry 
him. We have had our first quarrel. He is-
hurt and unhappy, and has gone to town. I
cannot see why I need feel called upon to miss-
him quite so much-not so preposterously. Ii
should not mind if I missed him only to a reason-1
able extent. He has telephoned that he is not,
coming out to-night. James answered the tele-x
phone. I was out watching Job catch grass-!
hoppers, an exhilarating, not to say exalted, oc-
cupation. It was wet, too, and I came in too
soppy and moppy for anything. There is a fog 
to-day. It wipes out the world as if it were a*
vast sponge. Happiness, I think, is only a little
white writing on a slate: it looks as if it would
last forever, but it is only chalk; the first touch
expunges it. My slate is gone suddenly blank 
and black.
Two of our old fishermen are putting out in
their old dories from the beach. They melt into
the fog like thoughts. There! they are gone 
out utterly. They are so old that I cannot even 
wonder how they feel. Age seems to me like a 
mighty mist into which people dip and vanish
slowly, and between them and the sympathy of 
youth an unfathomable fog shuts in. I stand
y            9~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="85"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     85
ore the mist of years. What does it hold for
withhold from me? Dana and I seem like
ail boats, feeling our way into a dim destiny.
y love stretches beyond his longing, a myste-
s sea. Shall I ever be old - and he ? And
i1 love mature as far as life does?  If it did
ot, if it does not, better that it be and remain
ever young, a mist-ideal in a blur of morning
Tciwo hozurs later.
o the record of these admirable and doubtless
Able sentiments a sound cut sharply. It was
b barking the one particular individual bark
l hich he reserves, out of the variety of his
ture, for Dana Herwin-a chromatic bark
f modulated love and jealousy, of welcome
d of distrust.  I ran down. He stood in
e green-and-white hall. No person besides
urselves was there. When he touched me,-
r he took me to his heart as if he never meant
let me go,-Job growled, and then he
ried like a hurt child, and crawled under the
fa and sobbed. I never knew anybody sob
ke Job.
j| And Mr. Herwin did not say a word about
arrying in October. I think he has forgotten
about it. I am quite happy.
.,



<pb n="86"/>
86   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 
"MY DEAR DANA: But I thought you had.
got over that. How can, how can you bring it all
up again?  Yes, I know I was very happy last
evening, and I did n't much mind your knowing
it. So I said, and so I did, as you say. But that.
did not mean that I am ready to be your wife.
It is so hard for a man to understand a woman -
it is so hard for you to understand me- that If
do not think I ought ever to be your wife at all.:
I am convinced we should make each other veryi
unhappy. As to marrying you in October, prayi
regard that point as irrevocably settled. I can-I
not consider the question for a moment. All
the battle blood of my tribe is surging behind"
me, and I am
"Your
"WILDERNESS GIRL." 
"OH, I love you -yes. I have said it. Ii
cannot unsay it. I cannot unlove, and that is!
the pitiful part of it. But I do not wish to be}
your wife in October. You would carry no
willing captive to your wedding-day."
"I NEVER knew a person with such a relentless
will. I should think, if you loved me as you.
profess to do, you would have some compassioni
on me."
'5



<pb n="87"/>
E   CONFESSIONS      OF A   WIFE      87
; " HAVE it your own way, then, if you must.
ow you have got Father on your side I am
/erfectly discouraged. I am worn out with this
onflict. I don't care whether I marry you this
ear or next, or in October, or in April, or now,
r never. I am tired out. I am tired of the
hole subject. I wish you to understand that I
eld out of sheer exhaustion.
5 "Take me up, fling me over your shoulder,
rry me away to your own tribe, then, if you
sist upon it - and start all the elements of my
ture that are incomprehensible to you into
/  "MY DEAR DANA: Oh, I don't care what you
ive me. Why should you give me anything
all ?  That seems to me a foolish custom. I
ill not be a bride fettered with pearls and dia-
onds, and flaunting her chains before gods and
en. I will have nothing from you but my
,edding-ring. I suppose I can't decently refuse
Fat. I think I have told you before -'I don't
re when. If it has got to be at all, one time is
good as another."
* "YEs, oh, yes; I don't care. The last week
f September is no worse than the first week of
tober, that I can see. You and Father must
E .



<pb n="88"/>
88    CONFESSIONS     OF A    WIFE
arrange it between you. Really, I don't care
be bothered with these details. 
" The only thing I insist on is that you shall
find some suitable person to stay with Father, i
you are going to turn him out of' his own hire
house' (as Longfellow used to call it) and sen
him back home alone, and keep me here with
out him. I warn you frankly: if you find me
vanished any evening, you need not be surprised
As it looks to me now, the station is abnormally
convenient, and, in fact, if I did n't know that 
could melt away from you any time, I do not
think, in fact I am quite sure, I could no
possibly make up my mind to stay alone in the
Dowe Cottage with you.
"Who ever invented the word ' honeymoon' 
Some man, I am sure. He never tasted myrrh in"
it. There is nothing in this world I find it so
hard to understand as the nature of a man. The
mysteries of sin, suffering, and immortality are
quite frank and open beside it.
"I am sorry if you are disappointed that I d
not write love-letters to you in these days. Pray;
what did you expect?  I am dumb, and thou
didst it.                      MARNA."
"September the third.
"MY DEAR DANA: Certainly we shall be glad
to see you whenever you come out. I quit
- -



<pb n="89"/>
!: CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE      89
k it best that you should be somewhere else,
rather come out, than stay out, just now.
bably we shall see enough of each other after
twentieth.         Yours,
i~^~-|           "MARNA TRENT.
" P.S. Oh, forgive me! I do not mean to be
el.H  I do notfeel cruel. It seems to me as if
were the cruel one of us two. It would have
n so easy to go on as we were, betrothed and
essed. We could have lived so for a long,
hg time, and been quite happy. I cannot see
y you were not contented. I was. Paradise
as paradise enow' for me."
September the twelfth.
HAVE not seen Dana for a week. I suppose it
as rather uncivil of me, but I wrote him not to
e. I find it impossible to entertain him in
ese days. He seems to me like company.
ather and Job and I are happier by ourselves.
tmust admit it is celestial weather. The ocean
linds me and the breakers deafen me. There
Iways is something about September sunshine,
t this September sunshine has the divine na-
re. It is working an awful miracle. I dare
ot think of it! Yet, in truth, I think of nothing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="90"/>
90    CONFESSIONS OF A       WIFE 
"September the fourteenth. 
"To INA IN HEAVEN: Ina! Ina! Here 
come to the parting of the ways between spi
and flesh; girl ghost and live wife, how can 
stay together, or be ever to each other what 
were ?  You - you would have been my bride
maid, Dear; you would have worn, I think, 
robin's-egg-blue silk mull. How dainty y
would have been! I am not to have any bride 
maid, Ina. No one shall take your place.
don't care for any wedding; it is all to be bi
ourselves, at home; we are going over the d
before-a very still little wedding, only a fe
people; and Father stays, but Dana and I, an
Job, are coming back to the Wave. Ina, I a
not glad, oh, I am not glad! Ina! In all thi
world of live people nobody understands
"Your poor            MARNA."
"September the sixteenth. 
"DEAR DANA: Leave me alone. Oh, lea,
me to my own nature for these last days an
hours! What it is not in yours to comprehe4
let it be yours to reverence. I stand apart fro
you, and you seem to me a vast space away fr
me, like an alien king of n unseen country wli
has threatened me and mine. Though I ma
you unhappy, I must speak the truth to you, ;



<pb n="91"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE             91
uth is the king of kings, and outranks your
rone or mine, or that on which we are fated to
crowned together. You ask me do I not love
Ou as I thought I did, that I treat you as I
oose to do, in this miracle September ?
" On my soul, I cannot answer you, for from
y soul I do not know.  I thought I loved
Ku; and I was happy when you were near me.
ow I know not if I love you; I only know
fear you, and I wish the width of the spaces
ween the stars and suns were distance be-
een us.
" I feel a magic circle drawn around me. If
ou cross, you cross it at your peril, for, volun-
ry sorcerer, I stand within it. I have nothing
ryou- nothing; I belong to myself. I have
d to the wilderness of Womanhood, where no
an ever sets his foot. If you pursue me, I can-
ot say what I shall do. I warn you! I warn
ou! It is nothing to me, and less than nothing,
hat other girls do the days before they are mar-
ied to other men. I told you I was a Wilder-
ess Girl; and now you find it out, you are
rprised and shocked. I would have you know,
ir, that a woman is to be obeyed when she
akes her will known to the man who loves her.
I am not sure that I love you enough to marry
ou. And, honestly, it does not trouble me that
7



<pb n="92"/>
92   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
I give you pain. I tell you, Dana Herwin-
oh, but I cannot tell, I cannot tell you! You
would not understand."
"September the seventeenth.
"MOTHER, I am not fit to be married, I am
behaving so badly! If you were not a ghost, I
think I should be a better girl -I should act
like other girls. And you would teach me how.
Mother, it is the holy truth that I packed my
bag to-night and ran away. I took the train
and went to town,--the late train,- and I
meant to send him word that I would not marry
anybody, for I could never do it.
"And when I got to town I was frightened at
what I had done, for I thought it would trouble
Father, and I came back again upon the mid-
night train alone; and it rained, for there is a
southeaster, and I got off at the station, crying,
in the wet. And, oh, Mother, there he stood
the Man! His face was white, and his hand
shook, and he did not speak at all. He took me
home, and in at the side door, and called
Maggie, and told me to go up-stairs, and did not
trouble me to try to kiss me; but he had such a
look that I felt ashamed, and I thought you
would be ashamed of me, Mother. So I confess
to you. For I have promised that I will marry



<pb n="93"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE      93
im in two days and three nights more. And
am
' "Your unmothered and bewildered
B|Z~~~              " DAUGHTER."
"DEA  DAA:'  "September the nineteenth.
:" DEAR DANA: I cannot possibly see you this
ivening. You will excuse me, I am sure. I
ave some writing to do, and, besides, I don't
el like it. Can't you go and call on Minnie
urtis ?  I should think she might amuse you.
!'''      " Hurriedly yours,
i!^|~ " MARNA TRENT."
" October the fifth.
"To MY HUSBAND: Oh, I admit it! I take
e first excuse I have to write the word. You
iave never given me a chance before. I do not
ink we have been apart three hours--have
e ?-- in these fifteen days. Now you are to be
ree hours in town. It seems a long time.
wenty minutes are gone. I have been sitting
ere, in the rose-colored room, staring at the
lock. I have been trying to decide where I
ihall put this note to surprise and please you.
ear, I like to please you! But, indeed, I do
ot always know how to make you believe that
do. You are very patient and gentle with me,
id I-I love you!



<pb n="94"/>
94    CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
"I think I will pin it on your cushion w
one of the pearl butterflies I wore to fasten
wedding lace. I was glad you noticed the b
terflies. I am glad you liked the way I look
This is part of the miracle.  I begin to care
much- too much -for what you like. 
now that I try to tell you so, I find that wo
flit away from me like butterflies - no, no! 
that. Rather are my words moths, and th
advance and retreat, and circle and waver ab
the light of my love for you, and dash th
headlong, and perish in it. For my love is l
a tall, strong candle on an altar; it burns stead
and sacredly before the holy of holies. I kn
that I have but begun to love you. I kn-
that I shall love you more - I fear to know h
I shall love you!
"For I am
"YOUR WIFE.'
The Second Note.
"DARLING: Will you mind two notes frct
me?   I cannot seem to find any other wayf
enduring this separation. I will slip this 
under your pillow, so you will find it later t
the pin-cushion one. See! I put one of -
roses you brought me last night within the 



<pb n="95"/>
I  CONFESSIONS     OF A   WIFE      95
ed the rose; it is just the color of this room.
m writing to tell you that I lose myself with-
you. I never knew three such hours in my
. I have stared the clock out of countenance:
2y eighty-five minutes are gone yet. I cannot
derstand myself; I am quite perplexed. Thou
png and tender! Come quickly and explain
to myself!
I" Thou dear Love! My love waits to learn
e way of loving from thine own; a bud that
Ill know an eternal blossom, a story that shall
read without an end. I tried to tell you so
t evening; I could not do it.
"The sea is white and still this morning.
he fishermen are singing at their nets. Fires
e on all the hearths; the sun is warm and deep.
Ithought September was the bridal month.
ow I see it is October. Then I think we shall
ow it is November. Eden waits in every
eather. All down the calendar,
I see Joy smiling.
" Dear, I cannot tell you unless I write it, and
feel that I must tell you, for I owe it to your
atience and gentleness to tell you what a foolish,
etulant girl she was--that Wilderness Girl.
whisper you a secret. She will not trouble you



<pb n="96"/>
96    CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 
any more. She has floated out upon the tide
of love,
Beyond the utmost purple rim.
The forest gave her, but the ocean claims her;
she is gone forever. And I am
"MARNA, your Wife."
The CIhird Note.
"OH, teach me how to make you happy!
I have everything to learn, I know. But believe
me that I care for nothing else- for nothing in
this world except your happiness. I will be the
most docile and the gladdest scholar that man
ever had.
"See, I have almost written this first separa-
tion away. I will confess: if I had not written,
I should have cried. Oh, you will be home in
half an hour!
"Don't be jealous, but I just went up and
kissed the clock.
"MARNA, Wife."



<pb n="97"/>
HERE is no doubt about it that happiness
is an occupation. When I see how long
is since I have added anything worth adding
the Accepted Manuscript, and when I try to
efine to myself what it is that gives me such a
nse of being busy all the time, I find that it is
arcely more than the existence of joy. What
have lost is the leisure of loneliness; what I
ave gained is the avocation of love.
They teach us that only in heaven can we ex-
ct to know happiness. It is not true! I sum-
on mine - a singing witness in the courts of
ife. I fling down the glove of joy, a challenge
o such dismal doctrine. There are whole weeks
when I live in poems, I breathe in song. There
are entire days when I float in color, and seem
to be set free in space, as a bird is, knowing the
earth and loving it, but citizen of the skies and
homing to them. I fall asleep as if I were a
unset, and I wake as if I were a sunrise, so near
97



<pb n="98"/>
98    CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
am I to Nature, so much a part of her beatitude
Nature is joy -I perceive that now. I used to
think she was duty. How wonderful it is to live
in harmony with her, out of sheer joyousness
not conscript, but volunteer within her might
and beautiful forces!
I am always reading new chapters in the Story
Without an End. Every day I turn a fresh page
in the book of love. I did not think that i
would be so absorbing. Really, it has plot.
For, what is the plot of incident beside that o
feeling ?  A tame affair, as thoroughly displaced
as a piece of sensational fiction by the great dramas
of the gospels.
Dana and I have been reading the New Testa
ment together on Sunday evenings. He said
yesterday: "What a complete situation!" Fromj
a histrionic point of view he thinks the life of
Christ the most tremendous and well-balanced--
plot ever conceived. He admitted that he had
forgotten how fine it was.
"Morally fine, at least," I said.
"Morally fine, at most; spiritually, if you
will," he answered. He spoke quite soberly forZ
Dana. He is a very merry person; he laughs
more easily and more often than I do. I am:
afraid, sometimes, he thinks me too strenuous.
(He said so one day, but I felt so badly that he-'



<pb n="99"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE      99
issed the word savagely away.) He is not at
1 religious. Why does this make me feel as if
ought to become so'?  I have never thought
uch about the philosophy of Christianity - I
ean as a practical matter that had anything in
articular to do with myself- until lately.
" You are a sumptuous little pagan," he said to
e Saturday. Now, this did not please me, as
he seemed to expect. It left a little dust, like
ashes of roses, in my heart. I feel as if I had
filed him somewhere.
: "I am afraid I am too happy to be religious,"
:I said.
" Then stay irreligious!" he cried. The plea
of his lips smothered that spark of sacred feeling;
land against the argument of his arms I cannot
Treason.
How fearful is the philosophy of a kiss!
When I think of poor girls -young, ignorant,
all woman and all love--I never thought of
them before except with a kind of bewildered
horror.
I wonder - to anchor to my thought; see,
even my thought casts off its moorings as well
I as my feeling; I seem to be adrift on all sides
- of my being- I wonder if it is in the nature of
suffering to make people in so far divine as it is
in that of joy to keep them altogether human.
.



<pb n="100"/>
100oo  CONFESSIONS OF A       WIFE 
I begin to see that there is a conflict as old as the 
axis of the world. Around its fixed and invisible. 
bar every soul of us revolves -so many revolu- 
tions to an ecstasy, so many to a pang; and the -
sum and nature of these revolutions is the sum
and nature of ourselves. When I am old and 
sad, shall I turn penitent and think about
heavens   Oh, I am young, I am glad, I am:)
beloved, and I love! Earth is enough for me,
for he is in it.
IT would be impossible for me to put into words
the quality of his consideration for me. It is 
something ineffable and not to be desecrated by
expression. It is my atmosphere. His treat-
ment of me is the very devoutness of love. I
breathe a devotion for which any tender woman
in the world would die. Though I am wife,
thus am I goddess, for he deifies me.
But while his soul looks up to mine
My heart lies at his feet.
The difference is that now I am willing he should 
know when he has my heart at his feet. Once
I kept the secret to myself, and confided it only 
to this dumb paper. There are some delicate
lines in the poem when Radha and Krishna were 
married - the one that begins:
But when the music of her bangles passed the porch -



<pb n="101"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A           WIFE    101
November the seventh.
lMRS. GRAY talked to me a little last week.
She said: "My dear, your mother kept your
ather at her feet. She held him there to the
ast breath. I tell you a secret, since she cannot.
The happiest marriages are those where a wife
loves her husband less than he loves her."
"How many such do you know?" I asked
her, rather hotly, for my cheeks burned.
She gave me a keen look.
"You have more knowledge of the world
!than I supposed," she answered slowly, and I
"thought she sighed.
W "Would you have a woman coquet with her
husband?" I demanded. "Is marriage an in-
Itrigue or a sacraments You don't know my
ihusband!" I cried- proudly, I suppose, for I
was touched a little.
" There, there! Never mind," said Mrs. Gray,
as if I had been a pouting child. She began to
-talk about Robert Hazelton's wedding-present.
It is a very odd present. Nobody quite un-
derstands it. It is just a gold candlestick made
in the shape of a compass, with the candle set at
one side as you see them, Dana says, on real
: compasses. Within is the needle, a black point
upon a white enameled dial, pointing to the
1north. I cannot help liking it; it is so like Rob.
|Dana asked me if it were meant to convey the



<pb n="102"/>
102  CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
fidelity of superfluous affection, and I could not,
help laughing, it was so like Dana. Yet, when
I had laughed, I was a little sorry. Robert has
always thought me a much better woman than I
am, poor fellow! Dana invited him to dinner
once, but he went away early to see some pa-
tients. I believe he has an excellent practice.
I wish he would marry Minnie Curtis.
I am writing somehow pettily this evening. I
don't know why. My soul seems shriveled a
little. Dana is dining out with some gentlemen:
I believe it has something to do with politics. 
It is the first time. I would not have believed
that I could be so ridiculous about it.  I have
devoted myself to Father the whole evening, ?
but the more devoted I was the worse it grew.
It seemed to me all the while as if the sky
were put out, and the earth had stopped, and
Dana were dead. Then it seemed as if there
never had been any Dana, and never would be
or could be. Father was so pleased with having 
me to himself again that it was quite touching.-
He even called Job, and told him to stand on
his head; and nothing could be more pathetic, 
for Father is not one of the dog people. He is
polite to Job, for he recognizes that Job is a -
gentleman, too; but he has never loved him. On ,I
Job's part it is a wholly unrequited attachment.



<pb n="103"/>
CONFESSIONS        OF A   WIFE     103
But for me, I could have cried all the evening.
!And Job would not stand on his head; he has
forgotten how.
He is up here with me now, just as he used
:to be, quite by ourselves. Poor Job! He kisses
me as if he had not seen me for six months-
not obtrusively, but with a shy rapture of which
no being but a dog is capable. He does not
get used to sleeping in the bath-room, but Dana
prefers to have him there. He says if we cannot
have a home to ourselves, at least we can have
our own rooms as he likes them, which is per-
f ectly reasonable in Dana. I find he is always
H reasonable when he has his preferences con-
sulted. I hope Job will overcome that air of
settled melancholy which he wears whenever he
: regards my husband. It cannot be denied that
he never " meets him with a smile."  Sometimes
I think this vexes Dana. I used to think he
loved Job as much as I did.
Dana is very late. It is more than half-past
ten. I admit I am rather tired of petting Job.
This occupation does not seem as absorbing as
it used to be. I cannot read,  I have tried,
but I listen so that I understand nothing I read.
I hear his footsteps on the concrete walk, past
the electric light in the street, whose cool, fair
light falls into our room and across it when the



<pb n="104"/>
104  CONFESSIONS      OF A   WIFE 
gas is out. (Dana likes that light as much as I
do; it was a delight to me to find that he under-
stands the way I have always felt about it.)
As I sit here alone I hear him and I hear him, 
but they are not his footsteps at all, only the
footsteps of my heart. I fiave seen a picture of
"Eurydice Listening," and her body was curved 
a little like an ear.
It is as if I had become an ear -heart and
body; I seem to hear with my forehead and my
hair. A lifelong invalid told me once that she
heard with her cheeks.
It is eleven o'clock. Job barks in his dreams
of the grasshoppers at Sanchester; he has dis-
tinctly a grasshopper bark. I know politics stay
out late nights, but I did not know Dana meant 
to go into politics. He told me to go to sleep. 
Men say such singular things to women.
Job is asleep on my lounging-gown; I hate to
move him. I did not have a new one, for I'm 
fond of this; but Maggie trimmed it up for me 
-very daintily with yards of fresh chantilly. Dana 
likes me in this gown. He likes the lace, and
he likes the color. He says it is the shade of my
ruby. I think that must be Dana this time....
It was a caller coming away from the Curtises'.
Perhaps by the time I get into the gown, and get
my hair brushed and braided, and warm my red 
-J



<pb n="105"/>
CONFESSIONS      OF A    WIFE     10o
klippers, and fix his candle and all his little things
the way he likes, he will be here.
I have put fresh wood on the fire, for it is
quite a cold night. The blaze springs, as if it
laughed. Crossing before the pier-glass just now,
dI was half startled at the figure I saw there--
1tall, all that lace and velvet, and all that color,
gand curved a little, like Eurydice - bent so, just
an ear.
I wonder if Orpheus was in politics ?
The leaping fire flares upon my ruby; deep,
deep, without a flaw, guardian and glad above
my wedding-ring. I think a ruby has never been
quite understood. I see now--of all the jewels
IGod created one for women. A    ruby is the
sheart of a wife.
Oh, there! After all! He is striding up the
avenue. How he swings along! As if he had
athe world beneath his ringing feet.
I will not run down. I will make believe that
I am asleep, or not pleased that he was out so
Jlate. And when he gets to the top of the stairs,
-and as far as the door
"DEAR LOVE: Was I cross with you to-day
about your golf-stockings?  Believe, I did not
mean to be. I have had a hard headache, and
the sore throat, ever since we went in town to



<pb n="106"/>
loO  CUNFEISSIOUNS    OF A    WIFE
the Grays' in the storm, and I wore the lace
dress because you like it; but it was pretty thin.
And I had darned the stockings myself,- I
would not leave them to Maggie,--and I was
so sure I had filled every single cavity! What
a poor dentist I should make ' See, I am trying
to laugh. But, really, I have cried. It is the
first time you have ever spoken so to me, Darling.
No woman ever forgets the first time that the
man she loves speaks sharply to her: of that I
am sure. Everything else would go out of her
consciousness first.
" I was so afraid I should cry on the spot, and
that would have shamed me before you and to
myself, for I don't like people to see me cry.
And I think it was because I tried so hard not
to cry that I 'answered back' a little.
"Dear, I am sorry. I was wrong. Forgive
me, my own! Love never needs to answer back;
it is too great to be so small. Silence would be
the nobler way. It is, I think, the stronger
weapon. But there need be no weapons, God
be thanked! between yourself and
"MARNA, your Wife.
"P.S. I have been all over them - the brown
ones, and the green, and the gray, and the speckly
kinds that are so hard to find the holes in; I



<pb n="107"/>
CONFESSIONS      OF A   WIFE     107
have worked over the whole pile for a long while,
to be sure there are none of those tiny places the
barbed-wire fence bites between the pattern. I
hope you will not find me so careless and stupid
| again. I am not much used to mending stock-
ings. Maggie has always done it for Father.
But I will see to yours, if you wish me to; of
course I will. One day you said so,- had you
forgottern?--'Marna, I wish you would mend
my clothes yourself. I have always thought
how nice it would be to have my wife do such
: things for me.' So I tried. Dear, I am more
than willing to please you about these little
| things. I care for nothing else but to please you.
I My heart leans to you all the time. Waking
and sleeping I dream, and all my dreams are
yours. All my being has become a student in
the science of love; and all my art is to learn
how skilfully to make you happy. Your frown
is my exile. Your smile is my Eden. Your
: arms are my heaven. Once, ah, once I was-
who could believe it now ?- your Wilderness
Girl. Now, your happy captive, I kiss my chains.
Hold them lightly, Love, for I wear them so
I heavily! Yet lock them; I shall but love you
more. Do you remember the day I told you to
- throw the key away ?
"Oh, but you took me from my tribe, you
8



<pb n="108"/>
o18  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
Son of Battle! You hurled me over your.
shoulder and ran. Do you know how Father
misses me, though we are in the very one self-
same house ? You have torn me from him,
from my own life, from myself. From a depth
that you knew not, you drew me, and you slew
me; for I tell you in a love like mine is a being
slain. To a depth that I know not, you drag
me. Ah, be merciful - I love you ! - for love's
sake!
"If ever the time should come when I could
not pour out words like these upon you, if ever
the day should dawn when I should be sorry
that I had written so to you, or that I had suf-
fered you so to see the beating of my heart, for
indeed such words are but drops of my heart's
blood-but I scorn myself for that unworthy
'if.'  When thought moves without a brain,
when blood leaps without a heart, when the
moon forgets to swim on summer nights above
the tree-house where my lips first drank your
kiss, then may I be sorry that I have written as
I write to-night to you.
" And I am sure you will never speak again
as you did to-day. It was the first time, as it
will be the last. I thought if I told you, if I
showed you how it slays a woman, if just this
once I should put by something in myself that



<pb n="109"/>
Ir    CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     log
stands guard over my nature and says,' Do not
I let him know,' I thought that perhaps it would
be worth while. You might, I can understand,
* you might hurt me, not knowing.  Knowing
that you did, I '11 swear you never would, be-
cause you never could."
December the third.
DANA has gone into the law office of Mrs.
Gray's brother, Mr. Mellenway-J. Harold
Mellenway. He is so busy that I see him only
evenings, and not always then. I am trying to
get used to it. Father says he is making a re-
markable beginning in his profession, and that if
he sustains his promise I shall have reason to be
proud of him. Father repeats that he is a bril-
liant young man. Dana does not have much
time to devote himself to Father now. He
seems to be whirled along. We all seem to be
whirled along like the figures in the Wheel of
Life drawn by some ancient Oriental people,- I
forget who,- all ignorant that they are helpless,
and all hurled on to a blind fate.
I have been married nearly seven weeks. If
he came in some night and said, "Marna, do
you know it is seven years ?" I should not feel
surprised. It is as if I had never existed before
I loved him, and it is as if I had lived cycles



<pb n="110"/>
11o CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 
since I became his wife. I have traversed worlds/
that astronomy never knew, and I am transmuted
into a being whose nature I do not recognize.
Here in my own room, where I have been 
such a happy and solitary girl, I see everywhere
the careless, precious signs of him - his slippers
on my hearth, his necktie tossed upon my bureau,
the newspapers that he always flings upon the
floor, and that I go and pick up; a messenger
from heaven could not have convinced me six
months ago that I would ever do it.
So, upon my heart, upon my brain, he flings
the traces of his presence, the impress of his
nature. It is to me as if my soul were a nickel
plate on which is etched a powerful and beauti-
ful picture, of which I know that I know not yet 
the composition or the scope, and though I love 
the picture, I fear it, because it is unfinished.
But he -he dips a rosebud in a rainbow, and
paints him garlands and Cupids, smiling steadily,
so debonair he is. There are times (dear Ac-
cepted Manuscript, you will never tell) when the
lightness of his heart seems to me disarranged
from mine - only for the moment, of course, I
mean. But yet I love him for the rainbow in
him. And perhaps, as Dana says, there is a zone
of twilight in my soul. A man does not like 
to be loved too solemnly; whereas I think a
I~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 



<pb n="111"/>
CONFESSIONS      OF A    WIFE     ill
woman builds within her heart an altar to an
unknown god, and leaves her happiest hour to
steal away and worship.
December the tenth.
I HAVE discovered a new planet: Dana has a
real though untrained musical nature. He has
flitted to the piano off and on, of course, and I
have sometimes said, " What a touch !" But he
has never truly played for me before. Last week
he came home with a violin. It seems he sent
it somewhere to be mended a year ago, and for-
got it (which is quite like him); and now that
he has remembered, I am  half jealous of the
violin, he so devotes himself. He plays with a
kind of feeling that I do not know how to define,
unless to say that it is passionate, imperious, and
fitful. If I said the utter truth to my very soul,
perhaps I could not call it tender music. But
why say    I have already found that the first
lesson a wife must learn is not to admit the utter
truth about her husband to her own soul. If she
mistranslates, she is unhappy; if she overvalues
him, she may be more so.    Marriage needs
something of the opalescent haze such as be-
trothal breathes, and daily life goes a beggar for
! the element of romance. This vanished some-
thing Dana's playing seems to be about to recall
to us. Just now he has gone music-mad. From
il



<pb n="112"/>
112 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
violin to piano, and back to violin, he sways like 
a mast in a storm. As I write he is singing;
there are beautiful tones in his voice, and tears
are on my cheeks as I listen.   He comes to an
unaccountable stop, and runs, dashing up the
stairs, to see me.--
I am staying in my room with a headache and
a kind of foolish languor.  He is so kind to me
that I could weep for happiness. What wife was
ever so cherished as I?  Listen! He sings that
exquisite thing which his voice seems to have
created, and for me. In point of fact I believe it
is Handel's.
Where'er you walk, cool gales shall fan the glade;
Trees where you sit shall crowd into a shade.
And now he dashes into the superb "Bedouin
Love-Song" that he often chooses:
From the Desert I come to thee,
On my Arab shod with fire;
And the winds are left behind
In the speed of my desire.
I love thee, I love but thee!
With a love that shall not die!
His voice peals through the house like a trium-
phal procession. Even Father has opened the
library door to listen. Job is lying perfectly
;' .,i



<pb n="113"/>
CONFESSIONS       OF A   WIFE     113
still in the hall, with quivering ears, music-
smitten, as delicately organized dogs sometimes
are. The eternal bridegroom rings in my hus-
band's singing-joyous, imperial, master of the
present and dauntless of the future. Oh, I love
thee, master of my heart and of my life!
I cannot stand this any longer.  What's a
headache 2  I think if I get into the warm red
gown, and steal down very softly, and up behind
him before he knows it, and just put my arms
about his neck, with no sound at all, and lay my
cheek to his (though the tears are on it still)-
Oh, hark! How sure and glad he is!
I love thee, I love but thee!
Till the sun grows cold,
And the stars are old,
And the leaves of the Judgment Book unfold!
December the twelfth.
DANA was displeased with me about something
(a little thing, too small to write) to-day, and
went to his day's work without kissing me. It
is the first time. I shut myself in here and cried
half the morning. Job's head is quite a mop,
for he tried to comfort me.
}1   Awhile ago I went down and telephoned to



<pb n="114"/>
114  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 
the office, for I could not, could not, bear it'l
This is the veracious record of our interview: 
HE: Oh! That you, Marna     Glad to heari
from you. What a lovely telephone voice you 
have ! Well, what is it ?
I: I have felt so unhappy, Dear, all the morn- 
ing! I thought- perhaps -
HE: Unhappy?    What in thunderfor?
I: Why, of course, Dana, you know -
HE: I have no more idea what you are talk-
ing about than you have of the English common
law. Do be quick, Marna! I 'm busy.
I: Oh, have you forgotten that you went off
without- without-
HE: I went off without my handkerchief, if,:
that 's what you mean.
I: Dana!
HE: Marna! Go find it, Dear, and dry the 
tears out of your voice. I tell you I 'm busy. 
Good-by. Oh, by the way. Don't wait dinner :
for me if I 'm not home on time. I am rushed
to death to-day. Good-by.
I: But, Dana dear--
HE: But, Mama dear! Don't bother me.;
Good-by.
I am thinking of an old French saying: Elle;
en meurt; ii en rit. Once, to think of it-to think I
of it, I mean, in a way that could possibly have 



<pb n="115"/>
r    CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE     115
iany relation to myself--would have brought
the blood stinging to my cheeks. Now it brings
only the tears starting to my eyes.
December the seventeenth.
DANA is obsessed with an idea. I find he has a
good many ideas. Father was a little vexed
I with him to-day, and called them notions. In
- point of fact, Dana wants to build a house, and
Father thinks it quite unnecessary and expensive.
He wants Dana to wait until his legal income is
more assured, offering us till such time our pres-
ent home in his own house. It is large enough,
I admit; we have our own suite, and every com-
fort, and no more care than if we were figures on
a fresco.
Father's old Ellen looks after everything; she
has been in the house since I was a baby, and
rules the family like a Chinese ancestor. I do
not think of Ellen any more than I do of the
atmosphere. I don't think I have ever so much
as mentioned her in the Accepted Manuscript;
she is a matter of course. I suppose my life has
been more free from care than that of many girls,
especially motherless girls, and that I shall have
a good deal to learn if I keep house. But if
Dana wishes it I should not mind the trouble; I
should like to please Dana. I asked Ellen
;.



<pb n="116"/>
116  CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE
whether she thought I could do it so as to please:
him. She looked at me and did not say any-
thing, only she patted me on the head with her 
wrinkled hand; I could n't make out at all what.B
Ellen meant. Then I asked Maggie, quite con-
fidentially, whether she would like to work for 
me if I kept house; for I suppose we could not:
afford more than one servant, or two at the most. ,
But Maggie said:
"Is it the lady's-maid ye 'd be wanting, Miss .
Mama ?   It's not a housemaid I am accustomed 
to call myself"
I never felt uncomfortable before the servants
before. Sometimes I think they don't like my
husband as much as they do me. I never should
have believed that it could make any difference
to anybody whether they did or not.
I have left the two gentlemen talking it outfii
in the library. Job and I hear their voices as.
we curl up here upon my lounge to rest. -I
don't know why I am so tired. Everything
seems to agitate or excite me, and then I am,
tired because I have been agitated. I feel thingsj
too much; I am surcharged, like a Leyden jar!
and every now and then there is a crash, a sort
of explosion of the nerve-force, and I find I amI
a little weak and spent. I live all the time iii
an electric world, where everything is tense, a
.,~



<pb n="117"/>
CONFESSIONS         OF A   WIFE     117
am liable to accidents of feeling for which I can
never be prepared. Dana is always in a hurry,
and a more nervous man than I thought him.
I think he wants calm and comfort all the time.
Sometimes I wonder if he did n't need a serener
girl than I am-some one quite poised and
comfortable-a girl who does n't mind things.
It would break my heart if I thought any woman
in the world could have made Dana happier
than I can.
Father's voice is quite low and controlled,
perfectly modulated, always; he never loses
himself. Poor Dana must be disturbed about
something. All those tones in his voice that I
love least are uppermost to-night. I feel as if I
wanted to go down and put my arms about him,
and put my lips to his, and kiss part of his voice
out of his nature.
December the eighteenth.
IT is very suddenly decided -for that is Dana's
way: to do things at once. We are to build
a cottage of our own here on Father's place.
Father will deed the land to me, but Dana
builds the house. We shall have to mortgage
it, he says. This seems to me somehow a lit-
tle disgraceful. Dana threw back his curling
head and laughed when I said so. I told him
he laughed like the young god Pan, so I laughed,



<pb n="118"/>
1 i8  CONFESSIONS       OF A    WIFE
too. Dana's spirits are contagious; that is, all
but sometimes. Once in a while I feel as if he
tried to laugh away things which are not laugh-
able, and then I am not merry. Father is rather
quiet; he does not talk much about the cottage. 
He only said that it was perfectly natural for a
man to want his own home; he finds no fault at
all with Dana.
"It will be a good deal of a care for you just
now," he said, but that was all.
Dana's voice - his best voice- soars all over 
the house., He is singing:
Then stay at home, my heart, and rest;
The bird is safest in its nest;
O'er all that flutter their wings and fly.
A hawk is hovering in the sky;
To stay at home is best.
Now he has slipped into a discord, and stopped
the music with a crash. Now he will come
running up-stairs, two at a time. I know what 
that means: he misses me. He will come bound-
ing in. There will be a kiss, a laugh, his arms,
his love, and paradise. We shall have a long,
happy evening by ourselves. The fire is fair;
the sweeping crimson curtains are drawn; there
are jacqueminots on my dressing-table; the ex-
pectant room is solemn. The winter night is:



<pb n="119"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE              119
like the angel Joy, strong and beautiful. It is
as I said those first few weeks beside the autumn
sea: Eden waits in every weather. Oh, I love
him! I love him so that it is as if I could
perish of loving and not know that I had been
slain.
December the twenty-fourth.
WE are all so happy to-night that it seems a
kind of theft from joy to take the time to say so.
The angel of life is bearing us along on quiet
wings. Father is quite well, better than usual,
and Dana has done some brilliant thing at court
which pleases the governor. The ground is to
be broken to-morrow for our new house; it is to
stand just behind Ararat, in the garden, near the
wall and the electric light. Dana is very merry
and kind; no one can be so kind as Dana. For
me, I am better, and I am happy, too. The
doctor (old Dr. Curtis) has quite talked me out
of the blues I was in awhile ago. And to-mor-
row - I thought I had pages to say about to-
morrow; but my pen is deaf and dumb. I find
I cannot speak, even to my own heart-only to
his. I will leave a note upon his pillow; I hope
he will like it. At first it was a joy to write
them because it was clearly such a joy to him to
read them. My brain seemed to be stimulated,
as well as my heart, by happiness; thought it-



<pb n="120"/>
120  CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE 
self was sharpened, and all my feeling and ex-
pression refined. There is no inspiration like
that which comes of being beloved. I think, if 
I had been born a writer or a poet, I could have
written a great book or song in my bridal weeks.
Dana has been so busy lately that I have not
written him many love-notes. It is quite a while
since I left one upon his pillow. I put this blank
white paper to my lips, and I breathe words upon 
it, and love them into meaning.
"DARLING: I should like to say that to you
which fails me in the saying, for it is our first
Christmas eve together, and to-morrow will mean
something for us which no other Christmas in
our lives can mean. Just this little time while
you are reading to Father (I am glad you thought 
to offer him that pleasure) I am taking the leisure
of my heart to write you a wife-note. Do you
remember how you used to kiss them!  I shall
put this you know where.
"The night is strong and still. There is not
much wind, and a mighty frost. The snow is
like the shield of the great Venus (supposing her
to have been a Victory; you know I always fan-
cied that idea; I like to think that she lost her
arms trying to defend herself--she, Victory,
vanquished). See! the pagan is not drowned



<pb n="121"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     121
out of me yet, though you have n't called it
'sumptuous' for quite a time, and to-night how
can imagination cherish any but the Christian
images ?
"I admit that the others ring rather hollow.
Even the great Venus, solemn and strong, ideal
of Unattained Love, -perhaps, who knows ? of
the Unattainable,-woman from the first heart-
beat, but goddess to the end, even she, the glory
of paganism - she bows with the shepherds be-
fore the Child of Bethlehem. Can't you see just
how she would look, the awful Venus, on her
knees? I can.
" I am writing by the firelight and the electric
street-light, crumpled upon a cricket between the
two, the paper on my lap and, Dear, the tears
upon my cheeks. I am thinking of the strange
light that blossomed on the sky that night in
Palestine. I have always thought it was deep
pink, like a bursting rose. I am thinking of
the village khan and the grotto stable; it flits
before me like the plates in a sacred magic-
lantern at some religious scene, now this slide,
now that, returning on themselves and repeating
the effect, and always centering upon one group.
"Dear, I have done all my Christmasing for
Father, for the servants, for Job, and for every-
body, and I have not much for you; only one



<pb n="122"/>
122   CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE 
thing. I shall fold it in this note, it is so small. 
For when I tried to think what I could give you, it 1
seemed to me that there was nothing left. I have
given you all I am. How can I, who am so spend-
thrift of myself for your dear sake -how can I
offer you any small thing on this, on this first
Christmas of our life together?  I chose the little
gold Madonna for your watch-guard because I
could not bring myself to anything else. It was 
made for me in Paris (if you care to know), but
it is to me as if Love had ordered it for me out
of heaven. Wear it, Dear, because you love me,
because you love us.
" I find I cannot write to-night; I cannot think;
I dare not dream. I find it out of my power to
admit your soul altogether to my own. For I
begin to feel now, as I used to do before we were
married, that a woman must not exact too much
of a man; she must not expect him to under-
stand; she must remind herself that he is a man,
and cannot. For a time we have been one, you
and I, husband and wife, and the eternal and al-
mighty difference has been smitten out between 
us by strong love, which makes of twain one 
being.
"Now, at the very time when we begin to be
dearest to each other, closest, most sacred, now
we begin again, for I do perceive it, while most
4



<pb n="123"/>
I      CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     123
i united, to deviate, nature from nature, sex from
sex. Already, thou dear lord of me and of mine,
I feel with blinding tears that I stand apart from
thee, when most cherished by thee. Already I
see that I begin to tread a separate and a solemn
road.
"Dana! Dana! My heart reaches out to you
with an unutterable cry. Try to interpret its
inarticulate meaning.
" Forgive this too solemn letter, my dear Love,
and love me better for it if you can. If your
love does not advance with my need of it, I shall
perish of that pause.
"For I can see nothing in all the world of
visions this Christmas eve but the Mother with
the Child upon her breast.
"Oh, be gentle to
"YOUR WIFE."
May the fifteenth.
WHEN I see how long it is since I have opened
this book, I do not know whether to laugh or
cry. As a rule I find the former works better.
Masculine tenderness is said to respond to tears.
I do not find it so. Rather, I should say that a
man's devotion fades under salt water, like a
bathing-suit, proving unserviceable in the very
element for which it is supposed to be adapted.
9



<pb n="124"/>
124   CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE 
I never used to be a crying girl; I am quite
ashamed of the number of times a week I lock
myself into my own rooms to have it out with 
myself. I suppose it is a physical condition.
Nobody sees but Job. He jumps into my lap,
more gently than he used to, and kisses my wet
face. Heaven knows how he understands that
drops on a cheek mean grief in the heart. Some-
times I think that perception of the finer states of
one we love is in relation to dumbness. Words,
protestations, impulses of the lip, come to mean
less as love means more. One of the sages was
he who said that conduct is three fourths of life.
Our cottage is done and we move in to-mor-
row. It is the night before I leave my father's
home for our own. There has been too much to
do, and I am not quite equal now to the tax upon
my strength. I was always such a well, strong 
girl--poised, I think, in soul and body. Physi-
cal malaise is a foreigner to me, and there is no
common vocabulary between it and myself No
girl thinks of this. When I expected to be
most comforted I find myself most solitary. I
suppose it is a common, or at least a frequent,
experience. Men are so busy and so insolently
strong. . There is something cruel in their physi-
cal freedom.
No woman deity could ever have constructed



<pb n="125"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A           WIFE     125
this world. I wonder is there not somewhere,
softly whirring through space, a planet that the
Ewigweibliche has created?  There must be a
* feminine element in Godhead, or woman would
not exist. Suppose this were given its untram-
* meled and separate expression ?  I like to think
what a world that would be, or may be yet, for
aught we know.
I am tired -oh, I am tired! I do not feel
much enthusiasm about this new house. The
sheer strain of building and furnishing has shaken
the romance all out of it. A sensible, middle-
aged woman once told me that she and her hus-
band came to the brink of a divorce over the
first house they built (they are rather an unusu-
ally happy couple), and that the only way she
-prevented the catastrophe was by saying, "Have
it all your own way; I will not express another
wish about this house." Yet they lived in it
comfortably for fifteen years. She had seven
children, most of them born in it.
Dana is happy about the house, quite happy;
and I suppose this ought to make me so. It
would have, once. But I see so little of my
* husband now that the proportions of feeling are
changing. I am afraid they are changing in
, me as well as in him. I don't mean -no, no!
I could not mean that I care less. But I enjoy



<pb n="126"/>
126   CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
less and I suffer more. He is away from homel
all day and many evenings; sometimes most:
evenings of the week. And he travels morel
or less on his professional business or on political:
errands. I try to think that this is all right, and 
that it is always necessary. In my soul I know
it is not. I am already very lonely. I am per-
plexed and troubled. I used always to feel be-
loved. Now I feel hurt much of the time. 
Such a state as this chills a woman to the heart.
My husband sometimes calls me cold; he will
say this when I am quivering with woundedi
love, when I am nothing but one nerve of pas-,
sionate tenderness bruised. I do not reply; I
let him say so. I have tried to make him see 
how it really is. I have tried so often that I:
have got through. I am beginning to think that 
he cannot understand.
Perhaps I shall be happier in our new house.
And by and by- in October, when I am well.
again--perhaps he will be different; he will
stay at home more; we shall be together as?
we used to be; and he will be so happy, we
shall be so united, that I shall be glad again. I
must hold this truth fast; for, from very phys- .
ical weakness, and a little, I think, from lone-.
liness, it eludes me.  The kingdom  of love
is within us, and "only our own souls can sever:
us."



<pb n="127"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           127
I AM too rebel to the primal laws. No Wilder-
ness Girl should ever be married, I think. Oh,
the silence and the freedom and the sacred soli-
tudes of maidenhood! I think of them with a pas-
sionate hunger and thirst. I remember how Gwen-
dolen, after one of her scenes with Grandcourt,
complained to herself that she could not even
make a passionate exclamation, or throw up her
arms as she would have done in her maiden days.
But she did not love her husband. I never
thought to see the time when I should thank
God that I do love mine. But now I perceive
that if I did not the foundations of the great
deep would be broken up. And I should-
What should I do ?  What could I do ?
Job just pulled something from the basket
on my sewing-table and brought it to me, wag-
ging rather piteously. It is the little blue blan-
ket that I am trying to embroider for my son.
It grows slowly; I never liked to sew.
Let me learn to be divinely patient, as women
can, as women must. I must remember that
happiness has not fled from my life at all. The
angel Joy will return with a sweet and solemn
face. "And a little child shall lead them."
Eleven o'clock.
I HAVE spent most of the evening with Father,
for he, too, feels, I can see, the emotion of this



<pb n="128"/>
128   CONFESSIONS      OF A   WIFE
last night before I leave his house. I had read
him to sleep, I thought, before I slid up-stairs. 
Just now the front door opened (with some un- 
necessary noise), and I ran to the head of the
stairs to tell Dana that Father was asleep. But
he had gone on into the library before I could
attract his attention.
He stays so long that I wonder why. I be-
lieve I will go down. ...
I went. My red slippers are quite mute, and ;
my old ruby gown never whispers. I did not 
think that they would not hear me, and I came 
upon them quite suddenly and unnoticed.
The two men were standing in the dim library, 
for Father had got into his dressing-gown and 
had come out to meet my husband; I am afraid 
he had been listening for his son-in-law to come 
in. He held Dana's hand in his own. Dana
looked very handsome and debonair in his even- i
ing dress, with his nonchalant eyes, and smiling 
steadily. Father did not smile; his face worked. 
As I stood silent and wondering, I saw the 
sacred tears stream down my father's face.
"Oh, be kind to her!" he said. "Be kind:!
to her!" 
May the sixteenth. 
Too tired to sit up, I write this lying flat on my:,!
new bed in my new room, in our new house. It i



<pb n="129"/>
I[      CONFESSIONS      OF A    WIFE    129
seemed a pity not to sanctify the date by one
warm word; for we moved over in a cold storm
-one of my own northeasters. All the garden
trees are tossing like masts in a gale, every green
sail flapping. The old apple-tree, on a level
with our little library, turns a strange, familiar
face to me in the rain, like the face of a friend
whom you had never seen cry before; there
seems to be no way to wipe off the tears, and
they stream on steadily. This is the more no-
ticeable because we really are not sad at all.
The cottage is quite comfortable, and I should
not have thought it would seem so attractive by
gas-light; it is very bright, and all the colors are
warm. There is rose in my own room. Why
is it that color means something less to me than
it used to do ? Once I should have responded
to the tinting of this room (it is really very good)
in every nerve. Now, somehow, it does not seem
to matter very much. I suppose that is physical,
too. Most things are, to women. Who said,
"There is a spiritual body" ?  Paul, I suppose.
Nevertheless, there is philosophy as sound as it
is subtle in those five words.
The new maids are buzzing about the new
kitchen. It seems like a doll's house. Maggie
has gone to Mrs. Gray. Old Ellen takes care
of Father, and he has connected the two houses



<pb n="130"/>
130   CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
by telephone.  Job is plainly homesick, and 
will not go to bed. Every time the apple-tree
hits the tree-house he barks in a melancholy
manner, and Dana cuffs him for it, for Dana can-
not bear anything melancholy.
There is a banshee in my house, I find. My
speaking-tube to the cook's room  catches the
wind and wails beyond belief  Job growls at
the banshee.
Dana is so happy that I wonder I do not feel
happier. There is a new piano, and he sits
singing. Somehow he seems to me like a new
husband. But I am quite aware that I do not
seem to him like a new wife. I wonder if I
ever shall again ?  He plays with his nonchalant
touch:
Stay, stay at home, my heart, and rest;
Home-keeping hearts are happiest.
Yes, here it comes; I hoped he would not forget
it. I really do not know why I did not want to -
ask him for this song. Something of the bond-
age of maidenhood seems to remain in a wife, a
kind of impossibility,- I do not know how toi
express it,- a power not herself which makes
for silence, the terrible law which takes from a J
woman's love even that which it hath, and forbids
her to woo even her own husband. I do nbt -



<pb n="131"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A            WIFE     131
know whether this is a right law or a wrong one,
a tradition or an instinct. I do not think women
are alike in this. Perhaps it is relative, too- so
much freedom in her nature to so much love in
his. The banshee is quite overborne as he sings
joyously:
From the Desert I come to thee,
On my Arab shod with fire.
May the twentieth.
THE new maid (her name is Luella) hit the new
sofa bang! against the new library wall to-day,
and bit two bites out of the new old-gold calci-
mine. Dana was very angry. I did not know
for quite a while after we were married that he
was such a quick-tempered man. I feel very
sorry for him; it must be so uncomfortable to
be quick-tempered. I am differently constituted
myself: I grieve.
I think he thinks it is my fault when he is
angry. I wonder if it is 2 Of course I am not
always right; and then, a woman is in such physi-
cal discomfort most of the time. To-day I an-
swered Dana very positively. He scolded Luella
so that she gave notice on the spot. I never
heard a girl give notice before, and it was a dis-
agreeable experience. We never had any trou-
ble with our maids in Father's hose. I have



<pb n="132"/>
132   CONFESSIONS     OF A    WIFE
always grown up with the feeling that families. 
that changed servants were not quite respectable. 
I told Dana that he ought to leave the manage- 
ment of the servants to me. He said, "D-n!"
Then he put on his hat and went out. There is
no music to-night. Luella and the cook are
conspiring in the kitchen, and Job and I are 
tete-a-tete, exchanging confidences.
May the twenty-first.
DANA was charming this evening. I think he is
sorry. I had found some good old prints of
Landseer's dogs, and cut them out and pasted
them up over the breaks in the calcimine, above
the sofa, something like the frieze of a dado;
really, they have quite an effect of their own.
" You always were clever," he said, and kissed 
me twice. Job was positively jealous of the
Landseer dogs. We held him up, and I stroked 
the dogs, and Job growled and snarled and flew
at them.  Dana was immensely amused. He 
named one of the dogs David, and the other
Dora. We have had a happy evening, and
Luella has consented to stay.
The night is all a palette of pale greens and
fair blues and grays after the storm, and there is !
no banshee. The apple-tree is in blossom, and
the tree-house is drifted with snow of pink and 
;.;~i



<pb n="133"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE            133
pearl. Dana asked me to come out into the
tree-house with him. "Subpoena Job for wit-
ness," he said.  "He can testify--what you
have the air of forgetting, my lady-that I took
the first there. Nothing can undo that."
"I wonder if anything can ever undo any-
thing?" I said, laughing too. So I climbed up
into the tree-house to please him; but I was so
tired and physically wretched that I am afraid I
disappointed him, and I could not stay very long.
I think Dana really tried to reproduce something
of the old glamour, and when he found that it
was missing, he thought· it was I who failed to
supply the materials of romance. No wonder.
I read a story last week in which the author
took upon himself to remark that the experience
of prospective parentage was equally hard to
husband and to wife, because, "while she bore
her sufferings, he bore her complaints"! It is
unnecessary to observe that this piece of fiction
was written by a man. This paragraph is quite
superfluous,-I believe women are superfluous
by nature,--for Dana has been very kind to me
to-day. I have justetphoned to Father that I
am quite happy.
" June the tenth.
"DANA MY DEAR: I do not think it will be
necessary for you to hurry home if the trip is



<pb n="134"/>
134  CONFESSIONS      OF A   WIFE 
doing you good. And if there is any professional
reason, as you say, for prolonging it a few days
more, never mind me. I cannot say, to be
honest, that I am very well. The hot weather
has leaped upon us like a tiger from a jungle; I
never was torn by it before. But I am not suf-
fering for anything in particular, except you. I
suppose a husband's presence is one of the luxu- 
ries that a wife must learn to go without. That
seems to be the modern idea. And I am too 
busy to mope or sentimentalize about you.
"Things are going after a fashion in the house.
The room being smaller than I am used to, I
think I feel the hot nights more. And Luella
has given notice again, and again consented to
remain.
"Father is a little troubled about the effect of
this weather on me, and has been doing some-
thing about the Dowe Cottage for August and
September. What do you think?   He asked
me to ask you to telegraph if you approve. The
idea is that we should go there (to visit him),
and stay till all is over. Dr. Curtis urges it. I
must say I should like to go. On these breath-
less nights, in my stuffy little rose room, I seem
to see waves breaking on the window-sill; but
they never get over. I can almost smell the
salt, but I never feel the spray. And, then, we



<pb n="135"/>
CONFESSIONS      OF A    WIFE    135
were so happy there! I can't help feeling as if
the old joy were shut up in that cottage, like a
tenant who was locked in, and would fly to meet
us, and take us in his arms, and bless us both
for now and for ever.
"I am your loving and your lonely
" WIFE."
June the tenth.
I HAVE just written to Dana about the Dowe
Cottage. I am afraid it was not exactly a love-
letter; somehow, I could not. If I had let him
know how much I miss him, I do not think he
would quite like it altogether. Why is almighty
Nature forever laying a coal of fire upon a
woman's lips ?
So I wrote quite stiffly and serenely; and
when I had finished the letter I cried, for no-
body but Job could see.
I just got up and went into his room, and
touched all his little things - the brushes on his
dressing-case, his slippers lying where he tossed
them'(for he never likes to have me move them
to put them away), his ash-receiver, with a half-
burnt cigar just as he left it. Then I went into the
closet where his clothes are hanging, and put my
cheek to them all, one after the other. His blue
velveteen smoking-jacket hung inside the door;



<pb n="136"/>
136  CONFESSIONS      OF A    WIFE
he wore that one day when he seemed to love me
more than usual, and - I could not help it - I
kissed the velveteen coat. I kissed it several times.
yune the fifteenth.
I WENT out about the grounds to-day to oversee
some workmen who were grading, but was quite
overcome by the burning weather, and I think I
had something like a faint, or touch of.the sun.
When they helped me indoors the house seemed
to rock and reverberate with Dana's voice, and it
was as if he were singing:
Trees where you sit shall crowd into a shade.
I could scarcely believe that he was not there.
"August the tenth. [West Sanchester.
"MY DEAR HEART: You have been very de-
voted and kind to me ever since we came here,
and I want to bless you for it. I know that you
have been working too hard and need a change,
and I am sure it is quite safe for you to be away
for a little while. If you want to try the moun-
tains after Bar Harbor, I would not prevent it on
any account. As long as you keep within reach
of the telegraph it will be all right. I thank you;
for giving up the Adirondack trip, for I do think
that was too far away just now. Continue to  I
. '



<pb n="137"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 137
write and telegraph as faithfully and lovingly
as you have done. I depend on that more than
you know. A wife is one of the foolish folk;
you cannot exact man's poise or wisdom of a
woman's heart and body. I never love you so
much as when you remember to love me and to
comfort me in little ways.
"How handsome you looked the morning you
left, my beautiful! You went swinging down
the avenue. I wanted to go to the station with
you, and because I could not I cried a little; but
not till you had quite gone. I watched you till
you were out of sight. The light was splendid
on your hair and forehead as you lifted your hat
and kissed your hand. I thought: ' If I should
never see him again, what a vision to keep with
me in this world, or to take with me to another!'
Women will have such thoughts, my darling;
we wait too much to take life lightly.  Be
patient with
"MARNA, your Wife."
TELEGRAM
"VWest Sanchester, August 17.
lTo Dana Herwin,
"Maplewood House,
"Bethlehem, New Hampshire.
"Come at once.
"FRANCIS TRENT."



<pb n="138"/>
138 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
TELEGRAM
"West Sanchester, August 18.
"To Dana Herwin,
"Care of Conductor, White Mountain Express,
en route for Boston. Try Portsmouth.
"Don't suffer. I am not in any danger now.
But the blanket ought to have been pink.
" MARNA."
'"August the eighteenth.
"DEAR FATHER OF MY DAUGHTER: They let
me write, in pencil, for I insisted. Father will
give it to you at the station. I convinced the
doctor it would be better for me than to talk-
at first. I don't want to speak. I only want to
be touched and kissed--and for you not to go
away again. All I want, all I want in this world,
is you. I shall get well. There will nothing
go wrong now you are here. Oh, I cannot say
that it was not hard-without you. At first I
thought of everything- motherless young wives,
and women with drunken husbands, and the
poor, unwedded girls: all womanhood seemed
to pass by me in a pathetic procession, drifting
through the room. And I thought, 'I am one of
them.'
"But after that I thought of nothing-no-



<pb n="139"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           139
thing in earth or heaven but you--not of the
baby at all, only you, you.
"Stay by me when you come, Darling! Don't
let them persuade you that it will harm me. It
will save me, and it is the only thing that will.
They thought that I should die, but I could not
die when you were so far away. That would
have been impossible.
"Dana, Dana, I live, and I love you. For I
am
"THE MOTHER OF YOUR CHILD."
August the thirtieth.
THIS is the first time I have been allowed to
write (to amuse myself), and I am limited to
eight lines. " Being happy," I remember Haw-
thorne said, " he had no questions to put." Being
happy because my husband gives me every mo-
ment that he can beg or steal from time, being
happy because he is so happy, because he blinds
me with tenderness, I have no letters to write.
Instead, I record the fact that my daughter is
two weeks old to-day, and that Job is so jealous
of her that we cannot keep them in the same
room. I think he is planning definite hostilities.
Job finds her more objectionable than David
and Dora.
10



<pb n="140"/>
'V
IV"
November the tenth.
I HEARD of a man the other day whose wife
went into his room           to kiss him      good     night,
and he said: "Mary, why do you do this '                           I
do not love you. There is no other woman in
the case. I have not wronged you. But I no
longer love you. If I were you, I should not
kiss my husband under these circumstances."
This is a true story.           Minnie Curtis told          me
the names of the people.              I repeated      it to Dana
to-day, and      he said, yes, she had          told   him     that
yarn.     He finds it quite a relief, he says, when
1 Upon careful examination of the manuscript of which these confessions are
composed, the system of dating is found to be, after the manner of women,
quite a matter of accident.  Days of the month or week are usually observed
with something like accuracy, but there is no reliable calendar of the years.
The next available record occurs apparently a year and some months from
the date of the last entry given in these columns, and which was coincident
with the birth of the young wife's child.
A close study of the copy reveals the fact that certain pages of the Ac-
cepted Manuscript are missing, having been torn rather than cut away, and
presumably destroyed.
What letters, if any, have shared the same fate, it is impossible to
say.-M. A.
I40



<pb n="141"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE             141
is tired and the baby is crying, to run in to
Ihe Curtises'. He met Robert Hazelton there,
1the last time, consulting with Dr. Curtis. The old
;doctor is not well, and makes over a good deal
Iof his practice to Robert. I asked Dana if he
f thought Robert saw much of Minnie; but Dana
.says that Robert has no time to talk to girls-
he says he does n't think he is that kind of doc-
tor. It leaped to my lips to ask Dana why he
was that kind of lawyer. But I did not do it.
If I had, all the answer I should have got would
have been: "You don't classify quite correctly.
I 'm going into politics," or some equally clever
parry. Nothing would have been gained, and
something lost--something of that indefinable
: advantage which a wife (more than a husband, I
think) retains with self-possession. A woman
can never afford to be cross. Why is it that a
man can ?
*H     The first lesson of a wife is to learn when not
to speak; I doubt if she ever learns why not. I
am a dull pupil in the school of marriage. No
Wilderness Girl takes to the higher mathematics
with any natural grace. If it were not for my
-!   daughter - well, if it were not for my daughter '
It is for my daughter - the insurmountable fact,
the unanswerable question, the key that locks
me to my lot. If I fled back to my forest, she
. . .



<pb n="142"/>
142  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 
would cry for me. And if I strapped her on my
back and ran-I don't think the governor's
granddaughter would make a successful papoose. 
She is much more like her grandfather than like
me, thank Heaven. She has his equable mouth,
though it curls at the corners more than his. I
think she will grow up into a comfortable young
lady, and marry a congressman, and be happy
ever after. There is nothing of her father about
her yet, except his eyes; hers already have the
insouciance, but not the insolence, the superflu-
ous merriment refined by her sex. I have studied
her anxiously. She bears my mother's name.
"Marion," I said to-day, "I am glad you are
not a boy baby."
She gave me an elfish glance, and the corners
of her mouth curled. I never saw a sarcastic
baby before. 
November the twentieth.
I HAVE the outlines of a Greek tragedy before
me. A girl I used to go to school with married
a brilliant young fellow of her own social class,
whom she adored with that kind of too tolerant
tenderness for which, as a sex, we seem to
be distinguished.  Some overlooked heredity, 
rooted two generations back, resulted in drink-
ing, and drinking resulted in worse. He left
·~.                  



<pb n="143"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A           WIFE       143
er last spring for a woman such as Fanny never
P saw  in her life. Fanny has two children, and
that sort of ill health which heartbreak creates in
-  women, a disorder not catalogued in the medical
-books. Her family lost their property when her
_  father died, and- to-day I had her advertising
_ / cards. They set forth the fact that Mrs. Fanny
Freer, masseuse, will treat patients at their own
homes for one dollar an hour. She will also
, repair ladies' dresses, and cut and make chil-
dren's clothes.
I call it Greek because she has not made any
fuss about it, but has endured her fate with a
terrible and splendid dumbness for which, again,
as a sex, we are not distinguished. She is a lit-
tle blonde thing, too, with a dimple, and a bow-
and-arrow mouth, and always had more gloves
-  than I did at school.
/:l   I have been ailing lately, I don't know just
why. I wonder if I could afford to send for her
a few times ?  It might be at least a comfort to
her to come here, where she will be asked to sit
at table with the family.
In face of a fate like this, how my half-grown
troubles hang their heads! I seem to see them
in a row, standing like school-boys punished for
playing at Indian massacre. "You foolish fel-
lows!" I say. "You are a shabby lot. There



<pb n="144"/>
144   CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE
is n't an Indian among you! Any respectable
tomahawk would disown you."
I am beginning to understand that happiness
in marriage is an art. I used to think it was a
gift. In short, what I thought was a right proves
to be a privilege.
November the twenty-third.
. I HOPE I have not been exacting with Dana.
He calls me so, when he is vexed about any-
thing. I never was thought exacting in any
other relation of life; but marriage makes a new
being of a woman: a wife is as truly born into
an unknown world as her child is. It seems to
me that I have my own character to form, as
completely as my daughter's. I, Marna Trent,
slain on my wedding-day, am a transmigrated
soul - the " twice-born," as the Buddhist calls it.
I am in my second existence...   Will there
be any others ?
I found something in one of Max Miller's
Oriental Bibles yesterday over in Father's library,
when I went to sit with him and read to him,
for Father is not quite well this fall, and it is
touching to me to see how he clings to what he
calls my "womanly tenderness."   (He never
said that I was exacting.) Here is what I read to
Father:
Though I go along trembling, like a cloud driven by a
strong wind, have mercy, Almighty, have mercy!



<pb n="145"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE                 145
. Oh, I cannot deceive       myself, or call
things by opalescent names, any longer!     My
husband is not kind to me, he is not kind!
November the twenty-seventh.
WE took our Thanksgiving dinner with Father,
and Dana went to the Curtises' later in the even-
ing.  I had to come back and stay with the baby,
to let the girls go out. She is asleep, and the
house is as still as resignation.  I cannot write,
and have been trying to read.    Dana says I do
not keep up with current thought, and that a
wife should make herself as attractive to her hus-
band intellectually as she was before marriage.
The first sentence I fell upon was this, from a
French critic:
It is well that passionate love is rare. Its principal effect is to
detach men from all their surroundings, to isolate them,
. . . and a civilized society composed of lovers would return
infallibly to misery and barbarism.
I think a woman should be quite happy in
order to keep up with current thought.  Current
feeling is as much as I can manage.
~7; -TELEPHONE MESSAGE
-1~^~ .~~" November the thirtieth.
.~ "~" Main-2o.
", To Mr. Dana Herwin, from Mrs. Herwin.
m'    "By the maid to the office-boy. Peter will deliver as soon
,~:,  ~  as Mr. Herwin comes in.



<pb n="146"/>
146   CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE           ]
"Dr. Curtis sent Dr. Hazelton over to see the
baby this noon. He calls it croup. When will
you be out ?                     MARNA."
TELEGRAM 
"New Tork, November 30.
" To Mrs. Dana Herwin.
"Called suddenly to New York on business.
Did not return to office. Hope child is better.
Address Astor House.               DANA."
TELEPHONE MESSAGE
"The ofice-boy to the maid.
" Say, Luella, you tell her he ain't got that
message.   He took the Limited, and never
showed up, only a district messenger that sassed
me, and I showed him the door.
"PETER."
TELEGRAM
" Astor House, New Tork, December 1.
"To Mrs. Dana Herwin.
" Yours received too late for midnight express.
Will return Limited. Hazelton all right. He '11
bring her through. Cheer up. Will catch the
3:12.  If baby better, telephone station. In
that case, take later train.      DANA."



<pb n="147"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A          WIFE     147
',~^  ~    TELEPHONE MESSAGE
i:!||'?~~( "December the first.
" ' To Mr. Dana Herwi,,
i!   " Care of Chief Operator, West Station.
:  "Marion is out of danger. Do as you please
about hurrying home. She is still sick, but safe.
;2!~ 'H~' "MARNA."
December the first, 10 P.M.
I KNEW he was a good, true, clever man, but I
did not know before that Robert Hazelton could
work a miracle. I never thought to see the day
when I should be glad that old Dr. Curtis could
not get to my sick child; but it is my belief that
if he had    The new methods and the new
remedies are wonder-workers in the control of an
able and alert mind, fresh from everything and
afraid of nothing. Robert was always a coura-
geous fellow; but he is so quiet about it that
one must know him pretty well to rate his intel-
lectual and moral independence at anything like
its value.
Together we fought for the baby's life all
night. What a night! Solemn, separate from
all nights, it stands apart in my life - the look
of my child's face, the way her little hands
clutched at the air; and the strong, still figure
beside me, grasping her from death .... He



<pb n="148"/>
148  CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
told me to go to bed, and that she could be  :1
trusted with Luella. I can't do it. I don't
think I could do it even if Dana had got home;
and he won't be here till half-past eleven. He
telephoned that it was very important, something
political, and that if the child were out of danger,
he would take the eleven-two; unless, he said, I
wished him to come right out ? I told him to
do as he pleased, and that it was not at all
necessary.
He is away so much that he does not seem
necessary in these days to very much of anything.
I suppose most wives have that feeling. I hope
they do not all have another, which persists and
pursues me- this feeling hurt, hurt all the time.
My whole soul is raw, as if it were flayed with
some petty instrument or utensil, like an awl or
a grater; something not to be dignified as a
weapon.
He says he loves the child as much as I do.
I thought at first that we should grow nearer and
be dearer on account of the baby. But I am
kept at home so much with her, and I can't go
about, as I used to do, with him; and Dana
hates sickness, and all babies are ailing more or
less. Even the experience of parentage, which
I thought was to unite, seems subtly to divide
us. Everything almost that we experience de-



<pb n="149"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     149
velops the sundering, not the soldering, quality.
One day Mrs. Gray said to me:
"My dear, marriage is full of phases. Don't
mistake them for finalities."
I suppose that is my tendency - to look upon
the stages of a thing as the end of it. When
one is caught on a barbed-wire fence, one does
not contemplate the beauties of the horizon.
I am writing because I cannot sleep till he
gets home. There would be no use in keeping
Luella up, and I am happier to watch the baby.
Only to hear her breathe is ecstasy. All last
night I had a strange, scared feeling. It seemed
monstrous that her father should not be there if
i   she died. And when she lived, it seemed some-
how abnormal that it should be Robert who
saved her. I have never thought of him as a
doctor, only as one of my old friends. In fact,
since I have been married, I have scarcely thought
of him at all.
He, on his side, seemed to have forgotten that
we were ever friends. He was all doctor. I
don't think he had an idea in his head except to
save my baby's life - not because she was mine,
but because she was a baby. His face was set
and stern; it was as strong as bronze. His per-
emptory orders rang like those of some military
man, a stranger, or some one you had only hap-



<pb n="150"/>
15o  CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE 
pened to meet. I always liked his voice. I
don't think he looked as short as he used to. It
seemed to me as if he had grown. He came
again at noon, and again this evening. When
he went away at nine, he said: "Go to sleep.
The child is safe. Do not sit up for your hus-
band. You are exhausted."
"I will meet him at the station and tell him
to come in softly," he added, as he shut the
door.
I did not even thank him, or think, till after-
ward, how kind that was, or how like him. If I
had, I doubt if I could have spoken. His man-
ner was as impersonal as if he had been a
physiological laboratory. Now that I think of
it, I don't believe he gave the least evidence of
anything that could possibly be called sympathy
in all that terrible time. I begin, now that the
strain is over, to perceive how kind this was in
him. I wanted my husband so all the time, I
perished so for Dana, that one tender word would: :?
have demoralized me. I should have cried my
soul out. And that would have been bad for the
baby. I suppose physicians acquire a sorcery 
about all these things; they never cross the magic 
circles.
I wonder if I ought not to write to Robert :I
and thank him properly '                   I
'.;.



<pb n="151"/>
CONFESSIONS       OF A    WIFE     151
"DEAR DR. HAZELTON: I disobeyed you, for I
! cannot sleep till my husband gets home. So I
am writing. And I know that I shall rest bet-
ter if I try to tell you how we feel about what
you have done for the baby. But, now that I
try, I cannot tell you; all my words deny me.
Her father will see you at once, and express to
you our affectionate gratitude for the professional
1 skill and the personal kindness which have saved
our child. I expect him now, every minute.
I    "Yours gratefully and as ever sincerely,
II~?: F~" MARNA HERWIN."
December the twelfth.
g I HAVE been shut in so much with the baby,
-  lately, that I have read rather more than usual.
:   I hoped this would please Dana, but I can't say
I that he has seemed aware of any accumulated in-
tellectual force in me. He says I am narrowing
to a domestic horizon. Thinking to amuse him
to-day, I carried him this, from an old author:
Woman ought every morning to put on the slippers of
humility, the shift of decorum, the corset of charity, the
garters of steadfastness, the pins of patience ..
. ... But it is by no means proved that even then a man
would not find his wife a little overdressed.
He laughed.
"That makes a good point," he said.    "A



<pb n="152"/>
152  CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE
fixed sense of moral superiority has a tendency
to become tiresome. A fellow resents being
always put in the wrong."
"Even if he is wrong?" I asked.
"Possibly because he is wrong," replied my
husband, with a changed expression. He glanced
over the book, and left the room abruptly. I saw
him go over to the Curtises' on his way to the
trolley; there were fifteen minutes to spare. I
did not feel at all surprised -perhaps not really
altogether sorry--that he did not spend those
fifteen minutes with me. Once I should have 
grieved. I could hear him playing a duet with
Minnie, some rollicking thing. He says she
accompanies very finely; his violin has been 
over there for some time. After he had gone, I
took up the book, which he had laid face down
upon the baby's crib. His swift and slender
pencil-point had run beside these words:
Only a saint can endure a wearing woman.
"December the thirteenth.
"MY DEAR DANA: Will you be patient with
one of my constitutional notes? It is a good
while since I have written you any, for I see that
they sometimes annoy you in these days, and in-
deed I do not mean to be troublesome. But do



<pb n="153"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     153
: you realize, my dear, how hard it is becoming
I for us to talk ? I so often displease you, God
k knows why. Or you hurt me, though I am sure
; you do not mean to. I find sometimes that if I
! have anything of any consequence to say to you,
* I must write it, or not say it at all. You call it
second nature in me to write my heart out. I
i wonder if it is first nature, and speech only the
i: second one ?
:" At all events, I found the sentence you had
marked in that old English book yesterday. I
think you can understand that it has troubled
me a little. Do you mind telling me, Dana,
what you meant by marking it ?
" Your loving
|t' "M "MARNA, Wife."
" Ihursday afternoon.
"DEAR DANA: If you have really forgotten
 what sentence it was, there is nothing to be said.
i||~-SC " MARNA."
Friday evening.
! DID he forget?  Had he truly forgotten  If
i so, either I am "too strenuous," as he calls me,
I or he was too frivolous. If not, then I am not
: strenuous enough, and my husband was not-
H quite -no, no, no! Forever, no! Not to my



<pb n="154"/>
154   CONFESSIONS     OF A    WIFE
own heart, not to this secret page, will I pro-
nounce the word.
A "wearing woman"?     She who was the
dearest, the sweetest, the gentlest, the most ten-
der, the loveliest of girls, the noblest of wives- 
to him ? I who had all the superlatives of love
crowded at my feet, treasures heaped for my sake
in a passion of such adoring madness as an older
and wiser woman than I might have spent her-
self upon, and must have trusted -I, Marma
Trent, once free and glad, now afraid to own to
my own soul how sad I am - now bond-slave
to this man for my love's sake, and for his - do I
wear upon my husband?                       i
Then God help us, both the man and the
woman, if this be true !
If I had been like some girls I have seen, if I
had not cared, or taken pains to please him-
Why, I know a young wife who danced all 
night one night when her husband lay battling
for his life at the crisis of typhoid pneumonia,
and he lived too, poor fellow. Even in our own
set, and we are not at all " smart," thank Heaven!
such things go on as I cannot, I cannot understand
-other men and other pleasures, any other
pleasures but those he shares with her, and their
children abandoned to nurses, and a wall of snow
forming all the time between the husband and



<pb n="155"/>
CONFESSIONS      OF A    WIFE     15
She wife; glittering snow, beautiful, carved, like
-he mattress that Catharine of Russia presented
-as a bridal gift to some persons whose marriage
>ishe did not favor, and the mattress was found to
b'e cut out of solid ice ....
!. . .AND yet, if a woman does not make a man
-happy, has she any right to assume that it is his
iult?  It seems to me as if the blame must be
my own, in some perplexing way that I do not
understand. If my mother were alive, I suppose
he could tell me where I am wrong. To whom
-can I turn?  The popular creed that married
ipeople should never seek advice of any third
Tperson seems to me a doubtful dogma. The
-:two-in-one life tends, by a subtle chemistry the
formula of which is too abstruse for me, to defi-
: nitely distinct points of view, and only the ideal
:oneness can reconcile these; if not reconciled,
they may need a third view as much as hydrogen
and oxygen need an electric spark to combine
them. There are times when I think that Dana
: is wholly in the wrong, because his offense is so
obvious. There are whole weeks when I try to
feel myself in error, implicit if not explicit. My
standards of right and wrong are wavering, like
i flags in the breeze; serving to show only which
way the wind is, and sometimes so twisted
IX



<pb n="156"/>
156  CONFESSIONS      OF A    WIFE 
around their poles that they are of no sort of use 
-as flags. Then, there is more or less wet
weather, when they hang limp and soaked.
I SAW a steam-carriage the other day take fire
from its own gasolene, owing to some defect in
the machinery; it burned up, yet it did not ex-
plode; the sealed tank remained true to its duty.
Is it miracle or science that married happiness
may come so near destruction and yet retain the
sealed tank  fire within fire- solid and safe 
IF he is right, then I must be radically wrong.
God knows, if He knows anything about me,
how much I would rather suffer than not to be
right in this subtle and fatal contention which
marriage evolves from love. Or, again, I would,
how gladly, be proved to be in the wrong, if that
would make him right. I do not ask to be this
or that, if only he is blameless. Sometimes I
think nothing else in life matters at all.
A NATURE may crumble from sheer dishar-
mony in its own elements. A man may be a
beautiful amalgam: gold on his brow, and iron
in his arms; but if his feet are clay, he falls.
Women kiss the clay, and cover it with their



<pb n="157"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     157
iair, and baptize it with their tears, even as she
of the sacred story kissed the Holy Feet, as white
las marble, and as strong, which trod the dust of
Il  Palestine patiently--never any less the feet of
ia man because they left the imprint of the God.
I READ to-day about a vine that is impelled by
lhunger and thirst. "During a severe drought,
if you place a basin of water at night say two
feet to the left or right of a stray vine, in the
morning it will be found bathing in the basin!"
It was a squash-vine, by the way.
Camille Flammarion said that he knew "an
heroic jasmine which went eight times through
I a board that kept the light away from it." Some
I- teasing person would put back the jasmine in the
shade, "hoping to wear out the flower's energy,
but he did not succeed."
If a woman were a jasmine, she would be
"heroic." If I were a squash, I should at least
be respected for the hunger and thirst of my
nature.
December the twenty-third.
POOR Fanny Freer came here to-day, for I have
not been very well. I kept her to luncheon,
and gave up everything else and sat with her as
long as she could stay. She has not many pa-



<pb n="158"/>
158 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
tients, and sewed for Marion in the afternoon.
She carries herself with a touching dignity. I
watched her dimple and her bow-and-arrow
mouth, and then the lines on her forehead, as if I
had seen a baby crucified. Neither of us men-
tioned her husband in any way, though she spoke
of her children freely. We talked a little about
the perplexities of modern life, as they affect
women. ,I think I expected to find her embit-
tered, or inclined to rate marriage by her own
pitiable experience. Nothing could be further
from the fact. I think she makes a point of her
sweet reasonableness- a definite struggle. And
she thinks there is no country where there are
more happy marriages than in America.
Then I suggested that women are apt to reason
too much from personal data. I did not add
that she had developed the force of character to
rise above this racial trait, but I wished to do so.
Fanny is one of those rose-petals that unexpect-
edly produce the strength of oak-leaves; not
falling before storm and sleet, but holding the
harder. One sees such women.
I asked her -she has had some experience in
her business in town, before she moved out here
-whether she found patients infatuated with
their doctors.
"Very seldom," replied the masseuse, " unless
A



<pb n="159"/>
t  CONFESSIONS OF A       WIFE     159
oav0w and then a married woman whose husband
_Vneglects her because she is sick." She added
tihat a doctor would find it hard work to culti-
l   vate illusions about his patients, and that this
lfact alone was enough to clear the atmosphere.
.- I never cared for Fanny at school, but now I
. could love her if I had time. When she went
.away, I wanted to throw my arms about her and
cry:
"How did it happen   How do you bear it ?
iWhy are you alive ?"
-  Instead, we talked of neuralgia and patterns.
I never knew anything about patterns before. It
m : seems there is a vast world where these things
- are important to women.
;  I wonder if I do not overweigh my troubles
Dana says I do. He says I have a genius for
being unhappy. Yet it seems to me as if I did
W  not ask much to make me happy - a kind word,
a kiss, some little thoughtful act. All a woman
wants is to be considered, to be valued. All she
wants is love -all she wants is the Life Eternal.
E   I suppose this is an immoderate demand - some-
thing like the demand of a moth for personal
immortality.
December the twenty-fifth.
CHRISTMAS again! I have had a happy day.
Dana has been at home all day, and last evening
A)(



<pb n="160"/>
160 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
he came in laughing, and splendid, with Marion's
first Christmas tree across his shoulder -he
handsome enough to break a woman's heart if
he did not love her, and perhaps (God knows) if
he did. Mine melted before the vision of him
as the ice was melting on the tree-house. It is a
South Carolina Christmas, and needs only a wild
pink azalea in the tree-house, or the scent of jas-
mine on the wet, warm air.
"You beauty!" I cried. " You look like the
Santa Claus ideal. I 've always thought it a
mistake to make an old man of him. You are
young, immortal fatherhood. Kiss her, Dana!"
I held the baby up, and he kissed her raptur-
ously; then he put her down and took me. No,
it was not rapturous -no. And yet I think it
was love. I tried not to think, not to reason
about it. I have learned that it is not wise for a
woman to philosophize about love, and that it is
dangerous for a wife to do so.
Job began to whine when my husband kissed
me, as he has always done from the very first;
he never gets used to it, and lately he has had
something of a respite from this source of mel-
ancholy. There is that in the dog's constancy
which touches me, I must say. He has become
accustomed to the baby, though he still cherishes
a smoldering jealousy of her. But his feeling



<pb n="161"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A          WIFE     161
about Dana is something finer than jealousy. In
fact, Job never accepted the man for the master;
why, then, he reasons, should I '
Dana and I covered the Landseer dogs to-
night (they had grown too shabby) with a dado
or frieze of Greek figures. I cut up an old
book of Parthenon plates for it, and Dana helped
me paste them on; he did not once object- he
was very kind. And he patted the Landseer
dogs, and called them David and Dora, and Job
|   growled and snarled at them, and Marion laughed
like a brook at Job: she has developed her
father's laugh. He has given her a boy doll (of
all things) nearly as large as herself, and she is
flirting with it like a summer girl with the
only man in the hotel. Dana named the doll
Dombey.
We went to Father's after Marion was in bed,
for he is too feeble to get over here; and I read
to him awhile. Dana asked me if I minded his
running over to the Curtises' for some music
while I was reading. I said, "Not in the least."
I was so pleased at his asking me that I did n't
care at all. And when we came home he sat
down at his own piano, and tossed his curling
head, and sang:
Stay, stay at home, my heart, and rest.



<pb n="162"/>
162  CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
Then he wheeled on the piano-stool with his 
beautiful, best look, and crushed me to his heart.
"You 're a dear old girl!" he said.
December the thirty-first.
A SUBMERGED country! The Atlantis of the
New England climate has evaded us, and it is
incredible that azaleas can swing their pink
lamps anywhere, or that jasmine can breathe its
heart out on any loving air. The tree-house is
stiff with icicles this morning, and the world has
got itself into armor, and stirs formidably and
heavily, like a medieval lord who kisses his lady
in the evening-and leaves her in the morning for
the wars.
The transformation happened in the night.
It was still warm last evening, and Dana brought
Minnie Curtis over to play for him here; but
the furnace was overheated, and they went out
on Ararat and serenaded me, instead; he played
his violin, and they both sang "Where'er you
walk," and some other things that he used to
sing to me. He asked me if I did not enjoy it,
and said he thought he was giving me a treat.
" Why in thunder did n't you come out with
us?" he asked when he came in, after taking
Minnie home.
" You knew Marion had one of her throats,"



<pb n="163"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A          WIFE     163
B I1 said. "I could n't leave her  even if I had
A- been invited."
B? " A wife should never wait to be invited," he
: retorted. "It looked queer, that 's all. A wife
ought to think how things look."
-  "And a husband?" I ventured.   "What
:: about him  "
The moment I had said it, I would have un-
-- said it at any estimable cost. I think it was
George Eliot who suggested that half the misery
|  of women's lives would be prevented if they
could only teach themselves to keep back the
things which they had resolved not to say. But
a resolution is a mathematical matter,- takes
, perceptible time,-and my fate was too swift
for me.
"I should n't have thought," observed my
husband, coldly, " that you had it in you, Mama,
to be a jealous woman."
Then, indeed, I turned upon him.
'"I?  Jealous?  Of Minnie Curtis? ... I
should as soon think of being jealous of
Dombey!"
"I would n't insult your neighbors, if I were
you," he blazed. "A rag doll--"
"Dombey is n't rag; he 's wax," I interrupted.
-}i    "Wax, then," said Dana, pettishly. He went
|: | into his own room and shut the door -hard.
£



<pb n="164"/>
164 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
This morning I scarcely dared to speak to
him, he was so manifestly offended, and he went
to his day's work without the ceremony of a
kiss. That a kiss should ever become a cere-
mony- is this most pitiable or most merciful'?
WHEN a liner is in fear of invisible icebergs she
takes the temperature of the sea to test the ques-
tion of their vicinity.
When my husband came home to dinner, I
took all the temperatures I could, dipping here
and there, and recording my poor little ther-
mometers, as women do. Half the time I am
sawn asunder by the conflict between love and
self-respect. In men these two are one- flesh; in
women - oh, in women they must be sometimes,
or the race would be exterminated by civil war.
(I think there is a declaration of war between
my metaphors, but, thank Heaven, I am not
writing for the magazines.)
At all events, I found a field of icebergs driv-
ing straight across the bows, and put the ship
about. Marion and Job and I are spending the
evening up here by ourselves- and Dombey.
Marion is asleep in her crib, and Dombey re-
poses beside her, as usual, with his head hanging
over the crib-rail, and his feet on the pillow. I
have some doubts of the effects of this habit
upon my daughter's manners, Dombey is so big



<pb n="165"/>
CONFESSIONS        OF A    WIFE    165
and so very boy; but Dana thinks it an excel-
<:lent joke. Marion has begun to demand a little
brother, and perhaps Dombey may fill the defi-
ciency. Dombey has become a painful subject
to me all at once, since last night. I could burn
him up, or snip him to pieces. I took Marion
to-day to see a big lady doll in a shop, in hopes
of effecting an honorable exchange; but though
the lady doll, two feet high, and glorious in a
wedding-dress spangled with gold-dust, hung
upon the arm of a red bridegroom in a fireman's
uniform, my daughter clung obstinately to Dom-
bey. I must say I respected her loyalty, while
I cannot say that I did not pity her for it.
R  Where will it take her twenty years hence ?
Does Dana expect me to come down and
storm his tenderness ?  Must a woman make all
the advances after marriage, as she must make
none before ?  Then shall we never be happy,
for I cannot, cannot do it.
Must she always be the first to institute recon-
ciliations  Must she forever forswear herself,
and say," I was wrong," though she knows, on
the honor of her own soul, that she was right 
lhursday evening.
VOLTAIRE said that a man could never be in the
wrong if he made the first advance toward an
offended woman.



<pb n="166"/>
166  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE                 I
NOTE SENT BY LUELLA
"DEAR DARLING: Don't let us make each
other miserable any longer! I cannot bear it. 
My heart will break, to live this way. I will  !
come down if you wish me to--or perhaps,
even, you would come up ?  I will do whichever 
you wish, whatever you want, anything to make 
you happy, Dear. Only be kind to me, Dana!
Only be tender and loving, as you used to be,
and I will try harder to please you, to do as you
wish, to be what you require:
Meet, if thou require it,
Both demands,
Laying flesh and spirit
In thy hands.
Was I wrong about Minnie'? Did I speak
petulantly?  I did not mean to. I don't care 
how much you play duets with Minnie, indeed
I don't. I am not one of the foolish folk. I scorn
a jealous wife as much as you do. And that was
why I felt so-  But never mind that. Forgive
me if I was wrong, Dana, and let us be happy
again! We used to be happy. We know we
can. We are not chasing an experiment, but
holding an experience.
"Darling, shall I come down to you?  Or
::Da



<pb n="167"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE     167
ould you rather-  Do whatever you would
!like best, only love
Your
"WIFE."'
An hour later.
I 1 I HAVE stopped crying,- it waked the baby,--
i and have lain crushed upon the pillows as long
I   as I can bear it. He sent a note by Luella
I; the first he has ever written to me in the same
house. He did not come up at all. I pin the
note upon this page.
"DEAR MARNA: I don't feel very happy to-
night, and I doubt if we can amuse each other
successfully. Your note is all right, and I ac-
cept your apology, of course, and we won't say
any more about it. But I think I '11 go to town
for the evening, and come out on the last elec-
tric. If I don't get out, don't worry. I should
be at the club. Go to bed and to sleep.
"Afflately,         DANA."
A GREAT mood has taken the weather since sun-
set. The ice has suddenly yielded again (like a
woman), and a storm is coming up; it will be a
fight between sleet and tears all night. The wind
A    raves about the tree-house, and the banshee in my
!:.2: 



<pb n="168"/>
168  CONFESSIONS      OF A    WIFE
room begins to moan slowly and subtly, as if she
wore trying her voice with a view to a mighty out-
cry by and by. The soul of the storm is in me,
as it was in the beginning and ever shall be.
Worn and worried as I am, half disillusioned of
myself, yet would I escape myself for the storm's
sake, and because I feel in every fiber of my be-
ing as if it would shelter me. I would fling the
window up, and let myself go, and ride upon the
wings of the east wind, for it understands me,
and I love it, and I would trust it, though it
took me God knows where. And I would be
borne into some wide caverns of the night,
where love is always tender (being love), and
tenderness, because it is gentle, is always true;
and where a woman, lest she perish, is cherished
by the mystery that won her.
. . . And what, pray, would become of my
daughter?  And Dombey?
January the twentieth.
SOME people came to dinner at Father's yester-
day, with wives; and he asked me to come over
and help him out. Dana was away, so I went
alone. After dinner the ladies discussed various
social phenomena of the day; they did this with
delicacy and earnestness; they spoke of noble



<pb n="169"/>
'  CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     169
>friendships as distinct from ignoble follies, and
!!:one of them suggested that salvation from the
last might lie partly in the existence of the first.
, The other hesitated.
"Friendship needs nourishment as well as
l:love," she said, "and one goes hungry in a
:week."
"I should call it--about-five days," re-
- plied the other, slowly. Then they both laughed,
and changed the subject- to the religious views
-of the new governor.
I could not join in the conversation intelli-
-gently, and I did not find it amibsing. I have
I never felt the need of friendship. My husband
Ihas always been my friend. Now-is he so
; much as that?  He seems to be eluding my
'real life by a strange and fatal process. I do not
-;.know how to account for it, or how to define it.
*I It is as if I stood on the edge of a precipice, and
I  saw him disappearing from my sight, a hundred
feet below, drawn down by a quicksand of the
true nature of which he is, or chooses to appear,
ignorant. The descent is subtle and slow; it is
not even dignified by the anguish of conscious
' death; debonair, and smiling steadily, he sinks
by inches. I can even hear him sing, as he suc-
cumbs without a struggle:



<pb n="170"/>
170   CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
I love thee, I love but thee!
Till the sun grows cold,
And the stars are old
If I sprang, and dashed myself down to reach
him -what then     He would probably stop
singing (he has stopped, this minute, abruptly
and unhappily) and observe without a smile:
"A wife should not annoy her husband."
It is possible that he might select the word
"pursue"; he is capable of it; and that would
outrage me so that I should quite regret my
amiable impulse.  If we could sink together,
there would be some comfort in it. I am sure I
should not mind a quicksand in the least. I
would rather suffer with him than be happy with-
out him. But he -he would be happy at any
cost. I do not think it is at all clear to him
whether default of happiness is to be attributed
to the institution of marriage or is (more simply)
my fault.
Friday.
DANA has lost his engagement-ring; he says the
tourmalins were growing shabby, anyway, and
one of them was broken.
"Sunday evening.
"MY DEAR DANA: After what has happened
to-day, I cannot- no, I cannot see you again



<pb n="171"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     171
It-night. Luella will bring up Marion's supper,
land I do not want any. I am sorry to leave you
'alone on Sunday evening.
"No, I shall not say anything to Father. I
mJust bear it as best I can.
A  "Your WIFE."
" Midnight.
e:" "OH, ask me to forgive you!   Ask me,
'Dana! For love's sake and your own sake-
'not for mine. All my being stretches out its
Iirms to you. I would forget-would love you,
etrust you, and begin again, if you will try to be
]more patient with me, if you will remember to
libe kind to
" Your
"MISERABLE MARNA."
0Rill.  '        March the thirteenth.
! DANA has the grippe, the real thing; he has
been sick for ten days, and persistently refuses to
have a doctor, so of course it has gone hard with
him, poor fellow. I have taken care of him as
best I could. I have not had my clothes off for
:- three nights, for he needs a good many things,
and one takes cold so easily, getting in and out
of a warm bed. I brush his hair a good deal, to
make him sleepy, and I read to him hours at a
fawarbe.bhii



<pb n="172"/>
172 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
time. A man is so unused to suffering that a
woman, if she loves him, cannot help being pa-
tient with him; that is a matter of course. If
she can help it, if she resents the natural irrita-
bility of his race too much, I am almost prepared
to say that she does not love him.
Sometimes, wherr I am very tired, when I can
scarcely keep on my feet, and he -does seem
almost unreasonable, I say to myself:
"Suppose you had never had the right to
take care of him   Suppose he were sick in
some remote place, and you could not get to
him ? "
An hour ago he fell heavily asleep, for he
insisted on taking a dose of laudanum (I could
not help it; he will, now and then, when he has
pain to bear), and I was on the edge of the bed
beside him, for I had been trying to magnetize
the pain in his head with passes of my hands.
I could, for the first year after we were married,
quite often, but not lately. I had hoped to fore-
stall the laudanum in that way to-night; but he
would not give me the chance; he would not
wait. So I was sitting cramped and crooked
(that is why I am writing, to try to drive the
ache out of my body by a little exercise of my
brain), anl his handsome head lay upon my arm
and shoulder, and his curling hair stirred with my



<pb n="173"/>
:' CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE     173
/ ath. He looked more than ill- he looked
lyney and wretched; and for the first time I saw
es across his forehead, the real carving of life
I t clearly.
I  "He, too, has unhappiness," I thought.  "It
1   not I alone. In marriage one cannot do any-
hing alone- not even suffer."
"You poor, poor boy!" I thought. And I
1 id my cheek upon his, and then I kissed him
l ftly. He did not wake, and I kissed him a
good many times - as I used to do. He did
m.ot know it.
" uly the sixth.
: "OH, Dana, can't we begin again ?  Is there
Sno way of blazing our path back through the
;forest of married life ?  I tell you, from my soul,
-lif there is not, we are lost. I do not know how
,.it is with you- I do not know how anything is
: with you in these times on which we have fallen;
sometimes I think I understand almost any other
- friend I have better than I do my husband. But,
for me, I perish. All my nature is astray, a
i homeless, hapless thing.
"Do not think that I blame you, Dear, or
throw our mutual misery too solidly upon your
1 A three months' silence precedes the date of the next entry, but no pages
have been mutilated or removed from the manuscript.  On the contrary, there
has, it seems, been no effort whatever to add to the record in any way.-M. A.



<pb n="174"/>
174 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
shoulders. I know that I was very young, that
I gain the tact of experience more slowly than
most wives, that I crave a good deal of tender-
ness -perhaps I am 'exacting,' as you say. I
know that I do not learn to be alone readily, and
that I grieve over little things. I am afraid my
heart is a ganglion, not a muscle, for it quivers
and winces at everything. Indeed, I try to be
different, to be patient, not to expect too much.
Oh, believe that I do try to be the kind of
,woman you prefer.
" It seems to me that if we could go back and
try all over again, we might be happy yet.
Love does not die. Love is the life everlasting.
It suffers maladies and syncopes, and it may be
hard beset, and have to fight for its life - but it
is alive, Dana, and it must be cherished like any
other living thing. We have laws and penalties
for the slayers of men. What court sits in judg-
ment on the murderers of love ' Somewhere in
the spaces and silences there must be such an
inviolate bar. Shall youand I go there, hand-
cuffed together, waiting judgment?  Oh, my
darling, what can we plead ? Mighty joy was in
our power, and we slew it, between us. We
were the happiest lovers, ours was the maddest,
gladdest bridal, we had reverence and ecstasy,
and our real went so far to outrun our ideal that



<pb n="175"/>
!i CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     175
ep left our ideal behind us -and now the feet
our real move heavily, and the race is spent.
e covered the face of delight with our mar-
age pillows, and smothered it till it breathed no
ore. So we buried it, for it stared upon us.
'e two, man and woman, elected to a great
~te, slayers of a supreme love, recreant to a
ighty trust - who will take our briefS
" MARNA, a Wife."
A)·E''        " "Sunday evening.
" MY DEAR HUSBAND: I have reached the
point where I cannot live and go on as we are.
"Your loving and unhappy
-1 K~:!' "MARNA."
i.-:~~~~ " Monday.
"' DEAR DANA: I think if I could die, I should
Snot hesitate long.             MARNA."
-  "July the tenth.
"DANA MY DARLING: What happened this
-morning distresses me so that I cannot wait till
to-morrow, and you said you should not come
X back to-night. What can I do for you to make
you happier, more calm ? You have niot been
yourself for months, I think. Are you ill ?
..!



<pb n="176"/>
176  CONFESSIONS      OF A    WIFE 
Does something ail you that you keep from me .
I am sorry if I called you cross when you were
suffering. I ought not to mind things so much, 
I know. I think this terrible weather is too
much for you. I feel it a little myself. If I
were you, I would go directly to the sea some-
where, and I send this in to the office to propose
it with all my heart. I will not mourn, and I
will try not to miss you.
"As you say, we cannot afford to move the
whole family; and as you see, I cannot leave
Father this summer, he is so feeble. He spoke
of the Dowe Cottage in the spring, but lately he
has said nothing about it; he acts a little
strangely about his affairs. Has it ever occurred
to you that he has lost anything - any property,
I means Once he would have told you; but
lately you have been so busy, and you see so
little of him. And he never talks business to
me.
"As long as Marion keeps well, I can stand
it. Dear, I don't mind it much. I can take her
over to Father's, where the rooms are large
enough to shut up; and we shall get along
nicely. I think you had better go to Bar Har-
bor or to Nova Scotia at once, if you feel like it.
" Your loyal and loving
"MARNA."



<pb n="177"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE     177
TELEGRAM
' To Dana Herwin,
X  Digby, Nova Scotia.
- ( "Yours received. I did not mean that at all.
rh, try to understand!          MARNA."
duly the thirtieth.
;' "MY DEAR DANA: I telegraphed because I
Io!uld not bear it that you should mistake me so.
am sure by this time that you will have re-read
bny letter and my meaning. Must it come to
this, that you and I need a new vocabulary to
interpret each other - in small, common matters
like this'. The 'little language' of love we
have lost the art of, like electives one learns at
school or college, and then forgets. But the
iQueen's English, Dana! Do I use it so stu-
B pidly '  Am I so crass with it that you cannot
i take me right ?
.' "Try to understand me, Dana! A   loving
"wife is not abstruse. I don't feel in cipher. If
:I express myself so, it is because I am so afraid
of offending you that I am not natural, and so I
am not simple. I do not feel at home with my
:own husband. I try too hard to please you,
Dear! I need so to be comprehended that I
cease to be comprehensible.
i;



<pb n="178"/>
178  CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE 
"Oh, try, Dana, try to understand
"Your wholly longing, always loving
" WIFE."
August the seventeenth.
THE date when a woman accepts the fact that
the man she loves cannot or will not understand
her, and that she must abandon the attempt to
make him do so, is one of the birthdays of ex-
perience. These are as definite as the other sort
of birthday-as my daughter's, for instance,
which occurs to-day.
I don't know whether her father has forgotten
it, or whether his letter is delayed. He has been
in Washington on some business (I do not know
what; I have given up asking now; he gave up
telling some time ago), and was so overcome by
the cruel heat of the place that he has fled to
Maine to cool. I think I read yesterday that
the President is in the Rangeleys on a fishing-
trip. Dana knows the President, who was a
friend of Senator Herwin's, and I have fancied
that he values this important acquaintance as
one which he does not owe to my father. It is a
week since I have heard from Dana. I must
say it occurs to me to wonder whether he has
gone fishing with the President. In that case,
letters will be uncertain. Dana likes to do the



<pb n="179"/>
!I   CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE     179
certain, and I will try to be prepared for any-
hing.
I have bought the big lady doll for Marion,
but she regards this acquisition to her family in-
differently. Her devotion to Dombey is unassail-
able. In deference to this feminine weakness, I
ontributed a golf-suit to Dombey's wardrobe.
l he has named the lady doll Banny Doodle - a
miystical appellation, intended, I think, to be a
term of reproach. She is two years old to-night..
Se calls her father "Pretty Popper," and cried,
When she woke up, because Pretty Popper had
not come home. To be exact, she calls him
Aft Pity Popper."
September the fifteenth.
I ONCE knew a discontented woman who lost
an eye and lived in danger of perfect blind-
iness.  She became suddenly cheerful and
'charming.
i "It is so much to keep one eye," she said.
It is two weeks since he came back. He did
tgo fishing with the President, and I heard no-
thing from him for ten days; but that seems
: now so small a trouble, all my troubles are such
0dwarfs beside this which has happened, that I
! look upon myself with contempt for having ever
been disturbed by them. Life seems to be a long
chromatic scale, all its major notes expressed by
[



<pb n="180"/>
180  CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
its minors, or the other way if you choose. Suf-
fering is purely relative.
Who said, " The young are only happy when
they experience pleasure; the old are happy
when they are free from pain"?  I have ceased
to be young, but have not learned to be old.
My husband is going as consul to Monte-
video. The appointment was offered him, vir-
tually, on that fishing-trip, and he formally ac-
cepted it the day before he came home: He did
this without consulting me.
September the seventeenth.
IT is only by fragments, as I have the strength
or can compass the courage, that I can write
anything about it. Yet I have a confused con-
sciousness that I had better record (though to
what end God knows) some of the events of 
these days -which flee by me like racers run-
ning on thorns, blood-tracked.
He began the night he got home, nervously,
as if he were flayed to have it over:
"Mama, I have accepted an appointment."
"A pleasant one, I hope, Dana' "
"To me    yes. I don't think I have been
well lately. I want travel, and distance, and a
pretty abrupt change of scene. It is a foreign
appointment."
.1



<pb n="181"/>
:CONFESSIONS      OF A WIFE       181
lne quick " Ah! " escaped me. After that I
not speak for a good while. I took up the
by, and put her in my lap, as if she were a
ield between me and my husband. When I
ild not look at him, I could bow my face on
r soft hair, and it steadied me a little.
.I" The President was glad to oblige my father's
n. He would have done something different,
ething better, I think, if he could. There
s no other post open but this just now.  I
in't mind it; I want a different climate - I am
ally not well, though you never have found it
tit. Besides, I want something out of the com-
n course - a new experience - fresh life. A
anof my type is not adapted to New England.
,e perishes of ennui in the life I lead here. At
y rate, I 'm going. I am going in October."
? :"You did not- speak to me -about it."
y lips were so stiff that I am not sure they
ticulated the words, but I thought they did.
' I am -your wife. You did not -tell me."
"What would have been the use '" he said.
"You would only have made a fuss. My mind
is quite made. I am going to Uruguay."
Then I know I spoke out, I think I cried out:
"Uruguay?"
: I held out the baby at my arm's length be-
:tween us. I felt as if she might, as if she must,



<pb n="182"/>
182  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
protect me from what would happen next. I
sat staring.
"Do shut your mouth," he said fretfully.
"That expression is not becoming."
I put the baby down, for my head swam; I
thought I should drop her. She ran over to
him, calling " Pity Popper!" and poked Dom-
bey into his arms to be kissed. He did not
touch them, either doll or child. I thought he
dared not trust himself. .His face worked. I
think he said;
"We might as well have this scene over."
"And I   ' " I said. "And Marion ?  And
Father? Father is failing; he is a dying man.
You knew I could not leave Father   now!
You knew we could not take the baby -to
Uruguay."
" You can do as you please," he replied stiffly.
"You are my wife. You have the right to
come, of course. Or I have the right to ask it,
for that matter. But I do not press the matter.
I wish you to please yourself."
I got up and went to the window and looked
out at the tree-house. It was moonlight, as it
was the night he kissed me for the first time,
and the shadows from the vines were floating over
us. I could hear Minnie Curtis warbling at her
piano. She was practising one of Dana's songs:



<pb n="183"/>
: CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE              183
Till the sun grows cold,
And the stars are old,
And the leaves of the Judgment Book unfold!
went back, and put my hand upon his arm.
IDo you desert me " I asked.
a He threw my hand off with an oath.
: "Put me in the wrong - as usual!   You
ways do. I 'm tired of your everlasting supe-
rity. If I did leave you, you could n't blame
e. Nobody could. We ought to be apart -
e wear on each other- we need absence, a
od dose of it, too. We only make each other
iserable. We -"
This was not all. I cannot write the rest.
ome of his words will sound in my ears till my
neral bell.
:."Very well, Dana," I said. "Do as you
ease."
! "I do not leave you, you understand!" he
red hotly. "You are welcome to come with
e. Or I will send for you by the next steamer,
fter I have found some sort of a place for you
if you prefer. You are at perfect liberty -
come, if you choose."
l  "And Marion "
i: His eye wavered.
? "And Father "
" I did not marry your father. You are my
Iii



<pb n="184"/>
184 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
wife. You can accompany me, if you wish, of
course."
"I shall sail," he added, "the    seventh of
October."
He was as white, by then, as the wedding-
dress of Banny Doodle, whom       Marion   had
dragged contemptuously by one leg, and flung
head downward in her father's arms. I stood
staring at those two spots of whiteness-the
doll's dress and the man's face. Everything else
in the room had turned black. I could not
even see my child. But I heard her rippling:
"Pity Popper!"
I think she asked him    to kiss her. And I
think he did.
.                                    .  ,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~'
.                              .~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~:
:.



<pb n="185"/>
V
October the twenty-first.
HE great crises of life are not, I think,
necessarily those which are in themselves
e hardest to bear, but those for which we are
ast prepared. My present fate has the distinc-
on of possessing both these features.  Like
iany forms of distinction, it is more uncom-
rtable than enviable.
f I suppose one ought to be glad if one is capa-
e of the sardonic.  Perhaps it is a healthy
.Probably that class of people who pass
eir lives in a chronic fear of being or of being
vumght "morbid" would call it so. On the
trary, I doubt if it is a sign of anything but
A mere struggle for human existence.  I am
/  mother of a child, and I must live. Since I
:st live, I cannot suffer beyond a certain point.
dimly perceive that if I could rise to the level
something quite alien to my nature, I might
rust off by sheer mechanics a measure of what I
ure. I wonder if this expulsive power is scorn?
/-~ ,~Ii85



<pb n="186"/>
186  CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE
There should be schools of the prophets for a
betrothed girl or a bride. She should be taught
to pray: " I find myself deficient in the first trait
of character necessary to womanhood.  Lord,
give me scorn."
I meant to record to-day-again to what end
who knows?-something of what has happened. 
But I find I cannot sit up long enough. The 
pen shakes in my hand like a halyard in a storm.
October the twenty-seventh.
I HAVE written many letters to him, but have
not sent one yet; I can't do it. If I am wrong,
I shall be sorry and repent; so far, I do not find
it possible.
He sailed on the seventh of the month, as he
said he should. For a long time Dana has done
everything that, and precisely as, he purposed. I
cannot remember when he has yielded to an ex-
pressed wish of mine because I expressed it.
Perhaps I should have given this more weight,
as a sign of deviation in his feeling toward me;
but in fact I have regarded it as a form of ner-
vousness. Yet I cannot see that he is ill, except
now and then, as everybody is. Indeed, much
of the time he has been in better health than
usual-vigorous, animated, often excitedly so.
He has had many moods and phases, but in one
.Si~



<pb n="187"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE    187
prespect he has undergone none: his determina-
tion to break away from his surroundings has
;-been sustained till it became inflexible. A con-
. sulship is only the mold into which his will has
hardened. It happened to be Montevideo. It
,.,might have been Venice or Constantinople,
:-the Philippines or Hawaii. He cabled, as he
Iihad arranged, and said that he was safe and
'well.
What took place between him and Father I
I never knew, and probably I never shall. The
inevitable interview occurred the next day after
Bghe hurled the news at me, for it could not be
psaid that he broke it. He came from the other
house with face like clay, gray and stiff, and
* locked his library door upon him. How he re-
*eived this, the first and probably the worst of
maany strokes which he must meet, I am not likely
-ever to be told. Men wince under another man's
rebuke, I observe, when a woman may pour her
' heart at their feet to no visible impression. Father
is as dumb as he in the marble group of the
iLaocoon. He has aged ten years since Dana
i went, and weakens visibly every day. We have
scarcely dared to talk about it, either he or I.
*-Ie sent for me once, and I went over, and knelt
'keside his chair, and laid my head in his lap,
4nd said:
L.3



<pb n="188"/>
188  CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
"Never mind, Father!"
He put his hands upon my hair, and seemed
to grope for me; and then he began to sob -
my father! I have never heard that sound be-
fore, since my mother died. I think he said:
" Daughter Marna! My poor daughter!" But
his words were broken. When I had com-
forted him a little, and kissed his wet face, and
laid my cheek upon his gray hair, and blessed
him, and calmed him, he struggled to his feet,
and held me at arm's-length, and read my face
with the look which used to be called "the
governor's eye" when he was in his prime.
"You shall not stay -on my account," he
said with the governor's voice. "You shall ac-
company your husband. I will not come be-
tween you. Ellen can take care of me; and I
have been thinking perhaps some of the cousins
would consent to live here and look after me a
little. I should not need it very long. A wife's
place is beside her husband. I will not consent
to come between you and yours."
I know that my eyes fell before my father's.
I think I thrust out my hands to ask him to
spare me. But all I could say was:
"Don't, Father! don't!"
I tried to tell him that it was not he who
came between me and my husband; but I



<pb n="189"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     189
think he understood without the telling, for he
did spare me.
"I am   not going to Montevideo," I said.
"There is nothing to be done, Father. I have
decided. I shall not accompany my husband--
not now."
Monday evening.
LIKE a hurricane, gust upon gust whirling, the
days that were left drove by. Dana became
suddenly quiet and strange, almost gentle. I
helped him in all the ways I could think of
about his packing, and little things. I sewed a
good deal, and mended all his clothes myself,
not letting Luella touch anything. And I asked
Robert Hazelton to put up a case of medicines
for him for sudden illness, and tucked it in be-
tween his golf-suits and his old blue velveteen
coat - the coat I used to kiss. Robert hesitated,
I thought, about the medicines. His face was
set and stern. - But he gave them to me. We
did not talk about my husband's going to Uru-
guay; and I am sure that he had already heard
of it.
Oh, I did my best! It was a miserable best,
for I do not think I am a brave woman, and
sometimes I crumbled to ashes. Then I would
go away alone, for a while, to regain myself, or
busy myself with some order - anything that I



<pb n="190"/>
190  CONFESSIONS      OF A    WIFE
could think of that would give Dana any ease
or comfort. I got everything that he liked for
dinner, all his favorite soups and meats, and the
pistachio cream and sponge-cake. I find myself
wondering if he would not have liked escalloped
potatoes better than souffle. And I would have
given five years of my life if the fire had not
smoked in the dining-room, and annoyed him so,
that last day but one.
The last day--the last day! If I write about
it, should I stand a chance of forgetting it for,
let us say, the span of one omitted pang ? Some-
times it works that way. I slept a little toward 
four o'clock, between then and six. The banshee
moaned so that I had to stifle her with a hand-
kerchief. Once, in the night, I am  sure his
door opened, and once again I thought it did.
And once I am sure that I heard him weeping.
I did not cry--not then. I only lay staring
and still. That sea-song which he read to me in
the Dowe Cottage before we were married kept
coming into my head:
The stars swing like lamps in the Judgment Hall
On the eve of the Day of the Last Awaking.
I got up at six, and \took care of Marion, and
put on my old ruby gown. I had made up my
mind not to go to the train with him, and I was



<pb n="191"/>
( CONFESSIONS       OF A   WIFE     191
I had, for when he saw me, the first thing
?said was, "So you are not going to see me
p" with unmistakable relief. I think he was
id there would be a scene in the station, or
haps he really felt as if he could not bear it,
self. It would be something if I could be-
ye that.
:There was, in fact, nothing left to say or do,
that time. He had arranged with Father
out all sorts of business concerns, and taught
e how to use my check-book (I never had one
fore), and he had done all the proper things.
ou might have thought he was only running
er to London and back for three or four
eks.
" I will find some kind of home for you when
-can look about," he said several times. To
is I made no reply.
"I will let you know at once, as soon as I
ome across anything," he repeated. But I felt
hat there was nothing to be said.
"You don't seem particularly anxious to join
Ime," he complained. "Of course I don't wish
o make myself disagreeable about it.  I will
"write often," he added, "and shall cable as soon
;as I arrive."
When I asked (still not replying), "Have
you packed your thick silk flannels?" he flushed.



<pb n="192"/>
192  CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
"Other husbands do such things," he urged.
"Other wives accept and accommodate them- 
selves; they do not claim a martyr's crown for
the ordinary episodes of political life. You will
get along, I am sure. You are very clever; I
never knew you fail to do anything that you
tried to do; and your father will relieve you of
all business cares. You will do nicely until we
can be together again -"
"Do you want a photograph of the baby to
take with you'?" I interrupted. I folded one in
an envelope, and handed it to him, writing on it
her name and age. Nothing was said about a
picture of myself; nor did I speak of our being
together again; I could as well have said it in 
the throat of the grave. I watched him strapping
his trunks as if I were watching the earth being
shoveled between us.
Marion ran up and sat on the steamer-trunk,
and commanded him, stamping her little foot:
"Pity Popper take Baby widing! Take Dombey!
Take Baby!"
While we were packing his valise, a hand-
organ came up Father's avenue, and began to
play negro melodies. There was a woman with
the man, and she sang shrilly, to a tambourine:
Keep me from sinking down!



<pb n="193"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     193
W(as a bright day, and the maples on, the
nues were of the topaz color, and had the
az fire; they met against the sky like the
ph of joy in some strange world where people
e happy. But the woodbine on the tree-
se, the one we planted the fall we were
ried, was ruby-red.
At the last, some power not myself compelled
and I ran out and picked a leaf of the red
dbine from the tree-house, and looked for a
tograph to pin it on, but could not find any.
ems he had taken one, after all. And so I
the leaf into his dressing-case; but first I
ed it. He did not know.
hen he had said good-by to Father and to
.servants, he kissed the baby, and put her
n, and looked about for me. I was up-stairs,
*all I could think was to get away, not to be
by anybody; and he followed me. I thought
would. He came into our own rooms, and
t the door. I think he held out his arms, I
k he spoke my name several times, but in
truth I do not know. I only know that
-,fountains of the great deep stirred and rose
On me. A woman's poise, self-control, self-
ect, purpose, pride, resolve-these are grand
inds, great words: a woman's breaking heart
s them all.
S.- 



<pb n="194"/>
194  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
I think when he tried to kiss me that I hid
my face, and slid from his lips to his breast, and
down, with my arms around him, till I clasped
his knees, and so sinking, I fell and reached his
feet. And then I called upon him, and cried out
to him-God knows what-such cries as heart-
break utters and the whole-hearted cannot under-
stand. I suppose I begged 'him not to go. I
suppose I prayed him for love's sake, for mine,
for the child's, and, above all and everything, for
his own. I suppose I spent myself in a passion
of entreaty which I cannot remember, and he will
not forget,- I, Mama, his wife,-wetting his
feet with my tears. I have moments of wonder-
ing why I am not ashamed of it. I think of it
stupidly, without emotion, as something which
had to be--the inevitable, the revenge of nature
upon herself  It was as if I watched the scene
upon some strange stage, and criticized some
woman, not myself; for an excessive part she
played.
Last night I dreamed it all over, as if it were
a play, and I sat in the audience, and Dana and
I were on the stage. But when I looked about
me, I found that the audience was serried with
women, thousands upon thousands -that all
Womanhood had thronged to the drama, and sat
weeping; and suddenly I saw that the house rose



<pb n="195"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     195
on me, because I alone did not weep, but
icized the woman on the stage.
?'She is nature!" they cried.  "She is ours,
of us, forever."
But I looked into my husband's face, and I
him debonair and smiling, and I cried out
n the women:
I Then is nature set against nature, and woman-
d and manhood are at civil war."
o I woke, and the door into Dana's room
open, and I remembered what had hap-
ed.
ORT letter has come from him; it said that
Iwas comfortable, and would give details by
next mail, and sent his love to Marion.
HjH7\~  ~      November the eighth.
LL not be ill, and I cannot be well, and
fore am I racked. Dr. Hazelton wishes me
uffer him to offer some professional service;
ink he said there might be consequences
h I did not foresee if I received no care. I
~k my head, and he turned away; and then I
d him back and thanked him, and shook my
H  again.
hat could he do. I am broken on this



<pb n="196"/>
196  CONFESSIONS      OF A    WIFE
SENT
"November the tenth.
"MY DEAR HUSBAND: I have your letters and
your cable, and thank you for them. I have not
written, partly because I have not been very
well; but I am not at all ill. When you write
more particularly, I shall know better what to
say. So far, I feel as if I were writing into the
air. I shall become accustomed, no doubt, to
the new conditions, and adjust myself to them.
Marion is well, except for one of her throats.
She talks a good deal about Pity Popper. Father
remains about the same, and there is no news
except domestic items, which would not interest,
and might annoy, you.
"I am, faithfully,
"MARNA, your Wife."
UNSENT
Undated.
" DEAR DARLING: I write you a thousand let-
ters in my heart, and I fold them there, and seal
/    them with my kisses, and blur them with my
tears, till the words lean one upon another, and
cling to each other so that they are illegible for
very clinging, as lovers are lost in oneness for
very loving.
"I am trying to bear it, since you have willed
I



<pb n="197"/>
CONFESSIONS       OF A    WIFE     197
'oh, believe I try! I keep hard at work, and
busy with Marion, and I am a good deal
; Father, for I will not wade into my misery.
ido, I shall be swept away. There is terrible
rtow in a woman's nature-it would hurl
nto an abyss. I wish I had been a different
n for your sake, Dana -not to mind things
and not to grieve. I think if I had been of
her fiber, coarser-grained, if I had not cared
in you were not tender, or when I was alone
uch, if I had been ruder of nerve or tissue
u suppose you would have liked me better ?
end my nights thinking how I could have
a better wife to you. I can see so many
akes I have made, so many ways in which I
d have done differently and pleased you
er. I dream a good deal about it, and always
~you have come back, and that we are happy
An, and that you love me, and are glad to be
me, as you used to be. But I do not ask
lto come back. Act your own nature. Have
r will. If it kills me, remember that I tried
ear it. Though it slay me, I will not pursue
' with my love - my bruised and broken love.
;Did you know you left your blue velveteen
t, after all ? I found it on the floor, and hung
p in your closet. I was rather glad you did
it, for it comforts me a little. I kiss it



<pb n="198"/>
198 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
every morning and every night--a good many
times at night. It is fortunate that it is an old
coat, for the shoulders and sleeves get pretty wet.
"Your desolate
' MARNA."
December the tenth.
DR. ROBERT allows me to go down to dinner to-
day, the first time for some weeks. I think I
must have been prytty sick, yet I cannot see that
anything in particular has been the matter; every-
thing is in good condition, unless there has been
a little feebleness of the heart's action; but there
is no real disorder, Dr. Curtis says. He has been
in a few times to see me, but left the case, as he
leaves most of his cases now, to Dr. Hazelton.
Possibly there has been some congestion in the
brain, hardly enough to call a fever- and, really,
I don't care enough what ails me to insist on
knowing, unless I am told. Neither of them has
shown any uncontrollable desire to tell me what
has been the matter.
One night when I was lying in a sort of stupor,
seeing strange things and thinking stranger, and
not supposed, I am sure, to be capable of hear-
ing any, I must have absorbed fragments of con-
versation between the old doctor and the young.
"Have you thought of trephining'" asked
, !*~~~~~~~~~~i



<pb n="199"/>
~ CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           199
Curtis, with a doubt and a dogma warring in
voice. " If there should be anything in the
re of a concealed inflammation-"
Would you operate for heartbreak'?" de-
ded Robert, fiercely. "There is absolutely
ing else."
-iDamn him! " cried our old doctor.
r. Robert did not answer. He got up and
t to the window, and stood with his back to
.Curtis;- a short, strong figure, as stern as
ite, he trembled like the river of light which
ke through the closed blinds against which he
. I saw the sun-motes whirling about his
and shoulders at the moment when I
gnized him in that flaming stream.
ow that I am better, and look back upon it
can see that it must have been Dr. Robert's
which I saw so often when I was the sick-
a calm, protecting presence, tireless and
. I scarcely remember seeing Fanny at
I could have blessed Robert, but I do not
I did. I dreamed so much of Dana, and
s!uch visions, all the while. I thought I
ld die, and Dana so many thousand miles
y. Nothing was of any consequence but
!:wonder if I talked about my husband?
. I dare not ask; and Robert would
i 



<pb n="200"/>
200   CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE 
cheerfully be put to the second question, but he
would not tell. I am glad that the doctor is not
a stranger, if there must be a doctor at all. I
suppose, really, he has been very kind to me. I
must remember to thank him.
To-day I found some of my letters to Dana
/ put away carefully in a drawer in his desk, but
not locked. I have taken out a few, and put
them into the Accepted Manuscript: they will
be safer there.
December the eleventh.
IT occurred to me to ask the doctor if anybody
had told Dana that I had been ill.
"Your father," he said, "and I."
"You did not cable for him ? " I fired. I felt
the color slap my cheeks. Dr. Robert made no
reply. "I will never forgive you," I cried, "if
you asked him to come home- for this!"
"The danger was not so imminent as to
make it really necessary," he answered quickly.
Afterward this reply struck me as less candid
than it might have been; but I did not pursue
the subject, for I saw that I had pained the
doctor.
To-day my husband's letters came -two or
three of them, blockaded in the mails. They
express the proper amount of concern for my
"indisposition,"-that was the word,-and re-



<pb n="201"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE     201
to be promptly informed of any change
etter or for worse.
'hat is it about that phrase ?  Oh, I remem-
It was for better and for worse that we
eourselves to each other.
onderful, those ancient oaths, sanctified by
turies of bridals! One must reverence lan-
e drawn out of the live, beating human
t- an artery of love through which a mighty
erience has poured.
'In sickness and in health"?  "Till death
do part"'?  Who knows but the time will
,e when the marriage service shall be thus
ended ?
Till sickness us do disenchant."  " Till dis-
e us do part."
anny Freer took her heart in her mouth to-
, and warned me in so many words that I
becoming vitriolic.
' It is quite unnecessary," she said. Fanny has
en care of me since I have been ill; I have
ned her Mercibel - Angel of Sickness, Beau-
l Mercy. When her dimple dips into her
w-and-arrow mouth she is irresistible. How
tine is the tenderness of a woman! It has
able delicacy, the refinement of a self-abne-
ting nature, a something passing the affection
man. A woman hungers and thirsts for the



<pb n="202"/>
202   CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
compassion of her own kind. I lean to Mercit
bel; " for my race is of the Asra."
Men have little tenderness, I think.
I HAD written so far when the doctor called. I
must say Robert is very kind to me. There is a:
certain quality in his manner which I do not:
know how to define; an instinctive or an ac-
quired forgetfulness of himself, a way of think-
ing no suffering too small if he can relieve it, no
relief too insignificant if he can offer it. I am
told that his patients love him devotedly, and
that he sacrifices himself for poor and obscure 
persons to an unfashionable extent, so that Dr.
Curtis and the older men feel quite concerned
about him.
"Are there not hospitals and dispensaries?"
they say. I believe they are plotting to tie him 
to a hospital of his own. Many people lean on
him; they "clamor" for him, Mercibel says, 
and she has worked for him a good deal; I sup-
pose she knows.  One need not clamor, and
one may not lean, but I do feel grateful to Rob-
ert. Now that I am getting better, Marion is:
ailing; the doctor thinks this delicacy of her 
throat needs careful attention, and I am sure 
he gives it. Dr. Curtis tells me to trust her
entirely to Dr. Hazelton, and that he has not 



<pb n="203"/>
! CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE            203
s;a:uperior among the young physicians of the
[ t is difficult to believe that Robert was ever a
er and suitor of mine. I have quite forgotten
nd I am sure he has. I wish he would marry
nnie Curtis.
wonder if Dana has written to Minnie?
does not mention it. I think she would if he
I have written to Dana to-day. The doc-
ioffered to mail it for me direct from the post-
e on his way down-town, that it might catch
Ooutgoing steamer. I wish I did not find it
hard to write naturally to my husband; but I
k that my embarrassment grows worse and
Wrse. I feel so bruised all the time; it is as if
(had beaten me -my soul is black. And he
er raised his hand against me in my life.
rcibel tells me that husbands sometimes do
F  things. And he was often very angry with
/-God knows why.
am glad he never did that. I should have
the baby and gone out of the house for-
r  I can't say that I should not have wished
d n't, but I should have gone; I am quite
of that, for I am so constituted.  I am
d a tender woman; but there is a shield of
acability in me, steel, deep down beneath my
B; If there were not, I think I should be dead.



<pb n="204"/>
204 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
One day the doctor said to me in quite a
casual way:
" Did you have occasion to notice any marked
nervous irritability in Mr. Herwin before he
went to Uruguay - say the last six months . "
"Why do you ask e" I suggested.
"I am answered," said Robert. He bent over
the powders which he was folding collectedly;
his profile was as impersonal as a symbolic
medallion.
" You will take these," he said, "one dry on
the tongue every night. You will give Marion
the others, in six tablespoonfuls of water, one
teaspoonful every two hours."
He rose, snapping the elastic on his medicine-
case, and his lips parted. I saw that he would
have spoken. In fact, he left without another
word.
December the twentieth.
TO-DAY the doctor said abruptly:
"Write to your husband often; and - par-
don me - write as kindly as you can."
I sat staring. Robert has never spoken so to
me before. I was inclined to resent his words;
but it would have been impossible to resent
his manner. This is something so fine and com-
passionate that I do not know how to qualify it.
Mercibel calls it his oxygen. "That is what



<pb n="205"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           205
/lamor for," she says, "an invigoration that
e breathed. Every patient feels the same
him."
.ionder if Fanny wanted me to understand
the doctor had no particular manner reserved
yself?  She need not have undergone any
ties. She does not know that Robert and I
like two spirits, having left all personal re-
s far behind us in an old, forgotten world.
SENT
t  "Janvary the third.
MY DEAR HUSBAND: I have not been quite
g enough to write you any details before
and I knew that Dr. Hazelton had cabled
though I did not know it until several days
Ward. I shall hear from you soon, no
had been over to see Father rather late that
ing, and had carried him our little presents,
on's and mine, and he kissed me good night
times, and blessed me, and said:
/B   Daughter, you have never given me one
s anxiety; you have been nothing but a
ort to me from the first moment that they
?you in my arms.'
n the morning, in the Christmas morning,
Wit was quite gray and early, Luella waked



<pb n="206"/>
206   CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
me, and said that the doctor was down-stairs and
wished to see me for a moment. Even then Il
did not understand; I thought perhaps he wasi
called away on some long case, or out-of-town
consultation, and had come to leave directions
about Marion,- for he takes such care of Marion
as I am sure you will be grateful to him for,-
and I dressed and hurried down, stupidly.
"Robert was standing in the middle of the 
library, and when I saw his face I said:
" 'Something has happened to Father! I
will go right over.'
"I started, and pushed open the front door,
and out into the snow, for it had stormed (and
the banshee had cried as she does in storms) all
night. James had not begun to shovel the paths, 
and it was pretty deep. But before I had waded
in I felt myself held strongly back by the shoul-
ders, and the doctor said:
" Do not go, Mama. There is nothing you
can do   nor I.'
"Ellen had found him at six o'clock, 'looking 
that happy,' she says. And the doctor got there
in a few minutes, but he is sure that nobody
could have saved Father. It was an embolism
in brain or heart, they think.
"We buried him beside Mother, on the third 
day of Christmas week. Of course I knew you



<pb n="207"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           207
not get here, and I tried not to think of it.
l eft a sealed letter for you. Shall I send it
-' Or would you rather wait?
You will forgive a short note, for I have not
quite well, and there are many cares and
lexities to be met.
"Your affectionate wife,
" MARNA."
UNSENT
Undated.
/Y DARLING: I know you do not realize
,.I am undergoing, and I tell myself so every
nt, lest I should lose myself and think
y of you. I say: 'It was so sudden that
'uld not come, and now that it is over, why
d he come?' It is true I long for you so
seems as if I could not live. But I do
e to tell you so. I am not used to bearing
/ch quite alone. I never had a real be-
ent before - I see now that I never did.
if I could creep into your arms, and hear
y, 'Poor little wife!' that I could cry. I
impossible to cry.
egin to understand for the first time some-
f what people mean when they say: 'It
est for him, but hardest for us.' All those
of grief and consolation have never had
I i for me; in truth, I don't think I have



<pb n="208"/>
208   CONFESSIONS OF A       WIFE 
respected them--the uncandid prattle about;
resignation, the religious phraseology made to
do duty for honest anguish. But now I think
of all the old human expedients enviously. Per- 
haps if I had been a devout woman I might
know how to bear this better. Do you think I
should'? Dana, it sometimes comes to me, on
long nights when I cannot sleep, to ask myself,
with the terrible frankness of vigil, whether, if 
you and I had been what are called religious
people, we should have found marriage any less
a mystery- for us, I mean; any easier to adapt
ourselves to. There may be something in the
trained sense of duty, something - who knows 
-in that old idea of sacrifice, in the putting
aside of one's own exacting personality, in the
yielding of lower to higher laws. Do you sup-
pose that the Christian idea can come to the rescue
of the love idea ?  I do not know. I am teach-
ing Marion to say her prayers. I hope you will
not mind ?
"Dana, Dana, I love you! Sometimes I wish
I did not; but I do. I cannot help it. I must
be honest and tell you; sometimes I try to help
it. I think that I must stop loving you or die;
and I grope about for something to take the
place of loving you, some interest that I could
tolerate, any diversion or occupation, some little
.'



<pb n="209"/>
CONFESSIONS      OF A WIFE       209
sing comfort, the kindness of other people to
e, something to 'keep me from sinking down.'
"Your lonely and your loving
" MARNA."
SENT
i  January thefifteenth.
"MY DEAR HUSBAND: You will be notified,
/ course, in the proper way by Father's lawyers,
t I am sure you should hear it first from me.
ie property is found to be in a strange condi-
n-depleted, Dr. Hazelton calls it. There
some shrunken investments, and there has
n some mismanagement at the factories since
has been obliged to delegate everything so to
er men, who have not proved conscientious.
en there are those lawsuits about his patent
ithe linen thread--you know you used to
'e a good deal of that off his hands; but lately
hink he has been wronged somehow, and was
- feeble to right himself. At all events, some-
g like a couple of hundred thousand is swept
Ay. And, in fact, my inheritance will prove
small that I am thinking seriously of renting
- old place. Do you objects  I have only
er's friends to take counsel of, and Mr. Gray
ises me to do this, decidedly.
Please reply by next steamer.
"Your affectionate        WIFE."
L-:



<pb n="210"/>
210   CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
CABLE MESSAGE
"January 20.
" Herwin, United States Consulate,
" Montevideo, Uruguay.
"Drs. Curtis and Hazelton wish Father's
house sanatorium. Twenty years' lease. Cable
reply.
" MARNA."
SENT
" January the twenty-fifth.
"MY DEAR DANA: Your cable came after a
little delay. I suppose you may have been out
of towns  We do not altogether understand it,
but I fancy that happens with the cable. It
seems clear, however, that you interpose no ob-
jections, and, not knowing anything better to
do, I have closed with the sanatorium offer for
the old place. I think I would gladly be in Uru-
guay if I need not see my decision carried into
effect. I have put the whole affair into Mr. Mel-
lenway's hands, so that there shall be no blunder.
"It seems this sanatorium idea has long been
a fad of Dr. Curtis's and a dream of Robert's;
and the other day that rich old man Pendleton,
whom Robert has kept alive for years, surren-
dered his ghost and his will. Everything goes
absolutely to Robert to support a private hos-
pital after his own unrestricted pleasure. Robert



<pb n="211"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     211
it is such an opportunity as some men in
iprofession would give their lives for. Dr.
tis is to be the figurehead, but Dr. Hazel-
I will be in virtual control, being resident
erintendent, but with a staff of subordinates
ih will permit him to retain portions of his
ate practice.  Otherwise, Fanny says, his
ntele would rise and mob him. If I must see
l body in the old house, I would rather it were
ds than strangers. I am trying to mold my
d to it without grumbling. I think there is
Fabout the great troubles -they teach us the
f cheerfulness; whereas the small ones culti-
the industry of discontent. I hope you will
pleased with what I have done. You see,
a, that what I have of Mother's has dwindled
the rest, and, I suppose, for the same reason.
ted to have to tell you, but really, Dear, I
't see just how we could get along if I did
-rent the place.
* Thank you for your last letter. If they were a
e longer sometimes, I could feel that I could
a better idea of your life. You seem as
- from 'me as if you swung in a purple star
n a frosty night- at the end of dark miles
asured by billions in mid-space. But I am
~ :*i,     "Loyally your wife,
MARNA.



<pb n="212"/>
212   CONFESSIONS      OF A   WIFE
"P.S. Marion is becoming dangerously pretty
and your eyes grow older in her every day. She
sends her love to Pity Popper, and commands!
that you kiss Dombey, distinctly omitting Banny|i
Doodle, who is, at this writing, head down in 
the umbrella-rack, by way of punishment for!
invisible offenses. Last Monday Banny Doodle
was saved by old Ellen, at the brink of fate, from
being scornfully run through the clothes-wringer.
"Ellen has asked my permission to spend the 
winter with me, refusing any wages.  Thank -
you for the last draft. I shall use it as wisely as
I can, and I am learning to live economically,
because I must. We have given up the tele-
phone."
May the twenty-fifth.
IT is one of the days that make one believe that
everything is coming out right in some world, 
and might do so in this one if the weather would
last. Showers of sunshine drench the brightest 
grass, the mistiest leaf, I think I ever saw. The
apple-tree is snowing pearl and coral upon the
tree-house. (If Dana could see it, I should be
quite happy.) The world is one bud, blossom- 
ing to a faithful sky.
Marion is out six hours of every blue-and-gold
day with Job and Ellen, who, between them,
spoil the child artistically. After her hard win-



<pb n="213"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     213
,the baby herself seems but a May-flower, a
k, sweet May-flower, opening in a shady
ace. If it had not been for the doctor- well,
it had not been for the doctor, I cannot think
at would have happened, or what would yet
ppen. I cannot, now, imagine myself without
. He who saves her child's life recreates a
ther.
:The old home and the new sanatorium are
/ded more comfortably than I should have
ught possible; and I have outgrown the first
gs ofjealousy. They call it the Pendleton,
if it were an apartment-house. The patients
. not so many yet, of course, as to be disturb-
and the whole thing moves on rubber-tired
eels.  Mercibel has a permanent position
re.
it is said that all sanatoriums, or such insti-
ons, are replicas of their superintendents.
out this one there is a certain gentle cheerful-
a subtle invigoration, which is Dr. Robert
over again. He is the soul of his hospital.
/ have noticed that the preoccupations of very
ymen do service as apologies for neglect of
dly claims to an extent which is deified in
/spirit of our day, like a scientific error, or any
false cult. I, who have no claim upon
>verworked man, either of his seeking, or



<pb n="214"/>
214   CONFESSIONS      OF A WIFE 
of my wishing, or of the world's providing, am
touched by a thoughtfulness which I have norm
right to exact and no reason to expect. WhenJ
I think of the intricacies which have resulted in 
the simple circumstance that my father's house
has become a private hospital, I must feel that 
the hand of mercy has remembered me.
Once when Father was calling on Whittier at
Amesbury, Mr. Whittier said: "I wish I had
thee for a neighbor." I have often wished I had 
a neighbor, a soul-neighbor who was a house-
neighbor. I never had before.
All this cruel winter my old friend has be-
friended and defended me from  every harm
between which and myself he could, by any in-
genuity of the heart, interpose his indefatigable
tenderness.
I choose the word, but I do not give it the
lower translations. He has taught me what few'
women learn, what fewer men can teach, that 
there is such a thing as trustworthy tenderness. 
I might almost call it impersonal tenderness.
Language does not betray it; expression does
not weaken it. It is as firm as the protection of i
a spirit, and as safe. Swept into the desert of
desolation as I am, something upholds me, that
I do not perish. Is it mirage, or is it miracle' 
There is a marvel which many women dream of



<pb n="215"/>
CONFESSIONS      OF A   WIFE     215
ut do not overtake-the friendly kindness
fa strong, good man.
~*~I-~   ~     May the twenty-seventh.
o letter has come yet from Dana. It is now
ree weeks since I have heard.  Once, in the
inter, it was four.
:" I would keep on writing," the doctor says.
ow did he know that I had not ?  Sometimes
seems to me as if I could drop into the un-
thomable silences, and at other times as if I
ust. Dana's letters are no more natural, I per-
iive, than mine. Some of them are curiously
volved and elaborate, and others are one dash
the pen, like a tongue of fire that may reach
iything or nothing.
He writes so frostily in one letter that my
rt freezes; and in the next I find a kind of
pteous affectionateness before which I melt and
eep.
;He has ceased to speak of making a home for
e in Montevideo. At first he wrote about
els and the discomforts of housekeeping-
ut the spiders and lizards. After that he said
at the climate would not do for Marion, and
there was no doctor in the whole blanked
yntry to whom I would be willing to trust the
d, There is a certain something in his let-



<pb n="216"/>
216  CONFESSIONS      OF A   WIFE
ters which perplexes me. I showed one of them 
in April to Robert.
"Do not resent this," he said. "Be patient;
be gentle."
He walked across the room, and returned.
"As if," he added, "you were ever anything
else!" I could have thought that his grieving 
lip was tremulous. He has a delicate mouth;
but it is stronger than most delicate things, and
never betrays him.
Did I once think him a plain person9  At
times his strong, unostentatious face assumes
transfigurations. There have been moments in
my desperate and desolate life this year when
he has looked to me like one of the sons of
God.
How manifold may be the simplest, sanest feel-
ing! I cherish in my soul two gratitudes- that
of the patient, and that of the mother--to this
kind, wise man.  I might add a third: the
thankfulness of an old friend for a new loyalty.
To-day the doctor said to me, quite incidentally:
" The next time you write to Mr. Herwin, pray
tell him that I suggested that he should hunt up
that medicine-case, and take atropine 3X twice
daily."
"What for ?  Malaria ?" I asked.
I



<pb n="217"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE     217
I think you said he complained of malaria,"
ied Dr. Hazelton.
June the first.
ION had one of her feverish turns last night,
Ellen went for the doctor. It was a warm,
night, and we had only candle-light in the
. I use Robert's candlestick a good deal
-sickness; it holds an English candle that
s all night.
hen he had stirred Marion's medicine, and
ered the tumbler in his conscientious way, he
ded at the gold candlestick.
'You keep it well polished," he said, smiling.
K It has proved a faithful compass," I answered,
ling too. "I believe they don't always, do
s  I heard the other day of a wreck on the
ist of Norway which was caused by the de-
tion of the needle."
i Yes," said the doctor, "I read that. It was
ibuted to a magnetic rock. There really are
,I think, though they are rare."  He began
alk about the coast of Norway with more in-
st, I thought, than the subject called for. It
sas if he deflected my mind from the compass.
et a trifle hurt, and a certain pugnacity into
ich I lapse now and then (and for which I
generally sorry) befell me. I took the com-
s up and shook it. The candle flared out.



<pb n="218"/>
218   CONFESSIONS      OF A   WIFE
I lighted it again as quickly as I could, for the
baby complained that I had "grown it dark".
and she could not see "her doctor."    He
watched the needle mounting steadily.
"See!" I cried, "the candle went out. But
the compass holds true. The needle points due 
north, Doctor."
"And always will," he answered solemnly. In 
the vague light, and moving away from me as he
was, for he had risen abruptly to end his call, 
his strong features were molded by massive 
shadows. Even in stature he seemed to change
before my eyes, and to grow tall, as figures do
that one sees in a fog.
zJune thefifteenth.
DANA'S letter has come at last. It is a very
strange letter. He offers no explanation of his
silence, no apology for the neglect. He writes
with a certain vagueness which is almost too im-
palpable to be called cold, and yet which chills
me to the soul, like a mist when the sun is down.
He sends his love to Marion, and I am to re-
member him to the doctor. He is glad I am in
such good medical hands. He mentions again 
that there is not a decent doctor in that country,
and adds that he does not think the climate
agrees with him, that he was fooled on the cli-
.~~~~~~~~~~~~;i



<pb n="219"/>
CONFESSIONS      OF A    WIFE    219
I ate, and that the whole blanked nation is a
ralaria microbe. He incloses a draft (a small
ne), and inquires whether I had not better have
Ithe telephone put in again; in fact, he makes a
particular request of it. I wonder why his mind
should fasten on this, the only detail about my
l!ife which has seemed, for some time, to take a
ivery distinct form to his imagination, or even to
his recollection.
I handed the letter to the doctor. Although I
:hesitated about troubling him, I did not hesitate
about the letter. There is seldom anything now
in my husband's letters which I could not show
to another person, unless, indeed, I should not
for the very reason that I could. Now and then
some sharp word or phrase pierces the soft, elabo-
rate surface,-some expression like a stone, or
a tool, which did not take the frost-work, or
from which a clouded sun has melted it,-but
for the most part Dana has ceased to be cross to
me. Sometimes I wish he were. I read a story
I once of a poor woman who fled and hid herself
i from her husband (but he was one of the brutes),
! and, being illuminated by repentance, he sought
and found her. His first expression of endear-
ment was a volley of oaths. " The familiar pro-
fanity," so ran the tale, " reassured the wife. She
nestled to him in ecstasy."
15 



<pb n="220"/>
220  CONFESSIONS      OF A WIFE 
There is something in Dana's excessive and 
courteous good nature which troubles me.
Dr. Robert read this letter slowly. I had the
ill manners to watch his face boldly while he
did so.  It was inscrutable.  He folded the
letter and handed it back without a word.
To-day Mercibel brought me this note from
him-the first that Robert has written me since 
those old days in the other world where I was
dear to him. It is a comfort to know that I am
so no longer, and I am sure he has forgotten that
I ever was. I am quite ashamed of myself that
I recall it. Women have relentless memories
about the men who have once loved and honored
them; I think they cherish these tender ghosts
of experience after a man himself has virtually
forgotten them.
I fasten in the doctor's note:
"MY DEAR MRS. HERWIN: I have given the
matter some thought, and I suggest that you
have your telephone reconnected, as your hus-
band seems to wish it. I do not know that my
reasons for the advice are so definite to myself
that I can very well make them clear to you;
but, in fact, I urge it.
"Sincerely yours,
"ROBERT HAZELTON.
:!



<pb n="221"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     221
"Later.
" P.S. I am called out of town on a distant
sultation, and expect you and Marion will
eoth keep quite well till I return. I shall be
I one till day after to-morrow. In case of any
dden need, my first assistant, Dr. Packard, will
o excellently, if Dr. Curtis should not be able
come to you. Dr. Packard has access to my
se-books and Marion's remedies.
1" I have taken the liberty of asking the tele-
lhne people to call and receive your orders
is afternoon. It may save you some trouble."
I  I am ashamed to say that my discreditable
Impulse was to refuse to see the telephone man-
ger when he came; for once I was a girl of
hat is called spirit, and certainly Robert has
ken upon himself-
; What ? What can the doctor take upon him-
elf but a thankless and uneased burden, a
e ieglected woman and her ailing child?  What
can he take upon himself but sacrifices without
1 hopes, duty without comfort ? What shall I take
upon myself but the ashes of repentance?  I am
not worthy of such high comradeship.
I have ordered the telephone put in again.
6 "MY DEAR DOCTOR: I send this to let you
knoow at once on your return that I have obeyed



<pb n="222"/>
222  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
you. The wire will be reconnected by Sunday,
and I shall send my first message by way of that
old and reestablished friend-if I may?- to
yourself.
" I do not find it easy to express my sense of
obligation to you, but I find it harder not to do so.
" I have been everything that is burdensome
and trying, and you have been everything that
is kind and wise and strong. I have been all
care and no comfort; believe that I understand
that, even though I do not seem to. You are
always nobly giving, and I am always pitiably
receiving, some unselfish, friendly service. Some-
times I feel ashamed to allow you to be so con- 
siderate of my child and of myself; and then I
am ashamed that I have been ashamed; for God
knows we have needed you, Marion and I.
What would have befallen us without you I do
not find myself able to imagine. I often try
to explain to my husband, when I write him, all
that you have done and been and are to us.
"Far better than I can ever do, he will ac- 
knowledge your faithful kindness when he returns
to us, and to himself  Oh, Robert! do you 
think he ever will  I am
"Your grateful patient and
your sincere friend,
"MARNA HERWIN."



<pb n="223"/>
! CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 223
F*~ ~I?              yJ7uly thefifth.
STERDAY I was really ill. I think it was the
ible weather (of course I miss the sea), and
ething that troubles me, and the loss of sleep
used by the excess of patriotism on our street;
fact, this has lasted five nights, culminating
ithe night of the third. The doctor says that
patients, some of whom are of the nervous
ecies, have suffered to such an extent that he
1 prepared to wish the American nation had re-
ined in a colonial condition. He divided the
tire night between his sick people and the
fians on the street, for the private guard that
. had provided proved incompetent to cope
th them. Once, in the night, I heard foot-
eps outside my cottage, and looking out, I
aw the doctor's patrolman softly pacing around
ur house. Nothing has been said to me about
is, and I have not told him that I know it;
out the tears smarted to my eyes - that little act
f thoughtful care was so divinely like him.
As I write, Ellen is singing to Marion in the
nursery:
His loving kindness,
Loving ki-ind-ness,
Lov-ing ki-i-ind-ness, oh, how great!
Every time that Ellen strikes a high note Job
barks. Ellen is a musical Methodist, and Job,
?~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="224"/>
224   CONFESSIONS OF A       WIFE 
I have always maintained, is a Unitarian. I
think Job misses his master's singing.  The
piano has been mute, now, nearly a year; I have
never touched it since he left. Ours has become
the home of the unsung songs.
I am writing on in this preposterous way be-
cause something has happened. It would be
easier to record any histrionic episode, any thrill-
ing incident of fate or of fiction, than the intan-
gible circumstance which I wish to enter upon
this candid page.
What (I think I have said before) are the 
plots of event before those of feelingS They
seem to me inartistic and dull.
I, who live - more quietly than most of my
class and my years - the secluded life of a New 
England lady; who play only the poor role of
the slighted wife, not even dramatically de-
serted; I, who have not the splendors of a great
tragedy to throw high lights upon my gray story X
- I, too, experience drama.
How shall I maintain my untaught part upon
this stage of the spirit? For 'me it confuses
more than if I were a woman of the world. I 
perceive that I am not representative of my day,
that, young as I am, I belong to an elder time::
I am an anachronism. For I am a woman of 
the home, and the homing nature has sheltered 
me. Mme. de Stael, when she was dying, said 



<pb n="225"/>
CONFESSIONS       OF A WIFE       225
JI have loved God, my father, and liberty."  I
'ave loved my father, my husband, and my child.
ow every thought is a spectator in this, to me,
neducated action; every hope, every feeling,
every nerve, is an actor. My nature seems to
be taxed with a new and imperious expression
f itself. Am I appointed to some solitary scene,
tome thrilling monologue, where duty and deso-
lation are at war ?
£WHEN the doctor was called to-day, he seemed
istressed at finding me more ill than he had
upposed, though, really, I think it was what
any physicians would have dismissed as a ner-
'vous attack, and disregarded. He said at once:
!? "Did you have a letter yesterday ? "
"I did not sleep," I answered; "the boys in
the street  "
"Yes, yes, I know. Can I see the letter'?"
"I think not - this time, Doctor."
"Very well. Any news in it' "
'"None. About the same thing."
"It is not necessary for me to know details.
What I must know is, has there been an emotional
strain ?  It makes a difference with the prescrip-
tion. Your pulse is not quite as firm as it ought
. to be. You were grieved at something  You
- need give me no particulars-"
He turned to prepare his powders, and neither
~i~



<pb n="226"/>
226  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
of us spoke. Marion did the talking; she trotted
up to my lounge, and asked when Pity Popper
would come home.
"You are to sleep, no matter how much
trouble it takes to keep the house still," the
doctor said peremptorily. " I will give orders to
the servants myself as I go down. Ellen shall
take the child over to Mrs. Freer for a few hours.
I will ring and direct this."
He rang, and Ellen came, and Marion went.
The doctor went on folding powders calmly. I
turned my face upon the sofa-pillow, and closed
my eyes. I had on one of my thin white gowns, 
and the lace at my throat stirred with my breath,
and tickled my cheek a little, so that it an-
noyed me, and I started quickly to brush it
away.
The suddenness of the motion took him un-
awares, and my eyes unexpectedly surprised his.
He had finished folding powders, and sat look-
ing at me, thinking that I would not see, be-
lieving that I would not know, perhaps-God -i
grant it! -himself not knowing how it was with
him.
It all passed like a captured illusion, which
escaped, and refused to be overtaken. The soul 
of the man retreated to its own place, and the ;
lens of the physician's guarded eyes passed §



<pb n="227"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE     227
ftly before his. The defense was something
subtle but so instantaneous as to be superb.
onored him for it from my heart.
-But, ah me, ah me! Some other man, some
anger, some new friend, might perplex me,
t not this one. For I had seen Robert look
ke that-how long ago!-when he was free
love me, and I to be beloved.
yuly the sixth.
SAID that something had happened. What?
he lifting of an eyelash, the foray of a soul.
Nothing more. Yet am I hurled by the move-
ient of the drama.
To-day Dr. Packard came to make the pro-
iessional call. He reported Dr. Hazelton as
xcessively busy, and summoned off on a con-
ultation by an early train. How haggard Rob-
rt looked that last time he was here! He had
slept less than any of us. His eyes had the in-
somniac brilliance and the insomniac honesty. I
do not think I even told him that I was sorry
for him. The omission taunts me now that I
cannot see him.
SENT
I" Yuly the seventh.
"MY DEAR HUSBAND: Your last letter hurt
ime, but I will not dwell on that. I am sure that



<pb n="228"/>
228   CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE 
you must have felt truly ill to write just as you,
did, and I am distressed and anxious. I cannot;
think that the climate agrees with you, as your
say. Your intimation that you may not serve,
out a much longer term in the consulate would:
have given me pleasure but for--you know
what. There seems to be always a lost bolt in:
the machinery of human happiness. As you
say, the mill never turns with the water that is,
passed. New currents sweep the whirling wheel,
and new forces start the life and fill the heart.
"Marion is well, and I am better.
"Your affectionate wife,
"MARNA HERWIN.
"P.S. No; I do not mind that gossip about,
you. I would not stoop. I could no more be-
lieve it than I would believe it of myself  Give.
yourself no concern on that score. Whateveri
else may happen, you are incapable of that.
"I cannot deny that it wounds me that I am
not in a position to defy the world and the worst
with my confidence in my husband-my ulti-
mate confidence burning deep in the dimnessi
where the great elements of character are forged.
But of this we need not speak. Let it sufficei
that I trust you, Dana.
"And, Dear, I have sometimes thought that was;?
.iT



<pb n="229"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE     229
wicked proverb. It may not be the same
water that turns the mill, but it is the same
>stream, Dana."
:  uly the eighth.
TO-DAY the doctor came. He has resumed him-
Iself altogether. Except for a sheen of his trans-
iparent pallor, he was much as usual-cheerful,
quiet, strong. He made a strictly professional
call, and it was brief.  He regretted that he
did not find me better, and I protested that
I was quite well; and we talked of the
weather, and of Marion, and of the climate of
Uruguay, which, it seems, bears an excellent
! reputation.
He left a new remedy, and rose to go. Swiftly
- my common sense deserted me, and I lapsed into
one of the lunacies for which sick women, above
the remainder of our race, are, I believe, distin-
guished. In point of fact, I felt physically weak
X enough to cry my soul out, and leave it for the
doctor to pick up and put back-as if one
dropped a bracelet, or a flower. It seemed to
me a laudable evidence of self-restraint that I
should only say:
" Why did you send Dr. Packard ?  I missed
you, Robert."
"Did you  " he asked gently. He took my
hand with ineffable tenderness and delicacy, and
I,



<pb n="230"/>
230   CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
then he laid it down upon the folds of my white
dress.
"I think you are right," he said quietly. " It
was not very brave. I do not mean that you
shall miss me too much-nor-"
The sentence broke. His eyes said: "Nor do
I mean that you shall need me too much, either."
But his lips said nothing at all.
UNSENT (ADDRESSED, STAMPED, AND HELD OVER)
Undated.
'DANA! Dana! Come back to me! I fling
my pride to the stars; I never had any too much
of it, so far as you are concerned, my dear,-not
since the day you made the Wilderness Girl
your prisoner,-and I clasp you with my heart,
and cling to you. Do not stay away too long,
not too long! Do not push the risks of separa-
tion too far, I do entreat you. I am a young
wife, Dana, not used to solitude and care, and
I never was neglected in my life before -and
you know I don't bear loneliness as well as some
women do. I thought I was a constant woman,
and I think so. But I cannot answer formyself,
Dana, if this should last, if I should be tried too
cruelly. There is an invisible line in a woman's
nature of the existence of which I begin, for the
first time, to be aware. Once crossed, I perceive



<pb n="231"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE     231
hat all the powers and principalities of love can-
.not recross it. I have often thought it must be
the final anguish if I should be compelled to ad-
mit to my own soul that you had ceased to love
me. Dana, there is a finality worse than that.
If I should cease to loveyou - then God help us
;both! Everything is mine as long as love iSo I
!sacredly believe that anything may be ours as
:long as I love you. Hope can live as long as
love does. I could be so tender to you--yet.
iI could be so patient, and try so hard to make
you happy-yet.
"There have been times (I wrote you so, can-
didly) when I have tried not to love you, in very
self-defense. I commit that spiritual gaucherie
no more. Now I summon my love, and cherish
it, like some precious escaping bird, lest it evade
me. Ah, help me to cage it, Dana! You only
can.
"Did you ever think what it means to be a
desolate woman, to sit alone every day and all
the evenings  Do you understand how far a
little kindness goes to a lonely wife - thought-
fulness, unselfishness-the being remembered
and cared for'  Did you never put the question
to yourself- No; I know you never did. And
I say you never shall.
"Dana, I ask you to come home. It is the



<pb n="232"/>
232   CONFESSIONS     OF A   WIFE
first time, you will bear witness to me. And I
cannot tell you all the reasons why I do. In-
deed, I do not think I understand them quite
myself. But I think you would respect them,
and I must tell you that I shall not ask again.
"Loyally and longingly,
"MARNA, your Wife.
yuly the tenth.
I THOUGHT I would go out myself, to-night, and
post that letter in the old box that has stood for
years on the elm at the opening of the governor's
avenue; it was put there by way of honoring my
father and making his large mail easier for him
to deal with.
It is a hot night, and there is a burning moon.
I ran across the lawn with Job, as I used to do,
as if I still had the right, not coming very near
to the Pendleton Hospital; but I could see it
quite plainly-the patients on the piazzas, the
lights in the long dining-room windows and in
the library, which is the doctor's office now. He
was sitting at his desk, absorbed and busy. I ran
on to mail my letter. When I got to the box, I
changed my mind, and thought I would not do
it. So I came back slowly, by the avenue,
meaning to cut athwart the shrubbery and come
out by the tree-house quite unnoticed, for I felt
:i



<pb n="233"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           233
all the moonlight of the world were concen-
ig on my organdie; white dresses do give
that impression on moonlit nights.
'When I reached the tree-house the doctor was
lking slowly up the garden path, between the
By flowers. He had one of his patients with
,a deaf old lady who is gifted with fits.
"I ain't had but six to-day," she announced.
1Now Job does not like that old lady, and he
s acquired an unfortunate tendency to take her
the hem of her dress and spin her round. As
turned to anticipate Job in this too evident in-
cntion, I dropped my letter. The doctor picked
up and handed it to me.
"You did not mail it," he said.
" I decided not to, Doctor."
"Why?'"
When I made no answer, his face settled sternly.
"Wait a moment, Mrs. Herwin," he com-
anded in his professional voice. " I shall re-
/urn directly."
"And only seven yesterday," put in the old
" Doctor," I said, "she will have sixteen if
bJob plays top with her in his present frame of
mind. I can't manage him much longer." For
Job was barking, and wriggling out of his collar
to get at the old lady.



<pb n="234"/>
234  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 
Smiling indulgently, the doctor drew h
patient away, and Job and I went up into 
tree-house to wait for him, and the large moo
regarded me solemnly through the vines. " N
here," I thought, "not here!"  For I remer
bered Dana. So I came down from the tree
house, and went into my own home, and Jo
went with me. In a few minutes Robert came i
knocking lightly on the open door, and waitin
for no answer. He did not sit down, but bega
at once:
"Tell me, why did you not mail that lett
to your husband "                      ?<
"Tell me why you ask."
He sighed, and turned.
"I know I seem to presume," he said wearily
"But I thought you would forgive me, Marn
And I had the feeling - of course I may 
wrong -that the letter had better go. An
thing that comes from your heart- anythin
that could do any good-"
He did not finish his sentence, but abruptl
left me. I went to the door, and watched '
sturdy figure quickly crossing the lawn and thj
hospital grounds, till it disappeared in the sacre
shadows of my father's house. I waited till 
had been gone awhile, and then ran out w
Job and mailed my letter. 



<pb n="235"/>
VI
July the thirtieth.
Hn TEATED seven times, the days pass through
the furnace. Only the nights are possible,
iund one lies awake much to realize the fact.
,Really, I find them more merciful than they often
fare in this terrible month. While the moon lived
they were solemn and unreal, like the nights of
i;an unknown planet in which one was a chance
,visitor.  My brain burned, my head swam; I
.thought strange thoughts and felt new emotions,
I and was an alien to myself  Now that the
:moon is dead, there is a singular quality in the
, darkness; it creeps on compassionately, like
. delicate and tender feeling, shielding one from
ilthe fiery trouble of the obscured sun. I long for
; the dark, and when it comes I feel as if it were
a cool hand, and I lay my cheek upon it, and
-am quieted and comforted - no, I am not com-
- forted. I have not heard from Dana for eighteen
days.
I read somewhere in a society novel, once,
ej:.1  '6      235



<pb n="236"/>
236   CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
of a husband and wife who could not live to- :
gether, and she smiled and said:
" Dear Bertie is on a yacht."
But after a good while " people began to think
that yachting trip had lasted rather long." I won-
der if people think that Uruguay is lasting rather
long?  But I am astonished at my fixed indif-
ference to that sort of sting; what I endure is so
much more important than any one else's view
of what I endure. Married man and woman
are a universe to themselves.  Other persons
look small to me, and quite distant, as if they
were the inhabitants of a different solar system.
The telephone people have changed our num-
ber. It is now 26 - 6, and went, I believe, into 
the new book.
August the fifth.
MARION'S head hangs like a sun-smitten flower,
for the first dog-days are cruel to her, and the 
doctor has been to see her every day for nearly
a week. She is better for the tireless attention
which he never fails to give her, and she has
grown very fond of him; he, I think, of her. I
found him to-day with the child on his lap, and
Dombey in his arms; Banny Doodle suspended
head first from his necktie, which had been un-
tied and retied for the purpose (who can fathom
the mental process which leads my daughter



<pb n="237"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE            237
systematically to deny to this unfortunate doll
tthe right to stand upon its feet ?) ;- and Job was
crawling up his back.  Job was engaged, I
:think, in the noble purpose of rescuing Banny
Doodle. Job is attached to the doctor, but not
* devotedly so. If the truth were known, I think
.Job misses his master, though he would not
admit it for a pound of chops. The doctor is
*not the master, and the master instinct in the
*dog is stronger than his affections or inclinations.
I have found him several times, lately, sleeping
on a glove or a slipper of Dana's. I think Job's
jealousy of my husband has yielded to a sense
of anxiety about him. We are all growing a
:little anxious.  The doctor's eyes ask every
day, and he telephoned me last evening to
;know if I had heard.
What would become of me without Robert ?
-He never forgets, he never fails, he never neg-
!lects. He carries my hapless lot as if it were a
shield that he might be brought home dead
upon and not regret it. He guards me, he
comforts me, he " keeps me from sinking down."
-He counts himself out; he never thinks of his
own ease, of the burden that I am, of the price
B that I may cost him.
I am not worthy of this chivalry. I always
aFew that Robert was a gentleman,- and, after
.!



<pb n="238"/>
238   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
all, there are none too many,- but now I pe
ceive him to be a Knight of the Sacred Circl
where honor and tenderness are one quality
He is faithful to "the highest when he sees&
it," because that is his nature, and he can trust
himself to his nature; and I--I can trust"
him.
I write to Dana sometimes how kind Robert;
is to us, and I have tried to explain to my hus-B
band precisely how I feel about the doctor. Ir
think Robert is very much troubled about Dana's:
long silence. To-day I took him unawares and-
asked him quite quickly: 
"Have you written to Mr. Herwin ? "
His face took on its transparent look, whiteni
ing visibly, but otherwise he showed no emotion:
and certainly nothing that could be called em,
barrassment.
"Why the question, Mrs. Herwin "
"Don't you wish me to ask it, Dr. Hazelton '- "
"It is your right, of course. But- no -1i
do not wish it."
"Very well, Doctor. I will not ask it again."
He got up and paced the room, with his.
hands in his pockets, and went to the window.
The blinds were closed and the light smogN
through, and I saw the man as I did once b
fore, standing in a gleaming stream with the su
~'.



<pb n="239"/>
CONFESSIONS        OF A   WIFE     239
nmotes whirling about his head. He' wheeled
. unexpectedly.
"I will not confuse you. I have not written
to your husband. But if I should ever see oc-
casion to do so, I wish to take the liberty with-
 out being questioned."
|    "Take it," I said. I held out my hands
toward him. "It is an unrestricted deed."
i  "You are quite sure that you trust me? " he
| asked, with just a perceptible catch in his breath.
Then I said:
"I would trust you, Robert, to the uttermost
ends of fate." And so I would. Who in all my
', life has proved trustworthy, if not this old friend ?
Only my dear dead father; no one else. As I
write, the candle is lighted by Marion's crib, and
I can see the compass pointing north. There is
something about this effect of gold and candle-
light that I wish I knew how to explain to my-
self -I mean the sense of rest that it gives me.
It melts upon the nerve like late sunlight upon
green branches, or firelight upon happiness.
And yet that is not what I wish to say. I am
losing my power to express beautiful thoughts,
so many tragic ones devour me. Is the sense of
beauty meant only for the young, the inexperi-
enced, and the happy ?  I have always thought
it was safer for the old and the sad.
ti



<pb n="240"/>
240  CONFESSIONS       OF A   WIFE 
August the sixth.
I USED to dream incessantly about Dana. At
first there was scarcely a night that was not
cruel with him; then it would happen for three
or four together, with spaces of mercy between.
He was generally in some trouble-ill, or in
prison, or lost. There is one Uruguay swamp
which I think must be on the map, I know it
so by heart: it has palmettos, and yucca-bushes,
and seven cypress-trees in the foreground; there
is an old bright-green log with a viper on it,
coiled (he wrote me about one called vivora
de la cruz because it had marks like a cross on
its head). Dana stands at the end of the log,
the end which dips into the water; he stretches
out his hands to me, and the log sinks, and then
the snake springs.
There is a prison in that country, somewhere,
barred with iron crosses at the windows, and he 
comes to the window of his dungeon,- he is far
below the ground,- and lifts his arms, and I can
see his fingers and enough of his left hand to
recognize his wedding-ring.  But I cannot see
his face, and I wake calling, "Dana!"
Then there were dreams when I saw his face,
and woke to wish I had not. It was turned
quite fully to me, and it was dark and offended.
. . 



<pb n="241"/>
CONFESSIONS      OF A    WIFE    241
:I cannot say that it was his freezing face, but
:-Hhe was always inscrutably displeased with me.
- Sometimes he retreated from me across a wide
country, and I -for I would not pursue him -
stood with vast spaces between us, and wrung
my hands. At other times I could hear him
.calling me repeatedly and anxiously, but I could
- not see him at all.  Thrice I lay staring and
' sleepless all night, and at two o'clock I heard his
voice distinctly in my room. "Marna ? Marna ?"
he said loudly.
Once I had a dear dream, and cried for joy of
it. I thought he came home and in at the door
suddenly, and ran his hand through his dark
curls, and said in his old way:
?- "Mama, what a darn fool I was to leave you!
* I can't stand it any longer."  I never had this
dream except that one time; and he took me to
' his heart, in the dream, and he cried out: " Have
I been too sure you would forgive me 2 " Then
he found my lips, although I would have de-
nied them (for my heart was sore with its long
I hurt), and he said: " This is the kiss that lives."
I do not dream of Dana so often lately. I
I. think I am  rather glad of this, because the
dreams lasted for days, and I was ill as long as
[  they lasted.



<pb n="242"/>
242   CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
August the seventh.
MINNIE CURTIS came over to-day, and asked
what I heard from my husband. He was quite
well, I said, by the last letter. I thought she
regarded me with a certain pity, expressed in her 
blonde way, without the complexion of reserve,
and I wondered why it did not annoy me. Only 
yesterday the doctor said to me: 
"The strongest trait in your character is your
indifference to inferior minds."
"Some one has been talking," I said at once. 
"Not about-"    I stopped, for I felt ashamed
to have begun, and the color smote my face. 
"Don't be foolish, Mama," replied the doctor,
gently. "Spare yourself. I shall take care of all 
that."
"Some one has been talking about Uruguay,"
I finished.
"I am glad you mind it so little," he returned
in his comfortable, comforting tone.
"Doctor," I demanded, "when your patients
are on the operating-table, would they mind a
wasp ?  Or a hornet? "
The doctor smiled: "I cannot say that I re-
member ever to have seen an insect of the spe-
cies, or any other, in an operating-room."
"You have said it," I maintained. "They are
never admitted."
*;



<pb n="243"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE     243
1  When Minnie got up to go, she went over to
he piano and began brushing the music about.
i never knew a girl with Minnie's nose who was
inot, somewhere in sensibility, a defective.
"Ah," she said, "the 'Bedouin Love-Song'?"
$he drummed a few chords of the prelude.
Then indeed I rose upon Minnie Curtis. I
think I actually took her by the shoulder, rather
ard, and I know that I pushed her hand back.
"' ' You will not touch that music, if you please.
i do not like it disturbed."
i Minnie colored and stared.
"You don't mean to say-" she began.
.[ In point of fact, Dana's music remains just as
ahe left it the last time he sang and played to me.
I never allow any person to touch it, for any
Ieason, and Luella and Ellen are forbidden to
dust the piano. But even Minnie Curtis's nose
iwas equal to the situation. She did not finish
|her sentence.
X When she had gone, I sat and eyed the music.
I love thee, I love but thee!
I~~  ~  With a love that shall not die!
I whirled the piano-stool, which still spun with
I Minnie's retreated figure, and hid my face upon
I the rack. Thus and then I thought-and I
I /
( 



<pb n="244"/>
244   CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
record that I thought it for the first time in my:
life:
A man selects whom he pleases, and wins her
if he can; he slights the object of his love when 
he will, and ceases to love when he chooses. A;
woman's choice is among her choosers, and she 
is denied the terrible advantage of the right to 
woo. Why should eternal tenderness be ex-;
pected of the more disabled, the less elective
feeling?  Why should the life everlasting be.
demanded of a woman's love?  I had got so far -
when Marion came up and pecked at my muslin ,
dress (it was the old May-flower dress that her.
father used to like), and said something about.
Pity Popper; so I took her in my lap and kissed 
her hair, and I wished that I could cry.
When I looked up, the doctor was standing
in the middle of the room. I do not know how
long he had been there. He glanced at the.
music on the rack.
"I am not going to use my horses this after- i
noon," he said, prosaically enough. " I have 
ordered James to come over and take you and |
Marion to drive at four o'clock, when it cools a i
little. You need the air."
He did not suggest that he drive with us, but:
left me, smiling gently. I do not think I even,
thanked him. But Marion ran and offered himn



<pb n="245"/>
CONFESSIONS      OF A WIFE       245
Dombey to kiss. This fact was the more im-
pressive because she had just fed Dombey on
raspberries and cream.
August the tenth.
OH, at last! . . . Dana's letters came yester-
day-three of them, stalled somewhere; whether
in the mails, or in his pockets, or on his desk,
- who can say?   He used to keep letters over
sometimes, and I would find them in such queer
places - once I found two in the umbrella-rack.
I say "he used to" as if my husband were
K dead. In all separations there are the elements
of eternity; and in every farewell to the being
| we love we set foot upon an undug grave.
Dana writes quite definitely and kindly. "I
shall resign the consulship," he says.  "You
may expect me home this fall.   I have had
enough of it. I am convinced that the climate
does not agree with me, and, in fact, I am not
very well."  He sends more love than usual to
Marion, and his grateful regards to the doctor,
to whom I am to set forth the fact that he is
taking atropine 3X. He adds a postscript:
"I have been thinking how patient you were
with me when I had that devil of a grippe. You
were a dear old girl, Mama. A fellow misses
I his home in a blank of a country like this. When
:,JI get better shall you want me back?"
[s'



<pb n="246"/>
246   CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
SENT 
" August the tenth.
"MY DEAR HUSBAND: Your letters were so
long delayed that we all had begun to be anx-
ious. I do not think I will try to tell you how 
I felt when Ellen brought them  in yesterday
and laid them on my lap. There was war on
her old face-tears and smiles. In my heart, i
too, were battling forces. Between anxiety and 
joy, between my hurt and my love, I was rent. 
I had waited a good while for these letters,
Dana.
"Shall I want you back ? Try me and see! I
hurry this off by the outgoing steamer to tell you
what an empty home waits for you how long-
ingly, and what a
"Loyal, loving
" WIFE.
"P.S. Marion is better, thanks to the doctor;
she has not been at all well lately. I will write
at more length to-night about her, and about
whatever I think will interest you. This note
goes only to hold out the arms of
"Your MARNA."
August the eleventh.
TO-DAY the doctor came, and I showed him
Dana's letters. I had, of course, telephoned the



<pb n="247"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE    247
news to him yesterday, as soon as I received it,
and he came in shining.   One would have
thought it was his own happiness, not mine, that
was in the question. He had a high expression.
'" I did not dare to hope for so much," he said
joyously, " nor quite so soon."
i  At least," I sobbed (for I could not help it),
"he is alive. He had been silent so long, I had
begun to - suffer, Doctor. And I did not want
to cable and make myself troublesome to him."
Something in Robert's face or manner per-
plexed me, and I said abruptly:
" You have been writing to him !"
"I have not written to Mr. Herwin."
-' "Cabled, then ' "
"Nor cabled."
-"You might as well tell me what you have
done. I think I ought to know."
"You were so kind as to say that you trusted
me."
"And I do! I do! Never mind, Doctor."
"But I do mind, and I will tell you. I took
steps to learn if he were still at the consulate.
Of course I did this very quietly-and suit-
ably."
"How long ago "
"Three weeks."
" You did not tell me."
...l l



<pb n="248"/>
248   CONFESSIONS     OF A WIFE
"I did not think it would make you any -
happier, on the whole."
" Have you ever done this before . "
He hesitated. " It is not the first time, I ad-
mit. I want you to feel that I shall do what-
ever is necessary and best for- you-"
"Robert," I tried to say, "you are a good
man. I bless you from my heart."
"I receive," he said, "the benediction."
He bowed his head and stood beside me
quite silently; and before I could think what
I should say, he was gone.
A.ugust the twentieth.
IT is on record that the fakirs really do live
buried for forty days, and are reanimated. It is
with me as if I had held my breath since the
seventh of October last, and now began to in-
hale - feebly, for the long asphyxia. Now that I
know I need not suffer, I scarcely know how to
be happy. In the morning I wake and think:
"It will soon be over." At night I fall asleep
saying something that perhaps religious people
would call a prayer. I have not learned to
pray, for I am not yet religious: I am only dis-
illusioned with the irreligious. I find that pa-
ganism has not helped perceptibly in that form
of fate which has been appointed to me. "After



<pb n="249"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A           WIFE     249
all," I say, "there is a God, and He is merciful."
I And then I sleep--long, blessed nights. Any-
thing can be borne, I think, if one sleeps, even
joy.
The days have wings.   They fly from  me
like strange birds lost on their way from some
tropical country. There are forest fires some-
where, and here the August air is impearled
with haze, or smoke, or both. There is an unreal
light all the time. The sun sinks like a burning
ship in a sullen sea, and if there were a moon,
she would be the ghost of a lovely mermaid
diving. I feel excited every minute, as if-
God knows what-would befall. I suppose it
-is because I am so happy.
"Try to be calmer," said Mercibel, to-day.
" It is quite unnecessary to wreck yourself."
" Mercibel," I demanded, "have you seen me
shed a tear?  Or do any foolish thingS"
"If I had," retorted Mercibel, dimpling, "I
might have spared myself any comments on the
subject."  I can see that she watches me fur-
tively. 
So does the doctor. No; the adverb is mis-
- placed: I never saw Robert do a furtive thing.
Rather should I say that he guards me quite
openly. I think he has caused it to be gener-
ally known that my husband will soon be at



<pb n="250"/>
250   CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE 
home. He took us to ride yesterday, Marion 
and me; it is the first time that he has done so.
He looks a little pale, but every recurrence of
feeling on his face is receptive, as if he reflected
my happiness. He has borne my troubles so
long and so uncomplainingly, how glad I am
to lighten his load! I wish I could be merrier.
I am conscious of trying to express the expected
amount of gladness for the doctor's sake. It is
remarkable how rigid the emotions grow when 
they have set in certain attitudes too long. 
August the thirty-first.
WE are very happy.     Dana's letters come
more regularly than they did, and I reply fre- 
quently and comfortably; I find myself much
more at ease in writing to my husband. He tells
me to expect him when his year's service is over,
if not, indeed, before, and that he will soon be
able to be more definite. The neighbors (in-
cluding Minnie Curtis) come in and wish me
joy, and some old friends who have had the
delicacy to keep silent while I have been filling
the role of the neglected wife hasten to share
my relief from the position, and particularly to
congratulate me in that I did not accompany
my husband to Montevideo. "The child made
it impossible," they say politely.



<pb n="251"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE    251
iMarion talks incessantly about Pity Popper,
d orders for a new bicycle-suit have been
ued in Dombey's behalf, while Job is des-
ed to a Yale-blue plush ulster; but Banny
oodle, whose wedding-dress is as gray and dim
an outlived honeymoon, is to have nothing at
- unless the clothes-wringer, a dark fate on
e teeth of which this hapless doll is forever
tched.  "Tell Ellen sqush her frough!"
mmands my daughter, contemptuously. Mer-
el asked me to-day, with some embarrassment,
I did not think I needed some new dresses
yself. I had not thought of it. I believe
have not had a new gown since Dana left.
Icompromised with Mercibel upon a long
hite cape to catch up and run about the
runds in.
A lady told me once that she never in her life
d ordered a black street-dress but that there
as a death in the family, and she had given up
ck street-dresses.
I wonder, if I instituted a new ruby house-
wn, if Dana would come home any sooner?
r if we should be any happier when he did
:me?  Colors are forces, I think, and their
wer lies among the subtleties and the sorceries.
-ho knows where it begins or ends?  If the
rt of the wife is in the ruby jewel, the arms
27
  i' .V



<pb n="252"/>
252  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
of the wife are in the ruby velvet. ... Shall ]
extend them '
My old gown is quite crushed and paled; it'
has a grieved look. Why do I hesitate to haves
more wife velvet? Why is it so difficult to:
renew a faded rapture 2 And is it a duty ? Or
a sacrilege '
"You are looking tired," the doctor said to-
day; "we must have a better color before Mr.
Herwin comes." He talks a good deal about
Mr. Herwin's coming. He seems to think of it all 
the time. He is so kind to Marion and to me
that I can but dwell on his kindness continually. 
It runs through my happiness -a comfort .
within a hope--like a thread of silver twisted
with a thread of gold. The other evening I ran 
out with Job about the grounds, and I saw the
doctor's shadow on the shades of his office win-
dow; he was sitting at his desk, with his face
bowed on his hands, and he looked to me (in the
shadow) a lonely man. It occurs to me that it
is rather noble in Robert to be so happy in my.l
happiness. So was he grieved in my grieving; 
so was he broken on my rack. 
Sometimes it seems to me that he shelters,'
my joy as if it were a faint flame that a rude i
wind might blow out-- as if he put his hand
around it carefully. 



<pb n="253"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE      253
~I"~; SENT
-~t~~~~~" September the third.
"DANA MY DEAR: I hurry this -it is but a
postscript to my letter - to say that I am begin-
ning to dream of you again (I have not lately),
and that last night I had the dearest dream that
ever a wife had of her husband in the dream-
history of separated married people. I thought
Iyou came home sooner than we expected you,
a and hurried in, and said -  But when you come
home I shall tell you all about it, if you will
care to hear. I shall not forget it. Some dreams
are more real than facts, I find, so I treasure this
for you. I am treasuring much. I am preserv-
ing my power to be happy (for that is a faculty
which weakens rapidly with disuse), and am fling-
ing offmy experience ofsuffering. I amforgetting
that you have hurt me, and remembering that
you are coming to me. I am forgetting that
we have ever failed to Mnake each other happy,
;and I am thinking that we loved each other
dearly. And, Dear, I began to write this only
-to tell you that I have begun to count the days.
I think you will sail on the 17th of Octo-
ber; don't you?  And that is forty-and-four
I days.
" And I am four-and-forty times your waiting
"WIFE."



<pb n="254"/>
254   CONFESSIONS OF A       WIFE
September the fifth.
LAST night I dreamed again of Dana, and I 
write it out to rid me of it. It was a composite
dream, and worse than any. There was the log -
and the swamp, the seven cypresses and the yucca,
and the viper; the coil, the spring, and the fall;
and there were the bars of crosses, and the dun- 
geon, and his uplifted hand with the wedding-
ring. And there was always his dark, offended
face.
Then he came home, in the dream, and he
was--as he used to be before he went away; 
and he spoke and he did-as he used to speak
and do. And, oh, it all happened all over again!
My husband was not kind to me- he was not
kind!
Sunday.
I WENT to church to-day with Marion. They
sang: "As it was in the beginning, is now, and
ever shall be." . . . What if, when he comes
back, it should be just the same?  Will the ice
in his nature solidify ? Or the fire of it melt? 
It is a war of the elements. It is a strange thing
when a wife must say: " I know no more than
any other woman, any chance acquaintance, what
my husband will do, how his character will
express itself."



<pb n="255"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A          WIFE    255
September the tenth.
ND yet we are very happy. It is as if the bow
/fpain had bent, and the arrow of joy were fly-
l bg to its mark. We live in a kind of exaltation.
can see my excitement reflected in every face
;- Mercibel's, Marion's, Ellen's, and, most sensi-
/tively of all, in Job's; more unerringly than any
person, Job knows when I am glad or sad.
The doctor's sympathy is a fact by itself,
something apart from that of other friends. It is
ike the atmosphere, or the law of gravitation. I
breathe it, and I stand upon it. What was I
/[writing the other day about elements'? There
/is elemental peace as well as elemental war.
I am young and well (as women go), and I
H inherit physical health, but I think, as I look back
/on the closing record of this year, that if it had
/not been for Robert I might have died.
I told him so this evening.
I    "Do not overestimate that," he said quickly.
-We were sitting on the piazza, for there is a
warm starlight, and he had come over to see if
I had heard any news from Dana.
" It would not be possible," I persisted, "to
tell you, Robert, how I feel about what you have
done for me -the kindness, the care, the trouble
you have taken for us - the obligation-"



<pb n="256"/>
256- CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE 
Ellen, from the nursery above, where she 
was putting Marion to bed, began to sing
shrilly:
His loving ki-i-ind-ness, oh, how great ! 
"Listen!" I said, laughing, and I held up my 
hand. It was my left hand, and the moon
blazed upon my wedding-ring. I crossed my
hands in my lap, and my betrothal ruby flared
before my eyes and his, a gleam of crimson fire.
The doctor did not speak, and I sat and watched
the ruby -of all colors the glorious, the rap-
turous, burning deep down to the heart.
" It is chilly for you here," said the doctor.
"You will come indoors."  He did not speak
quite naturally, though quietly and firmly, as he
always does. He rose, and stood for me to pass
in at the door.
" Are n't you coming in " I cried. I felt dis-
appointed; I am alone so much, and it is such
a comfort to me to see my old friends - I have
not too many. No; I will be quite candid: it
is a comfort to me to see the doctor. How could
I help that?  How could I?   If I ought, I
would. And I should be willing to show him
my whole heart and all that is therein, and I am
sure he knows that, too. I have not a thought
nor a feeling that I should be uncomfortable to



<pb n="257"/>
CONFESSIONS       OF A   WIFE    257
ave him see, and when Dana comes I shall tell
hem all to Dana- every one.
i; "I don't think I will come in to-night," re-
:plied the doctor. "My patients -" He paused.
^  "How is the old lady " I demanded. " How
9r many has she had to-day "
" Only two. I should soon discharge her, but
:,-she does n't want to go." He laughed....
-That laugh seemed to clear the air of I know
-: not what, and I know not why.
"There ! " I said. "You see for yourself it is
much better to come in. Your patients are all
quite comfortable just now. There is not one of
them who needs you as much as I."
Hesitating perceptibly, he came in. There
was a fire laid on the library hearth, and he took
a match and lighted it. The blaze leaped and
struck him in the face. .... I was shocked at its
expression.
"I have hurt you! " I managed to say.
" Child," he faltered, "you cannot help it."
"-I wish to change Marion's medicine," he
hastened to add in his usual voice, "while I am
here. Will you ring for a glass ? Or shall I "
I rang, and Luella brought the tumbler, and
the doctor prepared the medicine silently. He
had not sat down, and I pushed a chair toward
him; he did not appear to see it.
~i![~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~



<pb n="258"/>
258   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 
" Two teaspoonfuls once in four hours, if you
please, Mrs. Herwin." His tone was quite pro-
fessional, and the muscles of his face had stif-
fened; Iperceived that he did not mean to stay-
perhaps, God knows, that he did not dare. ...
Then swiftly it seemed to me as if I could have 
gone up and sat at his feet and put my head on
his knee--like Marion- and cried; and I
thought how he would have put his hand on my
head and comforted me- as he does the child.
And I was not ashamed that I thought it; but I
did not tell him my thoughts. I opened my
lips to say: "Don't go, Doctor!" and I closed
them. I should be glad to remember that I did
not say it, only that I am afraid I said a thing less
kind, more weak. For everything that I had
ever read and heard about friendships that people
may have -men and women, right women,
good men-came crowding to my mind. Once
I thought it impossible that I could experience
friendship, or need it, after I married Dana: now,
to-night, I remembered all that haughtiness of
happiness and that bigotry of inexperience with
a kind of scorn of myself, for I perceived that
I am more pitiable, needing friendship, than
I was happy, having love. My head swam
a little, and Dr. Hazelton's face seemed to
blur and recede from me like a countenance 



<pb n="259"/>
CONFESSIONS       OF A   WIFE     259
*:within a cloud, so exalted was the man's
look.
"Doctor!" I cried, "what is this? . . . Is it
friendship, Robert?"
1 Then across his eyes there passed the sacred
war which no woman, witnessing, could forget:
for she would reverence the man and do him
/ obeisance in her soul forever, because his knew
l no reproach, as it had known no fear; and -be-
cause the affection with which he had honored
. her was a matter to be proud of, and nobler
1  for, and better for, as long as she should live,
:: or he.
"Call it friendship, child," said Robert, not
quite steadily.  "It is a good word, safe and
strong, and it is respected of God and men."
" It is quite a true word, too," he added more
- distinctly-"for you, Mama."  His eyes did
- not evade me, but met mine wistfully and
.straight; they were as remote and as mournful
as the eyes of some higher being set to watch
the sealed tomb of a lower life.  He spoke
more quickly: "We must be honest with our-
selves in everything . . . you and I. And very
careful. I try to be!"
"I know you do! I know you are!" I cried.
-"God bless you, Robert!"
He held out his hand; it was cold. I put



<pb n="260"/>
260  CONFESSIONS       OF A   WIFE
mine into it, trembling; for I felt afraid-but 
not of him.
September the thirteenth.
WHO was it who wrote that "God bless you!"
was equal to a kiss?   Sterne, I think. But
what could Sterne know of the holy war?
the sacred victories? the high nature of a man
like this? the soul of a desolate woman, saved
from despair because she had been understood,
and guarded, too?
September the fifteenth.
WHERE did I track that ballad about the
skipper's daughters
c.. . .a man might sail to hell in your companie."
· Why not to Heaven ?" quo' she. ...
It has doubled, and is hunting me down.
September the twentieth.
THERE is no letter from Dana. And it is our
wedding-day.  What a freak of fate that a
woman should try to forget her wedding-day!
The doctor has not been'over to-day at all.
September the twenty-first.
THIS morning very early, at half-past eight,
the doctor came. He walked in without ringing,
,:?



<pb n="261"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           261
called me, in a low voice, from the foot of
bhe sthirs. I ran down, and Marion and Job
Icame tumbling after. The doctor detained the
child gently, that she should not follow us into
the library; but Job slid in. Then Robert shut
the door, and then I saw the cold autumn morn-
ing light full upon my old friend's face.
"Dana is dead!" I cried.
"No-no-no!" he gasped. "It is only-
this."
He held out a cablegram; his hand shook
more than mine. I read it, and folded it, hand-
ing it, without speaking, to the doctor, who
extended his fingers to take it back. This was
- the despatch:
c" To Dr. Hazelton.
"Sail Saturday San Francisco. Advised voy-
age round Cape for health. Have written. Tell
my wife.                      HERWIN."
I could not see quite clearly for a little, and I
got to the Morris chair and put my head back.
Job jumped into my lap and began to kiss me,
whining as he did so. It was so dark about me
that still I could not see any object in the room
|   except the face of the Yorkshire, and I clung to
* my dog; I think I said: "Y ou love me, Job, at
any rate!" but I am not sure. I did not think



<pb n="262"/>
262   CONFESSIONS     OF A WIFE           a
about Marion, nor about any person. It was 
as if I were a girl again, and had only
Job. I believe I said: "Father! I want my
father!" but I cannot tell; and then I sup-
pose the doctor caught me and lifted me,
for I felt that I was slipping sidewise to the 
floor.
. . . When my head cleared and the room
had lightened, I was on the lounge. Mercibel 
was doing something to my clothes, and rubbing
my feet; the doctor had my hands in his, and
warmed them gently; there was brandy on the
table, and his medicine-case. As I turned, he
drew my little girl between us, and put her in
my arms. Marion began to babble: "Pity
Popper!"   Then my voice came to me, and
broke upon me, overcoming me against my
will. I am afraid I said:
"Oh, pity Mommer, Marion! Pity Mommer!"
No one spoke in answer to me. In the still-
ness I heard the dog whining. They had put
him down, and he crawled back upon the lounge,
and made his way to my neck, and clung there
and kissed me with compassionate rapture-my
truest and most helpless friend.
September the twenty-second.
I WRITE, that I may endure: for it helps me to
do so - it always did; I am thus created. To-day



<pb n="263"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A          WIFE    263
the doctor suffered me to talk of what has hap-
pened, though he would not yesterday; but now
i am much stronger, and stiller, for I will not
break under this broadside, nor will I be shamed
by it to my own soul.
" You have gained perceptibly since last even-
ing," he began in his usual voice. "You are
brave."
"I am   the veriest coward who ever was
selected to stand under heavy fire," I protested.
" The only thing is that I know it, and so don't
run."
I!   ' That is the way the best soldiers are made,"
replied the doctor, smiling sadly.
"Run I will not - from this," I said. " It is
a battle to the death now. There is one thing
on which he has not counted - the roused pride
of a tender woman. The powder was belated,"
I added, "and it is smokeless, Doctor; but it
will do some execution yet." Something in my
voice seemed to wring his heart.
"Mama!" he entreated me, " Marna, don't!"
"Robert," I demanded, "tell me the holy
truth. Nothing less and nothing else will serve
me now. . . . Has my husband deserted me?"
He had now quite regained himself.    His
averted profile did not betray him; it was gray
and pinched, but it is often so. He turned his
head and looked me nobly in the eye.



<pb n="264"/>
264  CONFESSIONS       OF A    WIFE          |
"I will not deceive you," he said. " It may
be so. I do not know."
"Believe the best," he added in his reasonably
cheerful voice, "until your letter comes.. There
is to be a letter yet."
I said: "Oh, is there "  I had forgotten all
about the letter.
October the first.
AND once I was writing notes to ghosts--my
mother, who ceased from me when I was a little
girl, and pretty Ina, dead in her teens. There
are no ghost letters on these pages now. Life
has accepted my manuscript, and edited it
sternly, drawing his dele-mark through all the
fantasies.
And yet, I think if I could see my father for
one moment- perhaps he would find a way to
help me. He always did; he was full to the brim
of love-inventions. And if he came in at the
door and said, "Now, Daughter-" I should
expect the miracle. In the last few days I
think I have prayed to my father.
If Dana should never come in at the door
again -there is no letter yet. I have come to
regard the door as an enemy, as something forced
between us, and I have stolen down for several
nights and drawn the bolts, and slept with the
house unlocked.



<pb n="265"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A          WIFE     265
October the third.
!THE letter has come. I suppose it is what I
should expect, and yet I cannot say that it is.
He sets forth the fact that he has not been well,
iland that the only doctor he could get hold of
I*in that blanked country who seems to possess
a dose of sense ordered the sea-voyage. He
|-takes a coasting steamer, by name the Marion.
He will cable from San Francisco, and I am to
1 write to the hotel whose name he gives me. He
I is sorry to disappoint me, and I shall hear from
I him as often as possible. He cannot yet set a
date for his return, but hopes that it will not be
Flong delayed. He sends his love to the baby,
I and his regards to the doctor, to whom I am to
I-express my husband's warmest gratitude for the
faithful care which has been given to the family.
The letter reads like a copy-book with broken
sentences; there are several such, and the whole
thing is a reluctant medley. There is not a
genuine word in it from beginning to end. He
adds that he is glad to leave a country where
there are two thousand species of insects and
where the spiders are as large as- something that
I could not make out.
t~!i!~~~~rl~ ~Later.
- A SCRAP from Dana's letter fell when I opened
I the envelope,-I suppose I was confused and



<pb n="266"/>
266   CONFESSIONS OF A       WIFE 
excited,-and it wavered away and dropped ,
somewhere. Job has just found it and brought
it to me, wagging joyously. When I read the
scrap, I kissed Job and blessed him, for this
is it:
"P.S. You 're a sweet old girl, Mama. For
God's sake, think as well of me as you can."
October the fourth.
I SHOWED the letter to the doctor, for I felt that
I had better.
"Is this all " he asked.
"There is a postscript," I admitted. " I do not
know whether to show it to you or not."
"Have you written ? " he persisted.
No."
"Cabled ?"
"No."
"Are n't you going to do either ? or both "
"I have not made up my mind."
"Let me see the postscript," he replied au-
thoritatively.
I unfastened it from this page and showed it
to him, and pinned it back again in its place.
Neither of us spoke. The doctor went to the
window in that way he has, and stood with his
hands in his pockets, looking out--a sturdy



<pb n="267"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A          WIFE    267
!figure, all man, from his strong head to his firm
1 foot. I wondered that I had ever called him
/"too short," and that I used to think him plain.
"- You stand between me and despair," I
thought. But the thing I said was:
" Robert, what shall I do "
"Give me time," he answered patiently; "I
must think." He left me without looking at
me.
?! *H~it    ~October thefifth.
l  TO-DAY he came again, and began at once:
!  "Mrs. Herwin, I have come to say that I do
- not know how to advise you. This situation
:i-has passed beyond me. It has passed from the
C ordinary to the extraordinary perplexity. I am
'I afraid. ... I am sorry to seem to fail you!"
. He broke suddenly.
*!  "There is a point," he hurried on, "where the
B- third soul cannot trespass. Your tragedy has
reached that point. It may not remain there: it
may take on new phases . . . something where
- I can be of use again. If I can--you know
you will not have to ask."
I said something - I don't know what - half
t: inarticulate; but he spoke again, before I had
finished:
-  "Just now I think only your own heart can
? counsel you. Follow it. I can give you no
18



<pb n="268"/>
268   CONFESSIONS OF A       WIFE 
other advice to-day. When I have considered
the matter further I may have more to say. For
the present, do not depend upon my judgment,
but upon your own instincts."
As he moved to leave me, a shaft of sunlight
which his figure had interrupted fell across the
hair of my little daughter, who, running in, had
sprung upon me and at that moment laid her
face upon my lap. I put out my hand to smooth
her curls,- her father's curls,- and the ruby on
my finger received the light deep to the core of
the splendor.
"It is the heart of the wife," I thought. 
Yet at that moment-so perplexed am I,
so torn and troubled - it seemed to me that if the
doctor left me so I should perish of my bewil-
dered desolation. And I did utter these weak
and bitter words:
" I am sorry to have been so troublesome to
you."
He wheeled as if I had smitten him.
"I think, Mrs. Herwin, I have deserved to be
better understood by you than that."
Then indeed I followed the counsel of my
heart, for it urged me, and I cried out:
"Forgive me, Robert! . . . I am so wretched!
. . I have nobody but you! . . ."
I got up to put Marion out of the room, for
it was no sight for her, to see her mother weep-



<pb n="269"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE            269
-ng-and I could not have helped it if I had
feen slain for it. I shut the door, and put my
:head on the top of the Morris chair, and, so
standing, I cried and cried.
And then I heard from between the teeth of
my old friend these five half-strangled words:
" Good God! How could he? "
I do not think he knew I heard them, and I
:hope he did not. I motioned him to leave
me, and he did so instantly. I did nt see his
Eface, for I did not lift my own.
October the tenth.
-THERE have been burglars about us lately, and
the neighborhood is uneasy. I wonder why I
am not ? A burglar is such a small trouble! I
have scarcely seen the doctor for almost a week,
and although I have been really ill with I don't
know what, I have not summoned him. To-
day Mercibel came over, and ran back, and sent
him immediately. He was so entirely himself
that he put me at my ease at once. Neither of
us alluded to the circumstances of his last call.
He prepared his powders, gave me some quiet
professional advice, and rose to go. Then, quite
1 naturally, as he has been in the habit of speak-
ing, he observed:
" Have you cabled "
? "No."



<pb n="270"/>
270   CONFESSIONS     OF A WIFE
"Written "
"No, Doctor."
"Are you going to "
"I have not made up my mind. Of course 
he is at sea now. Is there any hurry ? "
He did not reply.
"If this is desertion -" I began.
"And if it is not?" interrupted the doctor,
quickly.
"Robert," I said, "if you knew anythingi
about Dana that I did n't -should you tell me? "
"Perhaps not."
"And yet, if I needed to know, if I ought to
know   "
"Have you ceased to trust me, Marna?"
Robert asked.
I held out my hand. He took it, laid it down,
and looked at me.
"You may not have all the perplexity," he
said gently. " I am trying to do the best I can."
"If the worst were true, if he means-this,"
I insisted, "would you have me pursue him ? "
A terrible gleam flickered in Robert's eyes,
but his pale lips were locked.
"And if the worst were not true-if there
were some reason, something that I do not un-
derstand -"
"Consider this possible," he interrupted, more



<pb n="271"/>
CONFESSIONS      OF A   WIFE     271
petuously than he is apt to speak; " in making
our decision, allow for such a margin. .... If
i knew, I should be able to counsel you. I can-
ot advise you on a working hypothesis. 'As
Wthe thing stands at this crisis, I would rather
Ctrust your heart than my head."
B _ "Child," he added, "remember that I am not
- unwilling to do - anything. I have a good
deal to consider . . . not for myself. .. but
£for you, Mama."
t Then he fell upon the phrase that he had used
i before:
"We must do-God help us!-the best
we can."
November the tenth.
-WHERE is that cataract which spends itself be-
fore it becomes spray and falls, so great the height
:from which it leaps? Nothing but mist reaches
-the ground.
What shall a woman do with the current of a
feeling fixed at too far a height, and dashing over
to its own destruction in too deep a gulf? My
I love is a spent cataract, wasted in mid-air. Last
night I waked suddenly and found myself
saying: "I wish I had never seen my hus-
band's face."  I have never said that before.
It is as if I had blasphemed for the first time
in my life. I quiver with it yet.  When I



<pb n="272"/>
272  CONFESSIONS       OF A   WIFE
slept again, I waked again, and that time I was
saying:
Oh, each man kills the thing he loves; . . .
The brave man does it with a sword,
The coward with a kiss.
I have not heard from   Dana.   The doctor
asked me two weeks ago if I had written, and I
said: " Only that once." I kept a copy of the
letter, as I have - I wonder why - of several
letters (but not all) that I have written him
since he went to South America.
SENT
"MY DEAR DANA: I try to write, as you asked,
but my pen is dumb. What would you have
me say? If a 'man would kill the thing he
loves,' he smites to slay, he does not torture.
If you would tear the tie between us-be a man
and tell me so. There is, I think, a circle of fate
where a woman's love will parley with neglect
no more. Mine has reached that invisible cir-
cumference. It used to be eternal growth and
motion, like the ripples of the ether, when a
sacred word has been spoken, widening on and
out forever. Now, everywhere that I turn I
meet the boundary; and I must say that I am
afraid to measure it, lest I should perceive that



<pb n="273"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           273
-is narrowing. Are you playing with your own
soul or with my tenderness ? Be candid with
We, for your own sake, for the child's, and for
Wine.                           MARNA.
"-P.S.  Dana!   Dana!   You ask me to
[ithink the best I can of you. Then tell me what
[to think, I pray you, Dear. Are you sick?  I
,'would come to you anywhere, anyhow--and,
R  oh, I would cherish you still. Are you in any
[ trouble?  I would share it to the uttermost pang.
i Have you done anything wrong, Dana? I would
[.be the first to forgive it, to forget it. I would
help you to put it behind you, to bear the con-
sequences, no matter what they are or might
[ become. Trust me, Dana. Confide in me-
even now. Tell me the worst, and I will be-
lieve the best. Share with me your trouble-
I don't care what it is - even if it is the trouble
of ceasing to love me. Let us meet that misery
together as once we met love together, and help
each other to bear it as best we can, because we
chose each other, and you did love me, and I
am                         Your WIFE."
There has been no answer to this letter. The
spray of the cataract turns sleet, and I can im-
' agine that in time there might a glacier form in
the gulf below.
: i



<pb n="274"/>
274   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 
I can see that the doctor grows anxious. He
has ceased to ask me whether I have written to
my husband. Nor do I longer question him. I
can see that Mercibel pities me. I thought I
was fond of Mercibel, but now I do not like to
have her near me very often. I do not care to
see any person, - I wince at every point of hu-
man contact,--yet I cannot show it. I am like
an animal fixed in a torture-trough by experi-
menters. My house has become my world. I
see my servants, my child, and the doctor. He
does not come as often as he did. I perceive
that even he is affected by the position I am in,
and that, in fact, I can take no natural hold on
life anywhere. Robert is very careful. The
Knight of the Sacred Circle makes no weak mis-
takes. Yet I feel from my soul that my fate
bears upon his continually. I may be wrong,-
a desolate woman is apt to lose her sense of pro-
portion in measuring her effect upon a man who
cares for her at all,-but it seems to me as if my
old friend did not forget me for an hour. And
when he does come-oh, God bless him! God
bless him as I never can, but as I would, and
I am not afraid or ashamed to say so ! I would
so bless him, if I could, that he should be hap-
pier, having my friendship, than he could be



<pb n="275"/>
CONFESSIONS       OF A    WIFE    275
ving the love of any gladder, freer woman in
e world.
I wish that I could tell him so.
November the twelfth.
HIE came to-day, and I tried to tell him; it
&eemed to me as if I must-as if I owed so great
debt to his chivalry, and his pure and high
A fection, that the least I could do was to express
':s much as that to him. Why, I could say it
ibefore all the world! But he forbade me by a
gentle motion of the hand.
: "Hush, Mama. You need not explain it.
47 Understand."
"It is true," he added, as if he had really un-
: derstood the very words upon which he sealed
' my lips. " I do feel in that way. And I am
happier- as it is--than I could be .. ."
"You need not explain, either," I interrupted,
smiling. "I, too, can understand."
We shook hands and parted quietly. His
presence remains for a long while after he has
i visibly left me. I read the other day:
It is easy to throw off a hand of flesh, but not the clasp
of a human soul.
Everything comes to the spirit at last, I find.



<pb n="276"/>
276   CONFESSIONS OF A       WIFE
Might there be some subtle and sacred advan-
tage reserved for that which begins with the
spirit and does not descend ?
Love is like God, omnipotent, immutable, in-
scrutable, and they that worship it must worship
it in spirit and in truth.
Next to God, the best thing is a true-hearted
and high-minded friend.
November the fifteenth.
MARION was taken suddenly last night with one
of her croupy throats (she is entirely relieved
to-day), and Ellen telephoned for the doctor.
It was half-past two. He got over on the wings
of the wind, and lavished himself upon the baby
for an hour; nor did he speak to me at all, ex-
cept to give me professional orders. When the
child was relieved, he asked me to step down-
stairs for a moment. We stood together in the
hall. There was no light except from the compass-
candle, which I had carried down; it had a gen-
tle flame.
" I found the front door unlocked," he began
with abrupt severity. "You had sent Ellen to
draw the bolts for me, I presume "
"No, Doctor."



<pb n="277"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           277
'" Was it intentionally unlocked "
B; "Yes, Doctor."
I, "Why?"
. "I cannot explain why. I ... feel happier
l  "Since when?"
" Oh, for quite a while, I think. It seems as
if I could not lock it. I tried."
"This has been so since your husband cabled
last ?"
1  "Yes, Robert."
i "Don't you know that it is positively unsafe
'"-for yourself, your family  You must know
that the autumn burglaries in the suburbs have
:been worse this year. You are as liable to have
trouble as any one else, and you are-quite
I  unprotected."
"We sleep with all our bedrooms bolted,
Doctor - thoroughly."
"You should sleep with your front door
locked and bolted after this."
I made no reply.
FIi   "Will you do so, Mrs. Herwin "
" No, Dr. Hazelton."
" Why not, Marna "
" I cannot bolt that door, Robert."
ii~   "Very well," said the doctor; "I shall send
over a man to sleep here after this -one of my
?.



<pb n="278"/>
278 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
nurses. I can spare Eliot, just now, perfectly
well; he is on day duty, and likely to be. He is
entirely trustworthy, and too well trained to ask
for reasons why.  You will make up the
sofa-bed for him in the library, if you please.
He will come over to-morrow night at ten
o'clock."
J offered no protest,- indeed, it did not occur
to me till to-day that I could,- and the doctor
left without another word. As he opened the
front door, the wind puffed out the compass-
candle and left me staring.
"'What should I do without it " I thought
as I groped up-stairs in the dark.
November the sixteenth.
ELIOT came over at ten o'clock last night, and
disappeared from public life in the library sofa-
bed. I slid down and unbolted the front door,
as usual, and slept as I have not done for weeks
-not listening, nor quivering. Eliot is so used
to watching that he would stir at any sound.
November the seventeenth.
TO-DAY the doctor found me grappling with the
shipping news-a feeble self-delusion. I never
knew there was any before, and I might as well
be turned afloat on the stock-market. He took



<pb n="279"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     279
e paper from my hand. In his eyes I saw un-
ithomable compassion.
l ."- I will attend to all that," he said.
' If there should be any wreck ' " I whispered.
"There is no wreck," answered Robert. " The
farion has arrived in port quite safely."
1" How long have you known this " I asked,
hen my head ceased whirling.
" About two weeks."
. " Why did you not tell me . "
"Would it have done any good'? been any
easier  I tried to choose the lesser pang for you."
There was nothing to be said. I felt that the
misery in my eyes leaned upon the chivalry in
is too utterly, too heavily. I turned my face
·way.
November the twentieth.
ToLSTOI says that people should marry in the
same way as they die -" only when they cannot
do otherwise."
In the main condition of civilized human hap-
piness, is there a terrible structural fault?  Is
:the flaw in the institution of marriage itself?
Or is it in the individual ?
Why did Dana find it impossible to be happy
aon the terms of married life ?  Other men are.
I'* . But are they ?  Is society dancing under
a white satin mask-the sob or the grimace



<pb n="280"/>
280   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
beneath .  Is my lot only more crudely or vul-
garly expressed than others selected from the
general experience -a cry instead of a satire 
Dana loved me- madly once, dearly after-
ward. Why did not the dearness remain when
the madness had gone ' Must a man cease to
value because he has won'? Is this a racial
trait  Or Dana's trait?  Am  I meeting the
personal misery ? or the fate of my sex ?  Why,
when I endured so much, could he bear so
little ? How, when I cherished, could he neg-
lect . Why, when my tenderness clung, could
his unclasp?
Once I was a proud girl. Plainly I should
never have become a loving wife. That was a
mistranslation of nature. It was the Descent of
Woman. If this which has befallen me is Man,
not Dana, then some woman of us should lift
her voice and warn the women of the world
what woe awaits them in the subterfuge of love.
Now I remember my dream-how I sat in the
amphitheater and saw myself and Dana on the
stage, and blamed myself for the excessive part
that I played in my tragedy, and the house rose
upon me, for it was serried of women, and they
said: "You are ours, and of us, forever"; and
I cried out upon them: " Then womanhood and
manhood are at civil war! "



<pb n="281"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE      281
Why does a woman trust herself to love or
to her lover?  Friendship is the safer as it is
the saner thing.
If it is Man, not Dana - what then, I say ?
It is conceivable that the time might come when
the Princess in the great Medley of Life should
make no feint of battle,-to be beaten, poor girl,
by all the military laws,-but in some later,
wiser day should gather her forces, and order her
heralds, and proclaim the evolution of her will:
"' We give you all that history has taught us you
can be trusted with - our friendship, sirs. For
the rest, we do reserve ourselves."
There is no word from Dana, yet, of any kind.
Every one has ceased to speak to me about my
husband.
November the twenty-fourth.
LAST night a strange thing happened. It was
pretty late, as much as half-past eleven, and Eliot
had come in and was asleep (or he says he was) in
the sofa-bed. I had not slept at all. The tele-
phone called sharply -I think it was twenty-
five minutes to twelve, for the compass-candle
showed my watch as I sprang. I got into my
old ruby negligee and ran. Eliot, in his nurse's
dressing-gown, stood tall and lank in-the hall.
He had the receiver at his ear. As I flew down
the stairs he was saying:



<pb n="282"/>
282 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
"26-6      Yes, this is 26-6."
"Mrs. Herwin's ?  Yes. This is Mrs. Her-
win's house. Yes, she is at home- yes. I will
call her."
"Yes; Mrs. Herwin is coming. Hold the
wire."
I took the receiver from his hand, and he
stepped back. I motioned to him to return to
the library. He did so, and I think he shut the
door. I said:
Who wishes Mrs. Herwin "
There was no reply. I repeated my ques-
tion, more loudly and quite distinctly; but there
was no answer. In a kind of nervous fright I
rang the Central peremptorily. The night oper-
ator, stupid with sleep, was inclined to view the
summons in the light of a personal offense.
"You 've cut me off!" I cried. " Give me
my message."
The night operator made some inarticulate
answer - Dana would have called it actionable.
He said the baby used actionable language
when she cried.
"Please give me my message!" I pleaded.
"It may be very important. I must have that
message. Oh, do give me my message!"



<pb n="283"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     283
i  "Great Scott!" said the night operator. The
night was windy and cold, and the wires sang
wildly. As I stood waiting, the noise deepened;
it was as if the electric forces pitted themselves
against me, that I should not have the message.
I threw the whole power of my voice upon
them:
"Who wants Mrs. Herwin?     Here she is.
I am here," I repeated clearly.
' Faint, far, infinitely far, jarred and jagged, like
a cry coming from a falling star, it seemed to me
as if a voice replied. But what it said I could
not hear--I do not know. The rage of the wires
increased. -I called till I was spent. The elec-
tric protest, as if hurled from a mighty throat,
grew into a roar. It was now impossible to
communicate even with our own exchange.
The cold drops started upon me--I do not
know why.    I experienced a kind of super-
natural fear.
The library door opened and the nurse
stepped out.
"Come away, Mrs. Herwin," said Eliot, sud-
denly. "It is of no use. I will call the doctor."
"You can't" I protested; "the wires won't
work. Listen to that roar! Horrible!"  I put
the receiver to his ear.
"It does sound ugly," admitted Eliot. He
19



<pb n="284"/>
284 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
was now dressed, and he put on his hat to go
for the doctor.
"Go back to bed," I said peremptorily.
"There is nothing in the world that the doctor
can do. Why should you rouse that tired man ?
Tell him in the morning."
"I am not your patient," I maintained, when
the nurse hesitated; "I am your hostess. Go
back to bed, Mr. Eliot."
With no more words, he went. I crawled up-
stairs, and lay staring till dawnf. The white elec-
tric light of the street-lamp that I have always
loved, and Dana used to like, flooded the lonely
room. The telephone wires raved on the roof
of the house, and the banshee suddenly joined
them.
November the twenty-fifth.
THE doctor was disturbed by the telephone story,
but he would not discuss it with me. He and
Eliot have been in some sort of consultation, and
it is my opinion that Robert went in person to
the exchange to-day. It did not occur to me to
do as much -I am so used to the doctor's
thinking of everything.
"Have you found out where the message
came from ' " I asked him suddenly.
He shook his head. I was so sure, however,
he had heard something, that I insisted:



<pb n="285"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A            WIFE    285
"What was it, Robert "
"It was a long-distance call," he said.
There was no repetition of the call last night.
November the twenty-seventh.
LAST night at half-past twelve - I had not slept,
but was lying in my old red gown, all ready for
any summons -the telephone called again, and
again I ran.
This time I was in advance of Eliot; in fact,
the nurse seemed to have slept through the ring-
ing of the call-bell, at which I was surprised; he
did not come out of the library, and I answered
the call myself.
The night was as mute as eternity, and the
wires were clear and calm. Again, as before, a
;   distant operator asked:
:  "Is this 26-6?"
"This is 26     6."
"Mrs. Herwin's house "
"It is Mrs. Herwin's house."
"'     I wish to speak with Mrs. Herwin."
"I am Mrs. Herwin."
A clumsy silence intervened. Then I heard
the distant operator say:
"Here 's your party. Whydon't you speak up?"
A faint voice feebly uttered an indeterminate
sourdd.



<pb n="286"/>
286 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
"Who wants Mrs. Herwin      Oh, who are
you?" I cried.
The unsuccessful articulation struggled and
fell feebly from the wire. The distant operator
took offense.
"t Why don't you talk, now you 've got your
party? You 've got no more voice than a
ghost. Speak up, man, in Heaven's name!
Can't ? . . . Mrs. Herwin, the party can't talk.
He can't be heard. And he won't talk through
me.   He seems to be an obstinate party-
he-"
The distant operator's voice died down. I
called, I rang, I threatened, I pleaded. The
message was cut off as utterly as the voices of
the dead.
The receiver shook so in my hand that I
could not hang it up, and while I was fumbling
to do so I felt it taken from me. I said: " Thank
you, Eliot." But it was not Eliot. Ashen and
stiff the doctor's face regarded mine.
" Am I too late ? " he asked hoarsely. ' Eliot
did as well as he could. It took time. Let me
come, Mrs. Herwin."
As I stepped aside for him to take my place
at the telephone, I perceived the impassive face
of the nurse; he was shutting the library door
to go back to his sofa-bed. What orders had



<pb n="287"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE    287
he received and (I must say admirably) exe-
cuted ?
'o leave me to answer the call-bell?  To slip
out of the window and summon the doctor ?
Peremptorily, in the professional tone, this
order came:
"Mrs. Herwin, go into the parlor and lie
down on the sofa till I call you."
I obeyed. The doctor stood at the telephone
a long time. Fragments of what he was saying
fell, but I did not try to gather them. I knew
everything would be right, everything would be
done, now that he was there. Presently he hung
up the receiver and came into the dark room;
he had the compass-candle in his hand.
"I have learned where the call came from,"
he said in a matter-of-fact tone  as if it were
hardly worth speaking of.
I sprang.
"From a town in Minnesota," proceeded
Robert, quietly. "The name is Healer -one
of those queer Western names."
I tried to speak, but I do not think I suc-
ceeded. I believe I meant to ask if he thought
it were a real town, and my dry lips stupidly
struggled with the words: " I never heard of such
a place "- as if that fact bore upon the case at all.
"I happen to have some professional know-



<pb n="288"/>
288 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
ledge of the village," observed the doctor,
"though that does n't amount to much. It is
near St. Paul-this side. St. Paul is about as
far as the telephone goes."
Then I cried out upon him:
"Oh, is there no way9 Can't you find out
anything more "
"I have done my best," said Robert, patiently.



<pb n="289"/>
VII
~:g- na:-December the first.
T       tHERE have been no more telephonic mys-
teries; the call-bell hangs mute all night.
I think Eliot has been ordered to sleep with his
door open. Only the banshee parts her lips, and
there are times when she wails from bedtime till
ebreakfast; usually this happens with a west wind.
The doctor is absorbed, and the horizontal lines
of anxiety in his forehead are heavily carved. I
cannot make out what he is thinking, for I am
never told unless he chooses to have me know,
while yet, oddly enough, I do not feel at all
hurt if he does not tell. It was, in fact, three
days after the last midnight summons before I
knew that he had suceeeded in tracing the first
telephone call to its source. The company, it
seems, had put every agency at his disposal, and
had hunted down this last message. Twelve hun-
dred miles between it and me! It had started
from one of the uttermost stations where the blue
bell hangs; beyond which there is no practicable
289



<pb n="290"/>
290 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
conversation between the West and the East. I
asked the name of the place.
"This message came," replied the doctor,
"from a pay-station in a drug-store. The name
was Pooltiss--a queer one, was n't it? The
number was 207-3."
He did not look at me as he dwelt on these
unnecessary details.
"And the town ?"
"Omaha."
"He may be dying!" I cried.
Robert shook his head.
" Sick ' In trouble ' In need ? Wandering
from place to place--homeless! He has gone
back, farther West, has n't he "
The doctor did not answer.
"Or he may be -thoughtless. He used so
often to say, ' Oh, I did n't mean anything.' He
may not mean anything by this. Or it may not
be he at all."
" Any of these thifigs is possible."
"He ought to come home to his wife!" I
said below my breath. I have never spoken so
before, not even to Robert. But there is some-
thing, as I told him once, in the roused pride of
a tender woman with which a man must reckon,
first or last. Mine battles with my tenderness
and plays victor with me now, at this bewil-



<pb n="291"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE    291
dered time-of all times, that when I should
have expected myself to melt with love and
longing. I feel but little longing for my hus-
band, and how much love I will not, must not,
dare not, ask myself. The strongest tie between
the married is the love of the wife; I am con-
vinced that more marriages are saved from de-
struction by this than by any other fact in life.
If my love for Dana is perishing- whose fault
is that  How has he flung from him the trea-
sure that he had'  I who gave him my utter-
most, I who made a subject of my sovereign
soul before his lightest whim, I who bent my
will before his, as if one melted a steel blade in a
mighty -fire and folded it back upon itself, lay-
ing it white and gleaming at his feet,-I,
Wilderness Girl made Wife, Pride beaten into
Love,- how, God forgive him, has he treated
me? ...
"He ought to come home to his wife!" I re-
peated aloud. It was as if I were willing the
whole world should know what I said. Then I
heard my old friend speaking; his voice seemed
to come from a great distance.
"Be patient, Mama. Be gentle. Believe the
best. Wait a little. There may be reasons-"
He turned away from me, halted, came back,
and looked at me with wretched, noble eyes.



<pb n="292"/>
292  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
" Love him as long as you can," he said gen-
tly. "Try for a while longer. It is worth . . .
trying... suffering... to save a married love."
Before I could answer, he had shut the door
and gone. I went up and took hold of the knob,
and I am not ashamed to write what I did. I
went up and bent my face and put my cheek
to the door, where his hand had touched it.
"You are the best man I ever knew," I
thought.
Later.
I CANNOT sleep. I have been thinking of the
evening when Robert asked me to marry him.
It was the first winter that Dana was reading to
Father. They were in the library, and Robert and
I were in the drawing-room; and I had on a rose-
pink dress with white chiffon, and the slippers
matched, and Robert liked the dress.
To him I 'said: "I am fond of you, Robert,
but I do not love you. I could never love you
so as to marry you. I do not want to be any-
body's wife." In my own mind I said: " You
are too short. And you are very plain. And
you are very old-as much as thirty."
December the second.
ELIOT does not come any more; I don't know
why. He has been suddenly taken away and



<pb n="293"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A          WIFE    293
put on duty elsewhere. The doctor suggested
' another nurse -I think his name was Peterkin;
..but I objected to Peterkin.
"Then," be observed, "you will lock the
front door "
I shook my head. Now why, I wonder, did I
shake my head?  Why, when I feel so about
-Dana, why, when Dana has treated me so, why
do I not bolt the door 2
I cannot perplex the doctor worse than I puz-
zle myself. He has sent our old James over to
stay nights here till Eliot is at liberty again.
James is quite shocked at sleeping in the library.
He never did such a thing in the governor's
house. But he calls me Miss Mama, and there's
some comfort in that. I wonder what has be-
come of Eliot 
There have been no more telephone calls,
which is convenient, for I am sure the last
trumpet would have its hands full if it tried to
wake up James. He used to sleep in the coach-
house, with four horses trampling beneath.
*'  So I listen for the telephone. I do not sleep
much.
December the tenth.
THE telephone continues dumb. I do not be-
h lieve those calls were from anybody in par-
ticular at all; some operator's blunder, most



<pb n="294"/>
294   CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
likely, as I told the doctor. The doctor made
no answer.
In fact, nothing has happened, and everything
has happened, for Robert has gone away on a
vacation.  He has had no vacation since he
started the hospital; all summer he stood by his
post, when other men were off. I suppose he
does need it. I should not have believed that I
would miss the doctor so.
It is not a fiequented part of the river.
December the thirteenth.
MARION has a cold, and we have had to send for
Dr. Packard. I don't think he understands the
child in the least. I wish Robert would come
back. I am lost in a hieroglyph. I thought I
knew what solitude was; now I perceive that I
never had the key to the cipher. I am so lonely
that I am frightened. If there were a spot in
the world where I could go and hurl myself into
space, I think I should do it. I used to have
fancies about letting myself out of a window in
easterly storms when I was a girl and comfort-
able. Now that I am a wife and wretched, a
window seems a small outlet. I want something
vast and daring-a desperate leap into a fathom-
less fate. What could be worse than to go on



<pb n="295"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE    295
tamely where and as I am?  Who will teach
I;me how to escape myself?  What philosophy
is there for a woman whose whole being has
been turned back upon itself, a mighty current
dammed, and toppling-forbidden in the essence
of her nature ?  What shall be done for an un-
dervalued tenderness?  What can friendship
offer to a deserted wife ?
The doctor does not write to me. I suppose,
in fact, he is under no obligation to do so.
December the fourteenth.
I HAVE had a note from the doctor. It was
mailed on the cars somewhere,-I could not make
out where,-and it was so hurriedly written that
he forgot to date it. He writes most kindly,
most thoughtfully. He begs me to be quiet
and brave, not to give up either hope or any-
thing else. He is sorry to have to leave me
just at this trying time; he will not be gone a
day longer than is really necessary,-he reminds
me with a touching gentleness that he really
needed the vacation, for he is pretty tired,-and
he will write me when he can. If I have any
more telephone messages, I am to repeat them
to him, in care of the Central Exchange both in
New York and in Chicago, as his movements
are a little uncertain, and he would not wish to



<pb n="296"/>
296 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
be beyond my reach in any emergency. And I
am not to feel that he has forgotten my difficul-
ties for an hour, but that he is doing the best he
can for all concerned. He signs the letter:
"Faithfully your friend, and Dana's,
"ROBERT HAZELTON."
Oh, God bless him, God bless him! And I
don't care if that is "equal to a kiss." Of such
is the tenderness that the whole wide world
might see and be the better for. The grateful
affection of an unhappy woman, indebted above
measure to a good, unselfish man, is not a thing
to feel ashamed of or to hide.
December thefifteenth.
THIS evening the telephone called again. It
was quite early, hardly nine o'clock, and James
had not come in. Mercibel had been over, but
did not stay; it was her evening off duty, and
she was on her way to see her children; they
live with their grandmother. If I had to board
Marion with relatives, and work for my living
and hers, I wonder should I be more, or less,
unhappy?
" Sorrow has her elect," Mercibel says. The
relativity of trouble is a mystery of which I am
just beginning to be aware. The doctor has a



<pb n="297"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A           WIFE      297
! paralyzed patient who says her ideal of human
happiness is to be able to walk across the room
and get her own tooth-brush. (He is curing the
I patient.)
My telephone call was from the doctor. It
seemed to be a long-distance call, but I could
hear his voice quite readily and perfectly - his
dear voice. Oh, I will be honest with my own
soul! It is a dear voice to me; there is not a
cadence of its quietness and strength which does
not hold just so much self-forgetting, me-remem-
bering melody. There are certain tones at which
my spirits rise like leaves in a strong wind, and
seek the skies- my poor, disordered, disheart-
ened spirits -as if they were birds. There are
certain others before which every nerve in my soul
and body calms and rests. The voice is the man,
and Robert's has stood between me and despair
(I believe I have said this before, at some time;
whether I have or not, I think it all the
time)-his voice has stood between me and
despair so long that I cannot help loving it.
Why need I?
He did not say very much by the telephone;
only to ask if I kept well, and Marion, and
if I had heard any news that I wished him to
know.
"Do not feel that you are forgotten," he said.



<pb n="298"/>
298   CONFESSIONS     OF A WIFE
"I shall not be beyond reach of helping you in
any emergency."
"Have courage," he added. "Be hopeful.
Better things than you fear may be possible. I
am telephoning you to-night to say this. Keep
well. Be quiet. Be strong. Be brave."
His resonant voice reverberates in my ears
yet, like a rich Belgian bell. As he shut the
wire off, he said comfortably:
"Expect me home in three or four days."
He forgot to tell me where he was telephoning
from.
December the sixteenth.
TO-DAY the doctor called again from he
knows where. There is a snow-storm, and the
wires are pneumonic, and roar wildly. I could
scarcely make out what he was trying to say,
and we had to give the message up. If I under-
stood at all correctly, Robert said a singular thing:
"Pray for one you love."
No man ever asked me to pray for anything
before; I suppose it never occurred to any per-
son that I could be a praying woman.
Poor little "sumptuous pagan "! how should
she be ? The gods die with the joys, I think;
Christianity must be the religion of patience, of
denial; and I am not patient.
Pray for one I love? . . . Suppose I tried 2



<pb n="299"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     299
fB^[~~~~r~~ Later.
I HAVE tried. I do not know how. I think I
shall educate my daughter in what George Sand
calls "la science de Dieu"; for she shall not
come to eight-and-twenty years with an unculti-
vated spiritual nature - not so ignorant a per-
son as I.
A4n hour later.
PRAY for one I love   . . . Then for whom
shall I pray ?  Pagan beauty stole my heart and
toyed with it, and cast it petulantly down. Pa-
tient duty gathered the bruised thing, and cher-
ished it, and guarded it gently, from itself and
from its guardian. How should a woman pray?
Prayer, I think, must be as honest as love, or
joy, or anguish; it is one of the elemental emo-
tions; it cannot confuse anything, or beguile
God.
Sudden expressions of my husband's face
start out upon the paper where I write, like pic-
tures which my pen traces against its will.
Words that he has spoken -scenes that I would
perish to forget-leap upon me. All the an-
guish of this deserted year surges pounding
through my arteries; I can understand how peo-
ple die of heartbreak in one great, significant
moment of self-revelation.
Cruelty flung me into the hands of kindness;



<pb n="300"/>
300 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
neglect left me to devotion; coldness hurled me
at the feet of tenderness, a disregarded, under-
valued woman; selfishness tossed me-where $
Into what?  Upon the truest heart, against the
noblest nature, that I ever knew.
Suppose I knelt and tried to pray- I could
only repeat the Morning Lesson or some of the
Collects. Perhaps if I wrote a prayer it would
be the most genuine thing possible-to me. I
found in Father's Greek Testament yesterday
this, copied in his own hand, and called " The
Prayer of Fenelon ":
Lord, take my heart, for I cannot give it to Thee. And
when Thou hast it, keep it, for I would not take it from
Thee. And save me in spite of myself, for Christ's sake.
Amen.
December the seventeenth.
THOU great God! Invisible! Almighty! I am
not a religious woman, and I do not know how
to express myself, but I will not soil my soul by
one uncandid word. Be Thou to me the utter
Truth. Then shall my heart utter it, and give
Thee back Thyself.
I am a woman unhappy and perplexed. I
have not even the excuse of a great temptation
to justify what I feel - only a subtle one, like a
mist that blurs my vision.



<pb n="301"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           301
] Thou God! I do not care so much- for any
other thing - except to do what is right. Teach
me where rightness is! I am willing to count
its price, to pay its cost. I am willing to be
very lonely, lonelier than I need to be, if I can
be sure of doing right. I am willing to give up
[; the only comfort I have, if I ought to do that.
... Hear my first prayer, O God!-Dana,
[   Dana, Dana ! Wherever in this wide world my
I  poor husband is - I pray for him! If he is sick,
or sinful, if he is in any trouble, if he has for-
gotten me, though he should come back and be
cruel to me - I pray for him, for him 
December the eighteenth.
THE doctor has got home. I think he arrived
at dusk, but it was late before he came over,
nearly ten o'clock. He looked fatigued beyond
description, and yet he had a radiance. All the
room seemed to shine when he entered it. I
had that old feeling that he stood in a stream of
light, and it was as if I crossed the current when
I moved to take his outstretched hand. There
was a solemn elation in his eyes.
"You have had a good rest!" I cried, "a
happy journey!"
"A happy journey, yes." Smiling, he studied
me as if my too candid face were a Chaldean



<pb n="302"/>
302 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
seal. For the first time in my life I felt uncom-
fortable before my old friend, and I took refuge
in the best of all civilized disguises - elaborate
frankness.
"I missed you, Doctor, ridiculously. I think
you ought either never to go away, or else to
stay all the time. I have yet to learn to do
without you, Robert."
" All that will take care of itself," said Robert,
gently. "There are first that shall be last. And
I am glad that you missed me, too. It harmed
nobody, and it touches me."
If Robert's face had frosted, or assumed any
of the masculine defenses which a commonplace
man throws out between himself and a woman
whom he is capable of misinterpreting, I think,
dear as he is to me, I could have spurned him
in my heart. But his comfortable, matter-of-fact
words restored the poise of my own nature;
the vertigo steadied instantly. By a divination
he put me delicately at my ease, like the gentle-
man he is.
We talked awhile quietly. The radiance
that I spoke of remained translucent on his face.
He said he would come in to-morrow, and ran
up and kissed Marion in her crib, and played
with Job a little, and then he went away. What
was that curious thing he said ? There are first



<pb n="303"/>
7   CONFESSIONS OF A       WIFE    303
at shall be last? . . . Robert is usually so
irect; he is never given to conversational sor-
ceries.
.*I^~ ~        December the nineteenth.
^ THE doctor came in this noon. He asked if I
could spare James, who is needed in the coach-
house, and suggested the objectionable Peterkin
as a substitute. I demurred.
[;  "I saw Eliot about the grounds this morning.
- If he is at liberty now, why can't I have Eliot?
-if you insist on anybody."
"Eliot is on night duty," replied the doctor.
[  "I thought perhaps Peterkin -but never mind.
Keep James, if you prefer, by all means."
E.   Now, penitent, I protested. For Peterkin I
now entreated. Peterkin, only Peterkin, could
protect my imperiled household or assuage my
troubled spirit. But the doctor smiled and
shook his head. He did not ask me to abjure
my folly and bolt my doors. He has ceased to
fret me on this topic. One of the remarkable
things about Robert is that he conforms to a
weakness as generously as he admires a strong
point. He accepts a woman just as she is, and
if she does a foolish thing, he takes it as a matter
of course, like a symptom. If he had the chance
he might cure it, but he never exasperates her
by resenting it. I know, when he loved me



<pb n="304"/>
304 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
long ago, before I was married, I used to feel
that he loved me for my very faults.
It would be difficult to say how much happier
and safer I feel now that the doctor has come
back. I have been listening lately at night for
the telephone-it is impossible to say why. But
it has not called again. I dusted all Dana's
music to-day.
December the twentieth; noon.
THERE was a savage storm last night -sleet and
snow fighting. James dug my paths before he
went to the hospital, and came back after a
while, plowing his way over with Father's little
old snow-plow and the doctor's white horse.
There is quite a clear path all around the tree-
house. It makes me feel less shut in and cut
off. Mercibel, at the office window, waved her
nurse's apron and blew a kiss to me. The doctor
will hardly come over, I think. I understand
there are some pretty sick patients.  There
seems to be some agitation at the hospital. The
countenance of my father's house has a tense
expression, as if it concealed drama - as it does,
as it must. All the tragedy of all that disabled
and disordered life crowds crushing upon the
superintendent. How seldom this occurs to me!
I am engrossed in my own drama. I think I
must be yet very young.



<pb n="305"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           305
The telephone wires are furred with sleet and
sag heavily, but still hold their thin lips between
* myself and the world; between myself and the
watchful, patient, unrewarded kindness which
has never failed me anywhere.
December the twenty-first.
AN extraordinary thing has happened.
The storm has been a wild caprice, lulling
and rousing without any visible reason; but by
mid-afternoon the snow ceased sullenly. There
was no sun, but a vicious wind, and a stinging
powder filled the air. James came over and
cleared out all my paths again, and brought the
doctor's remembrances, and was I quite com-
fortable  or did I need anything that he could
do?   The doctor did not telephone. Mercibel
did once or twice, but I thought her absent-
minded, for some reason.
After dinner, between half-past seven and
eight o'clock, the ghost of the Wilderness Girl
got me, for I have stayed indoors too long. I
put myself into rubber boots and waterproof,
pulled the hood over my head, and ran out. A
young moon wandered somewhere in a waste of
clouds, but it seemed to me only to make every-
thing darker; all the shadows of the shrubbery
crouched like creatures about to spring, and the
b.



<pb n="306"/>
306  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
tree-house stood in such a jungle of blackness
that I was afraid of it. I tramped about for a
while, running up and down the paths, and
crunching the snow, as children do. But I did
not stay long; I could not have told why, but
I was definitely afraid. I came back and into
the house, threw off my waterproof, but, I don't
know for what reason, did not remove my rub-
ber boots. I stood in the hall, by the register,
warming my feet. As I did this, I thought the
handle of the front door turned.
"It is the doctor," I said. But it was not the
doctor, and the door did not open. I started
to call Job, but he was in the kitchen with
Luella. At this moment the banshee up in my
room began to wail, and made such a noise that
I called up to Ellen to stifle her with a handker-
chief. Ellen, having obeyed me, came to the
balusters over my head, and said that Marion
would not go to sleep without Dombey, and
should she give in to such as that? I answered:
"Oh, she may have Dombey; I '11 get him
and toss him up to you," and I went into the
library for the doll. The shades were not drawn
-Dana never liked to have them. When I
stooped to pick up Dombey, I saw upon the
window-sill the fingers of a man's hand.
I stood quite still, with Dombey in my arms.



<pb n="307"/>
$)ONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           307
Ilooked at the window. The hand slid,
erby finger, and slipped away. It reminded
of the hand I saw in my dream of the
.guay dungeon, and it was a left hand, too;
Fit had no ring. I threw on my waterproof,
tched the front door, and opened it wide.
tAt last," I thought, "we have the burglar."
id not occur to me to be afraid. Such a
eof wrong overtook me, the rage of the
e against its violator, that I cared for nothing
to defy the fellow. I understand now, per-
how   small women, timid ones, have
l g upon tramps and thieves, and choked
and held them till the neighbors came. By
.time Job had begun to growl from the
en, and Luella had let him out. I ran
tn he steps and out into the snow, and Job met
at the comer of the house. The dog moved
ily; he di'd not bark.
Whoever you are," I cried, "make your
known, or leave my house!"
here was no person to be seen. I pushed
toward the tree-house.  There, cringing,
ed into the jungle of shadows, I perceived,
I thought I did, the figure of a man. It was
able figure, poor and outcast.
Who are you," I said more gently, "and
do you want "
:/h a..ou"I admor     etl,"



<pb n="308"/>
308   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE              ;
There was no reply, and I stood, uncertain
what to do. The thin young moon at this
moment dived into a sea of clouds, and when
she emerged the man had gone. I called to
Job, but he was nowhere to be seen. I came
back into the house and shut the door. From
long habit, even then I did not bolt it. I sat
down by the register, shivering and drying my
wet skirts. It did not occur to me to telephone
the doctor what had happened, or, if it did, I
thought I would spare him. He has care enough,
and I knew James would be over soon. It was
by then perhaps half-past eight o'clock. Ellen
came down and asked me what had happened.
"Nothing," I said. " Go back to Marion."
"I won't do, without the boy-doll," argued
Ellen, studying me furtively. I now perceived
that the old servant was distinctly scared, and
also that I still held Dombey affectionately
clasped to my heart. I gave her the doll, and
she went up-stairs reluctantly. When she had
gone, I slid to the front door and opened it,
and looked out and about. No person was
to be seen. There was now moon enough to
show the tree-house clearly; it was quite empty.
I shut the door and came back, and sat down by
the hall register again. I had forgotten about
Job.



<pb n="309"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           309
was sitting there when the door opened
earnest, swiftly though softly, and the doctor
ered. To my last hour I shall not be able to
gt the expression of his face.
"You have had a fright!" he began. "'Tell
all about it - quickly."
I now saw Eliot behind the doctor, and
es, and Peterkin - a good match between
all for a gang of housebreakers.
How in the world did you know ' " I par-
foolishly.
obert interrupted me with real impatience.
ought, for the instant, he would have liked
e me -but not hard.
Speak, can't you ' " he cried. " There is no
bto lose. Did he annoy you? Did you
the man' "
1 collected myself, and told him all there was
elL It was little enough, and seemed to dis-
int him. The two nurses had by this time
hed, directed, I thought, by a single up-
motion of the superintendent's heavy eyelids.
:What do you say you said," demanded the
, "when you first opened the door ? "
*I said: 'Whoever you are, make your errand
or leave my house."'
e doctor turned the high collar of his fur-
Pcoat, half concealing his averted face.



<pb n="310"/>
310   CONFESSIONS OF A       WIFE
"Go up to bed," he said. "Peterkin will
sleep here to-night. I have need of James. If
you are disturbed again, call me instantly, Mama.
Do you understand ? "
"Don't be cross to me, Doctor," I quavered
childishly. "I will do whatever you say."
He went, and Peterkin came. I am too ex-
cited to sleep, and so I write. Job has but just
come in. He is wet through, and shivers vio-
lently. He must have been out a long time.
December the twenty-second.
OUR tramp has not done us the honor again,
and nothing whatever has happened. In fact,
life is more than commonly dull, for I took cold
that night in the snow, and am cherishing a sore
throat in unexampled obscurity; the doctor hav-
ing gone away. So, I surmise, has Eliot. So, I
think, has Peterkin. James appears every night
as before, only now very early, by six o'clock.
Mercibel comes over and stays through the day-
I suppose because I have a sore throat; at all
events, those seem to be her orders. She an-
swers the telephone, which rings occasionally.
Now and then she seems to have messages from
the doctor, who inquires for me, with his remem-
brances. He does not ask me to come to the
telephone. Mercibel says he says I am to be



<pb n="311"/>
O0NFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     311
careful of this throat, and not to strain my
. I am trying to finish Marion's Christmas
ents-chiefly am I dressing a new wife for
bey. I have got her a doll's house from
:father, for I could not have her think he had
tten to send her anything.  I am  very
.ly. I can't see why the doctor should have
_ go away so soon again. Mercibel says it is a
essional errand and he could not help it. I
him cruelly - I am quite demoralized by
_ ising him; I may as well own to this as to
Iperience it.
Wbhat will become of me if Robert is so necessary
^.e as this ? . . .
A woman may be made very unhappy, I find,
the sake of a man whom she does not love,
hom  she must not love. Friendship takes
Id of women more seriously than of men, I
ilnk. Is it a disorder to which we are tempera-
ntally more subject '
~:i|j   ~     December the twenty-third.
1HE doctor has come home again. He called
at once, very early this morning, to see about my
|hroat. I was startled at his appearance; he
:nust have had a hard trip. But yet he has
1iappy eyes.   As I watched them I felt that
*mine might safely say anything, for it was as if
E..



<pb n="312"/>
312 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
he did not exactly see me. He talked more
than usual. He spoke of Dana, of his absence
and silence, and of what I had endured.
" You have behaved like a queen at her exe-
cution," he said. He talked about my husband
for quite a while. My thoughts were of him, but
his were of Dana. But I was so glad he had
come back that nothing troubled me. Job sat
on my lap and listened with a portentous solem-
nity to our conversation; there are times when
that dog seems like a brownie. Job has been
restless and unhappy these last few days; he
sleeps on the foot of my bed, and starts fre-
quently, and has bad dreams and little York-
shire nightmares out of which I have to wake
him up and reassure him.
December the twenty-fourth; afternoon.
MARION hit the Parthenon frieze behind the
library sofa a hard whack with Banny Doodle,
and the paper broke away; the paste had dried,
and the frieze has hung loosely for a long time.
I went up to fix it, and I saw the Landseer dogs
that I had forgotten about -David and Dora.
Then I remembered when I first put them on
the bruise in the calcimine, and how Dana made
fun of me, and how he helped me to put the
frieze up. I thought how he teased Job by



<pb n="313"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE    313
_     nfig David and Dora, and how Job snarled
I_  ! jealousy and sprang at the picture, and
I  ~' Dana laughed out- nobody ever had such
ugh as Dana. How happy was I! How
was he! And we did love each other-
knows.
I",Pity Mommer!" cooed Marion behind me.
1"Go and get Job," I commanded wildly, for
I¢   o.uld not have the child behold my overthrow.
'Something beat about me like a whirlwind
_   i*g from-the woman's God knows where.
I_| . I have tried to forget, I have tried to for-
It  t!--not to suffer, not to feel, to divert my
ul, to supplant Almighty Love by something
e; and I thought I had succeeded, but I had
lpnimbed a ladder which rested in the air- and
Iow, in a moment, it toppled with me. And
I avid and Dora had brought it down . . . that
Itle thing, that little foolish dear home thing,
iat Dana and I had done, and laughed about,
ether.
-   "Why don't you do as I bid you " I de-
manded, crossly enough, of Marion. "Why
ion't you go for Job?"
My daughter put up a grieved lip.
"JJob came his own self. And I fink I will
i go make a call on Ellen." Holding her little
head haughtily, my baby scornfully left me.
..



<pb n="314"/>
314  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 
Ashamed, I turned to follow her, and hurried a
little, and so stumbled over something in the
hall-and it was Dana's old blue velveteen
coat. Job was curled up on it, fixed and watch-
ful. How he had found it, why he had brought
it, only Job can say. It was plain that he had
meant to bring the coat to me, and, laboriously
dragging it, had wavered in his purpose at the
foot of the stairs. Perhaps a glimpse of David
and Dora had arrested his inner motive; one
never can tell: a highly organized dog is very
complex.
Commending Job and comforting Marion, I
took the coat and came up with it into Dana's
room, and locked the doors; and I thought I
would hang the coat up first - but oh, the touch
of it, the touch of it! . . .
At first I only laid my cheek upon it, for I
dared no more.   But remembrance has her
Judgment Day, when the books are opened.
And the illuminated text of married love which
I have sealed with seven seals stared at me from
silver and from crimson pages-and there was
no more power in me to close the book.
I caught my husband's coat to my heart, and
clasped it, and kissed it, and then I kissed it
again--oh, and again, till the tears stopped the
kisses; and when the sobs came, I felt that some-



<pb n="315"/>
- 'CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE         315
g finer than reason was saved in me. I
myself on Dana's bed, and sunk my face
e coat, and stroked it.
thought ofeverything that I had tried to forget,
I forgot everything that I had been remem-
. I got down from the bed, and knelt,
my face in the coat, and lifted my hands,
id thought I would try to pray again; but all I
ld say was:
" Dana ! "
For we did love each other-and I am his
.   All the awful power of the marriage tie
ed about me,-its relentlessness, its precious-
,-not to be escaped. The dead joys got
tof their graves and looked upon me. I
ught of all that faith and sacredness, and of
e honor in which we cherished it. I thought
w I had barred these things from my heart be-
use it was broken and so it could not hold them.
^  Who said: "It is worth trying . . . suffering
. to save a married love"?  That must
ave been Robert. I got up from my knees
and walked to and fro across my husband's
Zroom.  I went to the window and drew his
curtains and looked out at his stars. And, by
the holy name of the happiest hour that we had
;ever known, I charged myself with a vow, for
Dana's sake.



<pb n="316"/>
316   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
As soon as I was something composed, I sent
for the doctor so urgently that he came at once. 
Marion had gone to bed, and the library was
littered with her Christmas things. I was tying
up Dombey's second wife in silver paper with a 
crimson ribbon.
"Let me help you," said Robert, directly. He )
took the doll, and tied the package neatly; in fact,
he saw that my fingers trembled so Icould not do it.
Abruptly I began: 
"Doctor, I am going to find my husband. I 
shall take the child and start."
" Where are you going "
"I do not know."
"When "
"At once   to-morrow, I think."
"Why?"
" He may need me - who knows? "
I," said Robert, gravely.
" ro ?"
I pushed the second wife into the doll's house, 
anyhow, and she slid out into the doctor's lap. l
He picked her up, and put her carefully some-
where, before he spoke again.
" Tired of trusting me, Mama ? "
Then I said: "I must act for myself. I
have borne all I can. If he is alive, I will find
him. If he is dead -"



<pb n="317"/>
ONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           317
Iould you be willing," interrupted Robert,
, "to wait a little -perhaps two or three
I can advise you better if you give me
etime. I have some pretty sick patients
w," he added wearily, "and such a step
be very important. You would need
should need you, I grant you !" I cried out
. y"I can't even love my own husband
ut your help - I have come to that."
arna!" pleaded Robert, in a voice that
my heart.
took one look at his face, and then some-
in me gave way suddenly, and I slid to
assock on the floor below me, and-what
t I have done'? I cannot tell. I do not
Put my head upon his knee, like the
that I sometimes seem to myself to have
to him, and so sobbed out the "Forgive
Rlobert!" which came surging to my lips?
not know. I cannot tell. Instantly he had
me to my feet.
You are tired out," he said. "Go up to bed
e. Sleep if you can. Don't try to talk to
I understand. Child, I understand you
than you do yourself. I know... I
how you love your husband; better than
nan of us- is - apt to be loved."



<pb n="318"/>
318   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 
"I will see you to-morrow," he added in his 
usual manner. " We will talk everything over. 
Trust me till then."
"I will trust you till I am dead, and after," I
answered him. We shook hands as if nothing '
had happened. At the door, he turned and re- 
garded me mournfully and something solemnly, 
I thought--as if the man were looking his last -
upon some dear and sacred privilege.
"If I can keep-trustworthy-" he said; 
and so he shut the door.
Later. 
I HAPPENED on this, to-day, that Stevenson said
of himself: "I came about like a well-handled 
ship. There stood at the wheel that unknown 
steersman whom we call God."
January the fifteenth.
UNTIL this I have had no moments. Now,
while my patient is sleeping naturally, my heart
draws its first breath. It will rest me more to
write than to sleep.
I see that my record broke asunder abruptly
on Christmas eve, and with the doctor's call.
I slept that night, by God's good grace, though
no one could have been more surprised at this 
fact than myself. I dreamed that Marion and I
started out together on Christmas day to find 
'*I



<pb n="319"/>
' CONFESSIONS OF A       WIFE     319
father, and that we went to Uruguay, and
sd the swamp with the log and the snake,
Dana was in the dungeon with the crosses,
lhe put up his left hand with the wedding-
upon it, and so I knew him; and I tore
y the bars, for they were old and rusty, and
him free. And he said--I was dreaming
t he said when Marion waked me by slapping
i  with Dombey's second wife.
l The day went wildly to me. It was not a
asant day, but snowed a little and blew more.
e wind was savage, and the sky frowned.
edoctor did not come over, though Mercibel
Now and then I got away from Marion's
hristmas litter, and went up-stairs and put things
bags, at random. I think my idea was to
as soon as the doctor came - to what place,
what end, I knew no more than the child.
y head whirled. I kept repeating:
" I will find my husband."
In the afternoon I telephoned the doctor im-
tiently, but he was not in. As it grew to be
sk, everything looked differently to me, and I
t suddenly weakened in soul and body, like a
rn spent by a delirium, and I thought
"I can never find him without Robert. I
ust wait for Robert."
But Robert did not come over. Marion and



<pb n="320"/>
320  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 
I had our supper, and Luella went out; but 
Ellen stayed, and James came over; Peterkin
did not, so I was alone with my father's old
servants.'
It still snowed fitfully, not steadily nor much.
There was some sleet, and it rapped on the win-
dows like little knuckles. The banshee did not 
cry, and, except for the sleet, there was not any
sound. Marion had gone to bed, but Job was
playing with his rubber chicken. The chicken
had a gamboge head, and Job had cut its throat
already.  I sat dully watching Job and the
chicken. He dropped the chicken while I did
this, and went to the door. I said:
"Oh, you don't want to go out again so soon,
Job; it's snowing." But the dog insisted. I let
him out, and came back and sat down again. I
picked up Dombey's second wife, and Dombey,
and Banny Doodle, and put them all in the
doll's house, arranging them childishly, as if I 
had been a little girl myself.
"We are all dolls," I thought, " and fate plays
with us." I added Job's chicken to the collec-
tion, stupidly.
I went out into the hall and stood by the
register, and called up to Ellen to see if Marion
were happy; but Ellen had shut the nursery
door, for the night was cold, and so she did not
4.



<pb n="321"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           321
me. I was quite alone when Job scratched
the front door to be let in.
, opened the door immediately, but the dog
not come in. He ran off again into the
w, and I shut the door again. Presently I
d him scratching at the door once more, and
time he whined impatiently. Once more I
ed the door, and spoke to him rather sharply:
" Don't keep me waiting here! Come in, if
are coming at all!"
ut Job ran down the steps and off. I thought
our tramp, but I felt no fear of any kind, un-
that some one should steal Job, and I did
shut the door. I stood still in the hall and
ed the dog more gently:
Come right in, Dear. Don't stay out in the
m any longer!"
iAs I spoke, the dog leaped up the steps, shout-
wildly; ran to me and looked back; sprang
my arms, kissed me, and ran back. With-
hesitation I followed Job, and stepped out
the light, fresh snow.
iAt the foot of the steps a man leaned against
piazza pillar, heavily. He did not start
he saw me; and Job was in his arms.
man regarded me steadily.
In God's name," I cried out upon him, " who
u/"



<pb n="322"/>
322 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
"Well," he said, "Job knows, if you don't."
I did not answer, for I did not dare. I felt
that the wrong word would pull the whirling
world crashing on my head. I went up to the
man, and held out my hand, and led him up the
steps, and the light smote his face, and it was
my husband's face.
" I did n't know," he said timidly, "whether
you 'd want me back or not."
Without a word, I led him into the house
and shut the door behind him. I don't know
why I did it, but I slid the key, and put it in
my pocket. He stood still, like a child or a
sick person, just where I left him. The snow
dripped from his beard. I took off his hat, and
then, in the full gas-light, I saw his face . . . the
havoc on it: shame, disease, despair, and des-
olation - oh, desolation worse, by all the agonies,
than mine!
"I was a dam fool to leave you, Mama," he
said, just as I had heard him say it in my dream.
"I can't stand it any longer. I thought I 'd
come in - awhile - even if you did n't want to
keep me."
"-- What    You don't say very much, I no-
tice. Well, I don't blame you, Mama."
" - Don't try, Mama - if it comes so hard as
that. Don't stand on ceremony. I'd rather



<pb n="323"/>
. CONFESSIONS OF A      WIFE     323
did n't make such an effort to - be glad to
a fellow. It does n't matter very much. I
- go away again."
lHe turned his shattered face and tottered
ward the door. I slid between him and it,
d stretched out my hands.
" I 'm pretty - wet," he said uncertainly.
lI went straight up to him and clasped him to
heart, and his shaking arms closed fast
ut me.
HEN I lifted my face, the doctor was there, and
y father's old servants. Dana did not speak to
y of them; he looked about passively.
"Get off his wet things," said the doctor; and
ames came up to help us. It did not occur to
etill afterward to wonder how Robert got
o the house, for I had the front-door key in
y pocket.  Nothing occurred to me. Dana
come home.
We led him into the library and up to the
e, and the doctor rolled up the Morris chair
r him. I now saw for the first time that my
usband was a very sick man. He had a singu-
r expression. His eyes looked as if they had
n varnished. He looked around the room,
oticed the Christmas clutter, the doll's house
d the dolls, and the Parthenon frieze which



<pb n="324"/>
324   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 
he had helped me to paste over David and 1
Dora.
"It all looks so--natural," he said pitifully.
All this while he kept hold of my hand. Job i
came up quietly, and got into his lap. We
were standing just so- the doctor on the other -
side of him, and Ellen and James behind - when
Marion melted into the room. Her little bare
feet had made no sound upon the padded stairs,
and she startled us all. Job jumped down from
Dana's lap, and went and brought his chicken to
his master. No one spoke. Her father turned his
head slowly, and by the time that he saw the little
girl, she was quite near him. For an instant I
think she was frightened; she backed off, wide-
eyed and wondering, but advanced again, and
leaned up, in her little white night-gown, against
his knee.
"Why, she remembers me!" he whispered.
His face worked; he hid it on the child's soft
head and wept aloud.
" Pity Popper!" said Marion, distinctly. She
put up both her hands and stroked his hollow
cheeks.
WE got him up-stairs as soon as we could, the
doctor and I- into his own room and his own
bed. Ellen had warmed the sheets, and every-



<pb n="325"/>
f  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE        325
was ready, as if he had been expected, or
f he had never been away. I managed to
in and light his candle, and fix all his little
fgs as he used to like them. He looked at
rything pathetically, but he did not speak.
had grown strangely very weak, I thought,
panted for his breath. His forehead went a
dden deadly color which terrified me, and I
and sat on the bed beside him, and took
iin my arms. His sunken face fell upon my
"You 're a dear old girl!" he said.
" I think," said the doctor, unexpectedly, " that
had better leave him to us for a while."
And suddenly I saw that Eliot was in the
. But I did not move.
i Go down-stairs, Mrs. Herwin," commanded
t Hazelton, peremptorily.
l Wondering and pondering, I obeyed.
When they called me back, Dana was asleep.
a a dense sleep, and he did not rouse as I
down on the edge of the bed beside him.
t gleaming pallor was replaced by a stagnant,
tmfn color that I liked no better.
HHas he a fever 2 " I whispered.
n't yo     u going to tell me what ails
"Are n't you going to tell me what ails



<pb n="326"/>
326 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 
"Certainly I am."
"What is it, Doctor ? "
"Morphine." He drew up Dana's sleeve and i
showed me his poor marred arm. Dana did
not stir as the doctor gently replaced the sleeve.



<pb n="327"/>
VIII
7OME down-stairs," said Robert, "and I will
tell you everything."
I looked at Dana and shook my head.
' He will not miss you," urged the doctor.
e will know nothing more till it is time for
next dose."
I asked when that would be.
'"At three in the morning. Eliot will attend
that. Leave him with Eliot; trust him en-
ly to Eliot. He has had the care of him for
me time."
I don't think I uttered a word; I scarcely ex-
enced surprise. It seemed, now, that any-
ing might happen, or might have happened.
llowed Robert down-stairs in silence, and he
tthe library door.
'He bade me lie down upon the lounge, "be-
use I needed all my strength for what was
re me now," and he covered me carefully
fith e afghan, and drew up the Morris chair
ite me, and began at once. It was still
327



<pb n="328"/>
328   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
early, scarcely nine o'clock, and we talked twi
hours - evading nothing, facing everything. 
He began by telling me how he had at times'
suspected, before Dana went to Uruguay, that he^
was forming the morphine habit. 
" But he was not my patient; I never had his .
confidence. The early symptoms are elusive; I 
was never sure. I could scarcely create a theory;
I might have wronged him by the suspicion; I.
decided to keep it to myself." 
" So you sent him atropine 3x !" I cried. Curi-
ously, my mind fastened itself upon this unim- 
portant detail. It seemed to me as if the
important ones would come faster than I could 
bear them. As they did- as they did !
I tried to listen as quietly as he tried to speak; ,
but it was not easy for either; and Robert, I 
could see, was greatly worn with all that he had
endured for Dana's sake, and mine. My mind
ran ahead of his, as a woman's mind does with -i
a man's, and I would take loops in the mystery 
which he was unraveling slowly, and give the 
snarl a tear. I would say:
"Yes, yes!  So those telephone messages
were from him ?  I see - I see.
" And you traced him by them ?  It was you :
who found Dana! It was you who brought my
husband back to me."



<pb n="329"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     329
en, when I had collected myself a little:
you have done it all in these two weeks!"
the contrary," replied the doctor, "I
had Mr. Herwin's movements watched
since he put himself under the suspicion of
g deserted you. He was met by my agents
the Marion landed . . . Did you suppose I
sitting with my hands folded all that while ?
e your husband,your husband -  There was
*dy else to do it for you. Your father
ld have .. . We lost him between San Fran-
and St. Paul; and that was the hardest part
_'Do you mean-" I began. "Do you
1-2"
~ 'Never mind what I mean."
- Your nurses i  Eliot ?  Peterkin "
' Eliot and Peterkin and-     It does not
i who, does it? "
L"I will not interrupt you again, Robert," I
humbly. " Tell it in your own way."
So he told it all, and in his own way; simple,
et, modest, manly-- Robert's way. He told
how he had happened to know that there
a sanatorium in that little Western town
th the queer name, Healer; and how he had
ephoned by the longest long-distance wires
the land half across the continent, and
F



<pb n="330"/>
330   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
so traced Dana-a poor, wretched, outcast-
patient--in that place; how he had despatched.c
Eliot, and how he himself had followed; how'
Dana had left the sanatorium when Eliot reached 
it, and wandered back to Omaha and God knows',
where; how they pursued and how he eluded; 
*how they tracked him down at Chicago-my'
poor Dana - in an opium den, and brought him'
with them; for he came willingly with Robert, 
making only one condition.
"Take me to your hospital and treat me till 
I am fit to see my wife;" entreated Dana. "I 
will not go to her as I am."
"So I did as he asked," said Robert. "He
would not come on any other terms. My way
would have been to bring him straight to you -
there were so many risks. As it was, . . . when 
he escaped ... I should never have forgiven my- .
self-nor you me. I can't talk of it!-not yet."
Nor can I think of it- not yet.
For my Dana was the only patient who ever
escaped the superintendent's guards; and when I
think how he .had come straight to me, and
wandered about his own home that night, and
did not dare come in -and how I saw him in 
the tree-house, outcast and despairing, and did
not know--and he might never have come
back- and yet I did not know- and how I 



<pb n="331"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A' WIFE           331
hardened my heart against him all that
le, for I did not know-
-'My poor boy had fled to get the liberty of his
vRery. And Robert tracked him down again;
was buying morphine in a poor place, some
g-store at the north end of the city. There, on
eevening of the second day, Dana felt a hand
on his arm. And he did not look up, but
dd: "That you, Hazelton  Well, I 'm glad
it." And again he came with the doctor
iingly, but this time without conditions, for
e lt himself a beaten man. So he gave him-
Ilf into Robert's hands, reserving nothing; and
obert brought him to the hospital, and treated
im and battled with him and conquered him
r those two days. And on Christmas evening
Suddenly they gave Dana his liberty, to see what
,use he would make of it; but it was a trap, for
he had no liberty, all the exits of the hospital
and the grounds being guarded, and the super-
[intendent shadowing his every step.
i And my poor boy came straight to me; but he
| was afraid to make himself known, so he loitered
: in the snow, uncertain and ashamed, till Job
I went out and found him.
i.:
WHEN we had touched upon these things, giving
[nervous question and answer, talking rapidly



<pb n="332"/>
332 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 
and concisely, like people who sketch but the 7
table of contents of a long, unfinished volume, i
the doctor rose abruptly and went up to see .
Dana. I begged leave to go, but he objected, h
and I yielded - I found that I must. I remem-
bered what I had said to him in my foolish 
anger: " I can't even love my own husband with-
out your help, it seems; I have come to that." 
Now I could not even see my husband without 
his permission; it had come to that. Robert
came down again, in a few minutes, with shining 
eyes.
"He is doing remarkably well," he said. "But
we had better finish talking while we can. I
have important things to say to you, Mama.
. . . Are you comfortable ? Resting ' Be quiet. 
Do not agitate yourself. You are going to need
all your strength." 
"Before you begin," I said, "tell me this: ;
what has become of my husband's wedding- 
ring?  It is gone."
"I don't think you will be any happier to 
know." 
"Do you know "
"Yes."
"Was it   was it-"
"Pawned in Chicago in that place where we
found him."
I



<pb n="333"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE    333
- This is the worst ? "
" So far as I know, it is the worst."
"Very well, Robert.  There was no--one
en "
"It is my belief that there has been no one
The perils of his condition are not that
'y, and I have made-some inquiries."
"Thank you, Robert," I said humbly, as if it
re his doing. "Now I will listen to you."
Then he began to talk to me very gravely,
kindly, with the terrible frankness of the
ysician, and the merciful gentleness of my old
ed. He spoke in short sentences, something
e these:
I have brought your husband back to you,
I have not saved him. I do not even know
I can. That depends as much on you as
me, and more on the patient than on either
.In this case he has taken the drug hypo-
ically, the most difficult form of the habit
lcure, as it is the easiest and subtlest to create.
ere are several ways of treating the morphine
it. A man may have the drug taken away
him abruptly; he may recover, and he
not. He may be put upon substitute ano-
; they may serve, and they may fail. He
* be treated by a process of gradual reduction,
ssening the drug as fast as the diminution
E.



<pb n="334"/>
334     CONFESSIONS OF A     WIFE
can be borne; he may be rehabilitated by this
process, or he may not. I shall adopt this last=
method in treating Mr. Herwin. If I were a 
stranger to him, I might not, necessarily, do so.
Since I know him, I select it as being, in my
opinion, the only method for him. It is the 
slowest, but the safest. It will mean a great deal
that you do not understand, Mama. The ex-
periment will probably last a year, even if it is
successful. He must suffer, and so will you.
He must be guarded like a perishing soul-and
so interpreted.  He must be cherished and 
loved-above all, he must be borne with per-
fectly; he must be loved perfectly. It will not
do to offer him any half measure--not to feel to 
him doubtfully, or critically, or with reservations.
You will need all the patience, all the purpose,
of your nature. You will need - I was going
to say that you will need the infinite qualities.
Forgive everything. Forget all you can. Bear
anything. Trust. Hope. Endure. Something 
depends on me, but everything on you.  Be-
tween us we may save him. I can promise you 
nothing, but I will do my best; and if I fail, you
will forgive me, won't you, Mama' . . .
"Obey me without question, if you expect him
to stand any chance at all. Follow every order.
Raise no querulous doubts. Work with me-as



<pb n="335"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE    335
.we were one being-for Dana's sake. I shall
late every detail of your life and his- tell
u when to devote yourself to him, when to
ae him to nurses, how to do this, when not
do that. I shall seem a tyrant to you, often
ysterious, sometimes cold. But there is no
er chance. Do you think you can trust
Then I said: "If I cannot, if I do not, I
not trust the God in heaven above us,
bert."
" There is one other thing," said Robert, with-
t smiling. " I am going to speak out to you,
ul to soul. Too much is at stake for any pal-
reservations--and I can consider nothing
ut the salvation of my patient. I can't stand
anything--not even on wounding you,
ama - if I must. I think you will under-
tand me; but if you don't, I cannot help that.
must speak and run my risk."
He rose and paced the library, showing his
[ first sign of disturbance in all that tense, tre-
mendous evening.
" 'Speak, Robert," I said; "I am not dull."
He stopped and looked down upon me with
cthe most solemn and the most beautiful spirit
I that I ever saw imprisoned in the eyes of any
I an.



<pb n="336"/>
336   CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
"Marna," he said, "to save your husband you r
must love him without any qualifications. You
must love him altogether. You must serve him 
altogether. Nothing must come between your-
self and him -not even the shadow of that 
which never has been and can never be -no
other feeling, no other thought. Not even a
friendship must divert your interest in Dana's 
cure -no, not even ours. You will think of 
it-and express it-as little as possible, Mama. 
It is the only way. And if I do not . . . express
it, you will not allow yourself to believe that I
..do not think of it. You said you would
trust me, you know. And I shall be always
here. We must fight this fight together--yet -
apart--sacredly."... His voice broke. He
turned abruptly, went up-stairs to his patient,
and so left me.
I slipped to my knees and hid my face in my
hands. I can never say again that I do not 
know what it is to pray.
January the thirtieth.
WE are living so intensely that I wonder I ever
thought I knew what it was to live before.
How small are the simple joys and sorrows
beside the great dramas where soul and body >
are intervolved-the tremendous pathological
.    ~        ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ i.



<pb n="337"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A          WIFE      337
ecrets upon which a human home may lock its
.oors! There the physician stands high priest,
nd sacred. There a wife finds herself perhaps'
r the first time in her married life at peace
>with her wifehood; she comes to her valuation;
all the tenderness of her nature is employed, all
,:that which had not been cherished, that which
-she had come to count as superfluous and wasted.
It is impossible for me to say how happy I am
! to find myself so necessary to Dana. My poor
boy is gaining upon himself day by day, each
one bringing a little advance that we can see
and he can feel. I heard my father say once,
when he was recovering from some illness:
"The happiest people in this world are the
convalescents."
There are times when I think the happiest
man I ever saw is Dana. There are others when
the blackness of the spaces before God said
"Let there be light" seems to envelope him;
and darkness which can be felt rolls between his
soul and mine. But when this happens I have
learned to say: "This, too, will pass."
There are days when Eliot is not suffered to
leave his patient for the lifting of an eyelash.
There are nights when the house is guarded, and
when James or Peterkin sleeps in the library.
There are others when the doctor himself stays



<pb n="338"/>
338   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 
with us from dark to dawn; but these are rare,
and are becoming rarer. Not once yet has Dana 
fled from us, or obtained it for himself from any-
source. There is everything in preserving the.
patient's self-respect and his reputation, Robert 
says. This he has most skilfully succeeded in 
doing. Such tact, such gentleness and firmness 
but I cannot write of it.
It is understood that Dana has come home
from Uruguay with some malarial condition due
to the climate. We are often seen walking or
driving together. From this circumstance the
neighborhood seems to derive a kind of reflected
joy. We are so happy that I find no time to
write of anything.
To-day Dana asked a great privilege-that
Eliot should go out of the house, and that I
should spend the whole day with him. The doc-
tor consented without hesitation. There is some-
thing, he says, in trusting a patient. Dana and
I took a long walk in the morning; in the after-
noon Robert sent over his horses, and we had a
sleigh-ride, and Marion went with us. Between- 
whiles my dear boy asked me to sit by him, to
read to him, and once to brush his hair as I used ~i
to do. When he slept he held my hand, and I
sat on the edge of the bed, cramped and uncom-
fortable, and well content. When he woke he said:



<pb n="339"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE    339
^    You 're a dear, sweet girl!"
Often he calls me pathetically:
*' Mama, can you spare time to stay with me
little  It seems to me you have been gone a
eat while. I miss you, Mama." Or perhaps
is: "Eliot, where is my wife'  I want my
* e." Or, " Marion, run and call your mother.
want your mother.  Ask her to come and
ing her sewing in here. I want her to sit
There I can see her."
So Marion runs, and, being overcome with
be importance of her mission, tumbles upon
r words, and gets no further than:
" Pity Popper! Pity Popper!"
"Marion, Marion!" I say, "I do pity Pop-
per with all my heart." And I hurry to him,
Band he turns his poor face with the havoc on it,
'and lifts his wasted hand, and draws my cheek
to his. Then I see that he is sore beset, and
EI challenge my love that it may be strength to
him, and all my strength that it may be love for
-him. The tenderness that he used to disregard
I can pour upon him, as Radha did on Krishna,
[" give to him in fullest measure "- now. I am
not afraid of loving him too much-now. I am
I not ashamed to show him how I feel to him -
now. If I touch him, if I kiss him, he cherishes
I me -now. He cannot live without this wine.




<pb n="340"/>
340  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 
February the twelfth. ;
DANA is beginning to refer sometimes to thin
that happened while he was away. Until no
he has scarcely alluded to the abyss which 
thrust between us. Last night he said:
"Oh, I was so homesick, Mama! But I wa
ashamed to come back. Nobody knows ho!
a man feels . .. so many thousand mil
away . . . and sick.  Oh, it was such 
blanked country!" 
The other day he said:
" The nights were the worst. I could not 
any sleep without it. One night I said  tw
nights I said: 'If I die for it, I will not increa
the dose to-night.'  And it got to be tw
o'clock, and those sinking-turns came on, and -
thought it was all up with me. Then I cal
you. I cried out very loud: 'Mama! Mama 
Upon my word, dear girl, I believe I thoug
you 'd hear me."                      *
Then I said: 
"I did hear, Dana." For I remembered the
nights when I heard his voice quite plainly
and it was just two o'clock, and he called.
"Mama!" 
He has never spoken about his weddi
ring; nor have I.  The little gold Madom
still hangs upon his watch-guard, though 



<pb n="341"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A         WIFE    341
tch is gone.   What has she witnessed 
e keeps her counsel well.
-R-   %February the twentieth.
WAS looking over some of Dana's things to-
y, for we have been so absorbed with our
tient, and so busy with downright nursing,
bt, really, I have never straightened anything
t properly since he came back. The doctor
ad taken him out driving (with Marion), and I
d an hour altogether to myself. In one of
is pockets I found my photograph -the old
ie in the May-flower dress. It was in a leather
ae that folded over, and it was very much
onom.  He seems to have lost Marion's, but
his -the tears smarted to my eyes when I saw
ow often he must have handled my picture -
y poor boy!
Afterward I was dusting out his traveling
ressing-case, and mending it, for the lining had
roken away, and under the lining, carefully
pinned in so that it should not slip, I found the
eaf of the woodbine that I ran and picked for
im from the tree-house on that morning-
hat last one, when he sailed, when the woman
with the hand-organ sang, "Keep me from sink-.
g down! " The ruby-red leaf has faded to a
ullcolor, and is quite frail and brittle. I won-
. .



<pb n="342"/>
342   CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE        -
der that it has lasted at all. I kissed the leaf 
for I thought perhaps he might have kissed it -
if he cared enough to keep it. At first I thought 
I would ask him. But I have concluded that a -
wife is wiser (consequently happier) not to put
emotional catechisms to her husband. Few men
take kindly to this feminine habit, even well 
ones; and a sick man resents it. And a few
drops of resentment will extinguish a forest fire :
of tenderness. The doctor said to me one day
when Dana first came home:
"Take as much for granted as possible. As- 
sume all you can."
I have no time in these days to think much 
not too much - about the doctor; but once in
a while I wonder how he has become a master
of the magicians: how he should be expert in 
the occult art of married life--this lonely man. 
I suppose it may be partly because he belongs -
to one of the confessional professions.
March the first. ·
TO-DAY there has been a blasting storm.  We 
have sat within a white whirlwind, as if we were
on the outside of a blind planet, spinning through 
.frozen ether on a mysterious errand, directed by
the moving finger of the unseen God.   So, 
I think, a human love whirls blindly before



<pb n="343"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 343
fate, driven by the Power not itself, through
, through frost, through midnight, through
bwn; and the heart rides upon it, like organ-
d life upon the globe, fixed there without
nsent or power to rebel, whirling on anyhow,
ywhere, gladly or madly, yet, on the whole,
joying the ride!
Though I go along trembling, like a leaf driven by a
ong wind, have mercy, Almighty, have mercy!
That verse from the pagan scriptures which
Father used to like comes to me differently lately.
should put it like this:
Though I am a leaf driven by a strong wind, I bless Thee,
mighty, I bless Thee!
To-day I am quivering between happiness and
pain, diving from the skies to the sod and up
[gain -for Dana has touched the piano; it is
the first time.
' We have had a hard day with him, for it was
impossible for him to go out, and Eliot is off duty
ion an experiment-Dana pleaded so. The doc-
itor waded over in the blizzard to see him early
.this morning; no horse could live in the drifts.
iRobert sat with his patient a long time, and
ieft me with the day's orders, and would come
iagahi.



<pb n="344"/>
344    CONFESSIONS OF A      WIFE 
"Give up everything else," he said. "De-.
vote yourself utterly. Days like this are traps.:
Watch him, but do not seem t6. Repeat the
dose, but not till four o'clock. Lock everything
carefully. Run no chances."
Dana has been very restless all day. At two
he asked me timidly " if it were not time." At
three he asked again.  At half-past three he 
grew suddenly very faint and went a deathly 
color, and I telephoned, and Robert came, strug- 
gling and panting, through the snow. When he
came, he sat with his watch in his hand and a
finger on Dana's pulse. But he sat till the time
appointed, yielding nothing, I am sure, in this 
piteous battle; nor did my poor boy beg for
quarter, not once. They fought it out together, 
man to man.
"Can't you give us a little music, Mrs. Her-
win ?" asked the doctor, in a matter-of-fact
way. But the interrogation was a command. I
went to the piano and played for a while, blun-
*dering along with old things of Schubert and
Schumann that Dana and I used to like, but stu-
pidly enough; and I do not sing. After a time
I stopped and went into the library. Dana was
there reading quietly, and Marion and Job were
playing about his feet. Robert had gone.
Dana's eyes had their varnished look- but, ah,



<pb n="345"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 345
a much less of it, and softer; it is no longer
ainful. I went to him, and he clung to my
and a little. Then I sat down and began to
iend a tear in the flounce of Dombey's second
rife; and while I was sewing quietly, suddenly
ie long-silent power of his hand upon the piano-
eys smote every nerve in my body. Then his
haken voice uprose:
Stay, stay at home, my heart, and rest;
Home-keeping hearts are happiest.
For those that wander they know not where
Are full of trouble and full of care-
To stay at home is best.
"hen his hand fell with a crash upon the ivory.
ran, and held his face against my breast, and
owed my own upon his hair, and said to him-
don't know what; and I kissed him in a way
e used to like. Then he whirled upon the
iiano-stool, and caught me and crushed me to
is heart.
"' You 're the sweetest woman in the world!"
e said. "I never did deserve you, Mama;
nd now-"
Then I said:
"I always loved you, Dana; but now I
ionor you. It is a manly fight, and you battle
ike a man."



<pb n="346"/>
346   CONFESSIONS OF A       WIFE 
"It was n't a manly fall," he quivered piti-:
fully. "I had n't any good excuse-no terri-.
ble suffering, as some have. I thought I could 
stop any time. But, before God, Mama, nobody 
knows! Nobody can." 
"My poor boy!" I sobbed. "My poor, poor
boy!"
I do not cry in these days - never for Dana
to see me. I think this was the first time, and I
was ashamed and terrified at what I had done. 
But it did not seem to harm him any; I think it
even did him good. He looked at me with 
such a look as I would have died for joy to see
upon his face once, in that time before he went
away.
"If it had n't been for you, my girl -" he fal- 
tered. He whirled and struck the piano with a few
resounding chords. " When I get well, Mama,
I will make it up to you," he said. He played -
and sang no more; but we passed a gentle even- 
ing, and he went quietly to bed.
I don't think I ever knew real, live happiness 
before-not growing happiness, with roots.
"The madness has gone, but the dearness re-
mains."
April the fifth.
TO-DAY we were driving alone, and the soft air
had wings.  Dana seemed to be lifted upon



<pb n="347"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A       WIFE       347
gem to some lonely upper ether where I could
t follow him. There is no solitude, I believe,
ter all, like that of the soldier in a profound
moral struggle; it is more separate than that of
any mere misery. Dana looked exalted and re-
idmote. Lately he has made great advances and
gains upon himself in the process of his cure.
[These have weakened his physical but intensi-
i:fied his moral vitality. He said abruptly:
"You see, I thought if I went away I could
get rid of it. I did n't want to have anybody
" know -I felt ashamed. There was one time I
;thought if you knew, I should dislike you. I
could n't tell how you would take it-a man
can't bear to be lectured. If I had only known!
Mama, you have been a lovely girl. You 're
too good ' for the likes of me.'" He tried to
laugh it off but his lip trembled.
"I thought the voyage would do something;
but it made everything worse. When I got to
California -a man would n't ever need natural-
ization papers in hell, not after that." . ..
.. .  Thought I had deserted you, Mamaf?
Well, I had, I suppose. I could n't come home
-like that. I thought I should drop out of
sight, die of an overdose some night, and be out
of everybody's way, It put itself to me in that
light. I used to say: 'You 're a disgraceful
93



<pb n="348"/>
348   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
wreck. You 'd only shame her. Perish, and 
rid her of you. It's the only manly thing left 
for you to do.' Three or four times I mixed the 
overdose, and lay down to take it and die; and -
I had a letter that I kept ready for you when
everything was over. Then I would see that
little quiver of your chin-"
' Where is that letter, Dear " I asked.
"I gave it to the doctor," he said. "He
did n't want me to have it around. I asked him
to bum it. If it had n't been for Hazelton,
Mama-     Say, Mama, have you any idea what
that fellow has done for me ? "
He checked the horse, and we turned toward
home.   Dana drove rapidly and in silence.
When we came in sight of the hospital we met
the doctor, driving too.  He had the paralytic .
patient in the buggy, and no speech or language
could tell the transfiguration of the poor thing's 
face. But Robert looked worn.
"Mama," said Dana, abruptly, " I wonder you
never fell in love with him. I should n't have
blamed you."
I slid my hand into myhusband's, and his closed
upon my wrist.
May the twenty-second.
IT is a week to-night since it happened, and I am
writing (as I do) because nothing else will rest me.
Dana went to bed as usual, and no one thought



<pb n="349"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           349
of any trouble or any danger. He had been
so much better, and Eliot has not been required
to stay for quite a while. Dana and I have
fought it out alone-I giving the diminished
dose, by the doctor's orders; it had grown luite
small. About two weeks ago my poor boy asked
Robert's permission to handle the dose himself.
1 "Don't you think I am fit to be trusted now ?"
he asked abruptly. So Robert trusted him. And
everything went well, for the quantity was care-
fully prescribed and watched, and it lessened
regularly and rapidly, day by day. The doctor
says that he has never seen any person show the
pluck and determination that Dana has shown in
ridding himself of his affliction.
"It is a manly record," Robert said. "Mr.
Herwin has won my unqualified respect."
I had begun to feel very proud of Dana.
On this evening that I refer to (it was Sunday
evening) Dana had been playing a little, and
he tried to sing the "Bedouin Love-Song"; but
he could not do it, for it seemed to move him
too much, and emotion saps his strength. He
began:
From the Desert I come to thee--
but stopped abruptly and left the room.
He called me presently, saying that he thought
he would go to bed; and I went up to help him



<pb n="350"/>
350   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 
in the little ways he likes, and kissed him good 
night, and went to Marion, for she cried for'
me. Then I locked the front door, and Job 'I
came up with me, and trotted into Dana's room 
at once. Job has slept on his master's bed 
every night since Dana came home. Dana was 
sleeping quietly, so I went to bed, the doors 
being open between our rooms, and the corn-
pass-candle burning on Dana's table.
Once or twice in the night I crept in to make
sure that all was well, and once he kissed me 
and said I was a dear, sweet girl; but I slept be-
tweenwhiles, feeling quite at ease about him,
and I was asleep when Job came into my room.
I think the dog had tried to wake me without
at first succeeding, for he was pulling hard at
my hand with his thin old paws when I be- 
came aware of him. I understood at once, and 4
I sprang. Job never cries "Wolf!" and he is 
wiser than most people.
"Is Master sick, Job " I cried; but I ran.
The compass-candle was burning brightly; 
and when it showed me Dana's face, I gave such 
a cry that Ellen rushed from the nursery, and
the house was aroused in a moment. I man- 
aged to articulate, "The telephone! the doo- 
tor!" while I lifted my dear boy to the air and
did what I could for him. This was little enough, 



<pb n="351"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           351
for he could take no stimulants, and he seemed
to me to be dying in my arms. I had nothing
to offer him but love and air-the two elements
on which human life depends. Some one had
flung up the window, and I held him to my
heart and whispered to him:
"Live, Dana, live! I love you, Dana. Oh,
try to live!"
I was babbling in this way, like a bride, when
I looked up and saw the doctor's startled face.
It was now half-past two o'clock, the fatal hour
"between the night and dawning" when mortal
strength is at its lowest, the dead-line of im-
periled life.
From then till seven o'clock we fought for
Dana - science and love, the doctor and I. To
my fading hour I shall see Robert as he looked
that night.  Beyond a few curt professional
orders he did not speak. His jaws shut like
steel locks. His gentle eyes grew terrible, and
challenged death. Again and again my dear
boy sank away from us, and once the pulse
stopped altogether; but the doctor called my
husband's spirit back.
I could feel that a flicker of the judgment, a
blur upon the heart, any error or failure in the
man, would have cost everything. Dana's life
i lay in Robert's hand as utterly as if it had been
es 



<pb n="352"/>
352   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
a little jewel put there for safe-keeping, and
blown through sheltering fingers by a whirlwind.
Afterward, when it was over, I lifted my eyes
to the doctor's face. Dana's had been no whiter
in all those hours.
"I suppose it was an overdose " I breathed.
"He took too much ?"
"There was no dose at all," said Robert.
"Mr. Herwin has taken no morphine for twenty-
four hours."
He held up the vial with the thick white
liquid, and showed me the ebb-line.
"I could not understand why you repeated
the dose," I whispered. " It terrified me to see
you do it."
The doctor made no comment then, except
to say that he would send Eliot over at once.
But the next day Robert talked with me a little
about what had happened. He told me that a
man who could do what Dana had done had in
him that which physicians call the vital essence;
Dana had shown that he possessed the moral
basis for physical renewal. "I am now ready
to tell you that your husband is capable of cure,"
the doctor said. "He will recover, by God's
grace."
"And yours," I tried to say. But the words 



<pb n="353"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 353
refused me. They seemed like beggars in a
palace.
June the sixteenth.
MINNIE CURTIS came over to-day. She brought
Dana's violin; for it seems she has kept it all
this while. Dana thanked her indifferently.
She asked him to play a duet, but he said he
did not feel well enough, and added that he was
out of practice. She took up the "Bedouin Love-
Song," and drummed the prelude. Dana looked
annoyed and left the room. When Minnie
started to go it was dusk, and I asked Dana if
he did not feel like walking home with her.
"Certainly," he said; "put your hat on,
Mama."
So Dana and Job and I escorted Minnie
home. On the way back I asked him:
"Did she write to you while you were in
Uruguay ' "
"Oh, bother Minnie Curtis!" cried my hus-
band.
When we had got home we sat down in
the tree-house for a while, and the scent of the
June lilies was so strong that it made Dana
faint. But the breath of the climbing roses was
so delicate and so joyous that I could have wept
with comfort.
"Duets are well enough in their places," said



<pb n="354"/>
354  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
Dana, comfortably; "but when it comes to real
life and- trouble- there 's nothing for a man
like an unselfish wife .... Mama, you 're a
lovely girl !"
We sat in the tree-house with clasped hands.
Something dearer than betrothal, finer than our
bridal, drew us together. Dana's worn face held
an expression which touched me indescribably.
But the faintness increased upon him, and I had
to get him into the house. The sad thing about
Dana's convalescent strength is that it deserts
him so abruptly, at unexpected moments and
for unthought-of causes. Yet he is gaining
sturdily. I am very happy.
Robert thinks I am overdoing--but I am
quite happy.  Dana begins to show more in-
terest in Marion than he did. At first it was
only of me that he seemed to think. He sits
in the air and sun for hours, with Marion and
Job laughing and barking about him. Lately
he has begun to read; I often find him with
his law-books. Mr. J. Harold Mellenway has
been out to see him. Next week Dana is to
be allowed to go to town alone; the doctor
has given this permission. All that varnished
look has gone from Dana's eyes; they do not
regain their old insouciance, and the bright in-
solence is beaten out of my poor boy's beauty;
.-:



<pb n="355"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE             355
but I am watching for the debonair in him that
I loved so. Will it never revisit him  Or
me?
" You expect the miracles," said Robert, once,
when I spoke of this.
"Because you work them," I replied.
Robert's eyes filled; they do not often. He
said:
" The miracle may be in a man's own heart."
"Or in a woman's," I answered him. Yet
afterward I was not quite sure that I understood
the purport of his words; nor, perhaps, of my
own. But I had the consciousness, so frequent
with me, that Robert understood everything,
and that it did not matter whether I did or
not.
Wednesday evening.
So it was not Dana, and it was not Man. I am
spared that great dilemma. And all the scenery
has changed joyously, and the house, though
serried of women, seems to cry out upon me no
more, but only to lift to me gently murmuring
eyes.  There is a soft, pleased look in the eyes
of contented women, not unlike that in the eyes
of kindly treated animals. I wonder if I have it
myself; "for my race is of the Asra."
Are womanhood and manhood set at civil
war ? Then so are soul and body. There is a



<pb n="356"/>
356   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE               |
sketch of William Blake's. Death, the Divider, 
has divorced this elemental marriage, sundered "
the bliss of the spirit and the flesh. It is the I
Resurrection Day. Out of the grave clambers !
the body - a man in the glory of his youth and
vigor. Down from the ether sweeps the soul- -
a woman fair and swift and tender. Anything
finer than the rapture on whose wings these
twain rush together I never saw expressed by
any art of pencil or of pen. It is one of the 
embraces that imagination dares, but on whose
mystery and ecstasy hope does not intrude.
h'be Dowe Cottage, August the twelfth.
WE have been here ten days, and are to stay the
month out, by the doctor's orders. We both
needed it, he said. Dana has gained blessedly
since we came, and is now thought to be quite in
condition to go back to his law office in the fall -
Mr. Mellenway comes over from his place (he
is a neighbor this summer), now and then, to see 
Dana, and they talk about it. It is inexpressibly
touching to see how happy my poor boy is in
the prospect of doing a man's work again. In
fact, we are so light-hearted that I do not feel as
if it could last. One never again quite trusts
human happiness, I find, after one has experi-
enced great misery.



<pb n="357"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           357
We are all children playing on the sea-shore
together- Marion and Job and Ellen and
Luella; but I think Dana and I are the biggest
children of all. We spend hours of every day
upon the sand, not reading, not talking, leaning
on that silence which is more than reverie but
less than thought. Mercibel came out and took
Sunday with us. She said:
" Joy has her elect, as well as sorrow."
Mercibel has her vacation just now, and she
and her children are in our house at home for
the month that we are here. It is a delight to
see the happiness this gives. The doctor comes
out once a week. We miss the doctor - some-
times Dana more than I, sometimes I more
than Dana; we strike a fair average, I think.
He is expected next Saturday.
AJugust the seventeenth.
YESTERDAY I had a shock and fright. It came
to be dark, and I could not find Dana anywhere.
He had seemed very quiet and well all day, and
we had been together a good deal; but fearing to
sate him with tenderness,--for the happiest
wife should reserve herself, I am beginning to
believe,- I went up to put Marion to bed, and
lingered, leaving her father alone on the piazza.
He was watching for Robert, who was delayed,



<pb n="358"/>
358   CONFESSIONS OF A       WIFE
and had telegraphed us not to expect him until
we should see him.
When I got down-stairs Dana was gone, and
Job. It was then quite black, for the clouds
were piling for a shower, and the sea was thun- 
dering. I ran down to the rocks and the little
beach. The surf was throwing up its hands,
and seemed to me    for I was excited and 
startled -to wring them. A flash of lightning
revealed the fretted outlines of the weir and the
fishermen's dories.  In one of these I saw the
figure of a man. He was rowing, and the boat
was turning out.  Clinging to the stem seat
sat a little patient, watchful dog. I threw the
whole force of my soul and body into my voice,
and my "Dana " might have called a spirit
from the grave, I thought. But he did not hear 
me, being absorbed in God knows what abyss.
"Job! Job!" I cried.    "Oh, Job! Tell
Master! "
Job's bark came instantly to me -excited
and anxious, the high bark of aroused canine re-
sponsibility. There was lightning again, and I
saw that the little dog had crawled over in the
rocking boat and put his arms about his master's
neck. But now it was thundering, and no voice
could carry, either mine or Job's. While I
stood distressed and uncertain in the dark,- for it
;
,.S



<pb n="359"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 359
did not lighten any more, and the shower bab-
bled away foolishly,-suddenly the keel grated
under my very feet. Job sprang into the surf,
and dashed himself, drenched and ecstatic, upon
me. Dana slowly tied the painter to the haul-
ing-line, and drew the dory out, hand over hand.
"Frightened, Mama? " he said.
I went down quietly, and helped him haul the
dory off. I did not speak.
" I 'm all right," he muttered; " I was only -
hard put to it, that 's all."
We pulled on the hauling-line together till
the dory was out, and then we came up the
rocks, silently. Dana did not take my out-
stretched hand, and I perceived that his plight
was too sore for sympathy. A wife has learned
half the lesson of life, I think, if she has learned
when (and when not) to leave a man to fight
his direst battles without her.
Half-way up to the house we met the doctor.
Dana uttered a piteous exclamation:
"Hazelton! I thought you were n't coming!
I swore I would n't send for you," he added.
"I did my best," sighed Robert. "I have
some pretty sick people at home."
He fell into step with his patient. I slid away
and left the two men alone. The doctor re-
mained with Dana all the night.



<pb n="360"/>
360  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE               I
In the morning Robert and I found a few mo- 
ments apart.
" Is it always going to be like this ? " I asked
at once.
"Possibly."
"Has he got to fight so - to the end "
"Probably - at times."
"Was he in danger ? "
"Yes."
"Yet you count upon a sound recovery ' "
"I count upon recovery because he fights."
"It is so hard for him!" I said. "And so
splendid in him!"
"I respect your husband, Marna"-Robert 
drew a hard, slow breath- "as much as any
patient I ever had in my life, and I want you to 
know it. Doctors don't always, you know-.
they see so much moral weakness; it wears on 
them. I wish you to understand that, from my
point of view, you have reason to be very proud
of Mr. Herwin."
"Robert," I demanded, "tell me the utter
truth. How long can he fight like this? It i
seems to me as if his body weakened while his
soul strengthens. I must know what is befiKi
me. Will my husband live-for many years?" 
"By God's grace," said Robert, using the
solemn words that he had used before.



<pb n="361"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     361
" You do not tell me all you think!" I cried.
" Be Love incarnate to him, Mama," evaded
Robert, gently. "Give him all its price. All a
man's chance lies in the heart of his wife. And
yours," he added, "yours-" The doctor did
not finish his sentence, and we talked no more;
for Dana, with the havoc on his happy face,
came up and joined us.
September the nineteenth.
TO-MORROW is our wedding-day, and I have a
surprise for Dana. My poor boy has never
spoken to me of his missing marriage-ring; nor
I of it to him. But I can see him sometimes
looking wistfully at his bare left hand; and last
night he kissed my rings, both of them, the ruby
and the gold, in a way that went to my heart,
but he said nothing at all. Dana has grown so
kind, so gentle, that it frightens me. That ter-
rible irritability of his is melting away from him.
Sometimes I wish I could see more of it, and
there are moments when I think if he were a
little cruel, as he used to be, I should feel hap-
pier about him. When he swears, or is down-
right cross, my spirits are quite good. It is not
natural for Dana to be patient, and it troubles me
to see him unnaturally considerate. Character
has its price, as well as love; and it seems to me



<pb n="362"/>
362   CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE
as if he paid the cost of his in the treasury of his
life.
I have got a wedding-ring for Dana.
September the twentyfirst.
How natural is joy, my heart!  .
How easy after sorrow!
WE had a dear day. It was bride's weather 
without and within. Dana got up very early, 
for he was restless and sleepless, and began to
decorate the cottage with pearl-white roses and- 
ferns- the fine ones, no large fronds.
"You shall be a bride again, Mama," he 
said. "I have no other present for you, Dear. 
I looked at a lot of- little things; but nothing %
suited me." 
We were smothered in flowers. Everybody .
sent something--the Grays, the Mellenways, 
Mercibel, and a few old friends in town who :
knew; the neighbors, the servants, Minniei
Curtis and the old doctor, the staff from the. f^
hospital, and two or three of the patients. The:
paralytic produced hydrangeas and a Bible text. 
But the old lady distinguished by fits offeredti
a wreath of immortelles (as if we had been a!'
funeral), and wrote upon her card: "I have nt'i
had one for six weeks."                  :
Marion was quite well (having had one of her 
.%1ia



<pb n="363"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 363
throats the day before). I put her in the old
May-flower muslin that I have made over for
her, and Job wore a white necktie. Marion
had varnished the doll's house for the occasion,
and the effect was heightened by the fact that
she had performed this work of art with the mu-
cilage-brush, which she had dipped into the ink-
bottle in the process. Dombey was induced to
ride to the festivities in an automobile; but
Dombey's second wife followed at a deferential
distance, dragging a baby-carriage with twins.
Poor Banny Doodle was conspicuously absent,
having at last met a final fate in the clothes-
wringer; she is temporarily interred at the foot
of the tree-house. Invitations to a ceremonious
funeral are to be out, it is understood, next
week. Marion develops a quaint quality, and
something like imagination. She begins to be
old enough to interest her father. He does not
like too new a baby. When she was born he
asked if she were Maltese.
THE doctor did not come over yesterday at
all; nor did he send us any flowers or message
with the others. I could not deny to myself
that I should have felt happier through the day
if he had. It is a strange matter that love,
which exiles friendship at the first, may recall it
at the last; yes, and love the truer and be the
a4



<pb n="364"/>
364   CONFESSIONS OF A       WIFE
gladder for it. At least, that is the road of my
experience. I wonder if it is a forest path, un-
beaten though not untrodden  I think of that
old question that I used to ask myself about
Man and Dana. To me, beyond the lot of
women, has been given faith in a fair and noble
friendship. Is it Man ? Or is it Robert?
Just as the sun sank, James came over with
something under his arm, and the doctor's love.
Dana untied the package excitedly,- he was as
happy about everything as if he had been a boy
at a birthday party,- and we thought it was a
picture. But it was not a picture: it was a
prayer. There was a deep frame of bright gold,
and a panel of dulled gold, and the letters flick-
ered from it like little flames of crimson and of
white. The words were eight, and they prayed
the Prayer of Tobit in the Apocrypha:
MERCIFULLY ORDAIN
THAT WE MAY BECOME AGED
TOGETHER
Dana's eyes filled. Neither of us spoke. We
took the prayer up-stairs, and hung it in my hus- 
band's room. 



<pb n="365"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A        WIFE     365
"/What follows is to the Music Varadi and the
Mode Rupaka." So it ran in the Indian Song of
Songs, when Radha, forgiving Krishna, took
him to her heart, and they were married.
Wfhat follows is in the mode solitary, and to the
music of love and of repentance. For I have now
come to a page in my record which my husband
will not see, and through it I draw the dele-sign
of my separate soul. The happiest marriage
may have these erasures in shared experience,
and perhaps finish the great, completed sentence
of life not the less comfortably for that. I do
not deceive myself. I do not suppose that Dana
and I have had the happiest marriage. But the
end is not yet. And if we have saved our
sacred opportunity, where may it lead us ? The
salvation of an imperiled peace has I do not know
what of exquisite privilege. We seem to be
all the while expecting the unknown, the un-
tried, as we did when we were betrothed, as we did
when newly wedded.' Still we have the elusive
to overtake; even yet the eidolon flies before us.
There is an Indian summer of married life. In
that deep and purple atmosphere, sun-smitten,
warmed to the heart, will April seem a pale
affair s  I cannot tell. "There is burning haze,
on all the hills. My eyes are dim. I can see
but a very little way."



<pb n="366"/>
366   CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 
Now one thought has troubled me for this
many a week; and on my wedding-day it took  ;
definite thorn-shape and hid in my bride-roses.
As it grew to be dusk, a question which I
have often considered presented itself to me in
such a way that I could parry it no longer, and
I decided suddenly, and for myself, that I would .:s
write to my husband the note which I append.
I decided this without consulting the doctor, 
and risking something of the effect on Dana of 
what I meant to do; but it is as true that there |
are times when no risks can come between the  I
souls of wife and husband as it is that there can ni
be no third estate in marriage. So I wrote the  ?
note, and slipped it into his hand, and evaded  :
him, and left him to read it.
" Our Wedding-day; twiligbt. 
DANA MY DARLING: Before we were married .
and since -and while you were away-I have .'
kept a secret from you. r cannot be happy to 
keep it any longer. All this while, Dana, I ^
have written something that you have never '
seen. It is rather long, and it will pain you :`
sometimes; and it will tell you-perhaps it'd
will tell you what you do not know, perhaps 
not: I cannot say. You may feel that you have A
something to forgive me; for I, too, have hadl



<pb n="367"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 367
my holy war, and if I have come out of it
unwounded, that is owing not so much to any
superior quality in me as it is to the loyalty and
high nature of one who has fought for us both,
and saved us - you from ruin and death, and me
from misery or from mistake.
"I have a wedding-present for you, Dear--a
little one; but before I give it to you I feel
that I must show you all my heart; for I must
be honest with you to my uttermost - you know
you used to say that was my weakness. This
writing that I speak of holds me. I keep back
no part of the price. Will you take it -the
Book of the Heart of the Wife ?
"It is like your ruby on my finger, blazing
deep to the core, if you look at it in the right
light (and all the crimson fires are yoGrs, my
dear); but if you were to look at it in the
wrong way- I dare not think of it! I will not!
"Give me no time to think, Dana, lest my
courage fail me, but answer me at once.
"Your trembling
"MARNA, Wife."
Now when Dana had read this note, such a
startled spark flickered in his tired, happy eyes
that I was terrified, lest what I had done was a
mistake and would harm him; and I should, I



<pb n="368"/>
368  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
think, have repented and compromised, and
withheld the Book of the Heart from my hus-
band, after all, or until another day. But he
strode into my room where I sat quaking, and im-
periously commanded me, and I found myself
but a reed before the wind of his aroused will,
as I used to be when we first loved each other.
"I must have the book," he said. "Don't be
afraid. Give it to me." So I gave him the
book-saving only this which I am writing
now, and that one page where it was written in
the Dowe Cottage that the doctor evaded one
of my questions about Dana if the battle with
his affliction continued so sore and so exhaust-
ing.
I gave him the book, and he went away into
his own room, and locked his door, and read. I
went into my room, and got out of my wedding-
dress and into my ruby gown,- the dear old
faded thing! --and threw up the window, lest
I suffocate with the beating of my heart; and I
took down my hair and braided it for the night,
and lay down on my bed, and said to myself:'
" I have committed the worst mistake of my
life. In my obstinate impulse to be honest -
just to set my own soul at ease - I have run the
risk of estranging Dana forever.  And this
foolish manuscript may make him ill; it might



<pb n="369"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE           369
even be very dangerous for him.... What
have I done "
Two whirling hours spun between us, and he
made no sign. All the rooms were still. The
child was asleep; the servants were gone out:
Dana and I were alone in the house. The air
seemed to have absorbed the scent of the souls
of all the bridal flowers -hundreds of them -
in our rooms, and in the silent spaces of the
house down-stairs. Job was wandering about
the house, neglected and forlorn. He crept in
on tiptoe, as if he knew that he ought not to in-
trude. When he found me alone, he sprang
and kissed me rapturously, and put his poor old
paws about my neck, and I said aloud:
"You 've stood by me through it all, Job!"
That trifling, commonplace thing and the sound
of my own voice somehow steadied me. I got
up and took Job into the nursery, and put him
to bed in his basket by Marion's crib, and kissed
them both, the child and the dog, and came
back into my own room.
When I had done so, I found that Dana was
there. He had brought the compass-candle
and set it down upon the table. Beside the
candle lay the Book of the Heart, a mass of
crushed and crumpled manuscript, scattered any-
how. Dana was very pale. His face was, in



<pb n="370"/>
370  CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 
fact, so rigid and unsmiling that I shrank from 'I
him, and slipped back into a dark corer of the 
hall  I do not think he saw me, for he strode
by with ringing feet, and down the stairs, and
out of the front door.
I came to my senses at that, and ran down
after him, calling: "Dana! Dana dear!" But
he did not hear me, or he did not answer, and
melted into the darkness while I spoke. Such
a consciousness of what this might mean surged
within me that I could have shrieked for help;
but I restrained myself, and only followed him
quietly, catching up my white cape to cover me
as I flew by the sofa in the hall.
He walked rapidly, but I ran, and so I came
within sight of him half-way between the tree-
house and the avenue. I did not cry out to -
him, or in any way make my presence known,
for the power to do so had gone out in me, like
the bubbling of a drowning voice under water.
When I saw that he had his face set toward the 
hospital I followed no farther, but crushed my-
self into the spirea-bushes where it was darkest, 
and so stood, shaking. Dana went on to the  -
hospital, and up the steps, and in. After a little 
hesitation, I ran back to the house, and to the ;
telephone. Mercibel answered the call-bell. :
"Is he with the doctor " I panted. 
Ad



<pb n="371"/>
CONFESSIONS      OF A   WIFE     371
"Yes."   -
"Manage to get a message. Tell the doctor
not to lose sight of him, for God's sake! "
" Don't disturb yourself," said Mercibel. " It
is quite unnecessary."
Dizzy both with my fright and with my fear,
I staggered out into the air again, and got as
far as the tree-house. There I stopped, and sat,
quaking and cold. It seemed to me as if my
own nature stood aloof and looked at me criti-
cally, and took sides against me, and stripped me
comfortless, and I argued with my nature.
"Happiness was in your arms," I said, "and
you opened them and let it drop; that's all.
Probably there are plenty of people just as hon-
est as you are who don't make so much fuss
about it. It takes this to teach you that reserve
may be just as right and honorable as expres-
sion, and sometimes more necessary .... Dana
will never forgive you, never. He has read it
all, and gone straight to the doctor with it.
Probably Robert will never forgive you, either.
You have lost them both."
While I sat there, stabbing myself with these
poniards, footsteps crackled on the gravel walk,
and I got out of the tree-house and fled before
them, wrapping my long white cloak about me
as I ran, drawing the girdle of my shabby gown,



<pb n="372"/>
372 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
and fastening the lace somehow at the throat,
for I was not dressed to be seen. In my distress
and hurry I stumbled on the piazza steps and
fell, and I heard a low, disturbed exclamation
from the doctor; but it was my husband who
ran and lifted me. As he did so his arm went
about me, and I leaned upon it, for I could not
stand, I trembled so.
"Don't be a goose now, Mama," said Dana.
"You 've been magnificent too long! "
He tried to laugh in his old, boyish way, but
he could not do it. His face was very white;
it had his beautiful look.
" Here, Mama," he said, "is the best man I
ever knew in my life. I 've been over to tell
him so."
Before I knew what my husband meant to do,
he had fallen on his knees before the doctor,
and had drawn me with him.
"Bless us, old fellow," said Dana. "We -
we need it. There is n't any saint or minister I 'd
ask it of but you. It 's a kind of a--second
ceremony, don't you see ' My wife and I-"
But Dana choked. I think that Robert's
hands trembled for a moment upon our bowed
heads. I think he said:
"The Lord bless you, and keep you, ... and
give you peace."



<pb n="373"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE          373
But when I raised my raining eyes my hus-
band and I were alone upon the dark piazza.
Dana led me into the house, and shut the door,
and locked it; then drew me up the stairs and
into our own rooms. And when the doors of
these were shut, he held out both his arms; so
I ran to them, and they closed about me.
"You 're a lovely girl!" said Dana. "I
never half deserved you, Mama. ... I never
shall. Have I been too sure you would forgive
me, dear? . . . Say, Mama, after all that-are
you sure you want me?"
Then I took out the ring that I had worn all
day on a chain against my heart, till I could
gather my courage to show it to Dana-the
wedding-ring, all warm as it was. I put it to
my lips before I put it on his finger. Then I
laid my cheek upon his hand. But when I
raised my face, I heard him say, as he had said
it in my dream: " I'his is the kiss that lives."
WE sat on in the dim room; it was rose-
scented and still. Dana got into the easy-chair,
and took -me in his lap.
"I am too heavy," I said; "you are too
tired to hold me, Dear."
But Dana laughed.
"Why, you 've got on that dear old gown!"



<pb n="374"/>
374   CONFESSIONS OF A       WIFE
he said. He took a piece of the faded velvet
and lifted it slowly to his lips.
September the tweny-second.
DANA has been worse for all the excitement, as I
feared. He kept up joyously until yesterday after-
noon, when he suffered one of his sudden reac-
tions, and we sent for the doctor quickly. He was
not in, so I had to do the best I could for my
dear boy alone. As it happened, I made out
pretty well, and he did not sink, as he used to
do, but only grew faint, and then stronger, and
faint again; but in the end he rallied grandly. I
havenot feltso encouraged aboutDana atanytime.
When I was reading a novel to him after-
ward, to divert him from his suffering, suddenly
he interrupted me:
"Put it down, Mama. It seems dull after
the Book of the Heart. Real things are the
only interesting ones, are n't they?  That
was n't much of a fellow, that hero.  Say,
Mama, there 's one thing I want you to un-
derstand. You don't know men, and I do. I 
tell you, Hazelton is no common sort. He is .
like a fellow seen in a mist- taller than the :
rest of us; yet when you come up to him he is :
just as real, a man all the same-God blessw
him anyhow!"
,  ,'-



<pb n="375"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 375
When it came to be evening, Dana asked for
the doctor.
"I have n't seen him for two days!" he com-
plained.
The telephone was out of order, and Ellen
was putting Marion to bed, so I caught up my
white cape and slipped out and over to call Rob-
ert myself.
I ran up the steps of my father's old home,
and into the office of the hospital. No one was
there, and I sat down in Robert's chair to wait
for him. His desk was brightly lighted, and an
open book lay upon it -not a medical book,
plainly. I picked it up (I felt sure he would
not mind) and glanced at it. It was in French.
I translate from memory, and negligently
enough, for I read too quickly to recall the
French:
"Yet I love her."
·' But she does not love you."
"Yet I adore her."
But she will never come to meet you beneath the tree."
Yet I am waiting for her." . ..
My eyes ran down. the page and stayed at this,
against which Robert's pencil had slid and
paused:
"s Bat with what do you appease your hunger?"
"I aow #ot," said the youth. "It may be that I



<pb n="376"/>
376 CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE
have now and then gathered mulberries from the nearest
hedge."
" And with what do you quench your thirst ? "
"That, too, I know not," replied the youth.  "Per-
chance I have sometimes stooped over the brook whicbhfows
bard by."
As I sat with the book on my lap, Robert
came in. At first I did not speak; I could not.
For I felt that the Book of his Heart lay open
before me, and he felt that I felt it, and there
was nothing to be said.
"My husband sent me -" I faltered.
"I will go at once," replied the doctor, quietly.
He put on his hat and drew my falling cape
over my shoulders, and we started out.
He asked me one or two professional ques-
tions naturally enough, and I answered them
in the same way.    We crossed the hospital
grounds, and the lawn, and came up to the tree-
house.
When we reached the tree-house, suddenly
the night seemed to quiver and to be smitten
through and through with reeling music; for
Dana, with the restlessness of his nature and of
his convalescence, had come to the piano and
begun to sing - the dearest, the longest silent
of his songs:



<pb n="377"/>
CONFESSIONS OF A WIFE 377
From the Desert I come to thee,
On my Arab shod with fire.
I love thee, I love but thee!
With a love that shall not die!
Till the sun grows cold,
And the stars are old,
And the leaves of the Judgment Book unfold!
"Go to him," said Robert, in a low voice.
"I will wait till he has finished singing.      Then
I shall follow you."



